"Invasion of Iraq" redirects here. For events after 1 May 2003, see Iraq War. For the Mongol Invasion of Iraq, see Siege of Baghdad (1258). For the British Invasion of Iraq during World War II, see Anglo-Iraqi War. For other invasions of Iraq throughout history, see Military history of Iraq.


2003 invasion of Iraq


Part of the Iraq War



U.S. Army M1A1 Abrams tanks and their crews pose for a photo in front of the "Victory Arch" monument at Baghdad's Ceremony Square in November 2003.





Date
20 March – 1 May 2003
(1 month, 1 week and 4 days)


Location
Iraq


Result

Coalition victory

Iraqi Ba'athist government overthrown
Occupation of Iraq until 2011[6]
New Iraqi government established
Beginning of the Iraq War







Belligerents



Coalition forces:
 United States
 United Kingdom
 Australia
 Poland

With military support from:
Iraqi National Congress[1][2][3]
 Peshmerga

 KDP
 PUK



 Iraq

 Arab volunteers[4][5]


 Ansar al-Islam


Commanders and leaders



 George W. Bush
 Tommy Franks
 Tony Blair
 Brian Burridge
 Masoud Barzani
 Babakir Zebari
 Jalal Talabani
 Kosrat Rasul Ali
Ahmed Chalabi
 Saddam Hussein
 Qusay Hussein
 Uday Hussein
 Abid Hamid Mahmud
 Ali Hassan al-Majid
 Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti
 Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri
 Ra'ad al-Hamdani
 Abu Abdullah Warya Salih ash-Shafi'i


Strength



380,000 troops[7]

 United States: 192,000 troops[8]
 United Kingdom: 45,000 troops
 Australia: 2,000 troops
 Poland: 194 Special Forces[9]
 Peshmerga: 70,000[10]
Iraqi National Congress: 620

 Iraqi Armed Forces: 375,000
 Special Iraqi Republican Guard: 12,000
 Iraqi Republican Guard: 70,000–75,000
 Fedayeen Saddam: 30,000
 Iraqi reserves: 650,000[11][12]

Ansar al-Islam: 600–800


Casualties and losses



Coalition:
172 killed (139 U.S., 33 UK)[13]
551 wounded (U.S.)[14]
Peshmerga:
24+ killed[15]
Total:
196+ killed

Estimated Iraqi combatant fatalities: 30,000 (figure attributed to General Tommy Franks)

7,600–11,000 (4,895–6,370 observed and reported) (Project on Defense Alternatives study)[16][17]

13,500–45,000 (extrapolated from fatality rates in units serving around Baghdad)[18]
Total: 7,600–45,000 killed



Estimated Iraqi civilian fatalities:
7,269 (Iraq Body Count)[19]
3,200–4,300 (Project on Defense Alternatives study)[16]








v
t
e


Iraq War




Timeline

2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Invasion (2003)

Umm Qasr
Al Faw
1st Basra
Nasiriyah
Raid on Karbala
Battle of Haditha Dam
1st Najaf
Operation Airborne Dragon
Northern Delay
Viking Hammer
Samawah
1st Karbala
Al Kut
Hillah
Green Line
Karbala Gap
Baghdad
Debecka Pass
Kani Domlan Ridge

Post-invasion insurgency (2003–06)

Al Anbar
1st Ramadan
Red Dawn
Spring 2004

Al Kut
1st Fallujah
Sadr City
1st Ramadi
Husaybah


Danny Boy
2nd Najaf
CIMIC-House
Samarra
2nd Fallujah
Mosul
Lake Tharthar
Al Qaim
Hit
Haditha
Steel Curtain
Tal Afar
2nd Ramadi
Together Forward
Diwaniya

Sectarian violence (2006-08)

2nd Ramadan
Sinbad
Amarah
Turki
Diyala
Haifa Street
Karbala Raid
3rd Najaf
Imposing Law
U.K. bases
Black Eagle
Baghdad belts
Baqubah
Donkey Island
Shurta Nasir
Phantom Strike
2nd Karbala
Phantom Phoenix

Insurgency (2008–11)

2008 Day of Ashura
Ninawa
Spring 2008
2nd Basra
2008 Al-Qaeda Offensive
Augurs of Prosperity
Abu Kamal
Camp Ashraf
Palm Grove
US withdrawal violence







v
t
e


Insurgent attacks of the Iraq War




‡ indicates attacks resulting in over 100 deaths
§ indicates the deadliest attack in the Iraq WarThis list only includes major attacks.

2003
1st Baghdad
2nd Baghdad
Najaf
3rd Baghdad
1st Nasiriyah
1st Karbala


2004
‡ 1st Erbil
‡ Ashoura
1st Basra
Mosul (2004)
4th Baghdad
5th Baghdad
Karbala-Najaf
1st Baqubah
Kufa
FOB Marez


2005
Suwaira bombing
‡ 1st Al Hillah
2nd Erbil
‡ Musayyib
6th Baghdad
‡ 7th Baghdad
1st Balad
Khanaqin


2006
‡ Karbala-Ramadi
1st Samarra
8th Baghdad
9th Baghdad
‡ 10th Baghdad


2007
11th Baghdad
12th Baghdad
‡ 13th Baghdad
14th Baghdad
15th Baghdad
2nd Al Hillah
‡ 1st Tal Afar
16th Baghdad
17th Baghdad
2nd & 3rd Karbala
Mosul (2007)
‡ 18th Baghdad
Makhmour
Abu Sayda
2nd Samarra
19th Baghdad
‡ Amirli
1st Kirkuk
20th Baghdad
21st Baghdad
§ Qahtaniya
Amarah


2008
22nd Baghdad
2nd Balad
23rd Baghdad
4th Karbala
24th Baghdad
Karmah
2nd Baqubah
Dujail
Balad Ruz


2009
25th Baghdad
26th Baghdad
Baghdad-Muqdadiyah
Taza
27th Baghdad
2nd Kirkuk
2nd Tal Afar
‡ 28th Baghdad
‡ 29th Baghdad
‡ 30th Baghdad


2010
31st Baghdad
32nd Baghdad
3rd Baqubah
33rd Baghdad
34th Baghdad
35th Baghdad
‡ 1st Pan-Iraq
36th Baghdad
37th Baghdad
2nd Pan-Iraq
38th Baghdad
39th Baghdad
‡ 40th Baghdad


2011
41st Baghdad
‡ 3rd Pan-Iraq
Karbala-Baghdad
42nd Baghdad
Tikrit
3rd Al Hillah
3rd Samarra
Al Diwaniyah
Taji
4th Pan-Iraq
43rd Baghdad
4th Karbala
44th Baghdad
2nd Basra
45th Baghdad















v
t
e


Persian Gulf Wars






Iranian Revolution (1978–79)
Iran–Iraq War (1980–88)
Invasion of Kuwait (1990)
Gulf War (1990–91)
Iraqi Kurdish/Shi'a uprisings (1991)
Iraq no-fly zones conflict (1991–2003)
Iraq missile strikes (1993)
Iraq missile strikes (1996)
Iraq bombing (1998)
1999 Shia uprising in Iraq
Iraq conflict (2003–present)

Iraq War (2003–11)
Iraqi insurgency (2011–13)
Iraqi Civil War (2014–present)














v
t
e


Iraqi–Kurdish conflict




Early conflicts

Mahmud Barzanji revolts
Ahmed Barzani revolt
1943 Barzani revolt


Main phase

First Iraqi–Kurdish War
Second Iraqi–Kurdish War
PUK insurgency
Arabization campaigns
Kurdish rebellion of 1983
Al-Anfal Campaign
1991 uprisings


Later phase

1994–97 Civil War
2003 US invasion
2017 Iraqi–Kurdish conflict

Battle of Kirkuk (2017)








The 2003 invasion of Iraq lasted from 20 March to 1 May 2003 and signalled the start of the Iraq War, which the United States dubbed Operation Iraqi Freedom (prior to 19 March, the mission in Iraq was called "Operation Enduring Freedom", a carry-over from the War in Afghanistan).[20] The invasion consisted of 21 days of major combat operations, in which a combined force of troops from the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia and Poland invaded Iraq and deposed the Ba'athist government of Saddam Hussein. The invasion phase consisted primarily of a conventionally-fought war which included the capture of the Iraqi capital of Baghdad by American forces with the implicit assistance of the United Kingdom, alongside Australia and Poland.
The anti-Iraqi Coalition sent 177,194 troops into Iraq during the initial invasion phase, which lasted from 19 March to 9 April 2003. About 130,000 arrived from the USA alone, with about 45,000 British soldiers, Australia (2,000), and Poland (194). 36 other countries were involved in its aftermath. In preparation for the invasion, 100,000 U.S. troops assembled in Kuwait by 18 February.[21] The coalition forces also received support from the Peshmerga in Iraqi Kurdistan.
According to U.S. President George W. Bush and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair, the coalition aimed "to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction, to end Saddam Hussein's support for terrorism, and to free the Iraqi people."[22] Others place a much greater emphasis on the impact of the September 11 attacks, on the role this played in changing U.S. strategic calculations, and the rise of the freedom agenda.[23][24] According to Blair, the trigger was Iraq's failure to take a "final opportunity" to disarm itself of alleged nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons that U.S. and British officials called an immediate and intolerable threat to world peace.[25]
In a January 2003 CBS poll, 64% of Americans had approved of military action against Iraq; however, 63% wanted Bush to find a diplomatic solution rather than go to war, and 62% believed the threat of terrorism directed against the U.S. would increase due to war.[26] The invasion of Iraq was strongly opposed by some long-standing U.S. allies, including the governments of France, Germany, and New Zealand.[27][28][29] Their leaders argued that there was no evidence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and that invading that country was not justified in the context of UNMOVIC's 12 February 2003 report. On 15 February 2003, a month before the invasion, there were worldwide protests against the Iraq War, including a rally of three million people in Rome, which the Guinness Book of Records listed as the largest ever anti-war rally.[30] According to the French academic Dominique Reynié, between 3 January and 12 April 2003, 36 million people across the globe took part in almost 3,000 protests against the Iraq war.[31]
The invasion was preceded by an airstrike on the Presidential Palace in Baghdad on 20 March 2003. The following day, coalition forces launched an incursion into Basra Province from their massing point close to the Iraqi-Kuwaiti border. While special forces launched an amphibious assault from the Persian Gulf to secure Basra and the surrounding petroleum fields, the main invasion army moved into southern Iraq, occupying the region and engaging in the Battle of Nasiriyah on 23 March. Massive air strikes across the country and against Iraqi command-and-control threw the defending army into chaos and prevented an effective resistance. On 26 March, the 173rd Airborne Brigade was airdropped near the northern city of Kirkuk, where they joined forces with Kurdish rebels and fought several actions against the Iraqi Army to secure the northern part of the country.
The main body of coalition forces continued their drive into the heart of Iraq and met with little resistance. Most of the Iraqi military was quickly defeated and the coalition occupied Baghdad on 9 April. Other operations occurred against pockets of the Iraqi army, including the capture and occupation of Kirkuk on 10 April, and the attack on and capture of Tikrit on 15 April. Iraqi president Saddam Hussein and the central leadership went into hiding as the coalition forces completed the occupation of the country. On 1 May President George W. Bush declared an end to major combat operations: this ended the invasion period and began the period of military occupation.



Contents


1 Prelude to the invasion

1.1 Preparations for war


2 Attempts to avoid war
3 Casus belli and rationale

3.1 Iraqi drones
3.2 Human rights


4 Legality of invasion
5 Military aspects

5.1 Multilateral support
5.2 Invasion force
5.3 Preparation
5.4 Defending force


6 Invasion

6.1 Preceding special forces mission in al-Qa'im
6.2 Opening salvo: the Dora Farms strike
6.3 Opening attack

6.3.1 Battle of Nasiriyah
6.3.2 Battle of Najaf
6.3.3 Battle of Basra


6.4 Battle of Karbala
6.5 Special operations

6.5.1 Initial infiltration
6.5.2 Operation Row and Falconer
6.5.3 Operation Viking Hammer
6.5.4 Special operations in southern Iraq
6.5.5 Special operations in northern Iraq
6.5.6 Battle of Haditha Dam
6.5.7 Objective Beaver
6.5.8 Operations in western Iraq
6.5.9 Other special operations
6.5.10 Jessica Lynch rescue


6.6 Fall of Baghdad (April 2003)
6.7 Other areas
6.8 Bush declares "End of major combat operations" (May 2003)


7 Coalition and Allied contingent involvement

7.1 Australia
7.2 Poland
7.3 United Kingdom


8 Summary of the invasion
9 Casualties

9.1 Death toll
9.2 War crimes and allegations


10 Security, looting and war damage
11 Media coverage

11.1 U.S. media coverage
11.2 Independent media coverage
11.3 International media coverage


12 Criticism

12.1 Rationale based on faulty evidence
12.2 Lack of a U.N. mandate
12.3 Military intervention vs diplomatic solution
12.4 Distraction from the war on terrorism and other priorities
12.5 Potential to destabilize the region


13 Related phrases
14 See also
15 Notes
16 References
17 Further reading
18 External links



Prelude to the invasion[edit]




Gen. Anthony C. Zinni briefs reporters at The Pentagon following Operation Desert Fox, 21 December 1998


Hostilities of the 1991 Gulf War were suspended on 28 February 1991, with a cease-fire negotiated between the UN Coalition and Iraq.[32] The U.S. and its allies tried to keep Saddam in check with military actions such as Operation Southern Watch, which was conducted by Joint Task Force Southwest Asia (JTF-SWA) with the mission of monitoring and controlling airspace south of the 32nd Parallel (extended to the 33rd Parallel in 1996) as well as using economic sanctions. It was revealed that a biological weapons (BW) program in Iraq had begun in the early 1980s with help from the U.S. and Europe in violation of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) of 1972. Details of the BW program—along with a chemical weapons program—surfaced in the wake of the Gulf War (1990–91) following investigations conducted by the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) which had been charged with the post-war disarmament of Saddam's Iraq. The investigation concluded that there was no evidence the program had continued after the war. The U.S. and its allies then maintained a policy of "containment" towards Iraq. This policy involved numerous economic sanctions by the UN Security Council; the enforcement of Iraqi no-fly zones declared by the U.S. and the UK to protect the Kurds in Iraqi Kurdistan and Shias in the south from aerial attacks by the Iraqi government; and ongoing inspections. Iraqi military helicopters and planes regularly contested the no-fly zones.[33][34]




A UN weapons inspector in Iraq, 2002.


In October 1998, removing the Iraqi government became official U.S. foreign policy with enactment of the Iraq Liberation Act. Enacted following the expulsion of UN weapons inspectors the preceding August (after some had been accused of spying for the U.S.), the act provided $97 million for Iraqi "democratic opposition organizations" to "establish a program to support a transition to democracy in Iraq."[35] This legislation contrasted with the terms set out in United Nations Security Council Resolution 687, which focused on weapons and weapons programs and made no mention of regime change.[36] One month after the passage of the Iraq Liberation Act, the U.S. and UK launched a bombardment campaign of Iraq called Operation Desert Fox. The campaign's express rationale was to hamper Saddam Hussein's government's ability to produce chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, but U.S. intelligence personnel also hoped it would help weaken Saddam's grip on power.[37]




Two US F-16 Fighting Falcons prepare to depart Prince Sultan Air Base in Saudi Arabia for a patrol as part of Operation Southern Watch, 2000.


With the election of George W. Bush as president in 2000, the U.S. moved towards a more aggressive policy toward Iraq. The Republican Party's campaign platform in the 2000 election called for "full implementation" of the Iraq Liberation Act as "a starting point" in a plan to "remove" Saddam.[38] After leaving the George W. Bush administration, Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill said that an attack on Iraq had been planned since Bush's inauguration, and that the first United States National Security Council meeting involved discussion of an invasion. O'Neill later backtracked, saying that these discussions were part of a continuation of foreign policy first put into place by the Clinton administration.[39]
Despite the Bush administration's stated interest in liberating Iraq, little formal movement towards an invasion occurred until the September 11 attacks. For example, the administration prepared Operation Desert Badger to respond aggressively if any Air Force pilot was shot down while flying over Iraq, but this did not happen. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld dismissed National Security Agency (NSA) intercept data available by midday of the 11th that pointed to al-Qaeda's culpability, and by mid-afternoon ordered the Pentagon to prepare plans for attacking Iraq.[40] According to aides who were with him in the National Military Command Center on that day, Rumsfeld asked for: "best info fast. Judge whether good enough hit Saddam Hussein at same time. Not only Osama bin Laden."[41] A memo written by Rumsfeld in November 2001 considers an Iraq war.[42] The rationale for invading Iraq as a response to 9/11 has been widely questioned, as there was no cooperation between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda.[43]
Shortly after 11 September 2001 (on 20 September), Bush addressed a joint session of Congress (simulcast live to the world), and announced his new "War on Terror". This announcement was accompanied by the doctrine of "pre-emptive" military action, later termed the Bush Doctrine. Allegations of a connection between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda were made by some U.S. Government officials who asserted that a highly secretive relationship existed between Saddam and the radical Islamist militant organization al-Qaeda from 1992 to 2003, specifically through a series of meetings reportedly involving the Iraqi Intelligence Service (IIS). Some Bush advisers favored an immediate invasion of Iraq, while others advocated building an international coalition and obtaining United Nations authorization. Bush eventually decided to seek UN authorization, while still reserving the option of invading without it.[44]
Preparations for war[edit]




George W. Bush addressed the General Assembly of the United Nations on 12 September 2002 to outline the complaints of the United States government against the Iraqi government.






From left: French President Jacques Chirac, US President George W. Bush, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Italian Prime minister Silvio Berlusconi at the G8 Summit at Evian, France. Chirac was against the invasion, the other three leaders were in favor of it.


While there had been some earlier talk of action against Iraq, the Bush administration waited until September 2002 to call for action, with White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card saying, "From a marketing point of view, you don't introduce new products in August."[45] Bush began formally making his case to the international community for an invasion of Iraq in his 12 September 2002 address to the UN Security Council.[46]
Key U.S. allies in NATO, such as the United Kingdom, agreed with the U.S. actions, while France and Germany were critical of plans to invade Iraq, arguing instead for continued diplomacy and weapons inspections. After considerable debate, the UN Security Council adopted a compromise resolution, UN Security Council Resolution 1441, which authorized the resumption of weapons inspections and promised "serious consequences" for non-compliance. Security Council members France and Russia made clear that they did not consider these consequences to include the use of force to overthrow the Iraqi government.[47] Both the U.S. ambassador to the UN, John Negroponte, and the UK ambassador, Jeremy Greenstock, publicly confirmed this reading of the resolution, assuring that Resolution 1441 provided no "automaticity" or "hidden triggers" for an invasion without further consultation of the Security Council.[48]
Resolution 1441 gave Iraq "a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations" and set up inspections by the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Saddam accepted the resolution on 13 November and inspectors returned to Iraq under the direction of UNMOVIC chairman Hans Blix and IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei. As of February 2003, the IAEA "found no evidence or plausible indication of the revival of a nuclear weapons program in Iraq"; the IAEA concluded that certain items which could have been used in nuclear enrichment centrifuges, such as aluminum tubes, were in fact intended for other uses.[49] UNMOVIC "did not find evidence of the continuation or resumption of programs of weapons of mass destruction" or significant quantities of proscribed items. UNMOVIC did supervise the destruction of a small number of empty chemical rocket warheads, 50 liters of mustard gas that had been declared by Iraq and sealed by UNSCOM in 1998, and laboratory quantities of a mustard gas precursor, along with about 50 Al-Samoud missiles of a design that Iraq stated did not exceed the permitted 150 km range, but which had travelled up to 183 km in tests. Shortly before the invasion, UNMOVIC stated that it would take "months" to verify Iraqi compliance with resolution 1441.[50][51][52]
In October 2002, the U.S. Congress passed the "Iraq Resolution". The resolution authorized the President to "use any means necessary" against Iraq. Americans polled in January 2003 widely favored further diplomacy over an invasion. Later that year, however, Americans began to agree with Bush's plan. The U.S. government engaged in an elaborate domestic public relations campaign to market the war to its citizens. Americans overwhelmingly believed Saddam did have weapons of mass destruction: 85% said so, even though the inspectors had not uncovered those weapons. Of those who thought Iraq had weapons sequestered somewhere, about half responded that said weapons would not be found in combat. By February 2003, 64% of Americans supported taking military action to remove Saddam from power.[26]




Anti war protest in London, 2002


The Central Intelligence Agency's Special Activities Division (SAD) teams, consisting of the paramilitary operations officers and 10th Special Forces Group soldiers, were the first U.S. forces to enter Iraq, in July 2002, before the main invasion. Once on the ground, they prepared for the subsequent arrival of U.S. Army Special Forces to organize the Kurdish Peshmerga. This joint team (called the Northern Iraq Liaison Element (NILE))[53] combined to defeat Ansar al-Islam, a group with ties to al-Qaeda, in Iraqi Kurdistan. This battle was for control of the territory that was occupied by Ansar al-Islam and took place before the invasion. It was carried out by Paramilitary Operations Officers from SAD and the Army's 10th Special Forces Group. This battle resulted in the defeat of Ansar and the capture of a chemical weapons facility at Sargat.[53] Sargat was the only facility of its type discovered in the Iraq war.[54][55]
SAD teams also conducted missions behind enemy lines to identify leadership targets. These missions led to the initial air strikes against Saddam and his generals. Although the strike against Saddam was unsuccessful in killing him, it effectively ended his ability to command and control his forces. Strikes against Iraq's generals were more successful and significantly degraded the Iraqi command's ability to react to, and maneuver against, the U.S.-led invasion force.[53][56] SAD operations officers were also successful in convincing key Iraqi Army officers into surrendering their units once the fighting started.[54]
NATO member Turkey refused to allow the U.S. forces across its territory into northern Iraq. Therefore, joint SAD and Army Special forces teams and the Pershmerga constituted the entire Northern force against the Iraqi army. They managed to keep the northern divisions in place rather than allowing them to aid their colleagues against the U.S.-led coalition force coming from the south.[57] Four of these CIA officers were awarded the Intelligence Star for their actions.[54][55]




60,000–200,000 protesters of various ages demonstrated in San Francisco, 15 February 2003


In the 2003 State of the Union address, President Bush said "we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several mobile biological weapons labs".[58] On 5 February 2003, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell addressed the United Nations General Assembly, continuing U.S. efforts to gain UN authorization for an invasion. His presentation to the UN Security Council, which contained a computer generated image of a "mobile biological weapons laboratory". However, this information was based on claims of Rafid Ahmed Alwan al-Janabi, codenamed "Curveball", an Iraqi emigrant living in Germany who later admitted that his claims had been false.
Powell also presented evidence alleging Iraq had ties to al-Qaeda. As a follow-up to Powell's presentation, the United States, United Kingdom, Poland, Italy, Australia, Denmark, Japan, and Spain proposed a resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq, but NATO members like Canada, France, and Germany, together with Russia, strongly urged continued diplomacy. Facing a losing vote as well as a likely veto from France and Russia, the US, UK, Poland, Spain, Denmark, Italy, Japan, and Australia eventually withdrew their resolution.[59][60]
Opposition to the invasion coalesced in the worldwide 15 February 2003 anti-war protest that attracted between six and ten million people in more than 800 cities, the largest such protest in human history according to the Guinness Book of World Records.[30]




José Manuel Durão Barroso, Tony Blair, George W. Bush and José María Aznar on 20 March 2003


On 20 March 2003, Spanish Prime Minister, José María Aznar, UK Prime Minister, Tony Blair, president of the Unites States George W. Bush, and Prime Minister of Portugal, José Manuel Durão Barroso as host, met in the Azores, to discuss the invasion of Iraq, and Spain's potential involvement in the war, as well as the beginning of the invasion. This encounter was extremely controversial in Spain, even now remaining a very sensitive point for the Aznar government.[61] Almost a year later, Madrid suffered the worst terrorist attack in Europe since the Lockerbie bombing, motivated by Spain's decision to participate in the Iraq war, prompting some Spaniards to accuse the Prime Minister of being responsible.[62]




U.S. President George W. Bush meets with his top advisors on 19 March 2003 just before the invasion


In March 2003, the United States, United Kingdom, Poland, Australia, Spain, Denmark, and Italy began preparing for the invasion of Iraq, with a host of public relations and military moves. In his 17 March 2003 address to the nation, Bush demanded that Saddam and his two sons, Uday and Qusay, surrender and leave Iraq, giving them a 48-hour deadline.[63] But the U.S. began the bombing of Iraq on the day before the deadline expired. On 18 March 2003, the bombing of Iraq by the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Poland, Spain, Italy and Denmark began. Unlike the first Gulf War, this war had no explicit UN authorisation.
The UK House of Commons held a debate on going to war on 18 March 2003 where the government motion was approved 412 to 149.[64] The vote was a key moment in the history of the Blair administration, as the number of government MPs who rebelled against the vote was the greatest since the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. Three government ministers resigned in protest at the war, John Denham, Lord Hunt of Kings Heath, and the then Leader of the House of Commons Robin Cook. In a passionate speech to the House of Commons after his resignation, he said, "What has come to trouble me is the suspicion that if the 'hanging chads' of Florida had gone the other way and Al Gore had been elected, we would not now be about to commit British troops to action in Iraq." During the debate, it was stated that the Attorney General had advised that the war was legal under previous UN Resolutions.
Attempts to avoid war[edit]
Main article: Failed Iraqi peace initiatives
In December 2002, a representative of the head of Iraqi Intelligence, the General Tahir Jalil Habbush al-Tikriti, contacted former Central Intelligence Agency Counterterrorism Department head Vincent Cannistraro stating that Saddam "knew there was a campaign to link him to 11 September and prove he had weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)." Cannistraro further added that "the Iraqis were prepared to satisfy these concerns. I reported the conversation to senior levels of the state department and I was told to stand aside and they would handle it." Cannistraro stated that the offers made were all "killed" by the George W. Bush administration because they allowed Saddam to remain in power, an outcome viewed as unacceptable. It has been suggested that Saddam Hussein was prepared to go into exile if allowed to keep $1 billion USD.[65]
Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak's national security advisor, Osama El-Baz, sent a message to the U.S. State Department that the Iraqis wanted to discuss the accusations that the country had weapons of mass destruction and ties with Al-Qaeda. Iraq also attempted to reach the U.S. through the Syrian, French, German, and Russian intelligence services.
In January 2003, Lebanese-American Imad Hage met with Michael Maloof of the U.S. Department of Defense's Office of Special Plans. Hage, a resident of Beirut, had been recruited by the department to assist in the War on Terror. He reported that Mohammed Nassif, a close aide to Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, had expressed frustrations about the difficulties of Syria contacting the United States, and had attempted to use him as an intermediary. Maloof arranged for Hage to meet with civilian Richard Perle, then head of the Defense Policy Board.[66][67]
In January 2003, Hage met with the chief of Iraqi intelligence's foreign operations, Hassan al-Obeidi. Obeidi told Hage that Baghdad did not understand why they were being targeted, and that they had no WMDs. He then made the offer for Washington to send in 2000 FBI agents to confirm this. He additionally offered petroleum concessions, but stopped short of having Saddam give up power, instead suggesting that elections could be held in two years. Later, Obeidi suggested that Hage travel to Baghdad for talks; he accepted.[66]
Later that month, Hage met with General Habbush and Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz. He was offered top priority to U.S. firms in oil and mining rights, UN-supervised elections, U.S. inspections (with up to 5,000 inspectors), to have al-Qaeda agent Abdul Rahman Yasin (in Iraqi custody since 1994) handed over as a sign of good faith, and to give "full support for any U.S. plan" in the Israeli–Palestinian peace process. They also wished to meet with high-ranking U.S. officials. On 19 February, Hage faxed Maloof his report of the trip. Maloof reports having brought the proposal to Jaymie Duran. The Pentagon denies that either Wolfowitz or Rumsfeld, Duran's bosses, were aware of the plan.[66]
On 21 February, Maloof informed Duran in an email that Richard Perle wished to meet with Hage and the Iraqis if the Pentagon would clear it. Duran responded "Mike, working this. Keep this close hold." On 7 March, Perle met with Hage in Knightsbridge, and stated that he wanted to pursue the matter further with people in Washington (both have acknowledged the meeting). A few days later, he informed Hage that Washington refused to let him meet with Habbush to discuss the offer (Hage stated that Perle's response was "that the consensus in Washington was it was a no-go"). Perle told The Times, "The message was 'Tell them that we will see them in Baghdad.′″[68]
Casus belli and rationale[edit]
Main article: Rationale for the Iraq War
George Bush, speaking in October 2002, said that "The stated policy of the United States is regime change. ... However, if Saddam were to meet all the conditions of the United Nations, the conditions that I have described very clearly in terms that everybody can understand, that in itself will signal the regime has changed".[69] Citing reports from certain intelligence sources, Bush stated on 6 March 2003 that he believed that Saddam was not complying with UN Resolution 1441.[70]
In September 2002, Tony Blair stated, in an answer to a parliamentary question, that "Regime change in Iraq would be a wonderful thing. That is not the purpose of our action; our purpose is to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction..."[71] In November of that year, Blair further stated that, "So far as our objective, it is disarmament, not régime change – that is our objective. Now I happen to believe the regime of Saddam is a very brutal and repressive regime, I think it does enormous damage to the Iraqi people ... so I have got no doubt Saddam is very bad for Iraq, but on the other hand I have got no doubt either that the purpose of our challenge from the United Nations is disarmament of weapons of mass destruction, it is not regime change."[72]
At a press conference on 31 January 2003, Bush again reiterated that the single trigger for the invasion would be Iraq's failure to disarm, "Saddam Hussein must understand that if he does not disarm, for the sake of peace, we, along with others, will go disarm Saddam Hussein."[73] As late as 25 February 2003, it was still the official line that the only cause of invasion would be a failure to disarm. As Blair made clear in a statement to the House of Commons, "I detest his regime. But even now he can save it by complying with the UN's demand. Even now, we are prepared to go the extra step to achieve disarmament peacefully."[74]
Additional justifications used at various times included Iraqi violation of UN resolutions, the Iraqi government's repression of its citizens, and Iraqi violations of the 1991 cease-fire.[22]
The main allegations were: that Saddam possessed or was attempting to produce weapons of mass destruction, which Saddam Hussein had used in places such as Halabja,[75][76] possessed, and made efforts to acquire, particularly considering two previous attacks on Baghdad nuclear weapons production facilities by both Iran and Israel which were alleged to have postponed weapons development progress; and, further, that he had ties to terrorists, specifically al-Qaeda.
While it never made an explicit connection between Iraq and the 11 September attacks, the George W. Bush administration repeatedly insinuated a link, thereby creating a false impression for the U.S. public. Grand jury testimony from the 1993 World Trade Center bombing trials cited numerous direct linkages from the bombers to Baghdad and Department 13 of the Iraqi Intelligence Service in that initial attack marking the second anniversary to vindicate the surrender of Iraqi armed forces in Operation Desert Storm. For example, The Washington Post has noted that,

While not explicitly declaring Iraqi culpability in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, administration officials did, at various times, imply a link. In late 2001, Cheney said it was "pretty well confirmed" that attack mastermind Mohamed Atta had met with a senior Iraqi intelligence official. Later, Cheney called Iraq the "geographic base of the terrorists who had us under assault now for many years, but most especially on 9/11."[77]

Steven Kull, director of the Program on International Policy Attitudes (PIPA) at the University of Maryland, observed in March 2003 that "The administration has succeeded in creating a sense that there is some connection [between 11 Sept. and Saddam Hussein]". This was following a New York Times/CBS poll that showed 45% of Americans believing Saddam Hussein was "personally involved" in the 11 September atrocities. As the Christian Science Monitor observed at the time, while "Sources knowledgeable about U.S. intelligence say there is no evidence that Saddam played a role in the 11 Sept. attacks, nor that he has been or is currently aiding Al Qaeda. ... the White House appears to be encouraging this false impression, as it seeks to maintain American support for a possible war against Iraq and demonstrate seriousness of purpose to Saddam's regime." The CSM went on to report that, while polling data collected "right after 11 Sept. 2001" showed that only 3 percent mentioned Iraq or Saddam Hussein, by January 2003 attitudes "had been transformed" with a Knight Ridder poll showing that 44% of Americans believed "most" or "some" of the 11 September hijackers were Iraqi citizens.[78]
According to General Tommy Franks, the objectives of the invasion were, "First, end the regime of Saddam Hussein. Second, to identify, isolate and eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. Third, to search for, to capture and to drive out terrorists from that country. Fourth, to collect such intelligence as we can related to terrorist networks. Fifth, to collect such intelligence as we can related to the global network of illicit weapons of mass destruction. Sixth, to end sanctions and to immediately deliver humanitarian support to the displaced and to many needy Iraqi citizens. Seventh, to secure Iraq's oil fields and resources, which belong to the Iraqi people. And last, to help the Iraqi people create conditions for a transition to a representative self-government."[79]
The BBC has also noted that, while President Bush "never directly accused the former Iraqi leader of having a hand in the attacks on New York and Washington", he "repeatedly associated the two in keynote addresses delivered since 11 September", adding that "Senior members of his administration have similarly conflated the two." For instance, the BBC report quotes Colin Powell in February 2003, stating that "We've learned that Iraq has trained al-Qaeda members in bomb-making and poisons and deadly gases. And we know that after September 11, Saddam Hussein's regime gleefully celebrated the terrorist attacks on America." The same BBC report also noted the results of a recent opinion poll, which suggested that "70% of Americans believe the Iraqi leader was personally involved in the attacks."[80]
Also in September 2003, the Boston Globe reported that "Vice President Dick Cheney, anxious to defend the White House foreign policy amid ongoing violence in Iraq, stunned intelligence analysts and even members of his own administration this week by failing to dismiss a widely discredited claim: that Saddam Hussein might have played a role in the 11 Sept. attacks."[81] A year later, presidential candidate John Kerry alleged that Cheney was continuing "to intentionally mislead the American public by drawing a link between Saddam Hussein and 9/11 in an attempt to make the invasion of Iraq part of the global war on terror."[82]
Throughout 2002, the Bush administration insisted that removing Saddam from power to restore international peace and security was a major goal. The principal stated justifications for this policy of "regime change" were that Iraq's continuing production of weapons of mass destruction and known ties to terrorist organizations, as well as Iraq's continued violations of UN Security Council resolutions, amounted to a threat to the U.S. and the world community.




Colin Powell holding a model vial of anthrax while giving presentation to the United Nations Security Council on 5 February 2003 (still photograph captured from video clip, The White House/CNN)





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Colin Powell's 5 February 2003 address to The United Nations Security Council



The Bush administration's overall rationale for the invasion of Iraq was presented in detail by U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell to the United Nations Security Council on 5 February 2003. In summary, he stated,

We know that Saddam Hussein is determined to keep his weapons of mass destruction; he's determined to make more. Given Saddam Hussein's history of aggression ... given what we know of his terrorist associations and given his determination to exact revenge on those who oppose him, should we take the risk that he will not some day use these weapons at a time and the place and in the manner of his choosing at a time when the world is in a much weaker position to respond? The United States will not and cannot run that risk to the American people. Leaving Saddam Hussein in possession of weapons of mass destruction for a few more months or years is not an option, not in a post–September 11 world.[83]

Since the invasion, the U.S. government statements concerning Iraqi weapons programs and links to al-Qaeda have been discredited.[84] While the debate of whether Iraq intended to develop chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons in the future remains open, no WMDs have been found in Iraq since the invasion despite comprehensive inspections lasting more than 18 months.[85] In Cairo, on 24 February 2001, Colin Powell had predicted as much, saying, "[Saddam] has not developed any significant capability with respect to weapons of mass destruction. He is unable to project conventional power against his neighbours."[86] Similarly, assertions of operational links between the Iraqi regime and al-Qaeda have largely been discredited by the intelligence community, and Secretary Powell himself later admitted he had no proof.[87]
In September 2002, the Bush administration said attempts by Iraq to acquire thousands of high-strength aluminum tubes pointed to a clandestine program to make enriched uranium for nuclear bombs. Powell, in his address to the UN Security Council just before the war, referred to the aluminum tubes. A report released by the Institute for Science and International Security in 2002, however, reported that it was highly unlikely that the tubes could be used to enrich uranium. Powell later admitted he had presented an inaccurate case to the United Nations on Iraqi weapons, based on sourcing that was wrong and in some cases "deliberately misleading."[88][89][90]
The Bush administration asserted that the Saddam government had sought to purchase yellowcake uranium from Niger.[91] On 7 March 2003, the U.S. submitted intelligence documents as evidence to the International Atomic Energy Agency. These documents were dismissed by the IAEA as forgeries, with the concurrence in that judgment of outside experts. At the time, a US official stated that the evidence was submitted to the IAEA without knowledge of its provenance and characterized any mistakes as "more likely due to incompetence not malice".

Iraqi drones[edit]
In October 2002, a few days before the US Senate vote on the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution, about 75 senators were told in closed session that the Iraqi government had the means of delivering biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction by unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) drones that could be launched from ships off the US' Atlantic coast to attack US eastern seaboard cities. Colin Powell suggested in his presentation to the United Nations that UAVs were transported out of Iraq and could be launched against the United States.
In fact, Iraq had no offensive UAV fleet or any capability of putting UAVs on ships.[92] Iraq's UAV fleet consisted of less than a handful of outdated Czech training drones.[93] At the time, there was a vigorous dispute within the intelligence community whether the CIA's conclusions about Iraq's UAV fleet were accurate. The US Air Force agency denied outright that Iraq possessed any offensive UAV capability.[94]
Human rights[edit]
As evidence supporting U.S. and British charges about Iraqi Weapons of mass destruction and links to terrorism weakened, some supporters of the invasion have increasingly shifted their justification to the human rights violations of the Saddam government.[95] Leading human rights groups such as Human Rights Watch have argued, however, that they believe human rights concerns were never a central justification for the invasion, nor do they believe that military intervention was justifiable on humanitarian grounds, most significantly because "the killing in Iraq at the time was not of the exceptional nature that would justify such intervention."[96]
Legality of invasion[edit]






The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Legality of the Iraq War
See also: Legitimacy of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Views on the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and Opposition to the Iraq War




President George Bush, surrounded by leaders of the House and Senate, announces the Joint Resolution to Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq, 2 October 2002.


The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 was passed by congress with Republicans voting 98% in favor in the Senate, and 97% in favor in the House. Democrats supported the joint resolution 58% and 39% in the Senate and House respectively.[97][98] The resolution asserts the authorization by the Constitution of the United States and the Congress for the President to fight anti-United States terrorism. Citing the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998, the resolution reiterated that it should be the policy of the United States to remove the Saddam Hussein regime and promote a democratic replacement.
The resolution "supported" and "encouraged" diplomatic efforts by President George W. Bush to "strictly enforce through the U.N. Security Council all relevant Security Council resolutions regarding Iraq" and "obtain prompt and decisive action by the Security Council to ensure that Iraq abandons its strategy of delay, evasion, and noncompliance and promptly and strictly complies with all relevant Security Council resolutions regarding Iraq." The resolution authorized President Bush to use the Armed Forces of the United States "as he determines to be necessary and appropriate" to "defend the national security of the United States against the continuing threat posed by Iraq; and enforce all relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions regarding Iraq."
The legality of the invasion of Iraq has been challenged since its inception on a number of fronts, and several prominent supporters of the invasion in all the invading nations have publicly and privately cast doubt on its legality. It has been argued that the invasion was fully legal because authorization was implied by the United Nations Security Council.[99][100] International legal experts, including the International Commission of Jurists, a group of 31 leading Canadian law professors, and the U.S.-based Lawyers Committee on Nuclear Policy, have denounced both of these rationales.[101][102][103]
On Thursday 20 November 2003, an article published in the Guardian alleged that Richard Perle, a senior member of the administration's Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee, conceded that the invasion was illegal but still justified.[104][105]
The United Nations Security Council has passed nearly 60 resolutions on Iraq and Kuwait since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The most relevant to this issue is Resolution 678, passed on 29 November 1990. It authorizes "member states co-operating with the Government of Kuwait ... to use all necessary means" to (1) implement Security Council Resolution 660 and other resolutions calling for the end of Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwaiti territory and (2) "restore international peace and security in the area." Resolution 678 has not been rescinded or nullified by succeeding resolutions and Iraq was not alleged after 1991 to invade Kuwait or to threaten do so.
Resolution 1441 was most prominent during the run up to the war and formed the main backdrop for Secretary of State Colin Powell's address to the Security Council one month before the invasion.[106] According to an independent commission of inquiry set up by the government of the Netherlands, UN resolution 1441 "cannot reasonably be interpreted (as the Dutch government did) as authorising individual member states to use military force to compel Iraq to comply with the Security Council's resolutions." Accordingly, the Dutch commission concluded that the 2003 invasion violated international law.[107]




President George W. Bush addresses the nation from the Oval Office, 19 March 2003, to announce the beginning of Operation Iraqi Freedom. "The people of the United States and our friends and allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder." The Senate committee found that many of the administration's pre-war statements about Iraqi WMD were not supported by the underlying intelligence


At the same time, Bush Administration officials advanced a parallel legal argument using the earlier resolutions, which authorized force in response to Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait. Under this reasoning, by failing to disarm and submit to weapons inspections, Iraq was in violation of U.N. Security Council Resolutions 660 and 678, and the U.S. could legally compel Iraq's compliance through military means.
Critics and proponents of the legal rationale based on the U.N. resolutions argue that the legal right to determine how to enforce its resolutions lies with the Security Council alone, not with individual nations.
In February 2006, Luis Moreno Ocampo, the lead prosecutor for the International Criminal Court, reported that he had received 240 separate communications regarding the legality of the war, many of which concerned British participation in the invasion.[108] In a letter addressed to the complainants, Mr. Moreno Ocampo explained that he could only consider issues related to conduct during the war and not to its underlying legality as a possible crime of aggression because no provision had yet been adopted which "defines the crime and sets out the conditions under which the Court may exercise jurisdiction with respect to it." In a March 2007 interview with the Sunday Telegraph, Moreno Ocampo encouraged Iraq to sign up with the court so that it could bring cases related to alleged war crimes.[109]
United States Ohio Congressman Dennis Kucinich held a press conference on the evening of 24 April 2007, revealing US House Resolution 333 and the three articles of impeachment against Vice President Dick Cheney. He charged Cheney with manipulating the evidence of Iraq's weapons program, deceiving the nation about Iraq's connection to al-Qaeda, and threatening aggression against Iran in violation of the United Nations Charter.
Military aspects[edit]
The United Kingdom military operation was named Operation Telic.
Multilateral support[edit]
In November 2002, President George W. Bush, visiting Europe for a NATO summit, declared that, "should Iraqi President Saddam Hussein choose not to disarm, the United States will lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him."[110]




Tony Blair (left) and George W. Bush at Camp David in March 2003, during the build-up to the invasion of Iraq


Thereafter, the Bush administration briefly used the term Coalition of the Willing to refer to the countries who supported, militarily or verbally, the military action in Iraq and subsequent military presence in post-invasion Iraq since 2003. The original list prepared in March 2003 included 49 members.[111] Of those 49, only six besides the U.S. contributed troops to the invasion force (the United Kingdom, Australia, Poland, Spain, Portugal, and Denmark), and 33 provided some number of troops to support the occupation after the invasion was complete. Six members have no military, meaning that of the 49, 3 withheld troops completely.
Invasion force[edit]
Approximately 148,000 soldiers from the United States, 45,000 British soldiers, 2,000 Australian soldiers and 194 Polish soldiers from the special forces unit GROM were sent to Kuwait for the invasion.[9] The invasion force was also supported by Iraqi Kurdish militia troops, estimated to number upwards of 70,000.[10] In the latter stages of the invasion, 620 troops of the Iraqi National Congress opposition group were deployed to southern Iraq.[3]
A U.S. Central Command, Combined Forces Air Component Commander report, indicated that, as of 30 April 2003, there were a total of 466,985 U.S. personnel deployed for Operation Iraqi Freedom. This included USAF, 54,955; USAF Reserve, 2,084; Air National Guard, 7,207; USMC, 74,405; USMC Reserve, 9,501; USN, 61,296 (681 are members of the U.S. Coast Guard); USN Reserve, 2,056; and U.S. Army, 233,342; U.S. Army Reserve, 10,683; and Army National Guard, 8,866.[112]
Plans for opening a second front in the north were severely hampered when Turkey refused the use of its territory for such purposes.[113] In response to Turkey's decision, the United States dropped several thousand paratroopers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade into northern Iraq, a number significantly less than the 15,000-strong 4th Infantry Division that the U.S. originally planned to use for opening the northern front.[114]
Preparation[edit]




Kurdish areas in Northern Iraq






US Marine M1A1 tank is off-loaded from a US Navy LCAC in Kuwait in February 2003


CIA Special Activities Division (SAD) Paramilitary teams entered Iraq in July 2002 before the 2003 invasion. Once on the ground they prepared for the subsequent arrival of US military forces. SAD teams then combined with U.S. Army Special Forces to organize the Kurdish Peshmerga. This joint team combined to defeat Ansar al-Islam, an ally of Al Qaida, in a battle in the northeast corner of Iraq. The U.S. side was carried out by Paramilitary Officers from SAD and the Army's 10th Special Forces Group.[53][54][55]
SAD teams also conducted high-risk special reconnaissance missions behind Iraqi lines to identify senior leadership targets. These missions led to the initial strikes against Saddam Hussein and his key generals. Although the initial strikes against Saddam were unsuccessful in killing the dictator or his generals, they were successful in effectively ending the ability to command and control Iraqi forces. Other strikes against key generals were successful and significantly degraded the command's ability to react to and maneuver against the U.S.-led invasion force coming from the south.[53][55]
SAD operations officers were also successful in convincing key Iraqi army officers to surrender their units once the fighting started and/or not to oppose the invasion force.[54] NATO member Turkey refused to allow its territory to be used for the invasion. As a result, the SAD/SOG and U.S. Army Special Forces joint teams and the Kurdish Peshmerga constituted the entire northern force against government forces during the invasion. Their efforts kept the 5th Corps of the Iraqi army in place to defend against the Kurds rather than moving to contest the coalition force.
According to General Tommy Franks, April Fool, an American officer working undercover as a diplomat, was approached by an Iraqi intelligence agent. April Fool then sold to the Iraqi false "top secret" invasion plans provided by Franks' team. This deception misled the Iraqi military into deploying major forces in northern and western Iraq in anticipation of attacks by way of Turkey or Jordan, which never took place. This greatly reduced the defensive capacity in the rest of Iraq and facilitated the actual attacks via Kuwait and the Persian Gulf in the southeast.
Defending force[edit]




T-72 Lion of Babylon (tank) (Asad Babil)


The number of personnel in the Iraqi military before the war was uncertain, but it was believed to have been poorly equipped.[115][116][117] The International Institute for Strategic Studies estimated the Iraqi armed forces to number 538,000 (Iraqi Army 375,000, Iraqi Navy 2,000, Iraqi Air Force 20,000 and air defense 17,000), the paramilitary Fedayeen Saddam 44,000, Republican Guard 80,000 and reserves 650,000.[118]
Another estimate numbers the Army and Republican Guard at between 280,000 and 350,000 and 50,000 to 80,000, respectively,[119] and the paramilitary between 20,000 and 40,000.[120] There were an estimated thirteen infantry divisions, ten mechanized and armored divisions, as well as some special forces units. The Iraqi Air Force and Navy played a negligible role in the conflict.
During the invasion, foreign volunteers traveled to Iraq from Syria and took part in the fighting, usually under the command of the Fedayeen Saddam. It is not known for certain how many foreign fighters fought in Iraq in 2003, however, intelligence officers of the U.S. First Marine Division estimated that 50% of all Iraqi combatants in central Iraq were foreigners.[121][122]
In addition, the Kurdish Islamist militant group Ansar al-Islam controlled a small section of northern Iraq in an area outside of Saddam Hussein's control. Ansar al-Islam had been fighting against secular Kurdish forces since 2001. At the time of the invasion they fielded about 600 to 800 fighters.[123] Ansar al-Islam was led by the Jordanian-born militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who would later become an important leader in the Iraqi insurgency. Ansar al-Islam was driven out of Iraq in late March by a joint American-Kurdish force during Operation Viking Hammer.
Invasion[edit]
See also: 2003 invasion of Iraq order of battle




US invasion: 20–28 March 2003






US invasion: 29 March – 7 April 2003






Routes and major battles fought by invasion force and afterwards






Carrier Air Wing Two (CVW-2) mission briefing aboard Constellation (CV-64), 21 March 2003.


Since the 1991 Gulf War, the U.S. and UK had been engaged in low-level attacks on Iraqi air defenses which targeted them while enforcing Iraqi no-fly zones.[33][34] These zones, and the attacks to enforce them, were described as illegal by the former UN Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and the French foreign minister Hubert Vedrine. Other countries, notably Russia and China, also condemned the zones as a violation of Iraqi sovereignty.[124][125][126] In mid-2002, the U.S. began more carefully selecting targets in the southern part of the country to disrupt the military command structure in Iraq. A change in enforcement tactics was acknowledged at the time, but it was not made public that this was part of a plan known as Operation Southern Focus.
The amount of ordnance dropped on Iraqi positions by Coalition aircraft in 2001 and 2002 was less than in 1999 and 2000 which was during the Clinton administration.[127] This information has been used to attempt to refute the theory that the Bush administration had already decided to go to war against Iraq before coming to office and that the bombing during 2001 and 2002 was laying the groundwork for the eventual invasion in 2003. However, information obtained by the UK Liberal Democrats showed that the UK dropped twice as many bombs on Iraq in the second half of 2002 as they did during the whole of 2001. The tonnage of UK bombs dropped increased from 0 in March 2002 and 0.3 in April 2002 to between 7 and 14 tons per month in May–August, reaching a pre-war peak of 54.6 tons in September – before Congress' 11 October authorization of the invasion.
The 5 September attacks included a 100+ aircraft attack on the main air defense site in western Iraq. According to an editorial in New Statesman this was "Located at the furthest extreme of the southern no-fly zone, far away from the areas that needed to be patrolled to prevent attacks on the Shias, it was destroyed not because it was a threat to the patrols, but to allow allied special forces operating from Jordan to enter Iraq undetected."[128]
Tommy Franks, who commanded the invasion of Iraq, has since admitted that the bombing was designed to "degrade" Iraqi air defences in the same way as the air attacks that began the 1991 Gulf War. These "spikes of activity" were, in the words of then British Defence Secretary, Geoff Hoon, designed to 'put pressure on the Iraqi regime' or, as The Times reported, to "provoke Saddam Hussein into giving the allies an excuse for war". In this respect, as provocations designed to start a war, leaked British Foreign Office legal advice concluded that such attacks were illegal under international law.[129][130]
Another attempt at provoking the war was mentioned in a leaked memo from a meeting between George W. Bush and Tony Blair on 31 January 2003 at which Bush allegedly told Blair that "The US was thinking of flying U2 reconnaissance aircraft with fighter cover over Iraq, painted in UN colours. If Saddam fired on them, he would be in breach."[131] On 17 March 2003, U.S. President George W. Bush gave Saddam Hussein 48 hours to leave the country, along with his sons Uday and Qusay, or face war.
Preceding special forces mission in al-Qa'im[edit]
On the night of 17 March 2003, the majority of B and D squadron British 22nd SAS Regiment, who were designated as Task Force 14, crossed the border from Jordan to conduct a ground assault on a suspected chemical munitions site at a water-treatment plant in the city of al-Qa'im. It's been reported that the site might have been a SCUD launch site or a depot, an SAS officer was quoted by author Mark Nicol as saying "it was a location where missiles had been fired at Israel in the past, and a site of strategic importance for WMD material." The 60 members of D squadron, along with their 'Pinkie' DPVs (the last time the vehicles were used before their retirement), was flown 120 km into Iraq in 6 CH-47s in 3 waves. Following their insertion, D squadron established a patrol laager at a remote location outside al-Qa'im and awaited the arrival of B squadron, who had driven overland from Jordan. Their approach to the plant was compromised, and a firefight developed which ended in one 'pinkie' having to be abandoned and destroyed, repeated attempts to assault the plant were halted, leading the SAS calling in an air strike which finally silenced the opposition.[132]
Opening salvo: the Dora Farms strike[edit]
On the early morning of 19 March 2003, U.S. forces abandoned the plan for initial, non-nuclear decapitation strikes against 55 top Iraqi officials, in light of reports that Saddam Hussein was visiting his sons, Uday and Qusay, at Dora Farms, within the al-Dora farming community on the outskirts of Baghdad.[133] At approximately 05:30 UTC, two F-117 Nighthawk stealth fighters from the 8th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron[134] dropped four enhanced, satellite-guided 2,000-pound GBU-27 'Bunker Busters' on the compound. Complementing the aerial bombardment were nearly 40 Tomahawk cruise missiles fired from at least four ships, including the Ticonderoga-class cruiser USS Cowpens (CG-63), credited with the first to strike,[135] Arleigh Burke-class destroyer USS Donald Cook, and two submarines in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf.[136]
One bomb missed the compound entirely and the other three missed their target, landing on the other side of the wall of the palace compound.[137] Saddam Hussein was not present, nor were any members of the Iraqi leadership.[133][138] The attack killed one civilian and injured fourteen others, including four men, nine women and one child.[139][140] Later investigation revealed that Saddam Hussein had not visited the farm since 1995.[136]
Opening attack[edit]
On 19 March 2003 at 21:00, the first strike of the operation was carried out by members of the 160th SOAR: a flight of MH-60L DAPs (Direct Action Penetrators) and four 'Black Swarm' flights - each consisting of a pair of AH-6M Little Birds and a FLIR equipped MH-6M to identify targets for the AH-6s (each Black swarm flight was assigned a pair of A-10As) engaged Iraqi visual observation posts along the southern and western borders of Iraq. In the space of seven hours, more than 70 sites were destroyed, effectively depriving the Iraqi military of any early warning of the coming invasion. As the sites were eliminated the first heliborne SOF teams launched from H-5 airbase in Jordan, including vehicle-mounted patrols from the British and Australian components who were transported by the MH-47Es of the 160th SOAR. Ground elements of Task Force Dagger, Task Force 20, Task force 14 and Task Force 64 breached the sand berms along the Iraqi border with Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait in the early morning hours and drove into Iraq. Unofficially, the British, Australians and Task Force 20 had been in Iraq weeks prior.[141][142]
On 20 March 2003 at approximately 02:30 UTC or about 90 minutes after the lapse of the 48-hour deadline, at 05:33 local time, explosions were heard in Baghdad. Special operations commandos from the CIA's Special Activities Division from the Northern Iraq Liaison Element infiltrated throughout Iraq and called in the early air strikes.[53] At 03:15 UTC, or 10:15 pm EST, George W. Bush announced that he had ordered an "attack of opportunity" against targets in Iraq.[143] When this word was given, the troops on standby crossed the border into Iraq.




Wingtip vortices are visible trailing from an F-15E as it disengages from midair refueling with a KC-10 during Operation Iraqi Freedom


Before the invasion, many observers had expected a lengthy campaign of aerial bombing before any ground action, taking as examples the 1991 Persian Gulf War or the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan. In practice, U.S. plans envisioned simultaneous air and ground assaults to decapitate the Iraqi forces quickly (see Shock and awe), attempting to bypass Iraqi military units and cities in most cases. The assumption was that superior mobility and coordination of Coalition forces would allow them to attack the heart of the Iraqi command structure and destroy it in a short time, and that this would minimize civilian deaths and damage to infrastructure. It was expected that the elimination of the leadership would lead to the collapse of the Iraqi Forces and the government, and that much of the population would support the invaders once the government had been weakened. Occupation of cities and attacks on peripheral military units were viewed as undesirable distractions.
Following Turkey's decision to deny any official use of its territory, the Coalition was forced to modify the planned simultaneous attack from north and south.[144] Special Operations forces from the CIA and U.S. Army managed to build and lead the Kurdish Peshmerga into an effective force and assault for the North. The primary bases for the invasion were in Kuwait and other Persian Gulf nations. One result of this was that one of the divisions intended for the invasion was forced to relocate and was unable to take part in the invasion until well into the war. Many observers felt that the Coalition devoted sufficient numbers of troops to the invasion, but too many were withdrawn after it ended, and that the failure to occupy cities put them at a major disadvantage in achieving security and order throughout the country when local support failed to meet expectations.




NASA Landsat 7 image of Baghdad, 2 April 2003. The dark streaks are smoke from oil well fires set in an attempt to hinder attacking air forces


The invasion was swift, leading to the collapse of the Iraqi government and the military of Iraq in about three weeks. The oil infrastructure of Iraq was rapidly seized and secured with limited damage in that time. Securing the oil infrastructure was considered of great importance. In the Gulf War, while retreating from Kuwait, the Iraqi army had set many oil wells on fire in an attempt to disguise troop movements and to distract Coalition forces. Before the 2003 invasion, Iraqi forces had mined some 400 oil wells around Basra and the Al-Faw peninsula with explosives. Coalition troops launched an air and amphibious assault on the Al-Faw peninsula during the closing hours of 19 March to secure the oil fields there; the amphibious assault was supported by warships of the Royal Navy, Polish Navy, and Royal Australian Navy.
In the meantime, Royal Air Force Tornados from 9 and 617 Squadrons attacked the radar defence systems protecting Baghdad, but lost a Tornado on 22 March along with the pilot and navigator (Flight Lieutenant Kevin Main and Flight Lieutenant Dave Williams), shot down by an American Patriot missile as they returned to their airbase in Kuwait.[145] On 1 April, an F-14 from USS Kitty Hawk crashed in southern Iraq reportedly due to engine failure,[146] and a S-3B Viking plunged off the deck of the USS Constellation after a malfunction and an AV-8B Harrier jump jet went into the Gulf while it was trying to land on the USS Nassau.[147]
British 3 Commando Brigade, with the United States Marine Corps' 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit and the Polish Special Forces unit GROM attached, attacked the port of Umm Qasr. There they met with heavy resistance by Iraqi troops. A total of 14 Coalition troops and 30–40 Iraqi troops were killed, and 450 Iraqis taken prisoner. The British Army's 16 Air Assault Brigade also secured the oil fields in southern Iraq in places like Rumaila while the Polish commandos captured offshore oil platforms near the port, preventing their destruction. Despite the rapid advance of the invasion forces, some 44 oil wells were destroyed and set ablaze by Iraqi explosives or by incidental fire. However, the wells were quickly capped and the fires put out, preventing the ecological damage and loss of oil production capacity that had occurred at the end of the Gulf War.
In keeping with the rapid advance plan, the U.S. 3rd Infantry Division moved westward and then northward through the western desert toward Baghdad, while the 1st Marine Expeditionary Force moved along Highway 1 through the center of the country, and 1 (UK) Armoured Division moved northward through the eastern marshland.
During the first week of the war, Iraqi forces fired a Scud missile at the American Battlefield Update Assessment center in Camp Doha, Kuwait. The missile was intercepted and shot down by a Patriot missile seconds before hitting the complex. Subsequently, two A-10 Warthogs bombed the missile launcher.
Battle of Nasiriyah[edit]
Main article: Battle of Nasiriyah
Initially, the 1st Marine Division (United States) fought through the Rumaila oil fields, and moved north to Nasiriyah—a moderate-sized, Shi'ite-dominated city with important strategic significance as a major road junction and its proximity to nearby Talil Airfield. It was also situated near a number of strategically important bridges over the Euphrates River. The city was defended by a mix of regular Iraqi army units, Ba'ath loyalists, and Fedayeen from both Iraq and abroad. The United States Army 3rd Infantry Division defeated Iraqi forces entrenched in and around the airfield and bypassed the city to the west.




A U.S. amphibious fighting vehicle destroyed near Nasiriyah


On 23 March, a convoy from the 3rd Infantry Division, including the female American soldiers Jessica Lynch, Shoshana Johnson, and Lori Piestewa, was ambushed after taking a wrong turn into the city. Eleven U.S. soldiers were killed, and seven, including Lynch and Piestewa, were captured.[148] Piestewa died of wounds shortly after capture, while the remaining five prisoners of war were later rescued. Piestewa, who was from Tuba City, Arizona, and an enrolled member of the Hopi Tribe, was believed to have been the first Native American woman killed in combat in a foreign war.[149] On the same day, U.S Marines from the Second Marine Division entered Nasiriyah in force, facing heavy resistance as they moved to secure two major bridges in the city. Several Marines were killed during a firefight with Fedayeen in the urban fighting. At the Saddam Canal, another 18 Marines were killed in heavy fighting with Iraqi soldiers. An Air Force A-10 was involved in a case of friendly fire that resulted in the death of six Marines when it accidentally attacked an American amphibious vehicle. Two other vehicles were destroyed when a barrage of RPG and small arms fire killed most of the Marines inside.[150] A Marine from Marine Air Control Group 28 was killed by enemy fire, and two Marine engineers drowned in the Saddam Canal. The bridges were secured and the Second Marine division set up a perimeter around the city.




A U.S. soldier stands guard duty near a burning oil well in the Rumaila oil field, 2 April 2003


On the evening of 24 March, the 2nd Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalion, which was attached to Regimental Combat Team One (RCT-1), pushed through Nasiriyah and established a perimeter 15 kilometers (9.3 miles) north of the city. Iraqi reinforcements from Kut launched several counterattacks. The Marines managed to repel them using indirect fire and close air support. The last Iraqi attack was beaten off at dawn. The battalion estimated that 200–300 Iraqi soldiers were killed, without a single U.S. casualty. Nasiriyah was declared secure, but attacks by Iraqi Fedayeen continued. These attacks were uncoordinated, and resulted in firefights in which large numbers of Fedayeen were killed. Because of Nasiriyah's strategic position as a road junction, significant gridlock occurred as U.S. forces moving north converged on the city's surrounding highways.
With the Nasiriyah and Talil Airfields secured, Coalition forces gained an important logistical center in southern Iraq and established FOB/EAF Jalibah, some 10 miles (16 km) outside of Nasiriyah. Additional troops and supplies were soon brought through this forward operating base. The 101st Airborne Division continued its attack north in support of the 3rd Infantry Division.
By 28 March, a severe sand storm slowed the Coalition advance as the 3rd Infantry Division halted its northward drive halfway between Najaf and Karbala. Air operations by helicopters, poised to bring reinforcements from the 101st Airborne, were blocked for three days. There was particularly heavy fighting in and around the bridge near the town of Kufl.
Battle of Najaf[edit]
Main article: Battle of Najaf (2003)




Destroyed Iraqi T-72 tank on Highway 9 outside Najaf


Another fierce battle was at Najaf, where U.S. airborne and armored units with British air support fought an intense battle with Iraqi Regulars, Republican Guard units, and paramilitary forces. It started with U.S. AH-64 Apache helicopter gunships setting out on a mission to attack Republican Guard armored units; while flying low the Apaches came under heavy anti-aircraft, small arms, and RPG fire which heavily damaged many helicopters and shot one down, frustrating the attack.[151] They attacked again successfully on 26 March, this time after a pre-mission artillery barrage and with support from F/A-18 Hornet jets, with no gunships lost.[152]
The 1st Brigade Combat Team's air defense battery moved in and after heavy fighting with entrenched Iraqi Fedayeen seized a strategic bridge in Najaf, known as "Objective Jenkins". They then came under fierce counterattacks by Iraqi forces and Fedayeen, who failed to dislodge U.S. forces from their positions. After 36 hours of combat at the bridge at Najaf, the Iraqis were defeated, and the key bridge was secured, isolating Najaf from the north.[153]
The 101st Airborne Division on 29 March, supported by a battalion from the 1st Armored Division, attacked Iraqi forces in the southern part of the city, near the Imam Ali Mosque and captured Najaf's airfield.[154] Four Americans were killed by a suicide bomber. On 31 March the 101st made a reconnaissance-in-force into Najaf. On 1 April elements of the 70th Armored Regiment launched a "Thunder Run", an armored thrust through Najaf's city center, and after several days of heavy fighting and with air support were able to defeat the Iraqi forces, securing the city by 4 April.[155]
Battle of Basra[edit]
Main article: Battle of Basra (2003)




British soldiers engage Iraqi Army positions with their 81mm Mortars south of Basra, 26 March 2003.


The Iraqi port city of Umm Qasr was the first British obstacle. A joint Polish-British-American force ran into unexpectedly stiff resistance, and it took several days to clear the Iraqi forces out. Farther north, the British 7 Armoured Brigade ("The Desert Rats"), fought their way into Iraq's second-largest city, Basra, on 6 April, coming under constant attack by regulars and Fedayeen, while 3rd Battalion, The Parachute Regiment cleared the 'old quarter' of the city that was inaccessible to vehicles. Entering Basra was achieved after two weeks of fierce fighting, which included the biggest tank battle by British forces since World War II when the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards destroyed 14 Iraqi tanks on 27 March. A few members of D Squadron, British SAS, were deployed to southern Iraq to support the coalition advance on Basra, the team conducted forward route reconnaissance and infiltrated the city and brought in strikes on the Ba'athist loyalist leadership.[156][157]
Elements of 1 (UK) Armoured Division began to advance north towards U.S. positions around Al Amarah on 9 April. Pre-existing electrical and water shortages continued throughout the conflict and looting began as Iraqi forces collapsed. While Coalition forces began working with local Iraqi Police to enforce order, a joint team composed of Royal Engineers and the Royal Logistic Corps of the British Army rapidly set up and repaired dockyard facilities to allow humanitarian aid to begin to arrive from ships arriving in the port city of Umm Qasr.
After a rapid initial advance, the first major pause occurred near Karbala. There, U.S. Army elements met resistance from Iraqi troops defending cities and key bridges along the Euphrates River. These forces threatened to interdict supply routes as American forces moved north. Eventually, troops from the 101st Airborne Division of the U.S Army secured the cities of Najaf and Karbala to prevent any Iraqi counterattacks on the 3rd Infantry Division's lines of communication as the division pressed its advance toward Baghdad.
A total of 11 British soldiers were killed, while 395–515 Iraqi soldiers, irregulars, and Fedayeen were killed.
Battle of Karbala[edit]
Main article: Battle of Karbala (2003)
The Karbala Gap was a 20–25-mile wide strip of land with the Euphrates River to the east and Lake Razazah to the west. This strip of land was recognized by Iraqi commanders as a key approach to Baghdad, and was defended by some of the best units of the Iraqi Republican Guard. The Iraqi high command had originally positioned two Republican Guard divisions blocking the Karbala Gap.[158] Here these forces suffered heavy Coalition air attacks. However, the Coalition had since the beginning of March been conducting a strategic deception operation to convince the Iraqis that the U.S. 4th Infantry Division would be mounting a major assault into northern Iraq from Turkey.[159]
This deception plan worked, and on 2 April Saddam's son Qusay Hussein declared that the American invasion from the south was a feint and ordered troops to be re-deployed from the Karbala front to the north of Baghdad. Lt. Gen. Raad al-Hamdani, who was in command of the Karbala region, protested this and argued that unless reinforcements were rushed to the Karbala gap immediately to prevent a breach, U.S. forces would reach Baghdad within 48 hours, but his suggestions fell on deaf ears. American troops rushed through the gap and reached the Euphrates River at the town of Musayib. At Musayib, U.S. troops crossed the Euphrates in boats and seized the vital al-Kaed bridge across the Euphrates after Iraqi demolitions teams had failed to destroy it in time.
The 10th Armored Brigade from the Medina Division and the 22nd Armored Brigade from the Nebuchadnezzar Division, supported by artillery, launched night attacks against the U.S. bridgehead at Musayib. The attack was repulsed using tank fire and massed artillery rockets, destroying or disabling every Iraqi tank in the assault. The next morning, Coalition aircraft and helicopters fired on the Republican Guard units, destroying many more vehicles as well as communications infrastructure. The Republican Guard units broke under the massive firepower and the U.S. forces poured through the gap and onward to Baghdad.
Special operations[edit]




The northern front during March and April 2003


Initial infiltration[edit]
B Squadron, Delta Force (known as "Wolverines,") accompanied by several Air Force Special Tactics teams, a Delta intelligence and targeting cell, several military working dog teams and two Iraqi—American interpreters, was the first US SOF unit to enter western Iraq, crossing the border from Ar'ar in 15 customised Pinzgauer 6x6 Special Operations Vehicles and several armed Toyota Hilux pick up trucks. As part of Task Force 20, their formal role was to conduct selected high-priority SSE on suspected chemical weapon facilities before heading for the Haditha Dam complex. Along the way, Delta supported the seizure of H-3 Air Base and also conducted numerous deception operations to confuse the Iraqis as to the disposition of Coalition forces in west.[160]
Operation Row and Falconer[edit]
On 18 March 2003, B and D Squadrons of the British 22nd SAS Regiment had now infiltrated Iraq in full strength (D Squadron by air and B Squadron by ground) along with 1 Squadron Australian SASR and headed for H-2 and H-3 Air Base. They set up observation posts and called in airstrikes that defeated the Iraqi defenders, the combined British and Australian Squadrons took H-2 virtually unopposed, H-3 was secured on 25 March with the assistance of members of Delta Force and by Green Beret ODAs from Bravo company, 1st Battalion 5th SFG; a company of Rangers and Royal Marines from 45 Commando flew from Jordan to the bases and the base was handed over to them. The SAS teams moved to the next objective - the intersection of the two main highways linking Baghdad with Syria and Jordan,[161][162] where both squadrons were involved in conducting interdictions of fleeing Iraqi leadership targets heading for Syria.[157]
Previously, 16 (Air) Troop of D squadron conducted mounted reconnaissance of an Iraqi army facility near the Syrian border, followed by a harassing attack on the site, two other troops had conducted mobile ambushes on Iraqi units in the area, although they themselves were being hunted by a large Fedayeen Saddam unit mounted in 'technicals.'[157]
In northern Iraq in early March, a small reconnaissance team from M Squadron of the British Special Boat Service mounted on Honda ATVs inserted into Iraq from Jordan, its first mission was to conduct reconnaissance of an Iraqi air base at al-Sahara. The team was compromised by an anti-special forces Fedayeen unit and barely escaped thanks to a U.S. F-15E that flew air cover for the team and the bravery of an RAF Chinook that extracted the team under the Fedayeen's 'noses'. A second larger SBS operation was launched by M Squadron in full strength in a mix of land rovers and ATVs into northern Iraq from H-2 airbase, the objective was to locate, make contact and take the surrender of the Iraqi 5th Army Corps somewhere past Tikrit and to survey and mark viable temporary landing zones for follow-on forces. However the Squadron was compromised by a goat herder; the SBS drove for several days whilst unknown to them anti-special forces Fedayeen units followed them. At an overnight position near Mosul, the Fedayeen ambushed the Squadron with DShK heavy machine guns and RPGs, the SBS returned fire and began taking fire from a T-72, the Squadron scattered and escaped the well-constructed trap. A number of Land Rovers became bogged down in a nearby wadi, so they mined the vehicles and abandoned them - though several did not detonate and were captured and exhibited on Iraqi television. The SBS was now in three distinct groups: one with several operational Land Rovers was being pursued by the Iraqi hunter force, a second mainly equipped with ATVs was hunkered down and trying to arrange extraction, the third with just 2 operators on an ATV raced for the Syrian border. The first group tried to call in coalition strike aircraft but the aircraft couldn't identify friendly forces because the SBS were not equipped with infra-red strobes - although their vehicles did have Blue Force Tracker units, they eventually made it to an emergency rendezvous point and were extracted by a RAF Chinook. The second group was also extracted by an RAF Chinook and the third group made it to Syria and was held there until their release was negotiated, there were no SBS casualties.[163]
Operation Viking Hammer[edit]
In the early hours of 21 March 2003, as part of Operation Viking Hammer, a total of 64 Tomahawk cruise missiles struck the Ansar al-Islam camp and the surrounding sites, the terrorists group - numbering around 700 - had inhabited a valley near Halabja Iraqi Kurdistan, along with a small Kurdish splinter faction; they had prepared a number of defensive positions including anti-aircraft machine guns and maintained a facility, that US intelligence suspected, at which chemical and biological agents may have been developed and stored for future terrorist attacks. Viking Hammer was set to begin on 21 March, however the ground component of the operation was set back several days owing to the issues around infiltrating the majority of the 3rd Battalion 10th SFG into Iraq.[164] The Islamic Group of Kurdistan surrendered after having suffered 100 men killed in the 21 March strikes.[165]
On 28 March 2003, the ground element of Operation Viking Hammer was finally launched with a six-pronged advance, each prong was composed of several ODAs from 3rd Battalion, 10th SFG and upwards of 1,000 Kurdish Peshmerga fighters. The main advance set off towards Sargat - the location of the suspected chemical and biological weapons site; the force was soon pinned down by DShK heavy machine gun fire from the surrounding hills. A pair of US Navy F/A-18s responded to an urgent CAS request from the force and dropped two 500lb JDAMs on the Ansar al-Islam machine gun nests and strafed the positions with 20mm cannon before departing due to being low on fuel. The advance began again only to be halted once more by fire from prepared DShK and PKM machine gun nests, Green Berets from ODA 081 deployed a Mk 19 grenade launcher from the back of a Toyota Tacoma and suppressed the gun positions allowing the Peshmerga to assault and wipe out the terrorists. After capturing the town of Gulp, the force continued onto the village of Sargat; the village was heavily defended by fortified fighting positions mounting DShKs and mortars along with several BM-21 Grad. Unable to call in airstrikes due to the close proximity of the Peshmerga, a Green Beret sergeant used a dismounted M2 HMG to suppress the entrenched terrorists, his actions allowed the Peshmerga to bring forward their own 82mm Mortars and Grads which forced the Ansar al-Islam fighters to retreat. Task Force Viking advanced to secure the Daramar Gorge - which was surrounded by caves in the rock walls – the Peshmerga were again engaged by small arms fire and RPGs which it and the ODAs returned fire with heavy weapons, however it became obvious that they couldn't advance any further without air support. To dislodge the terrorists, the Combat Controllers attached to the ODAs vectored in US Navy F/A-18s which dropped six 500 lb JDAMs that shut down any further resistance. During the night, four AC-130 gunships maintained the pressure on the retreating Ansar al-Islam terrorists as they pulled back toward the Iranian border; the next day, Task Force Viking seized the high ground and pushed down through the valley - surrounding and killing small pockets of remnants from Ansar al-Islam. With their objectives completed 3rd Battalion and their Peshmerga returned to the green line to assist the push on Kirkuk and Mosul. A specialist SSE team was brought in to document the find at Sargat, the team recovered traces of several chemicals including Ricin along with stocks of NBC protective suits, atropine injectors and Arabic manuals on chemical weapons and IED construction. Estimates of Ansar al-Islam dead number over 300, many of them foreign fighters, whilst only 22 Peshmerga fighters were killed.[166]
Special operations in southern Iraq[edit]
On 21 March, ODA 554 of Charlie Company, 2nd Battalion 5th SFG crossed the border with the United States Marines to support the seizure of the Rumaylah oilfields which was later secured by UK forces; half the team later drove to the outskirts of Basra and successfully picked up four Iraqi oil industry technicians who had been recruited by the CIA to assist in safeguarding the oilfields from destruction, they later rejoined the other half of the team and fought roving bands of Fedayeen. The ODAs next mission was to work with a CIA-recruited Sheikh and assist British forces in identifying targets around Basra. The ODA soon established an informant network, they eventually assisted the British in rounding up some 170 Fedayeen in the city; they were eventually replaced by members of G Squadron 22nd SAS Regiment.[167]
Special operations in northern Iraq[edit]




A squad leader with the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable) (15th MEU (SOC)), moves his Marines to their objective during a mission in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom


Also In the North, the 10th Special Forces Group (10th SFG) and CIA paramilitary officers from their Special Activities Division had the mission of aiding the Kurdish parties, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, de facto rulers of Iraqi Kurdistan since 1991, and employing them against the 13 Iraqi Divisions located near Kirkuk and Mosul.[168][169] Turkey had officially prohibited any Coalition troops from using their bases or airspace, so lead elements of the 10th SFG had to make a detour infiltration; their flight was supposed to take four hours but instead took ten.[169] On 22 March 2003, the majority of 2nd and 3rd battalion 10th SFG from Task Force Viking flew from their forward staging area in Constanta, Romania to a location near Irbil aboard six MC-130H Combat Talons, several were engaged by Iraqi air defences on the flight into northern Iraq (one was sufficiently damaged enough that it was forced to make an emergency landing at Incirlik Air Base). The initial lift had deployed a total of 19 Green Beret ODAs and four ODBs into Northern Iraq.[170] Hours after the first of such flights, Turkey did allow the use of its air space and the rest of the 10th SFG infiltrated in. The preliminary mission was to destroy the base of the Kurdish terrorist group Ansar al-Islam, believed to be linked to al-Qaeda. Concurrent and follow-on missions involved attacking and fixing Iraqi forces in the north, thus preventing their deployment to the southern front and the main effort of the invasion.[169] Eventually Task Force Viking would number 51 ODAs and ODBs alongside some 60,000 Kurdish Peshmerga militia of the PUK (Patriotic Union of Kurdistan).[171]
On 26 March 2003, the 173rd Airborne Brigade augmented the invasion's northern front by parachuting into northern Iraq onto Bashur Airfield, controlled at the time by elements of 10th SFG and Kurdish peshmerga. The fall of Kirkuk on 10 April 2003 to the 10th SFG, CIA Paramilitary Teams and Kurdish peshmerga precipitated the 173rd's planned assault, preventing the unit's involvement in combat against Iraqi forces during the invasion.[172]
Following the Battle of Haditha Dam, Delta Force handed the dam over to the Rangers and headed north to conduct ambushes along the highway above Tikrit, tying up Iraqi forces in the region and attempting to capture fleeing high-value targets trying to escape to Syria.[173]
On 2 April, Delta were engaged by half a dozen armed technicals from the same anti-special forces Fedayeen that had previously fought the SBS, two Delta operators were wounded (one serious), the squadron requested an urgent aero medical evacuation and immediate close-air support as a company of truck-borne Iraqi reinforcements arrived. Two MH-60K Blackhawks carrying a para jumper medical team and two MH-60L DAPs of the 160th SOAR responded and engaged the Iraqis, which allowed the Delta operators to move their casualties to an emergency HLZ and they were medevaced to H-1 escorted by a pair of A-10As, however MSG George Fernandez died. The DAPs stayed on station and continued to engage the Iraqis, destroying a truck carrying a mortar and several infantry squads, whilst Delta snipers killed Iraqi infantryman firing on the DAPs, another pair of A-10As arrived and dropped airburst 500 lb bombs within 20m of Delta positions and killed a large number of Iraqi infantry gathering in a wadi. The DAPs engaged spotted several Iraqi units and engaged them until they were dangerously low on fuel.[174]
Task Force Viking launched an operation to seize the town of Ayn Sifni, the town was strategically important because it straddles the main highway into Mosul, once the town fell, it would be clear for the coalition to advance on Mosul. ODAs from the 3rd and 10th SFG called in airstrikes on the Iraqi garrisons in and around the town, causing many of the Iraqi conscripts to flee, by 5 April 2003, there appeared to be only two Iraqi platoons left in the town. On 6 April, ODAs 051, 055 and 056 assaulted the town – ODAs 055 and 056 provided fire support along with Peshmerga heavy weapons teams, whilst ODA 51 made the actual assault on the town. As ODA 51 cautiously advanced on the village, it came under intense fire - the two platoons of Iraqis turned out to be closer to battalion strength and equipped with heavy weapons like 82mm mortars, antiaircraft guns and an artillery piece. After 4 hours of F/A-18 airstrikes and constant heavy weapons fire from ODA 055 and 056, the assault force entered Ayn Sifni; soon afterwards, Iraqi infantry counterattacked, supported by several mortars, attempting to retake the town, but it was beaten back by ODA 51 and the Kurds.[175]
On 6 April 2003, ODA 391 and ODA 392 from the 3rd SFG and ODA 044 from 10th SFG with about 150 Kurdish fighters were the main force involved in the Battle of Debecka Pass.[176]
On 9 April, nine ODAs from FOB 103 encircled Kirkuk after fierce fighting to capture the ridges overlooking the approaches to the city, the earlier capture of the nearby city of Tuz had largely broken the will of the Iraqi Army and only the Fedayeen remained in Kirkuk, the first ODA units entered the city the next day, a week later the 173rd Airborne took over responsibility for the city, after some minor skirmishes the Fedayeen fled.[177] Staging out of MSS Grizzly, Delta mounted operations to interdict Ba'ath Party HVTs on Highway 1 (Highway 2 and 4 in western Iraq had been secured by British SAS and Australian SAS teams), on 9 April, the combined team seized an airfield near Tikrit.[178]
The successful occupation of Kirkuk came as a result of approximately two weeks of fighting that included the Battle of the Green Line (the unofficial border of the Kurdish autonomous zone) and the subsequent Battle of Kani Domlan Ridge (the ridgeline running northwest to southeast of Kirkuk), the latter fought exclusively by 3rd Battalion, 10th SFG and Kurdish peshmerga against the Iraqi I Corps. The 173rd Brigade would eventually take responsibility for Kirkuk days later, becoming involved in the counterinsurgency fight and remain there until redeploying a year later.[172]
On 11 April an advanced element from FOB 102 numbering no more than 30 Green Berets advanced into Mosul, the advanced had followed several days of heavy airstrikes on three Iraqi divisions defending Mosul; on 13 April, 3rd Battalion 3rd SFG and a battalion from the 10th Mountain Division were ordered to Mosul to relieve the 10th SFG and their Peshmerga allies.[179] Further reinforcing operations in Northern Iraq, the 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable), serving as Landing Force Sixth Fleet, deployed in April to Erbil and subsequently Mosul via Marine KC-130 flights.[180] The 26 MEU (SOC) maintained security of the Mosul airfield and surrounding area until relief by the 101st Airborne Division.[181]
Battle of Haditha Dam[edit]
The Battle of Haditha Dam occurred on the 24th March 2003, Rangers from 3rd Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment, conducted a combat parachute drop onto H-1 Air Base, securing the site as a staging area for operations in the west. Delta Force recce operators drove through Iraqi lines around the Haditha Dam on customised ATVs, marking targets for Coalition airstrikes resulting in the eventual destruction of a large number of Iraqi armoured vehicles and antiaircraft systems. Delta's reconnaissance of the dam indicated that a larger force would be needed to seize it, so a request was made and approved for a second Delta squadron from Fort Bragg to be dispatched with a further Ranger battalion, along with M1A1 Abrams tanks from C Company, 2nd Battalion 70th Armor. C-17 flew the company from Talil to H-1 and then to MSS (Mission Support Site) Grizzly - a desert strip established by Delta Force located between Haditha and Tikrit; C Squadron, Delta Force was flown directly to MSS Grizzly.[160]
On 1 April, C squadron, Delta Force and 3/75th Ranger Regiment conducted a night-time ground assault in their Pinzgauers and GMVs against the Haditha Dam complex. Three platoons of Rangers seized the dams' administrative buildings with little initial opposition, while a pair of AH-6M Six Guns orbited overhead, soon after daybreak, a Ranger sniper shot and killed 3 Iraqis carrying RPGs on the western side of the dam and Rangers on the eastern side engaged a truck carrying infantry, which led to an hour-long contract. South of the dam, another Ranger platoon was securing the dam's power station and electricity transformer against sabotage, another platoon was occupied establishing blocking positions on the main road into the dam complex. The blocking positions came under the sporadic mortar fire, resulting in the AH-6Ms flying multiple gun runs to silence the mortar positions, another mortar team, firing from a small island was engaged and silenced by a Ranger Javelin team. For five days, Iraqi forces continued to harass the Rangers at the dam, principally with episodic artillery and mortar fire along with several infantry counterattacks against the blocking positions; the HIMARS rocket system saw its first combat deployment at the dam – firing counter-battery missions, 3 Rangers were killed on 3 April by a VBIED at the blocking positions, the car was driven by a pregnant Iraqi woman acting distressed and asking for water. Rangers captured an Iraqi forward observer dressed as a civilian after sinking his kayak with .50cal fire, the observer had maps of the Rangers positions.[182]
Objective Beaver[edit]
Intelligence indicated that chemical and biological weapons stocks may have been located at a complex known as al Qadisiyah Research Centre along the shore of the al Qadisiyah reservoir among government and residential buildings, on the evening of 26 March, a DEVGRU assault element supported by B Company, 2nd Battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment assaulted the complex (codenamed Objective Beaver). Whilst the first of four MH-60Ks inserted the Rangers into their blocking positions, it was engaged by small arms fire from a nearby building, an AH-6M spotted the muzzle flashes and fired a 2.75inch rocket into the location silencing the small arms fire, the second MH-60K was also struck by small arms fire but its door gunner suppressed it. A-10As engaged nearby electricity transformers successfully blacking out the area, but it resulted in a series of explosions and a resulting fire at the stations that dramatically lit the sky – pinpointing the orbiting helicopters for enemy gunmen. Small arms fire increased as the final two MH-60Ks inserted their blocking teams, one Ranger was wounded, the two pairs of AH-6Ms and MH-60L DAPs supporting the mission continued to suppress targets as the four MH-47Es carrying the DEVGRU main assault force inserted under heavy enemy small arms fire whilst DEVGRU sniper teams aboard a pair of MH-6Ms engaged numerous gunmen and vehicles, one Nightstalker crew was wounded as the MH-47Es lifted off. The SEALs conducted a hasty SSE while the Ranger blocking positions received and returned fire, the AH-6Ms and the aerial snipers continued to engage enemy gunmen whilst the DAPs pushed further out to ensure no reinforcements approached - engaging and destroying numerous Fedayeen armed technicals. The SSE took longer than expected owing to the size and maze-like structure of the building, the mission completed after 45 minutes, later tests of the material recovered by DEVGRU showed no evidence of chemical or biological weapons at the Objective Beaver.[183]
Operations in western Iraq[edit]
Bravo and Charlie companies of 1st Battalion 5th SFG crossed the Kuwait border at H-Hour with ODA 531 using breaching demolition charges to clear a path through the sand berms. Charlie company's seven ODAs in 35 vehicles took the southeastern operation box of the western desert heading towards the towns of Nukyab, Habbariya and Mudyasis, ODA 534 split off to head for the area surrounding Nukyab serching for mobile SCUB-B TEL launch sites. Bravo company set out for the central town of Ar Rutba and H-3 Air Base with six ODAs and a support ODB (Operational Detachment Bravo). ODAs 523 and 524 searched a suspected Scud-B storage facility while ODAs 521 and 525 were tasked with clearing several abandoned airfields, with no sign of Scud launchers, ODA 525 deployed a Special Reconnaissance team to conduct pattern of life surveillance on the town of Ar Rutba. A two-man team called in a pair of nearby F-16C Fighting Falcons to destroy an Iraqi Army radio direction-finding facility they had identified. A second reconnaissance team from ODA 525 deployed to cover the two highways leading to Ar Rutbah, however as the team was compromised by roving Bedouins who informed the Iraqi Army garrison at Ar Rutbah of the teams presence and location, armed Iraqi technicals crewed by the Fedayeen drove out to search for them, so the Green Berets mounted their GMVs, left their hide and found a position to ambush the Fedayeen, under the weight of fire the Fedayeen retreated. ODA 525 attempted to link up with the two-man reconnaissance team and extract it to safety but large numbers of Iraqi vehicles began driving out of the town to them, the ODAs called in immediate air support. whilst waiting, the reconnaissance team fired on the Fedayeen leaders with their suppressed MK12 sniper rifle and contacted ODA 521 (whom were clearing suspected east of the town) and they reinforced ODA 525. Within minutes, F-16Cs arrived and engaged the Fedayeen vehicles, another Fedayeen convoy attempted to outflank ODA 525 but ran into the guns of ODA 524, after 4 hours of constant and punishing airstrikes on the encircling Fedayeen, eight GMVs of ODA 521 and 525 managed to extract the exposed reconnaissance team under the cover of a B-1B strategic bomber, the vehicles withdrew to ODB 520s staging area south of Ar Rutbah. Over 100 Fedayeen fighters were killed and four armed technicals were destroyed. To the west ODA 523 reinforced ODA 524, but ran into a pair of armed technicals on the highway, both were destroyed by the GMVs, the Green Berets ceased fire when a civilian station wagon full of Iraqi children drove into the middle of the firefight. ODA 522 also identified two Fedayeen armed technicals proceeding down the highway toward ODA 523, they set an ambush for them, destroying the vehicles and killing 15 Fedayeen.[184]
The strategic intent of the US Army Special Forces ODAs had been to shutdown the main supply routes and deny access around Ar Rutbah and the strategically important H-3 airbase, which was defended by a battalion of Iraqi troops and significant numbers of mobile and static anti aircraft guns. On 24 March 2003, the surrounding ODAs supported by Task Force 7 (British Special Air Service) and Task Force 64 (Australian Special Air Service Regiment) called in constant 24 hours of precision airstrikes on H-3 using SOFLAM target designators, the aerial bombardment forced the Iraqi military vehicles to leave the base and headed towards Baghdad. ODA 521 over watching the highway they were travelling on ambushed the convoy destroying a truck mounted ZU-23, the convoy was thrown into disarray, a sandstorm prevented the ODA calling in airstrikes and the convoy scattered into the desert. Bravo company 5th SFG and the coalition SOF secured the airfield, finding a Roland surface-to-air missile system, around 80 assorted anti aircraft cannon guns including ZSU-23-4 Shilka, SA-7 grail handheld SAMs and an enormous amount of ammunition. H-3 was established as an Advanced Operating Base for Bravo company, with supplies delivered by C-130s and MH-47Es; ODA 581 vehicle checkpoitn amnaged to capture the Iraqi general in command of H-3 as he was trying to escape in civilian attire, he was secured and flown by an unmarked CIA SAD Air Branch Little Brid on 28 March for further interrogation. Additionally, ODA 523 discovered what may have been chemical weapons samples in a laboratory on the grounds of H-3.[185]
Bravo company turned its attention to Ar Rutbah, signals intercepts by SOT-A (Support Operations Team - Alpha) and an informer network among the Bedouins as well as inhabitants of the town indicated that around 800 Fedayeen remained in the town; Fedayeen patrols from the town were engaged by surrounding Green Berets and captured. ODAs guided in precision airstrikes on Fedayeen anti aircraft guns on the outskirts of the town and on top of the airstrikes, they also struck large groups of Fedayeen militia with Javelin missiles. On 9 April, nine ODAs secured the main roads into the town an commenced a day of near continuous final airstrikes from fix-wing aircraft and Apache helicopters. Civilians from the town approached the Green Berets asking them to stop the bombing, the Green Berets struck a deal with the civilians and they entered the town the next day. A B-52 and 2 F-16Cs flew show of force flights over the town as the Green Berets entered, the Fedayeen blended in with the population. Within days, the Green Berets helped the town to elect a mayor and set up markets, get sixty percent of the electricity grid working and repair water supplies. ODA 521 and 525 continued to operate in the region, stopping several trucks carrying foreign fighters, they disarmed them, took their details and warned them not to come back before sending them to Syria; in late May, the teams were replaced by the 3rd Armoured Cavalry Regiment.[186]
Other special operations[edit]




The destroyed remains of Iraqi tanks and other armored vehicles litter an Iraqi military complex west of Diwaniyah


The 2nd Battalion of the U.S. 5th Special Forces Group, United States Army Special Forces (Green Berets) conducted reconnaissance in the cities of Basra, Karbala and various other locations.[187]
After Sargat was taken, Bravo Company, 3rd Battalion, 10th SFG and CIA paramilitary officers along with their Kurdish allies pushed south towards Tikrit and the surrounding towns of Northern Iraq.[188] Previously, during the Battle of the Green Line, Bravo Company, 3/10 with their Kurdish allies pushed back, destroyed, or routed the 13th Iraqi Infantry Division.[189] The same company took Tikrit. Iraq was the largest deployment of the U.S. Special Forces since Vietnam.[190]
ODA 563 worked in support of the US Marines around Al Diwaniyah with local Sheikhs and their militias supported by AV-8Bs and F/A-18s; managing to capture the city of Qwam al Hamza. The following day ODA 563, their local Sheikh and his militia and a small Force Recon team captured the bridge leading to Diwaniyah and the militia attacked Iraqi positions over the bridge, forcing the Iraqi army and Fedayeen to flee toward Baghdad whilst being harassed by Marine Corps aircraft.[191]
Jessica Lynch rescue[edit]






This section should include only a brief summary of Jessica Lynch. See Wikipedia:Summary style for information on how to properly incorporate it into this article's main text. (December 2016)







A combat camera video shows the April 1, 2003, footage of Lynch on a stretcher during her rescue from Iraq.


Private first class Jessica Lynch of the 507th Maintenance Company was seriously injured and captured after her convoy was ambushed by Iraqi forces during the Battle of Nasiriyah. Initial intelligence that led to her rescue was provided by an informant who approached ODA 553 when it was working in Nasiriyah, the intelligence was passed on and Task Force 20 planned a rescue mission. Launching from the recently captured airfield at Talil, the rescue force consisted of 290 Rangers from 1st and 2nd battalion, 75th Ranger Regiment, around 60 SEALs from DEVGRU along with Para Rescue Jumpers and Combat Controllers from the 24th Special Tactics Squadron conventional Marines from Task Force Tarawa then currently fighting through the city and aviators from the Army, Marines and Air Force. The plan called for Task Force Tarawa to conduct a deception mission by seizing the bridges across the Euphrates to draw attention away from the hospital Lynch was held at, an airstrike by US Marine AV-8 Harriers would be conducted against one of the bridges to confuse the opposition further and US Marine AH-1W Cobras were tasked to fly over the area to conceal the sound of incoming SOF helicopters. Air cover as provided by an AC-130 Spectre and a Marine EA-6 Prowler to jam any enemy SAM systems that might be present. With the deception mission underway, the SEAL and select Ranger elements would be inserted by MH-60K Blackhawks and four MH-6 Little Birds, supported by four AH-6 attack helicopters and two MH-60L DAPs, the other Rangers would be flown in by Marine CH-46s and CH-53 transport helicopters to establish a cordon around the hospital grounds. The main assault force of SEALs would arrive by a ground convoy of AGMS Pandur forearmed vehicles and GMV trucks whilst the hostage rescue element landed directly on the objective in MH-6 Little Birds.[192]
At 0100 on 1 April 2003, the Marines commenced their deception mission, CIA elements cut the city's power as the helicopters approached their objective, the AH-6s led the way, behind them the MH-6s dropped off Task Force 20 sniper teams at strategic locations around and on the hospital. The DAPs and the AH-6s covered the MH-60Ks as they dropped off assault teams on the hospital roof and another by the front door, the ground assault convoy arrived and the assaulters raced inside and onto the second floor where Lynch was located. 13 minutes later, a MH-60K touched down near the hospital entrance with a team of PJs and SOAR medics on board and transported Lynch to Talil where it rendezvoused with a standby medical flight and then onto Kuwait and finally the United States. The Hospital was devoid of any Fedayeen, although evidence suggested they were using it as a base; the Ranger blocking teams experienced some sporadic direct fire, the SEALs and the Rangers eventually recovered the remains of eight members of Lynch's unit that had been killed or died of their wounds. Task Force 20 carried out the first successful US POW rescue mission since World War II.[193]
Fall of Baghdad (April 2003)[edit]
Main article: Battle of Baghdad (2003)




A T72 Asad Babil abandoned after facing the final U.S. thrust into Baghdad


Three weeks into the invasion, U.S.-led Coalition forces moved into Baghdad. Units of the Iraqi Special Republican Guard led the defence of the city. The rest of the defenders were a mixture of Republican Guard units, regular army units, Fedayeen Saddam, and non-Iraqi Arab volunteers. Initial plans were for Coalition units to surround the city and gradually move in, forcing Iraqi armor and ground units to cluster into a central pocket in the city, and then attack with air and artillery forces.
This plan soon became unnecessary, as an initial engagement of armored units south of the city saw most of the Republican Guard's assets destroyed and routes in the southern outskirts of the city occupied. On 5 April, Task Force 1–64 Armor of the U.S. Army's 3rd Infantry Division executed a raid, later called the "Thunder Run", to test remaining Iraqi defenses, with 29 tanks and 14 Bradley armored fighting vehicles advancing to the Baghdad airport. They met heavy resistance, but were successful in reaching the airport. U.S. troops faced heavy fighting in the airport, but eventually secured the airport.




An American M1 Abrams tank destroyed in Baghdad


The next day, another brigade of the 3rd Infantry Division attacked into downtown Baghdad and occupied one of the palaces of Saddam Hussein in fierce fighting. U.S. Marines also faced heavy shelling from Iraqi artillery as they attempted to cross a river bridge, but the river crossing was successful. The Iraqis managed to inflict some casualties on the U.S. forces near the airport from defensive positions but suffered severe casualties from air bombardment. Within hours of the palace seizure and with television coverage of this spreading through Iraq, U.S. forces ordered Iraqi forces within Baghdad to surrender, or the city would face a full-scale assault. Iraqi government officials had either disappeared or had conceded defeat, and on 9 April 2003, Baghdad was formally occupied by Coalition forces. Much of Baghdad remained unsecured however, and fighting continued within the city and its outskirts well into the period of occupation. Saddam had vanished, and his whereabouts were unknown.




Marines from 1st Battalion 7th Marines enter a palace during the Battle of Baghdad


On 10 April, a rumor emerged that Saddam Hussein and his top aides were in a mosque complex in the Al Az'Amiyah District of Baghdad. Three companies of Marines were sent to capture him and came under heavy fire from rocket-propelled grenades, mortars, and assault rifles. One Marine was killed and 20 were wounded, but neither Saddam or any of his top aides were found. U.S. forces supported by mortars, artillery, and aircraft continued to attack Iraqi forces still loyal to Saddam Hussein and non-Iraqi Arab volunteers. U.S. aircraft flying in support were met with Iraqi anti-aircraft fire. On 12 April, by late afternoon, all fighting had ceased. A total of 34 American soldiers and 2,320 Iraqi fighters were killed.




The April 2003 toppling of Saddam Hussein's statue in Firdos Square in Baghdad shortly after the capture of the city


Many Iraqis celebrated the downfall of Saddam by vandalizing the many portraits and statues of him together with other pieces of his cult of personality. One widely publicized event was the dramatic toppling of a large statue of Saddam in Baghdad's Firdos Square. This attracted considerable media coverage at the time. As the British Daily Mirror reported,

For an oppressed people this final act in the fading daylight, the wrenching down of this ghastly symbol of the regime, is their Berlin Wall moment. Big Moustache has had his day."[194]

As Staff Sergeant Brian Plesich reported in On Point: The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom,

The Marine Corps colonel in the area saw the Saddam statue as a target of opportunity and decided that the statue must come down. Since we were right there, we chimed in with some loudspeaker support to let the Iraqis know what it was we were attempting to do...
Somehow along the way, somebody had gotten the idea to put a bunch of Iraqi kids onto the wrecker that was to pull the statue down. While the wrecker was pulling the statue down, there were Iraqi children crawling all over it. Finally they brought the statue down.[195]

The fall of Baghdad saw the outbreak of regional, sectarian violence throughout the country, as Iraqi tribes and cities began to fight each other over old grudges. The Iraqi cities of Al-Kut and Nasiriyah launched attacks on each other immediately following the fall of Baghdad to establish dominance in the new country, and the U.S.-led Coalition quickly found themselves embroiled in a potential civil war. U.S.-led Coalition forces ordered the cities to cease hostilities immediately, explaining that Baghdad would remain the capital of the new Iraqi government. Nasiriyah responded favorably and quickly backed down; however, Al-Kut placed snipers on the main roadways into town, with orders that invading forces were not to enter the city. After several minor skirmishes, the snipers were removed, but tensions and violence between regional, city, tribal, and familial groups continued.


Play media


US Marines being welcomed while entering Baghdad in April 2003


U.S. General Tommy Franks assumed control of Iraq as the supreme commander of the coalition occupation forces. Shortly after the sudden collapse of the defense of Baghdad, rumors were circulating in Iraq and elsewhere that there had been a deal struck (a "safqua") wherein the U.S.-led Coalition had bribed key members of the Iraqi military elite and/or the Ba'ath party itself to stand down. In May 2003, General Franks retired, and confirmed in an interview with Defense Week that the U.S.-led Coalition had paid Iraqi military leaders to defect. The extent of the defections and their effect on the war are unclear.
U.S.-led Coalition troops promptly began searching for the key members of Saddam Hussein's government. These individuals were identified by a variety of means, most famously through sets of most-wanted Iraqi playing cards. Later during the military occupation period after the invasion, on 22 July 2003 during a raid by the U.S. 101st Airborne Division and men from Task Force 20, Saddam Hussein's sons Uday and Qusay, and one of his grandsons were killed in a massive fire-fight. Saddam Hussein himself was captured on 13 December 2003 by the U.S. Army's 4th Infantry Division and members of Task Force 121 during Operation Red Dawn.
Other areas[edit]
U.S. special forces had also been involved in the extreme south of Iraq, attempting to occupy key roads to Syria and airbases. In one case two armored platoons were used to convince Iraqi leadership that an entire armored battalion was entrenched in the west of Iraq.
On 15 April, U.S. forces took control of Tikrit, the last major outpost in central Iraq, with an attack led by the Marines' Task Force Tripoli. About a week later the Marines were relieved in place by the Army's 4th Infantry Division.
Coalition aircraft flew over forty-one thousand sorties,[196] of which over nine thousand were tanker sorties.[197]
Bush declares "End of major combat operations" (May 2003)[edit]




USS Abraham Lincoln returning to port carrying its Mission Accomplished banner


On 1 May 2003, Bush landed on the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln, in a Lockheed S-3 Viking, where he gave a speech announcing the end of major combat operations in the Iraq war. Bush's landing was criticized by opponents as an unnecessarily theatrical and expensive stunt. Clearly visible in the background was a banner stating "Mission Accomplished." The banner, made by White House staff and supplied by request of the United States Navy,[198] was criticized as premature. The White House subsequently released a statement that the sign and Bush's visit referred to the initial invasion of Iraq and disputing the charge of theatrics. The speech itself noted: "We have difficult work to do in Iraq. We are bringing order to parts of that country that remain dangerous."[199] Post-invasion Iraq was marked by a long and violent conflict between U.S.-led forces and Iraqi insurgents.[200]

Coalition and Allied contingent involvement[edit]
Members of the Coalition included Australia: 2,000 invasion, [Poland]: 200 invasion—2,500 peak, Spain: 1,300 invasion United Kingdom: 46,000 invasion, United States: 150,000 to 250,000 invasion. Other members of the coalition were Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Palau, Panama, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Korea, Tonga, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.[201] At least 15 other countries participated covertly.[202]
Australia[edit]
Main article: Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq
Australia contributed approximately 2,000 Australian Defence Force personnel, including a special forces task group, three warships and 14 F/A-18 Hornet aircraft.[203] On 16 April 2003, Australian special operations forces captured the undefended Al Asad Airbase west of Baghdad. The base would later become the second largest Coalition facility post-invasion.
Poland[edit]
Main article: Polish involvement in the 2003 invasion of Iraq




Polish GROM troops pose immediately after the port's capture during the Battle of Umm Qasr.


The Battle of Umm Qasr was the first military confrontation in the Iraq War, with its objective the capture of the port. Polish GROM troops supported the amphibious assault on Umm Qasr with the British 3 Commando Brigade of the Royal Marines, and the US 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit.[204] After the waterway was de-mined by a Detachment from HM-14 and Naval Special Clearance Team ONE of the U.S. Navy and reopened, Umm Qasr played an important role in the shipment of humanitarian supplies to Iraqi civilians.[205]
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: Operation Telic
British troops, in what was codenamed Operation (or Op) TELIC participated in the 2003 Invasion of Iraq. The 1st Armoured Division was deployed to the Gulf and commanded British forces in the area, securing areas in southern Iraq, including the city of Basra during the invasion. A total of 46,000 troops of all the British services were committed to the operation at its start, including some 5,000 Royal Navy and Royal Fleet Auxiliary sailors and 4,000 Royal Marines, 26,000 British Army soldiers, and 8,100 Royal Air Force airmen. The British special forces deployment was codenamed Operation Row and were known as Task Force 7 under Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force-West (Task Force Dagger).[206]
Summary of the invasion[edit]




Aircraft of the USAF 379th Air Expeditionary Wing and UK and Australian counterparts stationed together at Al Udeid Air Base, Qatar, in southwest Asia, fly over the desert on 14 April 2003. Aircraft include KC-135 Stratotanker, F-15E Strike Eagle, F-117 Nighthawk, F-16CJ Falcon, British GR-4 Tornado, and Australian F/A-18 Hornet


The U.S.-led Coalition forces toppled the government and captured the key cities of a large nation in only 21 days. The invasion did require a large army build-up like the 1991 Gulf War, but many did not see combat and many were withdrawn after the invasion ended. This proved to be short-sighted, however, due to the requirement for a much larger force to combat the irregular Iraqi forces in the Iraqi insurgency. General Eric Shinseki, U.S. Army Chief of Staff, recommended "several hundred thousand"[207] troops be used to maintain post-war order, but then Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld—and especially his deputy, civilian Paul Wolfowitz—strongly disagreed. General Abizaid later said General Shinseki had been right.[208]
The Iraqi army, armed mainly with older Soviet and Eastern European built equipment,[209] was overall ill-equipped in comparison to the American and British forces. Attacks on U.S. supply routes by Fedayeen militiamen were repulsed. The Iraqis' artillery proved largely ineffective, and they were unable to mobilize their air force to attempt a defense. The Iraqi T-72 tanks, the most powerful armored vehicles in the Iraqi army, were both outdated and ill-maintained, and when they were mobilized they were rapidly destroyed, thanks in part to the Coalition air supremacy. The U.S. Air Force, Marine Corps and Naval Aviation, and British Royal Air Force operated with impunity throughout the country, pinpointing heavily defended resistance targets and destroying them before ground troops arrived. The main battle tanks of the U.S. and UK forces, the U.S. M1 Abrams and British Challenger 2, functioned well in the rapid advance across the country. Despite the many RPG attacks by irregular Iraqi forces, few U.S. and UK tanks were lost, and no tank crew-members were killed by hostile fire, although nearly 40 M1 Abrams were damaged in the attacks.[210] The only tank loss sustained by the British Army was a Challenger 2 of the Queen's Royal Lancers that was hit by another Challenger 2, killing two crew members.
The Iraqi army suffered from poor morale, even amongst the elite Republican Guard. Entire units disbanded into the crowds upon the approach of invading troops, or actually sought out U.S. and UK forces to surrender to. Many Iraqi commanding officers were bribed by the CIA or coerced into surrendering. The leadership of the Iraqi army was incompetent – reports state that Qusay Hussein, charged with the defense of Baghdad, dramatically shifted the positions of the two main divisions protecting Baghdad several times in the days before the arrival of U.S. forces, and as a result the units were confused, and further demoralized when U.S. forces attacked. The invasion force did not see the entire Iraqi military thrown against it; U.S. and UK units had orders to move to and seize objective target points rather than seek to engage Iraqi units. This resulted in most regular Iraqi military units emerging from the war without having been engaged, and fully intact, especially in southern Iraq. It is assumed that most units disintegrated to return to their homes.
According to the declassified Pentagon report, "The largest contributing factor to the complete defeat of Iraq's military forces was the continued interference by Saddam." The report, designed to help U.S. officials understand in hindsight how Saddam and his military commanders prepared for and fought the invasion, paints a picture of an Iraqi government blind to the threat it faced, hampered by Saddam's inept military leadership and deceived by its own propaganda and inability to believe an invasion was imminent without further Iraqi provocation. According to the BBC, the report portrays Saddam Hussein as "chronically out of touch with reality – preoccupied with the prevention of domestic unrest and with the threat posed by Iran."[211]
Casualties[edit]
Main articles: Casualties in the conflict in Iraq and Humanitarian Crises of the Iraq War
Death toll[edit]
Estimates on the number of casualties during the invasion in Iraq vary widely. Estimates on civilian casualties are more variable than those for military personnel. According to Iraq Body Count, a group that relies on press reports, NGO-based reports and official figures to measure civilian casualties, approximately 7,500 civilians were killed during the invasion phase.[212] The Project on Defense Alternatives study estimated that 3,200–4,300 civilians died during the invasion.[16]
War crimes and allegations[edit]
See also: The International Criminal Court and the 2003 invasion of Iraq
Fedayeen Saddam militia, Republican Guard and Iraqi security forces were reported to have executed Iraqi soldiers who tried to surrender on multiple occasions, as well as threatening the families of those who refused to fight.[213][214][215] One such incident was directly observed during the Battle of Debecka Pass.[216]
Many incidents of Fedayeen fighters using human shields were reported from various towns in Iraq.[217] Iraqi Republican Guard units were also reported to be using human shields.[218] Some reports indicate that the Fedayeen used ambulances to deliver messages and transport fighters into combat. On 31 March, Fedayeen in a Red Crescent-marked ambulance attacked American soldiers outside of Nasiriyah, wounding three.[218][219] During the Battle of Basra, British forces of the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) reported that on 28 March, Fedayeen forces opened fire on thousands of civilian refugees fleeing the city.[220][221]
After the ambush of the 507th Maintenance Company during the Battle of Nasiriyah on 23 March, the bodies of several U.S. soldiers who had been killed in the ambush were shown on Iraqi television. Some of these soldiers had visible gunshot wounds to head, leading to speculation that they had been executed. Except for Sgt. Donald Walters, no evidence has since surfaced to support this scenario and it is generally accepted that the soldiers were killed in action. Five live prisoners of war were also interviewed on the air, a violation of the Third Geneva Convention.[222][223] Sergeant Walters was initially reported to have been killed in the ambush after killing several Fedayeen before running out of ammunition. However, an eyewitness later reported that he had seen Walters being guarded by several Fedayeen in front of a building. Forensics work later found Walters' blood in front of the building and blood spatter suggesting he died from two gunshot wounds to the back at close range. This led the Army to conclude that Walters had been executed after being captured, and he was posthumously awarded the Prisoner of War Medal in 2004.[224][225] It was alleged in the authorized biography of Pfc. Jessica Lynch that she was raped by her captors after her capture, based on medical reports and the pattern of her injuries, though this is not supported by Ms Lynch.[226] Mohammed Odeh al-Rehaief, who later helped American forces rescue Lynch, stated that he saw an Iraqi Colonel slap Lynch while she was in her hospital bed.[227] The staff at the hospital where Lynch was held later denied both stories, saying that Lynch was well cared for.[228] While Lynch suffers from amnesia due to her injuries, Lynch herself has denied any mistreatment whilst in captivity.
Also on 23 March, a British Army engineering unit made a wrong turn near the town of Az Zubayr, which was still held by Iraqi forces. The unit was ambushed and Sapper Luke Allsopp and Staff Sergeant Simon Cullingworth became separated from the rest. Both were captured and executed by Iraqi irregular forces. In 2006, a video of Allsopp lying on the ground surrounded by Iraqi irregular forces was discovered.[229]
During the Battle of Nasiriyah, there was an incident where Iraqi irregulars feigned surrender to approach an American unit securing a bridge. After getting close to the soldiers, the Iraqis suddenly opened fire, killing 10 soldiers and wounding 40.[218] In response, American forces reinforced security procedures for dealing with prisoners of war.[230]
Marine Sergeant Fernando Padilla-Ramirez was reported missing from his supply unit after an ambush north of Nasiriyah on 28 March. His body was later dragged through the streets of Ash-Shatrah and hung in the town square, and later taken down and buried by sympathetic locals. The corpse was discovered by U.S. forces on 10 April.[231][232][233]
Security, looting and war damage[edit]
Massive looting took place in the days following the 2003 invasion.[234] According to U.S. officials, the "reality of the situation on the ground" was that hospitals, water plants, and ministries with vital intelligence needed security more than other sites. There were only enough U.S. troops on the ground to guard a certain number of the many sites that ideally needed protection, and so, apparently, some "hard choices" were made.
It was reported that the National Museum of Iraq was among the looted sites. The FBI was soon called into Iraq to track down the stolen items. It was found that the initial allegations of looting of substantial portions of the collection were heavily exaggerated. Initial reports asserted a near-total looting of the museum, estimated at upwards of 170,000 inventory lots, or about 501,000 pieces. The more recent estimate places the number of stolen pieces at around 15,000, and about 10,000 of them probably were taken in an "inside job" before U.S. troops arrived, according to Bogdanos. Over 5,000 looted items have since been recovered.[235] An assertion that U.S. forces did not guard the museum because they were guarding the Ministry of Oil and Ministry of Interior is disputed by investigator Colonel Matthew Bogdanos in his 2005 book Thieves of Baghdad. Bogdanos notes that the Ministry of Oil building was bombed, but the museum complex, which took some fire, was not bombed. He also writes that Saddam Hussein's troops set up sniper's nests inside and on top of the museum, and nevertheless U.S. Marines and soldiers stayed close enough to prevent wholesale looting.
More serious for the post-war state of Iraq was the looting of cached weaponry and ordnance which fueled the subsequent insurgency. As many as 250,000 tons of explosives were unaccounted for by October 2004.[236] Disputes within the US Defense Department led to delays in the post-invasion assessment and protection of Iraqi nuclear facilities. Tuwaitha, the Iraqi site most scrutinized by UN inspectors since 1991, was left unguarded and was looted.[237][238]
Zainab Bahrani, professor of Ancient Near Eastern Art History and Archaeology at Columbia University, reported that a helicopter landing pad was constructed in the heart of the ancient city of Babylon, and "removed layers of archeological earth from the site. The daily flights of the helicopters rattle the ancient walls and the winds created by their rotors blast sand against the fragile bricks. When my colleague at the site, Maryam Moussa, and I asked military personnel in charge that the helipad be shut down, the response was that it had to remain open for security reasons, for the safety of the troops."[239] Bahrani also reported that in the summer of 2004, "the wall of the Temple of Nabu and the roof of the Temple of Ninmah, both sixth century BC, collapsed as a result of the movement of helicopters."[239] Electrical power is scarce in post-war Iraq, Bahrani reported, and some fragile artifacts, including the Ottoman Archive, would not survive the loss of refrigeration.[239]
Media coverage[edit]
Main article: 2003 invasion of Iraq media coverage
U.S. media coverage[edit]




A study found that in the lead up to the Iraq War, most U.S. sources were overwhelmingly in favor of the invasion.


The U.S. invasion of Iraq was the most widely and closely reported war in military history.[240] Television network coverage was largely pro-war and viewers were six times more likely to see a pro-war source as one who was anti-war.[241] The New York Times ran a number of articles describing Saddam Hussein's attempts to build weapons of mass destruction. The 8 September 2002 article titled "U.S. Says Hussein Intensifies Quest for A-Bomb Parts" would be discredited, leading The New York Times to issue a public statement admitting it was not as rigorous as it should have been.[242]
At the start of the war in March 2003, as many as 775 reporters and photographers were traveling as embedded journalists.[243] These reporters signed contracts with the military that limited what they were allowed to report on.[244] When asked why the military decided to embed journalists with the troops, Lt. Col. Rick Long of the U.S. Marine Corps replied, "Frankly, our job is to win the war. Part of that is information warfare. So we are going to attempt to dominate the information environment."[245]
In 2003, a study released by Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting stated the network news disproportionately focused on pro-war sources and left out many anti-war sources. According to the study, 64% of total sources were in favor of the Iraq War while total anti-war sources made up 10% of the media (only 3% of US sources were anti-war). The study looked only at 6 American news networks after 20 March for three weeks. The study stated that "viewers were more than six times as likely to see a pro-war source as one who was anti-war; with U.S. guests alone, the ratio increases to 25 to 1."[246]
A September 2003 poll revealed that seventy percent of Americans believed there was a link between Saddam Hussein and the attacks of 9/11.[247] 80% of Fox News viewers were found to hold at least one such belief about the invasion, compared to 23% of PBS viewers.[248] Ted Turner, founder of CNN, charged that Rupert Murdoch was using Fox News to advocate an invasion.[249] Critics have argued that this statistic is indicative of misleading coverage by the U.S. media since viewers in other countries were less likely to have these beliefs.[250] A post-2008 election poll by FactCheck.org found that 48% of Americans believe Saddam played a role in the 9/11 attacks, the group concluded that "voters, once deceived, tend to stay that way despite all evidence."[251]
Independent media coverage[edit]
Independent media also played a prominent role in covering the invasion. The Indymedia network, among many other independent networks including many journalists from the invading countries, provided reports on the Iraq war. In the United States Democracy Now, hosted by Amy Goodman has been critical of the reasons for the 2003 invasion and the alleged crimes committed by the U.S. authorities in Iraq.
The Israeli Military Censor have released gag orders to Fresh and Rotter news platforms preventing them releasing any information about events and action related to the invasion.[252]
On the other side, among media not opposing to the invasion, The Economist stated in an article on the matter that "the normal diplomatic tools—sanctions, persuasion, pressure, UN resolutions—have all been tried, during 12 deadly but failed years" then giving a mild conditional support to the war stating that "if Mr Hussein refuses to disarm, it would be right to go to war".[253]
Australian war artist George Gittoes collected independent interviews with soldiers while producing his documentary Soundtrack To War. The war in Iraq provided the first time in history that military on the front lines were able to provide direct, uncensored reportage themselves, thanks to blogging software and the reach of the internet. Dozens of such reporting sites, known as soldier blogs or milblogs, were started during the war. These blogs were more often than not largely pro-war and stated various reasons why the soldiers and Marines felt they were doing the right thing.[254]
International media coverage[edit]
International coverage of the war differed from coverage in the U.S. in a number of ways. The Arab-language news channel Al Jazeera and the German satellite channel Deutsche Welle featured almost twice as much information on the political background of the war.[255] Al Jazeera also showed scenes of civilian casualties which were rarely seen in the U.S. media.
Criticism[edit]
Main article: Criticism of the Iraq War
Opponents of military intervention in Iraq have attacked the decision to invade Iraq along a number of lines, including the human cost of war,[256] calling into question the evidence used to justify the war, arguing for continued diplomacy, challenging the war's legality, suggesting that the U.S. had other more pressing security priorities, (i.e., Afghanistan and North Korea) and predicting that the war would destabilize the Middle East region. In 2010 an independent commission of inquiry set up by the government of the Netherlands, maintained that UN resolution 1441 "cannot reasonably be interpreted (as the Dutch government did) as authorising individual member states to use military force to compel Iraq to comply with the Security Council's resolutions." Accordingly, the Dutch commission concluded that the 2003 invasion violated international law.[107]
Rationale based on faulty evidence[edit]
The central U.S. justification for launching the Iraq War was that Saddam Hussein's alleged development of nuclear and biological weapons and purported ties to al-Qaeda made his regime a "grave and growing"[257] threat to the United States and the world community.[258] During the lead-up to the war and the aftermath of the invasion, critics cast doubt on the evidence supporting this rationale. Concerning Iraq's weapons programs, prominent critics included Scott Ritter, a former U.N. weapons inspector who argued in 2002 that inspections had eliminated the nuclear and chemical weapons programs, and that evidence of their reconstitution would "have been eminently detectable by intelligence services ..." Although it is popularly believed[citation needed] that Saddam Hussein had forced the IAEA weapons inspectors to leave Iraq, they were in fact withdrawn at the request of the US, in advance of Operation Desert Fox, the 1998 American bombing campaign. After the build-up of U.S. troops in neighboring states, Saddam welcomed them back and promised complete cooperation with their demands. Experienced IAEA inspection teams were already back in Iraq and had made some interim reports on its search for various forms of WMD.[259][260][261][262][263] American diplomat Joseph C. Wilson investigated the contention that Iraq had sought uranium for nuclear weapons in Niger and reported that the contention had no substance.[264][265]
Similarly, alleged links between Iraq and al-Qaeda were called into question during the lead-up to the war, and were discredited by a 21 October 2004 report from U.S. Senator Carl Levin, which was later corroborated by an April 2006 report from the Defense Department's inspector general.[266] These reports further alleged that Bush Administration officials, particularly former undersecretary of defense Douglas J. Feith, manipulated evidence to support links between al-Qaeda and Iraq.[267]
Lack of a U.N. mandate[edit]
One of the main questions in the lead-up to the war was whether the United Nations Security Council would authorize military intervention in Iraq. It became increasingly clear that U.N. authorization would require significant further weapons inspections. Many criticized their effort as unwise, immoral, and illegal. Robin Cook, then the leader of the United Kingdom House of Commons and a former foreign secretary, resigned from Tony Blair's cabinet in protest over the UK's decision to invade without the authorization of a U.N. resolution. Cook said at the time that: "In principle I believe it is wrong to embark on military action without broad international support. In practice I believe it is against Britain's interests to create a precedent for unilateral military action."[268] In addition, senior government legal advisor Elizabeth Wilmshurst resigned, stating her legal opinion that an invasion would be illegal.[citation needed]
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in an interview with the BBC in September 2004, "[F]rom our point of view and from the Charter point of view [the war] was illegal."[269] This drew immediate criticism from the United States and was immediately played down.[270] His annual report to the General Assembly for 2003 included no more than the statement: "Following the end of major hostilities which resulted in the occupation of Iraq..."[271] A similar report from the Security Council was similarly terse in its reference to the event: "Following the cessation of hostilities in Iraq in April 2003 ..."[272] The United Nations Security Council has passed nearly 60 resolutions on Iraq and Kuwait since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The most relevant to this issue is Resolution 678, passed on 29 November 1990. It authorizes "member states co-operating with the Government of Kuwait... to use all necessary means" to (1) implement Security Council Resolution 660 and other resolutions calling for the end of Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwaiti territory and (2) "restore international peace and security in the area."
Military intervention vs diplomatic solution[edit]



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
French address on Iraq at the UN Security Council



Criticisms about the evidence used to justify the war notwithstanding, many opponents of military intervention objected, saying that a diplomatic solution would be preferable, and that war should be reserved as a truly last resort. This position was exemplified by French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin, who responded to U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell's 5 February 2003 presentation to the U.N Security Council by saying that: "Given the choice between military intervention and an inspections regime that is inadequate because of a failure to cooperate on Iraq's part, we must choose the decisive reinforcement of the means of inspections."[273] In response to Donald Rumsfeld's reference to European countries that did not support the invasion of Iraq as 'Old Europe',[274] Dominique de Villepin ended his speech with words that would later come to embody the French-German political, economic, and military alliance throughout the beginning of the 21st Century: "This message comes to you today from an old country, France, from a continent like mine, Europe, that has known wars, occupation and barbarity. (...) Faithful to its values, it wishes resolutely to act with all the members of the international community. It believes in our ability to build together a better world."[275] The direct opposition between diplomatic solution and military intervention involving France and the United States which was personified by Chirac versus Bush and later Powell versus de Villepin, became a milestone in the Franco-American relations. Anti-French propaganda exploiting the classic Francophobic clichés immediately ensued in the United States and the United Kingdom. A call for a boycott on French wine was launched in the United States and the New York Post covered on the 1944 "Sacrifice" of the GIs that France had forgotten. It was followed a week later, on 20 February, by the British newspaper The Sun publishing a special issue entitled "Chirac is a worm" and including ad hominem attacks such as "Jacques Chirac has become the shame of Europe".[276] Actually both newspapers expressed the opinion of their owner, U.S. billionaire Rupert Murdoch, a military intervention supporter and a George W. Bush partisan as argued by Roy Greenslade in The Guardian published on 17 February.[276][277]
Distraction from the war on terrorism and other priorities[edit]
Both supporters and opponents of the Iraq War widely viewed it within the context of a post–11 September world, where the U.S. has sought to make terrorism the defining international security paradigm. Bush often described the Iraq War as a "central front in the war on terror".[278] Some critics of the war, particularly within the U.S. military community, argued pointedly against the conflation of Iraq and the war on terror, and criticized Bush for losing focus on the more important objective of fighting al-Qaeda. As Marine Lieutenant General Greg Newbold, the Pentagon's former top operations officer, wrote in a 2006 Time article, "I now regret that I did not more openly challenge those who were determined to invade a country whose actions were peripheral to the real threat—al-Qaeda."[279]
Critics within this vein have further argued that containment would have been an effective strategy for the Saddam government, and that the top U.S. priorities in the Middle East should be encouraging a solution to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, working for the moderation of Iran, and solidifying gains made in Afghanistan and Central Asia. In an October 2002 speech, Retired Marine Gen. Anthony Zinni, former head of Central Command for U.S. forces in the Middle East and State Department's envoy to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, called Iraq "maybe six or seven," in terms of U.S. Middle East priorities, adding that "the affordability line may be drawn around five."[280] However, while commander of CENTCOM, Zinni held a very different opinion concerning the threat posed by Iraq. In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee in February 2000, Zinni said: "Iraq remains the most significant near-term threat to U.S. interests in the Persian Gulf region. This is primarily due to its large conventional military force, pursuit of WMD, oppressive treatment of Iraqi citizens, refusal to comply with United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCR), persistent threats to enforcement of the No Fly Zones (NFZ), and continued efforts to violate UN Security Council sanctions through oil smuggling."[281] However, it is important to note that Zinni specifically referred to "the Persian Gulf region" in his Senate testimony, which is a significantly smaller region of the world than the "Middle East", which he referred to in 2007.
Potential to destabilize the region[edit]
Besides arguing that Iraq was not the top strategic priority in the war on terrorism or in the Middle East, critics of the war also suggested that it could potentially destabilize the surrounding region. Prominent among such critics was Brent Scowcroft, who served as National Security Advisor to George H. W. Bush. In a 15 August 2002 Wall Street Journal editorial entitled "Don't attack Saddam", Scowcroft wrote that, "Possibly the most dire consequences would be the effect in the region ... there would be an explosion of outrage against us ... the results could well destabilize Arab regimes", and, "could even swell the ranks of the terrorists."[282] In an October 2015 CNN interview with Fareed Zakaria, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair apologized for his 'mistakes' over Iraq War and admitted there were 'elements of truth' to the view that the invasion helped promote the rise of ISIS.[283]
As pointed out by Hayder al-Khoei, the Iraq was already "destined for chaos" before 2003:

Saddam's endless wars with Iraq's neighbours and his genocidal campaigns against his own people are bizarrely seen by many in the west as part of an era of "stability" and "security" for Iraqis. Stability imposed with chemical weapons and security achieved with mass graves. We would need to stretch the definition of those words beyond reason and meaning before we could ever apply them to pre-2003 Iraq.
— Hayder al-Khoei, The Guardian, "Iraq was destined for chaos – with or without Britain's intervention", 2016

Related phrases[edit]
See also: Public relations preparations for 2003 invasion of Iraq




Poland was part of the "coalition of the willing"


This campaign featured a variety of new terminology, much of it initially coined by the U.S. government or military. The military official name for the invasion was Operation Iraqi Liberation[citation needed], however this was quickly changed to "Operation Iraqi Freedom". Also notable was the usage "death squads" to refer to Fedayeen paramilitary forces. Members of the Saddam Hussein government were called by disparaging nicknames – e.g., "Chemical Ali" (Ali Hassan al-Majid), "Baghdad Bob" or "Comical Ali" (Muhammed Saeed al-Sahaf), and "Mrs. Anthrax" or "Chemical Sally" (Huda Salih Mahdi Ammash).
Terminology introduced or popularized during the war include:

"Axis of evil", originally used by Bush during a State of the Union address on 29 January 2002 to refer to the countries of Iraq, Iran, and North Korea.[284]
"Coalition of the willing", a term that originated in the Clinton era (e.g., interview, Clinton, ABC, 8 June 1994), and used by the Bush Administration for the countries contributing troops in the invasion, of which the U.S. and UK were the primary members.
"Decapitating the regime", a euphemism for killing Saddam Hussein.
"Embedding", United States practice of assigning civilian journalists to U.S. military units.
"Freedom fries", a euphemism for French fries invented to protest the non-participation of France
"Mother of all bombs", a bomb developed and produced to support Operation Iraqi Freedom. Its name echoes Saddam's phrase "Mother of all battles" to describe the first Gulf War.[285]
"Old Europe", Rumsfeld's term for European governments not supporting the war: "You're thinking of Europe as Germany and France. I don't. I think that's old Europe."
"Regime change", a euphemism for overthrowing a government.
"Shock and Awe", the strategy of reducing an enemy's will to fight through displays of overwhelming force.

Many slogans and terms coined came to be used by Bush's political opponents, or those opposed to the war. For example, in April 2003 John Kerry, the Democratic candidate in the presidential election, said at a campaign rally: "What we need now is not just a regime change in Saddam Hussein and Iraq, but we need a regime change in the United States."[286] Other war critics use the name "Operation Iraqi Liberation (OIL)" to subtly convey their belief with respect to the cause of the war, such as the song "Operation Iraqi Liberation (OIL)" by David Rovics, a popular folk protest singer.
See also[edit]


Iraq portal
Military of the United States portal
War portal



Governmental positions on the Iraq War prior to the 2003 invasion of Iraq
Investment in post-invasion Iraq
Occupation of Iraq timeline
Protests against the Iraq War
Popular opinion in the United States on the invasion of Iraq

Intrigues:

Iraq disarmament crisis
The UN Security Council and the Iraq war

Lists:

List of people associated with the 2003 invasion of Iraq
List of aviation accidents and incidents during the Iraq War
List of wars and disasters by death toll

General:

Carter Doctrine
Democracy in the Middle East
Jus ad bellum
Petrodollar

Notes[edit]


^ Graham, Bradley (7 April 2003). "U.S. Airlifts Iraqi Exile Force For Duties Near Nasiriyah". Washington Post. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ John Pike (14 March 2003). "Free Iraqi Forces Committed to Democracy, Rule of Law – DefenseLink". Globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 10 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ a b "Deploying the Free Iraqi Forces – U.S. News & World Report". Usnews.com. 7 April 2003. Archived from the original on 4 February 2004. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ Kim Ghattas (14 April 2003). "Syrians join Iraq 'jihad'". BBC News. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Arab volunteers to Iraq: 'token' act or the makings of another Afghan jihad?". Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Security Council endorses formation of sovereign interim government in Iraq; welcomes end of occupation by 30 June, democratic elections by January 2005". United Nations. 8 June 2004. 
^ Katzman, Kenneth (5 February 2009). "Iraq: Post-Saddam Governance and Security" (PDF). fpc.state.gov/. Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 23 September 2014. In the war, Iraq's conventional military forces were overwhelmed by the approximately 380,000-person U.S. and British-led 30-country18 "coalition of the willing" force, a substantial proportion of which were in supporting roles. 
^ "A Timeline of Iraq War, Troop Levels". Huffington Post. Associated Press. 15 April 2008. Archived from the original on 23 October 2014. Retrieved 23 February 2014. 
^ a b Australian Department of Defence (2004). The War in Iraq. ADF Operations in the Middle East in 2003. Page 11.
^ a b MAJ Isaac J. Peltier, US Army. "Surrogate Warfare: The Role of U.S. Army Special Forces" (PDF). p. 2. Retrieved 21 February 2013. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 2011-07-18. 
^ Toby Dodge (16 November 2002). "Iraqi army is tougher than US believes". The Guardian. Retrieved 2012-11-10. 
^ "Iraq Coalition Casualties: Fatalities by Year and Month" Archived 6 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine. iCasualties.org. Retrieved 1 November 2009.
^ icasualties Iraq Coalition Casualties: U.S. Wounded Totals Archived 24 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Willing to face Death: A History of Kurdish Military Forces – the Peshmerga – from the Ottoman Empire to Present-Day Iraq (page 67) Archived 29 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Michael G. Lortz
^ a b c "The Wages of War: Iraqi Combatant and Noncombatant Fatalities in the 2003 Conflict". Commonwealth Institute of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 2 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Wages of War – Appendix 1. Survey of reported Iraqi combatant fatalities in the 2003 war". Commonwealth Institute of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 2 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Body counts". By Jonathan Steele. The Guardian. 28 May 2003.
^ Iraq Body Count project. Source of IBC quote on undercounting by media is Press Release 15 :: Iraq Body Count. Archived 9 November 2009 at WebCite
^ https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RS21405.pdf
^ "U.S. has 100,000 troops in Kuwait". CNN. 18 February 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ a b "President Discusses Beginning of Operation Iraqi Freedom". Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "US Hardliners search for a Saddam connection". Gulf States Newsletter's Middle East Insider (9). September 2001. 
^ Oz Hassan (2012) Constructing America's Freedom Agenda for the Middle East
^ "President Bush Meets with Prime Minister Blair". Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov. 31 January 2003. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ a b "Poll: Talk First, Fight Later". CBS.com, 24 January 2003. Retrieved on 23 April 2007.
^ An exception was Denmark, where even the popular opinion supported the invasion and Denmark as a member of the coalition. Joint Declaration by Russia, Germany and France on Iraq France Diplomatie 10 February 2003
^ NZ praised for 'steering clear of Iraq war' The Dominion Post, 7 December 2008.
^ Beltrame, Julian (31 March 2003). "Canada to Stay out of Iraq War". Maclean's. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 19 January 2009. 
^ a b "Guinness World Records, Largest Anti-War Rally". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 4 September 2004. Retrieved 11 January 2007. 
^ Callinicos, Alex (19 March 2005). "Anti-war protests do make a difference". Socialist Worker. Archived from the original on 21 March 2006. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ "Gulf War Timeline". CNN. 2001. Archived from the original on 28 April 2005. Retrieved 22 December 2008. 
^ a b "Iraq tests no-fly zone". CNN. 4 January 1999. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ a b "Coalition planes hit Iraq sites in no-fly zone". CNN. 28 November 2002. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ "Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 (Enrolled as Agreed to or Passed by Both House and Senate)". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 11 July 2008. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ "RESOLUTION 687 (1991)". 8 April 1991. Archived from the original on 23 May 2006. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ William, Arkin (17 January 1999). "The Difference Was in the Details". The Washington Post. p. B1. Archived from the original on 9 September 2006. Retrieved 23 April 2007. 
^ "REPUBLICAN PLATFORM 2000". CNN. Archived from the original on 21 April 2006. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ "O'Neill: 'Frenzy' distorted war plans account". CNN. 14 January 2004. Retrieved 26 May 2006. 
^ Richard Aldrich, 'An extra copy for Mr Philby,' in Times Literary Supplement, 19 February 2010 pp.7–8, p.7
^ "Plans For Iraq Attack Began On 9/11". CBS News. 4 September 2002. Archived from the original on 25 May 2006. Retrieved 26 May 2006. 
^ Michael Isikoff (16 March 2013). "'Building momentum for regime change': Rumsfeld's secret memos". MSNBC. Retrieved 31 March 2013. 
^ Smith, Jeffrey R. "Hussein's Prewar Ties To Al-Qaeda Discounted". The Washington Post, Friday, 6 April 2007; Page A01. Retrieved on 23 April 2007.
^ "Chronology of the Bush Doctrine". Frontline.org. Retrieved on 23 April 2007.
^ William Schneider (9 December 2015). "Marketing Iraq: Why now?". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 May 2005. Retrieved 4 September 2006. 
^ George W. Bush, "President's Remarks at the United Nations General Assembly: Remarks by the President in Address to the United Nations General Assembly, New York, New York", official transcript, press release, The White House, 12 September 2002. Retrieved 24 May 2007.
^ "France threatens rival UN Iraq draft". BBC News, 26 October 2002. Retrieved on 23 April 2007
^ "U.S. Wants Peaceful Disarmament of Iraq, Says Negroponte". Embassy of the United States in Manila. 8 November 2002. Archived from the original on 3 January 2006. Retrieved 26 May 2006. 
^ "Statements of the Director General". IAEA. Archived from the original on 3 September 2006. Retrieved 7 September 2006. 
^ Blix, Hans (13 May 2003), Thirteenth quarterly report of the Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission in accordance with paragraph 12 of Security council resolution 1284 (1999), UNMOVIC 
^ "Selected Security Council Briefings". UNMOVIC. Archived from the original on 28 September 2002. Retrieved 7 September 2002. 
^ Hans Blix's briefing to the security council. Retrieved 30 January 2008.
^ a b c d e f Plan of Attack, Bob Woodward, Simon and Schuster, 2004.
^ a b c d e Tucker, Mike; Charles Faddis (2008). Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War inside Iraq. The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-59921-366-8. 
^ a b c d "Charles Faddis "Operation Hotel California" (Lyons Press)". The Diane Rehm Show. 17 October 2008. WAMU. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Behind lines, an unseen war," Faye Bowers, Christian Science Monitor, April 2003.
^ Woodward, Bob (2004). Plan of Attack. Simon & Schuster, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7432-5547-9. 
^ s:George W. Bush's Third State of the Union Address
^ "US, Britain and Spain Abandon Resolution". Associated Press. 17 March 2003. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ "Bush: Iraq is playing 'willful charade'". CNN. 7 March 2003. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ Azores: el día que Aznar puso a España al frente de la invasión de Irak por unas armas inexistentes
^ Bin Laden: "El 11-M es el castigo a España por sus acciones en Irak, Afganistán y Palestina"
^ "President Says Saddam Hussein Must Leave Iraq Within 48 Hours" (Press release). White House Office of the Press Secretary. 17 March 2003. Retrieved 28 July 2010. 
^ "Division No. 117 (Iraq)". Hansard. Parliament of the United Kingdom. 401 (365). 18 March 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Jason Webb (26 September 2007). "Bush thought Saddam was prepared to flee: report". Washington Post. Reuters. Retrieved 27 September 2007. 
^ a b c "Could War Have Been Avoided". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011. 
^ Risen, James; Lichtblau, Eric (11 December 2003). "A REGION INFLAMED: BACK CHANNELS; U.S. Opens Firearms Charge Against Iraq-U.S. Contact". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 March 2010. 
^ James Risen (6 November 2003). "THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DIPLOMACY; Iraq Said to Have Tried to Reach Last-Minute Deal to Avert War". New York Times. The New York Times. Retrieved 22 September 2017. 
^ Bob Kemper (23 October 2002). "Saddam can keep rule if he complies: Bush". Daily Times. Archived from the original on 25 August 2004. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ "News Release". White House. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011. 
^ "Tony Blair: Answer to Parliamentary Question". Hansard. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011. 
^ "PM gives interview to Radio Monte Carlo". Archived from the original on 22 June 2002. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ "Bush, Blair: Time running out for Saddam". CNN. 31 January 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Tony Blair: Parliamentary Statement". Hansard. Archived from the original on 13 February 2004. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ "BBC ON THIS DAY | 16 | 1988: Thousands die in Halabja gas attack". BBC News. 16 March 1988. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ "Halabja, the massacre the West tried to ignore - Times Online". Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Milbank, Dana (18 June 2004). "Bush Defends Assertions of Iraq-Al Qaeda Relationship". The Washington Post. p. A09. Retrieved 22 October 2007. 
^ Feldmann, Linda (14 March 2003). "The impact of Bush linking 9/11 and Iraq". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2007. 
^ Sale, Michelle (11 April 2003). "Missions Accomplished?". New York Times. Retrieved 2012-11-10. 
^ "Bush administration on Iraq 9/11 link". BBC News. 18 September 2003. Retrieved 22 October 2007. 
^ Kornblut, Anne E.; Bender, Bryan (16 September 2003). "Cheney link of Iraq, 9/11 challenged". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 5 October 2007. Retrieved 22 October 2007. 
^ "Kerry challenges Bush on Iraq-9/11 connection". CNN. 13 September 2004. Retrieved 22 October 2007. 
^ "Transcript of Powell's U.N. Presentation:... a Transcript of U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell's Presentation to the U.N. Security Council on the U.S. Case Against Iraq". cnn.com, February 6, 2003, accessed May 24, 2007. (Part 5 on "Iraq's Biological Weapons Program" inc. still photo of Powell with sample anthrax vial from Powell's presentation of 5 February 2003.) Cf.Press release and The White House video clip of full presentation, 5 February 2003, accessed 24 May 2007.
^ Marquis, Christopher (9 January 2004). "Powell Admits No Hard Proof in Linking Iraq to Al Qaeda". New York Times. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "CIA's final report: No WMD found in Iraq". MSNBC. 25 April 2005. Retrieved 2012-11-10. 
^ "Pilger claims White House knew Saddam was no threat". Sydney Morning Herald. Australian Associated Press. 23 September 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Marquis, Christopher (9 January 2004). "Powell Admits No Hard Proof in Linking Iraq to Al Qaeda". New York Times. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Evidence on Iraq Challenged," Joby Warrick, The Washington Post, 19 September 2002
^ Colin Powell's speech to the UN, 5 February 2003
^ Meet the Press, NBC, 16 May 2004
^ Lichtblau, Eric. "2002 Memo Doubted Uranium Sale Claim", The New York Times, 18 January 2006. Retrieved on 10 May 2007.
^ Senator Bill Nelson (28 January 2004) "New Information on Iraq's Possession of Weapons of Mass Destruction", Congressional Record
^ Lowe, C. (16 December 2003) "Senator: White House Warned of UAV Attack," Defense Tech
^ Hammond, J. (14 November 2005) "The U.S. 'intelligence failure' and Iraq's UAVs" The Yirmeyahu Review
^ Senators Slam Shifting Iraq War Justification. Islamonline. 30 July 2003.
^ Roth, Ken. "War in Iraq: Not a Humanitarian Intervention" Human Rights Watch. January 2004. Retrieved 6 April 2007.
^ "107th Congress-2nd Session 455th Roll Call Vote of by members of the House of Representatives". Clerk.house.gov. 10 October 2002. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ "107th Congress-2nd Session 237th Roll Call Vote by members of the Senate". Senate.gov. Archived from the original on 15 January 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ "Saddam Hussein's Defiance of UNSCRs". Georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov. Retrieved 2012-11-10. 
^ "Unable to Process Request". 8 July 2012. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Links to Opinions of Legality of War Against Iraq". Robincmiller.com. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Law Groups Say U.S. Invasion Illegal". Commondreams.org. 21 March 2003. Archived from the original on 15 February 2004. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ "International Commission of Jurists". Icj.org. 18 March 2003. Archived from the original on 7 April 2003. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ Burkeman, Oliver (21 November 2003). "Invasion right but 'illegal', says US hawk". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 26 May 2006. 
^ Oliver Burkeman; Julian Borger (20 November 2003). "War critics astonished as US hawk admits invasion was illegal". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 May 2006. Retrieved 26 May 2006. 
^ Transcript of Powell's U.N. Presentation. CNN.com.
^ a b "Iraq Invasion Violated International Law, Dutch Inquiry Finds: Investigation into the Netherlands' Support for 2003 War Finds Military Action was Not Justified under UN Resolutions". theguardian.com. The Guardian. 12 January 2010. 
^ Richard Norton-Taylor, "International court hears anti-war claims",[dead link] The Guardian, 6 May 2005.
^ Chamberlin, Gethin. "Court 'can envisage' Blair prosecution". The Sunday Telegraph, 17 March 2003. Retrieved on 25 May 2005.
^ "Bush: Join 'coalition of willing'". CNN. 20 November 2002. Archived from the original on 10 July 2007. 
^ "Coalition Members". The White House. 27 March 2003. Archived from the original on 21 September 2010. 
^ Carter, Linwood B. (28 November 2005). "Iraq: Summary of U.S. Forces" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2009. 
^ for more information about Turkey's policy during the invasion look, Ali Balci and Murat Yesiltas, "Turkey's New Middle East Policy: The Case of the Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Iraq's Neighboring Countries", Journal of South Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, XXIX (4), Summer 2006, pp. 18–38
^ Ford, Peter. "A weak northern front could lengthen Iraq War". Christian Science Monitor, 3 April 2003. Retrieved on 7 May 2003.
^ "Saddam's Last Line of Defense". CBS. 26 March 2003. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ "Saddam counts on Republican Guard as last chance for defending Baghdad". Associated Press. 26 March 2003. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ Burgess, Mark (12 November 2002). "CDI Primer: Iraqi Military Effectiveness". Center for Defense Information. Archived from the original on 30 November 2005. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ Windle, David (29 January 2003). "Military muscle". New Scientist. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ "Iraqi Ground Forces Organization". GlobalSecurity.org. Archived from the original on 19 July 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ "Most loyal soldiers in Iraq belong to Fedayeen Saddam". Seattle Times. 27 March 2003. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ Evan Wright, Generation Kill, page 249. Berkley Publishing Group, 2004. ISBN 978-0-399-15193-4
^ David Zucchino, Thunder Run, page 189. Grove Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-8021-4179-8
^ Peterson, Scott (16 October 2003). "The rise and fall of Ansar al-Islam". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "A People Betrayed, John Pilger". Zmag.org. 23 February 2003. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Labour claims its actions are lawful while it bombs Iraq, starves its people and sells arms to corrupt states, John Pilger". Johnpilger.com. 7 August 2000. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "No-fly zones: The legal position". BBC News. 19 February 2001. Archived from the original on 29 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ Department of the Official Report (Hansard), House of Commons, Westminster. "UK Parliamentary transcript". Parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20 July 2008. Retrieved 13 September 2009. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Smith, Michael (30 May 2005). "The war before the war". New Statesman. UK. Archived from the original on 10 December 2006. Retrieved 6 August 2006. 
^ Smith, Michael (29 May 2005). "RAF bombing raids tried to goad Saddam into war". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 27 July 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ Smith, Michael (19 June 2005). "British bombing raids were illegal, says Foreign Office – Times Online". The Times. London. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ Mcsmith, Andy (3 February 2006). "Bush 'plotted to lure Saddam into war with fake UN plane'". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ Neville, Leigh, The SAS 1983-2014 (Elite), Osprey Publishing, 2016, ISBN 1472814037 ISBN 978-1472814036, p.34,p.36
^ a b "A chronology of the six-week invasion of Iraq". PBS. 26 February 2004. Archived from the original on 31 March 2008. Retrieved 19 March 2008. 
^ "The First Shot". Airman Magazine. July 2003. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2008. 
^ "USS Cowpens". National Park Service. United States Department of Interior. 23 April 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2013. 
^ a b Gordon, Michael R.; Trainor, Bernard E. (12 March 2006). "Iraqi Leader, in Frantic Flight, Eluded U.S. Strikes". New York Times. Retrieved 19 March 2008. 
^ "At Saddam's Bombed Palace: New Details About The First Strike On Saddam". CBS Evening News. 28 May 2003. Retrieved 19 March 2008. 
^ "Transcript: The Invasion of Iraq". Retrieved 5 June 2011. 
^ Wilkinson, Marian (23 March 2003). "Decapitation attempt was worth a try, George". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 9 June 2008. 
^ Cockburn, Alexander (24 March 2007). "Where are the Laptop Bombardiers Now?". CounterPunch. Archived from the original on 16 April 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2008. 
^ Neville, Leigh, The SAS 1983-2014 (Elite), Osprey Publishing, 2016, ISBN 1472814037 ISBN 978-1472814036, p.34,
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p. 97
^ "President Bush Addresses the Nation" (Press release). Office of the White House Press Secretary. 19 March 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War inside Iraq, Mike Tucker, Charles Faddis, 2008, The Lyons Press.
^ "Coroner condemns 'glaring failures' that led to US missile killing RAF crew". the Guardian. 
^ "f-14". 
^ "The following was received from a PJ in Operation Iraqi Freedom". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. 
^ "Attack on the 507th Maintenance Company". The United States Army. 17 July 2003. Archived from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2009. 
^ Billy House; Mark Shaffer (10 April 2003). "Mom, Hopi, hero: Piestewa an icon". Arizona Republic. 
^ Lowe, Christian (8 September 2003). "Stopping Blue-on-Blue". The Daily Standard. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ "IRAQIS BASH CHOPPERS One U.S. copter downed, crew captured by Saddam's guards". Daily News. New York. 25 March 2003. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ John Pike (24 March 2003). "Loss of Apache in Iraq Is Evidence of Vulnerability of Copters to". Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 
^ John Pike. "On Point – The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom". Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 
^ ""The Battle for An Najaf" by James Dietz". Valorstudios.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2007. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 
^ John Pike. "On Point – The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom". Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 
^ Urban, Mark (2012). Task Force Black: The Explosive True Story of the Secret Special Forces War in Iraq. St. Martin's: Griffin. p. 9. ISBN 978-1250006967. 
^ a b c Neville, Leigh, The SAS 1983-2014 (Elite), Osprey Publishing, 2016, ISBN 1472814037 ISBN 978-1472814036, p.36,
^ "Battle through, around Karbala Gap likely to be 'hell of a fight'". Stars and Stripes. 1 April 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Michael Kelly (3 April 2003). "Across the Euphrates". Jewish World Review. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ a b Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.93, p.127-128
^ Urban, Mark, Task Force Black: The Explosive True Story of the Secret Special Forces War in Iraq , St. Martin's Griffin, 2012, ISBN 978-1-250-00696-7, p.10
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.118-119
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.121-123
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.98, p.100
^ "Masters of Chaos, Chapter 13" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2012. 
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.100-101
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.116
^ Anthony H. Cordesman (2003). The Iraq War: Strategy, Tactics, and Military Lessons. CSIS. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-89206-432-8. 
^ a b c Peltier, Issac J. (26 May 2005). "Surrogate Warfare: The Role of U.S. Army SpecialForces". School of Advanced Military Studies. United States Army Command and General Staff College. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p. 97-98
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.98
^ a b Gregory Fontenot; E. J. Degen; David Tohn (2004). On Point: The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Naval Institute Press. pp. 222–232. ISBN 978-1-59114-279-9. 
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.128-130
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.93, p.130
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.102
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.102-105
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.105
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.93, p.130-131
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.102, p.105
^ "26th MEU History". 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit, United States Marine Corps. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ After Saddam: Prewar Planning and the Occupation of Iraq. Rand Corporation. 2008. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-8330-4458-7. 
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.93, p.128-130
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.133-134
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.108-111
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.111-112
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.113-114
^ "SF in Iraq Long Before War Began". U.S. Army Special Forces Groups (Airborne). Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
"US Special Forces in Iraq Long Before War Began - 2003-04-29". Voice of America. 28 April 2003. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ Leigh Neville (1 January 2012). Special Operations Forces in Iraq. Osprey Publishing. pp. 12–13. ISBN 978-1-84908-826-8. 
^ Frank Antenori; Hans Halberstadt (24 May 2011). Roughneck Nine-One. St. Martin's Press. pp. 133–136. ISBN 978-0-312-54414-0. 
^ Alexander Stillwell (1 December 2012). Special Forces in Action: Elite Forces Operations, 1991–2011. Amber Books Ltd. p. 199. ISBN 978-1-909160-42-2. 
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.117-118
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.131
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.132
^ Anton Antonowicz, "Toppling Saddam's Statue Is The Final Triumph For These Oppressed People", The Mirror, 10 April 2003.
^ Staff Sergeant Brian Plesich, team leader, Tactical Psychological Operations Team 1153, 305th Psychological Operations Company, interview by Lieutenant Colonel Dennis Cahill, 31 May 2003 in Col. Gregory Fontenot, Lt. Col. E.J. Degen, and Lt. Col. David Tohn: On Point: The United States Army in Operation Iraqi Freedom, Chapter 6 "Regime Collapse"
^ "Operation Iraqi Freedom". Air Force Historical Support Division. United States Air Force. 16 October 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2015. n the first six weeks, coalition air forces flew more than 41,000 sorties and the USAF accounted for more than 24,000 of the total. 
Benjamin Benjamin Lambeth (15 October 2013). The Unseen War: Allied Air Power and the Takedown of Saddam Hussein. Naval Institute Press. p. 135. ISBN 978-1-61251-312-6. 
^ Anthony H. Cordesman (2003). The Iraq War: Strategy, Tactics, and Military Lessons. CSIS. p. 204. ISBN 978-0-89206-432-8. 
^ Bash, Dana (29 October 2003). "White House pressed on 'mission accomplished' sign". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 July 2006. Retrieved 21 July 2006. 
^ "Text of Bush Speech". CBS News. Associated Press. 1 May 2003. Archived from the original on 18 April 2008. Retrieved 21 July 2006. 
^ "Operation Iraqi Freedom Maps". GlobalSecurity.org. Archived from the original on 20 July 2006. Retrieved 21 July 2006. 
^ "Operation Iraqi Freedom". Conflict 21. United States Air Force. 13 March 2006. Retrieved 12 September 2014. 
^ Steve Schifferes (18 March 2003). "US names 'coalition of the willing'". BBC News. 
^ Dennis et al (2008), p. 248.
^ "Fierce battle around port," The Guardian, 24 March 2003
^ "Iraq aid confined to south", The Guardian, 2 April 2003
^ Neville, Leigh, Special Forces in the War on Terror (General Military), Osprey Publishing, 2015 ISBN 978-1-4728-0790-8, p.90
^ Dave Moniz, USA TODAY, 2 June 2003
^ Knowlton, Brian (15 November 2006). "Top U.S. general resists calls for pullout from Iraq". International Herald Tribune. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Thomas C. Bruneau; Florina Cristiana Matei (12 November 2012). The Routledge Handbook of Civil-Military Relations. Routledge. pp. 139–140. ISBN 978-1-136-25320-1. 
^ "During Operation Iraqi Freedom, as many as 40 Abrams tanks were damaged by RPGs. Most were repaired." Battle Tanks: Power in the Field, Page 33, Enslow Publishers, 2006
^ "Russia denies Iraq secrets claim". BBC News. 25 March 2006. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ "Iraq Body Count: A Dossier of Civilian Casualties in Iraq, 2003–2005". Archived from the original on 9 November 2009. Retrieved 2 May 2007. 
^ "ThunderingThird". Warchronicle.com. Archived from the original on 21 November 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ Lacey, Jim; Bennett, Brian; Ware, Michael; Perry, Alex; Robinson, Simon; Gupta, Sanjay, M.D. (7 April 2003). "We Are Slaughtering Them". Time. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Pentagon Briefing". CNN Transcripts. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ "Raytheon Company: Special Interest Stories: The Battle of Debecka Pass Iraq". Raytheon.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ "Iraqi use of human shields". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ a b c "Saddam Hussein's Violations of the Geneva Convention". Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on 26 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Human Rights Watch – Iraqi abuse of Red Cross and Red Crescent emblems". Hrw.org. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ Oliver, Mark (28 March 2003). "Iraqi militia 'fired on fleeing civilians'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Civilians fired on in Basra: UK". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "Iraqi TV shows US dead and POWs". Sydney Morning Herald. 24 March 2003. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "How POW TV violates the Geneva Conventions". Slate. March 2003. Retrieved 9 September 2015. 
^ From Mike MountCNN Washington Bureau (28 May 2004). "Status changed for soldier killed in Iraq: Investigation shows POW was murdered". CNN. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "U.S. military: Iraqis captured, murdered soldier in the 507th". USA Today. 28 May 2004. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ Rick Hampson (7 November 2003). "Lynch book tells of rape by captors". USA Today. Retrieved 24 April 2007. 
^ Lynch, David J. (3 April 2003). "Iraqi lawyer's courage leads Marines to Lynch". USA Today. Retrieved 20 April 2015. 
^ "House panel to probe reports on Tillman, Jessica Lynch". CNN. 10 April 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2007. 
^ Payne, Stewart (30 September 2006). "Soldier killed in convoy ambush 'was alive for four hours surrounded by mob'". The Telegraph. London. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ "U.S. troops' 'blood is up' over fake surrender". San Francisco Chronicle. 24 March 2003. Retrieved 13 September 2009. [permanent dead link]
^ "Invasion: Into the breach". Azcentral.com. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ "Defenselink News Release: Dod Announces Change In Marine Casualty Status". Defenselink.mil. Archived from the original on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ Evan Wright, Generation Kill, page 228. Berkley Publishing Group, 2004. ISBN 978-0-399-15193-4
^ Johnson, I.M. "The impact on libraries and archives in Iraq of war and looting in 2003 – a preliminary assessment of the damage and subsequent reconstruction efforts". International Information and Library Review, 37 (3), 2005, 209–271.
^ Harms, William (15 April 2004). "Archaeologists review loss of valuable artifacts one year after looting". The University of Chicago Chronicle. Archived from the original on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ "Pentagon: Some explosives possibly destroyed". Associated Press. 29 October 2004. Archived from the original on 6 July 2006. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ John H. Large (2004). "Video and Other Material and Data acquired by Greenpeace International at and around the Iraq Tuwaitha Nuclear Site During 2003" (PDF). Greenpeace. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 23 July 2006. 
^ Gellman, Barton (25 April 2003). "U.S. Has Not Inspected Iraqi Nuclear Facility". Washington Post. p. A14. Archived from the original on 2 March 2010. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ a b c Bahrani, Zainab (31 August 2004). "Days of plunder". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ "Reporters, commentators conduct an in-depth postmortem of Iraq war's media coverage". Archived from the original on 24 July 2007. 
^ "Amplifying Officials, Squelching Dissent". Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "The Times and Iraq". The New York Times. 26 May 2004. Retrieved 29 March 2010. 
^ "Reporters, commentators visit Berkeley to conduct in-depth postmortem of Iraq war coverage". Archived from the original on 24 July 2007. 
^ "Pros and Cons of Embedded Journalism". Archived from the original on 24 July 2007. 
^ "Postmortem: Iraq war media coverage dazzled but it also obscured". Archived from the original on 24 July 2007. 
^ Steve Rendall; Tara Broughel (2003). "Amplifying Officials, Squelching Dissent". Extra!. Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Poll: 70% believe Saddam, 9-11 link". USA Today. 6 September 2003. Archived from the original on 24 June 2007. 
^ "Misperceptions, the Media and the Iraq War". Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Murdoch helped start war on Iraq, says Turner". Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Bush and Iraq: Mass Media, Mass Ignorance". Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Our Disinformed Electorate. By Kathleen Hall Jamieson and Brooks Jackson. FactCheck.org Published 12 December 2008. Archived 17 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Censorship instructions - American Attack on Iraq, fas.org
^ "Dealing with Saddam Hussein – Why war would be justified". The Economist. 20 February 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "The Secret Letter From Iraq". Time. 6 October 2006. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. 
^ International comparison of TV news coverage of Iraq. Archived 29 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Yamada, Seiji; Fawzi, Mary C. Smith; Maskarinec, Gregory G.; Farmer, Paul E. (2006). "Casualties: narrative and images of the war on Iraq". International Journal of Health Services: Planning, Administration, Evaluation. 36 (2): 401–415. doi:10.2190/6PXW-LQ3B-DWN6-XD97. ISSN 0020-7314. PMID 16878399. 
^ "President's Remarks at the United Nations General Assembly, 12 September 2002". Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "Transcript of Powell's U.N. presentation". CNN. 6 February 2003. Retrieved 6 April 2007. 
^ ElBaradei, Dr. Mohamed (7 March 2003). "Mission Possible: Nuclear Weapons Inspections in Iraq". IAEA. Archived from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2009. 
^ ElBaradei, Dr. Mohamed (14 February 2003). "The Status of Nuclear Inspections in Iraq: 14 February 2003 Update". IAEA. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Blix, Hans; ElBaradei, Dr. Mohamed (9 February 2003). "Transcript of Hans Blix Feb. 9, 2003, press conference" (PDF). IAEA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ "IAEA Media Advisory 2003/1003". IAEA. 10 March 2003. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Nichols, John (6 February 2003). "Media Miss War Dissent in Congress". The Capital Times. p. 12A. Archived from the original on 22 July 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2009. 
^ Pitt, William R. War On Iraq: What Team Bush Doesn't Want You to Know. 2002, Context Books, New York. ISBN 978-1-893956-38-4.
^ Wilson, Joseph C. (6 July 2003). "What I Didn't Find in Africa". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 June 2007. Retrieved 17 April 2007. 
^ Jehl, Douglas. "Pentagon official distorted intelligence, report says". International Herald Tribune, 22 October 2004. Retrieved on 18 April 2007. Archived 24 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Pincus, Walter and R. Jeffrey Smith. "Official's Key Report on Iraq is Faulted". The Washington Post, Friday, 9 February 2007; Page A01
^ Tempest, Matthew. "Cook resigns from cabinet over Iraq". The Guardian, 17 March 2003. Retrieved on 17 April 2007.
^ "Excerpts: Annan interview". BBC News. 16 September 2004. Retrieved 7 August 2007. 
^ Lynch, Colum (17 September 2004). "U.S., Allies Dispute Annan on Iraq War". Washington Post. p. A18. Retrieved 25 May 2006. 
^ United Nations General Assembly  Session 58  Document A/58/1  page 9.  28 August 2003.  Retrieved 8 August 2007.
^ United Nations General Assembly  Session 58  Document A/58/2  page 20.  23 September 2003.  Retrieved 8 August 2007.
^ "Nations take sides after Powell's speech" Archived 8 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. CNN.com, 6 February 2003. Retrieved 17 April 2006.
^ "Old Europe". Video.msnbc.msn.com. 2003-01-22. Retrieved 2013-08-30. 
^ "Statement by Dominique de Villepin to the UNSC". Foreignpolicy.org.tr. 14 February 2003. Retrieved 5 November 2010. 
^ a b 20 heures le journal : émission du 20 février 2003 (National Audiovisual Institute archives), French news national edition, France 2 French public channel, 20 February 2003
^ Roy Greenslade (17 February 2003). "Their master's voice". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 29 March 2010. 
^ Office of the Press Secretary. President Addresses Nation, Discusses Iraq, War on Terror". White House Press Release, 28 June 2005. Retrieved on 17 April 2007.
^ Newbold, Greg. "Why Iraq Was a Mistake". Time, 9 April 2006. Retrieved on 16 April 2007.
^ Boehlert, Eric. "I'm not sure which planet they live on" Archived 3 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.. Salon, 17 October 20002. Retrieved 17 April 2007.
^ "Statement of General Anthony C. Zinni, Commander in Chief, US Central Command, before the U.S. Senate Committee on the Armed Services" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2009. 
^ Scowcroft, Brent. "Don't attack Saddam". The Wall Street Journal, 15 August 2002. Retrieved 17 April 2007. By A.k. Singh
^ Tony Blair apologises for 'mistakes' over Iraq War and admits 'elements of truth' to view that invasion helped rise of Isis, The Independent, Richard Osley, October 25, 2015 Retrieved 28 October 2015.
^ "The President's State of the Union Address". 29 January 2002. Archived from the original on 2 May 2009. Retrieved 21 July 2006. 
^ Kaplan, Fred (13 March 2003). "Meet the Air Force's 'palace buster.'". MSN. Archived from the original on 26 August 2005. Retrieved 21 September 2009. 
^ Balz, Dan (3 April 2003). "Kerry Angers GOP in Calling For 'Regime Change' in U.S". Washington Post. p. A10. Archived from the original on 2 March 2010. Retrieved 21 July 2006. 


References[edit]

Allen, Mike and Juliet Eilperin. Monday, 26 August 2002. Page A01 The Washington Post "Bush Aides Say Iraq War Needs No Hill Vote". Accessed on 2008-05-21.
CNN.com/Inside Politics (2002-10-11). "Senate approves Iraq war resolution". Accessed on 6 June 2005.
Donnelly, Thomas (2000). Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategy, Forces and Resources For a New Century (PDF). Washington D.C.: Project for the New American Century. OCLC 223661155. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2007. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
McCain, John. "Finishing the Job in Iraq" (PDF). Air Force Magazine (July 2004). Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 August 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009. 
Office of U.S. Representative Ron Paul (2002). "Paul Calls for Congressional Declaration of War with Iraq". Accessed on 6 June 2005.
Reynolds, Nicholas E. (1 May 2005). Basrah, Baghdad, and Beyond: U.S. Marine Corps in the Second Iraq War. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-717-6. 
Ricks, Thomas E. (2006). Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq. Penguin. ISBN 978-1-59420-103-5. 
Woods, Kevin M (2006). Iraqi Perspectives Project: A View of Operation Iraqi Freedom from Saddam's Senior Leadership (PDF). United States Joint Forces Command, Joint Center for Operational Analysis. ISBN 978-0-9762550-1-7. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
Wright, Steven. The United States and Persian Gulf Security: The Foundations of the War on Terror. Ithaca Press: 2007. ISBN 978-0-86372-321-6.
Zucchino, David (2004). Thunder Run: The Armored Strike to Capture Baghdad. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. ISBN 978-0-87113-911-5. 

Further reading[edit]

"The Gulf in 2003" Gulf States Newsletter, complete 2003 PDF archive
The Three Trillion Dollar War by Nobel Prize laureate Joseph Stiglitz and Harvard professor Linda Bilmes
Shadow Warriors by Kenneth R. Timmerman. Three Rivers Press. 2008. ISBN 978-0-307-35209-5 (Paperback edition)
Spring 2007 Dissent, "Exporting Democracy: Lessons from Iraq," a symposium featuring Paul Berman, Mitchell Cohen, Seyla Benhabib and others.
Google Print*Masters of Chaos: The Secret History of the Special Forces by Linda Robinson
Heavy Metal a Tank Company's Battle to Baghdad by Captain Jason Conroy and Ron Martz
Cobra II : The Inside Story of the Invasion and Occupation of Iraq by Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor
Iraq and the Evolution of American Strategy by Steven Metz. ISBN 978-1-59797-196-6
The Iraq War by Williamson Murray and Robert H. Scales, Jr.
The Iraq War by John Keegan
Hans Köchler, The Iraq Crisis and the United Nations. Power Politics vs. the International Rule of Law. Studies in International Relations, XXVIII. Vienna: I.P.O., 2004, ISBN 978-3-900704-22-3, Google Print
Bibliography: The Second U.S.–Iraq War (2003–) by Edwin Moise
Williams, C (2011). "Learning to redress preemptive deceit: The "Iraq Dossier". SAGE Open. 1 (3). doi:10.1177/221582440.  Based on analysis submitted to the Iraq Inquiry. See: Jones, Brian (2009) 'Dossier demolished', Iraq Digest www.iraqinquirydigest.org/?p=5355

External links[edit]



Wikinews has news related to:
Iraq War




H.J.Res. 114 U.S. Senate results to authorize the use of United States Armed Forces against Iraq.
"Operation Iraqi Freedom – The Invasion of Iraq". PBS Frontline. Retrieved 28 October 2011.  Chronology of invasion.
Occupation of Iraq Timeline at the History Commons
War in Iraq: Day by Day Guide
Frontline: "The Dark Side" PBS documentary on Dick Cheney's remaking of the Executive and infighting leading up to the war in Iraq
1999 Desert Crossing War Game to Plan Invasion of Iraq and to Unseat Saddam Hussein
"War in Iraq". CNN. May 2003. 
"Military Resources: War in Iraq". The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. 





Iraq war











v
t
e


Iraq War (2003–2011)



Background



Lead-up
Disarmament crisis
Yellowcake uranium
WMD claims
Rationale
US popular opinion
Hussein interview
Biological weapons





Invasion



Failed Iraqi peace initiatives
Preparations
Multi-National Force
Timeline
Battle of Nasiriyah
Invasion of Baghdad
Debecka Pass
Firdos Square statue
Mission Accomplished speech
Post-war WMD conjecture
Coalition Provisional Authority





Key events



Invasion (2003)
Execution of Saddam Hussein (2006)
Anbar Province (2003–11)
Insurgency (2003–11)

Post-invasion insurgency (2003–06)
Sectarian violence (2006–08)
U.S. withdrawal (2007–11)







Aftermath



Post-withdrawal insurgency (2011–13)
Military intervention against ISIL (2014–present)
Iraqi Civil War (2014–present)





Reactions



Views on the invasion
Legitimacy of the invasion
Opposition
Protests
Criticism
United Nations
Governmental positions





Controversies



Baghdad Museum looting (2003)
Fallujah genocide (2003)
Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse (2004)
Mukaradeeb wedding party massacre (2004)
Haditha massacre (2005)
Mahmudiyah rape and killings (2006)
Ishaqi incident (2006)
Baghdad airstrike (2007)
Nisour Square massacre (2007)
Iraq War documents leak (2010)





Impact



Refugees
Duelfer Report
Damage to Baghdad
Iraq Interim Governing Council
Aid and Investment
Economic reform
Financial cost
Casualties
Chilcot Inquiry
Human rights





Memorials



London





Lists



Coalition military operations
Bombings
Aviation shootdowns and accidents
Associated people





Timeline



2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011








 Category
 Wikinews
 Multimedia










2003 Iraq war Operations



2003 Operations



Iraqi Freedom
Abiline
Airborne Dragon
All American Tiger
Antica Babilonia (Ancient Babylon)
Arrowhead Blizzard
Bayonet Lightning
Boothill
Bulldog Mammoth
Catalyst
Chamberlain
Choke Hold
Clear Area
Desert Scorpion
Desert Snowplough
Desert Thrust
Devil Siphon
Eagle Curtain
Falconer
Industrial Sweep
Iron Bullet
Iron Force
Iron Grip
Iron Hammer
Iron Justice
Ivy Blizzard
Ivy Cyclone
Ivy Cyclone II
Ivy Lightning
Ivy Needle
Ivy Serpent
Longstreet
Mandarin Squeeze
Northern Delay
OK Corral
Option North
Overcoat
Panther Backroads
Panther Squeeze
Peninsula Strike
Planet X
Red Dawn
Rifles Blitz
Rifles Fury
Rifle Sweep
Salm
Santa Strike
Scorpion Sting
Sidewinder
Silverado
Soda Mountain
Spartan Scorpion
Sweeny
Telic
Tiger Clean Sweep
Tyr
Whitehouse





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post Invasion
Iraq Operations - Chronological
Timeline
Insurgent attacks
Casualties










2004 Iraq war Operations



2004 Operations



Aloha
Army Santa
Arrowhead Strike 10
Backbreaker
Backpack
Baton Rouge
Black Typhoon
Blue Tiger
Bulldog Mammoth
Cajun Mousetrap II
Cajun Mousetrap III
Centaur Fast Gas
Centaur Rodeo
Centaur Strike II
Centaur Strike III
Clean Sweep
Clothes for Kids
Cobra Sweep
Crayon
Dallas
Danger Fortitude
Devil Clinch
Devil Thrust
Disarm
Diyala Border Police Audit
Diyala Sunrise
Dragon Victory
Duke Fury
Duke Fortitude
Eagle Liberty 3
Falcon Freedom
Final Cut
Gimlet Crusader
Gimlet Silent Sniper
Gimlet Victory
Giuliani
Gizzly Forced Entry
Haifa Street
Hickory View
Hurricane
Hurricane II
I CAN
Iraqi Children
Iron Fist II
Iron Fury
Iron Fury II
Iron Promise
Iron Resolve
Iron Saber
Lancer Fury
Lancer Lightening
Lion Cub
Longhorn
Mandarine Squeeze
Market Sweep
Marne
Mayfield Sweep III
Mustang Flex
Mustang Socko
Mutual Security
New Dawn (Al Fajr)
Oasis
Outlaw Destroyer
Phantom Fury
Phantom Linebacker
Plymouth Rock
Powder River
Predator
Quarterhorse Rides
Ramadan Roundup
Rapier Thrust
Resolute Sword
Ripper Sweep
Rock Bottom
Rock Slide
Rocketman
Rocketman II
Rocketman III
Saber Turner II
Saloon
Shillelagh
Showdown
Slim Shady
Soccor Ball
Soprano Sunset
Spartan Scorpion
Spring Cleanup
Striker Hurricane
Striker Tornado
Student to Student
Suicide Kings
Tangerine Pinch
Tangerine Squeeze
Thunderstruck
Tiger Care
Tiger Fury
Tobruk
Tomahawk
Tombstone Piledriver
Trailblazer
Triple Play
True Grit
Vanguard Thunder
Vigilant Resolve
Warhorse Whirlwind
Warrior
Warrior Resolve
Windy City
Wolfhound Fury
Wolfhound Fury II
Wolfhound Jab
Wolfhound Power
Wolfhound Trap II
Wolfpack Crunch
Wolverine
Wolverine Feast
Wonderland
Yellowstone





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post Invasion
Iraq Operations – Chronological
Timeline
Terrorist Attacks
Casualties










2005 Iraq war Operations



2005 Operations



Able Rising Force
Able Warrior
Attleboro (Iraq)
Avarice
Badlands
Big Dig
Block Party
Block Party II
Bow Country
Bowie
Bruins
Bull Dawg Chariot
Carentan
Centaur Showdown
Checkmate
Chepultepec
Clear Decision
Cobweb (MND-CS)
Copperas Cove
Cyclone
Dagger
Demon Digger
Doctor
Dragons Breath
Dunlap
East Lansing
Flea Flicker
Fontana
Great Lakes
Green Trident
Grey Wolf II
Hedgehog
Hudson
Hunter
Iron Fist
Iron Hammer
Joint Venture
Kennesaw Dragon
Keystone Sweep
Knockout
Lanthonid
Liberty Express
Lightning
Lions
Matador
Mongoose
Moon
Moon River Dragon
Mountaineers
Moving Forward
Muthana Strike
National Unity
Neighborhood Watch
New Market
Open Window
Panthers(Numur)
Peninsula (MND-CS)
Pitchfork
Quickstrike
Rams
Restoring Rights
River Blitz
River Gate
River Walk
San Juan
Saratoga
Scimitar
Scrimmage
Seahorse
Shadyville
Shank
Skinner
Spear (Romhe)
Spider Web
Squeeze Play
Steel Curtain
Strategic Separation
Swashbuckle
Sword
Therapist
Thunder
Tigers (Numur)
Uhasar
Unforgiven
Vacant City
Warrior's Rage
White Shield
Wolf Stalk 2
Woodstock





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post-invasion
Iraq Operations – Chronological
Timeline
Terrorist attacks
Casualties










2006 Iraq war Operations



2006 Operations



Arctic Sunrise
Al Majid
Babil Peremeter
Baghdad is Beautiful
Barnstormer
Bastogne
Beastmaster
Benefit Day
Bold Action
Chepultepec
Cobra Strike
Commando Hunter
Constitution Hammer
Coolspring VIII
Cougar
Cowpens
Dealer
Dirty Harry
Dragons Breath
Eagle Watch
El Toro Loco
Enduring Education
Falcon Sweep
Gaugamela
Gladiator
Glory Light
Guardian Tiger
Harvest Lights
Helping Hands
Industrial Revolution
Iron Arrow
Iron Arrow II
Iron Triangle
Jaws V
King Tut
Koa Canyon
Lightning Blitz
Lion
Lion Hunt
Lion Hunt II
Lofty Summit
Medusa
Minotaur
Money Worth
Moonlight
Northern Lights
Passage
Pitbull
Polar Black Diamond
Polar Valor
Post Hawk
Raging Bull
Red Bull
Red Light II
River Falcon
Roaring Tiger
Sandstorm
Scales of Justice
Scorpion
Smokewagon
Stallion Run
Sterling
SOUK
Swamp Fox
Swarmer
Swift Sword
Talon (Iraq)
Thunder Cat
Tinto
Together Forward
Trifecta
Tropical Lightning
Unified Fist
United Front





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post Invasion
Iraq Operations - Chronological
Timeline
Terrorist Attacks
Casualties










2007 Iraq war Operations



2007 Operations



Agave L
Alljah
Ameliyet
Anchorage
Arbead II
Ardennes
Arrowhead Ripper
Arrowhead Strike III
Arrowhead Strike VI
Arrowhead Strike 9
Arrowhead Strike 10
Banzeen
Bastogne
Beach Yellow
Bear
Bell Hurriyah
Belleau Wood
Bethel
Black Eagle
Black Eagle II
Black Eagle City
Black Shark
Bonebreaker
Brown Hawk
Brutus
Bullrun
Castine
Cave Dweller
Chalons
Chesterfield
Church
Cobra Strike (2007)
Comanche Swarm II
Combined Justice
Eagle Ares
Commando Dive
Commando Eagle
Crazyhorse Thunder
Crimson Shogun
Destroyer Strike
Dixon
Dragon Fire
Dragon Fire East
Dragon Fox
Dragon Hammer
Dragon Talon II
Eagle Ares
Eagle Chickmauga
Eagle Claw XI
Eagle Dive I
Eagle Dive II
Eagle Lightning
Eagle Shiloh III
Eagle Sweep
Eagle Talon
Eagle Thunder III
Eagle Venture IV
Eagles
Eastern Fury
Elfin Cove
Enduring Education
Falcon Fury
Falcon Fury II
Falkirk
Firecracker
Four Brothers
Gator Run
Gecko
Gecko III A
Gecko III B
Geronimo Strike
Geronimo Strike II
Geronimo Strike III
Gold Digger
Golden Eagle II
Green Angel
Grenada
Greywolf Hammer II
Gun Barrel City
Headhunter
Hermes
Hit and Run
Hoplite
Iraqi Heart
Iraqi Home Protector
Iron Blitz
Ithaca
Justice League
Jalil
Justice Reach
K (Iraq)
Kids
Kodiak
Law and Order (Fardh Al Qanoon)
Leyte Gulf
Lightning Hammer
Lightning Hammer II
Lions Paw
Little Man
Marne Anvil
Marne Avalanche
Marne Husky
Marne Torch
Marne Torch II
Machete Harvest
Mawtini
Michigan
New Blue
New Day
Nijmegen
Nijmegen II
Nijmegen III
Northern Forge
Northern Venture
Northwestern Shoulder
Olympus
Patriot Strike
Pegasus Bridge
Peregrine II
Pericles
Phantom Strike
Phantom Thunder
Phoenix
Polar Charade
Polar Dive
Polar Scrum
Polar Tempest
Police Victory (Shurta Nasir)
Powerline
Punisher III
Purple Haze
Rat Trap
Red Eagle
Regular Justice
Rock Drill
Rock Hammer
Rogue Stomp
Rogue Thunder
Saber Boss
Saber Guardian
Safe Teach
Safety and Security
School Supplies
SINBAD
Sledgehammer
Snake River
Southern Scimitar
Stampede 3
Street Sweeper II
Tacoma III
Three Swords
Tiger Hammer
The Iron Hammer
Tomahawk Strike 11
Tomahawk Strike 12
Trident IV
Turki Bowl
Turki Bowl II
Tuwaitha Sunrise
Valdez
Valiant Guardian (Harris Ba'sil)
Viking Clampdown III
Viking Snatch
Viking Squeeze
Vipers Bite
Waterfront
Warmup
White Rockets
Wickersham
Wickersham II
Wickersham III
William Wallace
Winston-Salem
Wolverine Alesia
Woodshed
Yukon River





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post Invasion
Iraq Operations - Chronological
Timeline
Terrorist Attacks
Casualties










2008 Iraq war Operations



2008 Operations



Operation Defeat Al Qaeda in the North
Operation Iron Harvest
Operation Iron Pursuit
Operation Iron Reaper
Operation Marne Grand Slam
Operation Marne Thunderbolt
Operation Phantom Phoenix
Operation Raider Harvest
Operation Rock Reaper
Operation Viking Pursuit
Operation Viper Pursuit





See also



Iraq
Invasion
Post Invasion
Iraq Operations - Chronological
Timeline
Terrorist Attacks
Casualties







Iraq War Coalition troop deployment



Troops at time of MNF-I deactivation
Withdrawn troops (2008 – 2011)
Withdrawn troops (2003 – 2007)



Total invasion deployment

Less than 200,000 troops

Multi-National Force – Iraq units

Multi-National Force – West
Multi-National Division – Baghdad
Multinational Division Central-South
Multi-National Division – North
Multi-National Division (South-East)
Logistics Support Area Anaconda




 NATO: A contingent of around 150 advisers under the separate command NATO Training Mission – Iraq (withdrawn 12/11)
 United States: 150,000 invasion 165,000 peak (withdrawn 12/11)
 United Kingdom: 46,000 invasion (withdrawn 5/11)
 Australia: 2,000 invasion (withdrawn 7/09)
 Romania: 730 peak (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 7/09)
 El Salvador: 380 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 1/09)
 Estonia: 40 troops (deployed 6/05; withdrawn 1/09)
 Bulgaria: 485 peak (deployed 5/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Moldova: 24 peak (deployed 9/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Albania: 240 troops (deployed 4/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Ukraine: 1,650 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Denmark: 545 peak (deployed 4/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Czech Republic: 300 peak (deployed 12/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 South Korea: 3,600 peak (deployed 5/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Tonga: 55 troops (deployed 7/04; withdrawn 12/08)
 Azerbaijan: 250 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Singapore: 175 offshore (deployed 12/03; withdrawn 12/08)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina: 85 peak (deployed 6/05; withdrawn 11/08)
 Macedonia: 77 peak (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 11/08)
 Latvia: 136 peak (deployed 5/03; withdrawn 11/08)
 Poland: 200 invasion—2,500 peak (withdrawn 10/08)
 Kazakhstan: 29 troops (deployed 9/03; withdrawn 10/08)
 Armenia: 46 troops (deployed 1/05; withdrawn 10/08)
 Mongolia: 180 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 09/08)
 Georgia: 2,000 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 8/08)




 Slovakia: 110 peak (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 12/07)
 Lithuania: 120 peak (deployed 6/03; withdrawn 08/07)
 Italy: 3,200 peak (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 11/06)
 Norway: 150 troops (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 8/06)
 Japan: 600 troops (deployed 1/04; withdrawn 7/06)
 Hungary: 300 troops (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 3/05)
 Netherlands: 1,345 troops (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 3/05)
 Portugal: 128 troops (deployed 11/03; withdrawn 2/05)
 New Zealand: 61 troops (deployed 9/03; withdrawn 9/04)
 Thailand: 423 troops (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 8/04)
 Philippines: 51 troops (deployed 7/03; withdrawn 7/04)
 Honduras: 368 troops (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 5/04)
 Dominican Republic: 302 troops (deployed 8/03; withdrawn 5/04)
 Spain: 1,300 troops (deployed 4/03; withdrawn 4/04)
 Nicaragua: 230 troops (deployed 9/03; withdrawn 2/04)
 Iceland: 2 troops (deployed 5/03; withdrawal date unknown)












v
t
e


Armed groups in the Iraq conflict (2003–present)



Iraqi government



Iraqi Armed Forces

Iraqi Army
Iraqi Air Force


Iraqi Police

Iraqi Police Service
National Police
Supporting Forces


Facilities Protection Service





Ba'athists



Army of the Men of the Naqshbandi Order
Fedayeen Saddam
General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries
Al-Awda
General Command of the Armed Forces, Resistance and Liberation in Iraq
Popular Army
New Return
Patriotic Front
Political Media Organ of the Ba'ath Party
Popular Resistance for the Liberation of Iraq
Al-Abud Network





Militias
and others




Shia Islamic militias



Mahdi Army
Abu Deraa's Mahdi Army faction
Badr Organization
Sheibani Network
Soldiers of Heaven
Special Groups (Iraq)

Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq
Promised Day Brigade
Kata'ib Hezbollah







Sunni Islamic militias



Awakening groups
1920 Revolution Brigade
Jaish al-Rashideen
Islamic Army in Iraq
Islamic Front for the Iraqi Resistance
Hamas of Iraq





Kurdish militias



Peshmerga
Kurdistan Workers' Party
Kurdistan Freedom Hawks
Kurdistan Free Life Party





Turkmen militias



Iraqi Turkmen Front
16Brigade
52nd Brigade
92nd Brigade
Brigade of Imam Hussein
Sayyid al-Shuhada
Bashir Regiment





Assyrian militias



Qaraqosh Protection Committee
Nineveh Plain Forces
Nineveh Plain Protection Units
Dwekh Nawsha
Syriac Military Council
Kataib Rouh Allah Issa Ibn Miriam





Yazidi militias



Asayîşa Êzîdxanê
Êzîdxan Protection Force
Sinjar Alliance

Sinjar Resistance Units
Êzîdxan Women's Units










Insurgents




Nationalist Salafis



Mujahideen Army
Mujahideen Battalions of the Salafi Group of Iraq
Islamic Salafist Boy Scout Battalions
Mohammad's Army





Salafi Jihadists



Ansar al-Islam
Black Banner Organization
Abu Theeb's group
Jaish Abi Baker's group
Jamaat Ansar al-Sunna
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant

Mujahideen Shura Council
Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn
Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad


Wakefulness and Holy War















v
t
e


Terrorism in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

















v
t
e


Iraq articles



History




Ancient



Sumer
Akkadian Empire
Babylonia
Assyria
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Neo-Babylonian Empire
Achaemenid Assyria
Seleucid Babylonia
Parthian Babylonia
Sassanid Asorestan





638–1958



Muslim conquest of Persia
Abbasid Caliphate
Buyid dynasty
Kara Koyunlu
Ak Koyunlu
Safavids
Ottoman Iraq (Mamluk dynasty)
Mandatory Iraq
Kingdom of Iraq
Arab Federation





Republic



1958–68
1968–2003
2003–11
2011–present


Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region (National Command)
Saddam Hussein
Iran–Iraq War
Invasion of Kuwait
Gulf War
Sanctions
Iraq War

U.S. invasion
Iraqi insurgency
U.S. troop withdrawal


Insurgency (2011–2013)
Civil War (2014–present)

Mosul liberation










Geography











Al-Faw Peninsula
Al-Jazira
Euphrates
Hamrin Mountains
Persian Gulf
Islands
Mesopotamia
Mesopotamian Marshes
Places
Lakes
Shatt al-Arab
Syrian Desert
Tigris
Umm Qasr
Zagros Mountains











Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Council of Representatives (legislative)
Elections
Foreign aid
Foreign relations
Government

Council of Ministers
Presidency Council
President
Prime Minister


Human rights

in pre-Saddam Iraq
in Saddam Hussein's Iraq
in post-invasion Iraq

in ISIL-controlled territory


LGBT
Freedom of religion
Women


Law
Military
Police
Political parties
Judiciary
Wars and conflicts








Economy







Central Bank
Dinar (currency)
Infrastructure
Oil Industry
Oil reserves
Reconstruction
Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Transportation








Society







Cuisine
Culture
Education
Health
Media
Music
Smoking
Sports





Demographics



Iraqis

diaspora
refugees


Languages

Arabic
Aramaic
Kurdish
Persian
Iraqi Turkmen dialect


Minorities

Armenians
Assyrians
Circassians
Kurds
Mandaeans
Marsh Arabs
Persians
Solluba
Turkmen/Turcoman
Jews


Religion

Islam
Christianity
Mandaeism
Yazidis














Outline
Index



Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2003_invasion_of_Iraq&oldid=817479497"					Categories: Iraq WarGeorge W. Bush administration controversiesPresidency of George W. BushInvasions of IraqInvasions by AustraliaInvasions by PolandInvasions by the United KingdomInvasions by the United StatesIraq–United States relationsOperations involving special forcesWars involving the United StatesWars involving the United KingdomWars involving DenmarkWars involving AustraliaWars involving PolandWars involving Iraqi KurdistanUnited States Marine Corps in the Iraq WarConflicts in 2003Campaigns of the Iraq WarHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template webcite linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2015Articles with dead external links from April 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from January 2013Pages using military navigation subgroups without wide styleArticles with limited geographic scope from July 2016Articles containing overly long summariesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles containing video clips