This article is about the process of creating 3D computer graphics. For information on the study of computer graphics, see Computer graphics (computer science). For other usage, see Computer graphics.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Three-dimensional (3D)
computer graphics





Fundamentals




Modeling
Scanning
Rendering
Printing
Software




Primary uses




3D models
Computer-aided design
Graphic design
Video games
Visual effects
Visualization
Virtual engineering
Virtual reality
Virtual cinematography




Related topics




Computer-generated imagery (CGI)
Animation

computer
skeletal


3D display
Wireframe model
Texture mapping
Motion capture
Crowd simulation
Global illumination
Volume rendering







v
t
e





3D computer graphics or three-dimensional computer graphics, (in contrast to 2D computer graphics) are graphics that use a three-dimensional representation of geometric data (often Cartesian) that is stored in the computer for the purposes of performing calculations and rendering 2D images. Such images may be stored for viewing later or displayed in real-time.
3D computer graphics rely on many of the same algorithms as 2D computer vector graphics in the wire-frame model and 2D computer raster graphics in the final rendered display. In computer graphics software, the distinction between 2D and 3D is occasionally blurred; 2D applications may use 3D techniques to achieve effects such as lighting, and 3D may use 2D rendering techniques.
3D computer graphics are often referred to as 3D models. Apart from the rendered graphic, the model is contained within the graphical data file. However, there are differences: a 3D model is the mathematical representation of any three-dimensional object. A model is not technically a graphic until it is displayed. A model can be displayed visually as a two-dimensional image through a process called 3D rendering or used in non-graphical computer simulations and calculations. With 3D printing, 3D models are similarly rendered into a 3D physical representation of the model, with limitations to how accurate the rendering can match the virtual model.



Contents


1 History
2 Overview

2.1 Modeling
2.2 Materials and textures
2.3 Layout and animation
2.4 Rendering


3 Software

3.1 Modeling
3.2 Computer-aided design
3.3 Complementary tools


4 Communities
5 Differences with other types of computer graphics

5.1 Distinction from photorealistic 2D graphics
5.2 Pseudo-3D and true 3D


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of computer animation
William Fetter was credited with coining the term computer graphics in 1961[1][2] to describe his work at Boeing. One of the first displays of computer animation was Futureworld (1976), which included an animation of a human face and a hand that had originally appeared in the 1972 experimental short A Computer Animated Hand, created by University of Utah students Edwin Catmull and Fred Parke.[3]
3D computer graphics software began appearing for home computers in the late 1970s. The earliest known example is 3D Art Graphics, a set of 3D computer graphics effects, written by Kazumasa Mitazawa and released in June 1978 for the Apple II.[4][5]
Overview[edit]
3D computer graphics creation falls into three basic phases:

3D modeling – the process of forming a computer model of an object's shape
Layout and animation – the placement and movement of objects within a scene
3D rendering – the computer calculations that, based on light placement, surface types, and other qualities, generate the image

Modeling[edit]
Main article: 3D modeling
The model describes the process of forming the shape of an object. The two most common sources of 3D models are those that an artist or engineer originates on the computer with some kind of 3D modeling tool, and models scanned into a computer from real-world objects. Models can also be produced procedurally or via physical simulation. Basically, a 3D model is formed from points called vertices (or vertexes) that define the shape and form polygons. A polygon is an area formed from at least three vertexes (a triangle). A polygon of n points is an n-gon[citation needed]. The overall integrity of the model and its suitability to use in animation depend on the structure of the polygons.
Materials and textures[edit]
Which includes giving the model the properties that the render engine uses to render the model, in an unbiased render engine like blender cycles you can give the model materials to tell the engine how to treat light when it hits the surface, also textures are used to give the material color like a color or albedo map, or give the surface features like bump or normal maps, it can be also used to deform the model it self like displacement map.
Layout and animation[edit]
Main article: Computer animation
Before rendering into an image, objects must be laid out (place) in a scene. This defines spatial relationships between objects, including location and size. Animation refers to the temporal description of an object (i.e., how it moves and deforms over time. Popular methods include keyframing, inverse kinematics, and motion capture). These techniques are often used in combination. As with animation, physical simulation also specifies motion.
Rendering[edit]
Main article: 3D rendering
Rendering converts a model into an image either by simulating light transport to get photo-realistic images, or by applying an art style as in non-photorealistic rendering. The two basic operations in realistic rendering are transport (how much light gets from one place to another) and scattering (how surfaces interact with light). This step is usually performed using 3D computer graphics software or a 3D graphics API. Altering the scene into a suitable form for rendering also involves 3D projection, which displays a three-dimensional image in two dimensions. Although 3D modeling and CAD software may perform 3D rendering as well (e.g. Autodesk 3ds Max or Blender), exclusive 3D rendering software also exists.


Examples of 3D rendering













Far Left: A 3D rendering with ray tracing and ambient occlusion using Blender and YafaRay.
Center Left: A 3d model of a Dunkerque-class battleship rendered with flat shading.
Center Right: During the 3D rendering step, the number of reflections "light rays" can take, as well as various other attributes, can be tailored to achieve a desired visual effect. Rendered with Cobalt.
Far Right: Experience Curiosity, a real-time web application which leverages 3D rendering capabilities of browsers (WebGL).


Software[edit]
3D computer graphics software produces computer-generated imagery (CGI) through 3D modeling and 3D rendering or produces 3D models for analytic, scientific and industrial purposes.
Modeling[edit]
Main article: 3D modeling software
3D modeling software is a class of 3D computer graphics software used to produce 3D models. Individual programs of this class are called modeling applications or modelers.
3D modelers allow users to create and alter models via their 3D mesh. Users can add, subtract, stretch and otherwise change the mesh to their desire. Models can be viewed from a variety of angles, usually simultaneously. Models can be rotated and the view can be zoomed in and out.
3D modelers can export their models to files, which can then be imported into other applications as long as the metadata are compatible. Many modelers allow importers and exporters to be plugged-in, so they can read and write data in the native formats of other applications.
Most 3D modelers contain a number of related features, such as ray tracers and other rendering alternatives and texture mapping facilities. Some also contain features that support or allow animation of models. Some may be able to generate full-motion video of a series of rendered scenes (i.e. animation).
Computer-aided design[edit]
Main article: Computer-aided design
Computer aided design software may employ the same fundamental 3D modeling techniques that 3D modeling software use but their goal differs. They are used in computer-aided engineering, computer-aided manufacturing, Finite element analysis, product lifecycle management, 3D printing and Computer-aided architectural design.
Complementary tools[edit]
After producing video, studios then edit or composite the video using programs such as Adobe Premiere Pro or Final Cut Pro at the mid-level, or Autodesk Combustion, Digital Fusion, Shake at the high-end. Match moving software is commonly used to match live video with computer-generated video, keeping the two in sync as the camera moves.
Use of real-time computer graphics engines to create a cinematic production is called machinima.
Communities[edit]
There are a multitude of websites designed to help, educate and support 3D graphic artists. Some are managed by software developers and content providers, but there are standalone sites as well. These communities allow for members to seek advice, post tutorials, provide product reviews or post examples of their own work.
Differences with other types of computer graphics[edit]
Distinction from photorealistic 2D graphics[edit]
See also: Still life § 21st century
Not all computer graphics that appear 3D are based on a wireframe model. 2D computer graphics with 3D photorealistic effects are often achieved without wireframe modeling and are sometimes indistinguishable in the final form. Some graphic art software includes filters that can be applied to 2D vector graphics or 2D raster graphics on transparent layers. Visual artists may also copy or visualize 3D effects and manually render photorealistic effects without the use of filters.
Pseudo-3D and true 3D[edit]
Main article: 2.5D
Some video games use restricted projections of three-dimensional environments, such as isometric graphics or virtual cameras with fixed angles, either as a way to improve performance of the game engine, or for stylistic and gameplay concerns. Such games are said to use pseudo-3D graphics. By contrast, games using 3D computer graphics without such restrictions are said to use true 3D.
See also[edit]






Book: 3D Rendering




Graphics and software

Glossary of computer graphics
Comparison of 3D computer graphics software
3D computer graphics software
Graphics processing unit (GPU)
Graphical output devices
List of 3D computer graphics software
List of 3D modeling software
List of 3D rendering software
Real-time computer graphics
Reflection (computer graphics)
Rendering (computer graphics)

Fields of use

3D data acquisition and object reconstruction
3D motion controller
3D projection on 2D planes
3D reconstruction
3D reconstruction from multiple images
Anaglyph image
Computer vision
Digital geometry
Game development tool
Game engine
Geometry pipeline
Geometry processing
Graphics
Image processing
Isometric graphics in video games
Level editor
List of stereoscopic video games
Medical animation
Render farm
SIGGRAPH
Stereoscopy
Timeline of CGI in films
Computer-animated television series
Video game graphics


References[edit]


^ "An Historical Timeline of Computer Graphics and Animation". 
^ "Computer Graphics". 
^ "Pixar founder's Utah-made Hand added to National Film Registry". The Salt Lake Tribune. December 28, 2011. Retrieved January 8, 2012. 
^ brutaldeluxe.fr
^ "PROJECTS AND ARTICLES Retrieving Japanese Apple II programs". 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to 3D computer graphics.





Look up computer graphics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



A Critical History of Computer Graphics and Animation
How Stuff Works - 3D Graphics
History of Computer Graphics series of articles
How 3D Works - Explains 3D modeling for an illuminated manuscript
3D Tools table from the CGSociety wiki







v
t
e


Animation topics



By country







Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
Czech Republic
Estonia
India
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Thailand
United States
Vietnam





History



Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Hungary
Iran
Korea
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States








Industry



Animator

List


Animation department
Animation director
Story artist
Animation studios

List


Animation database
Biologist simulators
Animation film festivals

international
regional


Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends)
Outsourcing
International Animation Day





Works



Films

Based on cartoons
Computer-animated
Feature-length
Lost or unfinished
Package
Short
Short series
Stop-motion


Series

Direct-to-video
Internet
Television







Techniques




Traditional



Limited animation
Masking
Rotoscoping





Stop motion



Barrier grid
Clay

strata-cut


Cutout (silhouette)
Graphic
Model

go motion


Object
Pixilation
Puppetoon





Computer
(history, timeline)




2D



Flash
PowerPoint
SVG
CSS
Digital puppetry





3D



Cel shading
Crowd
Morph target
Motion capture
Non-photorealistic rendering
Procedural
Skeletal
Machinima
Digital puppetry
Virtual cinematography








Other methods



Blocking
Chuckimation
Drawn-on-film
Flip book
Inbetweening
Kinegram
Paint-on-glass
Pinscreen
Pixel art
Pose to pose
Rubber hose
Sand
Syncro-Vox
Zoetrope








Variants



Abstract animation (visual music)
Adult animation
Animated cartoon
Animated sitcom
Animated documentary
Cartoon pornography
Educational animation
Erotic animation
Independent animation
Instructional animation





Related topics



Animation music

Mickey Mousing


Character animation

model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model


Twelve principles
Motion comic
Films with live action and animation

highest grossing


Cartoon physics
Cartoon violence
Most expensive animated films








 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


3D computer graphics software



Open-source



Blender
K-3D
MakeHuman
MeshLab
OpenFX
Point Cloud Library
POV-Ray
Seamless3d
Sweet Home 3D
Wings 3D
YafaRay





Closed-source



3D-Coat
AC3D
Autodesk 3ds Max
Autodesk Maya
Autodesk Mudbox
AutoQ3D Community
Blackmagic Fusion
Bryce
Carrara
Cinema 4D
Clara.io
DAZ Studio
Electric Image Animation System
E-on Vue
Golaem Crowd
Hexagon
Houdini
Indigo Renderer
Kerkythea
LightWave 3D
MASSIVE
Messiah
Modo
Moment of Inspiration
Nuke
Paint 3D
Poser
RaySupreme
Remo 3D
Rhinoceros 3D
Sculptris
Shade 3D
Shark 3D
Silo
SketchUp
Strata 3D
Terragen
ZBrush





Defunct



Amapi
Autodesk Softimage
Cyber Studio CAD-3D
Dynamation
Imagine
N-World
PowerAnimator
Sculpt 3D
Softimage 3D
StrataVision 3D
Swift 3D
TrueSpace
TurboSilver
VistaPro





Core technologies



ACIS
C3D
HOOPS 3D
KernelCAD
Open CASCADE Technology
Parasolid
Romulus
RGK
ShapeManager
Teigha
IntelliCAD








 Comparison
 Category
 List

3D modeling
3D rendering













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=3D_computer_graphics&oldid=813049894"					Categories: Computer graphics3D computer graphics3D graphics software3D imagingVisual effectsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2018All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2011