
Addison-Wesley




Parent company
Pearson Education


Founded
1942; 76 years ago (1942)


Founder
Lew Addison Cummings, Melbourne Wesley Cummings


Country of origin
United States


Headquarters location
Boston


Publication types
Textbooks


Nonfiction topics
Computer Science, Economics, Finance, Mathematics, and Statistics


Fiction genres
textbooks


Official website
www.pearsonschool.com (school),
www.pearsonhighered.com (higher education),
informit.com (professional)


Addison-Wesley is a publisher of textbooks and computer literature. It is an imprint of Pearson PLC, a global publishing and education company. In addition to publishing books, Addison-Wesley also distributes its technical titles through the Safari Books Online e-reference service. Addison-Wesley's majority of sales derive from the United States (55%) and Europe (22%).[1]
The Addison-Wesley Professional Imprint produces content including books, eBooks, and video for the professional IT worker including developers, programmers, managers, system administrators. Classic titles include The Art of Computer Programming, The C++ Programming Language, The Mythical Man-Month, and Design Patterns. Addison-Wesley Professional is also a partner with Safari Books Online.



Contents


1 History
2 Notable books
3 References
4 External links



History[edit]
Melbourne Wesley Cummings and Lew Addison Cummings founded Addison-Wesley in 1942, with the first book published by Addison-Wesley being Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor Francis Weston Sears' Mechanics. Its first computer book was Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer, by Wilkes, Wheeler, and Gill. In 1977, Addison-Wesley acquired W. A. Benjamin Company, and merged it with the Cummings division of the company to form Benjamin Cummings. It was purchased by the global publishing and education company, Pearson PLC in 1988[2] and became part of Addison Wesley Longman in 1994. The trade publishing division of Addison-Wesley was sold to Perseus Books Group in 1997, leaving Addison-Wesley as solely an educational publisher.[3] Pearson acquired the educational division of Simon & Schuster in 1998, and merged it with Addison Wesley Longman to form Pearson Education and subsequently rebranded to Pearson in 2011. Pearson moved the former Addison Wesley Longman offices from Reading, Massachusetts to Boston in 2004. Its current executives hail from the original Addison-Wesley with a storied history of their own.
Notable books[edit]

Addison-Wesley Secondary Math: An Integrated Approach: Focus on Algebra
The Art of Computer Programming by Donald Knuth
The Feynman Lectures on Physics by Richard Feynman, Robert B. Leighton, and Matthew Sands
Concrete Mathematics: A Foundation For Computer Science by Ronald Graham, Donald Knuth, and Oren Patashnik
Evolutionary Biology by Dr. Eli C. Minkoff
Programming Pearls by Jon Bentley
Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John Vlissides
The C++ Programming Language by Bjarne Stroustrup
Hacker's Delight by Henry S. Warren, Jr.
Exploratory data analysis by John W. Tukey, based on a course taught at Princeton.
The Mythical Man-Month by Fred P. Brooks. Jr.
Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment and TCP/IP Illustrated by W. Richard Stevens
Iron John: A Book About Men by Robert Bly
Theory Z by William G. Ouchi
Basics of Web Design: HTML5 & CSS3 by Terry A. Felke-Morris

References[edit]



^ "Pearson PLC (PSO) Company Profile | Reuters.com". reuters.com. Retrieved 14 November 2012. 
^ "History". Pearson. Archived from the original on 2006-07-11. Retrieved 2013-05-14. 
^ "Perseus Books Buys Addison-Wesley Unit". The New York Times. December 22, 1997. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 



External links[edit]

Official site (education)
Official site (professional)
Official site (Germany)







v
t
e


Pearson PLC



Pearson School



Addison-Wesley
Dorling Kindersley
Heinemann (outside US)


Modern Curriculum Press
Prentice Hall
Scott Foresman
Silver Burdett
York Notes





Pearson
Higher Education



Addison-Wesley
Allyn & Bacon
Benjamin Cummings
Longman
Prentice Hall
Propero





Pearson
Professional



Addison-Wesley Professional
Adobe Press
Apple Certified
Allyn & Bacon Professional
Cisco Press
FT Press
IBM Press
InformIT
New York Institute of Finance
Peachpit
Pearson Assessment & Information
Prentice Hall Professional
SAMS Publishing
Pearson VUE
Wharton





Other



Connections Academy
Edexcel
Pearson College
Pearson Language Tests
Wall Street Institute
80 Strand
Glen Moreno
Weetman Pearson, 1st Viscount Cowdray
Marjorie Scardino
Penguin Random House






 Category







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 130155129
LCCN: n50062811
ISNI: 0000 0000 8498 2777
GND: 131596-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Addison-Wesley&oldid=806803892"					Categories: Addison-WesleyCompanies based in BostonComputer book publishing companiesPearson PLCPublishing companies established in 1942Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers