This article is about a former military department of England and later the United Kingdom. For other uses, see Admiralty (disambiguation).

Admiralty Department


Coat of Arms of Her Majesty's Government



Department overview


Formed
1709


Preceding Department



Office of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs





Dissolved
1964


Superseding agency



Navy Department, Ministry of Defence





Jurisdiction
Government of the United Kingdom


Headquarters
War Office building
Whitehall
London


Department executive



First Lord of the Admiralty





Parent Department
HM Government


The Admiralty, originally known as the Office of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs,[1] was the government department[2][3] responsible for the command of the Royal Navy first in the Kingdom of England, second in the Kingdom of Great Britain, and from 1801-1964,[4] the United Kingdom and former British Empire. Originally exercised by a single person, the Lord High Admiral (1385-1628), the Admiralty was, from the early 18th century onwards, almost invariably put "in commission" and exercised by the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, who sat on the Board of Admiralty.
In 1964, the functions of the Admiralty were transferred to a new Admiralty Board, which is a committee of the tri-service Defence Council of the United Kingdom and part of the Navy Department [5] of the Ministry of Defence. The new Admiralty Board meets only twice a year, and the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy is controlled by a Navy Board (not to be confused with the historic Navy Board described later in this article). It is common for the various authorities now in charge of the Royal Navy to be referred to as simply The Admiralty.
The title of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom was vested in the monarch from 1964 to 2011. The title was awarded to Philip, Duke of Edinburgh by Queen Elizabeth II on his 90th birthday.[6] There also continues to be a Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom and a Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom, both of which are honorary offices.



Contents


1 Function and organization

1.1 History
1.2 Board of Admiralty
1.3 Organization
1.4 Senior command


2 Admiralty Buildings

2.1 The Admiralty
2.2 Admiralty House
2.3 Admiralty Extension
2.4 Admiralty Arch
2.5 The Admiralty Citadel


3 "Admiralty" as a metonym for "sea power"
4 See also
5 Footnotes
6 Further reading
7 External links



Function and organization[edit]
History[edit]




Flag of the Lord High Admiral


The office of Admiral of England (or Lord Admiral and later Lord High Admiral) was created around 1400 although there had already been Admirals of the Northern and Western Seas. In 1546, King Henry VIII established the Council of the Marine, later to become the Navy Board, to oversee administrative affairs of the naval service. Operational control of the Royal Navy remained the responsibility of the Lord High Admiral, who was one of the nine Great Officers of State.
In 1628, Charles I put the office of Lord High Admiral into commission and control of the Royal Navy passed to a committee in the form of the Board of Admiralty. The office of Lord High Admiral passed a number of times in and out of commission until 1709 after which the office was almost permanently in commission (the last Lord High Admiral being the future King William IV in the early 19th century).
In 1831, the first Navy Board was abolished as a separate entity, and its duties and responsibilities were given over to the Admiralty.
In 1964, the Admiralty along with the War Office and the Air Ministry as separate departments of state were abolished, and re-emerged under one single new Ministry of Defence. Within the expanded Ministry of Defence are the new Admiralty Board which has a separate (second) Navy Board responsible for the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy., the Army Board and the Air Force Board, each headed by the Secretary of State for Defence.
Board of Admiralty[edit]




Board of admiralty about 1810.


When the office of Lord High Admiral was in commission, as it was for most of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, until it reverted to the Crown, it was exercised by a Board of Admiralty, officially known as the Commissioners for Exercising the Office of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, &c. (alternatively of England, Great Britain or the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland depending on the period).
The Board of Admiralty consisted of a number of Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. The Lords Commissioners were always a mixture of admirals, known as Naval Lords or Sea Lords and Civil Lords, normally politicians. The quorum of the Board was two commissioners and a secretary.
The president of the Board was known as the First Lord of the Admiralty, who was a member of the Cabinet. After 1806, the First Lord of the Admiralty was always a civilian while the professional head of the navy came to be (and is still today) known as the First Sea Lord.
Organization[edit]
Further information: Admiralty in the 16th century, Admiralty in the 17th century, Admiralty in the 18th century, Admiralty in the 19th century, and Admiralty in the 20th century
The first real concerted effort to professionally organize the Admiralty was started by Henry VIII, this management approach would continue in force in the Royal navy until to 1832. In this organization a dual system operated the Lord High Admiral (from 1546) then Commissioners of the Admiralty (from 1628) exercised the function of general control (military administration) of the Navy and they were usually responsible for the conduct of any war, while the actual supply lines, support and services were managed by four principal officers, namely, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor and Clerk of the Acts, responsible individually for finance, supervision of accounts, Shipbuilding and maintenance of ships, and record of business. These principle officers came to be known as the Navy Board responsible for (civil administration) of the navy, from 1546 to 1832.
This structure of administering the navy lasted for 285 years, however, the supply system was often inefficient and corrupt its deficiencies were due as much to its limitations of the times they operated in. The various functions within the Admiralty were not coordinated effectively and lacked inter-dependency with each other, with the result that in 1832 Sir James Graham abolished the Navy Board and merged its functions within the Board of Admiralty's that at the time also had distinct advantages, however it failed to retain the principle of distinctions between the Admiralty and supply and a lot of bureaucracy followed with the merger.
In 1860 saw big growth in the development of technical crafts, the expansion of more admiralty branches that really began with age of steam that would have an enormous influence on the navy and naval thought.
Between 1860 and 1908 there was no real study of strategy and of staff work conducted within the naval service; it was practically ignored. All the Navy's talent flowed to the great technical universities. This school of thought for the next 50 years was exclusively technically based. The first serious attempt to introduce a sole management body to administer the naval service manifested itself in the creation of the Admiralty Navy War Council in 1909.[7] It was believed by officials within the Admiralty at this time that the running of war was quite a simple matter for any flag officer who required no formal training. However, this mentality would be severely questioned with the advent of the Agadir crisis, when the Admiralty's war plans were heavily criticized. Following this, a new advisory body called the Admiralty War Staff was then instituted in 1912, headed by the Chief of the War Staff who was responsible for administering three new sub-divisions responsible for operations, intelligence and mobilisation. The new War Staff had hardly found its feet and it continually struggled with the opposition to its existence by senior officers they were categorically opposed to a staff. The deficiencies of the system within this department of state could be seen in the conduct of the Dardanelles campaign. There were no mechanisms in place to answer the big strategic questions. In 1914 a Trade Division was created.
In 1916, Sir John Jellicoe came to the Admiralty, he re-organized the war staff as following: Chief of War Staff, Operations, Intelligence, Signal Section, Mobilisation, Trade.
It was not until 1917 that the admiralty department was again properly reorganized and began to function as a professional military staff. In May that 1917, the term "Admiralty War Staff" was re-named and that department and its functional role were superseded by a new "Admiralty Naval Staff" in addition the newly created office of Chief of the Naval Staff was merged in the office of the First Sea Lord. Also appointed was a new post that of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff and an Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff who were all given seats on the Board of Admiralty. For the first time gave the naval staff direct representation on the board with the presence of three senior naval senior members on the board it ensured the necessary authority to carry through any operation of war. The Deputy Chief of Naval Staff would direct all operations and movements of the fleet, while the Assistant Chief of Naval Staff would be responsible for mercantile movements and anti-submarine operations.
The office of Controller would be re-established to deal with all questions relating to supply on September 6 1917 a Deputy First Sea Lord, was added to the Board who would administer operations abroad and deal with questions of foreign policy. In October 1917 the development of the staff was carried one step further by the creation of two sub-committees of the Board - the Operations Committee and the Maintenance Committee. The First Lord was chairman of both comittes, and the Operations Committee consisted of the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff., the Deputy First Sea Lord, Assistant Chief of Naval Staff, and Fifth Sea Lord. The Maintenance Committee consisted of the Deputy First Sea Lord. (representing the operations committee), Second Sea Lord. (personnel), Third Sea Lord. (material), Fourth Sea Lord. (transport and stores), Civil Lord, Controller and Financial Secretary.
Full operational control of the Royal Navy was finally handed over to the Chief of Naval Staff by an order in Council, effective October 1917, under which he became responsible for the issuing of orders affecting all war operations directly to the fleet. It also empowered the C.N.S to issue orders in their own name as opposed to them previously being issued by the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty in the name of the Board. This structure would remain in place until the department was abolished in 1964; post 1964 the operational control and this system still remains in place with the Royal Navy today. For the organisational structure of the admiralty department and how it developed through the centuries see the following articles below.
Senior command[edit]
Note: civilian is denoted (+) military is denoted (++)
Minister of State for the Department of Admiralty, President of the Board of Admiralty and Senior Government Adviser for Naval Affairs

Office of the First Lord of the Admiralty (+) --------------Office of the Naval Secretary (++)

Board of Admiralty (+ and ++)

Navy Board, (+) independent from 1546 it became subordinate to, yet autonomous of the Board of Admiralty from 1628 to 1832.





Military Head of the Navy Council/Naval War Staff/Naval Staff and Chief Naval Adviser on the Board of Admiralty to the First Lord

Office of the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff (++)

Admiralty Navy War Council, (1909-1912), (++)
Admiralty War Staff, (1912-1917), (++)
Admiralty Naval Staff, (1917-1964), (++)



Board of Admiralty, Navy Council and Naval Staff military members responsible for all Admiralty staff divisions and departments

Office of the Second Sea Lord (++)
Office of the Third Sea Lord (++)
Office of the Fourth Sea Lord (++)
Office of Fifth Sea Lord (++)

Office of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff (++)

Office of Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (++)
Office of the Vice Chief of the Naval Staff

Mobilisation and Intelligence Departments (++)
Naval Staff Divisions (++)
War Staff Divisions (++)


Office of the Deputy First Sea Lord (++)





Board of Admiralty members responsible other civil functions of the Department of Admiralty

Office of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty (+)

Office of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty (+)


Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty (+)
Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty (+)

Admiralty Buildings[edit]




The Admiralty complex in 1794. The colours indicate departments or residences for the several Lords of the Admiralty. The pale coloured extension behind the small courtyard, on the left is Admiralty House.


The Admiralty complex lies between Whitehall, Horse Guards Parade and The Mall and includes five inter-connected buildings. Since the Admiralty no longer exists as a department, these buildings are now used by separate government departments:
The Admiralty[edit]
The oldest building was long known simply as The Admiralty; it is now known officially as the Ripley Building, a three-storey U-shaped brick building designed by Thomas Ripley and completed in 1726. Alexander Pope implied the architecture is rather dull, lacking either the vigour of the baroque style, fading from fashion at the time, or the austere grandeur of the Palladian style just coming into vogue. It is mainly notable for being perhaps the first purpose-built office building in Great Britain. It contained the Admiralty board room, which is still used by the Admiralty, other state rooms, offices and apartments for the Lords of the Admiralty. Robert Adam designed the screen, which was added to the entrance front in 1788. The Ripley Building is currently occupied by the Department for International Development.







Old Admiralty (Ripley Building) in 1760 before addition of the Adam screen









Old Admiralty (Ripley Building) c. 1790 after addition of the Adam screen









Old Admiralty (Ripley Building) c. 1830




Admiralty House[edit]
Admiralty House is a moderately proportioned mansion to the south of the Ripley Building, built in the late 18th century as the residence of the First Lord of the Admiralty. It served that purpose until 1964. Winston Churchill was one of its occupants. It lacks its own entrance from Whitehall and is entered through the Ripley Building. It is a three-storey building in yellow brick with neoclassical interiors. Its rear facade faces directly onto Horse Guards Parade. The architect was Samuel Pepys Cockerell. There are now three ministerial flats in the building, which were unoccupied in 2012.[8]
Admiralty Extension[edit]




The Admiralty Extension (which is also one of the two buildings which are sometimes referred to as the "Old Admiralty") dates from the turn of the 20th century.


This is the largest of the Admiralty Buildings. It was begun in the late 19th century and redesigned while the construction was in progress to accommodate the extra offices needed by the naval arms race with the German Empire. It is a red brick building with white stone, detailing in the Queen Anne style with French influences. It has been used by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office from the 1960s to 2016. The Department for Education planned to move into the building in September 2017 following the Foreign and Commonwealth Office's decision to leave the building and consolidate its London staff into one building on King Charles Street.
Admiralty Arch[edit]




Admiralty Arch


Admiralty Arch is linked to the Old Admiralty Building by a bridge and is part of the ceremonial route from Trafalgar Square to Buckingham Palace.
The Admiralty Citadel[edit]
This is a squat, windowless World War II fortress north west of Horse Guards Parade, now covered in ivy. See Military citadels under London for further details.
"Admiralty" as a metonym for "sea power"[edit]




Bomb proof citadel constructed 1940 for Admiralty headquarters


In some cases, the term admiralty is used in a wider sense, as meaning sea power or rule over the seas, rather than in strict reference to the institution exercising such power. For example, the well-known lines from Kipling's Song of the Dead:

If blood be the price of admiralty,
Lord God, we ha' paid in full![9]

See also[edit]

Admiralty administration
Admiralty chart
Admiralty Peak
List of Lords High Admiral
List of the First Lords of the Admiralty
List of Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty
Lord High Admiral of Scotland
St Boniface's Catholic College

Footnotes[edit]



^ Knighton, C. S.; Loades, David; Loades, Professor of History David (Apr 29, 2016). Elizabethan Naval Administration. Routledge. p. 8. ISBN 9781317145035. 
^ Hamilton, C. I. (Feb 3, 2011). The Making of the Modern Admiralty: British Naval Policy-Making, 1805–1927. Cambridge University Press. p. 56. ISBN 9781139496544. 
^ Defence, Ministry of (2004). The Government's expenditure plans 2004-05 to 2005-06. London: Stationery Office. p. 8. ISBN 9780101621229. 
^ Lawrence, Nicholas Blake, Richard (2005). The illustrated companion to Nelson's navy (Paperback ed.). Mechanicsburg, Pa.: Stackpole Books. p. 8. ISBN 9780811732758. 
^ Archives, The National. "Admiralty, and Ministry of Defence, Navy Department: Correspondence and Papers". discovery.nationalarchives.gov.uk. National Archives, 1660-1976, ADM 1. Retrieved 3 March 2017. 
^ "New title for Duke of Edinburgh as he turns 90, who remains the incumbent". BBC news. BBC. 10 June 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2011. 
^ Kennedy, Paul (Apr 24, 2014). The War Plans of the Great Powers (RLE The First World War): 1880-1914. Routledge. p. 128. ISBN 9781317702528. 
^ Ministerial Residences
^ Kipling, Rudyard (2015). Stories and Poems. Oxford University Press. p. 471. ISBN 9780198723431. 



Further reading[edit]
The Building

Bradley, Simon, and Nikolaus Pevsner. London 6: Westminster (from the Buildings of England series). New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-300-09595-3.
C. Hussey, "Admiralty Building, Whitehall", Country Life, 17 and 24 November 1923, pp. 684–692, 718–726.

The Office

Daniel A. Baugh, Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole (Princeton, 1965).
Sir John Barrow, An Autobiographical Memoir of Sir John Barrow, Bart., Late of the Admiralty (London, 1847).
John Ehrman, The Navy in the War of William III: Its State and Direction (Cambridge, 1953).
C. I. Hamilton, The Making of the Modern Admiralty: British Naval Policy-Making 1805–1927 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
C. I. Hamilton, "Selections from the Phinn Committee of Inquiry of October–November 1853 into the State of the Office of Secretary to the Admiralty, in The Naval Miscellany, volume V, edited by N. A. M. Rodger, (London: Navy Records Society, London, 1984).
C. S. Knighton, Pepys and the Navy (Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2003).
Christopher Lloyd, Mr Barrow of the Admiralty (London, 1970).
Malcolm H. Murfett, The First Sea Lords: From Fisher to Mountbatten (Westport: Praeger, 1995).
Lady Murray, The Making of a Civil Servant: Sir Oswyn Murray, Secretary of the Admiralty 1917–1936 (London, 1940).
N.A.M. Rodger, The Admiralty (Lavenham, 1979)
J.C. Sainty, Admiralty Officials, 1660–1870 (London, 1975)
Sir Charles Walker, Thirty-Six Years at the Admiralty (London, 1933)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Admiralty, Royal Navy.



The Admiralty at the Survey of London online







v
t
e


 Admiralty Department



Direction and control
of Admiralty and Naval affairs



Office of First Lord of the Admiralty and President of the Board of Admiralty
Lord High Admirals Council










Boards and offices under
the First Lord



Board of Admiralty
Navy Board
Office of the Naval Secretary
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord
Office of the Senior Naval Lord
Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the Private Secretary to the First Lord of the Admiralty





Direction of
Admirals
Naval/Sea Lords
War and Naval Staff



Office of the Senior Naval Lord
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord





Secretariat and staff under
the First Sea Lord



Office of the Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord
Office of the Additional Naval Assistant to the First Sea Lord
Office of the Hydrographer of the Navy
Offices of the Sea Lords
Admiralty Navy War Council
Admiralty War Staff
Admiralty Naval Staff





Operational planning, policy
strategy, tactical doctrine
requirements



Admiralty Navy War Council
Admiralty War Staff
Admiralty Naval Staff





Divisions and sections
under the War and
Naval Staff



Administrative Planning Division
Air Division
Anti-Submarine Division
Anti-Submarine and Warfare Division
Anti-U-boat Division
Air Warfare Division
Air Warfare and Fly Training Division
Air Warfare and Training Division
Communications Division
Convoy Section
Economic Warfare Division
Gunnery and Anti-Aircraft Warfare Division
Gunnery Division
Gunnery and Torpedo Division
Historical Section
Local Defence Division Division
Mercantile Movements Division
Naval Air Division
Naval Air Organisation and Training Division
Naval Artillery and Torpedo Division
Navigation Division
Navigation and Direction Division
Minesweeping Division
Mobilisation Division
Naval Intelligence Division
Operations Division
Operations Division (Home)
Operations Division (Foreign)
Operations Division (Mining)
Plans Division
Plans Division Q
Press Division
Requirements and Organisation (Combined Operations) Division
Service Conditions and Fleet Supply Duties Division
Signal Division
Signal Section
Standardisation Division
Tactical Division
Tactical and Weapons Policy Division
Torpedo Division
Torpedo, Anti-Submarine and Minewarfare Division
Trade Division
Trade and Operations Division
Training Division
Training and Staff Duties Division
Undersurface Warfare Division





Offices of the Sea Lords



Office of the Second Sea Lord
Office of the Third Sea Lord
Office of the Fourth Sea Lord
Office of the Fifth Sea Lord





Admiralty civil units
under the Sea Lords



Admiralty Area Cash Offices
Admiralty Central Dockyard Laboratory
Admiralty Central Metallurgical Laboratory
Admiralty Civilian Shore Wireless Service
Admiralty Compass Observatory
Admiralty Constabulary
Admiralty Experiment Works
Admiralty Gunnery Establishment
Admiralty Interview Board
Admiralty Labour Department
Admiralty Mine Design Department
Admiralty Mining Establishment
Admiralty Naval Aircraft Materials Laboratory
Admiralty Regional Offices
Admiralty Research Laboratory
Admiralty Signal Establishment
Admiralty Signals and Radar Establishment
Admiralty Surveying Service
Admiralty Torpedo Experimental Establishment
Admiralty Underwater Weapons Establishment
Architectural and Engineering Works Department
Air Equipment and Naval Photography Department
Air Department
Air Materiel Department
Air Personnel Department
Amphibious Warfare Headquarters
Armament Supply Department
Board of Invention and Research
Board of Longitude
Boom Defence Department
Boom Defence and Marine Salvage Department
Britannia Royal Naval College
Chemical Board
Chemical Department
Civil Catering Department
Civil Engineer in Chiefs Department
Coastguard and Reserves Branch
Combined Operations Headquarters
Commissioner for Property and Income-tax for the Naval Department
Compass Department
Contract and Purchase Department
Council of Naval Education
Dental Examining Board
Department of Radio Equipment
Department of the Accountant-General of the Navy
Department of Aeronautical and Engineering Research
Department of Miscellaneous Weapons Development
Department of Naval Assistant (Foreign) to Second Sea Lord
Department of Naval Education
Operational Research
Department of Personal Services and Officer Appointments
Department of Physical Research
Department of Physical Training & Sports
Department of Radio Equipment
Department of Research Programmes and Planning
Department of Superintendent of de-magnetisation
Department of the Admiral of the Training Service
Department of the Chief Inspector of Naval Ordnance
Department of the Chief of Naval Information
Department of the Chief Scientist
Department of the Civil Engineer-in-Chief
Department of the Comptroller of Steam Machinery
Department of the Comptroller for Victualling and Transport Services
Department of the Controller of the Navy
Department of the Controller-General of Merchant Shipbuilding
Department of the Controller for Navy Pay
Department of the Deputy Controller for Auxiliary Shipbuilding
Department of the Deputy Controller for Dockyards and Shipbuilding
Department of the Director Contract-Built Ships
Department of the Director-General Aircraft
Department of the Director-General of Manpower
Department of the Director-General, Supply and Secretariat Branch
Department of the Director of Aircraft Maintenance and Repair
Department of the Director of Contract Labour
Department of the Director of Dockyards
Department of the Director of Electrical Engineering
Department of the Director of Manning
Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding
Department of the Director of Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs
Department of the Director of Merchant Ship Repairs
Department of the Director of Naval Construction
Department of the Director of Naval Equipment
Department of the Director of Naval Recruiting
Department of the Director of Naval Weather Service
Department of the Director of Personal Services
Department of the Director of Physical Training and Sports
Department of the Director of Torpedoes and Mining
Department of the Director of Transports
Department of the Director of Underwater Weapons
Department of the Director of Unexploded Bombs
Department of the Director of Warship Production
Department of the Director of Welfare and Service Conditions
Department of the Director of Wreck Dispersal
Department of the Flag Officer Sea Training
Department of the Engineer in Chief
Department of the Paymaster Director-General
Department of the Inspector of Anti-Aircraft Weapons
Department of the Inspector of Dockyard Expense Accounts
Department of the Inspector-General of Naval Hospitals and Fleets
Department of the Medical Director-General of the Navy
Department of the Physician of the Navy
Department of the Physician General of the Navy
Department of the Storekeeper-General of the Navy
Department of the Surveyor of Buildings
Department of the Surveyor of Dockyards
Dockyards and Fleet Maintenance Department
Dockyards Branch
Dockyard Expense Accounts Department
Dockyard Schools
Electrical Engineering Department
Engineer Branch
Engineering Department
Experimental Department
Fire Control Group
Greenwich Hospital Department
Medical Consultative Board
Medical Examining Board
Historical Section
Hydrographic Department
Marine Pay Office
Materials and Priority Department
Medical Consultative Board
Medical Department
Medical Examining Board
Movements Department
Nautical Almanac Office
Naval Artillery and Torpedo Department
Naval Engineering College
Naval Equipment Department
Naval Historical Branch
Naval Construction Department
Naval Intelligence Department
Naval Medical Service
Naval Law Division
Naval Mobilisation Department
Naval Ordnance Department
Naval Ordnance Inspection Department
Naval Ordnance Stores Department
Naval Publicity Department
Naval Reserve Department
Naval Security Department
Naval Stores Department
Naval Training Department
Naval Works Department
Navy, Army and Air Force Institute
Navy and Army Canteen Board
Navy Works Department
Navigation Department
Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope
Office of the Admiral Commanding Coast Guard and Reserves
Office of the Admiral Commanding Reserves
Office of the Admiral Superintendent, Chatham
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Devonport
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Malta
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent of Naval Reserves
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Pembroke
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Plymouth
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Portsmouth
Office of the Admiral-Superintendent, Rosyth
Office of the Admiralty Chemist
Office of the Adviser on the Naval Construction to the Board of Admiralty
Office of the Assistant Controller
Office of the Assistant Controller Research and Development
Office of the Deputy Controller of Navy
Office of the Deputy Controller Production
Office of the Director Woman’s Royal Naval Nursing Service
Office of Extra Naval Assistant to Second Sea Lord
Office of the Inspector Gun Mountings
Office of the Senior Psychologist of the Navy
Office of the Vice Controller Air
Office of the Vice Controller of the Navy
Organisation and Methods Department
Packet Service
Regional Organisation for Merchant Shipbuilding and Repairs
Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Royal Flying Corps
Royal Marines Office
Royal Marines Pay Office
Office of the Chaplain of the Fleet
Royal Naval Academy
Royal Naval Aircraft Workshops
Royal Naval Air Service
Royal Naval Air Stations
Royal Naval Armaments Depot
Royal Naval Cordite Factories
Royal Naval Propellant Factory
Royal Naval College, Dartmouth
Royal Naval College, Greenwich
Royal Naval College, Keyham
Royal Naval College, Osborne
Royal Naval Engineering College
Royal Naval Film Corporation
Royal Naval Hospital
Royal Naval Medical Depot
Royal Naval Minewatching Service
Royal Naval Mine Depot
Royal Naval Patrol Service
Royal Naval Scientific Service
Royal Naval Sick Quarters
Royal Naval Torpedo Depot
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Royal Naval War College
Royal Naval War College, Portsmouth
Royal Navy Dockyard
Royal Navy Medical Service
Royal Navy Shore Signal Service
Royal Observatory, Greenwich
Royal School of Naval Architecture
Salvage Department
School of Mathematics and Naval Construction
Scientific Research and Experiment Department
Sea Transport Department
Ship Department
Ship Design Department
Signal Department
Signal School
Statistics Department
Steam Department
Superintendent of De-magnetisation
Torpedoes and Mining Department
Transport Department
Undersurface Warfare Department
Victualling Department
Volunteer Boys and Cadet Corps
Weapons Department
Wireless Telegraphy Board





Distribution of the Fleet



Office of the Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty
Office of the First Naval Lord
Office of the First Sea Lord
Admiralty Naval Staff





Military units
distributed under
the Admiralty



1st Fleet
2nd Fleet
3rd Fleet
Admiral Commanding, Orkneys and Shetlands
Admiral of Patrols
Africa Station
Atlantic Fleet
Australia Station
Cape of Good Hope Station
Cape and West Africa Station
Caspian Flotilla
Channel Fleet
Coastal Forces
Coast of Ireland Station
Cork Station
Coast of Scotland
China Command
Dover Command
Downs Station
East Indies Fleet
East Indies Station
East Indies and China Station
Eastern Fleet
Far Eastern Fleet
Grand Fleet
Harwich Force
Home Fleet
Jamaica Station
Leeward Islands Station
Lisbon Station
Mediterranean Fleet
Newfoundland Station
New Zealand Division
New Zealand Naval Forces
Nore Command
North America and West Indies Station
North Atlantic Command
North Sea Fleet
Pacific Fleet
Pacific Station
Plymouth Command
Portsmouth Command
Queenstown
Royal East African Navy
Royal Indian Navy
Rosyth
Reserve Fleet
Scotland and Northern Ireland
South Atlantic Command
South Atlantic and Pacific Station
South America Station
South East Coast of America Station
West Africa
Western Approaches Command
Western Squadron





Direction of Naval Finance



Department of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty





Departments under
Secretary



Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty
Accountant-General's Department
Comptroller of the Navy
Department of the Surveyor of the Navy





Direction of Naval Administration
and the Admiralty Secretariat



Department of the Permanent Secretary





Branches and offices under
Permanent Secretary



Admiralty Central Copying Branch
Admiralty Central Registry Branch
Admiralty Record Office
Admiralty Library
Admiralty Secretariat
Air Branch
Civil Branch
Legal Branch
Military Branch
Naval Branch
Ship Branch





Civil Administration



Department of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty, Department of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty





Departments under
Civil Administration



Accountant-General's Department
Contract and Purchase Department
Department of the Director of Contract Labour
Department of the Surveyor of Buildings
Director of Works' Department
Greenwich Hospital Department
Works Loan Department





Legal



Judicial Department





Legal under
Judicial Department



Admiralty court
High Court of Admiralty
High Court of Justice
Office of the Judge Advocate of the Fleet
Office of the Chief Naval Judge Advocate
Office of the Admiralty Advocate
Office of the Solicitor for the Affairs of the Admiralty
Office of the Solicitor to the Admiralty and Navy
Court of Admiralty for the Cinque Ports
King's Bench Division (Admiralty)
Queens's Bench Division (Admiralty)
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division
Vice Admiralty courts
Colonial Courts of Admiralty












v
t
e


 Her Majesty's Naval Service



Leadership



Secretary of State for Defence
Minister of State for the Armed Forces
Chief of the Naval Staff and First Sea Lord
Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff and Second Sea Lord
Fleet Commander
Commander, Allied Maritime Command
Commandant General Royal Marines
Judge Advocate General of the Armed Forces
Warrant Officer of the Naval Service
Corps Regimental Sergeant Major
5-star admirals










Components




Royal Navy



Surface fleet
Fleet Air Arm
Submarine Service
Royal Navy Medical Service
Nursing Service (QARNNS)
Chaplaincy Service
Navy Police





Royal Marines



3 Commando Brigade
Special Boat Service
Marines Band Service





Royal Naval Reserve









Royal Marines Reserve









Naval Careers Service












History
and
future



Admiralty in the 16th century
Admiralty in the 17th century
Admiralty in the 18th century
Customs and traditions
Historic forces and commands
Future of the Royal Navy
History of the Royal Navy
History of the Royal Marines
HMS Belfast (C35)
National Maritime Museum
National Museum of the Royal Navy
Naval Historical Branch





Operating
forces



Navy Command
UK Maritime Forces
UK Amphibious Forces
Current forces and commands





Fleet



British fleet
Royal Fleet Auxiliary
Current deployments
Historic fleets





Ships



Aircraft carriers
Escort carriers
Seaplane carriers
Amphibious warfare ships
Battlecruisers
Battleships
Pre-dreadnought battleships
Bomb vessels
Corvette and sloop
Cruisers
Destroyers
Fireships
Frigates
Gun-brigs
Gunboat and gunvessels
Hospital ships
Ironclads
Mine countermeasure vessels
Monitors
Ironclads
Patrol vessels
Royal yachts
Ships of the line
Submarines
Support ships
Survey vessels
Historic ships names





Administration



Defence Council
Admiralty Board
Navy Board
Navy Command





Senior
officers



Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Aviation & Carriers)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Capability)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Personnel)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Policy)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Ships)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Submarines)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Support)
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (Training)
Chaplain of the Fleet
Chief of Material (Fleet)
Controller of the Navy
Commandant General Royal Marines
Commander Operations
Commander UK Amphibious Forces
Commander UK Maritime Forces
Commodore, Naval Staff
Commodore, Regional Forces
Commodore RFA
Flag Officer Training and Recruitment
Flag Officer, Reserves
Flag Officer Scotland and Northern Ireland
Flag Officer Sea Training
Head of Royal Navy Communications
Naval Secretary
Rear-Admiral, Fleet Air Arm
Rear Admiral Submarines





Personnel
and
training



Admiralty Interview Board
Britannia Royal Naval College
Commando Training Centre Royal Marines
Defence Academy of the United Kingdom
HMS Raleigh
HMS Sultan
Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Chaplain of the Fleet
Royal Navy Submarine School
Sea Training





Equipment



Uniforms
Officer rank insignia
Ratings rank insignia





Former
components



Naval Intelligence Division
Royal Corps of Naval Constructors
Royal Maritime Auxiliary Service
Royal Naval Academy
Royal Naval Auxiliary Service
Royal Naval College, Greenwich
Royal Naval Air Service
Royal Naval Supply and Transport Service
Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve
Royal School of Naval Architecture
Women's Royal Naval Service





Former
administration



Admiralty
Admiralty Naval Staff
Admiralty War Staff
Admiralty Navy War Council
Board of Admiralty
Navy Board
Sick and Hurt Board
Transport Board
Victualling Board





Former
leadership



Secretary of State
Lord High Admiral
First Lord of the Admiralty
Chief of the Admiralty War Staff
Commander-in-Chief Fleet
Commander-in-Chief, Naval Home Command
Deputy First Sea Lord
Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff
Third Sea Lord
Fourth Sea Lord
Fifth Sea Lord
Vice Chief of the Naval Staff
Judge Advocate of the Fleet
Chief Naval Judge Advocate






 category










v
t
e


Great Officers of State of England and Scotland



England



Lord High Steward
Lord High Chancellor (of Great Britain)
Lord High Treasurer
Lord President of the Council
Lord Privy Seal
Lord Great Chamberlain
Lord High Constable
Earl Marshal
Lord High Admiral








Scotland



Lord Chancellor
Keeper of the Great Seal of Scotland
Chamberlain of Scotland
Lord High Treasurer of Scotland
Keeper of the Privy Seal of Scotland
Lord Clerk Register
Lord Advocate
Lord Justice Clerk
Lord Justice General
Earl Marischal
Lord Lyon King of Arms
Lord High Admiral of Scotland






Italics indicate officers that are in commission, in abeyance or defunct









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Admiralty&oldid=815942283"					Categories: Defunct departments of the United Kingdom GovernmentRoyal NavyLords of the AdmiraltyHistory of the Royal NavyRoyal Navy admirals1964 disestablishments in the United KingdomUnited Kingdom in World War IIMilitary history of the United Kingdom during World War IIHidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2012