





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



For other uses, see Administrative divisions of China (disambiguation).
This article is about the administrative divisions in the People's Republic of China. For those of the Republic of China commonly known as Taiwan, see Administrative divisions of the Republic of China.


This article is part of a series on


Administrative divisions of China




Provincial level (1st)
Municipalities

Provinces

Autonomous regions

Special administrative regions







Sub-provincial level

Sub-provincial cities

Sub-provincial autonomous prefectures

Sub-provincial city districts






Prefectural level (2nd)
Prefectural cities

Autonomous prefectures

Leagues

Prefectures
(abolishing)







Sub-prefectural-level

Sub-prefectural cities

Provincial-controlled cities

Provincial-controlled counties

Provincial-controlled districts






County level (3rd)
Counties

Autonomous counties

County-level cities

Districts
Ethnic districts

Banners
Autonomous banners

Shennongjia Forestry District

Liuzhi Special District

Wolong Special Administrative Region

Workers and peasants districts
(obsolete)







Analogous county level units

Management areas
Management committee






Township level (4th)
Townships

Ethnic townships

Towns

Subdistricts
Subdistrict bureaux

Sums

Ethnic sums

County-controlled districts
County-controlled district bureaux
(obsolete)

Management committees

Town-level city
(pilot)







Analogous township level units

Management areas
Management committee

Areas

Farms area, Prison area, University towns etc.







Village level (5th) informal

(Grassroots Autonomous Organizations)

Villages · Gaqas
Village Committees

Residential communities
Residential Committees







Other

Regions

Capital cities

New areas

Autonomous administrative divisions

National Central Cities

Special Economic Zones





History: before 1912, 1912–49, 1949–present

Administrative division codes





v
t
e








China






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
China




Leadership


Leadership generations
Collective leadership

Paramount leader
Leadership core



Current leadership

Xi-Li Administration
National leaders


President (list): Xi Jinping


Vice President (list): Li Yuanchao



Provincial leaders








Communist Party



History
Organization



National Party Congress (18th)

Central Committee (18th)

General Secretary (list)

Xi Jinping




Central Politburo (18th)


Standing Committee (list)



Central Secretariat


Top-ranked secretary: Liu Yunshan



Central Military Commission


Chairman: Xi Jinping


Vice Chairmen:
Fan Changlong, Xu Qiliang


National Security Commission


Chairman: Xi Jinping





Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (18th)

Standing Committee (18th)

Secretary: Wang Qishan














Ideology


Marxism–Leninism
Maoism  ("Mao Zedong Thought")

Socialism with Chinese characteristics

Deng Xiaoping Theory

Primary stage of socialism
Four Cardinal Principles


Three Represents

Scientific Outlook on Development


Harmonious Socialist Society



Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era

Chinese Dream
Four Comprehensives















Constitution
Law





Constitution

Current constitution (1982)
Previous constitutions




1954
1975
1978






"People's democratic dictatorship"



Laws
Statutes








Legislative


National People's Congress (12th)

Members
Presidium
Standing Committee


Chairman: Zhang Dejiang













Executive


State Council (Li's Government)


Premier (list): Li Keqiang

Vice Premiers (list)




Zhang Gaoli
Liu Yandong
Wang Yang
Ma Kai





State Councilors
Secretary-General

Deputy Secretary-General












United Front


Political Consultative Conference

National Committee


Chairman: Yu Zhengsheng





Political parties








Military


Central Military Commission




Chairman: Xi Jinping


Vice Chairmen:
Fan Changlong, Xu Qiliang


People's Liberation Army
People's Armed Police Force


State Council


National Mobilization Commission


Chairman: Li Keqiang



Ministry of National Defense


Minister: Chang Wanquan



People's Armed Police Force


National Security Commission




Chairman: Xi Jinping













Judiciary



Central Politics and Law Commission


Secretary: Meng Jianzhu



Supreme People's Court


President: Zhou Qiang



Supreme People's Procuratorate


Procurator-General: Cao Jianming











Publicity


Leading Group for Propaganda

Central Guidance Commission for Building Spiritual Civilization


Chairman: Liu Yunshan



Propaganda Department


Head: Liu Qibao











Foreign relations



Foreign aid program
China and the United Nations
China–United States relations
Cross-Strait relations
One-China policy









Related topics


Administrative divisions

Politics of Hong Kong
Politics of Macau


Elections
Human rights
Internet

Internet censorship











Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





Due to China's large population and area, the administrative divisions of China have consisted of several levels since ancient times. The constitution of China provides for three de jure levels of government. Currently, however, there are five practical (de facto) levels of local government: the provincial (province, autonomous region, municipality, and special administrative region), prefecture, county, township, and village.
Since the 17th century, provincial boundaries in China have remained largely static. Major changes since then have been the reorganization of provinces in the northeast after the establishment of the People's Republic of China and the formation of autonomous regions, based on Soviet ethnic policies. The provinces serve an important cultural role in China, as people tend to identify with their native province.



Contents


1 Levels

1.1 Table
1.2 Summary
1.3 Provincial level (1st)

1.3.1 Provincial-level (1st) subdivisions


1.4 Prefectural level (2nd)
1.5 County level (3rd)
1.6 Township level (4th)

1.6.1 Township-level (4th) subdivisions


1.7 Village level (5th)

1.7.1 Village-level (5th) subdivisions


1.8 Special cases

1.8.1 Special cases subdivisions




2 Ambiguity of the word "city" in China
3 History
4 Reform
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Levels[edit]
The Constitution of China provides for three levels: the provincial (province, autonomous region, municipality, and special administrative region), county, and township. However, two more levels have been inserted in actual implementation: the prefecture, under provinces; and the village, under townships. There is a sixth level, the district public office, below counties, but it is being abolished. As of 2017[update], China administers 33 provincial-level regions, 334 prefecture-level divisions, 2,862 county-level divisions, 41,034 township-level administrations, and 704,382 village-level subdivisions.[1]
Each of the levels (except "special administrative regions") correspond to a level in the Civil service of the People's Republic of China.

Table[edit]


Structural hierarchy of the administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China


Provincial level (1st)
省级行政区[2]     
Prefectural level (2nd)
地级行政区     
County level (3rd)
县级行政区     
Township level (4th)
乡级行政区     
Village level (5th) [informal]
村级行政区     


Autonomous region
自治区
Sub-provincial-level autonomous prefecture 副省级自治州
District 市辖区
County-level city 县级市
County 县
Autonomous county 自治县
Banner 旗
Autonomous banner 自治旗
Subdistrict 街道
Town 镇
Township 乡
Ethnic township 民族乡
County-level district 县辖区
Sumu 苏木
Ethnic sumu 民族苏木
Neighbourhood Committee 虚拟镇
Residential community 社区
(Residential committees 居民委员会)
Village 村 / Gaqa 嘎查
(Villager committees 村民委员会)


Prefectural-level city 地级市


Autonomous prefecture 自治州
Prefecture 地区
Leagues 盟





Province
省


Sub-provincial-level city 副省级城市
District 市辖区
Ethnic district 民族区
Special district 特区
County-level city 县级市
County 县
Autonomous county 自治县


Prefectural-level city 地级市


Autonomous prefecture 自治州
Prefecture 地区


Sub-prefectural-level city 副地级市


Forestry district 林区





Municipality
直辖市
Sub-provincial-level new area 副省级市辖新区


District 市辖区


County 县





Special administrative region
特别行政区 [特別行政區]
(Part of the One country, two systems)
see Region 地区 [地區] (informal)
see District 区 [區]


see Civic and Municipal Affairs Bureau 民政总署 [民政總署]
see Municipality 市 (informal)
see Freguesia 堂区 [堂區] (informal)


Summary[edit]
This table summarizes the divisions of the area administered by the People's Republic of China As of June 2017[update].


Level
Name
Types


1
Provincial level (1st)
省级行政区/
一级行政区
(33)
(1 claimed)


(22) Provinces (省 shěng)

(1) Claimed province


(5) Autonomous regions (自治区 zìzhìqū)
(4) Municipalities (直辖市 zhíxiáshì)



(2) Special administrative regions (特别行政区 tèbié xíngzhèngqū)




2
Prefectural level (2nd)
地级行政区/
二级行政区
(334)


(293) Prefecture-level cities (地级市 dìjíshì)
(8) Prefectures (地区 dìqū)



(30) Autonomous prefectures (自治州 zìzhìzhōu)
(3) Leagues (盟 méng)




3
County level (3rd)
县级行政区/
三级行政区
(2,851)


(954) Districts (市辖区 shìxiáqū)
(366) County-level cities (县级市 xiànjíshì)
(1,360) Counties (县 xiàn)



(117) Autonomous counties (自治县 zìzhìxiàn)
(49) Banners (旗 qí)
(3) Autonomous banners (自治旗 zìzhìqí)



(1) Special district (特区 tèqū)
(1) Forestry district (林区 línqū)




4
Township level (4th)
乡级行政区/
四级行政区
(39,864)


(8,122) Subdistricts (街道办事处 jiēdàobànshìchù)
(20,942) Towns (镇 zhèn)
(9,660) Townships (乡 xiāng)
(2) District public offices (区公所 qūgōngsuǒ)



(985) Ethnic townships (民族乡 mínzúxiāng)
(152) Sumu (苏木 sūmù)
(1) Ethnic sumu (民族苏木 mínzúsūmù)




5
Village level (5th)
村级行政区/
五级行政区
(662,393)
informal


(104,083) Residential Committee (居民委员会 jūmínwěiyuánhuì)




Communities (社区 shèqū)




(558,310) Village Committee (村民委员会 cūnmínwěiyuánhuì)




Administrative Villages (行政村 xíngzhèngcūn)
Gaqa (嘎查 gāchá)






Provincial level (1st)[edit]
Main article: Provinces of China
The People's Republic of China administers 33 provincial-level divisions (省级行政区) or first-level divisions (国家地方一级行政区域), including 22 provinces, five autonomous regions, four municipalities, and two special administrative regions:
Provinces are theoretically subservient to the PRC central government, but in practice provincial officials have large discretion with regard to economic policy. Unlike the United States, the power of the central government was (with the exception of the military) not exercised through a parallel set of institutions until the early 1990s. The actual practical power of the provinces has created what some economists call federalism with Chinese characteristics.
Most of the provinces, with the exception of the provinces in the northeast, have boundaries which were established long ago in the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties. Sometimes provincial borders form cultural or geographical boundaries. This was an attempt by the imperial government to discourage separatism and warlordism through a divide and rule policy. Nevertheless, provinces have come to serve an important cultural role in China. People tend to be identified in terms of their native provinces, and each province has a stereotype that corresponds to their inhabitants.
The most recent administrative changes have included the elevation of Hainan (1988) and Chongqing (1997) to provincial level status, and the creation of Hong Kong (1997) and Macau (1999) as Special administrative regions.
Provincial level governments vary in details of organization:









First or provincial level Administrative divisions
of China by:




Area
Population
Population density
GDP
GDP per capita
Female infanticide
Sex ratio
Disposable income per capita
HDI
Highest point
Natural growth rate
Life expectancy
Illiteracy rate
Tax Revenues
Historical capitals







v
t
e





Provincial-level (1st) subdivisions[edit]





22 Provinces (省; shěng): A standard provincial government is nominally led by a provincial committee, headed by a secretary. The committee secretary is first-in-charge of the province, come in second is the governor of the provincial government.





5 Autonomous regions (自治区; zìzhìqū): A minority subject which has a higher population of a particular minority ethnic group along with its own local government, but an autonomous region theoretically has more legislative rights than in actual practice. The governor of the Autonomous Regions is usually appointed from the respective minority ethnic group.





4 Municipalities (直辖市; zhíxiáshì): A higher level of city which is directly under the Chinese government, with status equal to that of the provinces. In practice, their political status are higher than common provinces.





2 Special administrative regions (SARs) (特别行政区;tèbié xíngzhèngqū): A highly autonomous and self-governing subnational subject of the People's Republic of China. Each SAR has a chief executive as head of the region and head of government. The SAR's government is not fully independent, as foreign policy and military defence are the responsibility of the central government, according to the Basic Laws of the two SARs.[3][4][5]





1 Claimed province: The People's Republic of China claims the island of Taiwan and its surrounding islets, including Penghu, as "Taiwan Province". (Kinmen and the Matsu Islands are claimed by the PRC as part of its Fujian Province. Pratas and Itu Aba are claimed by the PRC as part of Guangdong and Hainan provinces respectively.) The territory is controlled by the Republic of China (ROC, commonly called "Taiwan").


Click any region for more info. For a larger version of this map, see here.










































Prefectural level (2nd)[edit]
Main article: Prefectures of the People's Republic of China
See also: List of prefectures in the People's Republic of China




Map of China's prefectural level divisions


Prefectural level divisions or second-level divisions are the second level of the administrative structure. Most provinces are divided into only prefecture-level cities and contain no other second level administrative units. Of the 22 provinces and 5 autonomous regions, only 3 provinces (Yunnan, Guizhou, Qinghai) and 2 autonomous regions (Xinjiang, Tibet) have more than three second level or prefectural level divisions that are not prefecture-level cities. As of 18, August 2015, there were 334 prefectural level divisions:


10 Prefectures (地区; dìqū): formerly the dominant second level division, thus this administrative level is often called "prefectural level". They were mostly replaced by prefecture-level cities from 1983 to the 1990s. Today, prefectures exist only in Heilongjiang, Tibet and Xinjiang.


30 Autonomous prefectures (自治州; zìzhìzhōu): prefectures with one or more designated ethnic minorities, mostly in China's western regions.


291 Prefecture-level cities (地级市; dìjíshì): the largest number of prefectural level divisions, generally composed of an urban center and surrounding rural areas much larger than the urban core, and thus are not "cities" but municipalities in the strict sense of the term.


3 Leagues (盟; méng): effectively the same as prefectures, but found only in Inner Mongolia. Like prefectures, leagues have mostly been replaced with prefecture-level cities. The unique name is a holdover from earlier forms of administration in Mongolia.



County level (3rd)[edit]
Main article: Counties of the People's Republic of China
See also: List of counties in the People's Republic of China




Map of China's county-level divisions


As of August 18, 2015, there were 2,852 county-level divisions:


1,408 Counties (县; xiàn): the most common county-level divisions, continuously in existence since the Warring States period, much earlier than any other level of government in China. Xian is often translated as "district" or "prefecture".


117 Autonomous counties (自治县; zìzhìxiàn): counties with one or more designated ethnic minorities, analogous to autonomous regions and prefectures


360 County-level cities (县级市; xiànjíshì): similar to prefecture-level cities, covering both urban and rural areas. It was popular for counties to become county-level cities in the 1990s, though this has since been halted.


913 Districts (市辖区; shìxiáqū): formerly the subdivisions of urban areas, consisting of built-up areas only. Recently many counties have become districts, so that districts are now often just like counties, with towns, villages, and farmland.


49 Banners (旗; qí): the same as counties except in the name, a holdover from earlier forms of administration in Mongolia


3 Autonomous banners (自治旗; zìzhìqí): the same as autonomous counties except in the name, a holdover from earlier forms of administration in Mongolia


1 Forestry area (林区; línqū): a special county-level forestry district located in Hubei province


1 Special district (特区; tèqū): a special county-level division located in Guizhou province


Township level (4th)[edit]
Main article: Townships of the People's Republic of China
Township-level (4th) subdivisions[edit]


13,749 Townships (乡; xiāng): in smaller rural areas division they are divided into this subject


1,098 Ethnic townships (民族乡; mínzúxiāng): small rural areas divisions designated for one or more ethnic minorities are divided into this subject


19,322 Towns (镇; zhèn): in larger rural areas division they are divided into this subject


6,686 Subdistricts (街道办事处; jiēdàobànshìchù): in a small urban areas division they are divided into this subject


2 District public offices (区公所; qūgōngsuǒ) are a vestigial level of government. These once represented an extra level of government between the county- and township-levels. Today there are very few of these remaining and they are gradually being phased out.


181 Sumus (苏木; sūmù) are the same as townships, but are unique to Inner Mongolia.


1 Ethnic sumu (民族苏木; mínzúsūmù) are the same as ethnic townships, but are unique to Inner Mongolia.


Village level (5th)[edit]
Main article: Villages of the People's Republic of China
The village level serves as an organizational division (census, mail system) and does not have much importance in political representative power. Basic local divisions like neighborhoods and communities are not informal like in America, but have defined boundaries and designated heads (one per area):
In urban areas, every subdistrict of a district of a city administers many communities or neighborhoods. Each of them have a neighborhood committee to administer the dwellers of that neighborhood or community. Rural areas are organized into village committees or villager groups. A "village" in this case can either be a natural village, one that spontaneously and naturally exists, or an administrative village, which is a bureaucratic entity.
Village-level (5th) subdivisions[edit]


80,717 Neighborhood / Community committees (居民委员会; jūmínwěiyuánhuì)
Neighborhood/Community groups (居民小组; jūmínxiǎozǔ)


  Neighborhoods / Communities (社区; shèqū)


623,669 Village committees (村民委员会; cūnmínwěiyuánhuì)
Village groups (村民小组; cūnmínxiǎozǔ)


  Villages (村; xíngzhèngcūn)


  Gaqas (嘎查; gāchá)


Special cases[edit]
Five cities formally on prefectural level have a special status in regard to planning and budget. They are separately listed in the five-year and annual state plans on the same level as provinces and national ministries, making them economically independent of their provincial government. These cities specifically designated in the state plan (Chinese: 计划单列市) are

Dalian (Liaoning)
Ningbo (Zhejiang)
Qingdao (Shandong)
Shenzhen (Guangdong)
Xiamen (Fujian)

In terms of budget authority, their governments have the de facto status of a province, but their legislative organs (National People's Congress and Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference) and other authorities not related to the economy are on the level of a prefecture and under leadership of the province.[6][7]
Some other large prefecture-level cities, known as sub-provincial cities, are half a level below a province. The mayors of these cities have the same rank as a vice governor of a province, and their district governments are half a rank higher than those of normal districts. The capitals of some provinces (seat of provincial government) are sub-provincial cities. In addition to the five cities specifically designated in the state plan, sub-provincial cities are[8]

Harbin (Heilongjiang)
Changchun (Jilin)
Shenyang (Liaoning)
Jinan (Shandong)
Nanjing (Jiangsu)
Hangzhou (Zhejiang)
Guangzhou (Guangdong)
Wuhan (Hubei)
Chengdu (Sichuan)
Xi'an (Shaanxi)

A similar case exists with some county-level cities. Some county-level cities are given more autonomy. These cities are known as sub-prefecture-level cities, meaning that they are given a level of power higher than a county, but still lower than a prefecture. Such cities are also half a level higher than what they would normally be. Sub-prefecture-level cities are often not put into any prefecture (i.e. they are directly administered by their province). Examples of sub-prefecture-level cities include Jiyuan (Henan province), Xiantao, Qianjiang and Tianmen (Hubei), Golmud (Qinghai), Manzhouli (Inner Mongolia), Shihanza, Tumushuk, Aral, and Wujiaqu (Xinjiang).
Some districts are also placed at half a level higher that what it should be. Examples are Pudong, Shanghai and Binhai, Tianjin. Although its status as a district of a municipality would define it as prefecture-level, the district head of Pudong is given sub-provincial powers. In other words, it is half a level higher than what it would normally be.
Special cases subdivisions[edit]


1 Sub-provincial autonomous prefecture (副省级自治州; fùshěngjízìzhìzhōu)


15 Sub-provincial cities (副省级城市; fùshěngjíchéngshì)


2 Sub-provincial new areas (副省级市辖新区; fùshěngjíchéngshìxiáqū)


8 Sub-prefecture-level cities (副地级市; fùdìjíshì)


Ambiguity of the word "city" in China[edit]
The Chinese word "市" (shì) is usually loosely translated in English as "city". However it really has several different meanings due to the complexity of the administrative divisions used in China.
(Despite being urban or have urban centers, the SARs are almost never referred as "Hong Kong City"/"Macau City" in contemporary Chinese, thus excluded from below)
By its political level, when a "city" is referred to, it can be a:

LV 1 (provincial-level):

Municipality of China, for example, Beijing


LV 2 (prefecture-level):

Sub-provincial city, for example, Shenzhen in Guangdong Province
Prefecture-level city, for example, Shijiazhuang, capital of Heibei Province


LV 3 (county-level):

Sub-prefecture-level city, for example, Jiyuan (directly under the administration of Henan Province)
County-level city, for example, Yiwu (under the administration of the prefecture-level city of Jinhua)



By its actual area and population, it can be:

Province-like, which is the municipality of Chongqing, a merger of 4 former prefectures, and is similar to the former Eastern-Sichuan province.
Prefecture-like, which is other three Municipalities and almost all Prefecture-level cities, usually 10~1000 times larger than urban center, and is a conglomeration of several counties and county-level cities. Some of them in sparsely populated areas like Hulunbuir is even larger than Chongqing Municipality, but have population comparable to prefectures.
County-like, which is all sub-prefecture-level and some county-level cities, and several extremely simple prefecture-level cities (Jiayuguan, Xiamen, Haikou, etc.)
Not substantially larger than urban establishment: some county-level cities, plus some members of the previous category. However, country-level cities converted from counties is unlikely to belong here. Shanghai, despite being prefecture-like size, belongs here which is due to her own extreme size, with its subway already extended beyond Municipality limits. Some other economically prosperous prefecture-level cities are also provoking inter-prefecture urban integration, although they still possess (and never intend to eliminate) large swaths of rural area.

When used in the statistical data, the word "city" may have three different meanings:

The area administrated by the city. For the municipality, the sub-provincial city, or the prefecture-level city, a "city" in this sense includes all of the counties, county-level cities, city districts that the city governed. For the Sub-prefecture-level city or the County-level city, it includes all of the subdistricts, towns and townships that it has.
The area comprised by its urban city districts and suburb city districts. The difference between the urban district and the suburb districts is that an urban district is only comprised by the subdistricts, while a suburb district also have towns and townships to govern rural areas. In some sense, this definition is approximately the metropolitan area. This definition is not applied to the sub-prefecture-level city and the county-level city since they do not have city districts under them.

Somewhat bizarrely, some districts such as Haidian District also possesses towns. They have been treated clearly as urban districts for decades, but not from the interception, and indeed some areas rural but other areas form inseparable part of the central city.


The urban area. Sometimes the urban area is referred as (Chinese: 市区; pinyin: shìqū). For the municipality, the sub-provincial city, and the prefecture-level city, it is comprised by the urban city district and the adjacent subdistricts of the suburb city districts. For the sub-prefecture-level city and the county-level city, only central subdistricts are included. This definition is close to the strict meaning of "city" in western countries.

It is important to specify the definition of "city" when referring to statistical data of Chinese cities, otherwise confusion may arise. For example, Shanghai is the largest city in China by population in the urban area, but is smaller than Chongqing by the population within the administration area.[9]
History[edit]
Main article: History of the administrative divisions of China




Map of the PRC in 1949


Before the establishment of the Qin Dynasty, China was ruled by a network of kings, nobles, and tribes. The rivalry of these groups culminated in the Warring States period, and the state of Qin eventually emerged dominant.
The Qin Dynasty was determined not to allow China to fall back into disunity, and therefore designed the first hierarchical administrative divisions in China, based on two levels: jùn commanderies and xiàn counties. The Han Dynasty that came immediately after added zhōu (usually translated as "provinces") as a third level on top, forming a three-tier structure.
The Sui Dynasty and Tang Dynasty abolished commanderies, and added circuits (dào, later lù under the Song) on top, maintaining a three-tier system that lasted through the Song Dynasty. (As a second-level division, zhou are translated as "prefectures".) The Mongol-established Yuan Dynasty introduced the modern precursors to provinces, bringing the number of levels to four. This system was then kept more or less intact until the Qing Dynasty, the last imperial dynasty to rule China.
The Republic of China streamlined the levels to just provinces and counties in 1928, and made the first attempt to extend political administration beyond the county level by establishing townships below counties. This was also the system officially adopted by the People's Republic of China in 1949, which defined the administrative divisions of China as three levels: provinces, counties, and townships.
In practice, however, more levels were inserted. The ROC government soon learned that it was not feasible for a province to directly govern tens and sometimes hundreds of counties. Started from Jiangxi province in 1935, Prefectures were later inserted between provinces and counties. They continue be ubiquitously applied by the PRC government to nearly all areas of China until the 1980s. Since then, most of the prefectures were converted into prefecture-level cities. Greater administrative areas were inserted on top of provinces by the PRC government, but they were soon abolished, in 1954. District public offices were inserted between counties and townships; once ubiquitous as well, they are currently being abolished, and very few remain.
The most recent developments major developments have been the establishment of Chongqing as a municipality, and the creation of Hong Kong and Macau as Special administrative regions.
Reform[edit]
Main article: Reform of the administrative divisions of China
In recent years there have been calls to reform the administrative divisions and levels of China. Rumours of an impending major reform have also spread through various online bulletin boards.[10]
The district public offices is an ongoing reform to remove an extra level of administration from between the county and township levels. There have also been calls to abolish the prefecture level, and some provinces have transferred some of the power prefectures currently hold to the counties they govern. There are also calls to reduce the size of the provinces. The ultimate goal is to reduce the different administration levels from five to three (Provincial level, County level, Village level), reducing the amount of corruption as well as the number of government workers, in order to lower the budget.
See also[edit]

Regions of China
Metropolitan cities of China
Tiao-kuai

References[edit]


^ King, Gary (January 14, 2017). "How the Chinese Government Fabricates Social Media Posts for Strategic Distraction, not Engaged Argument". Self-published at Harvard University. Retrieved January 19, 2017. 
^ 中国的行政区划——省级行政单位
^ Administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China (中华人民共和国行政区划; Zhōnghuá Rénmín Gònghéguó Xíngzhèng Qūhuà), 15 June 2005, retrieved 5 June 2010 
^ Chapter II : Relationship between the Central Authorities and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Article 12, retrieved 5 June 2010 
^ Chapter II Relationship between the Central Authorities and the Macau Special Administrative Region, Article 12, archived from the original on 5 February 2012, retrieved 5 June 2010 
^ "Baidu Baike" (in Chinese). 
^ "Hudong Wiki" (in Chinese). 
^ "Baidu Baike" (in Chinese). 
^ Chan, Kam Wing (2007). "Misconceptions and Complexities in the Study of China's Cities: Definitions, Statistics, and Implications" (PDF). Eurasian Geography and Economics. University of Washington. 
^ Consulte-General of the People's Republic of China in New York: 民政部官员：“中国将要设50个省区市”报道失实 Archived September 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Subdivisions of China.



Ministry of Civil Affairs official website for administrative divisions
Statistics
Provincial, prefecture, and county maps (in Chinese)
China's Regions and City Reports







v
t
e


China articles








History






China

timeline


Ancient China (outline) (2070–221 BCE)
Imperial China (221 BCE–1911 CE)
Republic of China (1912–1949)
People's Republic of China−PRC

PRC 1949–76
PRC 1976–89
PRC 1989–2002
PRC since 2002
Years in the PRC


















Geography
Natural environment






Overviews



Borders
Extreme points
Geology
Natural disasters





Regions



East
Northeast
North
South Central

Central
South


Western

Northwest
Southwest







Terrain



Bays
Canyons
Caves
Deserts
Grasslands
Hills
Islands
Mountains

ranges
passes


Peninsulas
Northeast / North / Central Plains
Valleys
Volcanoes





Water



Canals
Lakes
Rivers
Waterfalls
Wetlands
Water resources





Seas



Bohai
Yellow
East China
South China





Reserves



Protected areas
National parks
Nature reserves
UNESCO Biosphere Reserves





Wildlife



Fauna
Flora
















Government
Politics
Economy







Government
and politics




Civil service
Constitution
Elections
Environmental policy
Foreign relations
Military (People's Liberation Army)
National People's Congress

Standing Committee


National security
Political parties and movements

Communist Party

General Secretary
Politburo


Democratic Parties
Anti-democratisation
Pro-democratisation


President

Vice President


State Council

Premier
Vice Premier








Administrative
divisions




Baseline islands
Border crossings
Cities
Province-level subdivisions





Law



Judicial system
Human rights

LGBT


Law enforcement
Nationality law
Penal system





Economy



Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy

Petroleum industry
Renewable energy


Finance system
Foreign aid received
Foreign aid program
Historical GDP
International rankings
Poverty
Reform
Renminbi (currency)
Science and technology

history


Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
Standard of living
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

airports
ports and harbors


















People
Society
Culture






People



Demographics
Emigration
Ethnic groups
Internal migration
Statistics
Urbanization





Society



Anthem
Chinese Dream
Corruption
Crime
Emblem
Education

universities


Flag
"Generation Y"
Harmonious Socialist Society
HIV/AIDS
Intellectualism
Languages
Poverty
Public health

food safety

incidents




Public holidays
Rural life
Sexuality
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Social issues
Social relations
Social structure
Social welfare
Suicide
Terrorism
Time zones
Urban life
Water supply and sanitation
Women
Xiaokang (middle-class)
Primary stage of socialism





Culture



Archaeology
Archives
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Gardens
Libraries
Literature
Martial arts
Media

newspapers
radio
television


Music
Parks
Philosophy
Religion
Smoking
Sports
Tea culture
Tourism
Variety arts
World Heritage Sites












Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Major regions and cities of China



National
megalopolises




Jingjinji
(Inner) Bohai Economic Rim




Beijing



Beijing

Changping
Daxing
Fangshan
Mentougou
Shunyi
Tongzhou







Tianjin



Tianjin

Binhai
Dongli
Jinnan
Wuqing







Hebei



Baoding

Xiong'an


Cangzhou
Chengde
Langfang
Shijiazhuang
Tangshan

Caofeidian
Qian'an


Zhangjiakou








Yangtze River Delta
(Economic Zone)




Jiangsu



Changzhou
Lianyungang
Nanjing
Nantong
Suzhou
Taizhou
Wuxi
Yangzhou
Zhenjiang





Shanghai



Shanghai

Baoshan
Jiading
Minhang
Pudong
Qingpu
Songjiang







Zhejiang



Hangzhou
Huzhou
Jiaxing
Jinhua
Lishui
Ningbo
Quzhou
Shaoxing
Taizhou
Wenzhou
Zhoushan





Anhui



Chuzhou
Hefei
Huainan
Ma'anshan
Wuhu








Pearl River Delta/
Yuegang'ao Greater Bay Area
(Economic Zone)




Guangdong



Dongguan
Foshan
Guangzhou

Huadu
Nansha
Panyu


Huizhou
Jiangmen
Shenzhen

Bao'an


Zhaoqing
Zhongshan
Zhuhai

Hengqin







SARs



Hong Kong

Kowloon


Macau

Cotai










West Triangle
Economic Zone




Chongqing



Chongqing

Fuling
Liangjiang
Qianjiang
Wanzhou
Xinbei







Sichuan



Chengdu
Dazhou
Deyang
Guang'an
Leshan
Luzhou
Meishan
Mianyang
Nanchong
Neijiang
Suining
Yibin
Zigong
Ziyang





Shaanxi



Baoji
Tongchuan
Weinan
Xi'an
Xianyang

Yangling










Harbin-Changchun Megalopolis
(Northeastern Cities)




Heilongjiang



Harbin
Daqing
Mudanjiang
Qiqihar





Jilin



Changchun
Jilin
Siping
Yanji








Middle Reaches of the Yangtze River/
Yangtze River Valley
(Central Triangle
Economic Zone)




Hubei



Ezhou
Huanggang
Huangshi
Qianjiang
Tianmen
Wuhan
Xianning
Xiantao
Xiaogan





Hunan



Changde
Changsha
Hengyang
Loudi
Xiangtan
Yiyang
Yueyang
Zhuzhou





Jiangxi



Fuzhou
Ji'an
Jingdezhen
Jiujiang
Nanchang
Shangrao
Xinyu
Yichun
Yingtan





Anhui



Anqing
Bengbu
Chizhou
Chuzhou
Hefei
Huainan
Lu'an
Ma'anshan
Tongling
Wuhu
Xuancheng








(North) Bohai Economic Rim




Liaoning



Anshan
Dalian

Lüshun


Huludao
Jinzhou
Panjin
Shenyang
Yingkou








(South) Bohai Economic Rim




Shandong



Binzhou
Dongying
Jinan
Qingdao
Weifang
Weihai
Yantai
Zibo











Regions



East

Northeast


North
South Central

Central
South
Huizhou


Western

Northwest
Southwest







Administrative
divisions



By GDP
By GDP per capita
By Human Development Index
Prefecture-level divisions
County-level divisions





Cities



Direct-controlled municipality
Prefecture-level city
Sub-provincial city
County-level city
List of cities in China

by GDP per capita
by population







Capitals



Historical capitals
Current and former capitals








Categories: Subdivisions
Regions
Cities












v
t
e


Administrative divisions of Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau








China portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Administrative_divisions_of_China&oldid=814820030"					Categories: Administrative divisions of ChinaLists of administrative divisions of ChinaCountry subdivisions in AsiaLists of subdivisions of ChinaSubdivisions of ChinaHidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh)Webarchive template wayback linksArticles lacking in-text citations from September 2017All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from June 2017Articles containing simplified Chinese-language textArticles with Chinese-language external links