For the various countries named Mexico historically, see History of Mexico.


Mexican States and Mexico City
Estados mexicanos y la Ciudad de México (Spanish)


Also known as:
Free and Sovereign State
Estado Libre y Soberano





Category
Federated state


Location
United Mexican States


Number
31 States
+ Mexico City


Populations
(States only) 637,026 (Baja California Sur) – 12,851,821 (México)


Areas
(States only) 3,990 km2 (1,541 sq mi) (Tlaxcala) – 247,460 km2 (95,543 sq mi) (Chihuahua)


Government
State government/Mexico City Government


Subdivisions
States and Mexico City: Municipality





Mexico






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Mexico







Constitution
Law





Constitution (history)

Human rights
LGBT rights


Law

Abortion
Labor
Nationality
Capital punishment
Life imprisonment


Gun politics








Executive


President (list)

Enrique Peña Nieto


Federal government
Cabinet








Legislative


Congress (current)

Senate
Chamber of Deputies
Federal electoral districts










Judiciary


Supreme Court of Justice
Federal Electoral Tribunal








Administrative divisions


States

Governors


Municipalities








Elections


Recent major elections




General: 2006
2012
2018






Legislative: 2003
2009
2015






Gubernatorial: 2010





Federal Electoral Institute








Political parties



Institutional Revolutionary
National Action
Democratic Revolution
Labor Party
Ecologist Green
Citizens' Movement
New Alliance







Foreign relations





Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The United Mexican States (Spanish: Estados Unidos Mexicanos) is a federal republic composed of 31 states and the capital, Mexico City, an autonomous entity on par with the states.
According to the Constitution of 1917, the states of the federation are free and sovereign.[1] Each state has its own congress and constitution.



Contents


1 Federal entities of Mexico

1.1 States

1.1.1 Roles and powers of the states
1.1.2 Internal organization of states


1.2 Mexico City

1.2.1 Internal divisions of Mexico City




2 Self-determination of indigenous peoples
3 Postal abbreviations and ISO 3166-2 codes
4 History

4.1 Constitutional empire
4.2 Federal republic
4.3 Centralist republic
4.4 Restoration of the Republic and Second Empire


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References



Federal entities of Mexico[edit]
States[edit]
Main article: States of Mexico
Roles and powers of the states[edit]




Location of Socorro Island and the rest of the Revillagigedo Archipelago, and extent of Mexico's western EEZ in the Pacific. The islands are part of Colima state, but under federal jurisdiction.


The states of the Mexican Federation are free, sovereign, autonomous and independent of each other. They are free to govern themselves according to their own laws; each state has a constitution that cannot contradict the federal constitution, which covers issues of national competence. The states cannot make alliances with other states or any independent nation without the consent of the whole federation, except those of defense and security arrangements necessary to keep the border states secure in the event of an invasion. The political organization of each state is based on a separation of powers in a congressional system: legislative power is vested in a unicameral congress (the federal congress has two chambers); executive power is independent of the legislature and vested in a governor elected by universal suffrage; and judicial power is vested in a Superior Court of Justice. Since states have legal autonomy, each has its own civil and penal codes and judicial body.
In the Congress of the Union, the federative entities – the States and Mexico City – are each represented by 3 senators, 2 elected by universal suffrage on the principle of relative majority and 1 assigned to the party which obtains the largest minority. In addition, the federation makes up a constituency in which 32 senators are elected by the method of proportional representation. Federal Deputies, however, do not represent the states, but rather the citizens themselves. The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate together comprise the Congress of the Union.
Internal organization of states[edit]
Main articles: Municipalities of Mexico and Settlement classification in Mexico
The states are internally divided into municipalities. Each municipality is autonomous in its ability to elect their own council. The council is headed by a mayor elected every 3 years with no possibility of immediate reelection. Each municipality has a council composed of councilors in terms of population size. The council is responsible, in most cases, to provide all utilities required for its population. This concept, which arises from the Mexican Revolution, is known as a "free municipality". In total there are 2438 municipalities in Mexico, the state with the highest number of municipalities is Oaxaca, with 570, and the state with the lowest number is Baja California, with only 5.[2]
Mexico City[edit]
Mexico City has a special status within the federation, being a federal district. Until January 2016, Mexico City was officially called Federal District. It is the seat of government of the Union and the capital of the United Mexican States.
Mexico City was separated from the State of Mexico, of which it was the capital, on November 18, 1824, to become the capital of the federation. As such, it did not belong to any state in particular but to all (i.e., to the federation). Therefore, it was the president of Mexico, in representation of the federation, who designated its head of government (previously called regente, "regent" or jefe del departamento del Distrito Federal, "head of the department of the Federal District"). However, the Federal District received more autonomy in 1997 and its citizens were able directly elect their chief of government, the head of the boroughs (or delegaciones) and the representatives of the unicameral legislature called the Asamblea Legislativa, "Legislative Assembly".
In 2016, the Mexican Congress approved a constitutional reform eliminating the Federal District and establishing Mexico City as a fully autonomous entity on par with the states, but with financial advantages, in that unlike the states of the Union, it would receive funds for education and health. With full autonomy, Mexico City would have its own constitution – it previously had only an organic law called "Statute of Autonomy" – and its boroughs became municipalities.[3]
If the federal government moves to another city, Mexico City would be transformed into another state of the Union, called "State of the Valley of Mexico" with new borders and area that the Congress of the Union would give it.
Internal divisions of Mexico City[edit]
Main article: Municipalities of Mexico City
Until the ratification of Mexico City's constitution, it is still divided for administrative purposes into 16 "delegaciones" or boroughs. While not fully equivalent to a municipality or to the concept of a municipio libre, the 16 boroughs have gained significant autonomy, and since 2000, the heads of government of the boroughs are elected directly by plurality (they were previously appointed by the head of government of the Federal District).
Self-determination of indigenous peoples[edit]
The second article of the constitution recognizes the multicultural composition of the nation founded upon the indigenous peoples to whom the government grants the right of self-(free) determination and autonomy. According to this article the indigenous peoples are granted

The right to decide the internal forms of social, economic, political and cultural organization;
The right to apply their own normative systems of regulation as long as human rights and rights of women (gender equality) are granted;
The right to preserve and enrich their languages and culture;
The right to elect representatives before the municipal council in which their territories are located; amongst other rights.

The nation commits to and demands the constituent states and municipalities to promote the economic and social development of the indigenous communities as well as an intercultural and bilingual education. According to the General Law of Linguistic Rights of the Indigenous Peoples, the nation recognizes 68 indigenous languages as "national languages" with the same validity as Spanish in the territories in which they are spoken and the indigenous peoples are entitled to request public services in their languages.
Postal abbreviations and ISO 3166-2 codes[edit]
See also: ISO 3166-2:MX





Political divisions of Mexico in two letters




Abbreviations for the states of Mexico

Name of federative entity
Conventional
abbreviation
2-letter code*
3-letter code
(ISO 3166-2:MX)


 Aguascalientes
Ags.
MX - AG
MX-AGU


 Baja California
B.C.
MX - BC
MX-BCN


 Baja California Sur
B.C.S.
MX - BS
MX-BCS


 Campeche
Camp.
MX - CM
MX-CAM


 Chiapas
Chis.
MX - CS
MX-CHP


 Chihuahua
Chih.
MX - CH
MX-CHH


 Coahuila
Coah.
MX - CO
MX-COA


 Colima
Col.
MX - CL
MX-COL


 Mexico City
CDMX
MX - DF
MX-CMX


 Durango
Dgo.
MX - DG
MX-DUR


 Guanajuato
Gto.
MX - GT
MX-GUA


 Guerrero
Gro.
MX - GR
MX-GRO


 Hidalgo
Hgo.
MX - HG
MX-HID


 Jalisco
Jal.
MX - JA
MX-JAL


 México
Edomex. or Méx.
MX - EM
MX-MEX


 Michoacán
Mich.
MX - MI
MX-MIC


 Morelos
Mor.
MX - MO
MX-MOR


 Nayarit
Nay.
MX - NA
MX-NAY


 Nuevo León
N.L.
MX - NL
MX-NLE


 Oaxaca
Oax.
MX - OA
MX-OAX


 Puebla
Pue.
MX - PU
MX-PUE


 Querétaro
Qro.
MX - QT
MX-QUE


 Quintana Roo
Q. Roo. or Q.R.
MX - QR
MX-ROO


 San Luis Potosí
S.L.P.
MX - SL
MX-SLP


 Sinaloa
Sin.
MX - SI
MX-SIN


 Sonora
Son.
MX - SO
MX-SON


 Tabasco
Tab.
MX - TB
MX-TAB


 Tamaulipas
Tamps.
MX - TM
MX-TAM


 Tlaxcala
Tlax.
MX - TL
MX-TLA


 Veracruz
Ver.
MX - VE
MX-VER


 Yucatán
Yuc.
MX - YU
MX-YUC


 Zacatecas
Zac.
MX - ZA
MX-ZAC


*Mexico's post agency, Correos de México, does not offer an official list. Various competing commercially devised lists exist. The list here reflects choices among them according to these sources.

History[edit]
Constitutional empire[edit]




Political divisions of the First Mexican Empire.
  Treaty of Córdoba
  Acquisitions (1821–1822)



On September 27, 1821, after three centuries of Spanish rule, Mexico gained independence. The Treaty of Córdoba recognized part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain as an Independent Empire – "monarchist, constitutional and moderate".[4] The new country took the name of Mexican Empire. The morning after the Army of the Three Guarantees entered Mexico City on September 28, 1821, Agustín de Iturbide ordered the Supreme Provisional Governmental Junta (September 1821 – February 1822) to meet to elect a president of the Imperial Regency and to issue a declaration of independence for the new nation. Iturbide was elected president of the Regency, and that afternoon the members of the Regency and the Supreme Junta signed the Declaration.
A minority of the Constituent Congress, looking for stability, elected Agustín de Iturbide as emperor. On July 21, 1822, Iturbide was crowned Emperor of Mexico.[5] However, the Constitutional Empire quickly demonstrated the incompatibility of its two main parts: the Emperor and the Constituent Congress. The deputies were imprisoned just for expressing their opinions and finally, Iturbide decided to dissolve the Congress and establish instead a National Board.[6]
The lack of a legitimate legislature, the illegitimacy of the Emperor and the absence of real solutions to the nation's problems increased revolutionary activity.[7] Antonio López de Santa Anna proclaimed the Plan of Casa Mata, to which later joined Vicente Guerrero and Nicolás Bravo. Iturbide was forced to reestablish the Congress and in a vain attempt to save the order and keep the situation favorable to his supporters, he abdicated the crown of the Empire on March 19, 1823.[8]
However, the Congress nullified the designation of Iturbide and therefore the recognition of the abdication and made the coronation of Iturbide seem a logical mistake in consummation of Independence.[8]
The dissolution of the Empire was the first political realignment of independent Mexico.
Federal republic[edit]




Political divisions of Mexico after the Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1824 was enacted.
  Federal territory
  Sovereign state



After the fall of the Empire a triumvirate called the Supreme Executive Power was created. The provisional government would be responsible for the creation of the Federal Republic, and it was in effect from April 1, 1823, to October 10, 1824.[9]
Unrest in the provinces was huge. On May 21, 1823, The Founding Plan of the Federal Republic was enacted. Its sixth article precisely stated, "The component parts of the Republic are free, sovereign and independent States in that which touches internal administration and government".[10] Most of the Free States which were invited to form the Federal Republic joined the Union, except for the former Captaincy General of Guatemala which formed their own Federal Republic.[11]
On January 31, 1824, the decree to create a Constitutive Act of the Mexican Federation was issued, which incorporated the basic structure of the Federal Republic. It was determined that the criteria for inviting states to the federation should be that they "...not be so few that through expansion and wealth in a few years they be able to aspire to constitute themselves as independent nations, breaking the federal bond, nor so many that through lack of manpower and resources the system should come to be unworkable."[12]
Between 1823 and 1824, some of the free states created their own constitutions and others had already installed a Constituent Congress. Special cases were those of Yucatán, which on December 23, 1823, decided to join the federation but as a Federated Republic, and Chiapas, which decided by referendum to join the federation on September 14, 1824.[13]
On October 4, 1824, the Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1824 was enacted. The constitution officially created the United Mexican States. The country was composed of 19 states and 4 federal territories.[14] After the publication of the constitution, on November 18, the Federal District was created.[15] On November 24 Tlaxcala, which had retained a special status since the colonial era, was incorporated as a territory.[16]
On October 10, 1824, Guadalupe Victoria took office as the first President of Mexico.[17]
Centralist republic[edit]




The Centralist Republic with the separatist movements generated by the dissolution of the Federal Republic.
  Territory proclaimed its independence
  Territory claimed by the Republic of Texas
  Territory claimed by the Republic of the Rio Grande
  Rebellions



The political structure of the Republic was amended by a decree on October 3, 1835, when the centralist system was established.
The constituent states of the Republic lost their freedom, autonomy, independence, and sovereignty by being totally subordinated to the central government. However, the territorial division itself was the same; the text of Article 8 of the Law determined: The national territory is divided into departments, on the basis of population, location and other leading circumstances: its number, extension and subdivisions, would be detailed by constitutional law.[18]
The Seven Constitutional Laws (Spanish: Siete Leyes Constitucionales) were promulgated on December 30, 1836.[19] The 1st article confirmed the decree of the law October 3, 1835; the Republic would be divided into departments, these in districts and the districts in parties. The 2nd article pointed that the division of the Republic in departments would be under a special law with constitutional character.[20] On December 30, 1835, a transitory decree was added to the Seven Laws. The decree stated that the territory of Tlaxcala and the Federal District would become a part of the Department of Mexico. The territories of Alta and Baja California would form the department of the Californias. Coahuila y Texas would be divided into two departments. Colima would form part of Michoacán and Aguascalientes would be declared a department.
This period of political instability caused several conflicts between the central government and the entities of the country. There were rebellions in several states such as:[21]

Yucatán due its condition of Federated Republic declared itself independent in 1840 (officially in 1841). The República de Yucatán (English: Republic of Yucatán) rejoined Mexico in 1848.
Texas declared its independence and declared war against the central government of Mexico. The Republic of Texas was created. Texas remained independent until 1845, when it joined the United States of America. From 1861–1865, Texas was part of the Confederate States of America. After the defeat of the Confederacy in the American Civil War (1861–65) and Reconstruction, Texas rejoined the United States of America in 1870.
The states of Nuevo León, Tamaulipas and Coahuila declared themselves independent from Mexico for just under 250 days; the República del Río Grande never consolidated because independent forces were defeated by the centralist forces.
Tabasco declared its separation from Mexico in February 1841, in protest against centralism and the imposed sanctions by centralist president Anastasio Bustamante. It rejoined in December 1842.

On September 11, 1842, the region of Soconusco joined Mexico as part of the department of Chiapas.
Restoration of the Republic and Second Empire[edit]
The Federal Republic was restored by the interim president José Mariano Salas on August 22, 1846. The state of Guerrero was erected in 1849 (provisionally), conditioned to the acceptance of the legislatures of the states of México, Puebla and Michoacán; which would be affected in their territories.
On February 5, 1857, was enacted the Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1857. In 1864, however, after the French intervention, the conservative Mexicans restored the constitutional monarchy, known as the Second Mexican Empire, led by the emperor Maximilian of Habsburg and supported by the French army of Napoleon III. The Empire was deposed in 1867 by the republican forces of Benito Juarez and the Federal Republic was restored again under the Constitution of 1857.
The Political Constitution of the United Mexican States of 1917 was the result of the Mexican Revolution. The third Constitution of Mexico confirmed the federal system of government that is currently in force.[22]
See also[edit]


Mexico portal



Administrative division
List of Latin American subnational entities by HDI
Territorial evolution of Mexico

Notes[edit]

^a Some of these flags are used in states like Civil or Historic Flags (Yucatán, Hidalgo, Baja California, Michoacán) and are even more recognized by people as the official state flags assigned by President Ernesto Zedillo in 1999 and can be found waving in homes of the people. The others are proposed by citizen or groups to state legislatures, but have not yet been approved. Only two states in Mexico have changed the flags and have formalized their own, Jalisco and Tlaxcala.

References[edit]


^ "Federal Constitution of the United Mexican States" (PDF). Supreme Court of Mexico. p. 113. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011. Retrieved April 5, 2011. 
^ "Catalogo de Municipos y Localidades por Estado". 
^ "Ponen fin al DF tras 191 años; Senado aprueba Reforma Política". 16 December 2015. 
^ "24 de agosto de 1821. Se firman los tratados de Córdoba". Gobierno Federal. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ "21 de julio de 1822. Agustín de Iturbide es coronado emperador de México". Gobierno Federal. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ "La Transición del Imperio a la Republica (1821–1823)". Estudios de Historia Moderna y Contemporánea de México. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ Suárez y Navarro, Juan (1850). Historia de México y del general Antonio López de Santa Anna. México. p. 23. 
^ a b "La Transicion del Imperio a la Republica o la Participacion Indiscriminada" (in Spanish). 
^ "El Viajero en México (Pág. 30)" (PDF). CDigital. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ "División Territorial de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos (1810–1995) Pag.21" (PDF). INEGI. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ "01 de julio de 1823. Las Provincias Unidas del Centro de América se independizan de México". Gobierno Federal. Retrieved October 5, 2010. 
^ "Acta constitucional presentada al soberano Congreso Constituyente por su comisión" (in Spanish). 
^ "Aniversario de la Federación de Chiapas a México" (in Spanish). 
^ "Decreto. Constitución federal de los Estados-Unidos Mexicanos" (in Spanish). 
^ "Decreto. Se señala á México con el distrito que se expresa para la residencia de los supremos poderes de la federación" (in Spanish). 
^ "Decreto. Se declara á Tlaxcala territorio de la federación" (in Spanish). 
^ "Guadalupe Victoria". 
^ "Bases Constitucionales Expedidas por el Congreso Constituyente", en Felipe Tena Ramírez", Op.cit. p. 203
^ "La Suprema Corte en las Constituciones Centralistas" (PDF) (in Spanish). 
^ "Division Territorial de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos de 1810 a 1995 (Page 27)" (PDF) (in Spanish). 
^ "Division Territorial de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos de 1810 a 1995 (Page 28)" (PDF) (in Spanish). 
^ "Division Territorial de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos de 1810 a 1995 (Page 29)" (PDF) (in Spanish). 



Political Constitution of the United Mexican States; articles 2, and 42 through 48
Law of Linguistic Rights or "Ley de los Derechos Lingüísticos" approved in 2001.juihu b







v
t
e


 States of Mexico






Aguascalientes
Baja California
Baja California Sur
Campeche
Chiapas
Chihuahua
Coahuila
Colima
Durango
Guanajuato
Guerrero
Hidalgo
Jalisco
México
Mexico City
Michoacán
Morelos
Nayarit
Nuevo León
Oaxaca
Puebla
Querétaro
San Luis Potosí
Sinaloa
Sonora
Tamaulipas
Tlaxcala
Veracruz
Zacatecas
Quintana Roo
Tabasco
Yucatán












v
t
e


 Indicators of Mexican states



Ranked



Area
Growth rate
Population
Population density





Social



Fertility Rate
HDI
Homicides
Infant mortality
Life expectancy
Literacy rate





Political



Capitals
Governors
Statehood





Economy



GDP
Poverty rate
Unemployment





Other



Coats of arms
Flags
Indigenous-speaking
Irreligion












v
t
e


Mexico articles



History



Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era
War of Independence
First Mexican Empire
First Mexican Republic

Centralist Republic


Texas Revolution
Pastry War
Mexican–American War
Second Mexican Republic
La Reforma
French intervention
Second Mexican Empire
Porfiriato
Mexican Revolution
Cristero War
Maximato
Institutional Revolutionary Party
Mexican miracle
Chiapas conflict
Mexican Drug War





Geography







Cities
Climate
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Forests
Islands
Metropolitan areas
Mountains
Protected Natural Areas
Rivers
States
Territorial evolution
Time
Volcanism
Water resources
Wettest-known tropical cyclones








Politics







Administrative divisions
Congress

Senate
Chamber of Deputies


Constitution
Elections
Federal government
Foreign relations
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Law
Law enforcement
Military
Political parties
President

Cabinet


Supreme Court
State legislatures








Economy







Agriculture
Automotive market
Central bank
Companies
Economic history
Energy
Irrigation
Labor law
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Oil
Pension system
Peso (currency)
Petroleum
Science and technology
States by GDP
States by unemployment
Stock exchange
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transportation
Water scarcity








Society







Corruption
Crime
Demographics
Education
Health
Immigration
Nationality law
People
Poverty
Religion
States by HDI
Water supply and sanitation
Welfare
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art

Visual arts


Cinema
Cuisine
Flags
Folklore
Handcrafts and folk art
Languages
Literature
Monuments
Music
National symbols
Public holidays
Radio
Sports
Television
World Heritage Sites












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Articles on first-level administrative divisions of North American countries






Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Table of administrative subdivisions by country










v
t
e


Administrative divisions of the Americas






North America
South America





Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela









Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
US Virgin Islands











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Administrative_divisions_of_Mexico&oldid=816678698"					Categories: Subdivisions of MexicoLists of subdivisions of MexicoCountry subdivisions in North AmericaMexico geography-related listsLists of states of MexicoMexico politics-related listsHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Use mdy dates from December 2014Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language text