



Administrative units of the United Kingdom






This map shows Lieutenancy areas, the separate areas of the United Kingdom appointed a Lord Lieutenant.
  Ceremonial counties of England
  Lieutenancy areas of Northern Ireland
  Lieutenancy areas of Scotland
  Preserved counties of Wales



The administrative geography of the United Kingdom is complex, multi-layered and non-uniform. The United Kingdom, a sovereign state to the northwest of continental Europe, consists of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. For local government in the United Kingdom, England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales each have their own system of administrative and geographic demarcation. Consequently, there is "no common stratum of administrative unit encompassing the United Kingdom".[1]
Because there is no written document that comprehensively encompasses the British constitution, and owing to a convoluted history of the formation of the United Kingdom, a variety of terms is used to refer to its constituent parts, which are sometimes called the four countries of the United Kingdom.[2] The four are sometimes collectively referred to as the Home Nations, particularly in sporting contexts. Although the four countries are important for legal and governmental purposes, they are not comparable to administrative subdivisions of most other countries.
Historically, the subnational divisions of the UK have been the county[3] and the ecclesiastical parish, whilst following the emergence of a unified parliament of the United Kingdom, the ward and constituency have been pan-UK political subdivisions. More contemporary divisions include Lieutenancy areas and the statistical territories defined with the modern NUTS:UK and ISO 3166-2:GB systems.



Contents


1 History
2 Overview of administration
3 Local government

3.1 England
3.2 Northern Ireland
3.3 Scotland
3.4 Wales


4 Democratic representation

4.1 Parliaments
4.2 Local government


5 Informal divisions
6 International subdivisions
7 Dependent territories
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: History of the formation of the United Kingdom




Euler diagram of the British Isles


This structure was formed by the union agreed between the former sovereign states, the Kingdom of England (which included the conquered principality of Wales) and the Kingdom of Scotland in the Treaty of Union and enacted by the Acts of Union 1707 to form the single Kingdom of Great Britain (1707–1800); followed by the Act of Union 1800, which combined Great Britain with the Kingdom of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The independence of the Irish Free State in 1922, following the partition of Ireland, resulted in the present-day United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Wales was incorporated into the English legal system through the Laws in Wales Acts 1535-1542, the earlier Statute of Rhuddlan having restricted but not abolished Welsh Law following the Edwardian conquest in 1282. As a result, England and Wales are treated as a single entity for some purposes, principally that they share a legal system (see English law), while Scotland and Northern Ireland each have a separate legal system (see Scots Law and Northern Ireland law).
Northern Ireland was the first part of the British Isles to have a devolved government, under the Government of Ireland Act 1920, and that continued until the Parliament of Northern Ireland was suspended in 1972. After a period of direct rule by the Westminster government and some abortive attempts at reinstating devolved government during the Troubles, the present-day Northern Ireland Assembly was established in 1998, and is currently in operation following a number of periods of suspension. The complex history of Northern Ireland has led to differing views as to its status. The term "Province" is often used by unionist and British commentators to refer to Northern Ireland, but not by nationalists.[citation needed]
Overview of administration[edit]



United Kingdom[L]


Legal jurisdiction
England and Wales (English law)
Northern Ireland law
Scots law


Country
England
Wales[L]
Northern Ireland[L]
Scotland[L]


Region
Greater London[C]
Statistical regions[R]


County
City of London[C]
N/A
Metropolitan counties
Non-metropolitan counties (two tier)[C]
Non-metropolitan counties (unitary authorities)[C][U]
Isles of Scilly[C][S]
Unitary authorities[C]
Districts[C]
Unitary authorities[C]


District
London boroughs[C]
Metropolitan districts[B][C]
Non-metropolitan districts[B][C]


Parish
Wards
Civil parishes[C][T]
Civil parishes
Communities[M]
Civil parishes
Communities



Notes

The markers above link to relevant articles where available.

[B] Can have city, borough or royal borough status.
[C] Has a council.
[L] Has a legislature.
[M] May have a council.
[R] Used only for statistical and limited administrative purposes.
[S] Sui generis unitary authority. Not a county nor part of Cornwall. Powers similar to a mainland county.
[T] Can have city, town, village or neighbourhood status. Not all areas of England have parishes.
[U] Counties comprising one district. The council is at either county or district level.

Local government[edit]



United Kingdom






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the United Kingdom




Constitution


Constitution

Cabinet Manual
Erskine May


Taxation








The Crown

British Monarchy


Monarch

Queen Elizabeth II


Heir apparent

The Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession to the British throne
Royal prerogative








Executive

HM Government


Prime Minister

Theresa May


Cabinet

Current ministry


Her Majesty's Civil Service
Departments
Executive agencies
Public bodies

Privy Council


Crown-in-Council

Queen Elizabeth II










Legislature

Parliament
(56th Parliament)

Crown-in-Parliament

Queen Elizabeth II

House of Lords

Lord Speaker

The Lord Fowler



House of Commons

Speaker

John Bercow


Leader of the Opposition

Jeremy Corbyn





Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition
Shadow Cabinet
State Opening of Parliament
Prime Minister's Questions
Act of Parliament
Statutory Instruments








Judiciary

Supreme Court


President

Lord Neuberger


Deputy President

Lady Hale


Judges of the Supreme Court



Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Scotland
Courts of Northern Ireland








Devolution


Joint Ministerial Committee
Scotland

Government
Parliament


Wales

Government
National Assembly


Reserved matters
Northern Ireland

Executive
Assembly










Administrative geography


England

Subdivisions of England
Local government in England


Scotland

Subdivisions of Scotland
Local government in Scotland


Wales

Local government in Wales


Northern Ireland

Local government in Northern Ireland










Elections


Parliament constituencies
Political parties
Last election
Next election
Referendums








Foreign relations


History
Foreign policy
UK and the United Nations
Politics of the European Union
Commonwealth of Nations






 United Kingdom portal


Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





England[edit]
Main articles: England, Local government in England, and Subdivisions of England
England has no devolved national legislature or government.
The highest level subdivisions of England are the nine regions. The London region, known as Greater London, is further divided into the City of London and 32 London boroughs. This is administered by the Greater London Authority, including the directly elected London Assembly. The other regions are made up of metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties and unitary authorities. The counties are further divided into districts (which can be called cities, boroughs, royal boroughs, metropolitan boroughs or districts). The unitary authorities effectively combine the functions of counties and districts.
Below the district level, civil parishes exist, though not uniformly. Parish or town councils exist for villages and small towns; they only rarely exist for communities within urban areas.
Commonly, though not administratively, England's geography is divided into ceremonial counties, which in most areas closely mirror the traditional counties. Each ceremonial county has a Lord Lieutenant, who is the monarch's representative.
Northern Ireland[edit]
Main articles: Northern Ireland and Local government in Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has the Northern Ireland Assembly and Northern Ireland Executive established under the Good Friday Agreement. During periods where the devolved institutions were suspended, executive government in Northern Ireland was administered directly by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and laws made in the United Kingdom Parliament - known as "direct rule" in contrast to devolution.
For local government, Northern Ireland is divided into 11 districts, which are unitary authorities.
Northern Ireland is divided into six traditional counties. Though widely used, these no longer serve any administrative purpose.
Scotland[edit]
Main articles: Scotland, Local government in Scotland, and Subdivisions of Scotland
Scotland has a devolved legislature, the Scottish Parliament, with a government, known as the Scottish Government since 1999.
Below the national level, Scotland has 32 council areas (unitary authorities). Below this uniform level of subdivision, there are varying levels of area committees in the larger rural council areas, and many small community councils throughout the country, although these are not universal. Scottish community councils have few if any powers beyond being a forum for raising issues of concern.
Wales[edit]
Main articles: Wales and Local government in Wales
Wales has an elected, devolved assembly, the National Assembly for Wales, from which the Welsh Government is drawn. Below the national level, Wales consists of 22 unitary authorities: 10 county boroughs, 9 Counties, and 3 Cities. Below these are community councils, which have powers similar to those of English parish councils.
Wales is also divided into preserved counties, which are used for ceremonial purposes. Although based on the counties used for local government between 1974 and 1996, they no longer have an administrative function
Democratic representation[edit]
Parliaments[edit]
See also: List of United Kingdom Parliament constituencies
In terms of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, each of the electoral areas or divisions called constituencies elects one Member of Parliament to represent it at the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. Constituencies also exist for the devolved Scottish Parliament, Welsh National Assembly and Northern Irish Assembly.
Local government[edit]
The wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom are electoral districts at subnational level represented by one or more councillors at local authority level, or else used to divide the electorate into electoral districts for voting. It is the primary unit of British electoral geography.
Informal divisions[edit]
There are also many informal, historical and special purpose regional designations. Some such as the Highlands of Scotland have or have had, to some extent, formal boundaries. Others such as the London commuter belt are more diffuse. Some such as Snowdonia (Eryri) have a formal boundary in some contexts; in this case as a National Park. Others such as The Fens of eastern England are quite distinctly defined by geography but do not form any official entity.
International subdivisions[edit]
Both Eurostat and the International Organization for Standardization have developed subdivision codes for the UK. See NUTS:UK and ISO 3166-2:GB.
Dependent territories[edit]
The United Kingdom has 14 British overseas territories scattered around the world. Unlike some former colonial powers, the British Government does not classify its overseas possessions (or the crown dependencies, which share historical ties with the British Crown) as subdivisions of the United Kingdom itself; rather, each is treated in law as a separate jurisdiction. Most have their own legislatures and a degree of autonomy usually exceeding that of the devolved UK nations, including fiscal independence.
However, the UK retains varying degrees of responsibility in all of the territories, currently ranging from full political control to a largely ceremonial presence. The main reserved matters are the areas of diplomacy, international treaties, defence and security. The UK also retains in all territories a residual responsibility for 'good governance', a loosely defined constitutional concept recently exemplified by its imposition of direct rule following alleged serious corruption in the Turks and Caicos Islands. The UK parliament at Westminster, and the British Government through the Privy Council, both retain the power to legislate for the overseas territories - though by convention will usually only do so with each local government's consent.
The three crown dependencies within the British Isles are self-governing[4] possessions of the British Crown. They are distinct from the British overseas territories of the United Kingdom.[5]
See also[edit]

Countries of the United Kingdom
devolution in the United Kingdom
European Parliament constituencies in the United Kingdom
British Isles (terminology)
British overseas territories
Crown dependencies
Etymological list of counties of the United Kingdom
List of subnational entities
Office for National Statistics coding system for counties, districts, wards and census areas

References[edit]



^ United Nations Economic and Social Council (August 2007). "Ninth United Nations Conference on the standardization of Geographical Names" (PDF). unstats.un.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-21. 
^ Scottish Parliament. "Your Scotland questions; Is Scotland a country?". scottish.parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-01. As the UK has no written constitution in the usual sense, constitutional terminology is fraught with difficulties of interpretation and it is common usage nowadays to describe the four constituent parts of the UK (Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland) as “countries”. 
^ Bryne, T., Local Government in Britain, (1994)
^ http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/about/moj/our-responsibilities/Background_Briefing_on_the_Crown_Dependencies2.pdf Background briefing on the Crown dependencies: Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man
^ https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/cmselect/cmjust/56/5604.htm



External links[edit]

Browsable list of all UK local authorities' contact details and websites on the Business Link website
Beginners' guide to UK geography - administrative geography







v
t
e


United Kingdom articles



History




Chronology



Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
UK since 1945 (social history)





By topic



Economic
Empire
Maritime
Military








Geography








Administrative



Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies





Physical



British Isles

terminology
Great Britain


Coastline
Geology

Northern Ireland


Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes





Resources



Energy/Renewable energy

Biodiesel
Coal
Geothermal
Hydraulic frac.
Hydroelectricity
Marine
North Sea oil
Solar
Wind


Food

Agriculture
Fishing

English
Scottish


Hunting


Materials

Flora
Forestry
Mining













Politics











Constitution
Courts
Elections
Foreign relations

History


Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Legislation
Monarchy

monarchs


Nationality
Parliament

House of Commons
House of Lords


Political parties





Government



Cabinet

list


Civil service
Departments
Prime Minister

list







Military



Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction











Economy







Banks

Bank of England


Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound (currency)
Stock Exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
British Rail








Society







Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Ethnic groups
Health care
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty

Food banks


Prostitution
Public holidays
Social care
Social structure





Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Identity
Literature
Media

television


Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre

















Countries of the United Kingdom







England



History

social
timeline


Geography
Politics
Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Northern Ireland



History
Geography
Politics

Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Scotland



History

timeline


Geography
Politics

Parliament
Government
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Wales



History
Geography
Welsh Government
Politics

Assembly
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Administrative geography of the United Kingdom



United Kingdom local government



History
Subdivisions: Shrievalties
Lieutenancy areas
Counties (list)





England local government



History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties

list


Combined authorities
Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan counties
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Civil parishes (list)





Northern Ireland local government



History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts





Scotland local government



History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Lieutenancy areas
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes





Wales local government



History
Subdivisions: Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties












v
t
e


First-level administrative divisions in European countries



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan1
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia1
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan1
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia1
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City






States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia2
Kosovo
Nagorno-Karabakh2
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria







1 Has part of its territory outside Europe. 2 Considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons but is geographically in Western Asia.





Table of administrative divisions by country









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Administrative_geography_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=816671188"					Categories: Subdivisions of the United KingdomGeography of the United KingdomGovernment of the United KingdomLists of subdivisions of the United KingdomCountry subdivisions in EuropeTypes of subdivision in the United KingdomHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2008All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016