"Ahmadi" redirects here. For the surname, see Ahmadi (surname). For other uses, see Ahmadi (disambiguation).




The White Minaret and the Ahmadiyya Flag in Qadian, India. For Ahmadi Muslims, the two symbolise the advent of the Promised Messiah.




Part of a series on:
Ahmadiyya



flag





Beliefs and practices


Five Pillars of Islam
Six articles of faith
Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Bay'ah








Distinct views


Prophethood
Jesus
Jihad
Evolution








Mirzā Ghulām Ahmad


Prophecies
Writings








Key Literature


Rūhānī Khazā᾽in


Malfūzāt


Tafsīr-e-Kabīr


Haqā'iq al-Furqān


Review of Religions


Al Fazl (newspaper)


The Muslim Sunrise


Revelation, Rationality, Knowledge & Truth








Organizational structure


The Caliphs:

I
II
III
IV
V




Majlis al-Shura


Lajna
Khuddām
Ansār


Jalsa Salana
Mosques
Jamia
MTA








Miscellaneous


Persecution
Ahmadiyya by country


Ahmadiyya and other faiths
List of Ahmadis


Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement


Humanity First


Ahmadiyya translations of the Quran






 Ahmadiyya portal





v
t
e





Ahmadiyya (/ɑːməˈdiə/;[1] officially, the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community[2] or the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jama'at; Arabic: الجماعة الإسلامية الأحمدية‎, transliterated: al-Jamā'ah al-Islāmiyyah al-Aḥmadiyyah; Urdu: احمدیہ مسلم جماعت‬‎) is an Islamic religious movement founded in Punjab, British India, near the end of the 19th century.[3][4][5][6] It originated with the life and teachings of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908),[7] who claimed to have appeared in fulfilment of the prophecies concerning the world's reformer during the end times, who was to bring about, by peaceful means, the final triumph of Islam and herald the eschaton as predicted in Islamic scriptures as well as the traditions of various world religions.[8] He claimed to have been divinely appointed as the Mujaddid (renewer) of Islam, the promised Messiah and Mahdi awaited by Muslims.[9][10][11][12] The adherents of the Ahmadiyya movement are referred to as Ahmadi Muslims or simply Ahmadis.
Ahmadi thought emphasizes the belief that Islam is the final dispensation for humanity as revealed to Muhammad and the necessity of restoring to it its true essence and pristine form, which had been lost through the centuries.[13] Ahmadiyya adherents believe that Ahmad appeared in the likeness of Jesus, to end religious wars, condemn bloodshed and reinstitute morality, justice, and peace. They believe that upon divine guidance he divested Islam of fanatical and innovative beliefs and practices by championing what is, in their view, Islam’s true and essential teachings as practised by Muhammad and the early Muslim community.[14] Thus, Ahmadis view themselves as leading the revival and peaceful propagation of Islam.[15][16]
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad established the movement on 23 March 1889 by formally accepting allegiance from his supporters. Since his death, the Community has been led by a number of Caliphs and has expanded to 209 countries and territories of the world as of 2016 with concentrations in South Asia, West Africa, East Africa and Indonesia. The Ahmadis have a strong missionary tradition and were the first Muslim missionary movement to arrive in Britain and other Western countries.[17][18][19][20][21] Currently, the Community is led by its Caliph, Mirza Masroor Ahmad, and is estimated to number between 10 and 20 million worldwide.[22][23][24][25]
The population is almost entirely contained in the single, highly organized and united movement. In this sense there is only one major branch. However, in the early history of the Community, a number of Ahmadis broke away over the nature of Ahmad's prophethood and succession and formed the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement for the Propagation of Islam, which today represents a small fraction of all Ahmadis. Some Ahmadiyya-specific beliefs have been thought of as opposed to contemporary mainstream Islamic thought since the movement's birth, and some Ahmadis have subsequently faced persecution.[12][25][26][27] Many Muslims consider Ahmadi Muslims as either kafirs or heretics.[28][29][30][31]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Summary of beliefs
3 Articles of faith

3.1 Unity of God
3.2 Angels
3.3 Books
3.4 Prophets
3.5 Day of Judgement
3.6 Divine decree


4 Five pillars
5 Distinct teachings

5.1 Second Coming
5.2 Seal of Prophets
5.3 Jihad
5.4 Abrogation
5.5 Religion and science
5.6 Other


6 History

6.1 First Caliphate
6.2 Second Caliphate
6.3 Third Caliphate
6.4 Fourth Caliphate
6.5 Fifth Caliphate


7 Demographics
8 Organizational structure

8.1 The Caliph
8.2 The Consultative Council
8.3 The Headquarters
8.4 Institutions
8.5 Auxiliary organizations
8.6 The Community
8.7 Annual events


9 Persecution

9.1 Algeria
9.2 Bangladesh
9.3 India
9.4 Indonesia
9.5 Pakistan
9.6 Palestine
9.7 Saudi Arabia
9.8 United Kingdom


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology
The Ahmadiyya movement was founded in 1889, but the name Ahmadiyya was not adopted until about a decade later when a census was to be held in India in which data was collected not only on one's faith but also the denomination of the faith to which one belonged. In a manifesto dated 4 November 1900, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad explained that the name did not refer to himself but to Ahmad, the alternative name of Muhammad.
According to him, "Muhammad", which means "the most praised one", refers to the glorious destiny, majesty and power of the prophet, who adopted the name from about the time of the Hegira; but "Ahmad", an Arabic elative form, which means "highly praised" and also "comforter", stands for the beauty of his sermons, for the qualities of gentleness, humility, love and mercy displayed by Muhammad, and for the peace that he was destined to establish in the world through his teachings. According to Ahmad, these names thus refer to two aspects or phases of Islam, and in later times it was the latter aspect that commanded greater attention.[32][33]
The myriad distinguishing names adopted by various sects and schools of thought in Islam after their respective leaders he thus considered bid‘ah ("innovation") because Muhammad had only these two names.[34] Accordingly, in Ahmad's view, this was the reason that the Old Testament prophesied a Messenger "like unto Moses", which referred to Muhammad, while according to the Quran, Jesus foretold a messenger named Ahmad.[Quran 61:6] He also called it the Ahmadiyya madhhab (school of thought within Islam):

"And it is permissible that this [community] also be referred to as ‘Muslims of the Aḥmadī way (madhhab)."[35]

Summary of beliefs
The Six articles of Islamic Faith and the Five Pillars of Islam constitute the basis of Ahmadi belief and practice. Likewise, Ahmadis accept the Quran as their holy text, face the Kaaba during prayer, follow the sunnah (normative practice of Muhammad) and accept the authority of the hadith (reported sayings of and narrations about Muhammad).[36][37][38] In the derivation of Ahmadi doctrine and practice, the Quran has supreme authority followed by the sunnah and the hadith. Quranic rulings cannot be overruled by any other secondary or explanatory source. If a hadith is found to be in conflict with the Quran and defies all possible efforts at reconciliation, it is rejected regardless of the nature of its authenticity.[39][40]Their acceptance of the authority of the four Rightly Guided caliphs (successors) as legitimate leaders of the Muslim community following Muhammad’s death and their belief that a caliph need not be a descendant of Muhammad aligns Ahmadis with the Sunni tradition of Islam rather than with the Shi'a tradition. In matters of fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), Ahmadis reject strict adherence (taqlid) to any particular school of thought (madhhab), giving foremost precedence to the Quran and sunnah, but usually base their rulings on the Hanafi methodology in cases where these sources lack clear elaboration.[41][42][43][44][45] What essentially distinguishes Ahmadi Muslims from other Muslims is their belief in Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the movement, as both the promised Mahdi (Guided One) and Messiah foretold by Muhammad to appear in the end times. Summarising his claim, Ahmad writes:

The task for which God has appointed me is that I should remove the malaise that afflicts the relationship between God and His creatures and restore the relationship of love and sincerity between them. Through the proclamation of truth and by putting an end to religious conflicts, I should bring about peace and manifest the Divine verities that have become hidden from the eyes of the world. I am called upon to demonstrate spirituality which lies buried under egoistic darkness. It is for me to demonstrate by practice, and not by words alone, the Divine powers which penetrate into a human being and are manifested through prayer or attention. Above all, it is my task to re-establish in people’s hearts the eternal plant of the pure and shining Unity of God which is free from every impurity of polytheism, and which has now completely disappeared. All this will be accomplished, not through my power, but through the power of the Almighty God, Who is the God of heaven and earth.[46]

In keeping with this, he believed his objective was to defend and propagate Islam globally through peaceful means, to revive the forgotten Islamic values of peace, forgiveness and sympathy for all mankind, and to establish peace in the world through the teachings of Islam. He believed that his message had special relevance for the Western world, which, he believed, had descended into materialism.[47]
Ahmadi teachings state that all the major world religions had divine origins and were part of the divine plan towards the establishment of Islam as the final religion, because it was the most complete and perfected the previous teachings of other religions[48] (but they believe that all other religions have drifted away from their original form and have been corrupted). The message which the founders of these religions brought was, therefore, essentially the same as that of Islam, albeit incomplete. The completion and consummation of the development of religion came about with the advent of Muhammad. However, the global conveyance, recognition and eventual acceptance of his message (i.e. the perfection of the manifestation of Muhammad’s prophethood) was destined to occur with the coming of the Mahdi.[49] Thus, Ahmadi Muslims regard Mirza Ghulam Ahmad as that Mahdi and, by extension, the "Promised One" of all religions fulfilling eschatological prophecies found in the scriptures of the Abrahamic religions, as well as Zoroastrianism, the Indian religions, Native American traditions and others.[50] Ahmadi Muslims believe that Ahmad was divinely commissioned as a true reflection of Muhammad's prophethood to establish the unity of God and to remind mankind of their duties towards God and His creation.[51][52] Summarising the Islamic faith, Ahmad writes:

There are only two complete parts of faith. One is to love God and the other is to love mankind to such a degree that you consider the suffering and the trials and tribulations of others as your own and that you pray for them.[53]

Articles of faith
Ahmadi Muslims subscribe to the same beliefs as the majority of Muslims, but with a difference of opinion on the meaning of Khatam an-Nabiyyin. The six articles of faith are identical to those believed in by Sunni Muslims, and are based on the Quran and traditions of Muhammad:
Unity of God




The Shahada, outside the Mahmood Mosque in Zurich, proclaiming the oneness of God


Main article: Tawhid
Ahmadi Muslims firmly believe in the absolute Unity of God. Acknowledgement of this principle is the most important and the cardinal principle of Islam as interpreted by the Community. All other Islamic beliefs spring from this belief. The belief in the Unity of God is thought to influence a person's life in all its aspects and is believed to have much wider meaning and deeper applications. For example, elaborating on the Oneness of God, the Quranic verse "There is no all-encompassing power except God" is believed to negate all forms of fear with the exception of the fear of God. It instills a sense of complete dependence on God and that every good emanates from Him. In general, the belief in unity of God is thought to liberate believers from all forms of carnal passions, slavery and perceptions of earthly imprisonment. The founder of the Community writes:

The Unity of God is a light which illumines the heart only after the negation of all deities, whether they belong to the inner world or the outer world. It permeates every particle of man's being. How can this be acquired without the aid of God and His Messenger? The duty of man is only to bring death upon his ego and turn his back to devilish pride. He should not boast of his having been reared in the cradle of knowledge but should consider himself as if he were merely an ignorant person, and occupy himself in supplications. Then the light of Unity will descend upon him from God and will bestow new life upon Him.[54]

It is further believed that the Islamic concept of Oneness of God inculcates the realization of the Oneness of the human species and thus removes all impediments in this regard. The diversity of all human races, ethnicities and colours are considered worthy of acceptance. Moreover, it is thought that a belief in the Unity of God creates a sense of absolute harmony between the Creator and the creation. It is understood that there can be no contradiction between the word of God and work of God.[55][56]
Islam recognises God as the fountain-head of all excellences, free from all imperfection as understood by the Community. God is recognised as a Living God who manifests himself everywhere and listens to the prayers of his servants. Distinctively, however, Ahmadi Muslims recognise that the attributes of God are eternal. On account of this, Ahmadi teachings propound the view that God communicates with mankind as he did before.
Angels
Main article: Islamic view of angels
The belief in angels is fundamental to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. They are spiritual beings created by God to obey him and implement his commandments. Unlike human beings, angels have no free will and cannot act independently. Under God's command, they bring revelations to the Prophets, bring punishment on the Prophets' enemies, glorify God with his praise, and keep records of human beings' deeds. Angels are not visible to the physical eye. Yet, according to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, they do sometimes appear to man in one form or another. This appearance, however, is not physical but a spiritual manifestation.[57] Ahmadi Muslims regards angels as celestial beings who have their own entity as persons. The major role they play is the transmission of messages from God to human beings. According to the Quran, the entire material universe as well as the religious universe is governed by some spiritual powers, which are referred to as angels. Whatever they do is in complete submission to the Will of God and the design that he created for things. According to Islam, as interpreted by Ahmadi Muslims, they cannot deviate from the set course or functions allocated to them, or from the overall plan of things made by God.[58]
Books
Main article: Islamic holy books




Some of the many Quran translations by Ahmadi translators at the 2009 Frankfurt Book Fair


For Ahmadi Muslims, the third article in Islam is concerned with the belief in all the divine scriptures as revealed by God to his Prophets. This includes, the Torah, the Gospel, the Psalms, the scrolls of Abraham, and the Quran. Before the advent of Islam, the history of religion is understood as a series of dispensations where each messenger brought teachings suitable for the time and place. Thus, at the time of their inception, the divine teachings sent by God concurred in their fundamentals, with the exception of minor details that were chosen to complement the time and place. With the exception of the Quran, it is believed that the divine scriptures are susceptible to human interpolation. Islam recognises that God sent his prophets to every nation and isolated communities of the world. Thus, according to the Ahmadi teachings, books outside of the Abrahamic tradition, such as the Vedas and Avesta are too considered as being of divine origin. Among the recognised books, the Community believes that the Quran is the final divine scripture revealed by God to mankind. The teachings of the Quran are considered timeless.[59]
Prophets
Main articles: Prophets in Islam, Prophethood (Ahmadiyya), and Khatam an-Nabiyyin
According to the Ahmadi Muslim view, the fourth article of faith in Islam is concerned with the belief in all divine prophets sent by God. Ahmadi Muslims believe that when the world is filled with unrighteousness and immorality, or when a specific part of the world displays these attributes, or when the followers of a certain law (religion) become corrupt or incorporate corrupted teachings into the faith, thus making the faith obsolete or in need of a Divine Sustainer, then a Prophet of God is sent to re-establish His Divine Will. Aside from the belief in all prophets in the Quran and the Old Testament, the Community also regards Zoroaster, Krishna, Buddha, Confucius as prophets.[60][not in citation given]
According to the Ahmadiyya belief, the technical Islamic terms "warner" (natheer), "prophet" (nabi), "messenger" (rasul) and "envoy" (mursal) are synonymous in meaning. However, there are two kinds of prophethood as understood by the Community: Law-bearing prophets, who bring a new law and dispensation, such as Moses (given the Torah) and Muhammad (given the Quran); and non-law-bearing prophets, who appear within a given dispensation such as Jeremiah, Jesus and Mirza Ghulam Ahmad. Adam is regarded as the first human with whom God spoke with and revealed to him his divine will and thus the first prophet but is not regarded as the first human on earth by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, contrary to mainstream Islamic, Jewish and Christian beliefs. This view is based on the Quran itself, according to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community.[61] Ahmadis believe Muhammad to be the final law-bearing prophet but teach the continuity of prophethood.
Day of Judgement
Main article: Qiyamat
The fifth article of faith relates to the Day of Judgment.[62] According to the Ahmadis, after belief in one God, belief in the Day of Judgement is the most emphasized doctrine mentioned in the Quran.[62] According to Ahmadi Muslim beliefs, the entire universe will come to an end on the Day of Judgment, a position also taken by all other Islamic sects and schools of thought. The dead will be resurrected and accounts will be taken of their deeds. People with good records will enter into Heaven while those with bad records will be thrown into Hell.[62] Hell is understood in Ahmadiyya as a temporary abode, lasting an extremely long time but not everlasting, much like in mainstream Judaism. It is thought to be like a hospital, where souls are cleansed of their sins, and this view is based on the Quran and Hadith.[63]
Divine decree
Main articles: Qadar and Taqdir
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community believes that divine decree controls the eventual outcome of all actions in this universe. Within the boundaries of divine decree, man is given free will to choose the course.[64] Ahmadi Muslims believe that they will be judged on the basis of their intentions and deeds on the Day of Judgment. Ahmadis believe that science is the study of the acts of God and religion is the study of the word of God and the two cannot possibly contradict each other. They believe that Adam, the prophet, was simply the first Prophet and not the first human on earth, as understood by them being in the Quran. Ahmadi Muslims do believe in the theory of biological evolution, albeit guided by God.[citation needed]
Five pillars




Though many Ahmadi Muslims perform Hajj, they are not technically permitted by Saudi law.


Main article: Five pillars of Islam
The Pillars of Islam (arkan al-Islam; also arkan ad-din, "pillars of religion") are five basic acts in Islam, considered obligatory for all Ahmadi Muslims.[65] The Quran presents them as a framework for worship and a sign of commitment to the faith. They are (1) the shahadah (creed), (2) daily prayers (salat), (3) almsgiving (zakah), (4) fasting during Ramadan and (5) the pilgrimage to Mecca (hajj) at least once in a lifetime.[66] Ahmadi Muslims agree with both Shia and Sunni sects on the essential details for the performance of these acts. However, in Pakistan Ahmadi Muslims are prohibited by law, and to some extent in other Muslim countries by persecution, from self-identifying as Muslims. This creates some level of difficulty in performing the obligatory acts. Although Ahmadi Muslims from some countries do perform the pilgrimage to Mecca, they are not technically allowed under Saudi law.[67]
Distinct teachings
Although the Five Pillars of Islam and the six articles of belief of Ahmadi Muslims are identical to those of mainstream Sunni Muslims and central to Ahmadi belief,[68] distinct Ahmadiyya beliefs include the following:
Second Coming
Contrary to mainstream Islamic belief, Ahmadi Muslims believe that Jesus was crucified and survived the four hours on the cross. He was later revived from a swoon in the tomb.[69] Ahmadis believe that Jesus died in Kashmir of old age whilst seeking the Lost Tribes of Israel.[70] Jesus' remains are believed to be entombed in Kashmir under the name Yuz Asaf. In particular, it is believed that the biblical and the Islamic prophecies concerning the second coming of Jesus were metaphorical in nature and not literal, and that Mirza Ghulam Ahmad fulfilled in his person these prophecies and the second advent of Jesus. Ahmadi Muslims also believe that the "Promised Messiah" and the "Imam Mahdi" are the same person, and that it is through his teachings, influence and prayers and those of his followers that Islam will defeat the Anti-Christ or Dajjal in a period similar to the period of time it took for nascent Christianity to rise (see also: Ahmadiyya relationship with Christianity) and that the Dajjal's power will slowly fade away, heralding the prophecised final victory of Islam and the age of peace.




The White Minaret in Qadian, India. For Ahmadi Muslims, it symbolises the advent of the Promised Messiah


Seal of Prophets
See also: Khatam an-Nabiyyin and Prophethood (Ahmadiyya)
Although Ahmadi Muslims believe that the Quran is the final message of God for mankind, they also believe that God continues to communicate with his chosen individuals in the same way he is believed to have done in the past. All of God's attributes are eternal. In particular, Ahmadi Muslims believes that Muhammad brought prophethood to perfection and was the last law-bearing prophet and the apex of humankind's spiritual evolution. New prophets can come, but they must be completely subordinate to Muhammad and will not be able to exceed him in excellence nor alter his teaching or bring any new law or religion. They are also thought of as reflections of Muhammad rather than independently made into Prophets, like the Prophets of antiquity.[71]
Jihad
Main article: Ahmadiyya view on Jihad
According to Ahmadi Muslim belief, Jihad can be divided into three categories: Jihad al-Akbar (Greater Jihad) is that against the self and refers to striving against one's low desires such as anger, lust and hatred; Jihad al-Kabīr (Great Jihad) refers to the peaceful propagation of Islam, with special emphasis on spreading the true message of Islam by the pen; Jihad al-Asghar (Smaller Jihad) is an armed struggle only to be resorted to in self-defence under situations of extreme religious persecution whilst not being able to follow one's fundamental religious beliefs, and even then only under the direct instruction of the Caliph.[72] Ahmadi Muslims point out that as per Islamic prophecy, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad rendered Jihad in its military form as inapplicable in the present age as Islam, as a religion, is not being attacked militarily but through literature and other media, and therefore the response should be likewise.[73] They believe that the answer of hate should be given by love.[74]
Concerning terrorism, the fourth Caliph of the Community wrote in 1989:

As far as Islam is concerned, it categorically rejects and condemns every form of terrorism. It does not provide any cover or justification for any act of violence, be it committed by an individual, a group or a government.[75]

Abrogation
Unlike Sunni Muslims but like Shia Muslims, Ahmadi Muslims believe that no verse of the Quran abrogates or cancels another verse. All Quranic verses have equal validity, in keeping with their emphasis on the "unsurpassable beauty and unquestionable validity of the Qur'ān".[76] The harmonization of apparently incompatible rulings is resolved through their juridical deflation in Ahmadī fiqh, so that a ruling (considered to have applicability only to the specific situation for which it was revealed), is effective not because it was revealed last, but because it is most suited to the situation at hand.[77]
Religion and science
See also: Ahmadiyya views on evolution
Ahmadi Muslims believe that there cannot be a conflict between the word of God and the work of God, and thus religion and science must work in harmony with each other.[78] With particular reference to this relationship, the second Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community states that in order to understand God's revelation, it is necessary to study His work, and in order to realize the significance of His work, it is necessary to study His word.[79] According to the Nobel laureate, Abdus Salam, a devout Ahmadi Muslim, 750 verses of the Quran (almost one eighth of the book) exhort believers to study Nature, to reflect, to make the best use of reason in their search for the ultimate and to make the acquiring of knowledge and scientific comprehension part of the community's life.[80]
Other
Other distinct beliefs include:

That the history of religion is cyclic and is renewed every seven millennia. The present cycle from the time of the Biblical Adam is split into seven epochs or ages, parallel to the seven days of the week, with periods for light and darkness. Mirza Ghulam Ahmad appeared as the promised Messiah at the sixth epoch heralding the seventh and final age of mankind,[81] as a day in the estimation of God is like a thousand years of man's reckoning.[Quran 22:47] According to Ghulam Ahmad, just as the sixth day of the week is reserved for Jumu'ah (congregational prayers), likewise his age is destined for a global assembling of mankind in which the world is to unite under one universal religion: Islam.

History


Ahmadiyya timeline



1882
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (without publicity) claims to be the Mujaddid of the fourteenth Islamic century



1889
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad establishes the Ahmadiyya Muslim movement



1890
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad announces his claim to 'The Promised Messiah' and 'The Imam Mahdi' of the Latter days



1908
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad dies in Lahore. Hakeem Noor-ud-Din is elected as the First Caliph



1914
Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad is elected as the Second Caliph



1947
Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad migrates to Lahore, Pakistan



1948
Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad establishes the city of Rabwah as the new headquarters of the Community



1965
Mirza Nasir Ahmad is elected as the Third Caliph



1982
Mirza Tahir Ahmad is elected as the Fourth Caliph



1984
Mirza Tahir Ahmad migrates to London, England, moving the headquarters to London



2003
Mirza Masroor Ahmad is elected as the Fifth Caliph



Main article: Timeline of Ahmadiyya history
Formally, the history of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community begins when Mirza Ghulam Ahmad took the oath of allegiance from a number of his companions at a home in Ludhiana, India, on 23 March 1889. However, the history can be taken back to the early life Ahmad, when he reportedly started receiving revelations concerning his future, but also as far back as the traditions of various world religions. At the end of the 19th century, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian proclaimed himself to be the "Centennial Reformer of Islam" (Mujaddid), metaphorical second coming of Jesus and the Mahdi (guided one) awaited by the Muslims and obtained a considerable number of followers especially within the United Provinces, the Punjab and Sindh.[82] He and his followers claim that his advent was foretold by Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam, and also by many other religious scriptures of the world. Ahmadiyya emerged in India as a movement within Islam, also in response to the Christian and Arya Samaj missionary activity that was widespread in the 19th century.
The Ahmadiyya faith claims to represent the latter-day revival of the religion of Islam. Overseas Ahmadiyya missionary activities started at an organized level as early as 1913 (for example, the UK mission in Putney, London). For many modern nations of the world, the Ahmadiyya movement was their first contact with the proclaimants from the Muslim world.[83] The Ahmadiyya movement is considered by some historians[84] as one of the precursors to the Civil Rights Movement in America. According to some experts,[85] Ahmadiyya were "arguably the most influential community in African-American Islam" until the 1950s. Today, the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has one of the most active missionary programs in the world. It is particularly large in Africa. In the post colonial era, the Community is credited for much of the spread of Islam in the continent.[86]
First Caliphate
After the death of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, Hakeem Noor-ud-Din was unanimously elected as his first successor and Caliph of the Community. Within the stretch of his Caliphate, a period which lasted six years, he oversaw a satisfactory English translation of the Quran, the establishment of the first Ahmadiyya Muslim mission in England and the introduction of various newspapers and magazines of the Community. As a result of growing financial requirements of the Community, he set up an official treasury. Most notably, however, he dealt with internal dissensions, when a number high-ranking office bearers of the Ahmadiyya Council disagreed with some of the administrative concepts and the authority of the Caliph.
Second Caliphate




The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community Flag, first designed in 1939, during the Second Caliphate


Soon after the death of the first caliph, Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad was elected as the second caliph, in accordance with the will of his predecessor. However, a faction led by Maulana Muhammad Ali and Khwaja Kamal-ud-Din strongly opposed his succession and refused to accept him as the next caliph, which soon led to the formation of the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement. This was due to certain doctrinal differences they held with the caliph such as the nature of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad's prophethood and succession.[87] It has also been theorised that a clash of personalities with that of the dissenters and the caliph himself, who had a relatively poor academic background, also played a role.[88] However, the Lahore Ahmadiyya movement, which settled in Lahore, has had relatively little success and has failed to attract a sizeable following.[89] In the history of the Community, this event is referred to as 'The Split' and is sometimes alluded to a prophecy of the founder.
Elected at a young age, Mahmood Ahmad's Caliphate spanned a period of almost 52 years. He established the organizational structure of the Community and directed extensive missionary activity outside the subcontinent of India. Several weeks following his election, delegates from all over India were invited to discuss about propagation of Islam. Two decades later, Mahmood Ahmad launched a twofold scheme for the establishment of foreign missions and the moral upbringing of Ahmadi Muslims. The Tehrik-e-Jedid and Waqf-e-Jedid or the 'new scheme' and the 'new dedication' respectively, initially seen as a spiritual battle against the oppressors of the Ahmadi Muslims, called upon members of the Community to dedicate their time and money for the sake of their faith. In time the scheme produced a vast amount of literature in defence of Islam in general and the Ahmadiyya beliefs in particular. The funds were also spent on the training and dispatching of Ahmadi missionaries outside the Indian sub-continent.[90]
During his time, missions were established in 46 countries, mosques were constructed in many foreign countries and the Quran published in several major languages of the world. Although the Community continued to expand in the course of succeeding Caliphates, sometimes at a faster pace, the second caliph is credited for much of its inception. Ahmad wrote many written works, the most significant of which is the ten volume commentary of the Quran.[90]
Third Caliphate
Elected on 8 November 1965, Mirza Nasir Ahmad succeeded as the third Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Started by his predecessor, he is credited with the expansion of the missionary work, particularly in Africa, and is seen as having shown great leadership and guidance to the Community during the period when the National Assembly of Pakistan declared the Community as a non-Muslim minority.[91][92] Nusrat Jahan Scheme, a scheme dedicated to serving parts of Africa by running numerous medical clinics and schools was one of the many outcomes of his 1970 tour of West Africa, regarded as the first ever visit to the continent made by an Ahmadi Caliph. During his visit for the foundation stone ceremony of the Basharat Mosque, the first mosque in modern Spain, he coined the popular Ahmadiyya motto: Love for all, Hatred for None.[93][94]
Mirza Nasir Ahmad established the Fazl-e-Umar Foundation in honour of his predecessor, oversaw the compilations of dialogues and sayings of the founder of the Community, Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, and also directed the complete collection of the dreams, visions and verbal revelations claimed to have been received by the founder.[91]
Fourth Caliphate




Baitur Rehman Mosque near Washington, D.C is one of several mosques inaugurated by the fourth caliph


Mirza Tahir Ahmad was elected as the fourth Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community on 10 June 1982, a day after the death of his predecessor. Following the Ordinance XX that was promulgated by the government of Pakistan in 1984, which rendered the Caliph unable to perform his duties and put the very institution in jeopardy, Ahmad left Pakistan and migrated to London, England, moving the headquarters of the Community to Fazl Mosque, the first mosque in London.[95] For Ahmadi Muslims, the migration marked a new era in the history of the Community. Ahmad launched the first Muslim satellite television network, Muslim Television Ahmadiyya;[96] instituted the Waqfe Nau Scheme, a program to dedicate Ahmadi Muslim children for the services of the Community; and inaugurated various funds for humanitarian causes such as the Maryum Shaadi Fund, the Syedna Bilal Fund, for victims of persecution, and the disaster relief charity Humanity First.[96]
To the Community, Ahmad is noted for his regular Question & Answer Sessions he held in multiple languages with people of various faiths, professions and cultural backgrounds. However, Ahmad also wrote many books – the most significant of which include Islam's Response to Contemporary Issues, Murder in the name of Allah, Absolute Justice, Kindness and Kinship, Gulf Crisis and The New World Order and his magnum opus[97] Revelation, Rationality, Knowledge & Truth.
Fifth Caliphate
Following the death of the fourth Caliph in 2003, the Electoral College for the first time in the history of the Community convened in the western city of London, after which Mirza Masroor Ahmad was elected as the fifth and current Caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. In his effort to promote his message of peace and facilitate service to humanity, Ahmad travels globally meeting heads of state, holding peace conferences, and exhibiting Islamic solutions to world problems.[98] In response to ongoing conflicts, Ahmad has sent letters to world leaders, including Queen Elizabeth and Pope Francis. Being the spiritual head of millions of Ahmadi Muslims residing in over 200 countries and territories of the world, Ahmad travels globally, teaching, conveying and maintaining correspondence with communities of believers and individuals, expounding principles of the Islamic faith.
Demographics




Ahmadiyya Muslim population map.


See also: Ahmadiyya by country
As of 2016[update] the community has been established in 209 countries and territories of the world with concentrations in South Asia, West Africa, East Africa and Indonesia. The community is a minority Muslim sect in almost every country of the world.[99] On the other hand, it has spread to most countries of the world. In some countries like Pakistan, it is practically illegal to be an Ahmadi Muslim.[100] Together, these factors make it difficult to estimate the Ahmadiyya population for both the community itself as well as independent organizations. For this reason, the community gives a figure of "tens of millions";[101] however, most independent sources variously estimate the population to be at least 10 to 20 million[102] worldwide, thereby representing around 1% of the world's Muslim population.[103] In 2001, the World Christian Encyclopedia, estimated that the Ahmadiyya movement was the fastest growing sect within Islam.[104] It is estimated that the country with the largest Ahmadiyya population is Pakistan, with an estimated 4 million Ahmadi Muslims. The population is almost entirely contained in the single, organized and united movement, headed by the Caliph. The other is the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement, which represents less than 0.2% of the total Ahmadiyya population.[89] Ahmadiyya are estimated to be from 60,000 to 1 million in India.[105]
Organizational structure
The Caliph
Main article: Khalifatul Masih




Baitul Futuh Mosque, one of the largest mosques in Europe. The Caliph's Friday Sermon is televised live throughout the world, via MTA TV


Ahmadi Muslims believe that the Ahmadiyya caliphate is the resumption of the Rightly Guided Caliphate. This is believed to have been re-established with the appearance of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad whom Ahmadis believe was the promised Messiah and Mahdi. Ahmadi Muslims maintain that in accordance with Quranic verses (such as [Quran 24:55]) and numerous Hadith on the issue, Khilāfah or the Caliphate can only be established by God Himself and is a divine blessing given to those who believe and work righteousness and uphold the unity of God. Therefore, any movement to establish the Caliphate centred around human endeavours alone is bound to fail, particularly when the condition of the people diverges from the precepts of prophethood and they are as a result disunited, their inability to elect a caliph caused fundamentally by the lack of righteousness in them. It is believed that through visions, dreams and spiritual guidance, God instils into the hearts and minds of the believers of whom to elect. No campaigning, speeches or speculation of any kind are permitted. Thus the caliph is designated neither necessarily by right (i.e. the rightful or competent one in the eyes of the people) nor merely by election but primarily by God.[106]
According to Ahmadiyya thought, it is not essential for a caliph to be the head of a state, rather the spiritual and religious significance of the Caliphate is emphasised. It is above all a spiritual office, with the purpose to uphold, strengthen, spread the teachings of Islam and maintain the high spiritual and moral standards within the global community established by Muhammad. If a caliph does happen to bear governmental authority as a head of state, it is incidental and subsidiary in relation to his overall function as a caliph.[107][108] The caliph is also referred to by Ahmadi Muslims as Amir al-Mu'minin (Leader of the Faithful). The current and fifth caliph is Mirza Masroor Ahmad.
The Consultative Council
The Majlis-ash-Shura or the Consultative Council, in terms of importance, is the highest ranking institution within the Community after the Caliphate. It was established in 1922 by the second caliph, Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad. This advisory body meets formally at least once a year. At the international level, the council is presided over by the caliph. Its main purpose is to advise the caliph on important matters such as finance, projects, education and other issues relating to members of the Community. It is required for the caliph to carry out his duties through consultation, taking into consideration the views of the members of the council. However, it is not incumbent upon him to always accept the views and recommendations of the members.The caliph may comment, issue instructions, announce his decisions on the proposals during the course of the proceedings or may postpone the matter under further reflection. However, in most cases the caliph accepts the advice given by the majority. At the national level, the council is presided over by the ʾAmīr (National President). At the conclusion of the proceedings, the recommendations are sent to the caliph for approval which he may accept, reject or partially accept.[109]
The Headquarters




The Fazl Mosque, the first mosque in London, represents the current world headquarters of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community


The principal headquarters of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is the city, town or place where the caliph resides. As such, since the forced exile of the fourth caliph from Pakistan in 1984, the official headquarters of the Community has been based in London, England. Although the Islamic holy cities of Mecca and Medina are acknowledged to be more sacred, Qadian is considered to be the spiritual headquarters of the Community.[110] It is believed, and prophecised, that in the future, the Ahmadiyya Caliphate will once again return to Qadian, the birthplace of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad. However, the Ahmadiyya city of Rabwah in Pakistan, since its founding on 20 September 1948 by the second caliph, after the Indian partition, coordinates majority of the organization's activity around the world. In particular, the city is responsible for, but not exclusively, the two central bodies of the Community; Central Ahmadiyya Council and the Council for 'The New Scheme'.[111][112] Another, but much smaller body, the Council for 'New Dedication' , is also active. All central bodies work under the directive of the caliph.
Sadr Anjuman Ahmadiyya or the Central Ahmadiyya Council, first set up by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad in 1906, is today responsible for organizing the Community activities in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh; whereas the Anjuman Tehrik-i-Jadid or the Council for 'The New Scheme', first set up by the second caliph, is responsible for missions outside the Indian subcontinent.[111] Each council is further divided into further directorates, such as the Department of Financial Affairs, the Department of Publications, the Department of Education, the Department of External Affairs, and the Department of Foreign Missions among others.[113] Under the latter council, the Community has built over 15,000 mosques, over 500 schools, over 30 hospitals and translated the Quran into over 70 languages.[114] The Anjuman Waqf-i-Jadid or the Council for 'The New Dedication' , also initiated by the second caliph, is responsible for training and coordinating religious teachers in rural communities around the world.
Institutions




Pakistani campus of the Ahmadiyya University in Rabwah


Of all religious institutions of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, Jāmi’ah al-Ahmadīyya, sometimes translated as Ahmadiyya University of Theology and Languages, is particularly notable. It is an international Islamic seminary and educational institute with several campuses throughout Africa, Asia, Europe, and North America. Founded in 1906 as a section in Madrassa Talim ul Islam (later Talim-ul-Islam College) by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, it is the main centre of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community for Islamic learning and the training of missionaries. Graduates may be appointed by the Caliph either as missionaries of the Community[112] (often called Murrabi, Imam, or Mawlana) or as Qadis or Muftis of the Community with a specialisation in matters of fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence). Some Jamia alumni have also become Islamic historians. As of 2008, there are over 1,300 graduates of the University working as missionaries throughout the world.[114]
Auxiliary organizations
There are five organizations auxiliary to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Each organization is responsible for the spiritual and moral training of their members. The Lajna Ima’illah is the largest of all the organizations and consists of female members above the age of 15; Majlis Khuddamul Ahmadiyya is for male members between the ages of 15 and 40; Majlis Ansarullah is for male members above the age of 40; Nasiratul Ahmadiyya is for girls between the ages of 7 and 15; and Atfalul Ahmadiyya is for boys between the ages of 7 and 15.[112]
The Community
The International Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is divided into National Communities, each with its National Headquarters. Each National Community is further divided into Regional Communities, which is again partitioned into Local Communities.[115] In many cases, each Local Community will have its own mosque, centre or a mission house. The Amīr, or the National President, though overseen by the central bodies of the Community, directs the National Amila or the National Executive Body which consists of national secretaries such as the General Secretary, Secretary for Finance, Secretary for Preaching, Secretary for moral Training, Secretary for Education, among others. This layout is replicated at regional and local levels with each of their own President and Executive Bodies.[112][116]




The Ahmadiyya Flag and the German flags at the 2009 German Annual Convention


Annual events
Unlike the Muslim holidays of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha also celebrated by Ahmadi Muslims, there are several functions observed by Ahmadis though not regarded as religious holidays. As such, functions are not considered equally obligatory nor is it necessary to celebrate them on the day normally set for celebration. The most important religious function of the Community is Jalsa Salana or the Annual Convention, first initiated by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, is the formal annual gathering of the Community, for the purpose of increasing one's religious knowledge and the promotion of harmony, friendship, and solidarity within members of the Community.[117] Other functions include "Life of the Holy Prophet Day", "Promised Messiah Day", "Promised Reformer Day" and "Caliphate Day".
Persecution
Main article: Persecution of Ahmadis
An official Ahmadi website claims there are tens of millions of members, but the number of Ahmadis have variously been put at 10 million to 20 million.[102] The Ahmadis are active translators of the Quran and proselytizers for the faith; converts to Islam in many parts of the world first discover Islam through the Ahmadis. However, in many Islamic countries the Ahmadis have been defined as heretics and non-Muslim and subjected to persecution and often systematic oppression.[26]
Algeria
In March 2016, Algerian authorities refused an attempt by Ahmadis to register as an association under Algerian law. In June 2016, a planned Ahmadi mosque was raided and shut down in Larbraa. Since March 2016, more than 280 Ahmadis have been arrested and have faced prosecution. Algerian officials have publicly called Ahmadis heretics and a threat to Algeria. In June 2016, The Minister of Religious Affairs and Endowments, Mohamed Aissa, described Ahmadi presence in Algeria as part of a "prepared sectarian invasion". In February 2017, he stated that Ahmadis are "not Muslim." In April 2017, Ahmed Ouyahia, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika’s chief of cabinet called on Algerians to "preserve the country from the Shia and Ahmadiyya sects". [118]
Bangladesh
Main article: Ahmadiyya in Bangladesh
In Bangladesh, fundamentalist Islamic groups have demanded that Ahmadiyyas be "officially" declared to be kafirs (infidels). Ahmadiyyas have become a persecuted group, targeted via protests and acts of violence.[119] According to Amnesty International, followers have been subject to "house arrest", and several have been killed. In late 2003, several large violent marches, led by Moulana Moahmud Hossain Mumtazi, were directed to occupy an Ahmadiyya mosque. In 2004, all Ahmadiyya publications were banned.[120]
India
India has a significant Ahmadiyya population.[121] Most Ahmadis in India live in Kerala, Rajasthan, Odisha, Haryana, Bihar, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, and a few in Punjab in the area of Qadian.
Indian law regards Ahmadis as Muslims. A landmark ruling by the Kerala High Court on 8 December 1970 in the case of Shihabuddin Imbichi Koya Thangal vs K.P. Ahammed Koya, citation A.I.R. 1971 Ker 206 upheld their legal status as Muslims.[122] In this case, the court ruled that Ahmadis are Muslims and that they cannot be declared apostates by other Muslim sects because they hold true to the two fundamental beliefs of Islam: that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad was a servant and messenger of God.[123]
There are hence no legal restrictions on the religious activities of Ahmadis in India and Ahmadis are free to practice their religion and call themselves Muslims.[122] However, there is some discrimination against Ahmadis in India from fellow Muslims of other sects. Specifically, the Islamic University of India and Darul Uloom Deoband have declared Ahmadis to be non-Muslims.[124] Ahmadis are also not permitted by Muslim leaders of the other sects to sit on the All India Muslim Personal Law Board, an independent body of Islamic religious leaders that the Indian government recognises as representatives of Indian Muslims.[125]
In February 2012 the Andhra Pradesh Wakf Board took a series of unprecedented decisions and asked the Qazis in the state not to perform Nikah for those belonging to Ahmadiyya community.[126]
Indonesia
See also: Ahmadiyya in Indonesia
Ahmadiyya had existed before Proclamation of Indonesian Independence.[citation needed] However, Ahmadiyya as a controversial religious minority in Indonesia has only risen sharply in the 2000s with a rise of Islamic fundamentalism. In 2008, many Muslims in Indonesia protested against the Ahmadiyya movement. With large demonstrations, these religious conservatives put pressure on the government to monitor and harass the Ahmadiyya community in Indonesia.
Public opinion in Indonesia is split into two major views on how Ahmadiyya should be treated:

Majority of Muslims throughout Indonesia hold that it should be banned outright on the basis that Ahmadiyah rejected the central tenet of Islam that Muhammad is the last messenger of God; furthermore, Ahmadis should not use Islam as their banner but should constitute their own recognised religion in order to ensure their freedom of religion in Indonesia
Some minorities including Ahmadis and numerous non-governmental organizations hold that Ahmadiyya should be free to act and say as it pleases under the banner of Islam in keeping with the Constitutional right of freedom of religion.

In June 2008, a law was passed to curtail "proselytising" by Ahmadiyya members.[127] An Ahmadiyya mosque was burned.[128] Human rights groups objected to the restrictions on religious freedom. On 6 February 2011 some Ahmadiyya members were killed at Pandeglang, Banten province.[129]
In the past few years there has been an increase in attacks on religious freedom, including incidents of physical abuse, preventing groups from performing prayers, and burning their mosques. Data from the Setara Institute for Democracy and Peace show 17, 18, and 64 incidents for the years 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively.[130] Although the data cover persecution of all religions, the recent persecution of Ahmadis is significant and severe, followed by persecution of Christians and persecution of other Islamic sects who claim to be "genuine/pure/fundamentalist Muslims".
As of 2011, the sect faces widespread calls for a total "ban" in Indonesia.[131] On 6 February 2011, hundreds of mainstream Muslims surrounded an Ahmadiyya household and beat three people to death. Footage of the bludgeoning of their naked bodies – while policeman looked on – was posted on the internet and subsequently broadcast on international media.[132]
Pakistan
Main article: Ahmadiyya in Pakistan
See also: Ordinance XX




The Shahada, the basic creed of Islam and of Ahmadi Muslims being erased by Pakistani police


Approximately 2–5 million Ahmadis live in Pakistan, which has the largest population of Ahmadis in the world.[133] It is the only state to have officially declared the Ahmadis to be non-Muslims as they do not consider Muhammad to be the final prophet;[122] and their freedom of religion has been curtailed by a series of ordinances, acts and constitutional amendments. In 1974, Pakistan's parliament adopted a law declaring Ahmadis to be non-Muslims;[134] the country's constitution was amended to define a Muslim "as a person who believes in the finality of the Prophet Muhammad".[135] In 1984, General Zia-ul-Haq, the then military ruler of Pakistan, issued Ordinance XX.[136][137] The ordinance, which was supposed to prevent "anti-Islamic activities", forbids Ahmadis to call themselves Muslim or to "pose as Muslims". This means that they are not allowed to profess the Islamic creed publicly or call their places of worship mosques.[138] Although a derogatory religious slur,[139] the term Qadiani is widely used in Pakistan to refer to Ahmadis and is the term used by the government in its constitution.[140]
Ahmadis in Pakistan are also barred by law from worshipping in non-Ahmadi mosques or public prayer rooms, performing the Muslim call to prayer, using the traditional Islamic greeting in public, publicly quoting from the Quran, preaching in public, seeking converts, or producing, publishing, and disseminating their religious materials. These acts are punishable by imprisonment of up to three years.[67] In applying for a passport or a national ID card, all Pakistanis are required to sign an oath declaring Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to be an impostor prophet and all Ahmadis to be non-Muslims.[141] The word "Muslim" was erased from the gravestone of the Nobel prize winning theoretical physicist Abdus Salam, because he was an Ahmadi.[141]
As a result of the cultural implications of the laws and constitutional amendments regarding Ahmadis in Pakistan, persecution and hate-related incidents are constantly reported from different parts of the country. Ahmadis have been the target of many attacks led by various religious groups.[142] All religious seminaries and madrasas in Pakistan belonging to different sects of Islam have prescribed essential reading materials specifically targeted at refuting Ahmadiyya beliefs.[143]
In a 2005 survey in Pakistan, pupils in private schools of Pakistan expressed their opinions on religious tolerance in the country. The figures assembled in the study reflect that even in the educated classes of Pakistan, Ahmadis are considered to be the least deserving minority in terms of equal opportunities and civil rights. In the same study, the teachers in these elite schools showed an even lower amount of tolerance towards Ahmadis than their pupils.[144] Ahmadis are harassed by certain schools, universities and teachers in Pakistan's Punjab province. The harassment includes social boycott, expulsions, threats and violence against Ahmadi students by extremist students, teachers and principals of the majority sect.[145]
28 May 2010 saw the worst single incident of violence against Ahmadis to date (see May 2010 attacks on Ahmadi mosques in Lahore), when several members of an extremist religious group (allegedly Tehrik-i-Taliban Punjab) entered two Ahmadi mosques in Lahore and opened fire; three of them later detonated themselves. In total, the attacks claimed the lives of 86 people and injured well over 100.[146] The members were gathered in the mosques attending Friday services.[147] In response to the attacks, Pakistan minister for minorities Shahbaz Bhatti visited the Ahmadi community.[citation needed]
Palestine
Main article: Ahmadiyya in Palestine
Ahmadis were reported to be persecuted in the Palestinian Authority-controlled areas in 2010.[148] In 2010, Mohammed Sharif Ouda, head of the Ahmadi community in Israel, told Arutz Sheva radio that the Palestinian Authority is "encouraging the cold-blooded murder of Ahmadis" by failing to take concrete action to protect the community.[148]
Saudi Arabia
Main article: Ahmadiyya in Saudi Arabia
Ahmadis are continuously persecuted in Saudi Arabia.[149] In a 2006–2007 nationwide campaign to track down and deport Ahmadi Muslim foreign workers, the Saudi religious police arrested 56–60[150] Ahmadi Muslims of Indian, Pakistani and Syrian origin from major cities across the country. In May 2012, Saudi authorities arrested two Saudi Sunni Muslim citizens for their conversion to Ahmadiyya Islam.[151] They were arrested three months after joining the Ahmadiyya and refusing to abandon their beliefs. As of May 2014, the two accused of apostasy had served two years in prison awaiting trial. They have not been released since then[152][153]
On 24 January 2007, Human Rights Watch sent an open letter to the Saudi king King Abdullah asking him to cease religious persecution of the Ahmadi faith in Saudi Arabia. Two letters were sent in November 2006 and February 2007 asking him to remove the travel ban on critics of the Saudi government.[154]
Under Saudi religious law, Ahmadis, along with non-Muslims, are forbidden from entering Mecca, which restricts their ability to perform the mandatory Hajj pilgrimage.
United Kingdom
Ahmadis in the UK have endured killings, mass protests by other Muslims against Ahmadi mosque construction,[155] and threats and intimidation.[156] In March 2016, the First Minister of Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon, attended the wake of an Ahmadi, Asad Shah, 40, killed by a Sunni, Tanveer Ahmed, 32, in what the police characterised as "religious prejudice".[157] In April 2016, leaflets calling for death to Ahmadis were found in Stockwell Green mosque.[158][159] The mosque claimed that it was unaware of the leaflets being placed on its premises. The leaflets were authored in the name of an ex-head, Yusuf Ludhianvi, of Khatam-e-Nabuwwat (or Khatme Nabuwwat) – an anti-Ahmadiyya organization. The organization is fully known as Almi Majlis-e-Tahafuz Khatmi Nubuwat or the International Committee for the Protection of the Finality of Prophethood.[160]
In October 2017, BBC Radio 4's File on 4 programme investigated the publication and broadcasting of anti-Ahmadiyyah material in the UK, and asked when and whether media regulators should intervene.[161]
See also

Ahmadiyya mosques
Islamic schools and branches
Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement
List of Ahmadis

References


^ "Ahmadiyya". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. September 2005.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)
^ "History of the Ahmadiyya Community". Human Rights Watch. 2005. 
^ Valentine, Simon (2008). Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice. Columbia University Press. p. xv. ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8. 
^ Morgan, Diane (2009). Essential Islam: a comprehensive guide to belief and practice. Greenwood Press. p. 242. ISBN 978-0-313-36025-1. 
^ "Founding of Ahmadiyya Jamaat". 
^ Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A., eds. (2012). "Ahmadiya". Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 
^ "Who are the Ahmadi?". 
^ "10 Fabrications Muslim Leaders Need to Stop Making About Ahmadi Muslims". 
^ Naeem Osman Memon (1994). An Enemy a Disbeliever a Liar, Claims of Hadhrat Ahmad. Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-552-8. 
^ B.A Rafiq (1978). Truth about Ahmadiyyat, Reflection of all the Prohets. London Mosque. ISBN 0-85525-013-5. 
^ Mirza Tahir Ahmad (1998). Revelation Rationality Knowledge and Truth, Future of Revelation. Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-640-0. 
^ a b Lago, Colin, ed. (2011). The Handbook of Transcultural Counselling and Psychotherapy. UK: McGraw-Hill Education (published 1 October 2011). p. 312. ISBN 9780335238514. 
^ "The Ahmadi Muslim Community, Who are they?". The Times. 27 May 2008. 
^ "An Overview". Alislam.org. Retrieved 2012-11-14. 
^ Valentine, Simon (2008). Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice. Columbia University Press. p. xv and passim. ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8. 
^ "Introduction to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community". Retrieved 19 February 2016. 
^ Geaves, Ron (2017). Islam and Britain: Muslim Mission in an Age of Empire. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 42. ISBN 978-1-4742-7173-8.  "They were the first Muslim organization to send missionaries to the West..."
^ Gilham, Jamie (2014). Loyal Enemies: British Converts to Islam, 1850-1950. C. Hurst & Co. pp. 123–213. ISBN 978-1-84904-275-8. 
^ Umar Ryad. (2015, p.47), 'Salafiyya, Ahmadiyya, and European Converts to Islam in the Interwar Period' in B. Agai et al. (eds.), Muslims in Interwar Europe: A Transcultural Historical Perspective, Leiden: BRILL, pp.47–87 " In the interwar period the Ahmadiyya occupied a pioneering place as a Muslim missionary movement in Europe; they established mosques, printed missionary publications in a variety of European languages, and attracted many European converts to Islam."
^ Jonker, Gerdien (2015). The Ahmadiyya Quest for Religious Progress: Missionizing Europe 1900-1965. Brill Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-30529-8. 
^ Hendrik Kraemer. "World Cultures and World Religions: The Coming Dialogue" James Clarke & Co., 1960, p 267 "The spirit of their tenets and the militant vigour of their founder have made the Ahmadiyya naturally a group with strong missionary and reforming zeal, both inside the lands of Islam where they are represented and outside. They constitute almost exclusively the "Muslim Missions" in Western countries and elsewhere...They devote themselves with sincere enthusiasm to the task of proclaiming Islam to the world in a rationalist, often combative way, and try in Muslim lands to purify and reform the dominant type of popular Islam."
^ "Major Branches of Religions". Adherents.com. 28 October 2005. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ See:

Breach of Faith. Human Rights Watch. June 2005. p. 8. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Estimates of around 20 million would be appropriate 
Larry DeVries; Don Baker; Dan Overmyer. Asian Religions in British Columbia. University of Columbia Press. ISBN 978-0-7748-1662-5. Retrieved 29 March 2014. The community currently numbers around 15 million spread around the world 
Juan Eduardo Campo. Encyclopedia of Islam. p. 24. ISBN 0-8160-5454-1. Retrieved 29 March 2014. The total size of the Ahmadiyya community in 2001 was estimated to be more than 10 million 
"Ahmadiyya Muslims". pbs.org. Retrieved 6 October 2013. 


^ "Ahmadiyya Muslim Community: An Overview". Al Islam. The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ a b Lawton, Kim (20 January 2012). "Ahmadiyya Muslims". WNET. Archived from the original on 10 March 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015 – via PBS. 
^ a b Balzani, Marzia. "Localising Diaspora: The Ahmadi Muslims and the Problem of Multi-sited Ethnography". Retrieved 17 April 2016. 
^ Cloudhury, Barnie (26 July 2003). "Islamic sect gathers in Surrey". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ "Ahmadiyya Islam – Beliefs History Practices". ReligionFacts. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ "Who are the Ahmadi?". BBC News. 28 May 2010. Archived from the original on 30 May 2010. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ Burhani, Ahmad Najib (2013). When Muslims are not Muslims: the Ahmadiyya community and the discourse on heresy in Indonesia. Santa Barbara, California: University of California. ISBN 9781303424861. 
^ Haq, Zia (2 October 2011). "'Heretical' Ahmadiyya sect raises Muslim hackles". Hindustan Times. New Delhi: HT Media. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ Mirza Ghulam Ahmad: Tabligh-i-Risalat, Vol. IX, pp.90–91; Maulana Murtaza Khan: The Name Ahmadiyya and Its Necessity, 1945.
^ Falahud Din Shams:"Introduction to the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community"
^ The Essence of Islam, Vol. IV, p.305-7
^ Ruḥānī Khazāʾin, v.15, p.526, Tiryāqu'l-Qulūb pg. 1066–1067
^ Annemarie Schimmel et al.: Der Islam III. Volksfrömmigkeit, Islamische Kultur, Zeitgenössische Strömungen. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart 1990, S. 418–420
^ Marzia Balzani.'An ethnographer among the Ahmadis: Learning Islam in the suburbs' in Gabriele Marranci (ed.) Studying Islam in Practice. Routledge, 2014, p.117.
^ "Islam", Al Islam Online
^ Andrea Lathan (2008) ‘The Relativity of Categorizing in the Context of the Aḥmadiyya’ Die Welt des Islams, 48 (3/4): 377
^ Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (2004) The Essence of Islam, Vol. II, p.129--39, Tilford: Islam International
^ Adil Hussain Khan. "From Sufism to Ahmadiyya: A Muslim Minority Movement in South Asia" Indiana University Press, 6 apr. 2015 ISBN 978-0253015297

"It may be useful to mention that Ahmadis do not actually adhere to the Hanafi school of thought like most South Asian Muslims, even though many rulings are loosely based on Hanafi methodology." p.12
"Ahmadis claim to base their legal methodology primarily on rulings and principles of the Hanafi madhhab but reject strict adherence to any particular school of thought, which is likely a direct result of Ghulam Ahmad’s Ahl-i Hadith influence." p.59


^ Andrea Lathan (2008) ‘The Relativity of Categorizing in the Context of the Aḥmadiyya’ Die Welt des Islams, 48 (3/4): 377-8 "For him [Ghulam Ahmad] the main source of law was the Qurʾān, followed by the Prophet’s actions and statements (sunna) and the traditions (aḥādīth). The tradition would only meet approval if it did not contradict the Qurʾān. If all three sources did not lead to a solution, Ghulām Aḥmad would refer to the jurisprudence (fiqh) of the Ḥanafī school and to the ijtihād by the scholars of the Aḥmadiyya."
^ Muniruddin Ahmed, Das Fiqh der Ahmadiyya. Archived index[Date mismatch], at the Wayback Machine.
^ Mirza Bashiruddin Mahmud Ahmad: What is Ahmadiyyat? Question Answered by the Head of the Ahmadiyya Community, 1963; pp.26-31
^ "Question & Answer Session (3 March 1996) with Hadhrat Mirza Tahir Ahmad, Islam Ahmadiyya". Youtube. Retrieved 8 February 2017. 
^ A.R. Dard. Life of Ahmad (PDF). Islami International Publications. p. XV. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Ina Wunn: Muslimische Gruppierungen in Deutschland. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart 2007, S. 158
^ "The Promised Messiah – Prophecies Fulfilled". Alislam.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011. 
^ "The Holy Quran". Alislam.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011. 
^ Invitation to Ahmadiyyat by Mirza Bashir-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad Part II, Argument 4, Chapter "Promised Messiah, Promised One of All Religions"
^ Simon Ross Valentine. Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice. Columbia University Press. pp. 32–33. ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8. 
^ Nasir Mahmood Malik (2007). "Raising Ahmadi Children in the West" (PDF). Al Islam. Retrieved 10 June 2011. 
^ "Islam – A Threat or a Source of Peace". Review of Religions. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "Mirza Ghulam Ahmad on the Unity of Allah". Al Islam. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the True Islam (PDF). Islami International Publications. p. 54. 
^ "Allah". Alislam.org. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the True Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. p. 64. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the True Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. p. 65. 
^ "A Book of Religious Knowledge" by Waheed Ahmad, pg. 34
^ "Finality of Prophet hood | Hadhrat Muhammad (PUBH) the Last Prophet – Al Islam Online". Alislam.org. 29 November 1966. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011. 
^ "Man Lived on Earth Even Before the Advent of Adam". Alislam.org. Retrieved 18 June 2012. 
^ a b c Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, The True Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. p. 72. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the True Islam (PDF). Islami International Publications. p. 73. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, The True Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. pp. 73–74. 
^ Robert Dannin. Black Pilgrimage to Islam. p. 37. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Juan Eduardo Campo. Encyclopedia of Islam. p. 24. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ a b "Ahmadiyya Islam". Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "Islam". Al Islam. 
^ "Jesus, a Humble Prophet of God". Al Islam. 
^ "Death of Jesus", by Shahid Aziz, Bulletin October 2001, Ahmadiyya Anjuman Ishaat Islam Lahore (UK)
The Promised Mehdi and Messiah, p. 50, "Jesus Migrated to India", by Aziz Ahmad Chaudhry, Islam International Publications Limited
^ The Promised Messiah and Mehdi – The Question of Finality of Prophethood, by Dr. Aziz Ahmad Chaudhry, Islam International Publications Limited.
^ "Suspension of Jihad". Archived from the original on 14 April 2012. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Simon Ross Valentine. Islam and the Ahmadiyya Jama'at: History, Belief, Practice. Columbia University Press. p. 190. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "True Concept of Islamic Jihad". Review of Religions. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "Is Islam a Threat to Poland and World Peace?". Review of Religions. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Friedmann, Jihād in Ahmadī Thought, ISBN 965-264-014-X, p. 227
^ Friedmann, Jihād in Ahmadī Thought, p. 227
^ Mathieu Guidère. Historical Dictionary of Islamic Fundamentalism. p. 22. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "From the Archives:Why I believe in Islam". Review of Religions. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Ayub K. Ommaya. "The Rise and Decline of Science in Islam". Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ Daud A Hanif (2003). "Prophets of God". The Muslim Sunrise (2). 
^ "H.H. Risley and E.A. Gait, (1903), Report of the Census of India, 1901, Calcutta, Superintendent of Government Printing, p. 373". Chinese Heritage of the Australian Federation Project. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. 
^ Egdunas Racius. The Multiple Nature of the Islamic Da'wa (PDF). University of Helsinki. pp. 158–160. ISBN 952-10-0489-4. 
^ Michael Angelo Gomez (2005). Black Crescent: the experience and legacy of African Muslims in the Americas. Cambridge University Press. pp. 254–256. 
^ Timothy Miller (1995). America's alternative religions. State University of New York Press. p. 280. 
^ Michael Nkuzi Nnam. Colonial Mentality in Africa. US. p. 89. ISBN 0-7618-3291-2. 
^ Simon Ross Valentine. Islam and the Ahmadiyya Jama'at: History, Belief, Practice. Columbia University Press. p. 56. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Friedmann, Yohanan (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval Background. Oxford University Press. p. 21. ISBN 965-264-014-X. 
^ a b The Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement has unofficially stated its total population to be up to 30,000, of which 5,000 to 10,000 live in Pakistan. On this basis, the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement represents approximately 0.2% of the total Ahmadiyya population.See:

Simon Ross Valentine (6 October 2008). Islam and the Ahmadiyya Jamaʻat: History, Belief, Practice. Columbia University Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8. 
"Pakistan: Situation of members of the Lahori Ahmadiyya Movement in Pakistan". Retrieved 30 April 2014. 


^ a b Moulvi Bashir Ahmad Dehlavi. "Hazrat Mirza Bashiruddin Mahmood Ahmad". Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ a b "Hazrat Hafiz Mirza Nasir Ahmad". Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Ishtiaq Ahmed. The Politics of Religion in South and Southeast Asia. Routledge. p. 89. Retrieved 28 August 2014. 
^ Iain Adamson. A Man of God. p. 127. 
^ "The Lives of the Successors of the Promised Messiah". Retrieved 28 August 2014. 
^ Richard C. Martín. Encyclopedia of Islam & the Muslim World. p. 31. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ a b "Hadhrat Mirza Tahir Ahmad (1928–2003)". London Book Fair. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ David Buckley. Where the Waters Meet: Convergence and Complementarity in Therapy and Theology. Karnac Books. p. 75. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "Clamoring for the Khalifa". The Wall Street Journal. 12 May 2013. Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ "The Minority's Minority". 
^ "The 1974 ouster of the 'heretics': What really happened?". 
^ "An Overview". Al Islam. Retrieved 4 March 2014. 
^ a b See:

Breach of Faith. Human Rights Watch. June 2005. p. 8. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Estimates of around 20 million would be appropriate 
Larry DeVries; Don Baker; Dan Overmyer. Asian Religions in British Columbia. University of Columbia Press. ISBN 978-0-7748-1662-5. Retrieved 29 March 2014. The community currently numbers around 15 million spread around the world 
Juan Eduardo Campo. Encyclopedia of Islam. p. 24. ISBN 0-8160-5454-1. Retrieved 29 March 2014. The total size of the Ahmadiyya community in 2001 was estimated to be more than 10 million 
"Ahmadiyya Muslims". pbs.org. Retrieved 6 October 2013. 


^ A figure of 10 to 20 million represents 0.62% to 1.25% of the worlds Muslim population.
^ As of 2001[update] the Ahmadiyya Movement had been the fastest growing sect according to the World Christian Encyclopedia for a number of decades. For this, see earlier editions. The 2001 edition placed the growth rate at 3.25%, which was the highest of all Islamic sects and schools of thought. See:

David B. Barrett; George Thomas Kurian; Todd M. Johnson, eds. (15 February 2001). World Christian Encyclopedia. Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 0195079639. 


^ "Wretched Of The Land". 
^ The Holy Quran with English Translation and Commentary. Surrey: Islam International Publications. p. 1870. ISBN 1-85372-045-3. 
^ Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad. Khilafat-e-Rashidah (PDF). Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-620-6. 
^ Rafi Ahmad. "The Islamic Khilafat – Its Rise, Fall, and Re-emergence". 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the true Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. pp. 318–324. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the true Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. p. 324. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ a b Simon Ross Valentine. Islam and the Ahmadiyya Jama'at: History, Belief, Practice. p. 86. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ a b c d "Organisational Structure". Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the true Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. pp. 324–342. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ a b "Tehrike-Jadid-Scheme" (PDF). Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Jamie S. Scott. The Religions of Canadians. University of Toronto Press. p. 198. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the true Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. pp. 357–360. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ "Renewing a Pledge of Unity and Peace". Washington Post. 5 September 2005. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Algeria: Wave of arrests and prosecutions of hundreds of Ahmadis Amnesty International. 19 June 2017
^ "Violent Dhaka rally against sect", BBC News
^ Bangladesh: The Ahmediyya Community – their rights must be protected Archived 21 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Amnesty International
^ "Number of Ahmadis in India". Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 1 November 1991. Retrieved 9 March 2009. 
^ a b c Hoque, Ridwanul (21 March 2004). "On right to freedom of religion and the plight of Ahmadiyas". The Daily Star. 
^ "Shihabuddin Imbichi Koya Thangal vs K.P. Ahammed Koya on 8 December 1970". Indian Kanoon. Retrieved 28 October 2011. The various texts quoted in the ruling dispel doubts about Ahamadis on the crucial twin tests "that there is no God but Allah...and Mohammad is the servant and Messenger of God." 
^ "Answer: Darul Ifta Deoband India". darulifta-deoband.org. 
^ Naqvi, Jawed (1 September 2008). "Religious violence hastens India's leap into deeper obscurantism". Dawn. Retrieved 23 December 2009. 
^ Courtesy: Two Circles (20 February 2012). "Don't perform nikaah of Qadiyanis: AP Wakf board to Qazis". Siasat Urdu Daily, Hyderabad. Retrieved 10 March 2012. 
^ "Indonesia to ban Ahmadi activities". AsiaNews.IT. 6 September 2008. 
^ Anti-Ahmadiyya Mullah Burning Ahmadiyya Mosques – Indonesia. Al Jazeera. 
^ "Six killed in clash between villagers and Ahmadiyah followers". The Jakarta Post. 6 February 2011. 
^ Gillian Terzis (18 February 2011). "Indonesia is no longer a poster child for pluralism". The Guardian. 
^ McGeown, Kate. "Islamic sect Ahmadiyah faces ban in Indonesia" BBC. 21 April 2011. (Video)
^ Allard, Tom. Trial begins after shocking mob violence ends in slaying. The Sydney Morning Herald. 27 April 2011.
^ The 1998 Pakistani census states that there are 291,000 (0.22%) Ahmadis in Pakistan. However, the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community has boycotted the census since 1974 which renders official Pakistani figures to be inaccurate. Independent groups have estimated the Pakistani Ahmadiyya population to be somewhere between 2 million and 5 million Ahmadis. However, the 4 million figure is the most quoted figure. See:

over 2 million: Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (4 December 2008). "Pakistan: The situation of Ahmadis, including legal status and political, education and employment rights; societal attitudes toward Ahmadis (2006 – Nov. 2008)". Retrieved 28 June 2012. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
3 million: International Federation for Human Rights: International Fact-Finding Mission. Freedoms of Expression, of Association and of Assembly in Pakistan. Ausgabe 408/2, Januar 2005, S. 61 (PDF)
3–4 million: Commission on International Religious Freedom: Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom. 2005, S. 130
4.910.000: James Minahan: Encyclopedia of the stateless nations. Ethnic and national groups around the world. Greenwood Press . Westport 2002, page 52
"Pakistan: Situation of members of the Lahori Ahmadiyya Movement in Pakistan". Retrieved 30 April 2014. 


^ Khan, Naveeda. "Trespasses of the State: Ministering to Theological Dilemmas through the Copyright/Trademark". Sarai Reader 2005: Bare Acts. p. 184.
^ "Constitution (Second Amendment) Act, 1974". Retrieved 3 September 2014. 
^ The presentation before the parliament can be seen here: Khan, Naveeda. Mahzaharnama (PDF). Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-386-X. 
^ Khan, Naveeda. "Trespasses of the State: Ministering to Theological Dilemmas through the Copyright/Trademark" (PDF).  Sarai Reader 2005: Bare Acts. p. 178.
^ Heiner Bielefeldt: "Muslim Voices in the Human Rights Debate", Human rights quarterly, 1995 vol. 17 no. 4 p. 587.
^ Antonio R. Gualtieri (1989). Conscience and Coercion: Ahmadis and Orthodoxy in Pakistan. Guernica Editions. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-920717-41-7. 
^ "Pakistan Penal Code, Official Pakistani Government document Chap. XV "Of Offences Relating to Religion"" (PDF). pp. 79–81. 
^ a b Hanif, Mohammed (16 June 2010). "Why Pakistan's Ahmadi community is officially detested". BBC News. 
^ Persecution of the Ahmadiyya Community in Pakistan: An Analysis Under International Law and International Relations Harvard Human Rights Journal, Vol 16, September 2003
"Eight die in Pakistan sect attack", BBC News
"Sect offices closed in Pakistan", BBC News
^ Denizens of Alien Worlds. T Rahman – Contemporary South Asia, 2004. A Survey of the Education System of Pakistan, by Tariq Rahman, page 15.
^ Peace and Democracy in South Asia, Volume 1, Number 1, January 2005. Passports to Privilege: The English-Medium Schools In Pakistan, Tariq Rahman.
^ "Ahmadis: The lightning rod that attracts the most hatred". The Dawn. 28 October 2011. 
^ "Clarification – 86 Ahmadis died in the Lahore attacks". Al Islam. 12 June 2010. 
^ "Pakistan mosque raids kill scores". BBC News. 28 May 2010. 
^ a b "Palestinian Muslims who reject violence are persecuted". israeltoday.co.il. 
^ "Persecution of Ahmadis in Saudi Arabia". Persecution.org. Retrieved 11 March 2012. 
^ Depending on the source there were 56–60 Ahmadis arrested in the years 2006–2007
^ U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, International Religious Freedom Report for 2012: Saudi Arabia (20 May 2013).
^ HAW urges Saudi to free two Ahmadis held for apostasy, The Daily Star, Lebanon News (15 May 2014).
^ "Saudi Arabia: 2 Years Behind Bars on Apostasy Accusation". Human Rights Watch. 15 May 2014. Retrieved 1 March 2015. 
^ "Letter to King Abdullah". HRW. 8 February 2007. Retrieved 23 October 2011. 
^ Bunglawala, Inayat (8 December 2009). "Freedom of worship for Ahmadis". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ Porter, Tom (8 April 2016). "Hate leaflets calling for killing of Ahmadi Muslims distributed across London". 
^ Asad Shah: Nicola Sturgeon joins 500 people at vigil as defiant locals declare 'This is not who we are' dailyrecord.co.uk 25 March 2016.
^ "'Kill Ahmadis' leaflets found in UK mosque – BBC News". Retrieved 2016-08-15. 
^ "The Muslim Council of Britain is failing Ahmadis like Asad Shah". The Guardian. 2016-04-25. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-08-15. 
^ "Renowned Scholar Maulana Yusuf Ludhianvi Martyred in Karachi". www.albalagh.net. Retrieved 2016-08-15. 
^ Presenter: Manveen Rana; Producers: Richard Fenton-Smith & Sajid Iqbal; Editor: Gail Champion (3 October 2017). "Extremism: Hidden in Plain Sight". File on 4. BBC. BBC Radio 4. Retrieved 3 October 2017. 


Further reading


Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad (1980). Invitation to Ahmadiyyat. Routledge & Kegan Ltd. ISBN 0-7100-0119-3. 
Mirza Basheer-ud-Din Mahmood Ahmad (1924). Ahmadiyyat or the true Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-982-5. 
Mirza Tahir Ahmad (2004). With Love to the Muslims of the World: The Ahmadiyya Perspective (PDF). Surrey: Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-744-X. 
Mirza Tahir Ahmad (1985). An Elementary Study of Islam. Surrey: Islam International Publications. ISBN 1-85372-562-5. 
Syed Hasanat Ahmad (2010). An Introduction to the Hidden Treasures of Islam (PDF). Surrey: Islam International Publications. ISBN 978-1-84880-050-2. 
Humphrey J Fisher (1963). Ahmadiyya: a study in contemporary Islam on the West African coast. Nigeria: Oxford University Press. 
Yohanan Friedmann (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval Background. Oxford University Press. ISBN 965-264-014-X. 
Antonio R. Gualtieri (1989). Conscience And Coercion. Canada: Guernica Editions. ISBN 0-920717-41-1. 
Antonio Gualtieri (2004). The Ahmadis: community, gender, and politics in a Muslim society. Canada: McGill-Queen's University Press. ISBN 0-7735-2738-9. 
Shaikh Abdul Hadi (2008). Basics of Religious Education (PDF) (5th ed.). Canada: Islam International Publications. ISBN 1882494-03-2. 
Farhan Iqbal; Imtiaz Ahmed Sra (2014). With Love to Muhammad, The Khatam-un-Nabiyyin: The Ahmadiyya Muslim Understanding of Finality of Prophethood (PDF). Canada: Islam International Publications. ISBN 978-0-9937731-0-5. 
Muhammad Zafarullah Khan (1978). Ahmadiyyat: the renaissance of Islam. Tabshir Publications. ISBN 0-85525-015-1. 
Simon Ross Valentine (2008). Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8. 
Karimullah Zirvi. Welcome to Ahmadiyyat, the True Islam (PDF). Islam International Publications. 


External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ahmadiyya.



Official website of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
An Introduction and a short sketch of history of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community
Official website highlighting the persecution of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community







v
t
e


Ahmadiyya topics



Beliefs and practices



Five Pillars of Islam
Six articles of faith
Quran
Hadith
Sunnah





Distinct views



Prophethood
Jesus
Jihad
Evolution





Mirza Ghulam Ahmad



Prophecies
Claims
Writings
Death





Literature



Barahin-e-Ahmadiyya
The Philosophy of the Teachings of Islam
Jesus in India
Noor-ul-Haq
Victory of Islam
Malfoozat
Tafseer-e-Kabeer





Ahmadiyya Muslim Community



Successors of the Messiah:
I
II
III
IV
V
Jalsa Salana
Mosques
MTA International





Miscellaneous



Persecution
Ahmadiyya by country
Ahmadiyya and other faiths
List of Ahmadis
Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement








 Category:Ahmadiyya
 Portal:Ahmadiyya












v
t
e


Ahmadiyya in the World






Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Macedonia
Republic of the Congo
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
São Tomé and Príncipe
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe












v
t
e


Islam topics




Outline of Islam







Beliefs



God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad

In Islam


Prophets of Islam





Five Pillars



Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








History
Leaders






Timeline of Muslim history
Conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman







Religious texts



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah





Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Ibadi
Black Muslims
Ahmadiyya
Quranism
Non-denominational








Life
Culture






Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science

medieval


Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
















Law
Jurisprudence










Economics



Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba





Hygiene



Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu








Marriage
Sex






Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Masturbation
Nikah
Nikah Mut‘ah
Zina





Other aspects



Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military

POWs


Slavery
Sources of law
Theological

baligh
kalam


















 Islamic studies







Arts



Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery





Medieval science



Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics





Philosophy



Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological





Other areas



Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature

poetry


Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques


















Other religions



Christianity

Mormonism
Protestantism


Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism





Related topics



Apostasy
Criticism of Islam
Cultural Muslim
Islamism

Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Salafi movement


Islamophobia

Incidents


Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism








 Islam portal
 Category















v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4297505-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahmadiyya&oldid=814407237"					Categories: AhmadiyyaIslam in IndiaSchisms in IslamReligious organizations established in 18891889 establishments in IndiaIslam in PakistanIslam in BangladeshIslam in IndonesiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template warningsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2001All articles containing potentially dated statementsCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse British English from April 2012Use dmy dates from April 2012Articles containing Arabic-language textArticles containing Urdu-language textAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from May 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2009Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2011Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers