





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



This is a list of airline codes. The table lists IATA's two-character airline designators[a], ICAO's three-character airline designators and the airline call signs (telephony designator). Historical assignments are also included.
This is a list of all airline codes. The table lists the IATA airline designators, the ICAO airline designators and the airline call signs (telephony designator). Historical assignments are also included for completeness.


Airline codes for airlines beginning with:




All
0–9
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z







Contents


1 IATA airline designator
2 ICAO airline designator
3 Call signs (flight identification or flight ID)
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links




If "All" is selected, the page may load slowly.

IATA airline designator[edit]
IATA airline designators, sometimes called IATA reservation codes, are two-character codes assigned by the International Air Transport Association (IATA) to the world's airlines. The standard is described in IATA's Standard Schedules Information Manual and the codes themselves are described in IATA's Airline Coding Directory.[1] (Both are published twice-annually.)
The IATA codes originally based on the ICAO designators which were issued in 1947 as two-letter airline identification codes (see the section below). IATA expanded the 2-letter-system with codes consisting of a letter and a digit (or vice versa) after ICAO had introduced its current 3-letter-system in 1982. Until then only combinations of letters were used.
Airline designator codes follow the format xx(a), i.e., two alphanumeric characters (letters or digits) followed by an optional letter. Although the IATA standard provides for three-character airline designators, IATA has not used the optional third character in any assigned code. This is because some legacy computer systems, especially the "central reservations systems", have failed to comply with the standard, notwithstanding the fact that it has been in place for 20 years. The codes issued to date comply with IATA Resolution 762, which provides for only two characters. These codes thus comply with the current airline designator standard, but use only a limited subset of its possible range.
There are three types of designator: unique, numeric/alpha and controlled duplicate.[clarification needed]
IATA airline designators are used to identify an airline for commercial purposes in reservations, timetables, tickets, tariffs, air waybills and in telecommunications.
A flight designator is the concatenation of the airline designator, xx(a), and the numeric flight number, n(n)(n)(n), plus an optional one-letter "operational suffix" (a). Therefore, the full format of a flight designator is xx(a)n(n)(n)(n)(a).
After an airline is delisted, IATA can make the code available for reuse after six months and can issue "controlled duplicates". Controlled duplicates are issued to regional airlines whose destinations are not likely to overlap, so that the same code is shared by two airlines. The controlled duplicate is denoted here, and in IATA literature, with an asterisk (*). An example of this is the code "6Y", which refers to both Mid Airlines, a charter airline in Sudan, and Med Airways, a charter airline in Lebanon.
IATA also issues an accounting or prefix code. This number is used on tickets as the first three characters of the ticket number.
ICAO airline designator[edit]




IATA Flight coupon stock control number


The ICAO airline designator is a code assigned by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to aircraft operating agencies, aeronautical authorities, and services related to international aviation, each of whom is allocated both a three-letter designator and a telephony designator. These codes are unique by airline, unlike the IATA airline designator codes (see section above). The designators are listed in ICAO Document 8585: Designators for Aircraft Operating Agencies, Aeronautical Authorities and Services.
ICAO codes have been issued since 1947. The ICAO codes originally based on a two-letter-system and were identical to the airline codes used by IATA. After an airline joined IATA its existing ICAO-two-letter-code was taken over as IATA code. Because both organizations used the same code system, the current terms ICAO code and IATA code did not exist until the 1980s. They were commonly called two-letter-airline-designators. At this time it was impossible to find out whether an airline was an IATA member or not just by looking at its code. In the 1970s the abbreviation BA was the ICAO code and the IATA code of British Airways while non-IATA-members like Court Line used their 2-letter-abbreviation as ICAO code only. In 1982 ICAO introduced the current three-letter-system due to the increasing number of airlines. After a transitional period of five years it became the official new ICAO standard system in November 1987 while IATA kept the older 2-letter-system that was introduced by ICAO in 1947.[2][3]
Certain combinations of letters, for example SOS, are not allocated to avoid confusion with other systems. Other designators, particularly those starting with Y and Z, are reserved for government organizations. The designator YYY is used for operators that do not have a code allocated.
An example is:

Operator: American Airlines
Three-letter designator: AAL (the original ICAO-two-letter-designator AA was officially used until 1987 and is also the IATA code of the airline)
Telephony designator: AMERICAN

A timeline of the airline designators used by American Airlines:


period
ICAO
IATA
remarks


before 1947
-
-
airline designators did not exist


1947 to early 1950s
AA
-
ICAO issued 2-letter-designators in 1947


early 1950s to 1982
AA
AA
ICAO designators were taken over by IATA in the early 1950s


1982 to 1987
AA (AAL)
AA
ICAO issued 3-letter-codes but kept the 2-letter-designators as official standard


from 1988
AAL
AA
3-letter-designators became the official ICAO system in November 1987


Call signs (flight identification or flight ID)[edit]
Most airlines employ a call sign that is normally spoken during airband radio transmissions. As by ICAO Annex 10 chapter 5.2.1.7.2.1 a call sign shall be one of the following types:

Type A: the characters corresponding to the registration marking of the aircraft.
Type B: the telephony designator of the aircraft operating agency, followed by the last four characters of the registration marking of the aircraft.
Type C: the telephony designator of the aircraft operating agency, followed by the flight identification.

The one most widely used within commercial aviation is type C. The flight identification is very often the same as the flight number, though this is not always the case. In case of call sign confusion a different flight identification can be chosen, but the flight number will remain the same. Call sign confusion happens when two or more flights with similar flight numbers fly close to each other, e.g., KLM 645 and KLM 649 or Speedbird 446 and Speedbird 664.
The flight number is published in an airline's public timetable and appears on the arrivals and departure screens in the airport terminals. In cases of emergency, the airline name and flight number, rather than the call sign, are normally mentioned by the main news media.
Some call signs are less obviously associated with a particular airline than others. This might be for historic reasons (South African Airways uses the callsign "Springbok", hearkening back to the airline's old livery which featured a springbok), or possibly to avoid confusion with a call sign used by an established airline.[citation needed]
Companies' assigned names may change as a result of mergers, acquisitions, or change in company name or status; British Airways uses BOAC's old callsign ("Speedbird"), as British Airways was formed by a merger of BOAC and British European Airways. Country names can also change over time and new call signs may be agreed in substitution for traditional ones. The country shown alongside an airline's call sign is that wherein most of its aircraft are believed to be registered, which may not always be the same as the country in which the firm is officially incorporated or registered. There are many other airlines in business whose radio call signs are more obviously derived from the trading name.
The callsign should ideally resemble the operator's name or function and not be confused with callsigns used by other operators. The callsign should be easily and phonetically pronounceable in at least English, the international language of aviation. For example, Air France's callsign is "Airfrans"; 'frans' is the phonetic spelling of 'France'.
See also[edit]

International Air Transport Association airport code
International Civil Aviation Organization airport code

Notes[edit]



^ IATA has the optional third character in any assigned code, see IATA airline designator.



References[edit]



^ IATA's Airline Coding Directory
^ jp aircraft markings, jp airlines-fleets international, Edition 1966 - Edition 1988/89
^ Yearbook of the United Nations 41.1987, Chapter X, p. 1259, at Google Books



External links[edit]

International Civil Aviation Organization Official site
ICAO On-line Publications Purchasing Official site
IATA's Airline and Airport Code Search







v
t
e


Commercial air travel



Airlines



Airline codes
Airline holding companies
Charter airlines
Low-cost airlines
Passenger airlines
Regional airlines





Alliances



Oneworld
SkyTeam
Star Alliance
Value Alliance
Vanilla Alliance
U-FLY Alliance





Trade groups



International (ACO
ATAG
IATA
IATAN
ISTAT)
United States (A4A
RAA)
Europe (AEA
EBAA
ELFAA
ERA)
Other regions (AACO
AAPA
AFRAA
RAAA)





Aircrew



Captain
First Officer
Second Officer
Third Officer
Flight attendant
Flight engineer
Loadmaster
Pilot
Purser
Deadheading





Airliner



Travel class

First class (aviation)
First class travel
Business
Premium economy
Economy


Aircraft cabin
Aircraft lavatory
Aircraft seat map
Airline meal
Airline seat
Buy on board
Crew rest compartment
In-flight entertainment
Inflight smoking
Galley
Sickness bag





Airport



Aerodrome
Airline hub
Airport check-in
Airport lounge
Airport rail link
Airport terminal
Airstair
Boarding
Domestic airport
Gate
International airport
Jet bridge
Low cost carrier terminal
Runway
Transit hotel





Customs / Immigration



Arrival card (Landing card)
Border control
Departure card
Passport
Timatic
Travel document
Visa





Environmental impact



Hypermobility
Impact on environment





Law



Air transport agreement

Bermuda Agreement (UK-US, 1946-78)
Bermuda II Agreement (UK-US, 1978-2008)
China-US
Cross-Strait charter (China-Taiwan)


Beijing Convention
Cape Town Treaty
Chicago Convention
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives
European Common Aviation Area
Flight permit
Freedoms of the air
Hague Hijacking Convention
Hague Protocol
ICAO
Montreal Convention
Open skies (EU–US Open Skies Agreement)
Paris Convention of 1919
Rome Convention
Sabotage Convention
Tokyo Convention
Warsaw Convention





Luggage



Bag tag
Baggage allowance
Baggage carousel
Baggage cart
Baggage reclaim
Baggage handler
Baggage handling system
Checked baggage
Hand luggage
Lost luggage
Luggage lock





Safety



Air Navigation and Transport Act
Air rage
Air traffic control (ATC)
Aircraft safety card
Airport authority
Airport crash tender
Airport police
Airport security
Brace position
Evacuation slide
Flight recorder
National aviation authority
Overwing exits
Pre-flight safety demonstration
Sky marshal
Unruly aircraft passenger





Ticketing



Airline booking ploys
Airline reservations system
Airline ticket
Airline timetable
Bereavement flight
Boarding pass
Codeshare agreement
Continent pass
Electronic ticket
Fare basis code
Flight cancellation and delay
Frequent-flyer program
Government contract flight
One-way travel
Open-jaw ticket
Passenger name record
Red-eye flight
Round-the-world ticket
Standby
Tracking
Travel agency
Travel website





Groundcrew



Aircraft maintenance technician
Aircraft ground handler
Baggage handler
Flight dispatcher





Miscellaneous



Mile high club












v
t
e


Call signs



By type



Aircraft

Airlines


Broadcast
Amateur radio
Maritime
Military
Spacecraft





By place



Africa
Antarctica
Asia

India
Japan
Korea
Middle East


Europe

Russia
United Kingdom


North America

Barbados
Canada
Mexico
United States


Oceania

Australia

television


New Zealand


South America

Argentina













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Airline_codes&oldid=816354434"					Categories: AirlinesCall signsInternational Air Transport AssociationLists of airline codesLists of abbreviationsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2014All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2009