"Einstein" redirects here. For the musicologist, see Alfred Einstein. For other people, see Einstein (surname). For other uses, see Albert Einstein (disambiguation) and Einstein (disambiguation).


Albert Einstein



Albert Einstein in 1921



Pronunciation



/ˈaɪnstaɪn/[1] German: [ˈalbɛɐ̯t ˈaɪnʃtaɪn] ( listen)





Born
(1879-03-14)14 March 1879
Ulm, Kingdom of Württemberg, German Empire


Died
18 April 1955(1955-04-18) (aged 76)
Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.


Residence
Germany, Italy, Switzerland, Austria (present-day Czech Republic), Belgium, United States


Citizenship



Subject of the Kingdom of Württemberg during the German Empire (1879–1896)[note 1]
Stateless (1896–1901)
Citizen of Switzerland (1901–1955)
Austrian subject of the Austro-Hungarian Empire (1911–1912)
Subject of the Kingdom of Prussia during the German Empire (1914–1918)[note 1]
German citizen of the Free State of Prussia (Weimar Republic, 1918–1933)
Citizen of the United States (1940–1955)





Education



Swiss Federal Polytechnic (1896–1900; B.A., 1900)
University of Zurich (Ph.D., 1905)





Known for



General relativity
Special relativity
Photoelectric effect
E=mc2 (Mass–energy equivalence)
E=hf (Planck–Einstein relation)
Theory of Brownian motion
Einstein field equations
Bose–Einstein statistics
Bose–Einstein condensate
Gravitational wave
Cosmological constant
Unified field theory
EPR paradox
Ensemble interpretation
List of other concepts





Spouse(s)
Mileva Marić
(m. 1903;  div. 1919)
Elsa Löwenthal
(m. 1919;  d. 1936)[2][3]


Children
"Lieserl" Einstein
Hans Albert Einstein
Eduard "Tete" Einstein


Awards



Barnard Medal (1920)
Nobel Prize in Physics (1921)
Matteucci Medal (1921)
ForMemRS (1921)[4]
Copley Medal (1925)[4]
Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1926)
Max Planck Medal (1929)
Time Person of the Century (1999)





Scientific career


Fields
Physics, philosophy


Institutions



Swiss Patent Office (Bern) (1902–1909)
University of Bern (1908–1909)
University of Zurich (1909–1911)
Charles University in Prague (1911–1912)
ETH Zurich (1912–1914)
Prussian Academy of Sciences (1914–1933)
Humboldt University of Berlin (1914–1933)
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute (director, 1917–1933)
German Physical Society (president, 1916–1918)
Leiden University (visits, 1920)
Institute for Advanced Study (1933–1955)
Caltech (visits, 1931–1933)
University of Oxford (visits, 1931-1933)





Thesis
Eine neue Bestimmung der Moleküldimensionen (A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions) (1905)


Doctoral advisor
Alfred Kleiner


Other academic advisors
Heinrich Friedrich Weber


Influenced



Ernst G. Straus
Nathan Rosen
Leó Szilárd








Signature





Albert Einstein (14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955) was a German-born theoretical physicist[5] who developed the theory of relativity, one of the two pillars of modern physics (alongside quantum mechanics).[4][6]:274 Einstein's work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science.[7][8] Einstein is best known by the general public for his mass–energy equivalence formula E = mc2 (which has been dubbed "the world's most famous equation").[9] He received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to theoretical physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect",[10] a pivotal step in the evolution of quantum theory.
Near the beginning of his career, Einstein thought that Newtonian mechanics was no longer enough to reconcile the laws of classical mechanics with the laws of the electromagnetic field. This led him to develop his special theory of relativity during his time at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern (1902–1909), Switzerland. However, he realized that the principle of relativity could also be extended to gravitational fields and—with his subsequent theory of gravitation in 1916—he published a paper on general relativity. He continued to deal with problems of statistical mechanics and quantum theory, which led to his explanations of particle theory and the motion of molecules. He also investigated the thermal properties of light which laid the foundation of the photon theory of light. In 1917, Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to model the large-scale structure of the universe.[11][12]
Between 1895 and 1914, he lived in Switzerland (except for one year in Prague, 1911–12), where he received his academic diploma from the Swiss Federal Polytechnic in Zürich (later the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETH) in 1900. He later taught there at the same institute as a professor of theoretical physics between 1912 and 1914 before he left for Berlin. In 1901, after being stateless for more than five years, Einstein acquired Swiss citizenship, which he kept for the rest of his life. In 1905, Einstein was awarded a PhD by the University of Zürich. The same year, his annus mirabilis (miracle year), he published four groundbreaking papers, which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world, at the age of 26.
He was visiting the United States when Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933 and—being Jewish—did not go back to Germany, where he had been a professor at the Berlin Academy of Sciences. He settled in the United States, becoming an American citizen in 1940.[13] On the eve of World War II, he endorsed a letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt alerting him to the potential development of "extremely powerful bombs of a new type" and recommending that the U.S. begin similar research. This eventually led to what would become the Manhattan Project. Einstein supported defending the Allied forces, but generally denounced the idea of using the newly discovered nuclear fission as a weapon. Later, with the British philosopher Bertrand Russell, Einstein signed the Russell–Einstein Manifesto, which highlighted the danger of nuclear weapons. Einstein was affiliated with the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, until his death in 1955.
Einstein published more than 300 scientific papers along with over 150 non-scientific works.[11][14] Einstein's intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "Einstein" synonymous with "genius".[15]



Contents


1 Life and career

1.1 Early life and education
1.2 Marriages and children
1.3 Friends
1.4 Patent office

1.4.1 First scientific papers


1.5 Academic career
1.6 1921–1922: Travels abroad
1.7 1930–1931: Travel to the U.S.
1.8 1933: Emigration to the U.S.

1.8.1 Refugee status
1.8.2 Resident scholar at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study
1.8.3 World War II and the Manhattan Project
1.8.4 U.S. citizenship


1.9 Personal life

1.9.1 Supporter of civil rights
1.9.2 Assisting Zionist causes
1.9.3 Love of music
1.9.4 Political and religious views


1.10 Death


2 Scientific career

2.1 1905 – Annus Mirabilis papers
2.2 Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics
2.3 General principles
2.4 Theory of relativity and E = mc²
2.5 Photons and energy quanta
2.6 Quantized atomic vibrations
2.7 Adiabatic principle and action-angle variables
2.8 Wave–particle duality
2.9 Theory of critical opalescence
2.10 Zero-point energy
2.11 General relativity and the equivalence principle

2.11.1 Gravitational waves


2.12 Hole argument and Entwurf theory
2.13 Physical cosmology
2.14 Modern quantum theory
2.15 Bose–Einstein statistics
2.16 Energy momentum pseudotensor
2.17 Unified field theory
2.18 Wormholes
2.19 Einstein–Cartan theory
2.20 Equations of motion
2.21 Other investigations
2.22 Collaboration with other scientists

2.22.1 Einstein–de Haas experiment
2.22.2 Schrödinger gas model
2.22.3 Einstein refrigerator


2.23 Bohr versus Einstein
2.24 Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox


3 Non-scientific legacy
4 In popular culture
5 Awards and honors
6 Publications
7 See also
8 Notes and references

8.1 Explanatory notes
8.2 Citations
8.3 Further reading


9 External links



Life and career
Early life and education
See also: Einstein family




Einstein at the age of 3 in 1882






Albert Einstein in 1893 (age 14)






Einstein's matriculation certificate at the age of 17, showing his final grades from the Argovian cantonal school (Aargauische Kantonsschule, on a scale of 1–6, with 6 being the highest possible mark)


Albert Einstein was born in Ulm, in the Kingdom of Württemberg in the German Empire, on 14 March 1879.[5] His parents were Hermann Einstein, a salesman and engineer, and Pauline Koch. In 1880, the family moved to Munich, where Einstein's father and his uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein & Cie, a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current.[5]
The Einsteins were non-observant Ashkenazi Jews and Albert attended a Catholic elementary school in Munich, from the age of 5, for three years. At the age of 8, he was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium (now known as the Albert Einstein Gymnasium), where he received advanced primary and secondary school education until he left the German Empire seven years later.[16]
In 1894, Hermann and Jakob's company lost a bid to supply the city of Munich with electrical lighting because they lacked the capital to convert their equipment from the direct current (DC) standard to the more efficient alternating current (AC) standard.[17] The loss forced the sale of the Munich factory. In search of business, the Einstein family moved to Italy, first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia. When the family moved to Pavia, Einstein stayed in Munich to finish his studies at the Luitpold Gymnasium. His father intended for him to pursue electrical engineering, but Einstein clashed with authorities and resented the school's regimen and teaching method. He later wrote that the spirit of learning and creative thought was lost in strict rote learning. At the end of December 1894, he travelled to Italy to join his family in Pavia, convincing the school to let him go by using a doctor's note.[18] During his time in Italy he wrote a short essay with the title "On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field".[19][20]
Contrary to popular belief, Einstein never failed math. He had learned integral and differential calculus on his own before he was 15 years old.[21]
In 1895, at the age of 16, Einstein took the entrance examinations for the Swiss Federal Polytechnic in Zürich (later the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule, ETH). He failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the examination,[22] but obtained exceptional grades in physics and mathematics.[23] On the advice of the principal of the Polytechnic, he attended the Argovian cantonal school (gymnasium) in Aarau, Switzerland, in 1895–96 to complete his secondary schooling. While lodging with the family of professor Jost Winteler, he fell in love with Winteler's daughter, Marie. (Albert's sister Maja later married Winteler's son Paul.)[24] In January 1896, with his father's approval, Einstein renounced his citizenship in the German Kingdom of Württemberg to avoid military service.[25] In September 1896, he passed the Swiss Matura with mostly good grades, including a top grade of 6 in physics and mathematical subjects, on a scale of 1–6.[26] At 17, he enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Zürich Polytechnic. Marie Winteler, who was a year older, moved to Olsberg, Switzerland, for a teaching post.
Einstein's future wife, Mileva Marić, also enrolled at the Polytechnic that year. She was the only woman among the six students in the mathematics and physics section of the teaching diploma course. Over the next few years, Einstein and Marić's friendship developed into romance, and they read books together on extra-curricular physics in which Einstein was taking an increasing interest. In 1900, Einstein was awarded the Zürich Polytechnic teaching diploma, but Marić failed the examination with a poor grade in the mathematics component, theory of functions.[27] There have been claims that Marić collaborated with Einstein on his 1905 papers,[28][29] known as the Annus Mirabilis papers, but historians of physics who have studied the issue find no evidence that she made any substantive contributions.[30][31][32][33]
Marriages and children




Albert Einstein in 1904 (age 25)


The discovery and publication in 1987 of an early correspondence between Einstein and Marić revealed that they had had a daughter, called "Lieserl" in their letters, born in early 1902 in Novi Sad where Marić was staying with her parents. Marić returned to Switzerland without the child, whose real name and fate are unknown. Einstein probably never saw his daughter. The contents of his letter to Marić in September 1903 suggest that the girl was either given up for adoption or died of scarlet fever in infancy.[34][35]




Einstein with his wife Elsa, 1921


Einstein and Marić married in January 1903. In May 1904, their first son, Hans Albert Einstein, was born in Bern, Switzerland. Their second son, Eduard, was born in Zürich in July 1910. In April 1914 they moved to Berlin. After a few months his wife returned to Zürich with their sons, after learning that Einstein's chief romantic attraction was his first and second cousin Elsa.[36] They divorced on 14 February 1919, having lived apart for five years.[37] Eduard, whom his father called "Tete" (for petit), had a breakdown at about age 20 and was diagnosed with schizophrenia.[38] His mother cared for him and he was also committed to asylums for several periods, finally being committed permanently after her death.[39]
In letters revealed in 2015, Einstein wrote to his early love, Marie Winteler, about his marriage and his still-strong feelings for Marie. In 1910 he wrote to her that "I think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be" while his wife was pregnant with their second child. Einstein spoke about a "misguided love" and a "missed life" regarding his love for Marie.[40]
Einstein married Elsa Löwenthal in 1919,[41][42] after having had a personal relationship with her since 1912.[43] She was a first cousin maternally and a second cousin paternally.[43] In 1933, they emigrated to the United States. In 1935, Elsa Einstein was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems; she died in December 1936.[44]
Friends
Among Einstein's well-known friends were Michele Besso, Paul Ehrenfest, Marcel Grossmann, János Plesch, Maurice Solovine, and Stephen Wise.[45]
Patent office




Olympia Academy founders: Conrad Habicht, Maurice Solovine and Einstein.


After graduating in 1900, Einstein spent almost two frustrating years searching for a teaching post. He acquired Swiss citizenship in February 1901,[46] but was not conscripted for medical reasons. With the help of Marcel Grossmann's father, he secured a job in Bern at the Federal Office for Intellectual Property, the patent office,[47][48] as an assistant examiner – level III.[49][50]
Einstein evaluated patent applications for a variety of devices including a gravel sorter and an electromechanical typewriter.[50] In 1903, his position at the Swiss Patent Office became permanent, although he was passed over for promotion until he "fully mastered machine technology".[51]:370
Much of his work at the patent office related to questions about transmission of electric signals and electrical-mechanical synchronization of time, two technical problems that show up conspicuously in the thought experiments that eventually led Einstein to his radical conclusions about the nature of light and the fundamental connection between space and time.[51]:377
With a few friends he had met in Bern, Einstein started a small discussion group in 1902, self-mockingly named "The Olympia Academy", which met regularly to discuss science and philosophy. Their readings included the works of Henri Poincaré, Ernst Mach, and David Hume, which influenced his scientific and philosophical outlook.[52]
First scientific papers




Einstein's official 1921 portrait after receiving the Nobel Prize in Physics


In 1900, Einstein's paper "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen" ("Conclusions from the Capillarity Phenomena") was published in the journal Annalen der Physik.[53][54] On 30 April 1905, Einstein completed his thesis,[55] with Alfred Kleiner, Professor of Experimental Physics, serving as pro-forma advisor. As a result, Einstein was awarded a PhD by the University of Zürich, with his dissertation "A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions".[55][56]
In that same year, which has been called Einstein's annus mirabilis (miracle year), he published four groundbreaking papers, on the photoelectric effect, Brownian motion, special relativity, and the equivalence of mass and energy, which were to bring him to the notice of the academic world, at the age of 26.
Academic career
By 1908, he was recognized as a leading scientist and was appointed lecturer at the University of Bern. The following year, after giving a lecture on electrodynamics and the relativity principle at the University of Zürich, Alfred Kleiner recommended him to the faculty for a newly created professorship in theoretical physics. Einstein was appointed associate professor in 1909.[57]
Einstein became a full professor at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague in April 1911, accepting Austrian citizenship in the Austro-Hungarian Empire to do so.[58][59] During his Prague stay, he wrote 11 scientific works, five of them on radiation mathematics and on the quantum theory of solids. In July 1912, he returned to his alma mater in Zürich. From 1912 until 1914, he was professor of theoretical physics at the ETH Zurich, where he taught analytical mechanics and thermodynamics. He also studied continuum mechanics, the molecular theory of heat, and the problem of gravitation, on which he worked with mathematician and friend Marcel Grossmann.[60]
On 3 July 1913, he was voted for membership in the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin. Max Planck and Walther Nernst visited him the next week in Zurich to persuade him to join the academy, additionally offering him the post of director at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, which was soon to be established.[61] (Membership in the academy included paid salary and professorship without teaching duties at the Humboldt University of Berlin.) He was officially elected to the academy on 24 July, and he accepted to move to the German Empire the next year. His decision to move to Berlin was also influenced by the prospect of living near his cousin Elsa, with whom he had developed a romantic affair. He joined the academy and thus the Berlin University on 1 April 1914.[62] As World War I broke out that year, the plan for Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics was aborted. The institute was established on 1 October 1917, with Einstein as its Director.[63] In 1916, Einstein was elected president of the German Physical Society (1916–1918).[64]
Based on calculations Einstein made in 1911, about his new theory of general relativity, light from another star should be bent by the Sun's gravity. In 1919, that prediction was confirmed by Sir Arthur Eddington during the solar eclipse of 29 May 1919. Those observations were published in the international media, making Einstein world famous. On 7 November 1919, the leading British newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: "Revolution in Science – New Theory of the Universe – Newtonian Ideas Overthrown".[65]
In 1920, he became a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.[66] In 1922, he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect".[10] While the general theory of relativity was still considered somewhat controversial, the citation also does not treat the cited work as an explanation but merely as a discovery of the law, as the idea of photons was considered outlandish and did not receive universal acceptance until the 1924 derivation of the Planck spectrum by S. N. Bose. Einstein was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1921.[4] He also received the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in 1925.[4]
1921–1922: Travels abroad




Albert Einstein at a session of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (League of Nations) of which he was a member from 1922 to 1932.


Einstein visited New York City for the first time on 2 April 1921, where he received an official welcome by Mayor John Francis Hylan, followed by three weeks of lectures and receptions. He went on to deliver several lectures at Columbia University and Princeton University, and in Washington he accompanied representatives of the National Academy of Science on a visit to the White House. On his return to Europe he was the guest of the British statesman and philosopher Viscount Haldane in London, where he met several renowned scientific, intellectual and political figures, and delivered a lecture at King's College London.[67] [68]
He also published an essay, "My First Impression of the U.S.A.," in July 1921, in which he tried briefly to describe some characteristics of Americans, much as had Alexis de Tocqueville, who published his own impressions in Democracy in America (1835).[69] For some of his observations, Einstein was clearly surprised: "What strikes a visitor is the joyous, positive attitude to life . . . The American is friendly, self-confident, optimistic, and without envy."[70]:20
In 1922, his travels took him to Asia and later to Palestine, as part of a six-month excursion and speaking tour, as he visited Singapore, Ceylon and Japan, where he gave a series of lectures to thousands of Japanese. After his first public lecture, he met the emperor and empress at the Imperial Palace, where thousands came to watch. In a letter to his sons, he described his impression of the Japanese as being modest, intelligent, considerate, and having a true feel for art.[71]
Because of Einstein's travels to the Far East, he was unable to personally accept the Nobel Prize for Physics at the Stockholm award ceremony in December 1922. In his place, the banquet speech was held by a German diplomat, who praised Einstein not only as a scientist but also as an international peacemaker and activist.[72]
On his return voyage, he visited Palestine for 12 days in what would become his only visit to that region. He was greeted as if he were a head of state, rather than a physicist, which included a cannon salute upon arriving at the home of the British high commissioner, Sir Herbert Samuel. During one reception, the building was stormed by people who wanted to see and hear him. In Einstein's talk to the audience, he expressed happiness that the Jewish people were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world.[73]
Einstein visited Spain for two weeks in 1923, where he briefly met Santiago Ramón y Cajal and also received a diploma from King Alfonso XIII naming him a member of the Spanish Academy of Sciences.[74]
From 1922 to 1932, Einstein was involved in the works of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations, in Geneva, an organisation created to promote international exchange between scientists, researchers, teachers, artists and intellectuals.[75] His former physics professor Hendrik Lorentz and the french chemist Marie Curie were also members of this committee.
1930–1931: Travel to the U.S.
In December 1930, Einstein visited America for the second time, originally intended as a two-month working visit as a research fellow at the California Institute of Technology. After the national attention he received during his first trip to the U.S., he and his arrangers aimed to protect his privacy. Although swamped with telegrams and invitations to receive awards or speak publicly, he declined them all.[76]
After arriving in New York City, Einstein was taken to various places and events, including Chinatown, a lunch with the editors of the New York Times, and a performance of Carmen at the Metropolitan Opera, where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival. During the days following, he was given the keys to the city by Mayor Jimmy Walker and met the president of Columbia University, who described Einstein as "the ruling monarch of the mind".[77] Harry Emerson Fosdick, pastor at New York's Riverside Church, gave Einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of Einstein, standing at the entrance.[77] Also during his stay in New York, he joined a crowd of 15,000 people at Madison Square Garden during a Hanukkah celebration.[77]




Einstein (left) and Charlie Chaplin at the Hollywood premiere of City Lights, January 1931


Einstein next traveled to California, where he met Caltech president and Nobel laureate, Robert A. Millikan. His friendship with Millikan was "awkward", as Millikan "had a penchant for patriotic militarism," where Einstein was a pronounced pacifist.[78] During an address to Caltech's students, Einstein noted that science was often inclined to do more harm than good.[79]
This aversion to war also led Einstein to befriend author Upton Sinclair and film star Charlie Chaplin, both noted for their pacifism. Carl Laemmle, head of Universal Studios, gave Einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to Chaplin. They had an instant rapport, with Chaplin inviting Einstein and his wife, Elsa, to his home for dinner. Chaplin said Einstein's outward persona, calm and gentle, seemed to conceal a "highly emotional temperament," from which came his "extraordinary intellectual energy".[80]:320
Chaplin's film, City Lights, was to premiere a few days later in Hollywood, and Chaplin invited Einstein and Elsa to join him as his special guests. Walter Isaacson, Einstein's biographer, described this as "one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity".[79] Chaplin visited Einstein at his home on a later trip to Berlin, and recalled his "modest little flat" and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory. Chaplin speculated that it was "possibly used as kindling wood by the Nazis."[80]:322
1933: Emigration to the U.S.




Cartoon of Einstein, who has shed his "Pacifism" wings, standing next to a pillar labeled "World Peace". He is rolling up his sleeves and holding a sword labeled "Preparedness" (by Charles R. Macauley, c. 1933).


In February 1933 while on a visit to the United States, Einstein knew he could not return to Germany with the rise to power of the Nazis under Germany's new chancellor, Adolf Hitler.[81][82]
While at American universities in early 1933, he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. He and his wife Elsa returned to Belgium by ship in March, and during the trip they learned that their cottage was raided by the Nazis and his personal sailboat confiscated. Upon landing in Antwerp on 28 March, he immediately went to the German consulate and surrendered his passport, formally renouncing his German citizenship.[83] The Nazis later sold his boat and converted his cottage into a Hitler Youth camp.[84]
Refugee status




Albert Einstein's landing card (26 May 1933), when he landed in Dover (United Kingdom) from Ostende (Belgium) to visit Oxford.


In April 1933, Einstein discovered that the new German government had passed laws barring Jews from holding any official positions, including teaching at universities.[83] Historian Gerald Holton describes how, with "virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues", thousands of Jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed.[70]
A month later, Einstein's works were among those targeted by the German Student Union in the Nazi book burnings, with Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proclaiming, "Jewish intellectualism is dead."[83] One German magazine included him in a list of enemies of the German regime with the phrase, "not yet hanged", offering a $5,000 bounty on his head.[83][85] In a subsequent letter to physicist and friend Max Born, who had already emigrated from Germany to England, Einstein wrote, "... I must confess that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise."[83] After moving to the U.S., he described the book burnings as a "spontaneous emotional outburst" by those who "shun popular enlightenment," and "more than anything else in the world, fear the influence of men of intellectual independence."[86]
Einstein was now without a permanent home, unsure where he would live and work, and equally worried about the fate of countless other scientists still in Germany. He rented a house in De Haan, Belgium, where he lived for a few months. In late July 1933, he went to England for about six weeks at the personal invitation of British naval officer Commander Oliver Locker-Lampson, who had become friends with Einstein in the preceding years. To protect Einstein, Locker-Lampson had two assistants watch over him at his secluded cottage outside London, with photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding Einstein, published in the Daily Herald on 24 July 1933.[87][88]
Locker-Lampson took Einstein to meet Winston Churchill at his home, and later, Austen Chamberlain and former Prime Minister Lloyd George.[89] Einstein asked them to help bring Jewish scientists out of Germany. British historian Martin Gilbert notes that Churchill responded immediately, and sent his friend, physicist Frederick Lindemann to Germany to seek out Jewish scientists and place them in British universities.[90] Churchill later observed that as a result of Germany having driven the Jews out, they had lowered their "technical standards" and put the Allies' technology ahead of theirs.[90]
Einstein later contacted leaders of other nations, including Turkey's Prime Minister, İsmet İnönü, to whom he wrote in September 1933 requesting placement of unemployed German-Jewish scientists. As a result of Einstein's letter, Jewish invitees to Turkey eventually totaled over "1,000 saved individuals".[91]
Locker-Lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend British citizenship to Einstein, during which period Einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in Europe.[92] In one of his speeches he denounced Germany's treatment of Jews, while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting Jewish citizenship in Palestine, as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere.[93] In his speech he described Einstein as a "citizen of the world" who should be offered a temporary shelter in the U.K.[note 2][94] Both bills failed, however, and Einstein then accepted an earlier offer from the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study, in the U.S., to become a resident scholar.[92]
Resident scholar at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study




Portrait taken in 1935 in Princeton


In October 1933 Einstein returned to the U.S. and took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study,[92][95] noted for having become a refuge for scientists fleeing Nazi Germany.[96] At the time, most American universities, including Harvard, Princeton and Yale, had minimal or no Jewish faculty or students, as a result of their Jewish quota which lasted until the late 1940s.[96]
Einstein was still undecided on his future. He had offers from several European universities, including Christ Church, Oxford where he stayed for three short periods between May 1931 and June 1933 and was offered a 5-year studentship,[97][98] but in 1935 he arrived at the decision to remain permanently in the United States and apply for citizenship.[92][99]
Einstein's affiliation with the Institute for Advanced Study would last until his death in 1955.[100] He was one of the four first selected (two of the others being John von Neumann and Kurt Gödel) at the new Institute, where he soon developed a close friendship with Gödel. The two would take long walks together discussing their work. Bruria Kaufman, his assistant, later became a physicist. During this period, Einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics, both unsuccessfully.
World War II and the Manhattan Project
See also: Einstein–Szilárd letter
In 1939, a group of Hungarian scientists that included émigré physicist Leó Szilárd attempted to alert Washington to ongoing Nazi atomic bomb research. The group's warnings were discounted. Einstein and Szilárd, along with other refugees such as Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner, "regarded it as their responsibility to alert Americans to the possibility that German scientists might win the race to build an atomic bomb, and to warn that Hitler would be more than willing to resort to such a weapon."[101][102] To make certain the U.S. was aware of the danger, in July 1939, a few months before the beginning of World War II in Europe, Szilárd and Wigner visited Einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs, which Einstein, a pacifist, said he had never considered.[103] He was asked to lend his support by writing a letter, with Szilárd, to President Roosevelt, recommending the U.S. pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research.
The letter is believed to be "arguably the key stimulus for the U.S. adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the U.S. entry into World War II".[104] In addition to the letter, Einstein used his connections with the Belgian Royal Family[105] and the Belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the White House's Oval Office. President Roosevelt could not take the risk of allowing Hitler to possess atomic bombs first. As a result of Einstein's letter and his meetings with Roosevelt, the U.S. entered the "race" to develop the bomb, drawing on its "immense material, financial, and scientific resources" to initiate the Manhattan Project. The U.S. became the only country to successfully develop nuclear weapons during World War II and also remains the only country to have used them in combat, against Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 and 9 August 1945, respectively, towards the end of the war.
For Einstein, "war was a disease ... [and] he called for resistance to war." By signing the letter to Roosevelt, he went against his pacifist principles.[106] In 1954, a year before his death, Einstein said to his old friend, Linus Pauling, "I made one great mistake in my life—when I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justification—the danger that the Germans would make them ..."[107]
U.S. citizenship




Einstein accepting U.S. citizenship certificate from judge Phillip Forman


Einstein became an American citizen in 1940. Not long after settling into his career at the Institute for Advanced Study (in Princeton, New Jersey), he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in American culture when compared to Europe. He recognized the "right of individuals to say and think what they pleased", without social barriers, and as a result, individuals were encouraged, he said, to be more creative, a trait he valued from his own early education.[108]
Personal life
Supporter of civil rights
Einstein was a passionate, committed antiracist and joined National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in Princeton, where he campaigned for the civil rights of African Americans. He considered racism America's "worst disease,"[85] seeing it as "handed down from one generation to the next".[109] As part of his involvement, he corresponded with civil rights activist W. E. B. Du Bois and was prepared to testify on his behalf during his trial in 1951.[110]:565 When Einstein offered to be a character witness for Du Bois, the judge decided to drop the case.[111]




Einstein in 1947


In 1946 Einstein visited Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, a historically black college, where he was awarded an honorary degree. (Lincoln was the first university in the United States to grant college degrees to African Americans; alumni include Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall.) Einstein gave a speech about racism in America, adding, "I do not intend to be quiet about it."[112] A resident of Princeton recalls that Einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student.[111]
Assisting Zionist causes
Einstein was a figurehead leader in helping establish the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, which opened in 1925, and was among its first Board of Governors. Earlier, in 1921, he was asked by the biochemist and president of the World Zionist Organization, Chaim Weizmann, to help raise funds for the planned university.[113] He also submitted various suggestions as to its initial programs.
Among those, he advised first creating an Institute of Agriculture in order to settle the undeveloped land. That should be followed, he suggested, by a Chemical Institute and an Institute of Microbiology, to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria, which he called an "evil" that was undermining a third of the country's development.[114]:161 Establishing an Oriental Studies Institute, to include language courses given in both Hebrew and Arabic, for scientific exploration of the country and its historical monuments, was also important.[114]:158
Chaim Weizmann later became Israel's first president. Upon his death while in office in November 1952 and at the urging of Ezriel Carlebach, Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion offered Einstein the position of President of Israel, a mostly ceremonial post.[115][116] The offer was presented by Israel's ambassador in Washington, Abba Eban, who explained that the offer "embodies the deepest respect which the Jewish people can repose in any of its sons".[117] Einstein declined, and wrote in his response that he was "deeply moved", and "at once saddened and ashamed" that he could not accept it.[117]
Love of music




Einstein (right) with writer, musician and Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore, 1930



Einstein developed an appreciation for music at an early age, and later wrote: "If I were not a physicist, I would probably be a musician. I often think in music. I live my daydreams in music. I see my life in terms of music... I get most joy in life out of music."[118][119]
His mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin, not only to instill in him a love of music but also to help him assimilate into German culture. According to conductor Leon Botstein, Einstein is said to have begun playing when he was 5, although he did not enjoy it at that age.[120]
When he turned 13, he discovered the violin sonatas of Mozart, whereupon "Einstein fell in love" with Mozart's music and studied music more willingly. He taught himself to play without "ever practicing systematically", he said, deciding that "love is a better teacher than a sense of duty."[120] At age 17, he was heard by a school examiner in Aarau as he played Beethoven's violin sonatas, the examiner stating afterward that his playing was "remarkable and revealing of 'great insight'." What struck the examiner, writes Botstein, was that Einstein "displayed a deep love of the music, a quality that was and remains in short supply. Music possessed an unusual meaning for this student."[120]
Music took on a pivotal and permanent role in Einstein's life from that period on. Although the idea of becoming a professional musician himself was not on his mind at any time, among those with whom Einstein played chamber music were a few professionals, and he performed for private audiences and friends. Chamber music had also become a regular part of his social life while living in Bern, Zürich, and Berlin, where he played with Max Planck and his son, among others. He is sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the Köchel catalogue of Mozart's work; that edition was prepared by Alfred Einstein, who may have been a distant relation.[121][122]
In 1931, while engaged in research at the California Institute of Technology, he visited the Zoellner family conservatory in Los Angeles, where he played some of Beethoven and Mozart's works with members of the Zoellner Quartet.[123][124] Near the end of his life, when the young Juilliard Quartet visited him in Princeton, he played his violin with them, and the quartet was "impressed by Einstein's level of coordination and intonation".[120]
Political and religious views
Main articles: Albert Einstein's political views and Albert Einstein's religious views




Albert Einstein with his wife Elsa Einstein and Zionist leaders, including future President of Israel Chaim Weizmann, his wife Vera Weizmann, Menahem Ussishkin, and Ben-Zion Mossinson on arrival in New York City in 1921


Einstein's political view was in favor of socialism and critical of capitalism, which he detailed in his essays such as "Why Socialism?".[125][126] Einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics.[92] He strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation.[127] The FBI created a secret dossier on Einstein in 1932, and by the time of his death his FBI file was 1,427 pages long.[128]
Einstein spoke of his religious outlook in a wide array of original writings and interviews. Einstein stated that he believed in the pantheistic God of Baruch Spinoza.[129] He did not believe in a personal God who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings, a view which he described as naïve.[130] He clarified however that, "I am not an atheist",[131] preferring to call himself an agnostic,[132] or a "deeply religious nonbeliever".[130] When asked if he believed in an afterlife, Einstein replied, "No. And one life is enough for me."[133]
Death
On 17 April 1955, Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, which had previously been reinforced surgically by Rudolph Nissen in 1948.[134] He took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the State of Israel's seventh anniversary with him to the hospital, but he did not live long enough to complete it.[135]
Einstein refused surgery, saying: "I want to go when I want. It is tasteless to prolong life artificially. I have done my share, it is time to go. I will do it elegantly."[136] He died in Princeton Hospital early the next morning at the age of 76, having continued to work until near the end.
During the autopsy, the pathologist of Princeton Hospital, Thomas Stoltz Harvey, removed Einstein's brain for preservation without the permission of his family, in the hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made Einstein so intelligent.[137] Einstein's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location.[138][139]
In a memorial lecture delivered on 13 December 1965, at UNESCO headquarters, nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer summarized his impression of Einstein as a person: "He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without worldliness ... There was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn."[140]
Scientific career
Throughout his life, Einstein published hundreds of books and articles.[14][5] He published more than 300 scientific papers and 150 non-scientific ones.[11][14] On 5 December 2014, universities and archives announced the release of Einstein's papers, comprising more than 30,000 unique documents.[141][142] Einstein's intellectual achievements and originality have made the word "Einstein" synonymous with "genius".[15] In addition to the work he did by himself he also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including the Bose–Einstein statistics, the Einstein refrigerator and others.[143]
1905 – Annus Mirabilis papers
Main articles: Annus Mirabilis papers, Photoelectric effect, Special theory of relativity, Mass–energy equivalence, and Brownian motion
The Annus Mirabilis papers are four articles pertaining to the photoelectric effect (which gave rise to quantum theory), Brownian motion, the special theory of relativity, and E = mc2 that Einstein published in the Annalen der Physik scientific journal in 1905. These four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space, time, and matter. The four papers are:


Title (translated)
Area of focus
Received
Published
Significance


On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light
Photoelectric effect
18 March
9 June
Resolved an unsolved puzzle by suggesting that energy is exchanged only in discrete amounts (quanta).[144] This idea was pivotal to the early development of quantum theory.[145]


On the Motion of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid, as Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat
Brownian motion
11 May
18 July
Explained empirical evidence for the atomic theory, supporting the application of statistical physics.


On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies
Special relativity
30 June
26 September
Reconciled Maxwell's equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics by introducing major changes to mechanics close to the speed of light, resulting from analysis based on empirical evidence that the speed of light is independent of the motion of the observer.[146] Discredited the concept of a "luminiferous ether".[147]


Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?
Matter–energy equivalence
27 September
21 November
Equivalence of matter and energy, E = mc2 (and by implication, the ability of gravity to "bend" light), the existence of "rest energy", and the basis of nuclear energy.


Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics
Main articles: Statistical mechanics, thermal fluctuations, and statistical physics
Einstein's first paper[148] submitted in 1900 to Annalen der Physik was on capillary attraction. It was published in 1901 with the title "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen", which translates as "Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena". Two papers he published in 1902–1903 (thermodynamics) attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view. These papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion, which showed that Brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist. His research in 1903 and 1904 was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena.[148]
General principles
He articulated the principle of relativity. This was understood by Hermann Minkowski to be a generalization of rotational invariance from space to space-time. Other principles postulated by Einstein and later vindicated are the principle of equivalence, general covariance and the principle of adiabatic invariance of the quantum number.
Theory of relativity and E = mc²
Main article: History of special relativity
Einstein's "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper" ("On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies") was received on 30 June 1905 and published 26 September of that same year. It reconciles Maxwell's equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics, by introducing major changes to mechanics close to the speed of light. This later became known as Einstein's special theory of relativity.
Consequences of this include the time–space frame of a moving body appearing to slow down and contract (in the direction of motion) when measured in the frame of the observer. This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether—one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the time—was superfluous.[149]
In his paper on mass–energy equivalence, Einstein produced E = mc2 from his special relativity equations.[150] Einstein's 1905 work on relativity remained controversial for many years, but was accepted by leading physicists, starting with Max Planck.[151][152]
Photons and energy quanta




The photoelectric effect. Incoming photons on the left strike a metal plate (bottom), and eject electrons, depicted as flying off to the right.


Main articles: Photon and Quantum
In a 1905 paper,[153] Einstein postulated that light itself consists of localized particles (quanta). Einstein's light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists, including Max Planck and Niels Bohr. This idea only became universally accepted in 1919, with Robert Millikan's detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect, and with the measurement of Compton scattering.
Einstein concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a collection of photons with energy hf each, where h is Planck's constant. He does not say much more, because he is not sure how the particles are related to the wave. But he does suggest that this idea would explain certain experimental results, notably the photoelectric effect.[153]
Quantized atomic vibrations
Main article: Einstein solid
In 1907, Einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator. In the Einstein model, each atom oscillates independently—a series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator. Einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult, but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics. Peter Debye refined this model.[154]
Adiabatic principle and action-angle variables
Main article: Old quantum theory
Throughout the 1910s, quantum mechanics expanded in scope to cover many different systems. After Ernest Rutherford discovered the nucleus and proposed that electrons orbit like planets, Niels Bohr was able to show that the same quantum mechanical postulates introduced by Planck and developed by Einstein would explain the discrete motion of electrons in atoms, and the periodic table of the elements.
Einstein contributed to these developments by linking them with the 1898 arguments Wilhelm Wien had made. Wien had shown that the hypothesis of adiabatic invariance of a thermal equilibrium state allows all the blackbody curves at different temperature to be derived from one another by a simple shifting process. Einstein noted in 1911 that the same adiabatic principle shows that the quantity which is quantized in any mechanical motion must be an adiabatic invariant. Arnold Sommerfeld identified this adiabatic invariant as the action variable of classical mechanics.
Wave–particle duality




Einstein during his visit to the United States


Main article: Wave–particle duality
Although the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner Second Class in 1906, he had not given up on academia. In 1908, he became a Privatdozent at the University of Bern.[155] In "Über die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen über das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung" ("The Development of our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation"), on the quantization of light, and in an earlier 1909 paper, Einstein showed that Max Planck's energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as independent, point-like particles. This paper introduced the photon concept (although the name photon was introduced later by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1926) and inspired the notion of wave–particle duality in quantum mechanics. Einstein saw this wave–particle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new, unified foundation.
Theory of critical opalescence
Main article: Critical opalescence
Einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations, giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point. Ordinarily the density fluctuations are controlled by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density. At the critical point, this derivative is zero, leading to large fluctuations. The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered, making the fluid look milky white. Einstein relates this to Rayleigh scattering, which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength, and which explains why the sky is blue.[156] Einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations, and demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter.
Zero-point energy
Main article: Zero-point energy
In a series of works completed from 1911 to 1913, Planck reformulated his 1900 quantum theory and introduced the idea of zero-point energy in his "second quantum theory". Soon, this idea attracted the attention of Einstein and his assistant Otto Stern. Assuming the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy, they then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with the experimental data. The numbers matched nicely. However, after publishing the findings, they promptly withdrew their support, because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy.[157]
General relativity and the equivalence principle
Main article: History of general relativity
See also: Principle of equivalence, Theory of relativity, and Einstein field equations




Eddington's photograph of a solar eclipse


General relativity (GR) is a theory of gravitation that was developed by Einstein between 1907 and 1915. According to general relativity, the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of space and time by those masses. General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics. It provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes, regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape.
As Einstein later said, the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory, while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion (even accelerated ones) should appear more satisfactory.[158] Consequently, in 1907 he published an article on acceleration under special relativity. In that article titled "On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It", he argued that free fall is really inertial motion, and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply. This argument is called the equivalence principle. In the same article, Einstein also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation, gravitational red shift and deflection of light.[159][160]
In 1911, Einstein published another article "On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of Light" expanding on the 1907 article, in which he estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies. Thus, the theoretical prediction of general relativity can for the first time be tested experimentally.[161]
Gravitational waves
In 1916, Einstein predicted gravitational waves,[162][163] ripples in the curvature of spacetime which propagate as waves, traveling outward from the source, transporting energy as gravitational radiation. The existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity due to its Lorentz invariance which brings the concept of a finite speed of propagation of the physical interactions of gravity with it. By contrast, gravitational waves cannot exist in the Newtonian theory of gravitation, which postulates that the physical interactions of gravity propagate at infinite speed.
The first, indirect, detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s through observation of a pair of closely orbiting neutron stars, PSR B1913+16.[164] The explanation of the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves.[164][165] Einstein's prediction was confirmed on 11 February 2016, when researchers at LIGO published the first observation of gravitational waves,[166] on Earth, exactly one hundred years after the prediction.[164][167][168][169][170]
Hole argument and Entwurf theory
Main article: Hole argument
While developing general relativity, Einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory. He formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible. He gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations, and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only.
In June 1913, the Entwurf ("draft") theory was the result of these investigations. As its name suggests, it was a sketch of a theory, less elegant and more difficult than general relativity, with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions. After more than two years of intensive work, Einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken[171] and abandoned the theory in November 1915.
Physical cosmology
Main article: Physical cosmology


Part of a series on


Physical cosmology







Big Bang · Universe
Age of the universe
Chronology of the universe






Early universe





Inflation · Nucleosynthesis




Backgrounds




Gravitational wave (GWB)
Microwave (CMB) · Neutrino (CNB)











Expansion · Future


Hubble's law · Redshift
Metric expansion of space
FLRW metric · Friedmann equations
Inhomogeneous cosmology
Future of an expanding universe
Ultimate fate of the universe








Components · Structure



Components




Lambda-CDM model
Dark energy · Dark fluid · Dark matter




Structure




Shape of the universe
Galaxy filament · Galaxy formation
Large quasar group
Large-scale structure
Reionization · Structure formation











Experiments


Black Hole Initiative (BHI)
BOOMERanG
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE)
Illustris project
Planck space observatory
Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)
2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey ("2dF")

Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe (WMAP)









Scientists



Aaronson
Alfvén
Alpher
Bharadwaj
Copernicus
de Sitter
Dicke
Ehlers
Einstein
Ellis
Friedman
Galileo
Gamow
Guth
Hawking
Hubble
Lemaître
Mather
Newton
Penrose
Penzias
Rubin
Schmidt
Smoot
Suntzeff
Sunyaev
Tolman
Wilson
Zel'dovich



List of cosmologists








Subject history



Discovery of cosmic microwave
background radiation

History of the Big Bang theory

Religious interpretations of
the Big Bang theory

Timeline of cosmological theories








 Category
 Cosmology portal
 Astronomy portal







v
t
e





In 1917, Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole.[172] He discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was dynamic, either contracting or expanding. As observational evidence for a dynamic universe was not known at the time, Einstein introduced a new term, the cosmological constant, to the field equations, in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe. The modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature, in accordance with Einstein's understanding of Mach's principle in these years. This model became known as the Einstein World or Einstein's static universe.[173][174]
Following the discovery of the recession of the nebulae by Edwin Hubble in 1929, Einstein abandoned his static model of the universe, and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos, The Friedmann-Einstein universe of 1931[175][176] and the Einstein–de Sitter universe of 1932.[177][178] In each of these models, Einstein discarded the cosmological constant, claiming that it was "in any case theoretically unsatisfactory".[175][176][179]
In many Einstein biographies, it is claimed that Einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his "biggest blunder". The astrophysicist Mario Livio has recently cast doubt on this claim, suggesting that it may be exaggerated.[180]
In late 2013, a team led by the Irish physicist Cormac O'Raifeartaigh discovered evidence that, shortly after learning of Hubble's observations of the recession of the nebulae, Einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe.[181][182] In a hitherto overlooked manuscript, apparently written in early 1931, Einstein explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter, a process he associated with the cosmological constant.[183][184] As he stated in the paper, "In what follows, I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation (1) that can account for Hubbel's [sic] facts, and in which the density is constant over time" ... "If one considers a physically bounded volume, particles of matter will be continually leaving it. For the density to remain constant, new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space."
It thus appears that Einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before Hoyle, Bondi and Gold.[185][186] However, Einstein's steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea.[183][184][187]
Modern quantum theory
Main article: Schrödinger equation




Newspaper headline on 4 May 1935


Einstein was displeased with quantum theory and quantum mechanics (a theory he had helped create), despite its acceptance by other physicists, stating that God "is not playing at dice."[188] Einstein continued to maintain his disbelief in the theory, and attempted unsuccessfully to disprove it until he died at the age of 76.[189]
In 1917, at the height of his work on relativity, Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission, the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser.[190] This article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with Planck's distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode. This paper was enormously influential in the later development of quantum mechanics, because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws.
Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie's work, and supported his ideas, which were received skeptically at first. In another major paper from this era, Einstein gave a wave equation for de Broglie waves, which Einstein suggested was the Hamilton–Jacobi equation of mechanics. This paper would inspire Schrödinger's work of 1926.
Bose–Einstein statistics
Main article: Bose–Einstein statistics
In 1924, Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles. Einstein noted that Bose's statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles, and submitted his translation of Bose's paper to the Zeitschrift für Physik. Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications, among them the Bose–Einstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures.[191] It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST–JILA laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder.[192] Bose–Einstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons. Einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University.[143]
Energy momentum pseudotensor
Main article: Stress–energy–momentum pseudotensor
General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime, so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum. Noether's theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance, but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry. The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether's presecriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason.
Einstein argued that this is true for fundamental reasons, because the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates. He maintained that the non-covariant energy momentum pseudotensor was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field. This approach has been echoed by Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz, and others, and has become standard.
The use of non-covariant objects like pseudotensors was heavily criticized in 1917 by Erwin Schrödinger and others.
Unified field theory
Main article: Classical unified field theories
Following his research on general relativity, Einstein entered into a series of attempts to generalize his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism as another aspect of a single entity. In 1950, he described his "unified field theory" in a Scientific American article titled "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation".[193] Although he continued to be lauded for his work, Einstein became increasingly isolated in his research, and his efforts were ultimately unsuccessful. In his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces, Einstein ignored some mainstream developments in physics, most notably the strong and weak nuclear forces, which were not well understood until many years after his death. Mainstream physics, in turn, largely ignored Einstein's approaches to unification. Einstein's dream of unifying other laws of physics with gravity motivates modern quests for a theory of everything and in particular string theory, where geometrical fields emerge in a unified quantum-mechanical setting.
Wormholes
Main article: Wormhole
In 1935, Einstein collaborated with Nathan Rosen to produce a model of a wormhole, often called Einstein–Rosen bridges.[194][195] His motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations, in line with the program outlined in the paper "Do Gravitational Fields play an Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary Particles?". These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches.[196]
If one end of a wormhole was positively charged, the other end would be negatively charged. These properties led Einstein to believe that pairs of particles and antiparticles could be described in this way.
Einstein–Cartan theory
Main article: Einstein–Cartan theory




Einstein at his office, University of Berlin, 1920


In order to incorporate spinning point particles into general relativity, the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part, called the torsion. This modification was made by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s.
Equations of motion
Main article: Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations
The theory of general relativity has a fundamental law—the Einstein equations which describe how space curves, the geodesic equation which describes how particles move may be derived from the Einstein equations.
Since the equations of general relativity are non-linear, a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields, like a black hole, would move on a trajectory which is determined by the Einstein equations themselves, not by a new law. So Einstein proposed that the path of a singular solution, like a black hole, would be determined to be a geodesic from general relativity itself.
This was established by Einstein, Infeld, and Hoffmann for pointlike objects without angular momentum, and by Roy Kerr for spinning objects.
Other investigations
Main article: Einstein's unsuccessful investigations
Einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned. These pertain to force, superconductivity, and other research.
Collaboration with other scientists




The 1927 Solvay Conference in Brussels, a gathering of the world's top physicists. Einstein is in the center.


In addition to longtime collaborators Leopold Infeld, Nathan Rosen, Peter Bergmann and others, Einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists.
Einstein–de Haas experiment
Main article: Einstein–de Haas effect
Einstein and De Haas demonstrated that magnetization is due to the motion of electrons, nowadays known to be the spin. In order to show this, they reversed the magnetization in an iron bar suspended on a torsion pendulum. They confirmed that this leads the bar to rotate, because the electron's angular momentum changes as the magnetization changes. This experiment needed to be sensitive, because the angular momentum associated with electrons is small, but it definitively established that electron motion of some kind is responsible for magnetization.
Schrödinger gas model
Einstein suggested to Erwin Schrödinger that he might be able to reproduce the statistics of a Bose–Einstein gas by considering a box. Then to each possible quantum motion of a particle in a box associate an independent harmonic oscillator. Quantizing these oscillators, each level will have an integer occupation number, which will be the number of particles in it.
This formulation is a form of second quantization, but it predates modern quantum mechanics. Erwin Schrödinger applied this to derive the thermodynamic properties of a semiclassical ideal gas. Schrödinger urged Einstein to add his name as co-author, although Einstein declined the invitation.[197]
Einstein refrigerator
Main article: Einstein refrigerator
In 1926, Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd co-invented (and in 1930, patented) the Einstein refrigerator. This absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input.[198] On 11 November 1930, U.S. Patent 1,781,541 was awarded to Einstein and Leó Szilárd for the refrigerator. Their invention was not immediately put into commercial production, and the most promising of their patents were acquired by the Swedish company Electrolux.[199]
Bohr versus Einstein
Main article: Bohr–Einstein debates




Einstein and Niels Bohr, 1925


The Bohr–Einstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between Einstein and Niels Bohr who were two of its founders. Their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science.[200][201][202] Their debates would influence later interpretations of quantum mechanics.
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox
Main article: EPR paradox
In 1935, Einstein returned to the question of quantum mechanics. He considered how a measurement on one of two entangled particles would affect the other. He noted, along with his collaborators, that by performing different measurements on the distant particle, either of position or momentum, different properties of the entangled partner could be discovered without disturbing it in any way.
He then used a hypothesis of local realism to conclude that the other particle had these properties already determined. The principle he proposed is that if it is possible to determine what the answer to a position or momentum measurement would be, without in any way disturbing the particle, then the particle actually has values of position or momentum.
This principle distilled the essence of Einstein's objection to quantum mechanics. As a physical principle, it was shown to be incorrect when the Aspect experiment of 1982 confirmed Bell's theorem, which had been promulgated in 1964.
Non-scientific legacy
While traveling, Einstein wrote daily to his wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters Margot and Ilse. The letters were included in the papers bequeathed to The Hebrew University. Margot Einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public, but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death (she died in 1986[203]). Einstein had expressed his interest in the plumbing profession and was made an honorary member of the Plumbers and Steamfitters Union.[204][205] Barbara Wolff, of The Hebrew University's Albert Einstein Archives, told the BBC that there are about 3,500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955.[206]
Corbis, successor to The Roger Richman Agency, licenses the use of his name and associated imagery, as agent for the university.[207]
In popular culture
Main article: Albert Einstein in popular culture
In the period before World War II, The New Yorker published a vignette in their "The Talk of the Town" feature saying that Einstein was so well known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain "that theory". He finally figured out a way to handle the incessant inquiries. He told his inquirers "Pardon me, sorry! Always I am mistaken for Professor Einstein."[208]
Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels, films, plays, and works of music.[209] He is a favorite model for depictions of mad scientists and absent-minded professors; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated. Time magazine's Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was "a cartoonist's dream come true".[210]
Awards and honors
Main article: Einstein's awards and honors
Einstein received numerous awards and honors and in 1922 he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect". None of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel, so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to Einstein in 1922.[10]
Publications

The following publications by Einstein are referenced in this article. A more complete list of his publications may be found at List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein.



Einstein, Albert (1901) [Manuscript received: 16 December 1900], written at Zurich, Switzerland, "Folgerungen aus den Capillaritätserscheinungen" [Conclusions Drawn from the Phenomena of Capillarity] (PDF), Annalen der Physik (Berlin) (in German), Hoboken, NJ (published 14 March 2006), 309 (3), pp. 513–523, Bibcode:1901AnP...309..513E, doi:10.1002/andp.19013090306 – via Wiley Online Library 
Einstein, Albert (1905a) [Manuscript received: 18 March 1905], written at Berne, Switzerland, "Über einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen Gesichtspunkt" [On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light] (PDF), Annalen der Physik (Berlin) (in German), Hoboken, NJ (published 10 March 2006), 322 (6), pp. 132–148, Bibcode:1905AnP...322..132E, doi:10.1002/andp.19053220607 – via Wiley Online Library 
Einstein, Albert (1905b) [Completed 30 April and submitted 20 July 1905]. Written at Berne, Switzerland, published by Wyss Buchdruckerei. Eine neue Bestimmung der Moleküldimensionen [A new determination of molecular dimensions] (PDF). Dissertationen Universität Zürich (PhD Thesis) (in German). Zurich, Switzerland: ETH Zürich (published 2008). doi:10.3929/ethz-a-000565688 – via ETH Bibliothek. 
Einstein, Albert (1905c) [Manuscript received: 11 May 1905], written at Berne, Switzerland, "Über die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Wärme geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Flüssigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen" [On the Motion – Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat – of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid] (PDF), Annalen der Physik (Berlin) (in German), Hoboken, NJ (published 10 March 2006), 322 (8), pp. 549–560, Bibcode:1905AnP...322..549E, doi:10.1002/andp.19053220806, hdl:10915/2785  – via Wiley Online Library 
Einstein, Albert (1905d) [Manuscript received: 30 June 1905], written at Berne, Switzerland, "Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper" [On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies] (PDF), Annalen der Physik (Berlin) (in German), Hoboken, NJ (published 10 March 2006), 322 (10), pp. 891–921, Bibcode:1905AnP...322..891E, doi:10.1002/andp.19053221004, hdl:10915/2786  – via Wiley Online Library 
Einstein, Albert (1905e) [Manuscript received: 27 September 1905], written at Berne, Switzerland, "Ist die Trägheit eines Körpers von seinem Energieinhalt abhängig?" [Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?] (PDF), Annalen der Physik (Berlin) (in German), Hoboken, NJ (published 10 March 2006), 323 (13), pp. 639–641, Bibcode:1905AnP...323..639E, doi:10.1002/andp.19053231314 – via Wiley Online Library 
Einstein, Albert (1915) [Published 25 November 1915], "Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation" [The Field Equations of Gravitation] (Online page images), Königlich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften (in German), Berlin, Germany, pp. 844–847 – via ECHO, Cultural Heritage Online, Max Planck Institute for the History of Science 
Einstein, Albert (1917a), "Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie" [Cosmological Considerations in the General Theory of Relativity], Königlich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin (in German) 
Einstein, Albert (1917b), "Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung" [On the Quantum Mechanics of Radiation], Physikalische Zeitschrift (in German), 18, pp. 121–128, Bibcode:1917PhyZ...18..121E 
Einstein, Albert (1923) [First published 1923, in English 1967]. Written at Gothenburg. Grundgedanken und Probleme der Relativitätstheorie [Fundamental Ideas and Problems of the Theory of Relativity] (PDF) (Speech). Lecture delivered to the Nordic Assembly of Naturalists at Gothenburg, 11 July 1923. Nobel Lectures, Physics 1901–1921 (in German (1923) and English (1967)). Stockholm: Nobelprice.org (published 3 February 2015) – via Nobel Media AB 2014. CS1 maint: Unrecognized language (link)
Einstein, Albert (1924) [Published 10 July 1924], "Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases" [Quantum theory of monatomic ideal gases] (Online page images), Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Physikalisch-Mathematische Klasse (in German), Munich, Germany: Königlich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin: 261–267 – via ECHO, Cultural Heritage Online, Max Planck Institute for the History of Science . First of a series of papers on this topic.
Einstein, Albert (12 March 1926) [Cover Date 1 March 1926], written at Berlin, "Die Ursache der Mäanderbildung der Flußläufe und des sogenannten Baerschen Gesetzes" [On Baer's law and meanders in the courses of rivers], Die Naturwissenschaften (in German), Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 14 (11): 223–224, Bibcode:1926NW.....14..223E, doi:10.1007/BF01510300, ISSN 1432-1904 – via SpringerLink 
Einstein, Albert (1926b), written at Berne, Switzerland, R. Fürth, ed., Investigations on the Theory of the Brownian Movement (PDF), Translated by A. D. Cowper, USA: Dover Publications (published 1956), ISBN 978-1-60796-285-4, retrieved 2015-01-04 
Einstein, Albert; Podolsky, Boris; Rosen, Nathan (15 May 1935) [Received 25 March 1935], "Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?" (PDF), Physical Review, American Physical Society, 47 (10): 777–780, Bibcode:1935PhRv...47..777E, doi:10.1103/PhysRev.47.777  – via APS Journals 
Einstein, Albert (9 November 1940), "On Science and Religion", Nature, Edinburgh: Macmillan Publishers Group, 146 (3706): 605–607, Bibcode:1940Natur.146..605E, doi:10.1038/146605a0, ISBN 0-7073-0453-9 
Einstein, Albert; et al. (4 December 1948), "To the editors of the New York Times", New York Times, Melville, New York: AIP, American Inst. of Physics, ISBN 0-7354-0359-7 
Einstein, Albert (May 1949), "Why Socialism? (Reprise)", Monthly Review, New York: Monthly Review Foundation (published May 2009), vol. 61 no. 01 (May), archived from the original on 11 January 2006, retrieved 16 January 2006 – via MonthlyReview.org 
Einstein, Albert (1950), "On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation", Scientific American, CLXXXII (4): 13–17, Bibcode:1950SciAm.182d..13E, doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0450-13 
Einstein, Albert (1954), Ideas and Opinions, New York: Random House, ISBN 0-517-00393-7 
Einstein, Albert (1969), Albert Einstein, Hedwig und Max Born: Briefwechsel 1916–1955 (in German), Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, ISBN 3-88682-005-X 
Einstein, Albert (1979), Autobiographical Notes, Paul Arthur Schilpp (Centennial ed.), Chicago: Open Court, ISBN 0-87548-352-6 . The chasing a light beam thought experiment is described on pages 48–51.
Collected Papers: Stachel, John; Martin J. Klein; A. J. Kox; Michel Janssen; R. Schulmann; Diana Komos Buchwald; et al., eds. (21 July 2008) [Published between 1987–2006], "The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein", Einstein's Writings, Princeton University Press, 1–10 . Further information about the volumes published so far can be found on the webpages of the Einstein Papers Project and on the Princeton University Press Einstein Page


See also


Albert Einstein House in Princeton
 Albert Einstein – Wikipedia book
Einstein notation
Einstein Theory of Relativity, The (educational film)
Genius, a television series depicting Einstein's life
Heinrich Burkhardt
Historical Museum of Bern (Einstein Museum)
History of gravitational theory
Introduction to special relativity
List of coupled cousins
List of German inventors and discoverers
Jewish Nobel laureates
List of peace activists
Nature timeline
Political views of Albert Einstein
Relativity priority dispute
Religious and philosophical views of Albert Einstein
Sticky bead argument


Notes and references
Explanatory notes



^ a b During the German Empire, citizenship were exclusively subject of one of the 27 Bundesstaaten
^ "Their leaders in Germany have not driven out her cut-throats and her blackguards. She has chosen the cream of her culture and has suppressed it. She has even turned upon her most glorious citizen, Albert Einstein, who is the supreme example of the selfless intellectual...The man, who, beyond all others, approximates a citizen of the world, is without a home. How proud we must be to offer him temporary shelter."



Citations



^ Wells, John (3 April 2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman. ISBN 1-4058-8118-6. 
^ Heilbron, John L., ed. (2003). The Oxford Companion to the History of Modern Science. Oxford University Press. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-19-974376-6. 
^ Pais (1982), p. 301.
^ a b c d e Whittaker, E. (1 November 1955). "Albert Einstein. 1879–1955". Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society. 1: 37–67. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1955.0005 . JSTOR 769242. 
^ a b c d "Albert Einstein – Biography". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 6 March 2007. Retrieved 7 March 2007. 
^ Fujia Yang; Joseph H. Hamilton (2010). Modern Atomic and Nuclear Physics. World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-4277-16-7. 
^ Howard, Don A., ed. (2014) [First published 11 February 2004], "Einstein's Philosophy of Science", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (website), The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University, retrieved 2015-02-04 
^ Howard, Don A. (December 2005), "Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science" (PDF), Physics Today, American Institute of Physics, 58 (12): 34–40, Bibcode:2005PhT....58l..34H, doi:10.1063/1.2169442, retrieved 2015-03-08 – via University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, author's personal webpage 
^ Bodanis, David (2000). E = mc2: A Biography of the World's Most Famous Equation. New York: Walker. 
^ a b c "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921". Nobelprize.org. Nobel Prize. Retrieved 11 July 2016. 
^ a b c Scientific Background on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2011. The accelerating universe (PDF), Nobel Media AB, p. 2, retrieved 2015-01-04 – via Nobelprize.org 
^ Overbye, Dennis (24 November 2015). "A Century Ago, Einstein's Theory of Relativity Changed Everything". New York Times. Retrieved 24 November 2015. 
^ Paul S. Boyer; Melvyn Dubofsky (2001). The Oxford Companion to United States History. Oxford University Press. p. 218. ISBN 978-0-19-508209-8. 
^ a b c Paul Arthur Schilpp, ed. (1951), Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, II, New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers (Harper Torchbook edition), pp. 730–746 . His non-scientific works include: About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein (1930), "Why War?" (1933, co-authored by Sigmund Freud), The World As I See It (1934), Out of My Later Years (1950), and a book on science for the general reader, The Evolution of Physics (1938, co-authored by Leopold Infeld).
^ a b Result of WordNet Search for Einstein, 3.1, The Trustees of Princeton University, retrieved 2015-01-04 
^ Stachel (2002), pp. 59–61.
^ Barry R. Parker, Einstein: The Passions of a Scientist, Prometheus Books – 2003, page 31
^ Fölsing (1997), pp. 30–31.
^ Stachel (2008), vol. 1 (1987), doc. 5.
^ Mehra, Jagdish (2001), "Albert Einstein's first paper", The Golden Age of Physics, World Scientific, ISBN 981-02-4985-3 
^ http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,1936731_1936743_1936758,00.html
^ Stachel (2008), vol. 1 (1987), p. 11.
^ Fölsing (1997), pp. 36–37.
^ Highfield & Carter (1993), pp. 21, 31, 56–57.
^ Fölsing (1997), p. 40.
^ Stachel (2008), vol. 1 (1987), docs. 21–27.
^ Stachel (2008), vol. 1 (1987), doc. 67.
^ Troemel-Ploetz, D. (1990), "Mileva Einstein-Marić: The Woman Who Did Einstein's Mathematics", Women's Studies Int. Forum, 13 (5), pp. 415–432, doi:10.1016/0277-5395(90)90094-e 
^ Walker, Evan Harris (February 1989), Did Einstein Espouse his Spouse's Ideas? (PDF), Physics Today, archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2012, retrieved 19 October 2014. 
^ Pais (1994), pp. 1–29.
^ Holton, G., Einstein, History, and Other Passions, Harvard University Press, 1996, pp. 177–193.
^ Stachel (2002), pp. 49–56.
^ Martinez, A. A., "Handling evidence in history: the case of Einstein's wife", School Science Review, 86 (316), March 2005, pp. 49–56. PDF Archived 11 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ J. Renn & R. Schulmann, Albert Einstein/Mileva Marić: The Love Letters, 1992, pp. 73–74, 78.
^ A. Calaprice & T. Lipscombe, Albert Einstein: A Biography, 2005, pp. 22–23.
^ Stachel (1966).
^ Stachel (2002), p. 50.
^ Robinson, Andrew (2015). Einstein: A Hundred Years of Relativity. Princeton University Press. pp. 143–145. ISBN 978-0-691-16989-7. 
^ Neffe (2007), p. 203.
^ Wüthrich, Urs (11 April 2015). "Die Liebesbriefe des untreuen Einstein" [The love letters of the unfaithful Einstein]. BZ Berner Zeitung (in German). Bern, Switzerland. Retrieved 2015-04-11. Ich denke in innigster Liebe an Dich in jeder freien Minute und bin so unglücklich, wie nur ein Mensch es sein kann. 
^ Isaacson (2007).
^ Calaprice, Kennefick & Schulmann (2015), p. 62.
^ a b Calaprice, Alice; Lipscombe, Trevor (2005). Albert Einstein: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-313-33080-3. 
^ Highfield & Carter (1993), p. 216.
^ An Einstein Encyclopedia, Alice Calaprice, Daniel Kennefick, Robert Schulmann, p. 65 et seq, Princeton University Press, 2015
^ Fölsing (1997), p. 82.
^ J J O'Connor; E F Robertson, eds. (May 2010). "Grossmann biography" (scientific website?). School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland. Retrieved 2015-03-27. 
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 63.
^ "Einstein at the patent office" (official website). Berne, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property, IGE/IPI. 6 February 2014. Retrieved 2016-09-09. 
^ a b "FAQ about Einstein and the Institute" (official website). Berne, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property, IGE/IPI. 27 May 2014. Retrieved 2015-03-27. 
^ a b Galison, Peter (2000). "Einstein's Clocks: The Question of Time". Critical Inquiry. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 26 (2 Winter): 355–389. JSTOR 1344127. 
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 79-84.
^ Einstein (1901).
^ Galison, Peter (2003). Einstein's Clocks, Poincaré's Maps: Empires of Time. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-02001-4. 
^ a b Einstein (1905b), "Meinem Freunde Herr Dr. Marcel Grossmann gewidmet (Dedicated to my friend, Dr. Marcel Grossmann)".
^ Einstein (1926b), chap. "A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions".
^ "Associate Professor at the University of Zurich und professor in Prague (1909–1912)". www.library.ethz.ch/en/ (digital library). Einstein Online (in German and English). Bern, Switzerland: ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, ETH Zürich, www.ethz.ch. 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 164.
^ von Hirschhausen, Ulrike (2007). "Von imperialer Inklusion zur nationalen Exklusion:Staatsbürgerschaft in Österreich- Ungarn 1867–1923" (PDF) (WZB Discussion Paper). ZKD – Veröffentlichungsreihe der Forschungsgruppe, „Zivilgesellschaft, Citizenship und politische Mobilisierung in Europa" Schwerpunkt Zivilgesellschaft, Konflikte und Demokratie, Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung. Berlin, Germany: WZB Social Science Research Center Berlin. p. 8. ISSN 1860-4315. Retrieved 2015-08-04. Eine weitere Diskontinuität bestand viertens darin, dass die Bestimmungen der österreichischen Staatsbürgerschaft, die in den ersten Dritteln des Jahrhunderts auch auf Ungarn angewandt worden waren, seit 1867 nur noch für die cisleithanische Reichshälfte galten. Ungarn entwickelte hingegen jetzt eine eige-ne Staatsbürgerschaft. 
^ "Professor at the ETH Zurich (1912–1914)". www.library.ethz.ch/en/ (digital library). Einstein Online (in German and English). Zurich, Switzerland: ETH-Bibliothek Zurich, ETH Zürich, www.ethz.ch. 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. 
^ Stachel (2002), p. 534.
^ Weinstein (2015), pp. 18-19.
^ "Director in the attic". www.mpg.de. Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, München. Retrieved 9 July 2017. 
^ Calaprice, Alice; Lipscombe, Trevor (2005). Albert Einstein: a biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. xix. ISBN 0-313-33080-8. , Timeline, p. xix
^ Andrzej, Stasiak (2003). "Myths in science". EMBO Reports. 4 (3): 236. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.embor779 . PMC 1315907 . Retrieved 31 March 2007. 
^ "Albert Einstein (1879–1955)". Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved 21 July 2015. 
^ Hoffmann (1972), pp. 145–148.
^ Fölsing (1997), pp. 499–508.
^ "As Einstein Sees American", Einstein's World, a 1931 reprint with minor changes, of his 1921 essay.
^ a b Holton, Gerald. "The migration of physicists to the United States", Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, April 1984 pp. 18–24
^ Isaacson (2007), pp. 307–308.
^ The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921: Albert Einstein. Banquet Speech by R. Nadolny (in German). Retrieved 9 December 2015 via Nobelprize.org
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 308.
^ Montes-Santiago, J. (2017-07-16). "[The meeting of Einstein with Cajal (Madrid, 1923): a lost tide of fortune]". Revista De Neurologia. 43 (2): 113–117. ISSN 0210-0010. PMID 16838259. 
^ Grandjean, Martin (2017). "Analisi e visualizzazioni delle reti in storia. L'esempio della cooperazione intellettuale della Società delle Nazioni". Memoria e Ricerca (2): 371–393. doi:10.14647/87204.  See also: French version (PDF) and English summary.
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 368.
^ a b c Isaacson (2007), p. 370.
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 373.
^ a b Isaacson (2007), p. 374.
^ a b Chaplin, Charles. Charles Chaplin: My Autobiography, Simon and Schuster, N.Y. (1964)
^ Fölsing (1997), p. 659.
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 404.
^ a b c d e Isaacson (2007), pp. 407–410.
^ "Albert Einstein: How I See the World" on YouTube, PBS
^ a b Jerome, Fred, and Taylor, Rodger. Einstein on Race and Racism Rutgers University Press, (2006)
^ Einstein (1954), p. 197.
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 422.
^ "Professor Einstein with Commander Locker-Lampson", ScienceMuseum.org, U.K.
^ Isaacson (2007), pp. 419–420.
^ a b Gilbert, Martin. Churchill and the Jews, Henry Holt and Company, N.Y. (2007) pp. 101, 176
^ Reisman, Arnold (20 November 2006). "What a Freshly Discovered Einstein Letter Says About Turkey Today". History News Network, George Masons University. 
^ a b c d e Clark (1971).
^ "Denunciation of German Policy is a Stirring Event", Associated Press, 27 July 1933
^ "Stateless Jews: The Exiles from Germany, Nationality Plan", The Guardian (U.K.) 27 July 1933
^ Fölsing (1997), pp. 649, 678.
^ a b Arntzenius, Linda G. (2011). Institute for Advanced Study. Arcadia Publishing. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-7385-7409-7. 
^ "Oxford Jewish Personalities:". Oxford Chabad Society. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ "How Einstein fled from the Nazis to an Oxford college". The Oxford Times. 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2015. 
^ Fölsing (1997), pp. 686–687.
^ "In Brief". Institute for Advanced Study. Archived from the original on 29 March 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2010. 
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 630.
^ Gosling, F. G. (2010). "The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb". U.S. Department of Energy, History Division. p. vii. Retrieved 2015-06-07. 
^ Lanouette, William; Silard, Bela (1992). Genius in the Shadows: A Biography of Leo Szilárd: The Man Behind The Bomb. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 198–200. ISBN 0-684-19011-7. 
^ J. Diehl, Sarah; Moltz, James Clay (2008). Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation: A Reference Handbook. ABC-CLIO. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-59884-071-1. Retrieved 2015-06-07. 
^ Hewlett, Richard G.; Anderson, Oscar E. (1962). The New World, 1939–1946 (PDF). University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 15–16. ISBN 0-520-07186-7. OCLC 637004643. Retrieved 2015-06-07. 
^ Einstein, Albert (1952). "On My Participation in the Atom Bomb Project". AJ Software & Multimedia. p. ???. Retrieved 2015-06-07 – via atomicarchive.org. 
^ Clark (1971), p. ???.
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 432.
^ Calaprice, Alice (2005) The new quotable Einstein Archived 22 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine.. pp.148–149 Princeton University Press, 2005. See also Odyssey in Climate Modeling, Global Warming, and Advising Five Presidents
^ Robeson, Paul. Paul Robeson Speaks, Citadel (2002) p. 333
^ a b "Albert Einstein, Civil Rights activist", Harvard Gazette, 12 April 2007
^ Jerome, Fred (December 2004). "Einstein, Race, and the Myth of the Cultural Icon". Isis. 95 (4): 627–639. doi:10.1086/430653. JSTOR 10.1086/430653.  
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 290.
^ a b Rowe, David E. and Schulmann, Robert, editors. Einstein on Politics, Princeton University Press (2007)
^ "ISRAEL: Einstein Declines". Time magazine. 1 December 1952. Retrieved 31 March 2010. 
^ Rosenkranz, Ze'ev (6 November 2002). The Einstein Scrapbook. Baltimore, Maryland, USA: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-8018-7203-7. 
^ a b Isaacson (2007), p. 522.
^ Duchen, Jessica (28 January 2011). "The relative beauty of the violin". The Independent. 
^ "Einstein and his love of music" (PDF). Physics World. January 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2015. 
^ a b c d Peter Galison; Gerald James Holton; Silvan S. Schweber (2008). Einstein for the 21st Century: His Legacy in Science, Art, and Modern Culture. Princeton University Press. pp. 161–164. ISBN 0-691-13520-7. 
^ Article "Alfred Einstein", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. ISBN 1-56159-174-2
^ The Concise Edition of Baker's Biographical Dictionary of Musicians, 8th ed. Revised by Nicolas Slonimsky. New York, Schirmer Books, 1993. ISBN 0-02-872416-X
^ Cariaga, Daniel, "Not Taking It with You: A Tale of Two Estates," Los Angeles Times, 22 December 1985. Retrieved April 2012.
^ Auction listing by RR Auction, auction closed 13 October 2010.
^ Einstein, Albert (May 1949). Sweezy, Paul; Huberman, Leo, eds. "Why Socialism?". Monthly Review. New York. 1 (1). 
^ Rowe, David E. & Robert Schulmann (8 June 2007). David A., Walsh, ed. "What Were Einstein's Politics?". History News Network. George Mason University. Retrieved 29 July 2012. 
^ Isaacson (2007), p. 487, 494, 550.
^ Waldrop, Mitch (19 April 2017). "Why the FBI Kept a 1,400-Page File on Einstein". National Geographic. 
^ Calaprice, Alice (2010). The Ultimate Quotable Einstein. Princeton: Princeton University Press, p. 325.
^ a b Calaprice, Alice (2000). The Expanded Quotable Einstein. Princeton: Princeton University Press, p. 218.
^ Isaacson, Walter (2008). Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 390.
^ Calaprice, Alice (2010). The Ultimate Quotable Einstein. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, p. 340. Letter to M. Berkowitz, 25 October 1950. Einstein Archive 59–215.
^ Isaacson, Walter (2008). Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 461.
^ The Case of the Scientist with a Pulsating Mass, 14 June 2002, retrieved 11 June 2007 
^ Albert Einstein Archives (April 1955), "Draft of projected Telecast Israel Independence Day, April 1955 (last statement ever written)", Einstein Archives Online, archived from the original on 13 March 2007, retrieved 14 March 2007 
^ Cohen, J.R.; Graver, L.M. (November 1995), "The ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm of Albert Einstein", Surgery, Gynecology & Obstetrics, 170 (5): 455–8, PMID 2183375. 
^ The Long, Strange Journey of Einstein's Brain, National Public Radio, retrieved 3 October 2007 
^ O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (1997), "Albert Einstein", The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St. Andrews 
^ Late City, ed. (18 April 1955). Written at Princeton, NJ. "Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76; World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist, Rupture of Aorta Causes Death, Body Cremated, Memorial Here Set". The New York Times. CIV (35,514). New York, NY (published 19 April 1955). p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331. 
^ Oppenheimer, J. Robert (March 1979). "Oppenheimer on Einstein". The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Chicago: Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science. 35 (3): 38. Retrieved 12 January 2017. 
^ Stachel (2008).
^ Overbye, Dennis (4 December 2014). "Thousands of Einstein Documents Are Now a Click Away". New York Times. Retrieved 2015-01-04. 
^ a b "Einstein archive at the Instituut-Lorentz". Instituut-Lorentz. 2005. Retrieved on 21 November 2005.
^ Das, Ashok (2003). Lectures on quantum mechanics. Hindustan Book Agency. p. 59. ISBN 81-85931-41-0. 
^ Spielberg, Nathan; Anderson, Bryon D. (1995). Seven ideas that shook the universe (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons. p. 263. ISBN 0-471-30606-1. 
^ Major, Fouad G. (2007). The quantum beat: principles and applications of atomic clocks (2nd ed.). Springer. p. 142. ISBN 0-387-69533-8. 
^ Lindsay, Robert Bruce; Margenau, Henry (1981). Foundations of physics. Ox Bow Press. p. 330. ISBN 0-918024-17-X. 
^ a b Kuepper, Hans-Josef. "List of Scientific Publications of Albert Einstein". Einstein-website.de. Retrieved 3 April 2011. 
^ Einstein (1905d).
^ Stachel (2002), pp. vi, 15, 90, 131, 215.
^ For a discussion of the reception of relativity theory around the world, and the different controversies it encountered, see the articles in Thomas F. Glick, ed., The Comparative Reception of Relativity (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1987), ISBN 90-277-2498-9.
^ Pais (1982), pp. 382–386.
^ a b Einstein (1905a).
^ Celebrating Einstein "Solid Cold". U.S. DOE., Office of Scientific and Technical Information, 2011.
^ Pais (1982), p. 522.
^ Levenson, Thomas (9 September 1997). "Einstein's Big Idea" (public broadcaster website). Boston, MA, USA: WBGH. Retrieved 2015-06-20 – via NOVA by Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), Arlington, VA, USA. 
^ Stachel (2008), pp. 270ff, vol. 4: The Swiss Years: Writings, 1912–1914.
^ Einstein (1923).
^ Pais (1982), pp. 179–183.
^ Stachel (2008), pp. 273–274, vol. 2: The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900–1909.
^ Pais (1982), pp. 194–195.
^ Einstein, A (June 1916). "Näherungsweise Integration der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Berlin. part 1: 688–696. 
^ Einstein, A (1918). "Über Gravitationswellen". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Berlin. part 1: 154–167. 
^ a b c "Found! Gravitational Waves, or a Wrinkle in Spacetime". Nadia Drake. National Geographic. 11 February 2016. Archived from the original on 12 February 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2016. 
^ "Gravity investigated with a binary pulsar-Press Release: The 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics". Nobel Foundation. Retrieved 6 July 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (6): 061102. arXiv:1602.03837 . Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. PMID 26918975. Lay summary (PDF). 
^ "Gravitational Waves: Ripples in the fabric of space-time". space.mit.edu. LIGO | MIT. 2016-02-11. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ "Scientists make first direct detection of gravitational waves". Jennifer Chu. MIT News. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ "Einstein's gravitational waves 'seen' from black holes – BBC News". BBC News. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (2016-02-11). "Gravitational Waves Detected, Confirming Einstein's Theory". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ van Dongen, Jeroen (2010) Einstein's Unification Cambridge University Press, p.23.
^ Einstein (1917a).
^ Pais (1994), pp. 285–286.
^ North, J.D. (1965). The Measure of the Universe: A History of Modern Cosmology. New York: Dover. pp. 81–83. 
^ a b Einstein, A. 1931. Zum kosmologischen Problem der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie Sitzungsb.König. Preuss. Akad. 235–237
^ a b O’Raifeartaigh, C. and McCann, B. (2014) ‘Einstein’s cosmic model of 1931 revisited: an analysis and translation of a forgotten model of the universe’. Eur. Phys. J. (H) 39 (1), pp. 63–85. Physics ArXiv preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.2192
^ Einstein, A and de Sitter, W. 1932. On the relation between the expansion and the mean density of the universe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 18: 213–214
^ Nussbaumer, Harry (2014). "Einstein's conversion from his static to an expanding universe". Eur. Phys. J (H). 39 (1): 37–62. arXiv:1311.2763 . Bibcode:2014EPJH...39...37N. doi:10.1140/epjh/e2013-40037-6. 
^ Nussbaumer and Bieri (2009). Discovering the Expanding Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 144–152. 
^ "The Genius of Getting It Wrong". The New York Times. 9 June 2013. 
^ "Einstein's lost theory uncovered". Nature News & Comment. 
^ "On His 135th Birthday, Einstein is Still Full of Surprises". Out There. 
^ a b O’Raifeartaigh, C., B. McCann, W. Nahm and S. Mitton. (2014)' Einstein’s steady-state theory: an abandoned model of the cosmos'. Eur. Phys. J (H) 39(3):353–369. Physics ArXiv preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.0132
^ a b Nussbaumer, H. (2014). ‘Einstein’s aborted attempt at a dynamic steady state universe’. Physics ArXiv preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/1402.4099
^ Hoyle, "A New Model for the Expanding Universe," MNRAS 108 (1948) 372. Bibcode: 1948MNRAS.108..372H
^ Bondi and Gold, "The Steady-State Theory of the Expanding Universe," MNRAS 108 (1948) 252. Bibcode: 1948MNRAS.108..252B
^ "Einstein's Lost Theory Describes a Universe Without a Big Bang – The Crux". The Crux. 
^ Andrews, Robert (2003). The New Penguin Dictionary of Modern Quotations. Penguin UK. p. 499. ISBN 0-14-196531-2.  Extract of page 499
^ Video: The Elegant Universe: Part 1 | Watch NOVA Online | PBS Video. Video.pbs.org. Retrieved on 11 May 2012.
^ Einstein (1917b).
^ Einstein (1924).
^ Cornell and Wieman Share 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics, 9 October 2001, archived from the original on 10 June 2007, retrieved 11 June 2007 
^ Einstein (1950).
^ Einstein, Albert & Rosen, Nathan (1935). "The Particle Problem in the General Theory of Relativity". Physical Review. 48: 73. Bibcode:1935PhRv...48...73E. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.48.73. 
^ "2015 – General Relativity's Centennial". American Physical Society. 2015. Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ Lindley, David (25 March 2005). "Focus: The Birth of Wormholes". American Physical Society. Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ Moore, Walter (1989), Schrödinger: Life and Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-43767-9 
^ Goettling, Gary. Einstein's refrigerator Georgia Tech Alumni Magazine. 1998. Retrieved on 12 November 2014. Leó Szilárd, a Hungarian physicist who later worked on the Manhattan Project, is credited with the discovery of the chain reaction
^ In September 2008 it was reported that Malcolm McCulloch of Oxford University was heading a three-year project to develop more robust appliances that could be used in locales lacking electricity, and that his team had completed a prototype Einstein refrigerator. He was quoted as saying that improving the design and changing the types of gases used might allow the design's efficiency to be quadrupled.Alok, Jha (21 September 2008), "Einstein fridge design can help global cooling", The Guardian, UK, archived from the original on 24 January 2011, retrieved 22 February 2011 
^ Bohr N. "Discussions with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics". The Value of Knowledge: A Miniature Library of Philosophy. Marxists Internet Archive. Archived from the original on 13 September 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2010.  From Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist (1949), publ. Cambridge University Press, 1949. Niels Bohr's report of conversations with Einstein.
^ Einstein (1969), A reprint of this book was published by Edition Erbrich in 1982, ISBN 3-88682-005-X.
^ Einstein (1935).
^ "Obituary". New York Times. 12 July 1986. Retrieved 3 April 2011. 
^ UGC, Chicago Tribune. "13 Plumbing Facts You Probably Didn't Know". chicagotribune.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2016. Retrieved 10 April 2016. 
^ Sagan, Carl (2014-03-14). "Carl Sagan Explains Albert Einstein". New Republic. Retrieved 2016-04-10. 
^ "Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life", BBC News, BBC, 11 July 2006, retrieved 14 March 2007 
^ Einstein, Corbis Rights Representation, archived from the original on 19 August 2008, retrieved 8 August 2008 
^ Libman, E. (14 January 1939). "Disguise". The New Yorker. 
^ McTee, Cindy. "Einstein's Dream for orchestra". Cindymctee.com. 
^ Golden, Frederic (3 January 2000), "Person of the Century: Albert Einstein", Time, archived from the original on 21 February 2006, retrieved 25 February 2006 



Further reading


Brian, Denis (1996), Einstein: A Life, New York: John Wiley 
Calaprice, Alice; Kennefick, Daniel; Schulmann, Robert (2015), An Einstein Encyclopedia, Princeton University Press 
Clark, Ronald W. (1971), Einstein: The Life and Times, New York: Avon Books, ISBN 0-380-44123-3 
Fölsing, Albrecht (1997), Albert Einstein: A Biography, Translated and abridged from German by Ewald Osers, New York: Penguin Viking, ISBN 978-0-670-85545-2 
Highfield, Roger; Carter, Paul (1993), The Private Lives of Albert Einstein, London: Faber and Faber, ISBN 978-0-571-16744-9 
Hoffmann, Banesh (1972), Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel', with the collaboration of Helen Dukas, London: Hart-Davis, MacGibbon, ISBN 978-0-670-11181-7 
Isaacson, Walter (2007), Einstein: His Life and Universe, New York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, ISBN 978-0-7432-6473-0 
Moring, Gary (2004), The complete idiot's guide to understanding Einstein (1st ed.), Indianapolis IN: Alpha books (Macmillan), ISBN 0-02-863180-3 
Neffe, Jürgen (2007), Einstein: A Biography, Translated by Shelley Frisch, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, ISBN 978-0-374-14664-1 
Oppenheimer, J. Robert (1971), Lecture delivered at the UNESCO House in Paris on 13 December 1965, "On Albert Einstein", Science and synthesis: an international colloquium organized by Unesco on the tenth anniversary of the death of Albert Einstein and Teilhard de Chardin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 8–12, 208 , or "On Albert Einstein by Robert Oppenheimer", The New York Review of Books, 17 March 1966 
Pais, Abraham (1982), Subtle is the Lord: The science and the life of Albert Einstein, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-853907-0 
Pais, Abraham (1994), Einstein Lived Here, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-280672-6 
Parker, Barry (2000), Einstein's Brainchild: Relativity Made Relatively Easy!, Illustrated by Lori Scoffield-Beer, Prometheus Books, ISBN 978-1-59102-522-1 
Rogers, Donald W. (2005), Einstein's "Other" Theory: The Planck-Bose-Einstein Theory of Heat Capacity, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-11826-0 
Schweber, Silvan S. (2008), Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius, Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-02828-9 
Stachel, John J. (1966), Albert Einstein and Mileva Marić (PDF), 9, unknown, Archived from the original on 7 March 2008, retrieved 2016-05-13 – via archive.org CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
Stachel, John J. (2002), Einstein from ‘B’ to ‘Z’, Einstein Studies, 9, Birkhäuser, ISBN 978-0-8176-4143-6, retrieved 2015-03-23 – via WorldCat by OCLC (Dublin, OH, USA) 
Stone, A. Douglas (2013), Einstein and the Quantum, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-13968-5 
Weinberg, Steven (2005). "Einstein's mistakes". Physics Today. 58 (11): 31–35. Bibcode:2005PhT....58k..31W. doi:10.1063/1.2155755 . 
Weinstein, G. (2015), General Relativity Conflict and Rivalries: Einstein's Polemics with Physicists, Newcastle upon Tyne (UK): Cambridge Scholars Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4438-8362-7 


External links

Find more aboutAlbert Einsteinat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Bibliowiki has original media or text related to this article: Albert Einstein (in the public domain in Canada)
Albert Einstein at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Works by Albert Einstein at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Albert Einstein at Internet Archive
Works by Albert Einstein at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Einstein's Personal Correspondence: Religion, Politics, The Holocaust, and Philosophy Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Federal Bureau of Investigation file on Albert Einstein
Einstein and his love of music, Physics World
Albert Einstein on NobelPrize.org
Albert Einstein, videos on History.com
MIT OpenCourseWare STS.042J/8.225J: Einstein, Oppenheimer, Feynman: Physics in the 20th century at the Wayback Machine (archived 8 June 2011) – free study course that explores the changing roles of physics and physicists during the 20th century
Albert Einstein Archives Online (80,000+ Documents) (MSNBC, 19 March 2012)
Einstein's declaration of intention for American citizenship on the World Digital Library
Albert Einstein Collection at Brandeis University
The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein "Digital Einstein" at Princeton University
Newspaper clippings about Albert Einstein in the 20th Century Press Archives of the German National Library of Economics (ZBW).







v
t
e


Albert Einstein



Physics



Special relativity
General relativity
Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc2)
Brownian motion
Photoelectric effect
Einstein coefficients
Einstein solid
Equivalence principle
Einstein field equations
Einstein radius
Einstein relation (kinetic theory)
Cosmological constant
Bose–Einstein condensate
Bose–Einstein statistics
Bose–Einstein correlations
Einstein–Cartan theory
Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations
Einstein–de Haas effect
EPR paradox
Bohr–Einstein debates
Teleparallelism
Unsuccessful investigations





Works



Annus Mirabilis papers (1905)
"Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement" (1905)
Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916)
The World as I See It (1934)
"Why Socialism?" (1949)
Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955)





Family



Pauline Koch (mother)
Hermann Einstein (father)
Maja Einstein (sister)
Mileva Marić (first wife)
Elsa Einstein (second wife)
Lieserl Einstein (daughter)
Hans Albert Einstein (son)
Eduard Einstein (son)
Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson)
Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter)
Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson)





Einstein Prizes



Albert Einstein Award
Albert Einstein Medal
Albert Einstein Peace Prize
Albert Einstein World Award of Science
Einstein Prize (APS)
Einstein Prize for Laser Science





Related



Political views
Religious views
Albert Einstein House
Einstein refrigerator
Brain
In popular culture
Einsteinium
Awards and honors
List of things named after Albert Einstein
Einstein Papers Project
Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary)
The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary)
Relics: Einstein's Brain
Genius (2017 series)












v
t
e


Copley Medallists of 1901–50






Josiah Willard Gibbs (1901)
Joseph Lister (1902)
Eduard Suess (1903)
William Crookes (1904)
Dmitri Mendeleev (1905)
Élie Metchnikoff (1906)
Albert A. Michelson (1907)
Alfred Russel Wallace (1908)
George William Hill (1909)
Francis Galton (1910)
George Darwin (1911)
Felix Klein (1912)
Ray Lankester (1913)
J. J. Thomson (1914)
Ivan Pavlov (1915)
James Dewar (1916)
Pierre Paul Émile Roux (1917)
Hendrik Lorentz (1918)
William Bayliss (1919)
Horace Tabberer Brown (1920)
Joseph Larmor (1921)
Ernest Rutherford (1922)
Horace Lamb (1923)
Edward Albert Sharpey-Schafer (1924)
Albert Einstein (1925)
Frederick Gowland Hopkins (1926)
Charles Scott Sherrington (1927)
Charles Algernon Parsons (1928)
Max Planck (1929)
William Henry Bragg (1930)
Arthur Schuster (1931)
George Ellery Hale (1932)
Theobald Smith (1933)
John Scott Haldane (1934)
Charles Thomson Rees Wilson (1935)
Arthur Evans (1936)
Henry Hallett Dale (1937)
Niels Bohr (1938)
Thomas Hunt Morgan (1939)
Paul Langevin (1940)
Thomas Lewis (1941)
Robert Robinson (1942)
Leonel Messi (1943)
Geoffrey Ingram Taylor (1944)
Oswald Avery (1945)
Edgar Douglas Adrian (1946)
G. H. Hardy (1947)
Archibald Hill (1948)
George de Hevesy (1949)
James Chadwick (1950)












v
t
e


Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Physics



1901–1925



1901 Röntgen
1902 Lorentz / Zeeman
1903 Becquerel / P. Curie / M. Curie
1904 Rayleigh
1905 Lenard
1906 J. J. Thomson
1907 Michelson
1908 Lippmann
1909 Marconi / Braun
1910 Van der Waals
1911 Wien
1912 Dalén
1913 Kamerlingh Onnes
1914 Laue
1915 W. L. Bragg / W. H. Bragg
1916
1917 Barkla
1918 Planck
1919 Stark
1920 Guillaume
1921 Einstein
1922 N. Bohr
1923 Millikan
1924 M. Siegbahn
1925 Franck / Hertz








1926–1950



1926 Perrin
1927 Compton / C. Wilson
1928 O. Richardson
1929 De Broglie
1930 Raman
1931
1932 Heisenberg
1933 Schrödinger / Dirac
1934
1935 Chadwick
1936 Hess / C. D. Anderson
1937 Davisson / G. P. Thomson
1938 Fermi
1939 Lawrence
1940
1941
1942
1943 Stern
1944 Rabi
1945 Pauli
1946 Bridgman
1947 Appleton
1948 Blackett
1949 Yukawa
1950 Powell





1951–1975



1951 Cockcroft / Walton
1952 Bloch / Purcell
1953 Zernike
1954 Born / Bothe
1955 Lamb / Kusch
1956 Shockley / Bardeen / Brattain
1957 C. N. Yang / T. D. Lee
1958 Cherenkov / Frank / Tamm
1959 Segrè / Chamberlain
1960 Glaser
1961 Hofstadter / Mössbauer
1962 Landau
1963 Wigner / Goeppert-Mayer / Jensen
1964 Townes / Basov / Prokhorov
1965 Tomonaga / Schwinger / Feynman
1966 Kastler
1967 Bethe
1968 Alvarez
1969 Gell-Mann
1970 Alfvén / Néel
1971 Gabor
1972 Bardeen / Cooper / Schrieffer
1973 Esaki / Giaever / Josephson
1974 Ryle / Hewish
1975 A. Bohr / Mottelson / Rainwater





1976–2000



1976 Richter / Ting
1977 P. W. Anderson / Mott / Van Vleck
1978 Kapitsa / Penzias / R. Wilson
1979 Glashow / Salam / Weinberg
1980 Cronin / Fitch
1981 Bloembergen / Schawlow / K. Siegbahn
1982 K. Wilson
1983 Chandrasekhar / Fowler
1984 Rubbia / Van der Meer
1985 von Klitzing
1986 Ruska / Binnig / Rohrer
1987 Bednorz / Müller
1988 Lederman / Schwartz / Steinberger
1989 Ramsey / Dehmelt / Paul
1990 Friedman / Kendall / R. Taylor
1991 de Gennes
1992 Charpak
1993 Hulse / J. Taylor
1994 Brockhouse / Shull
1995 Perl / Reines
1996 D. Lee / Osheroff / R. Richardson
1997 Chu / Cohen-Tannoudji / Phillips
1998 Laughlin / Störmer / Tsui
1999 't Hooft / Veltman
2000 Alferov / Kroemer / Kilby





2001–
present



2001 Cornell / Ketterle / Wieman
2002 Davis / Koshiba / Giacconi
2003 Abrikosov / Ginzburg / Leggett
2004 Gross / Politzer / Wilczek
2005 Glauber / Hall / Hänsch
2006 Mather / Smoot
2007 Fert / Grünberg
2008 Nambu / Kobayashi / Maskawa
2009 Kao / Boyle / Smith
2010 Geim / Novoselov
2011 Perlmutter / Riess / Schmidt
2012 Wineland / Haroche
2013 Englert / Higgs
2014 Akasaki / Amano / Nakamura
2015 Kajita / McDonald
2016 Thouless / Haldane / Kosterlitz
2017 Weiss / Barish / Thorne












v
t
e


Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1921



Fellows



Wilfred Eade Agar
Francis William Aston
William Lawrence Bragg 
William Thomas Calman
Arthur Harry Church
Georges Dreyer
William Eccles
John Charles Grant Ledingham
Kennedy Joseph Previte Orton
John Herbert Parsons
James Charles Philip
Alfred Robb
Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt
Udny Yule





Foreign



Albert Calmette
Henri-Alexandre Deslandres
Albert Einstein
Albin Haller
Edmund Beecher Wilson
Pieter Zeeman












v
t
e


Philosophy of science







Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science





Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / reductionism / determinism
Rationalism / empiricism
Received view / semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism





Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time





Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance













Philosophers of science by era







Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans





Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby





Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume





Classical modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson





Late modern



Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett














Portal
Category








Biography portal
Physics portal
Science portal
Cosmology portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 75121530
LCCN: n79022889
ISNI: 0000 0001 2281 955X
GND: 118529579
SELIBR: 184709
SUDOC: 026849186
BNF: cb119016075 (data)
ResearcherID: I-6013-2012
BIBSYS: 90053072
ULAN: 500240971
HDS: 28814
MusicBrainz: c98c325e-7277-46e8-8b44-e3517f3e041a
MGP: 53269
NLA: 36582360
NDL: 00438728
NCL: 369710
NKC: jn19990002019
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\035853
BNE: XX834035
IATH: w69k499r











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Albert_Einstein&oldid=818264022"					Categories: PantheistsAlbert Einstein1879 births1955 deaths20th-century American engineers20th-century American writers20th-century German writers20th-century Jews20th-century physicistsAmerican agnosticsAmerican engineersAmerican inventorsAmerican pacifistsAmerican people of German-Jewish descentAmerican physicistsAmerican science writersAmerican socialistsAmerican ZionistsAshkenazi JewsCharles University in Prague facultyCorresponding Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences (1917–25)CosmologistsDeaths from abdominal aortic aneurysmEinstein familyETH Zurich alumniETH Zurich facultyGerman agnosticsGerman JewsGerman people of Jewish descentGerman emigrants to SwitzerlandGerman Nobel laureatesGerman inventorsGerman physicistsGerman socialistsAnti-nationalistsInstitute for Advanced Study facultyJewish agnosticsJewish American scientistsJewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United StatesJewish engineersJewish inventorsJewish philosophersJewish physicistsJewish socialistsLeiden University facultyForeign Fellows of the Indian National Science AcademyForeign Members of the Royal SocietyMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyMembers of the Bavarian Academy of SciencesMembers of the Lincean AcademyMembers of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and SciencesHonorary Members of the USSR Academy of SciencesNobel laureates in PhysicsPatent examinersPeople from BerlinPeople from BernPeople from MunichPeople from Princeton, New JerseyPeople from UlmPeople from ZürichPeople who lost German citizenshipPeople with acquired Austrian citizenshipPeople with acquired Swiss citizenshipPeople with acquired American citizenshipPhilosophers of scienceRelativity theoristsStateless peopleSwiss agnosticsSwiss emigrants to the United StatesSwiss JewsSwiss physicistsTheoretical physicistsWinners of the Max Planck MedalWorld federalistsRecipients of the Pour le Mérite for Arts and SciencesRecipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class)DeterministsActivists from New JerseyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesGood articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles containing German-language textBiography template using pronunciationBiography with signatureArticles with hCardsCS1 maint: Unrecognized languageCS1 maint: Unfit urlArticles with Wikilivres linksArticles with DMOZ linksArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksUse dmy dates from October 2012AC with 20 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with RID identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles containing timelines