This article is about the ancient king of Macedonia. For other uses, see Alexander the Great (disambiguation).


Alexander the Great


Basileus of Macedon, Hegemon of the Hellenic League, Shahanshah of Persia, Pharaoh of Egypt, Lord of Asia



"Darius III of Persia", Alexander Mosaic, Naples National Archaeological Museum 



King of Macedonia


Reign
336–323 BC


Predecessor
Philip II


Successor
Alexander IV
Philip III


Pharaoh of Egypt


Reign
332–323 BC


Predecessor
Darius III


Successor
Alexander IV
Philip III


King of Persia


Reign
330–323 BC


Predecessor
Darius III


Successor
Alexander IV
Philip III


Lord of Asia


Reign
331–323 BC


Predecessor
New office


Successor
Alexander IV
Philip III







Born
20 or 21 July 356 BC
Pella, Macedon, Ancient Greece


Died
10 or 11 June 323 BC (aged 32)
Babylon


Spouse
Roxana of Bactria
Stateira II of Persia
Parysatis II of Persia


Issue
Alexander IV





Full name


Alexander III of Macedon





Greek



Μέγας Ἀλέξανδρος[d] (Mégas Aléxandros, Great Alexander)
Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Μέγας (Aléxandros ho Mégas, Alexander the Great)





Dynasty
Argead


Father
Philip II of Macedon


Mother
Olympias of Epirus


Religion
Greek polytheism


Alexander III of Macedon (20/21 July 356 BC – 10/11 June 323 BC), commonly known as Alexander the Great (Greek: Ἀλέξανδρος ὁ Μέγας, Aléxandros ho Mégas Koine Greek: [a.lék.san.dros ho mé.gas]), was a king (basileus) of the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon[a] and a member of the Argead dynasty. He was born in Pella in 356 BC and succeeded his father Philip II to the throne at the age of twenty. He spent most of his ruling years on an unprecedented military campaign through Asia and northeast Africa, and he created one of the largest empires of the ancient world by the age of thirty, stretching from Greece to northwestern India.[1][2] He was undefeated in battle and is widely considered one of history's most successful military commanders.[3]
During his youth, Alexander was tutored by Aristotle until age 16. After Philip's assassination in 336 BC, he succeeded his father to the throne and inherited a strong kingdom and an experienced army. Alexander was awarded the generalship of Greece and used this authority to launch his father's Panhellenic project to lead the Greeks in the conquest of Persia.[4][5] In 334 BC, he invaded the Achaemenid Empire (Persian Empire) and began a series of campaigns that lasted ten years. Following the conquest of Anatolia, Alexander broke the power of Persia in a series of decisive battles, most notably the battles of Issus and Gaugamela. He subsequently overthrew Persian King Darius III and conquered the Achaemenid Empire in its entirety.[b] At that point, his empire stretched from the Adriatic Sea to the Indus River.
He endeavored to reach the "ends of the world and the Great Outer Sea" and invaded India in 326 BC, winning an important victory over the Pauravas at the Battle of the Hydaspes. He eventually turned back at the demand of his homesick troops. Alexander died in Babylon in 323 BC, the city that he planned to establish as his capital, without executing a series of planned campaigns that would have begun with an invasion of Arabia. In the years following his death, a series of civil wars tore his empire apart, resulting in the establishment of several states ruled by the Diadochi, Alexander's surviving generals and heirs.
Alexander's legacy includes the cultural diffusion and syncretism which his conquests engendered, such as Greco-Buddhism. He founded some twenty cities that bore his name, most notably Alexandria in Egypt. Alexander's settlement of Greek colonists and the resulting spread of Greek culture in the east resulted in a new Hellenistic civilization, aspects of which were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century AD and the presence of Greek speakers in central and far eastern Anatolia until the 1920s. Alexander became legendary as a classical hero in the mold of Achilles, and he features prominently in the history and mythic traditions of both Greek and non-Greek cultures. He became the measure against which military leaders compared themselves, and military academies throughout the world still teach his tactics.[6][c] He is often ranked among the most influential people in history.[7]



Contents


1 Early life

1.1 Lineage and childhood
1.2 Adolescence and education


2 Philip's heir

2.1 Regency and ascent of Macedon
2.2 Exile and return


3 King of Macedon

3.1 Accession
3.2 Consolidation of power
3.3 Balkan campaign


4 Conquest of the Persian Empire

4.1 Asia Minor
4.2 The Levant and Syria
4.3 Egypt
4.4 Assyria and Babylonia
4.5 Persia
4.6 Fall of the Empire and the East
4.7 Problems and plots
4.8 Macedon in Alexander's absence


5 Indian campaign

5.1 Forays into the Indian subcontinent
5.2 Revolt of the army


6 Last years in Persia
7 Death and succession

7.1 After death
7.2 Division of the empire
7.3 Will


8 Character

8.1 Generalship
8.2 Physical appearance
8.3 Personality
8.4 Personal relationships


9 Battle record
10 Legacy

10.1 Hellenistic kingdoms
10.2 Founding of cities
10.3 Funding of temples
10.4 Hellenization
10.5 Influence on Rome
10.6 Legend
10.7 In ancient and modern culture


11 Historiography
12 Ancestry
13 See also
14 Annotations
15 References
16 Sources

16.1 Primary sources
16.2 Secondary sources


17 Further reading
18 External links



Early life
Lineage and childhood




Bust of a young Alexander the Great from the Hellenistic era, British Museum






Aristotle Tutoring Alexander, by Jean Leon Gerome Ferris


Alexander was born on the sixth day of the ancient Greek month of Hekatombaion, which probably corresponds to 20 July 356 BC, although the exact date is disputed,[8] in Pella, the capital of the Kingdom of Macedon.[9] He was the son of the king of Macedon, Philip II, and his fourth wife, Olympias, the daughter of Neoptolemus I, king of Epirus.[10] Although Philip had seven or eight wives, Olympias was his principal wife for some time, likely because she gave birth to Alexander.[11]




Alexander the Great, Thessaloniki, Greece


Several legends surround Alexander's birth and childhood.[12] According to the ancient Greek biographer Plutarch, on the eve of the consummation of her marriage to Philip, Olympias dreamed that her womb was struck by a thunder bolt that caused a flame to spread "far and wide" before dying away. Sometime after the wedding, Philip is said to have seen himself, in a dream, securing his wife's womb with a seal engraved with a lion's image.[13] Plutarch offered a variety of interpretations of these dreams: that Olympias was pregnant before her marriage, indicated by the sealing of her womb; or that Alexander's father was Zeus. Ancient commentators were divided about whether the ambitious Olympias promulgated the story of Alexander's divine parentage, variously claiming that she had told Alexander, or that she dismissed the suggestion as impious.[13]
On the day Alexander was born, Philip was preparing a siege on the city of Potidea on the peninsula of Chalcidice. That same day, Philip received news that his general Parmenion had defeated the combined Illyrian and Paeonian armies, and that his horses had won at the Olympic Games. It was also said that on this day, the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, burnt down. This led Hegesias of Magnesia to say that it had burnt down because Artemis was away, attending the birth of Alexander.[14] Such legends may have emerged when Alexander was king, and possibly at his own instigation, to show that he was superhuman and destined for greatness from conception.[12]
In his early years, Alexander was raised by a nurse, Lanike, sister of Alexander's future general Cleitus the Black. Later in his childhood, Alexander was tutored by the strict Leonidas, a relative of his mother, and by Lysimachus of Acarnania.[15] Alexander was raised in the manner of noble Macedonian youths, learning to read, play the lyre, ride, fight, and hunt.[16]
When Alexander was ten years old, a trader from Thessaly brought Philip a horse, which he offered to sell for thirteen talents. The horse refused to be mounted, and Philip ordered it away. Alexander however, detecting the horse's fear of its own shadow, asked to tame the horse, which he eventually managed.[12] Plutarch stated that Philip, overjoyed at this display of courage and ambition, kissed his son tearfully, declaring: "My boy, you must find a kingdom big enough for your ambitions. Macedon is too small for you", and bought the horse for him.[17] Alexander named it Bucephalas, meaning "ox-head". Bucephalas carried Alexander as far as India. When the animal died (because of old age, according to Plutarch, at age thirty), Alexander named a city after him, Bucephala.[18]
Adolescence and education
When Alexander was 13, Philip began to search for a tutor, and considered such academics as Isocrates and Speusippus, the latter offering to resign from his stewardship of the Academy to take up the post. In the end, Philip chose Aristotle and provided the Temple of the Nymphs at Mieza as a classroom. In return for teaching Alexander, Philip agreed to rebuild Aristotle's hometown of Stageira, which Philip had razed, and to repopulate it by buying and freeing the ex-citizens who were slaves, or pardoning those who were in exile.[19]
Mieza was like a boarding school for Alexander and the children of Macedonian nobles, such as Ptolemy, Hephaistion, and Cassander. Many of these students would become his friends and future generals, and are often known as the 'Companions'. Aristotle taught Alexander and his companions about medicine, philosophy, morals, religion, logic, and art. Under Aristotle's tutelage, Alexander developed a passion for the works of Homer, and in particular the Iliad; Aristotle gave him an annotated copy, which Alexander later carried on his campaigns.[20]
Philip's heir
Regency and ascent of Macedon
Main articles: Philip II of Macedon and Rise of Macedon
Further information: History of Macedonia (ancient kingdom)




Philip II of Macedon, Alexander's father


At age 16, Alexander's education under Aristotle ended. Philip waged war against Byzantion, leaving Alexander in charge as regent and heir apparent.[12] During Philip's absence, the Thracian Maedi revolted against Macedonia. Alexander responded quickly, driving them from their territory. He colonized it with Greeks, and founded a city named Alexandropolis.[21]
Upon Philip's return, he dispatched Alexander with a small force to subdue revolts in southern Thrace. Campaigning against the Greek city of Perinthus, Alexander is reported to have saved his father's life. Meanwhile, the city of Amphissa began to work lands that were sacred to Apollo near Delphi, a sacrilege that gave Philip the opportunity to further intervene in Greek affairs. Still occupied in Thrace, he ordered Alexander to muster an army for a campaign in southern Greece. Concerned that other Greek states might intervene, Alexander made it look as though he was preparing to attack Illyria instead. During this turmoil, the Illyrians invaded Macedonia, only to be repelled by Alexander.[22]
Philip and his army joined his son in 338 BC, and they marched south through Thermopylae, taking it after stubborn resistance from its Theban garrison. They went on to occupy the city of Elatea, only a few days' march from both Athens and Thebes. The Athenians, led by Demosthenes, voted to seek alliance with Thebes against Macedonia. Both Athens and Philip sent embassies to win Thebes' favour, but Athens won the contest.[23] Philip marched on Amphissa (ostensibly acting on the request of the Amphictyonic League), capturing the mercenaries sent there by Demosthenes and accepting the city's surrender. Philip then returned to Elatea, sending a final offer of peace to Athens and Thebes, who both rejected it.[24]




Statue of Alexander in Istanbul Archaeology Museum


As Philip marched south, his opponents blocked him near Chaeronea, Boeotia. During the ensuing Battle of Chaeronea, Philip commanded the right wing and Alexander the left, accompanied by a group of Philip's trusted generals. According to the ancient sources, the two sides fought bitterly for some time. Philip deliberately commanded his troops to retreat, counting on the untested Athenian hoplites to follow, thus breaking their line. Alexander was the first to break the Theban lines, followed by Philip's generals. Having damaged the enemy's cohesion, Philip ordered his troops to press forward and quickly routed them. With the Athenians lost, the Thebans were surrounded. Left to fight alone, they were defeated.[25]
After the victory at Chaeronea, Philip and Alexander marched unopposed into the Peloponnese, welcomed by all cities; however, when they reached Sparta, they were refused, but did not resort to war.[26] At Corinth, Philip established a "Hellenic Alliance" (modelled on the old anti-Persian alliance of the Greco-Persian Wars), which included most Greek city-states except Sparta. Philip was then named Hegemon (often translated as "Supreme Commander") of this league (known by modern scholars as the League of Corinth), and announced his plans to attack the Persian Empire.[27][28]
Exile and return
When Philip returned to Pella, he fell in love with and married Cleopatra Eurydice, the niece of his general Attalus.[29] The marriage made Alexander's position as heir less secure, since any son of Cleopatra Eurydice would be a fully Macedonian heir, while Alexander was only half-Macedonian.[30] During the wedding banquet, a drunken Attalus publicly prayed to the gods that the union would produce a legitimate heir.[29]

At the wedding of Cleopatra, whom Philip fell in love with and married, she being much too young for him, her uncle Attalus in his drink desired the Macedonians would implore the gods to give them a lawful successor to the kingdom by his niece. This so irritated Alexander, that throwing one of the cups at his head, "You villain," said he, "what, am I then a bastard?" Then Philip, taking Attalus's part, rose up and would have run his son through; but by good fortune for them both, either his over-hasty rage, or the wine he had drunk, made his foot slip, so that he fell down on the floor. At which Alexander reproachfully insulted over him: "See there," said he, "the man who makes preparations to pass out of Europe into Asia, overturned in passing from one seat to another."
— Plutarch, describing the feud at Philip's wedding.[31]

Alexander fled Macedon with his mother, dropping her off with her brother, King Alexander I of Epirus in Dodona, capital of the Molossians.[32] He continued to Illyria,[32] where he sought refuge with the Illyrian king and was treated as a guest, despite having defeated them in battle a few years before. However, it appears Philip never intended to disown his politically and militarily trained son.[32] Accordingly, Alexander returned to Macedon after six months due to the efforts of a family friend, Demaratus, who mediated between the two parties.[33]
In the following year, the Persian satrap (governor) of Caria, Pixodarus, offered his eldest daughter to Alexander's half-brother, Philip Arrhidaeus.[32] Olympias and several of Alexander's friends suggested this showed Philip intended to make Arrhidaeus his heir.[32] Alexander reacted by sending an actor, Thessalus of Corinth, to tell Pixodarus that he should not offer his daughter's hand to an illegitimate son, but instead to Alexander. When Philip heard of this, he stopped the negotiations and scolded Alexander for wishing to marry the daughter of a Carian, explaining that he wanted a better bride for him.[32] Philip exiled four of Alexander's friends, Harpalus, Nearchus, Ptolemy and Erigyius, and had the Corinthians bring Thessalus to him in chains.[34]
King of Macedon
Accession
Further information: Government of Macedonia (ancient kingdom)




The Kingdom of Macedon in 336 BC.


In summer 336 BC, while at Aegae attending the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra to Olympias's brother, Alexander I of Epirus, Philip was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguards, Pausanias.[e] As Pausanias tried to escape, he tripped over a vine and was killed by his pursuers, including two of Alexander's companions, Perdiccas and Leonnatus. Alexander was proclaimed king on the spot by the nobles and army at the age of 20.[35][36][37]
Consolidation of power
Alexander began his reign by eliminating potential rivals to the throne. He had his cousin, the former Amyntas IV, executed.[38] He also had two Macedonian princes from the region of Lyncestis killed, but spared a third, Alexander Lyncestes. Olympias had Cleopatra Eurydice and Europa, her daughter by Philip, burned alive. When Alexander learned about this, he was furious. Alexander also ordered the murder of Attalus,[38] who was in command of the advance guard of the army in Asia Minor and Cleopatra's uncle.[39]
Attalus was at that time corresponding with Demosthenes, regarding the possibility of defecting to Athens. Attalus also had severely insulted Alexander, and following Cleopatra's murder, Alexander may have considered him too dangerous to leave alive.[39] Alexander spared Arrhidaeus, who was by all accounts mentally disabled, possibly as a result of poisoning by Olympias.[35][37][40]
News of Philip's death roused many states into revolt, including Thebes, Athens, Thessaly, and the Thracian tribes north of Macedon. When news of the revolts reached Alexander, he responded quickly. Though advised to use diplomacy, Alexander mustered 3,000 Macedonian cavalry and rode south towards Thessaly. He found the Thessalian army occupying the pass between Mount Olympus and Mount Ossa, and ordered his men to ride over Mount Ossa. When the Thessalians awoke the next day, they found Alexander in their rear and promptly surrendered, adding their cavalry to Alexander's force. He then continued south towards the Peloponnese.[41]
Alexander stopped at Thermopylae, where he was recognized as the leader of the Amphictyonic League before heading south to Corinth. Athens sued for peace and Alexander pardoned the rebels. The famous encounter between Alexander and Diogenes the Cynic occurred during Alexander's stay in Corinth. When Alexander asked Diogenes what he could do for him, the philosopher disdainfully asked Alexander to stand a little to the side, as he was blocking the sunlight.[42] This reply apparently delighted Alexander, who is reported to have said "But verily, if I were not Alexander, I would like to be Diogenes."[43] At Corinth, Alexander took the title of Hegemon ("leader") and, like Philip, was appointed commander for the coming war against Persia. He also received news of a Thracian uprising.[44]
Balkan campaign
Main article: Alexander's Balkan campaign




The emblema of the Stag Hunt Mosaic, c. 300 BC, from Pella; the figure on the right is possibly Alexander the Great due to the date of the mosaic along with the depicted upsweep of his centrally-parted hair (anastole); the figure on the left wielding a double-edged axe (associated with Hephaistos) is perhaps Hephaestion, one of Alexander's loyal companions.[45]


Before crossing to Asia, Alexander wanted to safeguard his northern borders. In the spring of 335 BC, he advanced to suppress several revolts. Starting from Amphipolis, he travelled east into the country of the "Independent Thracians"; and at Mount Haemus, the Macedonian army attacked and defeated the Thracian forces manning the heights.[46] The Macedonians marched into the country of the Triballi, and defeated their army near the Lyginus river[47] (a tributary of the Danube). Alexander then marched for three days to the Danube, encountering the Getae tribe on the opposite shore. Crossing the river at night, he surprised them and forced their army to retreat after the first cavalry skirmish.[48]
News then reached Alexander that Cleitus, King of Illyria, and King Glaukias of the Taulantii were in open revolt against his authority. Marching west into Illyria, Alexander defeated each in turn, forcing the two rulers to flee with their troops. With these victories, he secured his northern frontier.[49]
While Alexander campaigned north, the Thebans and Athenians rebelled once again. Alexander immediately headed south.[50] While the other cities again hesitated, Thebes decided to fight. The Theban resistance was ineffective, and Alexander razed the city and divided its territory between the other Boeotian cities. The end of Thebes cowed Athens, leaving all of Greece temporarily at peace.[50] Alexander then set out on his Asian campaign, leaving Antipater as regent.[51]
Conquest of the Persian Empire
Main articles: Wars of Alexander the Great and Chronology of the expedition of Alexander the Great into Asia
Asia Minor
Further information: Battle of the Granicus, Siege of Halicarnassus, and Siege of Miletus




Map of Alexander's empire and his route


Alexander's army crossed the Hellespont in 334 BC with approximately 48,100 soldiers, 6,100 cavalry and a fleet of 120 ships with crews numbering 38,000,[50] drawn from Macedon and various Greek city-states, mercenaries, and feudally raised soldiers from Thrace, Paionia, and Illyria.[52][f] He showed his intent to conquer the entirety of the Persian Empire by throwing a spear into Asian soil and saying he accepted Asia as a gift from the gods. This also showed Alexander's eagerness to fight, in contrast to his father's preference for diplomacy.[50]
After an initial victory against Persian forces at the Battle of the Granicus, Alexander accepted the surrender of the Persian provincial capital and treasury of Sardis; he then proceeded along the Ionian coast, granting autonomy and democracy to the cities. Miletus, held by Achaemenid forces, required a delicate siege operation, with Persian naval forces nearby. Further south, at Halicarnassus, in Caria, Alexander successfully waged his first large-scale siege, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea.[53] Alexander left the government of Caria to a member of the Hecatomnid dynasty, Ada, who adopted Alexander.[54]
From Halicarnassus, Alexander proceeded into mountainous Lycia and the Pamphylian plain, asserting control over all coastal cities to deny the Persians naval bases. From Pamphylia onwards the coast held no major ports and Alexander moved inland. At Termessos, Alexander humbled but did not storm the Pisidian city.[55] At the ancient Phrygian capital of Gordium, Alexander "undid" the hitherto unsolvable Gordian Knot, a feat said to await the future "king of Asia".[56] According to the story, Alexander proclaimed that it did not matter how the knot was undone and hacked it apart with his sword.[57]
The Levant and Syria




Detail of Alexander Mosaic, showing Battle of Issus, from the House of the Faun, Pompeii


Further information: Battle of Issus and Siege of Tyre (332 BC)
In spring 333 BC, Alexander crossed the Taurus into Cilicia. After a long pause due to illness, he marched on towards Syria. Though outmanoeuvered by Darius' significantly larger army, he marched back to Cilicia, where he defeated Darius at Issus. Darius fled the battle, causing his army to collapse, and left behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and a fabulous treasure.[58] He offered a peace treaty that included the lands he had already lost, and a ransom of 10,000 talents for his family. Alexander replied that since he was now king of Asia, it was he alone who decided territorial divisions.
Alexander proceeded to take possession of Syria, and most of the coast of the Levant.[54] In the following year, 332 BC, he was forced to attack Tyre, which he captured after a long and difficult siege.[59][60] The men of military age were massacred and the women and children sold into slavery.[61]
Egypt
Further information: Siege of Gaza




Name of Alexander the Great in Egyptian hieroglyphs (written from right to left), c. 330 BC, Egypt. Louvre Museum


When Alexander destroyed Tyre, most of the towns on the route to Egypt quickly capitulated. However, Alexander met with resistance at Gaza. The stronghold was heavily fortified and built on a hill, requiring a siege. When "his engineers pointed out to him that because of the height of the mound it would be impossible… this encouraged Alexander all the more to make the attempt".[62] After three unsuccessful assaults, the stronghold fell, but not before Alexander had received a serious shoulder wound. As in Tyre, men of military age were put to the sword and the women and children were sold into slavery.[63]
Alexander advanced on Egypt in later 332 BC, where he was regarded as a liberator.[64] He was pronounced son of the deity Amun at the Oracle of Siwa Oasis in the Libyan desert.[65] Henceforth, Alexander often referred to Zeus-Ammon as his true father, and after his death, currency depicted him adorned with the horns of a ram as a symbol of his divinity.[66] During his stay in Egypt, he founded Alexandria-by-Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic Kingdom after his death.[67]
Assyria and Babylonia
Further information: Battle of Gaugamela
Leaving Egypt in 331 BC, Alexander marched eastward into Mesopotamia (now northern Iraq) and again defeated Darius, at the Battle of Gaugamela.[68] Darius once more fled the field, and Alexander chased him as far as Arbela. Gaugamela would be the final and decisive encounter between the two. Darius fled over the mountains to Ecbatana (modern Hamedan), while Alexander captured Babylon.[69]
Persia




Site of the Persian Gate; the road was built in the 1990s


Further information: Battle of the Persian Gate
From Babylon, Alexander went to Susa, one of the Achaemenid capitals, and captured its treasury.[69] He sent the bulk of his army to the Persian ceremonial capital of Persepolis via the Persian Royal Road. Alexander himself took selected troops on the direct route to the city. He then stormed the pass of the Persian Gates (in the modern Zagros Mountains) which had been blocked by a Persian army under Ariobarzanes and then hurried to Persepolis before its garrison could loot the treasury.[70]
On entering Persepolis, Alexander allowed his troops to loot the city for several days.[71] Alexander stayed in Persepolis for five months.[72] During his stay a fire broke out in the eastern palace of Xerxes I and spread to the rest of the city. Possible causes include a drunken accident or deliberate revenge for the burning of the Acropolis of Athens during the Second Persian War by Xerxes.[73] Even as he watched the city burn, Alexander immediately began to regret his decision.[74][75][76] Plutarch claims that he ordered his men to put out the fires,[74] but that the flames had already spread to most of the city.[74] Curtius claims that Alexander did not regret his decision until the next morning.[74] Plutarch recounts an anecdote in which Alexander pauses and talks to a fallen statue of Xerxes as if it were a live person:

Shall I pass by and leave you lying there because of the expeditions you led against Greece, or shall I set you up again because of your magnanimity and your virtues in other respects?[77]

Fall of the Empire and the East




Silver coin of Alexander wearing the lion scalp of Herakles, British Museum


Alexander then chased Darius, first into Media, and then Parthia.[78] The Persian king no longer controlled his own destiny, and was taken prisoner by Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman.[79] As Alexander approached, Bessus had his men fatally stab the Great King and then declared himself Darius' successor as Artaxerxes V, before retreating into Central Asia to launch a guerrilla campaign against Alexander.[80] Alexander buried Darius' remains next to his Achaemenid predecessors in a regal funeral.[81] He claimed that, while dying, Darius had named him as his successor to the Achaemenid throne.[82] The Achaemenid Empire is normally considered to have fallen with Darius.[83]
Alexander viewed Bessus as a usurper and set out to defeat him. This campaign, initially against Bessus, turned into a grand tour of central Asia. Alexander founded a series of new cities, all called Alexandria, including modern Kandahar in Afghanistan, and Alexandria Eschate ("The Furthest") in modern Tajikistan. The campaign took Alexander through Media, Parthia, Aria (West Afghanistan), Drangiana, Arachosia (South and Central Afghanistan), Bactria (North and Central Afghanistan), and Scythia.[84]
Spitamenes, who held an undefined position in the satrapy of Sogdiana, in 329 BC betrayed Bessus to Ptolemy, one of Alexander's trusted companions, and Bessus was executed.[85] However, when, at some point later, Alexander was on the Jaxartes dealing with an incursion by a horse nomad army, Spitamenes raised Sogdiana in revolt. Alexander personally defeated the Scythians at the Battle of Jaxartes and immediately launched a campaign against Spitamenes, defeating him in the Battle of Gabai. After the defeat, Spitamenes was killed by his own men, who then sued for peace.[86]
Problems and plots




The Killing of Cleitus, by André Castaigne (1898–1899)


During this time, Alexander adopted some elements of Persian dress and customs at his court, notably the custom of proskynesis, either a symbolic kissing of the hand, or prostration on the ground, that Persians showed to their social superiors.[87] The Greeks regarded the gesture as the province of deities and believed that Alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it. This cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen, and he eventually abandoned it.[88]
A plot against his life was revealed, and one of his officers, Philotas, was executed for failing to alert Alexander. The death of the son necessitated the death of the father, and thus Parmenion, who had been charged with guarding the treasury at Ecbatana, was assassinated at Alexander's command, to prevent attempts at vengeance. Most infamously, Alexander personally killed the man who had saved his life at Granicus, Cleitus the Black, during a violent drunken altercation at Maracanda (modern day Samarkand in Uzbekistan), in which Cleitus accused Alexander of several judgmental mistakes and most especially, of having forgotten the Macedonian ways in favour of a corrupt oriental lifestyle.[89]
Later, in the Central Asian campaign, a second plot against his life was revealed, this one instigated by his own royal pages. His official historian, Callisthenes of Olynthus, was implicated in the plot, and in the Anabasis of Alexander, Arrian states that Callisthenes and the pages were then tortured on the rack as punishment, and likely died soon after.[90] It remains unclear if Callisthenes was actually involved in the plot, for prior to his accusation he had fallen out of favour by leading the opposition to the attempt to introduce proskynesis.[91]
Macedon in Alexander's absence
When Alexander set out for Asia, he left his general Antipater, an experienced military and political leader and part of Philip II's "Old Guard", in charge of Macedon.[51] Alexander's sacking of Thebes ensured that Greece remained quiet during his absence.[51] The one exception was a call to arms by Spartan king Agis III in 331 BC, whom Antipater defeated and killed in the battle of Megalopolis.[51] Antipater referred the Spartans' punishment to the League of Corinth, which then deferred to Alexander, who chose to pardon them.[92] There was also considerable friction between Antipater and Olympias, and each complained to Alexander about the other.[93]
In general, Greece enjoyed a period of peace and prosperity during Alexander's campaign in Asia.[94] Alexander sent back vast sums from his conquest, which stimulated the economy and increased trade across his empire.[95] However, Alexander's constant demands for troops and the migration of Macedonians throughout his empire depleted Macedon's manpower, greatly weakening it in the years after Alexander, and ultimately led to its subjugation by Rome after the Third Macedonian War (171–168 BC).[16]
Indian campaign
Main article: Indian campaign of Alexander the Great
Forays into the Indian subcontinent




The Phalanx Attacking the Centre in the Battle of the Hydaspes by André Castaigne (1898–1899)


After the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana (Raoxshna in Old Iranian) to cement relations with his new satrapies, Alexander turned to the Indian subcontinent. He invited the chieftains of the former satrapy of Gandhara (a region presently straddling eastern Afghanistan and northern Pakistan), to come to him and submit to his authority. Omphis (Indian name Ambhi), the ruler of Taxila, whose kingdom extended from the Indus to the Hydaspes (Jhelum), complied, but the chieftains of some hill clans, including the Aspasioi and Assakenoi sections of the Kambojas (known in Indian texts also as Ashvayanas and Ashvakayanas), refused to submit.[96] Ambhi hastened to relieve Alexander of his apprehension and met him with valuable presents, placing himself and all his forces at his disposal. Alexander not only returned Ambhi his title and the gifts but he also presented him with a wardrobe of "Persian robes, gold and silver ornaments, 30 horses and 1,000 talents in gold". Alexander was emboldened to divide his forces, and Ambhi assisted Hephaestion and Perdiccas in constructing a bridge over the Indus where it bends at Hund (Fox 1973), supplied their troops with provisions, and received Alexander himself, and his whole army, in his capital city of Taxila, with every demonstration of friendship and the most liberal hospitality.
On the subsequent advance of the Macedonian king, Taxiles accompanied him with a force of 5,000 men and took part in the battle of the Hydaspes River. After that victory he was sent by Alexander in pursuit of Porus, to whom he was charged to offer favourable terms, but narrowly escaped losing his life at the hands of his old enemy. Subsequently, however, the two rivals were reconciled by the personal mediation of Alexander; and Taxiles, after having contributed zealously to the equipment of the fleet on the Hydaspes, was entrusted by the king with the government of the whole territory between that river and the Indus. A considerable accession of power was granted him after the death of Philip, son of Machatas; and he was allowed to retain his authority at the death of Alexander himself (323 BC), as well as in the subsequent partition of the provinces at Triparadisus, 321 BC.
In the winter of 327/326 BC, Alexander personally led a campaign against these clans; the Aspasioi of Kunar valleys, the Guraeans of the Guraeus valley, and the Assakenoi of the Swat and Buner valleys.[97] A fierce contest ensued with the Aspasioi in which Alexander was wounded in the shoulder by a dart, but eventually the Aspasioi lost. Alexander then faced the Assakenoi, who fought in the strongholds of Massaga, Ora and Aornos.[96]
The fort of Massaga was reduced only after days of bloody fighting, in which Alexander was wounded seriously in the ankle. According to Curtius, "Not only did Alexander slaughter the entire population of Massaga, but also did he reduce its buildings to rubble."[98] A similar slaughter followed at Ora. In the aftermath of Massaga and Ora, numerous Assakenians fled to the fortress of Aornos. Alexander followed close behind and captured the strategic hill-fort after four bloody days.[96]




Alexander's invasion of the Indian subcontinent


After Aornos, Alexander crossed the Indus and fought and won an epic battle against King Porus, who ruled a region lying between the Hydaspes and the Acesines (Chenab), in what is now the Punjab, in the Battle of the Hydaspes in 326 BC.[99] Alexander was impressed by Porus' bravery, and made him an ally. He appointed Porus as satrap, and added to Porus' territory land that he did not previously own, towards the south-east, up to the Hyphasis (Beas).[100][101] Choosing a local helped him control these lands so distant from Greece.[102] Alexander founded two cities on opposite sides of the Hydaspes river, naming one Bucephala, in honour of his horse, who died around this time.[103] The other was Nicaea (Victory), thought to be located at the site of modern-day Mong, Punjab.[104]
Revolt of the army
East of Porus' kingdom, near the Ganges River, were the Nanda Empire of Magadha and further east the Gangaridai Empire (of the modern-day Bengal region of the Indian subcontinent). Fearing the prospect of facing other large armies and exhausted by years of campaigning, Alexander's army mutinied at the Hyphasis River (Beas), refusing to march farther east.[105] This river thus marks the easternmost extent of Alexander's conquests.[106]

As for the Macedonians, however, their struggle with Porus blunted their courage and stayed their further advance into India. For having had all they could do to repulse an enemy who mustered only twenty thousand infantry and two thousand horse, they violently opposed Alexander when he insisted on crossing the river Ganges also, the width of which, as they learned, was thirty-two furlongs, its depth a hundred fathoms, while its banks on the further side were covered with multitudes of men-at-arms and horsemen and elephants. For they were told that the kings of the Ganderites and Praesii were awaiting them with eighty thousand horsemen, two hundred thousand footmen, eight thousand chariots, and six thousand war elephants.[107]

Alexander tried to persuade his soldiers to march farther, but his general Coenus pleaded with him to change his opinion and return; the men, he said, "longed to again see their parents, their wives and children, their homeland". Alexander eventually agreed and turned south, marching along the Indus. Along the way his army conquered the Malhi (in modern-day Multan) and other Indian tribes and Alexander sustained an injury during the siege.[108]
Alexander sent much of his army to Carmania (modern southern Iran) with general Craterus, and commissioned a fleet to explore the Persian Gulf shore under his admiral Nearchus, while he led the rest back to Persia through the more difficult southern route along the Gedrosian Desert and Makran.[109] Alexander reached Susa in 324 BC, but not before losing many men to the harsh desert.[110]
Last years in Persia




Alexander, left, and Hephaestion, right


Discovering that many of his satraps and military governors had misbehaved in his absence, Alexander executed several of them as examples on his way to Susa.[111][112] As a gesture of thanks, he paid off the debts of his soldiers, and announced that he would send over-aged and disabled veterans back to Macedon, led by Craterus. His troops misunderstood his intention and mutinied at the town of Opis. They refused to be sent away and criticized his adoption of Persian customs and dress and the introduction of Persian officers and soldiers into Macedonian units.[113]




Alexander at the Tomb of Cyrus the Great, by Pierre-Henri de Valenciennes (1796)


After three days, unable to persuade his men to back down, Alexander gave Persians command posts in the army and conferred Macedonian military titles upon Persian units. The Macedonians quickly begged forgiveness, which Alexander accepted, and held a great banquet for several thousand of his men at which he and they ate together.[114] In an attempt to craft a lasting harmony between his Macedonian and Persian subjects, Alexander held a mass marriage of his senior officers to Persian and other noblewomen at Susa, but few of those marriages seem to have lasted much beyond a year.[112] Meanwhile, upon his return to Persia, Alexander learned that guards of the tomb of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae had desecrated it, and swiftly executed them.[115] Alexander admired Cyrus the Great, from an early age reading Xenophon's Cyropaedia, which described Cyrus's heroism in battle and governance as a king and legislator.[116] During his visit to Pasargadae Alexander ordered his architect Aristobulus to decorate the interior of the sepulchral chamber of Cyrus' tomb.[116]
Afterwards, Alexander travelled to Ecbatana to retrieve the bulk of the Persian treasure. There, his closest friend and possible lover, Hephaestion, died of illness or poisoning.[117][118] Hephaestion's death devastated Alexander, and he ordered the preparation of an expensive funeral pyre in Babylon, as well as a decree for public mourning.[117] Back in Babylon, Alexander planned a series of new campaigns, beginning with an invasion of Arabia, but he would not have a chance to realize them, as he died shortly thereafter.[119]
Death and succession
Main article: Death of Alexander the Great




A Babylonian astronomical diary (c. 323–322 BC) recording the death of Alexander (British Museum, London)






19th century depiction of Alexander's funeral procession based on the description of Diodorus


On either 10 or 11 June 323 BC, Alexander died in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar II, in Babylon, at age 32.[120] There are two different versions of Alexander's death and details of the death differ slightly in each. Plutarch's account is that roughly 14 days before his death, Alexander entertained admiral Nearchus, and spent the night and next day drinking with Medius of Larissa.[121] He developed a fever, which worsened until he was unable to speak. The common soldiers, anxious about his health, were granted the right to file past him as he silently waved at them.[122] In the second account, Diodorus recounts that Alexander was struck with pain after downing a large bowl of unmixed wine in honour of Heracles, followed by 11 days of weakness; he did not develop a fever and died after some agony.[123] Arrian also mentioned this as an alternative, but Plutarch specifically denied this claim.[121]
Given the propensity of the Macedonian aristocracy to assassination,[124] foul play featured in multiple accounts of his death. Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian and Justin all mentioned the theory that Alexander was poisoned. Justin stated that Alexander was the victim of a poisoning conspiracy, Plutarch dismissed it as a fabrication,[125] while both Diodorus and Arrian noted that they mentioned it only for the sake of completeness.[123][126] The accounts were nevertheless fairly consistent in designating Antipater, recently removed as Macedonian viceroy, and at odds with Olympias, as the head of the alleged plot. Perhaps taking his summons to Babylon as a death sentence,[127] and having seen the fate of Parmenion and Philotas,[128] Antipater purportedly arranged for Alexander to be poisoned by his son Iollas, who was Alexander's wine-pourer.[126][128] There was even a suggestion that Aristotle may have participated.[126]
The strongest argument against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days passed between the start of his illness and his death; such long-acting poisons were probably not available.[129] However, in a 2003 BBC documentary investigating the death of Alexander, Leo Schep from the New Zealand National Poisons Centre proposed that the plant white hellebore (Veratrum album), which was known in antiquity, may have been used to poison Alexander.[130][131][132] In a 2014 manuscript in the journal Clinical Toxicology, Schep suggested Alexander's wine was spiked with Veratrum album, and that this would produce poisoning symptoms that match the course of events described in the Alexander Romance.[133] Veratrum album poisoning can have a prolonged course and it was suggested that if Alexander was poisoned, Veratrum album offers the most plausible cause.[133][134] Another poisoning explanation put forward in 2010 proposed that the circumstances of his death were compatible with poisoning by water of the river Styx (modern-day Mavroneri in Arcadia, Greece) that contained calicheamicin, a dangerous compound produced by bacteria.[135]
Several natural causes (diseases) have been suggested, including malaria and typhoid fever. A 1998 article in the New England Journal of Medicine attributed his death to typhoid fever complicated by bowel perforation and ascending paralysis.[136] Another recent analysis suggested pyogenic (infectious) spondylitis or meningitis.[137] Other illnesses fit the symptoms, including acute pancreatitis and West Nile virus.[138][139] Natural-cause theories also tend to emphasize that Alexander's health may have been in general decline after years of heavy drinking and severe wounds. The anguish that Alexander felt after Hephaestion's death may also have contributed to his declining health.[136]
After death
See also: Tomb of Alexander the Great




Detail of Alexander on the Alexander Sarcophagus


Alexander's body was laid in a gold anthropoid sarcophagus that was filled with honey, which was in turn placed in a gold casket.[140][141] According to Aelian, a seer called Aristander foretold that the land where Alexander was laid to rest "would be happy and unvanquishable forever".[142] Perhaps more likely, the successors may have seen possession of the body as a symbol of legitimacy, since burying the prior king was a royal prerogative.[143]
While Alexander's funeral cortege was on its way to Macedon, Ptolemy seized it and took it temporarily to Memphis.[140][142] His successor, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, transferred the sarcophagus to Alexandria, where it remained until at least late Antiquity. Ptolemy IX Lathyros, one of Ptolemy's final successors, replaced Alexander's sarcophagus with a glass one so he could convert the original to coinage.[144] The recent discovery of an enormous tomb in northern Greece, at Amphipolis, dating from the time of Alexander the Great [145] has given rise to speculation that its original intent was to be the burial place of Alexander. This would fit with the intended destination of Alexander's funeral cortege.
Pompey, Julius Caesar and Augustus all visited the tomb in Alexandria, where Augustus, allegedly, accidentally knocked the nose off. Caligula was said to have taken Alexander's breastplate from the tomb for his own use. Around AD 200, Emperor Septimius Severus closed Alexander's tomb to the public. His son and successor, Caracalla, a great admirer, visited the tomb during his own reign. After this, details on the fate of the tomb are hazy.[144]
The so-called "Alexander Sarcophagus", discovered near Sidon and now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum, is so named not because it was thought to have contained Alexander's remains, but because its bas-reliefs depict Alexander and his companions fighting the Persians and hunting. It was originally thought to have been the sarcophagus of Abdalonymus (died 311 BC), the king of Sidon appointed by Alexander immediately following the battle of Issus in 331.[146][147] However, more recently, it has been suggested that it may date from earlier than Abdalonymus' death.
Division of the empire
Main articles: Partition of Babylon and Diadochi




Kingdoms of the Diadochi in 301 BC: the Ptolemaic Kingdom (dark blue), the Seleucid Empire (yellow), Kingdom of Pergamon (orange), and Kingdom of Macedon (green). Also shown are the Roman Republic (light blue), the Carthaginian Republic (purple), and the Kingdom of Epirus (red).


Alexander's death was so sudden that when reports of his death reached Greece, they were not immediately believed.[51] Alexander had no obvious or legitimate heir, his son Alexander IV by Roxane being born after Alexander's death.[148] According to Diodorus, Alexander's companions asked him on his deathbed to whom he bequeathed his kingdom; his laconic reply was "tôi kratistôi"—"to the strongest".[123] Another theory is that his successors willfully or erroneously misheard “tôi Kraterôi” — “to Craterus”, the general leading his Macedonian troops home and newly entrusted with the regency of Macedonia.[149]
Arrian and Plutarch claimed that Alexander was speechless by this point, implying that this was an apocryphal story.[150] Diodorus, Curtius and Justin offered the more plausible story that Alexander passed his signet ring to Perdiccas, a bodyguard and leader of the companion cavalry, in front of witnesses, thereby nominating him.[123][148]
Perdiccas initially did not claim power, instead suggesting that Roxane's baby would be king, if male; with himself, Craterus, Leonnatus, and Antipater as guardians. However, the infantry, under the command of Meleager, rejected this arrangement since they had been excluded from the discussion. Instead, they supported Alexander's half-brother Philip Arrhidaeus. Eventually, the two sides reconciled, and after the birth of Alexander IV, he and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only.[151]
Dissension and rivalry soon afflicted the Macedonians, however. The satrapies handed out by Perdiccas at the Partition of Babylon became power bases each general used to bid for power. After the assassination of Perdiccas in 321 BC, Macedonian unity collapsed, and 40 years of war between "The Successors" (Diadochi) ensued before the Hellenistic world settled into four stable power blocks: Ptolemaic Egypt, Seleucid Mesopotamia and Central Asia, Attalid Anatolia, and Antigonid Macedon. In the process, both Alexander IV and Philip III were murdered.[152]
Will




Commemorative coin by Agathocles of Bactria (190–180 BC) for Alexander the Great


Diodorus stated that Alexander had given detailed written instructions to Craterus some time before his death.[153] Craterus started to carry out Alexander's commands, but the successors chose not to further implement them, on the grounds they were impractical and extravagant.[153] Nevertheless, Perdiccas read Alexander's will to his troops.[51]
Alexander's will called for military expansion into the southern and western Mediterranean, monumental constructions, and the intermixing of Eastern and Western populations. It included:

Construction of a monumental tomb for his father Philip, “to match the greatest of the pyramids of Egypt”[51]
Erection of great temples in Delos, Delphi, Dodona, Dium, Amphipolis, and a monumental temple to Athena at Troy[51]
Conquest of Arabia and the entire Mediterranean Basin[51]
Circumnavigation of Africa[51]
Development of cities and the “transplant of populations from Asia to Europe and in the opposite direction from Europe to Asia, in order to bring the largest continent to common unity and to friendship by means of intermarriage and family ties.”[154]

Character
Generalship




The Battle of the Granicus, 334 BC






The Battle of Issus, 333 BC


Alexander earned the epithet "the Great" due to his unparalleled success as a military commander. He never lost a battle, despite typically being outnumbered.[50] This was due to use of terrain, phalanx and cavalry tactics, bold strategy, and the fierce loyalty of his troops.[155] The Macedonian phalanx, armed with the sarissa, a spear 6 metres (20 ft) long, had been developed and perfected by Philip II through rigorous training, and Alexander used its speed and maneuverability to great effect against larger but more disparate[clarification needed] Persian forces.[156] Alexander also recognized the potential for disunity among his diverse army, which employed various languages and weapons. He overcame this by being personally involved in battle,[72] in the manner of a Macedonian king.[155]
In his first battle in Asia, at Granicus, Alexander used only a small part of his forces[citation needed], perhaps 13,000 infantry with 5,000 cavalry, against a much larger Persian force of 40,000. Alexander placed the phalanx at the center and cavalry and archers on the wings, so that his line matched the length of the Persian cavalry line, about 3 km (1.86 mi). By contrast, the Persian infantry was stationed behind its cavalry. This ensured that Alexander would not be outflanked, while his phalanx, armed with long pikes, had a considerable advantage over the Persian's scimitars and javelins. Macedonian losses were negligible compared to those of the Persians.[157]
At Issus in 333 BC, his first confrontation with Darius, he used the same deployment, and again the central phalanx pushed through.[157] Alexander personally led the charge in the center, routing the opposing army.[158] At the decisive encounter with Darius at Gaugamela, Darius equipped his chariots with scythes on the wheels to break up the phalanx and equipped his cavalry with pikes. Alexander arranged a double phalanx, with the center advancing at an angle, parting when the chariots bore down and then reforming. The advance was successful and broke Darius' center, causing the latter to flee once again.[157]
When faced with opponents who used unfamiliar fighting techniques, such as in Central Asia and India, Alexander adapted his forces to his opponents' style. Thus, in Bactria and Sogdiana, Alexander successfully used his javelin throwers and archers to prevent outflanking movements, while massing his cavalry at the center.[158] In India, confronted by Porus' elephant corps, the Macedonians opened their ranks to envelop the elephants and used their sarissas to strike upwards and dislodge the elephants' handlers.[114]
Physical appearance




Roman copy of a herma by Lysippos, Louvre Museum. Plutarch reports that sculptures by Lysippos were the most faithful.


Greek biographer Plutarch (c. 45–120 AD) describes Alexander's appearance as:

¹ The outward appearance of Alexander is best represented by the statues of him which Lysippus made, and it was by this artist alone that Alexander himself thought it fit that he should be modelled. ² For those peculiarities which many of his successors and friends afterwards tried to imitate, namely, the poise of the neck, which was bent slightly to the left, and the melting glance of his eyes, this artist has accurately observed. ³ Apelles, however, in painting him as wielder of the thunder-bolt, did not reproduce his complexion, but made it too dark and swarthy. Whereas he was of a fair colour, as they say, and his fairness passed into ruddiness on his breast particularly, and in his face. 4 Moreover, that a very pleasant odour exhaled from his skin and that there was a fragrance about his mouth and all his flesh, so that his garments were filled with it, this we have read in the Memoirs of Aristoxenus.[159]

Greek historian Arrian (Lucius Flavius Arrianus 'Xenophon' c. 86–160) described Alexander as:

[T]he strong, handsome commander with one eye dark as the night and one blue as the sky.[160][161]

The semi-legendary Alexander Romance also suggests that Alexander exhibited heterochromia iridum: that one eye was dark and the other light.[162]
British historian Peter Green provided a description of Alexander's appearance, based on his review of statues and some ancient documents:

Physically, Alexander was not prepossessing. Even by Macedonian standards he was very short, though stocky and tough. His beard was scanty, and he stood out against his hirsute Macedonian barons by going clean-shaven. His neck was in some way twisted, so that he appeared to be gazing upward at an angle. His eyes (one blue, one brown) revealed a dewy, feminine quality. He had a high complexion and a harsh voice.[163]

Ancient authors recorded that Alexander was so pleased with portraits of himself created by Lysippos that he forbade other sculptors from crafting his image.[164] Lysippos had often used the contrapposto sculptural scheme to portray Alexander and other characters such as Apoxyomenos, Hermes and Eros.[165] Lysippos' sculpture, famous for its naturalism, as opposed to a stiffer, more static pose, is thought to be the most faithful depiction.[166]
Personality
Some of Alexander's strongest personality traits formed in response to his parents. His mother had huge ambitions, and encouraged him to believe it was his destiny to conquer the Persian Empire.[163] Olympias' influence instilled a sense of destiny in him,[167] and Plutarch tells how his ambition "kept his spirit serious and lofty in advance of his years".[168] However, his father Philip was Alexander's most immediate and influential role model, as the young Alexander watched him campaign practically every year, winning victory after victory while ignoring severe wounds.[38] Alexander's relationship with his father forged the competitive side of his personality; he had a need to out-do his father, illustrated by his reckless behaviour in battle.[163] While Alexander worried that his father would leave him "no great or brilliant achievement to be displayed to the world",[169] he also downplayed his father's achievements to his companions.[163]




Alexander (left), wearing a kausia and fighting an Asiatic lion with his friend Craterus (detail); late 4th century BC mosaic,[170] Pella Museum


According to Plutarch, among Alexander's traits were a violent temper and rash, impulsive nature,[171] which undoubtedly contributed to some of his decisions.[163] Although Alexander was stubborn and did not respond well to orders from his father, he was open to reasoned debate.[172] He had a calmer side—perceptive, logical, and calculating. He had a great desire for knowledge, a love for philosophy, and was an avid reader.[173] This was no doubt in part due to Aristotle's tutelage; Alexander was intelligent and quick to learn.[163] His intelligent and rational side was amply demonstrated by his ability and success as a general.[171] He had great self-restraint in "pleasures of the body", in contrast with his lack of self-control with alcohol.[174]
Alexander was erudite and patronized both arts and sciences.[168][173] However, he had little interest in sports or the Olympic games (unlike his father), seeking only the Homeric ideals of honour (timê) and glory (kudos).[175] He had great charisma and force of personality, characteristics which made him a great leader.[148][171] His unique abilities were further demonstrated by the inability of any of his generals to unite Macedonia and retain the Empire after his death—only Alexander had the ability to do so.[148]
During his final years, and especially after the death of Hephaestion, Alexander began to exhibit signs of megalomania and paranoia.[127] His extraordinary achievements, coupled with his own ineffable sense of destiny and the flattery of his companions, may have combined to produce this effect.[176] His delusions of grandeur are readily visible in his will and in his desire to conquer the world,[127] in as much as he is by various sources described as having boundless ambition,[177][178] an epithet, the meaning of which has descended into an historical cliché.[179][180]
He appears to have believed himself a deity, or at least sought to deify himself.[127] Olympias always insisted to him that he was the son of Zeus,[181] a theory apparently confirmed to him by the oracle of Amun at Siwa.[182] He began to identify himself as the son of Zeus-Ammon.[182] Alexander adopted elements of Persian dress and customs at court, notably proskynesis, a practice of which Macedonians disapproved, and were loath to perform.[87] This behaviour cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen.[183] However, Alexander also was a pragmatic ruler who understood the difficulties of ruling culturally disparate peoples, many of whom lived in kingdoms where the king was divine.[184] Thus, rather than megalomania, his behaviour may simply have been a practical attempt at strengthening his rule and keeping his empire together.[185]




A mural in Pompeii, depicting the marriage of Alexander to Barsine (Stateira) in 324 BC. The couple are apparently dressed as Ares and Aphrodite.


Personal relationships
Main article: Personal relationships of Alexander the Great
Alexander married three times: Roxana, daughter of the Sogdian nobleman Oxyartes of Bactria,[186][187][188] out of love;[189] and the Persian princesses Stateira II and Parysatis II, the former a daughter of Darius III and latter a daughter of Artaxerxes III, for political reasons.[190][191] He apparently had two sons, Alexander IV of Macedon by Roxana and, possibly, Heracles of Macedon from his mistress Barsine. He lost another child when Roxana miscarried at Babylon.[192][193]
Alexander also had a close relationship with his friend, general, and bodyguard Hephaestion, the son of a Macedonian noble.[117][163][194] Hephaestion's death devastated Alexander.[117][195] This event may have contributed to Alexander's failing health and detached mental state during his final months.[127][136]
Alexander's sexuality has been the subject of speculation and controversy.[196] No ancient sources stated that Alexander had homosexual relationships, or that Alexander's relationship with Hephaestion was sexual. Aelian, however, writes of Alexander's visit to Troy where "Alexander garlanded the tomb of Achilles and Hephaestion that of Patroclus, the latter riddling that he was a beloved of Alexander, in just the same way as Patroclus was of Achilles."[197] Noting that the word eromenos (ancient Greek for beloved) does not necessarily bear sexual meaning, Alexander may have been bisexual, which in his time was not controversial.[198]
Green argues that there is little evidence in ancient sources that Alexander had much carnal interest in women; he did not produce an heir until the very end of his life.[163] However, he was relatively young when he died, and Ogden suggests that Alexander's matrimonial record is more impressive than his father's at the same age.[199] Apart from wives, Alexander had many more female companions. Alexander accumulated a harem in the style of Persian kings, but he used it rather sparingly,[200] showing great self-control in "pleasures of the body".[174] Nevertheless, Plutarch described how Alexander was infatuated by Roxana while complimenting him on not forcing himself on her.[201] Green suggested that, in the context of the period, Alexander formed quite strong friendships with women, including Ada of Caria, who adopted him, and even Darius' mother Sisygambis, who supposedly died from grief upon hearing of Alexander's death.[163]
Battle record


Date
War
Action
Opponent/s
Type
Country
Rank
Outcome
Record


338-08-02 2 August 338 BC
Rise of Macedon
Chaeronea Battle of Chaeronea
.Thebans, Athenians
Battle
Greece
Prince
Victory
⁂

1–0


335 335 BC
Balkan Campaign
Mount Haemus Battle of Mount Haemus
.Getae, Thracians
Battle
present-day Bulgaria
King
Victory
⁂

2–0


335-12 December 335 BC
Balkan Campaign
Pelium Siege of Pelium
.Illyrians
Siege
Greece
King
Victory
⁂

3–0


335-12 December 335 BC
Balkan Campaign
Pelium Battle of Thebes
.Thebans
Battle
Greece
King
Victory
⁂

4–0


334-05 May 334 BC
Persian Campaign
Granicus Battle of the Granicus
.Achaemenid Empire
Battle
present-day Turkey
King
Victory
⁂

5–0


334 334 BC
Persian Campaign
Miletus Siege of Miletus
.Achaemenid Empire, Milesians
Siege
present-day Turkey
King
Victory
⁂

6–0


334 334 BC
Persian Campaign
Halicarnassus Siege of Halicarnassus
.Achaemenid Empire
Siege
present-day Turkey
King
Victory
⁂

7–0


333-11-05 5 November 333 BC
Persian Campaign
Issus Battle of Issus
.Achaemenid Empire
Battle
present-day Turkey
King
Victory
⁂

8–0


332 January–July 332 BC
Persian Campaign
Tyre Siege of Tyre
.Achaemenid Empire, Tyrians
Siege
present-day Lebanon
King
Victory
⁂

9–0


332-10 October 332 BC
Persian Campaign
Tyre Siege of Gaza
.Achaemenid Empire
Siege
present-day Palestine
King
Victory
⁂

10–0


331-10-01 1 October 331 BC
Persian Campaign
Gaugamela Battle of Gaugamela
.Achaemenid Empire
Battle
present-day Iraq
King
Victory
⁂

11–0


331-12 December 331 BC
Persian Campaign
Uxian Defile Battle of the Uxian Defile
.Uxians
Battle
present-day Iran
King
Victory
⁂

12–0


330-01-20 20 January 330 BC
Persian Campaign
Persian Gate Battle of the Persian Gate
.Achaemenid Empire
Battle
present-day Iran
King
Victory
⁂

13–0


329 329 BC
Persian Campaign
Cyropolis Siege of Cyropolis
.Sogdians
Siege
present-day Turkmenistan
King
Victory
⁂

14–0


329-10 October 329 BC
Persian Campaign
Jaxartes Battle of Jaxartes
.Scythians
Battle
present-day Uzbekistan
King
Victory
⁂

15–0


327 327 BC
Persian Campaign
Sogdian Rock Siege of the Sogdian Rock
.Sogdians
Siege
present-day Uzbekistan
King
Victory
⁂

16–0


327 May 327 – March 326 BC
Indian Campaign
Cophen Cophen Campaign
.Aspasians
Expedition
present-day Afghanistan and Pakistan
King
Victory
⁂

17–0


326-04 April 326 BC
Indian Campaign
Aornos Siege of Aornos
.Aśvaka
Siege
present-day Pakistan
King
Victory
⁂

18–0


326-05 May 326 BC
Indian Campaign
Hydaspes Battle of the Hydaspes
.Paurava
Battle
present-day Pakistan
King
Victory
⁂

19–0


325 November 326 – February 325 BC
Indian Campaign
Aornos Siege of Multan
.Malli
Siege
present-day Pakistan
King
Victory
⁂

20–0


Legacy




The Hellenistic world view after Alexander: ancient world map of Eratosthenes (276–194 BC), incorporating information from the campaigns of Alexander and his successors.[202]


Alexander's legacy extended beyond his military conquests. His campaigns greatly increased contacts and trade between East and West, and vast areas to the east were significantly exposed to Greek civilization and influence.[16] Some of the cities he founded became major cultural centers, many surviving into the 21st century. His chroniclers recorded valuable information about the areas through which he marched, while the Greeks themselves got a sense of belonging to a world beyond the Mediterranean.[16]
Hellenistic kingdoms
Main article: Hellenistic period
Alexander's most immediate legacy was the introduction of Macedonian rule to huge new swathes of Asia. At the time of his death, Alexander's empire covered some 5,200,000 km2 (2,000,000 sq mi),[203] and was the largest state of its time. Many of these areas remained in Macedonian hands or under Greek influence for the next 200–300 years. The successor states that emerged were, at least initially, dominant forces, and these 300 years are often referred to as the Hellenistic period.[204]




Plan of Alexandria c. 30 BC


The eastern borders of Alexander's empire began to collapse even during his lifetime.[148] However, the power vacuum he left in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent directly gave rise to one of the most powerful Indian dynasties in history, the Maurya Empire. Taking advantage of this power vacuum, Chandragupta Maurya (referred to in Greek sources as "Sandrokottos"), of relatively humble origin, took control of the Punjab, and with that power base proceeded to conquer the Nanda Empire.[205]
Founding of cities
Over the course of his conquests, Alexander founded some twenty cities that bore his name, most of them east of the Tigris.[88][206] The first, and greatest, was Alexandria in Egypt, which would become one of the leading Mediterranean cities.[88] The cities' locations reflected trade routes as well as defensive positions. At first, the cities must have been inhospitable, little more than defensive garrisons.[88] Following Alexander's death, many Greeks who had settled there tried to return to Greece.[88][206] However, a century or so after Alexander's death, many of the Alexandrias were thriving, with elaborate public buildings and substantial populations that included both Greek and local peoples.[88]
Funding of temples




Dedication of Alexander the Great to Athena Polias at Priene, now housed in the British Museum[207]


In 334 BC, Alexander the Great donated funds for the completion of the new temple of Athena Polias in Priene.[208][209] An inscription from the temple, now housed in the British Museum, declares: "King Alexander dedicated [this temple] to Athena Polias."[207] This inscription is one of the few independent archaeological discoveries confirming an episode from Alexander's life.[207] The temple was designed by Pytheos, one of the architects of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus.[207][208][209][210]
Hellenization
Main article: Hellenistic civilization




Alexander's empire was the largest state of its time, covering approximately 5.2 million square km.


Hellenization was coined by the German historian Johann Gustav Droysen to denote the spread of Greek language, culture, and population into the former Persian empire after Alexander's conquest.[204] That this export took place is undoubted, and can be seen in the great Hellenistic cities of, for instance, Alexandria, Antioch[211] and Seleucia (south of modern Baghdad).[212] Alexander sought to insert Greek elements into Persian culture and attempted to hybridize Greek and Persian culture. This culminated in his aspiration to homogenize the populations of Asia and Europe. However, his successors explicitly rejected such policies. Nevertheless, Hellenization occurred throughout the region, accompanied by a distinct and opposite 'Orientalization' of the successor states.[213]
The core of the Hellenistic culture promulgated by the conquests was essentially Athenian.[214] The close association of men from across Greece in Alexander's army directly led to the emergence of the largely Attic-based "koine", or "common" Greek dialect.[215] Koine spread throughout the Hellenistic world, becoming the lingua franca of Hellenistic lands and eventually the ancestor of modern Greek.[215] Furthermore, town planning, education, local government, and art current in the Hellenistic period were all based on Classical Greek ideals, evolving into distinct new forms commonly grouped as Hellenistic.[211] Aspects of Hellenistic culture were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century.[216]




The Buddha, in Greco-Buddhist style, 1st–2nd century AD, Gandhara, ancient India. Tokyo National Museum.


Some of the most pronounced effects of Hellenization can be seen in Afghanistan and India, in the region of the relatively late-rising Greco-Bactrian Kingdom (250–125 BC) (in modern Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Tajikistan) and the Indo-Greek Kingdom (180 BC – 10 CE) in modern Afghanistan and India.[217] There on the newly formed Silk Road Greek culture apparently hybridized with Indian, and especially Buddhist culture. The resulting syncretism known as Greco-Buddhism heavily influenced the development of Buddhism[citation needed] and created a culture of Greco-Buddhist art. These Greco-Buddhist kingdoms sent some of the first Buddhist missionaries to China, Sri Lanka, and the Mediterranean (Greco-Buddhist monasticism). Some of the first and most influential figurative portrayals of the Buddha appeared at this time, perhaps modeled on Greek statues of Apollo in the Greco-Buddhist style.[217] Several Buddhist traditions may have been influenced by the ancient Greek religion: the concept of Boddhisatvas is reminiscent of Greek divine heroes,[218] and some Mahayana ceremonial practices (burning incense, gifts of flowers, and food placed on altars) are similar to those practiced by the ancient Greeks; however, similar practices were also observed amongst the native Indic culture. One Greek king, Menander I, probably became Buddhist, and was immortalized in Buddhist literature as 'Milinda'.[217] The process of Hellenization also spurred trade between the east and west.[219] For example, Greek astronomical instruments dating to the 3rd century BC were found in the Greco-Bactrian city of Ai Khanoum in modern-day Afghanistan,[220] while the Greek concept of a spherical earth surrounded by the spheres of planets eventually supplanted the long-standing Indian cosmological belief of a disc consisting of four continents grouped around a central mountain (Mount Meru) like the petals of a flower.[219][221][222] The Yavanajataka (lit. Greek astronomical treatise) and Paulisa Siddhanta texts depict the influence of Greek astronomical ideas on Indian astronomy.
Following the conquests of Alexander the Great in the east, Hellenistic influence on Indian art was far-ranging. In the area of architecture, a few examples of the Ionic order can be found as far as Pakistan with the Jandial temple near Taxila. Several examples of capitals displaying Ionic influences can be seen as far as Patna, especially with the Pataliputra capital, dated to the 3rd century BC.[223] The Corinthian order is also heavily represented in the art of Gandhara, especially through Indo-Corinthian capitals.
Influence on Rome




This medallion was produced in Imperial Rome, demonstrating the influence of Alexander's memory. Walters Art Museum, Baltimore.


Alexander and his exploits were admired by many Romans, especially generals, who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements.[224] Polybius began his Histories by reminding Romans of Alexander's achievements, and thereafter Roman leaders saw him as a role model. Pompey the Great adopted the epithet "Magnus" and even Alexander's anastole-type haircut, and searched the conquered lands of the east for Alexander's 260-year-old cloak, which he then wore as a sign of greatness.[224] Julius Caesar dedicated a Lysippean equestrian bronze statue but replaced Alexander's head with his own, while Octavian visited Alexander's tomb in Alexandria and temporarily changed his seal from a sphinx to Alexander's profile.[224] The emperor Trajan also admired Alexander, as did Nero and Caracalla.[224] The Macriani, a Roman family that in the person of Macrinus briefly ascended to the imperial throne, kept images of Alexander on their persons, either on jewelry, or embroidered into their clothes.[225]




The Greco-Bactrian king Demetrius (reigned c. 200–180 BC), wearing an elephant scalp, took over Alexander's legacy in the east by again invading India, and establishing the Indo-Greek kingdom (180 BC–10 AD).






The coronation of Alexander depicted in medieval European style in the 15th century romance The History of Alexander's Battles


On the other hand, some Roman writers, particularly Republican figures, used Alexander as a cautionary tale of how autocratic tendencies can be kept in check by republican values.[226] Alexander was used by these writers as an example of ruler values such as amicita (friendship) and clementia (clemency), but also iracundia (anger) and cupiditas gloriae (over-desire for glory).[226]
Legend
Main article: Alexander the Great in legend
Legendary accounts surround the life of Alexander the Great, many deriving from his own lifetime, probably encouraged by Alexander himself.[227] His court historian Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis. Writing shortly after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, invented a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons. When Onesicritus read this passage to his patron, Alexander's general and later King Lysimachus reportedly quipped, "I wonder where I was at the time."[228]
In the first centuries after Alexander's death, probably in Alexandria, a quantity of the legendary material coalesced into a text known as the Alexander Romance, later falsely ascribed to Callisthenes and therefore known as Pseudo-Callisthenes. This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages,[229] containing many dubious stories,[227] and was translated into numerous languages.[230]
In ancient and modern culture
Main articles: Cultural depictions of Alexander the Great and Alexander the Great in the Quran




Alexander the Great depicted in a 14th-century Byzantine manuscript






Alexander the Great depicted in a 15th-century Persian miniature painting


Alexander the Great's accomplishments and legacy have been depicted in many cultures. Alexander has figured in both high and popular culture beginning in his own era to the present day. The Alexander Romance, in particular, has had a significant impact on portrayals of Alexander in later cultures, from Persian to medieval European to modern Greek.[230]
Alexander features prominently in modern Greek folklore, more so than any other ancient figure.[231] The colloquial form of his name in modern Greek ("O Megalexandros") is a household name, and he is the only ancient hero to appear in the Karagiozis shadow play.[231] One well-known fable among Greek seamen involves a solitary mermaid who would grasp a ship's prow during a storm and ask the captain "Is King Alexander alive?" The correct answer is "He is alive and well and rules the world!" causing the mermaid to vanish and the sea to calm. Any other answer would cause the mermaid to turn into a raging Gorgon who would drag the ship to the bottom of the sea, all hands aboard.[231]
In pre-Islamic Middle Persian (Zoroastrian) literature, Alexander is referred to by the epithet gujastak, meaning "accursed", and is accused of destroying temples and burning the sacred texts of Zoroastrianism.[232] In Sunni Islamic Persia, under the influence of the Alexander Romance (in Persian: اسکندرنامه‎ Iskandarnamah), a more positive portrayal of Alexander emerges.[233] Firdausi's Shahnameh ("The Book of Kings") includes Alexander in a line of legitimate Persian shahs, a mythical figure who explored the far reaches of the world in search of the Fountain of Youth.[234] Later Persian writers associate him with philosophy, portraying him at a symposium with figures such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, in search of immortality.[233] The figure of Dhul-Qarnayn (literally "the Two-Horned One") mentioned in the Quran is believed by some scholars to represent Alexander, due to parallels with the Alexander Romance.[233] In this tradition, he was a heroic figure who built a wall to defend against the nations of Gog and Magog.[235] He then travelled the known world in search of the Water of Life and Immortality, eventually becoming a prophet.[235]
The Syriac version of the Alexander Romance portrays him as an ideal Christian world conqueror who prayed to "the one true God".[233] In Egypt, Alexander was portrayed as the son of Nectanebo II, the last pharaoh before the Persian conquest.[235] His defeat of Darius was depicted as Egypt's salvation, "proving" Egypt was still ruled by an Egyptian.[233]
According to Josephus, Alexander was shown the Book of Daniel when he entered Jerusalem, which described a mighty Greek king who would conquer the Persian Empire. This is cited as a reason for sparing Jerusalem.[236]
In Hindi and Urdu, the name "Sikandar", derived from Persian, denotes a rising young talent.[237] In medieval Europe, Alexander the Great was revered as a member of the Nine Worthies, a group of heroes whose lives were believed to encapsulate all the ideal qualities of chivalry.[238]
Irish playwright Aubrey Thomas de Vere wrote Alexander the Great, a Dramatic Poem.




Statue of Alexander the Great in Thessaloniki, Greece


Historiography
Main article: Alexander the Great in historiography
Apart from a few inscriptions and fragments, texts written by people who actually knew Alexander or who gathered information from men who served with Alexander were all lost.[16] Contemporaries who wrote accounts of his life included Alexander's campaign historian Callisthenes; Alexander's generals Ptolemy and Nearchus; Aristobulus, a junior officer on the campaigns; and Onesicritus, Alexander's chief helmsman. Their works are lost, but later works based on these original sources have survived. The earliest of these is Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), followed by Quintus Curtius Rufus (mid-to-late 1st century AD), Arrian (1st to 2nd century AD), the biographer Plutarch (1st to 2nd century AD), and finally Justin, whose work dated as late as the 4th century.[16] Of these, Arrian is generally considered the most reliable, given that he used Ptolemy and Aristobulus as his sources, closely followed by Diodorus.[16]
Ancestry


Ancestors of Alexander the Great







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

8. Arrhidaeus

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

4. Amyntas III of Macedon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 











































 

2. Philip II of Macedon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

10. Sirras

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

5. Eurydice I of Macedon

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 











































 

1. Alexander the Great

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

24. Tharrhypas



 




 


 


 


 


 







 

12. Alcetas I of Epirus

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 



















 

6. Neoptolemus I of Epirus

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 











































 

3. Olympias

 




 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 






























































































See also


History portal
Greece portal
Iran portal
Egypt portal
War portal




Library resources about
Alexander the Great





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Alexander the Great in the Qur'an
Ancient Macedonian army
Bucephalus
Chronology of European exploration of Asia
Diogenes and Alexander
Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great
List of people known as The Great
The Mahabharata Quest: The Alexander Secret

Annotations


^ Macedon was an Ancient Greek polity. The Macedonians were a Hellenic (Greek) tribe. Historiography and scholarship agree that Alexander the Great was Greek.[239]
^ By the time of his death, he had conquered the entire Achaemenid Persian Empire, adding it to Macedon's European territories; according to some modern writers, this was most of the world then known to the ancient Greeks (the 'Ecumene').[240][241] An approximate view of the world known to Alexander can be seen in Hecataeus of Miletus's map; see Hecataeus world map.
^ For instance, Hannibal supposedly ranked Alexander as the greatest general;[242] Julius Caesar wept on seeing a statue of Alexander, since he had achieved so little by the same age;[243] Pompey consciously posed as the 'new Alexander';[244] the young Napoleon Bonaparte also encouraged comparisons with Alexander.[245]
^ The name Ἀλέξανδρος derives from the Greek verb ἀλέξω (alexō) "ward off, avert, defend"[246][247] and ἀνδρ- (andr-), the stem of ἀνήρ (anēr) "man",[248][247] and means "protector of men."[249]
^ There have been, since the time, many suspicions that Pausanias was actually hired to murder Philip. Suspicion has fallen upon Alexander, Olympias and even the newly crowned Persian Emperor, Darius III. All three of these people had motive to have Philip murdered.[250]
^ However, Arrian, who used Ptolemy as a source, said that Alexander crossed with more than 5,000 horse and 30,000 foot; Diodorus quoted the same totals, but listed 5,100 horse and 32,000 foot. Diodorus also referred to an advance force already present in Asia, which Polyaenus, in his Stratagems of War (5.44.4), said numbered 10,000 men.


References


^

Bloom, Jonathan M.; Blair, Sheila S. (2009) The Grove Encyclopedia of Islamic Art and Architecture: Mosul to Zirid, Volume 3. (Oxford University Press Incorporated, 2009), 385; "[Khojand, Tajikistan]; As the easternmost outpost of the empire of Alexander the Great, the city was renamed Alexandria Eschate ("furthest Alexandria") in 329 BCE."
Golden, Peter B. Central Asia in World History (Oxford University Press, 2011), 25;"(...) his campaigns in Central Asia brought Khwarazm, Sogdia and Bactria under Graeco-Macedonian rule. As elsewhere, Alexander founded or renamed a number of cities, such as Alexandria Eschate ("Outernmost Alexandria,", near modern Khojent in Tajikistan)."


^ "Alexander the Great (356–323 BC)". UK: BBC. 
^ Yenne 2010, p. 159.
^ Heckel, Waldemar; Tritle, Lawrence A., eds. (2009). "The Corinthian League". Alexander the Great: A New History. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 99. ISBN 1-4051-3082-2. 
^ Burger, Michael (2008). The Shaping of Western Civilization: From Antiquity to the Enlightenment. University of Toronto Press. p. 76. ISBN 1-55111-432-1. 
^ Yenne 2010, p. viii.
^ "Guardian on Time Magazine's 100 personalities of all time". 
^ "The birth of Alexander the Great". Livius. Retrieved 16 December 2011. Alexander was born the sixth of Hekatombaion. 
^ Green, Peter (1970), Alexander of Macedon, 356–323 B.C.: a historical biography, Hellenistic culture and society (illustrated, revised reprint ed.), University of California Press, p. xxxiii, ISBN 978-0-520-07165-0, 356 – Alexander born in Pella. The exact date is not known, but probably either 20 or 26 July. 
^ McCarty 2004, p. 10, Renault 2001, p. 28, Durant 1966, p. 538
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 171.
^ a b c d Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 188.
^ a b Plutarch 1919, III, 2
^ Renault 2001, p. 28, Bose 2003, p. 21
^ Renault 2001, pp. 33–34.
^ a b c d e f g Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 186.
^ Plutarch 1919, VI, 5
^ Durant 1966, p. 538, Fox 1980, p. 64, Renault 2001, p. 39
^ Fox 1980, pp. 65–66, Renault 2001, p. 44, McCarty 2004, p. 15
^ Fox 1980, pp. 65–66, Renault 2001, pp. 45–47, McCarty 2004, p. 16
^ Fox 1980, p. 68, Renault 2001, p. 47, Bose 2003, p. 43
^ Renault 2001, pp. 47–49.
^ Renault 2001, pp. 50–51, Bose 2003, pp. 44–45, McCarty 2004, p. 23
^ Renault 2001, p. 51, Bose 2003, p. 47, McCarty 2004, p. 24
^ Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVI, 86
^ "History of Ancient Sparta". Sikyon. Archived from the original on 5 March 2001. Retrieved 14 November 2009. 
^ Renault 2001, p. 54.
^ McCarty 2004, p. 26.
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 179.
^ McCarty 2004, p. 27.
^ Plutarch 1919, IX, 1
^ a b c d e f Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 180.
^ Bose 2003, p. 75, Renault 2001, p. 56
^ McCarty 2004, p. 27, Renault 2001, p. 59, Fox 1980, p. 71
^ a b McCarty 2004, pp. 30–31.
^ Renault 2001, pp. 61–62
^ a b Fox 1980, p. 72
^ a b c Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 190.
^ a b Green 2007, pp. 5–6
^ Renault 2001, pp. 70–71
^ McCarty 2004, p. 31, Renault 2001, p. 72, Fox 1980, p. 104, Bose 2003, p. 95
^ Stoneman 2004, p. 21.
^ Dillon 2004, pp. 187–88.
^ Renault 2001, p. 72, Bose 2003, p. 96
^ Chugg, Andrew (2006). Alexander's Lovers. Raleigh, N.C.: Lulu. ISBN 978-1-4116-9960-1, pp. 78–79.
^ Arrian 1976, I, 1
^ Arrian 1976, I, 2
^ Arrian 1976, I, 3–4, Renault 2001, pp. 73–74
^ Arrian 1976, I, 5–6, Renault 2001, p. 77
^ a b c d e Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 192.
^ a b c d e f g h i j Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 199
^ Arrian 1976, I, 11
^ Arrian 1976, I, 20–23
^ a b Arrian 1976, I, 23
^ Arrian 1976, I, 27–28
^ Arrian 1976, I, 3
^ Green 2007, p. 351
^ Arrian 1976, I, 11–12
^ Arrian 1976, II, 16–24
^ Gunther 2007, p. 84
^ Sabin, van Wees & Whitby 2007, p. 396
^ Arrian 1976, II, 26
^ Arrian 1976, II, 26–27
^ Ring et al. 1994, pp. 49, 320
^ Bosworth 1988, pp. 71–74.
^ Dahmen 2007, pp. 10–11
^ Arrian 1976, III, 1
^ Arrian 1976, III 7–15; also in a contemporary Babylonian account of the battle of Gaugamela
^ a b Arrian 1976, III, 16
^ Arrian 1976, III, 18
^ Foreman 2004, p. 152
^ a b Morkot 1996, p. 121.
^ Hammond 1983, pp. 72–73.
^ a b c d Yenne, Bill (2010). Alexander the Great: Lessons from History's Undefeated General. New York City, New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-230-61915-9. 
^ Freeman, Philip (2011). Alexander the Great. New York City, New York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks. p. 213. ISBN 978-1-4391-9328-0. 
^ Briant, Pierre (2010) [1974]. Alexander the Great and His Empire: A Short Introduction. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-691-15445-9. 
^ O'Brien, John Maxwell (1994). Alexander the Great: The Invisible Enemy: A Biography. Psychology Press. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-415-10617-7. 
^ Arrian 1976, III, 19–20.
^ Arrian 1976, III, 21.
^ Arrian 1976, III, 21, 25.
^ Arrian 1976, III, 22.
^ Gergel 2004, p. 81.
^ "The end of Persia". Livius. Retrieved 16 November 2009. 
^ Arrian 1976, III, 23–25, 27–30; IV, 1–7.
^ Arrian 1976, III, 30.
^ Arrian 1976, IV, 5–6, 16–17.
^ a b Arrian 1976, VII, 11
^ a b c d e f Morkot 1996, p. 111.
^ Gergel 2004, p. 99.
^ The Anabasis of Arrian
^ Heckel & Tritle 2009, pp. 47–48
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 201
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 202
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 203
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 205
^ a b c Tripathi 1999, pp. 118–21.
^ Narain 1965, pp. 155–65
^ McCrindle, J. W. (1997). "Curtius". In Singh, Fauja; Joshi, L. M. History of Punjab. I. Patiala: Punjabi University. p. 229. 
^ Tripathi 1999, pp. 124–25.
^ p. xl, Historical Dictionary of Ancient Greek Warfare, J, Woronoff & I. Spence
^ Arrian Anabasis of Alexander, V.29.2
^ Tripathi 1999, pp. 126–27.
^ Gergel 2004, p. 120.
^ Worthington 2003, p. 175
^ Kosmin 2014, p. 34.
^ Tripathi 1999, pp. 129–30.
^ Plutarch 1919, LXII, 1
^ Tripathi 1999, pp. 137–38.
^ Tripathi 1999, p. 141.
^ Morkot 1996, p. 9
^ Arrian 1976, VI, 27
^ a b Arrian 1976, VII, 4
^ Worthington 2003, pp. 307–08
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 194
^ Arrian 1976, II, 29
^ a b Ulrich Wilcken (1967). Alexander the Great. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-393-00381-9. 
^ a b c d Arrian 1976, VII, 14
^ Berkley 2006, p. 101
^ Arrian 1976, VII, 19
^ Depuydt, L. "The Time of Death of Alexander the Great: 11 June 323 BC, ca. 4:00–5:00 pm". Die Welt des Orients. 28: 117–35. 
^ a b Plutarch 1919, LXXV, 1
^ Wood 2001, pp. 2267–70.
^ a b c d Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVII, 117
^ Green 2007, pp. 1–2.
^ Plutarch 1919, LXXVII, 1
^ a b c Arrian 1976, VII, 27
^ a b c d e Green 2007, pp. 23–24.
^ a b Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVII, 118
^ Fox 2006, chapter 32.
^ "NZ scientist's detective work may reveal how Alexander died". The Royal Society of New Zealand. Dunedin. 16 October 2003. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2014. 
^ Cawthorne 2004, p. 138.
^ Bursztajn, Harold J (2005). "Dead Men Talking". Harvard Medical Alumni Bulletin (Spring). Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ a b Schep LJ, Slaughter RJ, Vale JA, Wheatley P (January 2014). "Was the death of Alexander the Great due to poisoning? Was it Veratrum album?". Clinical Toxicology. 52 (1): 72–77. doi:10.3109/15563650.2013.870341 . PMID 24369045. 
^ Bennett-Smith, Meredith (14 January 2014). "Was Alexander The Great Poisoned By Toxic Wine?". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 15 January 2014. 
^ Squires, Nick (4 August 2010). "Alexander the Great poisoned by the River Styx". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 12 December 2011. 
^ a b c Oldach, DW; Richard, RE; Borza, EN; Benitez, RM (June 1998). "A mysterious death". N. Engl. J. Med. 338 (24): 1764–69. doi:10.1056/NEJM199806113382411. PMID 9625631. 
^ Ashrafian, H (2004). "The death of Alexander the Great – a spinal twist of fate". J Hist Neurosci. 13 (2): 138–42. doi:10.1080/0964704049052157. PMID 15370319. 
^ Marr, John S; Calisher, Charles H (2003). "Alexander the Great and West Nile Virus Encephalitis". Emerging Infectious Diseases. 9 (12): 1599–1603. doi:10.3201/eid0912.030288. PMC 3034319 . PMID 14725285. 
^ Sbarounis, CN (2007). "Did Alexander the Great die of acute pancreatitis?". J Clin Gastroenterol. 24 (4): 294–96. doi:10.1097/00004836-199706000-00031. PMID 9252868. 
^ a b Kosmetatou, Elizabeth (1998). "The Location of the Tomb: Facts and Speculation". Greece.org. Archived from the original on 31 May 2004. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ "Bayfront Byline Bug Walk". UCSD. Mar 1996. Retrieved 25 March 2013. 
^ a b Aelian, "64", Varia Historia, XII 
^ Green 2007, p. 32.
^ a b Kosmetatou, Elizabeth (1998). "The Aftermath: The Burial of Alexander the Great". Greece.org. Archived from the original on 27 August 2004. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ "Greeks captivated by Alexander-era tomb at Amphipolis". BBC News. 
^ Studniczka 1894, pp. 226ff
^ Bieber, M (1965). "The Portraits of Alexander". Greece & Rome, Second Series. 12.2 (2): 183–88. doi:10.1017/s0017383500015345. 
^ a b c d e Green 2007, pp. 24–26.
^ Graham Shipley. "The Greek World After Alexander 323–30 BC". p. 40. 
^ Green 2007, p. 20
^ Green 2007, pp. 26–29.
^ Green 2007, pp. 29–34.
^ a b Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVIII, 4
^ McKechnie 1989, p. 54
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 193, Morkot 1996, p. 110
^ Morkot 1996, p. 110.
^ a b c Morkot 1996, p. 122.
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 193.
^ Plutarch 1919, IV, 1.
^ "Alexander the Great". Mithec. 
^ Popovic, John J. "Alexander the Great" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2013. 
^ Grafton 2010, p. 27.
^ a b c d e f g h i Green 2007, pp. 15–16.
^ "Images of Authority II: The Greek Example". SUNY Oneonta. 2005. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ Grout, James. "Lysippus: Apoxyomenos". Encyclopaedia Romana. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ Bosworth 1988, pp. 19–20.
^ Green 2007, p. 4.
^ a b Plutarch 1919, IV, 4
^ Plutarch 1919, V, 2
^ Olga Palagia (2000). "Hephaestion's Pyre and the Royal Hunt of Alexander," in A.B. Bosworth and E.J. Baynham (eds), Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198152873, p. 185.
^ a b c Arrian 1976, VII, 29
^ Plutarch 1919, VII, 1
^ a b Plutarch 1919, VIII, 1
^ a b Arrian 1976, VII, 28
^ Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 190, Green 2007, p. 4
^ Green 2007, pp. 20–21.
^ M Wood (edited by T Gergel) – Alexander: Selected Texts from Arrian, Curtius and Plutarch Penguin, 2004 ISBN 0-14-101312-5 [Retrieved 2015-04-08]
^ Google Books
^ G Highet – The Classical Tradition: Greek and Roman Influences on Western Literature: Greek and Roman Influences on Western Literature, Oxford University Press, 31 Dec 1949 p. 68 [Retrieved 2015-04-08] (ed. c.f. – Merriam-webster.com)
^ Merriam-Webster – epithet [Retrieved 2015-04-08]
^ Plutarch 1919, IX, IV
^ a b Plutarch 1919, XXVII, 1
^ Plutarch 1919, LXV, 1
^ Morkot 1996, p. 111, Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 195
^ Morkot 1996, p. 121, Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 195
^ Ahmed, S. Z. (2004), Chaghatai: the Fabulous Cities and People of the Silk Road, West Conshokoken: Infinity Publishing, p. 61.
^ Strachan, Edward and Roy Bolton (2008), Russia and Europe in the Nineteenth Century, London: Sphinx Fine Art, p. 87, ISBN 978-1-907200-02-1.
^ Livius.org. "Roxane." Articles on Ancient History. Retrieved on 30 August 2016.
^ Plutarch 1919, LXVII, 1.
^ Carney, Elizabeth Donnelly (2000), Women and Monarchy in Macedonia, Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, ISBN 0-8061-3212-4 
^ Plutarch 1936, II, 6.
^ "Alexander IV". Livius. Retrieved 13 December 2009. 
^ Renault 2001, p. 100.
^ Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVII, 114
^ Plutarch 1919, LXXII, 1
^ Ogden 2009, p. 204.
^ Aelian, "7", Varia Historia, XII 
^ Sacks 1995, p. 16.
^ Ogden 2009, p. 208: "...three attested pregnancies in eight years produces an attested impregnation rate of one every 2.7 years, which is actually superior to that of his father's."
^ Diodorus Siculus 1989, XVII, 77
^ Plutarch 1936, I, 11.
^ "World map according to Eratosthenes (194 B.C.)". henry-davis.com. Henry Davis Consulting. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ Peter Turchin, Thomas D. Hall and Jonathan M. Adams, "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires Archived 22 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine.", Journal of World-Systems Research Vol. 12 (no. 2), pp. 219–29 (2006).
^ a b Green 2007, pp. xii–xix.
^ Keay 2001, pp. 82–85.
^ a b "Alexander the Great: his towns". livius.org. Retrieved 13 December 2009. 
^ a b c d Burn, Lucilla (2004). Hellenistic Art: From Alexander the Great to Augustus. London, England: The British Museum Press. pp. 10–11. ISBN 978-0-89236-776-4. 
^ a b "Alexander the Great". British Museum.  "On reaching Priene, he made a further dedication to Athena. There the townspeople were laying out their new city and building a temple to its patron goddess. Alexander offered funds to complete the temple, and the inscription on this wall block, cut into a block of marble, records his gift. The inscription was found in the 19th century by the architect-archaeologist Richard Pullan leading an expedition on behalf of the Society of Dilettanti. It reads: ‘King Alexander dedicated the Temple to Athena Polias’."
^ a b "Collection online". British Museum.  "Marble wall block from the temple of Athena at Priene, inscribed on two sides. The inscription on the front records the gift of funds from Alexander the Great to complete the temple."
^ "Priene Inscription". British Museum.  "Marble wall block from the temple of Athena at Priene, inscribed. Part of the marble wall of the temple of Athena at Priene. Above: "King Alexander dedicated the temple to Athena Polias."
^ a b Green 2007, pp. 56–59.
^ Waterman, Leroy; McDowell, Robert H.; Hopkins, Clark (1998). "Seleucia on the Tigris, Iraq". umich.edu. The Kelsey Online. Archived from the original on 27 May 2012. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ Green 2007, pp. 21, 56–59.
^ Green 2007, pp. 56–59, McCarty 2004, p. 17
^ a b Harrison 1971, p. 51.
^ Baynes 2007, p. 170, Gabriel 2002, p. 277
^ a b c Keay 2001, pp. 101–09.
^ Luniya 1978, p. 312
^ a b Pingree 1978, pp. 533, 554ff
^ Cambon, Pierre; Jarrige, Jean-François (2006). Afghanistan, les trésors retrouvés: Collections du Musée national de Kaboul [Afghanistan, the treasures found: collections of the Kabul national museum] (in French). Réunion des musées nationaux. p. 269. ISBN 978-2-7118-5218-5. 
^ Glick, Livesey & Wallis 2005, p. 463
^ Hayashi (2008), Aryabhata I
^ A Companion to Asian Art and Architecture by Deborah S. Hutton, John Wiley & Sons, 2015, p. 438 [1]
^ a b c d Roisman & Worthington 2010, Chapter 6, p. 114
^ Holt 2003, p. 3.
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, Chapter 6, p. 115
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 187.
^ Plutarch 1919, LXVI, 1
^ Stoneman 1996, passim
^ a b Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 117.
^ a b c Fermor 2006, p. 215
^ Curtis, Tallis & Andre-Salvini 2005, p. 154
^ a b c d e Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 120.
^ Fischer 2004, p. 66
^ a b c Roisman & Worthington 2010, p. 122.
^ Josephus, Jewish Antiquities, XI, 337 viii, 5
^ Connerney 2009, p. 68
^ Noll, Thomas (2016). "The Visual Image of Alexander the Great". In Stock, Markus. Alexander the Great in the Middle Ages: Transcultural Perspectives. Translated by Boettcher, Susan. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press. p. 258. ISBN 978-1-4426-4466-3. 
^ Zacharia 2008, Simon Hornblower, "Greek Identity in the Archaic and Classical Periods", pp. 55–58; Joint Association of Classical Teachers 1984, pp. 50–51; Errington 1990, pp. 3–4; Fine 1983, pp. 607–08; Hall 2000, p. 64; Hammond 2001, p. 11; Jones 2001, p. 21; Osborne 2004, p. 127; Hammond 1989, pp. 12–13; Hammond 1993, p. 97; Starr 1991, pp. 260, 367; Toynbee 1981, p. 67; Worthington 2008, pp. 8, 219; Cawkwell 1978, p. 22; Perlman 1973, p. 78; Hamilton 1974, Chapter 2: The Macedonian Homeland, p. 23; Bryant 1996, p. 306; O'Brien 1994, p. 25.
^ Danforth 1997, pp. 38, 49, 167.
^ Stoneman 2004, p. 2.
^ Goldsworthy 2003, pp. 327–28.
^ Plutarch 1919, XI, 2
^ Holland 2003, pp. 176–83.
^ Barnett 1997, p. 45.
^ Plutarch 1919, IV, 57: ‘ἀλέξω’.
^ a b Liddell & Scott 1940.
^ Plutarch 1919, IV, 57: ‘ἀνήρ’.
^ "Alexander". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 11 December 2009. 
^ Fox 1980, pp. 72–73.


Sources

Primary sources

Arrian (1976). de Sélincourt, Aubrey, ed. Anabasis Alexandri (The Campaigns of Alexander). Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-044253-7. 
Quintus Curtius Rufus (1946). Rolfe, John, ed. History of Alexander. Loeb Classical Library. Retrieved 28 April 2015. 
Siculus, Diodorus (1989). "Library of History". CH Oldfather, translator. Perseus Project. Retrieved 14 November 2009. 
Plutarch (1919). Perrin, Bernadotte, ed. Plutarch, Alexander. Perseus Project. Retrieved 6 December 2011. 
Plutarch (1936). Babbitt, Frank Cole, ed. On the Fortune of Alexander. IV. Loeb Classical Library. pp. 379–487. Retrieved 26 November 2011. 
Trogus, Pompeius (1853). Justin, ed. "Epitome of the Philippic History". Rev. John Selby Watson, translator. Forum romanum. Retrieved 14 November 2009. .

Secondary sources

Barnett, C. (1997). Bonaparte. Wordsworth. ISBN 1-85326-678-7. 
Baynes, Norman G (2007). "Byzantine art". Byzantium: An Introduction to East Roman Civilization. Baynes. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-4067-5659-3. 
Berkley, Grant (2006). Moses in the Hieroglyphs. Trafford. ISBN 1-4120-5600-4. Retrieved 13 January 2011. 
Bose, Partha (2003). Alexander the Great's Art of Strategy. Crows Nest, NSW: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-74114-113-3. 
Bosworth, A. B. (1988). Conquest and Empire: The Reign of Alexander the Great. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Cawthorne, Nigel (2004). Alexander the Great. Haus. ISBN 1-904341-56-X. 
Connerney, R. D. (2009). The upside-down tree: India's changing culture. Algora. p. 214. ISBN 0-87586-649-2. 
Curtis, J.; Tallis, N; Andre-Salvini, B (2005). Forgotten empire: the world of ancient Persia. University of California Press. p. 154. ISBN 0-520-24731-0. 
Dahmen, Karsten (2007). The Legend of Alexander the Great on Greek and Roman Coins. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-39451-1. 
Danforth, Loring M. (1997). The Macedonian Conflict: Ethnic Nationalism in a Transnational World. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-04356-6. 
Dillon, John M. (2004). Morality and custom in ancient Greece. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-34526-4. 
Durant, Will (1966). The Story of Civilization: The Life of Greece. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-41800-9. 
Fermor, Patrick Leigh (2006). "Mani: Travels in the Southern Peloponnese". New York Book Review: 358. ISBN 1-59017-188-8. 
Fischer, MMJ (2004). Mute dreams, blind owls, and dispersed knowledges: Persian poesis in the transnational circuitry. Duke University Press. p. 66. ISBN 0-8223-3298-1. 
Foreman, Laura (2004). Alexander the conqueror: the epic story of the warrior king. Da Capo Press. p. 217. ISBN 978-0-306-81293-4. 
Fox, Robin Lane (1980). The Search for Alexander. Boston: Little Brown & Co. ISBN 0-316-29108-0. 
——— (2006). Alexander the Great. ePenguin. ASIN B002RI9DYW. 
Gabriel, Richard A (2002). "The army of Byzantium". The Great Armies of Antiquity. Greenwood. p. 277. ISBN 0-275-97809-5. 
Gergel, Tania, ed. (2004). The Brief Life and Towering Exploits of History's Greatest Conqueror as Told By His Original Biographers. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-200140-6. 
Glick, Thomas F.; Livesey, Steven John; Wallis, Faith, eds. (2005). Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-96930-1. 
Goldsworthy, A. (2003). The Fall of Carthage. Cassel. ISBN 0-304-36642-0. 
Grafton, Anthony (2010). Most, Glenn W; Settis, Salvatore, eds. The Classical Tradition. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03572-0. 
Green, Peter (2007). Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Age. London: Phoenix. ISBN 978-0-7538-2413-9. 
Gunther, John (2007). Alexander the Great. Sterling. ISBN 1-4027-4519-2. 
Hammond, NGL (1983). Sources for Alexander the Great. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71471-6. 
——— (1986). A History of Greece to 323 BC. Cambridge University. 
Harrison, E. F. (1971). The language of the New Testament. Wm B Eerdmans. p. 508. ISBN 0-8028-4786-2. 
Holland, Tom (2003). Rubicon: Triumph and Tragedy in the Roman Republic. Abacus. ISBN 978-0-349-11563-4. 
Holt, Frank Lee (2003). Alexander the Great and The Mystery of the Elephant Medallions. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-23881-8. 
Keay, John (2001). India: A History. Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3797-0. 
Kosmin, Paul J. (2014), The Land of the Elephant Kings: Space, Territory, and Ideology in Seleucid Empire, Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-72882-0 
Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940). Jones, Sir Henry Stuart; McKenzie, Roderick, eds. A Greek-English Lexicon on Perseus Digital Library. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Luniya, Bhanwarlal Nathuram (1978). Life and Culture in Ancient India: From the Earliest Times to 1000 AD. Lakshmi Narain Agarwal. LCCN 78907043. 
McCarty, Nick (2004). Alexander the Great. Camberwell, Victoria: Penguin. ISBN 0-670-04268-4. 
McKechnie, Paul (1989). Outsiders in the Greek cities in the fourth century BC. Taylor & Francis. p. 54. ISBN 0-415-00340-7. Retrieved 28 December 2010. 
Morkot, Robert (1996). The Penguin Historical Atlas of Ancient Greece. Penguin. 
Narain, A. K. (1965). Alexander the Great: Greece and Rome–12. 
Ogden, Daniel (2009). "Alexander's Sex Life". In Heckel, Alice; Heckel, Waldemar; Tritle, Lawrence A. Alexander the Great: A New History. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 1-4051-3082-2. 
Pingree, D. (1978). "History of Mathematical Astronomy in India". Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 15. pp. 533–633. 
Pratt, James Bissett (1996). The Pilgrimage of Buddhism and a Buddhist Pilgrimage. Laurier Books. ISBN 81-206-1196-9. 
Renault, Mary (2001). The Nature of Alexander the Great. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-139076-X. 
Ring, Trudy; Salkin, Robert M; Berney, KA; Schellinger, Paul E, eds. (1994). International dictionary of historic places. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1994–1996. ISBN 978-1-884964-04-6. 
Roisman, Joseph; Worthington, Ian (2010). A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 1-4051-7936-8. 
Sabin, P; van Wees, H; Whitby, M (2007). The Cambridge History of Greek and Roman Warfare: Greece, the Hellenistic World and the Rise of Rome. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-78273-2. 
Sacks, David (1995). Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World. Constable & Co. ISBN 0-09-475270-2. 
Stoneman, Richard (2004). Alexander the Great. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-31932-3. 
Stoneman, Richard (1996). "The Metamorphoses of Alexander Romance". In Schmeling, Gareth L. The Novel in the Ancient World. Brill. pp. 601–12. ISBN 90-04-09630-2. 
Studniczka, Franz (1894). Achäologische Jahrbook 9. 
Tripathi, Rama Shankar (1999). History of Ancient India. ISBN 978-81-208-0018-2. 
Heckel, Waldemar; Tritle, Lawrence A, eds. (2009). Alexander the Great: A New History. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 47–48. ISBN 978-1-4051-3082-0. 
Wood, Michael (2001). In the Footsteps of Alexander the Great: A Journey from Greece to Asia. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-23192-4. 
Worthington, Ian (2003). Alexander the Great: A Reader. Routledge. p. 332. ISBN 0-415-29187-9. 
Yenne, Bill (2010). Alexander the Great: Lessons From History's Undefeated General. Palmgrave McMillan. ISBN 978-0-230-61915-9. 




Library resources about
Alexander the Great





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




Further reading


Badian, Ernst (1958). "Alexander the Great and the Unity of Mankind". Historia. 7. 
Beazley, JD; Ashmole, B (1932). Greek Sculpture and Painting. Cambridge University Press. 
Bowra, Maurice (1994). The Greek Experience. Phoenix. ISBN 1-85799-122-2. 
Burn, AR (1951). Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Empire (2 ed.). London: English Universities Press. 
Rufus, Quintus Curtius. "Quintus Curtius Rufus, History of Alexander the Great" (in Latin). U Chicago. Retrieved 16 November 2009. 
Cartledge, Paul (2004). "Alexander the Great". Overlook. 
Doherty, Paul (2004). "The Death of Alexander the Great". Carroll & Graf. 
Engels, Donald W (1978). Alexander the Great and the Logistics of the Macedonian Army. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Fawcett, Bill, ed. (2006). How To Lose A Battle: Foolish Plans and Great Military Blunders. Harper. ISBN 0-06-076024-9. 
Fuller, JFC (1958). The Generalship of Alexander the Great. London: Eyre & Spottiswoode. ISBN 9780306803710. 
Green, Peter (1992). Alexander of Macedon: 356–323 BC. A Historical Biography. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-07166-2. 
Greene, Robert (2000). The 48 Laws of Power. Penguin. p. 351. ISBN 0-14-028019-7. 
Hammond, NGL (1989). The Macedonian State: Origins, Institutions, and History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-814883-6. 
Hammond, NGL (1994). Alexander the Great: King, Commander, and Statesman (3 ed.). London: Bristol Classical Press. 
Hammond, NGL (1997). The Genius of Alexander the Great. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 
Mercer, Charles (1962). The Way of Alexander the Great (1 ed.). Boston: American Heritage Inc. 
McCrindle, J. W. (1893). The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as Described by Arrian, Q Curtius, Diodorus, Plutarch, and Justin. Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co. 
Murphy, James Jerome; Katula, Richard A; Hill, Forbes I; Ochs, Donovan J (2003). A Synoptic History of Classical Rhetoric. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. p. 17. ISBN 1-880393-35-2. 
Nandan, Y; Bhavan, BV (2003). British Death March Under Asiatic Impulse: Epic of Anglo-Indian Tragedy in Afghanistan. Mumbai: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. ISBN 81-7276-301-8. 
O'Brien, John Maxwell (1992). Alexander the Great: The Invisible Enemy. London: Routledge. 
Pomeroy, S; Burstein, S; Dolan, W; Roberts, J (1998). Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-509742-4. 
Prevas, John (2004). Envy of the Gods: Alexander the Great's Ill-Fated Journey Across Asia (3 ed.). Da Capo. 
Roisman, Joseph, ed. (1995). Alexander the Great Ancient and Modern Perspectives. Problems in European Civilization. Lexington, MA: DC Heath. 
Savill, Agnes (1959). Alexander the Great and His Time (3 ed.). London: Barrie & Rockliff. 
Stewart, Andrew (1993). Faces of Power: Alexander's Image and Hellenistic Politics. Hellenistic Culture and Society. 11. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Stoneman, Richard (2008). Alexander the Great: A Life in Legend. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11203-0. 
Tarn, WW (1948). Alexander the Great. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Wheeler, Benjamin Ide (1900). Alexander the Great; the merging of East and West in universal history. New York: GP Putnam's sons. 
Wilcken, Ulrich (1997) [1932]. Alexander the Great. New York: WW Norton & Co. ISBN 0-393-00381-7. 
Worthington, Ian (2004). Alexander the Great: Man And God. Pearson. ISBN 978-1-4058-0162-1. 


External links

Find more aboutAlexander the Greatat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Delamarche, Félix (1833), The Empire and Expeditions of Alexander the Great .
Romm, James; Cartledge, Paul, "Two Great Historians On Alexander the Great", Forbes (conversations)  Part 1, Part 2, Part 3, Part 4, Part 5, Part 6.
Alexander the Great at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Alexander the Great: An annotated list of primary sources, Livius .
The Elusive Tomb of Alexander the Great, Archæology .
Alexander the Great and Sherlock Holmes, Sherlockian Sherlock .
In Our Time: Alexander the Great BBC discussion with Paul Cartledge, Diana Spencer and Rachel Mairs hosted by Melvyn Bragg, first broadcast 1 October 2015.




Alexander the Great
Argead dynasty
Born: 356 BC 323 BC


Regnal titles


Preceded by
Philip II
King of Macedon
336–323 BC
Succeeded by
Philip III and Alexander IV


Preceded by
Darius III
Great King (Shah) of Persia
330–323 BC


Pharaoh of Egypt
332–323 BC


New creation
Lord of Asia
331–323 BC








v
t
e


Kings of Macedon



Argead



Caranus
Coenus
Tyrimmas
Perdiccas I
Argaeus I
Philip I
Aeropus I
Alcetas I
Amyntas I
Alexander I
Alcetas II
Perdiccas II
Archelaus I
Craterus
Orestes / Aeropus II
Archelaus II
Amyntas II
Pausanias
Argaeus II
Amyntas III
Alexander II
Perdiccas III
Amyntas IV
Philip II
Alexander III (Alexander the Great)
Philip III
Alexander IV










Regents



Ptolemy of Aloros
Perdiccas
Peithon and Arrhidaeus
Antipater
Polyperchon
Cassander





Antipatrid



Cassander
Philip IV
Alexander V
Antipater II
Antipater Etesias
Sosthenes





Antigonid



Demetrius I
Antigonus II
Demetrius II
Antigonus III
Philip V
Perseus
Andriscus (Philip VI)





Non-dynastic



Lysimachus
Pyrrhus
Ptolemy Keraunos
Meleager












v
t
e


Hellenistic rulers



Argeads



Philip II
Alexander III the Great
Philip III Arrhidaeus
Alexander IV





Antigonids



Antigonus I Monophthalmus
Demetrius I Poliorcetes
Antigonus II Gonatas
Demetrius II Aetolicus
Antigonus III Doson
Philip V
Perseus
Philip VI (pretender)





Ptolemies



Ptolemy I Soter
Ptolemy II Philadelphus
Ptolemy III Euergetes
Ptolemy IV Philopator
Ptolemy V Epiphanes
Cleopatra I Syra (regent)
Ptolemy VI Philometor
Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator
Cleopatra II Philometor Soter
Ptolemy VIII Physcon
Cleopatra III
Ptolemy IX Lathyros
Ptolemy X Alexander
Berenice III
Ptolemy XI Alexander
Ptolemy XII Auletes
Cleopatra VI Tryphaena
Berenice IV Epiphanea
Ptolemy XIII
Ptolemy XIV
Cleopatra VII Philopator
Ptolemy XV Caesarion





Kings of Cyrene



Magas
Demetrius the Fair
Ptolemy VIII Physcon
Ptolemy Apion





Seleucids



Seleucus I Nicator
Antiochus I Soter
Antiochus II Theos
Seleucus II Callinicus
Seleucus III Ceraunus
Antiochus III the Great
Seleucus IV Philopator
Antiochus IV Epiphanes
Antiochus V Eupator
Demetrius I Soter
Alexander I Balas
Demetrius II Nicator
Antiochus VI Dionysus
Diodotus Tryphon
Antiochus VII Sidetes
Alexander II Zabinas
Seleucus V Philometor
Antiochus VIII Grypus
Antiochus IX Cyzicenus
Seleucus VI Epiphanes
Antiochus X Eusebes
Antiochus XI Epiphanes
Demetrius III Eucaerus
Philip I Philadelphus
Antiochus XII Dionysus
Antiochus XIII Asiaticus
Philip II Philoromaeus





Lysimachids



Lysimachus
Ptolemy Epigonos





Antipatrids



Cassander
Philip IV
Alexander V
Antipater II
Antipater Etesias
Sosthenes





Attalids



Philetaerus
Eumenes I
Attalus I
Eumenes II
Attalus II
Attalus III
Eumenes III





Greco-Bactrians



Diodotus I
Diodotus II
Euthydemus I
Demetrius I
Euthydemus II
Antimachus I
Pantaleon
Agathocles
Demetrius II
Eucratides I
Plato
Eucratides II
Heliocles I





Indo-Greeks



Demetrius I
Antimachus I
Pantaleon
Agathocles
Apollodotus I
Demetrius II
Antimachus II
Menander I
Zoilos I
Agathokleia
Lysias
Strato I
Antialcidas
Heliokles II
Polyxenos
Demetrius III
Philoxenus
Diomedes
Amyntas
Epander
Theophilos
Peukolaos
Thraso
Nicias
Menander II
Artemidoros
Hermaeus
Archebius
Telephos
Apollodotus II
Hippostratos
Dionysios
Zoilos II
Apollophanes
Strato II
Strato III





Kings of Bithynia



Boteiras
Bas
Zipoetes I
Nicomedes I
Zipoetes II
Etazeta (regent)
Ziaelas
Prusias I
Prusias II
Nicomedes II
Nicomedes III
Nicomedes IV
Socrates Chrestus





Kings of Pontus



Mithridates I Ctistes
Ariobarzanes
Mithridates II
Mithridates III
Pharnaces I
Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos
Mithridates V Euergetes
Mithridates VI Eupator
Pharnaces II
Darius
Arsaces
Polemon I
Pythodorida
Polemon II





Kings of Commagene



Ptolemaeus
Sames II
Mithridates I
Antiochus I
Mithridates II
Antiochus II
Mithridates III
Antiochus III
Antiochus IV





Kings of Cappadocia



Ariarathes I
Ariarathes II
Ariamnes II
Ariarathes III
Ariarathes IV
Ariarathes V
Orophernes
Ariarathes VI
Ariarathes VII
Ariarathes VIII
Ariarathes IX
Ariobarzanes I
Ariobarzanes II
Ariobarzanes III
Ariarathes X
Archelaus





Kings of the
Cimmerian Bosporus



Paerisades I
Satyros II
Prytanis
Eumelos
Spartokos III
Hygiainon (regent)
Paerisades II
Spartokos IV
Leukon II
Spartokos V
Paerisades III
Paerisades IV
Paerisades V
Mithridates I
Pharnaces
Asander with Dynamis
Mithridates II
Asander with Dynamis
Scribonius’ attempted rule with Dynamis
Dynamis with Polemon
Polemon with Pythodorida
Aspurgus
Mithridates III with Gepaepyris
Mithridates III
Cotys I












v
t
e


Pharaohs








Protodynastic to First Intermediate Period  (<3150–2040 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Protodynastic
(pre-3150 BC)




Lower



Hsekiu
Khayu
Tiu
Thesh
Neheb
Wazner
Mekh
Double Falcon





Upper



Scorpion I
Crocodile
Iry-Hor
Ka
Scorpion II
Narmer / Menes








Early Dynastic
(3150–2686 BC)




I



Narmer / Menes
Hor-Aha
Djer
Djet
Merneith 
Den
Anedjib
Semerkhet
Qa'a
Sneferka
Horus Bird





II



Hotepsekhemwy
Nebra/Raneb
Nynetjer
Ba
Nubnefer
Horus Sa
Weneg-Nebty
Wadjenes
Senedj
Seth-Peribsen
Sekhemib-Perenmaat
Neferkara I
Neferkasokar
Hudjefa I
Khasekhemwy








Old Kingdom
(2686–2181 BC)




III



Nebka
Djoser
Sekhemkhet
Sanakht
Khaba
Qahedjet
Huni





IV



Snefru
Khufu
Djedefre
Khafre
Bikheris
Menkaure
Shepseskaf
Thamphthis





V



Userkaf
Sahure
Neferirkare Kakai
Neferefre
Shepseskare
Nyuserre Ini
Menkauhor Kaiu
Djedkare Isesi
Unas





VI



Teti
Userkare
Pepi I
Merenre Nemtyemsaf I
Pepi II
Merenre Nemtyemsaf II
Netjerkare Siptah








1st Intermediate
(2181–2040 BC)







VIII






Menkare
Neferkare II
Neferkare III Neby
Djedkare Shemai
Neferkare IV Khendu
Merenhor
Neferkamin
Nikare
Neferkare V Tereru
Neferkahor
Neferkare VI Pepiseneb
Neferkamin Anu
Qakare Iby
Neferkaure
Neferkauhor
Neferirkare
Wadjkare
Khuiqer
Khui








IX






Meryibre Khety
Neferkare VII
Nebkaure Khety
Setut








X






Meryhathor
Neferkare VIII
Wahkare Khety
Merykare



















Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period  (2040–1550 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Middle Kingdom
(2040–1802 BC)




XI



Mentuhotep I
Intef I
Intef II
Intef III
Mentuhotep II
Mentuhotep III
Mentuhotep IV





Nubia



Segerseni
Qakare Ini
Iyibkhentre





XII



Amenemhat I
Senusret I
Amenemhat II
Senusret II
Senusret III
Amenemhat III
Amenemhat IV
Sobekneferu 








2nd Intermediate
(1802–1550 BC)




XIII



Sekhemrekhutawy Sobekhotep
Sonbef
Nerikare
Sekhemkare Amenemhat V
Ameny Qemau
Hotepibre
Iufni
Ameny Antef Amenemhet VI
Semenkare Nebnuni
Sehetepibre
Sewadjkare
Nedjemibre
Khaankhre Sobekhotep
Renseneb
Hor
Sekhemrekhutawy Khabaw
Djedkheperew
Sebkay
Sedjefakare
Wegaf
Khendjer
Imyremeshaw
Sehetepkare Intef
Seth Meribre
Sobekhotep III
Neferhotep I
Sihathor
Sobekhotep IV
Merhotepre Sobekhotep
Khahotepre Sobekhotep
Wahibre Ibiau
Merneferre Ay
Merhotepre Ini
Sankhenre Sewadjtu
Mersekhemre Ined
Sewadjkare Hori
Merkawre Sobekhotep
Mershepsesre Ini II
Sewahenre Senebmiu
Merkheperre
Merkare
Sewadjare Mentuhotep
Seheqenre Sankhptahi





XIV



Yakbim Sekhaenre
Ya'ammu Nubwoserre
Qareh Khawoserre
'Ammu Ahotepre
Maaibre Sheshi
Nehesy
Khakherewre
Nebefawre
Sehebre
Merdjefare
Sewadjkare III
Nebdjefare
Webenre
Nebsenre
Sekheperenre
Djedkherewre
Bebnum
'Apepi
Nuya
Wazad
Sheneh
Shenshek
Khamure
Yakareb
Yaqub-Har





XV



Semqen
'Aper-'Anati
Sakir-Har
Khyan
Apepi
Khamudi





XVI



Djehuti
Sobekhotep VIII
Neferhotep III
Mentuhotepi
Nebiryraw I
Nebiriau II
Semenre
Bebiankh
Sekhemre Shedwast
Dedumose I
Dedumose II
Montuemsaf
Merankhre Mentuhotep
Senusret IV
Pepi III





Abydos



Senebkay
Wepwawetemsaf
Pantjeny
Snaaib





XVII



Rahotep
Nebmaatre
Sobekemsaf I
Sobekemsaf II
Sekhemre-Wepmaat Intef
Nubkheperre Intef
Sekhemre-Heruhirmaat Intef
Senakhtenre Ahmose
Seqenenre Tao
Kamose



















New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period  (1550–664 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









New Kingdom
(1550–1070 BC)




XVIII



Ahmose I
Amenhotep I
Thutmose I
Thutmose II
Thutmose III
Hatshepsut 
Amenhotep II
Thutmose IV
Amenhotep III
Akhenaten
Smenkhkare
Neferneferuaten 
Tutankhamun
Ay
Horemheb





XIX



Ramesses I
Seti I
Ramesses II
Merneptah
Amenmesses
Seti II
Siptah
Twosret 





XX



Setnakhte
Ramesses III
Ramesses IV
Ramesses V
Ramesses VI
Ramesses VII
Ramesses VIII
Ramesses IX
Ramesses X
Ramesses XI








3rd Intermediate
(1069–664 BC)




XXI



Smendes
Amenemnisu
Psusennes I
Amenemope
Osorkon the Elder
Siamun
Psusennes II





XXII



Shoshenq I
Osorkon I
Shoshenq II
Takelot I
Osorkon II
Shoshenq III
Shoshenq IV
Pami
Shoshenq V
Osorkon IV





XXIII



Harsiese A
Takelot II
Pedubast I
Shoshenq VI
Osorkon III
Takelot III
Rudamun
Menkheperre Ini





XXIV



Tefnakht
Bakenranef





XXV



Piye
Shebitku
Shabaka
Taharqa
Tanutamun



















Late Period and Hellenistic Period  (664–30 BC)








Period






Dynasty





Pharaohs  (male
female )
uncertain









Late
(664–332 BC)




XXVI



Necho I
Psamtik I
Necho II
Psamtik II
Wahibre
Ahmose II
Psamtik III





XXVII



Cambyses II
Petubastis III
Darius I
Xerxes
Artaxerxes I
Darius II





XXVIII



Amyrtaeus





XXIX



Nepherites I
Hakor
Psammuthes
Nepherites II





XXX



Nectanebo I
Teos
Nectanebo II





XXXI



Artaxerxes III
Khabash
Arses
Darius III








Hellenistic
(332–30 BC)




Argead



Alexander the Great
Philip III Arrhidaeus
Alexander IV





Ptolemaic



Ptolemy I Soter
Ptolemy II Philadelphus
Ptolemy III Euergetes
Ptolemy IV Philopator
Ptolemy V Epiphanes
Ptolemy VI Philometor
Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator
Ptolemy VIII Euergetes
Ptolemy IX Soter
Ptolemy X Alexander I
Ptolemy XI Alexander II
Ptolemy XII Neos Dionysos
Berenice IV 
Cleopatra 
Ptolemy XV Caesarion



















Dynastic genealogies






4th
11th
12th
18th
19th
20th
21st to 23rd
25th
26th
27th
30th
31st
Ptolemaic









List of pharaohs










v
t
e


Shahnameh of Ferdowsi



Characters




Pishdadian



Keyumars
Hushang
Tahmuras
Jamshid
Fereydun
Iraj
Manuchehr
Nowzar
Zaav
Garshasp





Kayanian



Kay Kobad
Kay Kāvus
Kay Khosrow
Kay Lohrasp
Goshtāsb
Kay Bahman
Homai
Kay Darab





Characters



Siamak
Mardas
Zahhak
Shahrasp
Abtin
Kayanoush
Kāve
Arash
Salm
Tur
Qobád
Qaren
Tous
Gostaham
Nariman
Sām
Zāl
Rostam
Sohrab
Esfandiyār
Pashotan
Faramarz
Fariborz
Siyâvash
Farud
Zangay-i Shavaran
Kashvad
Goudarz
Rohham
Hojir
Bahram
Giv
Bizhan
Japasp
Garshasp
Gorgin
Mehrab Kaboli
Zavara
Shaghad
Rostam Farrokhzād





Women



Faranak
Arnavāz
Shahrnāz
Sindukht
Rudaba
Sudabeh
Tahmina
Gordafarid
Farangis
Manizheh
Katāyoun





Turanian



Zadashm
Pashang
Aghrirat
Garsivaz
Afrasiab
Shideh
Arjasp
Viseh
Nastihan
Piran Viseh
Houman
Barman
Biderafsh





Clans and families



Kashvadian
House of Goudarz
House of Viseh
House of Nowzar
House of Sasan
House of Sām















Creatures
& animals



Akvan Div
Khazawran-i Div
Arzhang Div
Div-e Sepid
Koulad-Ghandi
Huma bird
Simurgh
Rakhsh
Shabdiz
Shabrang





Places



Iran
Turan
Zabulistan
Sistan
Kabul
Balkh
Ctesiphon
Estakhr
Mazandaran
Alborzkouh
Mount Damavand
Tammisha
Kasa-Roud
...





Structures



Gonbadan Castle
Dez-i Roein
White Castle
Bahman Castle
Dez-i Alanan
Kang-dez





Manuscripts



Baysonghor Shahnameh
Shahnameh of Shah Tahmasp
Florence Shahnameh
Shahnameh of Rashida
Windsor Shahnameh
Great Mongol Shahnameh (or Demotte)
Shahnameh of Ghavam al-Din





See also



Abu-Mansur Daqiqi
Abu-Mansuri Shahnameh
Derafsh Kaviani
Babr-e Bayan
Zal and Rudabeh
Rostam and Sohrab
Rostam's Seven Labours
Davazdah Rokh
Khosrow and Shirin
Bijan and Manijeh
Persian mythology








 Category
 Book












v
t
e


Ancient Greece






Outline
Timeline













History
Geography










Periods



Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece





Geography



Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Alexandria
Antioch
Cappadocia
Crete
Cyprus
Doris
Ephesus
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Miletus
Peloponnesus
Pergamon
Pontus
Taurica
Ancient Greek colonies



















City states
Politics
Military










City states



Argos
Athens
Byzantion
Chalcis
Corinth
Eretria
Kerkyra
Larissa
Megalopolis
Megara
Rhodes
Samos
Sparta
Syracuse
Thebes





Politics







Boeotarch
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Strategos
Tagus
Tyrant
Amphictyonic League





Athenian



Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphē paranómōn
Heliaia
Ostracism





Spartan



Apella
Ephor
Gerousia
Harmost





Macedon



Synedrion
Koinon








Military



Wars
Athenian military
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston
















People








List of ancient Greeks



Rulers



Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Lydia
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse





Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno





Authors



Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Panyassis
Philocles
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon





Others



Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles





Groups



Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants





By culture



Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians



















Society
Culture










Society



Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Funeral and burial practices
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine





Arts and science



Architecture

Greek Revival architecture


Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music

Musical system


Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre





Religion







Funeral and burial practices
Mythology

mythological figures


Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld





Sacred places



Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia








Structures







Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos





Temples



Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera, Olympia
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus, Olympia








Language



Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects

Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian


Koine





Writing



Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals
















Lists






Cities

in Epirus


People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres











 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


The works of Plutarch



Works



Parallel Lives
Moralia
Pseudo-Plutarch





Lives



Alcibiades and Coriolanus1
Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar
Aratus of Sicyon / Artaxerxes and Galba / Otho2
Aristides and Cato the Elder1
Crassus and Nicias1
Demetrius and Antony1
Demosthenes and Cicero1
Dion and Brutus1
Fabius and Pericles1
Lucullus and Cimon1
Lysander and Sulla1
Numa and Lycurgus1
Pelopidas and Marcellus1
Philopoemen and Flamininus1
Phocion and Cato the Younger
Pompey and Agesilaus1
Poplicola and Solon1
Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius
Romulus and Theseus1
Sertorius and Eumenes1
Agis / Cleomenes1 and Tiberius Gracchus / Gaius Gracchus
Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus1
Themistocles and Camillus





Translators and editors



Jacques Amyot
Arthur Hugh Clough
John Dryden
Philemon Holland
Thomas North








1 Comparison extant
2 Four unpaired Lives












v
t
e


Ancient Greek and Roman wars



Ancient Greece



Trojan War
First Messenian War
Second Messenian War
Lelantine War
Greek–Punic Wars (Sicilian Wars)
Greco-Persian Wars
Aeginetan War
Wars of the Delian League
Samian War
Peloponnesian War
Corinthian War
First / Second / Third Sacred War
Social War (357–355 BC)
Rise of Macedon
Wars of Alexander the Great
Wars of the Diadochi
Lamian War
Chremonidean War
Cleomenean War
Social War (220–217 BC)
Cretan War
Aetolian War
War against Nabis
Maccabean Revolt





Roman Republic



Roman–Latin wars (First Latin War (Battle of Lake Regillus)
Second Latin War)
Samnite Wars
Pyrrhic War
Punic Wars (First
Second
Third)
Macedonian Wars (Illyrian
First Macedonian
Second Macedonian
Seleucid
Third Macedonian
Fourth Macedonian)
Jugurthine War
Cimbrian War
Roman Servile Wars (First
Second
Third)
Social War (90–88 BC)
Sulla's civil wars (First
Second)
Mithridatic Wars (First
Second
Third)
Gallic Wars
Julius Caesar's civil war
Augustus' rise to power (Battle of Mutina
Liberators' civil war
Sicilian revolt
Perusine War (Fulvia's civil war)
Final War of the Roman Republic)





Roman Empire



Germanic Wars (Marcomannic
Alemannic
Gothic
Visigothic)
Conquest of Britain
Wars of Boudica
Armenian War
Four Emperors
Jewish wars
Domitian's Dacian War
Trajan's Dacian Wars
Parthian Wars
Wars against Persia
Third-century civil wars
Decline and fall of the Western Empire








Military history












v
t
e


Empires



Ancient



Akkadian
Egyptian
Assyrian
Babylonian
Carthaginian
Chinese

Qin
Han
Jin
Northern Wei


Hellenistic

Macedonian
Seleucid


Hittite
Indian

Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha


Iranian

Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian


Kushan
Mongol

Xianbei
Xiongnu


Roman

Western
Eastern


Teotihuacan





Post-classical



Arab

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Córdoba


Aragonese
Angevin
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian

First
Second


Byzantine

Nicaea
Trebizond


Carolingian
Chinese

Sui
Tang
Song
Yuan


Ethiopian

Zagwe
Solomonic


Georgian
Hunnic
Inca
Indian

Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Delhi
Vijayanagara


Iranian

Tahirid
Samanid
Buyid
Sallarid
Ziyarid


Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mongol

Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate


Moroccan

Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid


North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Serbian
Somali

Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Warsangali


Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Turko-Persian

Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid


Vietnamese

Ly
Tran
Le


Wagadou





Modern



Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Central African
Chinese

Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo


Ethiopian
French

First
Second


German

First/Old Reich
Second Reich
Third Reich


Haitian

First
Second


Indian

Maratha
Sikh
Mughal
British Raj


Iranian

Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi


Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mexican

First
Second


Moroccan

Saadi
Alaouite


Russian
USSR
Somali

Gobroon
Majeerteen
Hobyo
Dervish


Swedish
Tongan
Turkish

Ottoman
Karaman
Ramazan


Vietnamese

Tay Son
Nguyen
Vietnam







Colonial



American
Belgian
British

English


Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Norwegian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish





Lists



Empires

largest


ancient great powers
medieval great powers
modern great powers









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 101353608
LCCN: n79004067
ISNI: 0000 0001 2283 5816
GND: 118501828
SELIBR: 229496
SUDOC: 027417077
BNF: cb11946296j (data)
ULAN: 500280655
NLA: 35002922
NDL: 00620255
NKC: jn19981000073
ICCU: IT\ICCU\VEAV\023322
BNE: XX1031303
IATH: w6p270nw











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_the_Great&oldid=816777705"					Categories: Alexander the Great356 BC births323 BC deaths4th-century BC Greek people4th-century BC Macedonians4th-century BC rulersAncient Macedonian generalsAncient PellaeansCity foundersDeified peopleGreek historical hero cultHellenistic-era peopleHellenistic ruler cultMacedonian monarchsMonarchs of PersiaPharaohs of the Argead dynastyShahnameh charactersMilitary commanders who never lost a battleHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesGood articlesUse dmy dates from January 2014Use Canadian English from September 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian EnglishArticles containing Greek-language textWikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles containing Persian-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textCS1 Latin-language sources (la)Articles with DMOZ linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers