





American Legation




U.S. National Register of Historic Places




U.S. National Historic Landmark







Courtyard of the Legation


















Location
Tangier, Morocco


Coordinates
35°47′16.71″N 5°48′32.69″W﻿ / ﻿35.7879750°N 5.8090806°W﻿ / 35.7879750; -5.8090806Coordinates: 35°47′16.71″N 5°48′32.69″W﻿ / ﻿35.7879750°N 5.8090806°W﻿ / 35.7879750; -5.8090806


Built
1821


Architect
Unknown


Architectural style
Moorish architecture


NRHP reference #
81000703


Significant dates


Added to NRHP
January 08, 1981[1]


Designated NHL
December 17, 1982[2]


The Tangier American Legation is a building in the medina of Tangier, Morocco. The first American public property outside the United States, it commemorates the historic cultural and diplomatic relations between the United States and the Kingdom of Morocco. It is now officially called the Tangier American Legation Institute for Moroccan Studies, and is a cultural center, museum, and a research library, concentrating on Arabic language studies.
The legation was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on January 8, 1981. U.S. Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt subsequently designated it a National Historic Landmark on December 17, 1982. It was the first (and only) such listing or designation in a foreign country. The building has been listed on the U.S. Secretary of State's Register of Culturally Significant Property, a listing of State Department properties around the world that have particular cultural or historical significance.



Contents


1 Diplomatic history
2 Present
3 References
4 External links



Diplomatic history[edit]




Entrance.






American Legation Seal above door.






Dining room.






Conference Hall.


The legation is an elaborate Moorish-style building of stuccoed masonry. This complex structure contains the two-story mud and stone building presented to the United States in 1821 by Sultan Moulay Suliman. The first property acquired abroad by the United States government, it housed the United States Legation and Consulate for 140 years, the longest period any building abroad has been occupied as a United States diplomatic post. It is symbolic of the 1786 Moroccan–American Treaty of Friendship, which is still in force today. The complex expanded over the years as the surrounding houses were bought up. During World War II it served as headquarters for United States intelligence agents.
After the move to Rabat as the diplomatic capital in 1956, when the country gained its independence, the Legation was abandoned as a diplomatic building. Over the years the United States government proceeded to use it as consul offices and Peace Corps offices, among other things. In time it became neglected and threatened with demolition.[citation needed]
Present[edit]
In 1976 a group of American citizens established a public, non-profit organization to save the Old American Legation (as it is known locally). Today the Tangier American Legation Museum Society rents the structure, which is still owned by the United States government.
The Tangier American Institute for Moroccan Studies is a museum and cultural center for the study of Morocco and Morocco–United States relations, and it has many paintings by Marguerite McBey and other artists. TALIM's historic building now includes an entire wing devoted to the expatriate writer and composer Paul Bowles. The museum also has a research library and conference room. TALIM's community outreach programs include Arabic literacy courses for women living in the Tangier medina. John Davison is the current museum director.
References[edit]



^ National Park Service (2007-01-23). "National Register Information System". National Register of Historic Places. National Park Service. 
^ "American Legation". National Historic Landmark summary listing. National Park Service. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 2007-10-12. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to American Legation Tangier.



Tangier American Legation Institute for Moroccan Studies
The Paul Bowles Wing at the Tangier American Legation
National Historic Landmarks Program: American Legation
Tangier American Legation Institute for Moroccan Studies on Archnet







v
t
e


U.S. National Register of Historic Places



Topics



Architectural style categories
Contributing property
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Keeper of the Register
National Park Service
Property types





Lists by states



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





Lists by insular areas



American Samoa
Guam
Minor Outlying Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands





Lists by associated states



Federated States of Micronesia
Marshall Islands
Palau





Other areas



District of Columbia
Morocco








 Portal












v
t
e


Tangier



History



History of Tangier

Timeline


European Governors of Tangier
Battle of Tangier (1664)
English Tangier
Tangier Garrison
Tangier Regiment
2nd Tangier Regiment
Battle of Cape Spartel (1782)
Treaty of Tangiers
First Moroccan Crisis
Tangier Protocol
Tangier International Zone
Administrators of the Tangier International Zone
Battle of Cape Spartel (1936)








Economy



Economy of Tangier
Tangier Exportation Free Zone
Tanger-med





Districts and streets



Tangier City Center
Grand Socco
Petit Socco
Quartier du Marshan
Rue Es-Siaghine
Rue de la Liberté
Avenue Pasteur
Avenue d'Espagne
Avenue Mohammed VI beach





Religious buildings



Tangier Grand Mosque
Kasbah Mosque
Sidi Bou Abib Mosque
Church of the Immaculate Conception
Anglican Church of St. Andrew





Palaces and museums



Dar el Makhzen
American Legation
Forbes Museum of Tangier
Museum of Contemporary Art
Fondation Lorin
Musée de Carmen-Macein





Other buildings



Plaza de Toros bullring
Borj en Naam
Gran Teatro Cervantes
Hotel Continental (Tangier)
Café Hafa
Tangerinn
Villa Muniria





Schools and colleges



Tangier Anglo-Moroccan School
The American School of Tangier





Transport



Rabat-Tangier expressway
Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport





Sport and culture



Atletico Tanger
IR Tanger
Stade de Tanger
Stade de Marchan
Cap Radio (Morocco)
National Cricket Stadium





Geography



Bay of Tangier
Parc de la Mendoubia
Colline du Charf
Cape Spartel
Cape Malabata











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Legation,_Tangier&oldid=772440264"					Categories: 1821 establishments in the United StatesDiplomatic missions of the United StatesHistory museums in MoroccoBuildings and structures in TangierNational Historic Landmarks of the United StatesRegister of Culturally Significant PropertyMorocco–United States relationsArab studiesDiplomatic missions in MoroccoTourist attractions in Tangier1821 establishments in MoroccoHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2009