For the journal, see Analytical Chemistry (journal).




Gas chromatography laboratory


Analytical chemistry studies and uses instruments and methods used to separate, identify, and quantify matter.[1] In practice separation, identification or quantification may constitute the entire analysis or be combined with another method. Separation isolates analytes. Qualitative analysis identifies analytes, while quantitative analysis determines the numerical amount or concentration.
Analytical chemistry consists of classical, wet chemical methods and modern, instrumental methods.[2] Classical qualitative methods use separations such as precipitation, extraction, and distillation. Identification may be based on differences in color, odor, melting point, boiling point, radioactivity or reactivity. Classical quantitative analysis uses mass or volume changes to quantify amount. Instrumental methods may be used to separate samples using chromatography, electrophoresis or field flow fractionation. Then qualitative and quantitative analysis can be performed, often with the same instrument and may use light interaction, heat interaction, electric fields or magnetic fields . Often the same instrument can separate, identify and quantify an analyte.
Analytical chemistry is also focused on improvements in experimental design, chemometrics, and the creation of new measurement tools. Analytical chemistry has broad applications to forensics, medicine, science and engineering.



Contents


1 History
2 Classical methods

2.1 Qualitative analysis

2.1.1 Chemical tests
2.1.2 Flame test


2.2 Quantitative analysis

2.2.1 Gravimetric analysis
2.2.2 Volumetric analysis




3 Instrumental methods

3.1 Spectroscopy
3.2 Mass spectrometry
3.3 Electrochemical analysis
3.4 Thermal analysis
3.5 Separation
3.6 Hybrid techniques
3.7 Microscopy
3.8 Lab-on-a-chip


4 Errors
5 Standards

5.1 Standard curve
5.2 Internal standards
5.3 Standard addition


6 Signals and noise

6.1 Thermal noise
6.2 Shot noise
6.3 Flicker noise
6.4 Environmental noise
6.5 Noise reduction


7 Applications
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]




Gustav Kirchhoff (left) and Robert Bunsen (right)


Analytical chemistry has been important since the early days of chemistry, providing methods for determining which elements and chemicals are present in the object in question. During this period significant contributions to analytical chemistry include the development of systematic elemental analysis by Justus von Liebig and systematized organic analysis based on the specific reactions of functional groups.
The first instrumental analysis was flame emissive spectrometry developed by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff who discovered rubidium (Rb) and caesium (Cs) in 1860.[3]
Most of the major developments in analytical chemistry take place after 1900. During this period instrumental analysis becomes progressively dominant in the field. In particular many of the basic spectroscopic and spectrometric techniques were discovered in the early 20th century and refined in the late 20th century.[4]
The separation sciences follow a similar time line of development and also become increasingly transformed into high performance instruments.[5] In the 1970s many of these techniques began to be used together as hybrid techniques to achieve a complete characterization of samples.
Starting in approximately the 1970s into the present day analytical chemistry has progressively become more inclusive of biological questions (bioanalytical chemistry), whereas it had previously been largely focused on inorganic or small organic molecules. Lasers have been increasingly used in chemistry as probes and even to initiate and influence a wide variety of reactions. The late 20th century also saw an expansion of the application of analytical chemistry from somewhat academic chemical questions to forensic, environmental, industrial and medical questions, such as in histology.[6]
Modern analytical chemistry is dominated by instrumental analysis. Many analytical chemists focus on a single type of instrument. Academics tend to either focus on new applications and discoveries or on new methods of analysis. The discovery of a chemical present in blood that increases the risk of cancer would be a discovery that an analytical chemist might be involved in. An effort to develop a new method might involve the use of a tunable laser to increase the specificity and sensitivity of a spectrometric method. Many methods, once developed, are kept purposely static so that data can be compared over long periods of time. This is particularly true in industrial quality assurance (QA), forensic and environmental applications. Analytical chemistry plays an increasingly important role in the pharmaceutical industry where, aside from QA, it is used in discovery of new drug candidates and in clinical applications where understanding the interactions between the drug and the patient are critical.
Classical methods[edit]




The presence of copper in this qualitative analysis is indicated by the bluish-green color of the flame


Although modern analytical chemistry is dominated by sophisticated instrumentation, the roots of analytical chemistry and some of the principles used in modern instruments are from traditional techniques many of which are still used today. These techniques also tend to form the backbone of most undergraduate analytical chemistry educational labs.
Qualitative analysis[edit]
A qualitative analysis determines the presence or absence of a particular compound, but not the mass or concentration. By definition, qualitative analyses do not measure quantity.
Chemical tests[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Chemical test.
There are numerous qualitative chemical tests, for example, the acid test for gold and the Kastle-Meyer test for the presence of blood.
Flame test[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Flame test.
Inorganic qualitative analysis generally refers to a systematic scheme to confirm the presence of certain, usually aqueous, ions or elements by performing a series of reactions that eliminate ranges of possibilities and then confirms suspected ions with a confirming test. Sometimes small carbon containing ions are included in such schemes. With modern instrumentation these tests are rarely used but can be useful for educational purposes and in field work or other situations where access to state-of-the-art instruments are not available or expedient.
Quantitative analysis[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Quantitative analysis (chemistry).
Quantitative analysis is the measurement of the quantities of particular chemical constituents present in a substance.
Gravimetric analysis[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Gravimetric analysis.
Gravimetric analysis involves determining the amount of material present by weighing the sample before and/or after some transformation. A common example used in undergraduate education is the determination of the amount of water in a hydrate by heating the sample to remove the water such that the difference in weight is due to the loss of water.
Volumetric analysis[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Titration.
Titration involves the addition of a reactant to a solution being analyzed until some equivalence point is reached. Often the amount of material in the solution being analyzed may be determined. Most familiar to those who have taken chemistry during secondary education is the acid-base titration involving a color changing indicator. There are many other types of titrations, for example potentiometric titrations. These titrations may use different types of indicators to reach some equivalence point.
Instrumental methods[edit]
Main article: Instrumental analysis




Block diagram of an analytical instrument showing the stimulus and measurement of response


Spectroscopy[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2016)



For more details on this topic, see Spectroscopy.
Spectroscopy measures the interaction of the molecules with electromagnetic radiation. Spectroscopy consists of many different applications such as atomic absorption spectroscopy, atomic emission spectroscopy, ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, x-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, dual polarization interferometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, photoemission spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectroscopy and so on.
Mass spectrometry[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Mass spectrometry.




An accelerator mass spectrometer used for radiocarbon dating and other analysis


Mass spectrometry measures mass-to-charge ratio of molecules using electric and magnetic fields. There are several ionization methods: electron impact, chemical ionization, electrospray, fast atom bombardment, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization, and others. Also, mass spectrometry is categorized by approaches of mass analyzers: magnetic-sector, quadrupole mass analyzer, quadrupole ion trap, time-of-flight, Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance, and so on.
Electrochemical analysis[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Electroanalytical method.
Electroanalytical methods measure the potential (volts) and/or current (amps) in an electrochemical cell containing the analyte.[7][8] These methods can be categorized according to which aspects of the cell are controlled and which are measured. The four main categories are potentiometry (the difference in electrode potentials is measured), coulometry (the transferred charge is measured over time), amperometry (the cell's current is measured over time), and voltammetry (the cell's current is measured while actively altering the cell's potential).
Thermal analysis[edit]
Further information: Calorimetry and Thermal analysis
Calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis measure the interaction of a material and heat.
Separation[edit]




Separation of black ink on a thin layer chromatography plate


Further information: Separation process, Chromatography, and Electrophoresis
Separation processes are used to decrease the complexity of material mixtures. Chromatography, electrophoresis and Field Flow Fractionation are representative of this field.
Hybrid techniques[edit]
Combinations of the above techniques produce a "hybrid" or "hyphenated" technique.[9][10][11][12][13] Several examples are in popular use today and new hybrid techniques are under development. For example, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, gas chromatography-infrared spectroscopy, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, liquid chromatography-NMR spectroscopy. liquid chromagraphy-infrared spectroscopy and capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry.
Hyphenated separation techniques refers to a combination of two (or more) techniques to detect and separate chemicals from solutions. Most often the other technique is some form of chromatography. Hyphenated techniques are widely used in chemistry and biochemistry. A slash is sometimes used instead of hyphen, especially if the name of one of the methods contains a hyphen itself.
Microscopy[edit]




Fluorescence microscope image of two mouse cell nuclei in prophase (scale bar is 5 µm)[14]


For more details on this topic, see Microscopy.
The visualization of single molecules, single cells, biological tissues and nanomaterials is an important and attractive approach in analytical science. Also, hybridization with other traditional analytical tools is revolutionizing analytical science. Microscopy can be categorized into three different fields: optical microscopy, electron microscopy, and scanning probe microscopy. Recently, this field is rapidly progressing because of the rapid development of the computer and camera industries.
Lab-on-a-chip[edit]
Further information: Microfluidics and Lab-on-a-chip
Devices that integrate (multiple) laboratory functions on a single chip of only millimeters to a few square centimeters in size and that are capable of handling extremely small fluid volumes down to less than picoliters.
Errors[edit]
Main article: Approximation error
Error can be defined as numerical difference between observed value and true value.[15]
In error the true value and observed value in chemical analysis can be related with each other by the equation





E
=
O
−
T


{\displaystyle E=O-T}



where

E = absolute error,
O = observed value,
T = true value.

Error of a measurement is an inverse measure of accurate measurement i.e. smaller the error greater the accuracy of the measurement. Errors are expressed relatively as:







E
T




{\displaystyle {\frac {E}{T}}}

 × 100 = % error,








E
T




{\displaystyle {\frac {E}{T}}}

 × 1000 = per thousand error

Standards[edit]
See also: Analytical quality control
Standard curve[edit]




A calibration curve plot showing limit of detection (LOD), limit of quantification (LOQ), dynamic range, and limit of linearity (LOL)


A general method for analysis of concentration involves the creation of a calibration curve. This allows for determination of the amount of a chemical in a material by comparing the results of unknown sample to those of a series of known standards. If the concentration of element or compound in a sample is too high for the detection range of the technique, it can simply be diluted in a pure solvent. If the amount in the sample is below an instrument's range of measurement, the method of addition can be used. In this method a known quantity of the element or compound under study is added, and the difference between the concentration added, and the concentration observed is the amount actually in the sample.
Internal standards[edit]
Sometimes an internal standard is added at a known concentration directly to an analytical sample to aid in quantitation. The amount of analyte present is then determined relative to the internal standard as a calibrant. An ideal internal standard is isotopically-enriched analyte which gives rise to the method of isotope dilution.
Standard addition[edit]
The method of standard addition is used in instrumental analysis to determine concentration of a substance (analyte) in an unknown sample by comparison to a set of samples of known concentration, similar to using a calibration curve. Standard addition can be applied to most analytical techniques and is used instead of a calibration curve to solve the matrix effect problem.
Signals and noise[edit]
One of the most important components of analytical chemistry is maximizing the desired signal while minimizing the associated noise.[16] The analytical figure of merit is known as the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N or SNR).
Noise can arise from environmental factors as well as from fundamental physical processes.
Thermal noise[edit]
Main article: Johnson–Nyquist noise
Thermal noise results from the motion of charge carriers (usually electrons) in an electrical circuit generated by their thermal motion. Thermal noise is white noise meaning that the power spectral density is constant throughout the frequency spectrum.
The root mean square value of the thermal noise in a resistor is given by[16]






v

R
M
S


=


4

k

B


T
R
Δ
f


,


{\displaystyle v_{RMS}={\sqrt {4k_{B}TR\Delta f}},}



where kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, R is the resistance, and 



Δ
f


{\displaystyle \Delta f}

 is the bandwidth of the frequency 



f


{\displaystyle f}

.
Shot noise[edit]
Main article: Shot noise
Shot noise is a type of electronic noise that occurs when the finite number of particles (such as electrons in an electronic circuit or photons in an optical device) is small enough to give rise to statistical fluctuations in a signal.
Shot noise is a Poisson process and the charge carriers that make up the current follow a Poisson distribution. The root mean square current fluctuation is given by[16]






i

R
M
S


=


2

e

I

Δ
f




{\displaystyle i_{RMS}={\sqrt {2\,e\,I\,\Delta f}}}



where e is the elementary charge and I is the average current. Shot noise is white noise.
Flicker noise[edit]
Main article: flicker noise
Flicker noise is electronic noise with a 1/ƒ frequency spectrum; as f increases, the noise decreases. Flicker noise arises from a variety of sources, such as impurities in a conductive channel, generation and recombination noise in a transistor due to base current, and so on. This noise can be avoided by modulation of the signal at a higher frequency, for example through the use of a lock-in amplifier.
Environmental noise[edit]




Noise in a thermogravimetric analysis; lower noise in the middle of the plot results from less human activity (and environmental noise) at night


Environmental noise arises from the surroundings of the analytical instrument. Sources of electromagnetic noise are power lines, radio and television stations, wireless devices, Compact fluorescent lamps[17] and electric motors. Many of these noise sources are narrow bandwidth and therefore can be avoided. Temperature and vibration isolation may be required for some instruments.
Noise reduction[edit]
Noise reduction can be accomplished either in computer hardware or software. Examples of hardware noise reduction are the use of shielded cable, analog filtering, and signal modulation. Examples of software noise reduction are digital filtering, ensemble average, boxcar average, and correlation methods.[16]
Applications[edit]
Analytical chemistry has applications including in forensic science, bioanalysis, clinical analysis, environmental analysis, and materials analysis. Analytical chemistry research is largely driven by performance (sensitivity, detection limit, selectivity, robustness, dynamic range, linear range, accuracy, precision, and speed), and cost (purchase, operation, training, time, and space). Among the main branches of contemporary analytical atomic spectrometry, the most widespread and universal are optical and mass spectrometry.[18] In the direct elemental analysis of solid samples, the new leaders are laser-induced breakdown and laser ablation mass spectrometry, and the related techniques with transfer of the laser ablation products into inductively coupled plasma. Advances in design of diode lasers and optical parametric oscillators promote developments in fluorescence and ionization spectrometry and also in absorption techniques where uses of optical cavities for increased effective absorption pathlength are expected to expand. The use of plasma- and laser-based methods is increasing. An interest towards absolute (standardless) analysis has revived, particularly in emission spectrometry.[citation needed]
Great effort is being put in shrinking the analysis techniques to chip size. Although there are few examples of such systems competitive with traditional analysis techniques, potential advantages include size/portability, speed, and cost. (micro total analysis system (µTAS) or lab-on-a-chip). Microscale chemistry reduces the amounts of chemicals used.
Many developments improve the analysis of biological systems. Examples of rapidly expanding fields in this area are genomics, DNA sequencing and related research in genetic fingerprinting and DNA microarray; proteomics, the analysis of protein concentrations and modifications, especially in response to various stressors, at various developmental stages, or in various parts of the body, metabolomics, which deals with metabolites; transcriptomics, including mRNA and associated fields; lipidomics - lipids and its associated fields; peptidomics - peptides and its associated fields; and metalomics, dealing with metal concentrations and especially with their binding to proteins and other molecules.[citation needed]
Analytical chemistry has played critical roles in the understanding of basic science to a variety of practical applications, such as biomedical applications, environmental monitoring, quality control of industrial manufacturing, forensic science and so on.[19]
The recent developments of computer automation and information technologies have extended analytical chemistry into a number of new biological fields. For example, automated DNA sequencing machines were the basis to complete human genome projects leading to the birth of genomics. Protein identification and peptide sequencing by mass spectrometry opened a new field of proteomics.
Analytical chemistry has been an indispensable area in the development of nanotechnology. Surface characterization instruments, electron microscopes and scanning probe microscopes enables scientists to visualize atomic structures with chemical characterizations.
See also[edit]


Analytical chemistry portal



List of chemical analysis methods
List of materials analysis methods
Important publications in analytical chemistry
Sensory analysis - in the field of Food science
Virtual instrumentation
Working range
Metrology
Measurement uncertainty
Microanalysis
Quality of analytical results

References[edit]


^ Skoog, Douglas A.; West, Donald M.; Holler, F. James; Crouch, Stanley R. (2014). Fundamentals of Analytical Chemistry. Belmont: Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning. p. 1. ISBN 0-495-55832-X. 
^ Skoog, Douglas A.; Holler, F. James; Crouch, Stanley R. (2007). Principles of Instrumental Analysis. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole, Thomson. p. 1. ISBN 0-495-01201-7. 
^ Arikawa, Yoshiko (2001). "Basic Education in Analytical Chemistry" (pdf). Analytical Sciences. The Japan Society for Analytical Chemistry. 17 (Supplement): i571–i573. Retrieved 10 January 2014. 
^ Miller, K; Synovec, RE (2000). "Review of analytical measurements facilitated by drop formation technology". Talanta. 51 (5): 921–33. doi:10.1016/S0039-9140(99)00358-6. PMID 18967924. 
^ Bartle, Keith D.; Myers, Peter (2002). "History of gas chromatography". TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry. 21 (9–10): 547. doi:10.1016/S0165-9936(02)00806-3. 
^ Laitinen, H.A. (1989). "History of analytical chemistry in the U.S.A". Talanta. 36 (1–2): 1–9. doi:10.1016/0039-9140(89)80077-3. PMID 18964671. 
^ Bard, A.J.; Faulkner, L.R. Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2nd Edition, 2000.[page needed]
^ Skoog, D.A.; West, D.M.; Holler, F.J. Fundamentals of Analytical Chemistry New York: Saunders College Publishing, 5th Edition, 1988.[page needed]
^ Wilkins, C. (1983). "Hyphenated techniques for analysis of complex organic mixtures". Science. 222 (4621): 291–6. Bibcode:1983Sci...222..291W. doi:10.1126/science.6353577. PMID 6353577. 
^ Holt, R. M.; Newman, M. J.; Pullen, F. S.; Richards, D. S.; Swanson, A. G. (1997). "High-performance Liquid Chromatography/NMR Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry:Further Advances in Hyphenated Technology". Journal of Mass Spectrometry. 32 (1): 64–70. Bibcode:1997JMSp...32...64H. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(199701)32:1<64::AID-JMS450>3.0.CO;2-7. PMID 9008869. 
^ Ellis, Lyndon A; Roberts, David J (1997). "Chromatographic and hyphenated methods for elemental speciation analysis in environmental media". Journal of Chromatography A. 774 (1–2): 3–19. doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(97)00325-7. PMID 9253184. 
^ Guetens, G; De Boeck, G; Wood, M; Maes, R.A.A; Eggermont, A.A.M; Highley, M.S; Van Oosterom, A.T; De Bruijn, E.A; Tjaden, U.R (2002). "Hyphenated techniques in anticancer drug monitoring". Journal of Chromatography A. 976 (1–2): 229–38. doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(02)01228-1. PMID 12462614. 
^ Guetens, G; De Boeck, G; Highley, M.S; Wood, M; Maes, R.A.A; Eggermont, A.A.M; Hanauske, A; De Bruijn, E.A; Tjaden, U.R (2002). "Hyphenated techniques in anticancer drug monitoring". Journal of Chromatography A. 976 (1–2): 239–47. doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(02)01227-X. PMID 12462615. 
^ Schermelleh, L.; Carlton, P. M.; Haase, S.; Shao, L.; Winoto, L.; Kner, P.; Burke, B.; Cardoso, M. C.; Agard, D. A.; Gustafsson, M. G. L.; Leonhardt, H.; Sedat, J. W. (2008). "Subdiffraction Multicolor Imaging of the Nuclear Periphery with 3D Structured Illumination Microscopy". Science. 320 (5881): 1332–6. Bibcode:2008Sci...320.1332S. doi:10.1126/science.1156947. PMC 2916659 . PMID 18535242. 
^ G.L. David - Analytical Chemistry
^ a b c d Crouch, Stanley; Skoog, Douglas A. (2007). Principles of instrumental analysis. Australia: Thomson Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-495-01201-7. [page needed]
^ "Health Concerns associated with Energy Efficient Lighting and their Electromagnetic Emissions" (PDF). Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada. Retrieved 2011-11-12. 
^ Bol'Shakov, Aleksandr A; Ganeev, Aleksandr A; Nemets, Valerii M (2006). "Prospects in analytical atomic spectrometry". Russian Chemical Reviews. 75 (4): 289. arXiv:physics/0607078 . Bibcode:2006RuCRv..75..289B. doi:10.1070/RC2006v075n04ABEH001174. 
^ "Analytical Chemistry - American Chemical Society". American Chemical Society. Retrieved 2017-05-26. 


Further reading[edit]

Skoog, D.A.; West, D.M.; Holler, F.J. Fundamentals of Analytical Chemistry New York: Saunders College Publishing, 5th Edition, 1988.
Bard, A.J.; Faulkner, L.R. Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2nd Edition, 2000.
Bettencourt da Silva, R; Bulska, E; Godlewska-Zylkiewicz, B; Hedrich, M; Majcen, N; Magnusson, B; Marincic, S; Papadakis, I; Patriarca, M; Vassileva, E; Taylor, P; Analytical measurement: measurement uncertainty and statistics, 2012, ISBN 978-92-79-23070-7.

External links[edit]



At Wikiversity, you can learn more and teach others about Analytical chemistry at the Department of Analytical chemistry





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Analytical chemistry.



Analytical Chemistry at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Analytical chemistry



Instrumentation



Atomic absorption spectrometer
Flame emission spectrometer
Gas chromatograph
High-performance liquid chromatograph
Infrared spectrometer
Mass spectrometer
Melting point apparatus
Microscope
Spectrometer
Spectrophotometer





Techniques



Calorimetry
Chromatography
Electroanalytical methods
Gravimetric analysis
Mass spectrometry
Spectroscopy





Sampling



Coning and quartering
Dilution
Dissolution
Filtration
Masking
Pulverization
Sample preparation
Separation process
Sub-sampling





Calibration



Chemometrics
Calibration curve
Matrix effect
Internal standard
Standard addition
Isotope dilution





Prominent publications



Analyst
Analytica Chimica Acta
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry
Analytical Chemistry
Analytical Biochemistry






Chemistry










v
t
e


Branches of chemistry






Dictionary of chemical formulas
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table





Physical



Chemical kinetics
Chemical physics
Nuclear chemistry
Electrochemistry
Femtochemistry
Geochemistry
Photochemistry
Quantum chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Spectroscopy
Surface science
Thermochemistry





Organic



Biochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Chemical biology
Clinical chemistry
Fullerene chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Neurochemistry
Pharmacy
Physical organic chemistry
Polymer chemistry





Inorganic



Bioinorganic chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Coordination chemistry
Materials science
Organometallic chemistry





Others



Actinide chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Astrochemistry
Chemistry education
Clay chemistry
Click chemistry
Computational chemistry
Cosmochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Food chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Green chemistry
Post-mortem chemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Theoretical chemistry
Wet chemistry








 Category
 Portal
 Commons
 WikiProject









Authority control



LCCN: sh85023011
GND: 4129906-1
NDL: 00561030











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analytical_chemistry&oldid=817219697"					Categories: Analytical chemistryMaterials scienceHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2014Articles to be expanded from April 2016All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2013Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles prone to spam from January 2013Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers