For other uses, see Anatolia (disambiguation) and Asia Minor (disambiguation).

Anatolia

Native name: Anadolu



The traditional definition of Anatolia within modern Turkey[1][2]



Geography


Location
Western Asia
Middle East


Coordinates
39°N 35°E﻿ / ﻿39°N 35°E﻿ / 39; 35Coordinates: 39°N 35°E﻿ / ﻿39°N 35°E﻿ / 39; 35


Area
756,000 km2 (292,000 sq mi)[3]


Administration



Turkey



Capital and largest
Ankara (pop. 5,270,575[4])


Demographics


Demonym
Anatolian


Languages
Turkish, Kurmanji, Arabic, Zaza, Kabardian, various others


Ethnic groups
Turks, Kurds, Arabs, Laz, various others


Anatolia (Turkish: Anadolu, in Modern Greek: Ανατολία, Anatolía, from Ἀνατολή, Anatolḗ, modern pronunciation Anatolí – "east" or "(sun)rise"), sometimes known as Asia Minor (Turkish: Küçük Asya, in Medieval and Modern Greek: Μικρά Ἀσία, Mīkrá Asía, modern pronunciation Mikrá Asía – "small Asia"), Asian Turkey, the Anatolian peninsula, or the Anatolian plateau, is the westernmost protrusion of Asia, which makes up the majority of modern-day Turkey. The region is bounded by the Black Sea to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, and the Aegean Sea to the west. The Sea of Marmara forms a connection between the Black and Aegean Seas through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits and separates Anatolia from Thrace on the European mainland.
Traditionally, Anatolia is considered to extend in the east to a line between the Gulf of Alexandretta and the Black Sea to the Armenian Highlands (Armenia Major). This region is now named and largely situated in the Eastern Anatolia Region of the far north east of Turkey and converges with the Lesser Caucasus – an area that was incorporated in the Russian Empire region of Transcaucasia in the 19th century.[5][6] Thus, traditionally Anatolia is the territory that comprises approximately the western two-thirds of the Asian part of Turkey.
Anatolia is often considered to be synonymous with Asian Turkey, which comprises almost the entire country;[7] its eastern and southeastern borders are widely taken to be the Turkish borders with neighboring Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, and Syria, in clockwise direction.
The ancient inhabitants of Anatolia spoke the now-extinct Anatolian languages, which were largely replaced by the Greek language starting from classical antiquity and during the Hellenistic, Roman and Byzantine periods. The Turkification of Anatolia began under the Seljuk Empire in the late 11th century and continued under the Ottoman Empire between the early 14th and early 20th centuries. However, various non-Turkic languages continue to be spoken by minorities in Anatolia today, including Kurdish, Assyrian, Armenian, Arabic, Laz, Georgian, and Greek. Ancient peoples in the region included Galatians, Hurrians, Scythians, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Hattians, Cimmerians, Ionian Greeks, the Mongols and Arabs.



Contents


1 Definition
2 Onomastics and etymology
3 History

3.1 Prehistory
3.2 Ancient Near East (Bronze and Iron Ages)

3.2.1 Hattians and Hurrians
3.2.2 Assyrian Empire (21st–18th centuries BC)
3.2.3 Hittite Kingdom and Empire (17th–12th centuries BC)
3.2.4 Neo-Hittite kingdoms (c. 1180–700 BC)
3.2.5 Neo-Assyrian Empire (10th–7th centuries BC)
3.2.6 Cimmerian and Scythian invasions (8th–7th centuries BC)
3.2.7 Greek West


3.3 Classical antiquity
3.4 Early Christian period
3.5 Islamic rule replacing Byzantium
3.6 Ottoman Empire
3.7 Modern times


4 Geography

4.1 Geology
4.2 Climate
4.3 Ecoregions


5 Demographics
6 Cuisine
7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links



Definition[edit]
Further information: Geographical name changes in Turkey




The location of Turkey (within the rectangle) in reference to the European continent. Anatolia roughly corresponds to the Asian part of Turkey, except the eastern parts historically known as the Armenian Highlands






1907 map of Asia Minor, showing the local ancient kingdoms. The map includes the East Aegean Islands and the island of Cyprus to Anatolia's continental shelf.


The Anatolian peninsula, also called Asia Minor, is bounded by the Black Sea to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, the Aegean Sea to the west, and the Sea of Marmara to the northwest, which separates Anatolia from Thrace in Europe.
Traditionally, Anatolia is considered to extend in the east to an indefinite line running from the Gulf of Alexandretta to the Black Sea, coterminous with the Anatolian Plateau. This traditional geographical definition is used, for example, in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary,[1] as well as the archeological community.[2] Under this definition, Anatolia is bounded to the east by the Armenian Highlands, and the Euphrates before that river bends to the southeast to enter Mesopotamia.[2] To the southeast, it is bounded by the ranges that separate it from the Orontes valley in Syria (region) and the Mesopotamian plain.[2]
Following the Armenian Genocide and establishment of the Republic of Turkey, the Armenian Highlands (or Western Armenia) were renamed "Eastern Anatolia" (literally The Eastern East) by the Turkish government,[8][9] being effectively co-terminous with Asian Turkey. Turkey's First Geography Congress in 1941 created two regions to the east of the Gulf of Iskenderun-Black Sea line named the Eastern Anatolia Region and the Southeastern Anatolia Region,[10] the former largely corresponding to the western part of the Armenian Highland, the latter to the northern part of the Mesopotamian plain. This wider definition of Anatolia has gained widespread currency outside of Turkey and has, for instance, been adopted by Encyclopædia Britannica[11] and other encyclopedic and general reference publications.[12] Vazken Davidian terms the expanded use of "Anatolia" to apply to territory formerly referred to as Armenia as "an historical imposition", and notes that a growing body of literature is uncomfortable with referring to the Ottoman East as "Eastern Anatolia".[13]
Onomastics and etymology[edit]
The oldest known reference to Anatolia – as “Land of the Hatti” – appears on Mesopotamian cuneiform tablets from the period of the Akkadian Empire (2350–2150 BC).[citation needed] The first recorded name the Greeks used for the Anatolian peninsula, Ἀσία (Asía),[14] presumably echoed the name of the Assuwa league in western Anatolia.[citation needed] As the name "Asia" broadened its scope to apply to other areas east of the Mediterranean, Greeks in Late Antiquity came to use the name Μικρὰ Ἀσία (Mikrá Asía) or Asia Minor, meaning "Lesser Asia" to refer to present-day Anatolia.
The English-language name Anatolia itself derives from the Greek ἀνατολή (anatolḗ) meaning “the East” or more literally “sunrise” (comparable to the Latin-derived terms “levant” and “orient”).[15][16] The precise reference of this term has varied over time, perhaps originally referring to the Aeolian, Ionian and Dorian colonies on the west coast of Asia Minor. In the Byzantine Empire, the Anatolic Theme (Aνατολικόν θέμα) was a theme covering the western and central parts of Turkey's present-day Central Anatolia Region.[17][18] The modern Turkish form of Anatolia, Anadolu, derives from the Greek name Aνατολή (Anatolḗ). The Russian male name Anatoly and the French Anatole share the same linguistic origin.
In English the name of Turkey for ancient Anatolia first appeared c. 1369. It derives from the Medieval Latin Turchia (meaning “Land of the Turks”, Turkish Türkiye), a name originally used by Europeans to designate those parts of Anatolia controlled by the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum after the Battle of Manzikert (1071).[citation needed]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Anatolia
Prehistory[edit]
Main article: Prehistory of Anatolia




Mural of aurochs, a deer, and humans in Çatalhöyük, which is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. It was registered as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2012.[19]


Human habitation in Anatolia dates back to the Paleolithic.[20] Neolithic Anatolia has been proposed as the homeland of the Indo-European language family, although linguists tend to favour a later origin in the steppes north of the Black Sea. However, it is clear that the Anatolian languages, the oldest attested branch of Indo-European, have been spoken in Anatolia since at least the 19th century BC.
Ancient Near East (Bronze and Iron Ages)[edit]
Hattians and Hurrians[edit]
The earliest historical records of Anatolia stem from the southeast of the region and are from the Mesopotamian-based Akkadian Empire during the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 24th century BC. Scholars generally believe the earliest indigenous populations of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians. The Hattians spoke a language of unclear affiliation, and the Hurrian language belongs to a small family called Hurro-Urartian, all these languages now being extinct; relationships with indigenous languages of the Caucasus have been proposed[21] but are not generally accepted. The region was famous for exporting raw materials, and areas of Hattian- and Hurrian-populated southeast Anatolia were colonised by the Akkadians.[22]
Assyrian Empire (21st–18th centuries BC)[edit]
After the fall of the Akkadian Empire in the mid-21st century BC, the Assyrians, who were the northern branch of the Akkadian people, colonised parts of the region between the 21st and mid-18th centuries BC and claimed its resources, notably silver. One of the numerous cuneiform records dated circa 20th century BC, found in Anatolia at the Assyrian colony of Kanesh, uses an advanced system of trading computations and credit lines.[22]
Hittite Kingdom and Empire (17th–12th centuries BC)[edit]
Main article: History of the Hittites




The Lion Gate at Hattusa, capital of the Hittite Empire. The city's history dates to before 2000 BC.


Unlike the Akkadians and their descendants, the Assyrians, whose Anatolian possessions were peripheral to their core lands in Mesopotamia, the Hittites were centred at Hattusa (modern Boğazkale) in north-central Anatolia by the 17th century BC. They were speakers of an Indo-European language, the Hittite language, or nesili (the language of Nesa) in Hittite. Attested for the first time in the Assyrian tablets of Nesa around 2000BC, they conquered Hattusa in the 18th century BC, imposing themselves over Hattian- and Hurrian-speaking populations. According to the widely accepted Kurgan theory on the Proto-Indo-European homeland, however, the Hittites (along with the other Indo-European ancient Anatolians) were themselves relatively recent immigrants to Anatolia from the north.
The Hittites adopted the cuneiform script, invented in Mesopotamia. During the Late Bronze Age circa 1650 BC, they created a kingdom, the Hittite New Kingdom, which became an empire in the 14th century BC after the conquest of Kizzuwatna in the south-east and the defeat of the Assuwa league in western Anatolia. The empire reached its height in the 13th century BC, controlling much of Asia Minor, northwestern Syria and northwest upper Mesopotamia. They failed to reach the Anatolian coasts of the Black Sea, however, as a non-Indo-European people, the semi-nomadic pastoralist and tribal Kaskians, had established themselves there, displacing earlier Palaic-speaking Indo-Europeans.[23] Much of the history of the Hittite Empire concerned war with the rival empires of Egypt, Assyria and the Mitanni.[24]
The Egyptians eventually withdrew from the region after failing to gain the upper hand over the Hittites and becoming wary of the power of Assyria, which had destroyed the Mitanni Empire.[24] The Assyrians and Hittites were then left to battle over control of eastern and southern Anatolia and colonial territories in Syria. The Assyrians had better success than the Egyptians, annexing much Hittite (and Hurrian) territory in these regions.[25]
Neo-Hittite kingdoms (c. 1180–700 BC)[edit]
After 1180 BC, during the Late Bronze Age collapse, the Hittite empire disintegrated into several independent Syro-Hittite states, subsequent to losing much territory to the Middle Assyrian Empire and being finally overrun by the Phrygians, another Indo-European people who are believed to have migrated from the Balkans. The Phrygian expansion into southeast Anatolia was eventually halted by the Assyrians, who controlled that region.[25]

Arameans

Arameans encroached over the borders of south central Anatolia in the century or so after the fall of the Hittite empire, and some of the Syro-Hittite states in this region became an amalgam of Hittites and Arameans. These became known as Syro-Hittite states.

Luwians





Lycian rock cut tombs of Kaunos (Dalyan)


In central and western Anatolia, another Indo-European people, the Luwians, came to the fore, circa 2000 BC. Their language was closely related to Hittite.[26] The general consensus amongst scholars is that Luwian was spoken—to a greater or lesser degree—across a large area of western Anatolia, including (possibly) Wilusa (Troy), the Seha River Land (to be identified with the Hermos and/or Kaikos valley), and the kingdom of Mira-Kuwaliya with its core territory of the Maeander valley.[27] From the 9th century BC, Luwian regions coalesced into a number of states such as Lydia, Caria and Lycia, all of which had Hellenic influence.
Neo-Assyrian Empire (10th–7th centuries BC)[edit]
From the 10th to late 7th centuries BC, much of Anatolia (particularly the east, central, and southeastern regions) fell to the Neo-Assyrian Empire, including all of the Syro-Hittite states, Tabal, Kingdom of Commagene, the Cimmerians and Scythians and swathes of Cappadocia.
The Neo-Assyrian empire collapsed due to a bitter series of civil wars followed by a combined attack by Medes, Persians, Scythians and their own Babylonian relations. The last Assyrian city to fall was Harran in southeast Anatolia. This city was the birthplace of the last king of Babylon, the Assyrian Nabonidus and his son and regent Belshazzar. Much of the region then fell to the short-lived Iran-based Median Empire, with the Babylonians and Scythians briefly appropriating some territory.
Cimmerian and Scythian invasions (8th–7th centuries BC)[edit]
From the late 8th century BC, a new wave of Indo-European-speaking raiders entered northern and northeast Anatolia: the Cimmerians and Scythians. The Cimmerians overran Phrygia and the Scythians threatened to do the same to Urartu and Lydia, before both were finally checked by the Assyrians.
Greek West[edit]
The north-western coast of Anatolia was inhabited by Greeks of the Achaean/Mycenaean culture from the 20th century BC, related to the Greeks of south eastern Europe and the Aegean.[28] Beginning with the Bronze Age collapse at the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the west coast of Anatolia was settled by Ionian Greeks, usurping the area of the related but earlier Mycenaean Greeks. Over several centuries, numerous Ancient Greek city-states were established on the coasts of Anatolia. Greeks started Western philosophy on the western coast of Anatolia (Pre-Socratic philosophy).[28]
Classical antiquity[edit]




Ancient regions of Anatolia (500 BC)






Asia Minor in the Greco-Roman period. The classical regions and their main settlements






Asia Minor in the early 2nd century AD. The Roman provinces under Trajan.






The temple of Athena (funded by Alexander the Great) in the ancient Greek city of Priene


In classical antiquity, Anatolia was described by Herodotus and later historians as divided into regions named after tribes such as Lydia, Lycia, Caria, Mysia, Bithynia, Phrygia, Galatia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, Paphlagonia, Cilicia, and Cappadocia. By that time, the populations were a mixture of the ancient Anatolian or "Syro-Hittite" substrate and post-Bronze-Age-collapse "Thraco-Phrygian" and more recent Greco-Macedonian incursions.




The Dying Galatian was a famous statue commissioned some time between 230–220 BC by King Attalos I of Pergamon to honor his victory over the Celtic Galatians in Anatolia.


Anatolia is known as the birthplace of minted coinage (as opposed to unminted coinage, which first appears in Mesopotamia at a much earlier date) as a medium of exchange, some time in the 7th century BC in Lydia. The use of minted coins continued to flourish during the Greek and Roman eras.[29][30]
During the 6th century BC, all of Anatolia was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire, the Persians having usurped the Medes as the dominant dynasty in Iran. In 499 BC, the Ionian city-states on the west coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule. The Ionian Revolt, as it became known, though quelled, initiated the Greco-Persian Wars, which ended in a Greek victory in 449 BC, and the Ionian cities regained their independence, alongside the withdrawal of the Persian forces from their European territories.
In 334 BC, the Macedonian Greek king Alexander the Great conquered the peninsula from the Achaemenid Persian Empire.[31] Alexander's conquest opened up the interior of Asia Minor to Greek settlement and influence.




Sanctuary of Commagene Kings on Mount Nemrut (1st century BC)


Following the death of Alexander and the breakup of his empire, Anatolia was ruled by a series of Hellenistic kingdoms, such as the Attalids of Pergamum and the Seleucids, the latter controlling most of Anatolia. A period of peaceful Hellenization followed, such that the local Anatolian languages had been supplanted by Greek by the 1st century BC. In 133 BC the last Attalid king bequeathed his kingdom to the Roman Republic, and western and central Anatolia came under Roman control, but Hellenistic culture remained predominant. Further annexations by Rome, in particular of the Kingdom of Pontus by Pompey, brought all of Anatolia under Roman control, except for the eastern frontier with the Parthian Empire, which remained unstable for centuries, causing a series of wars, culminating in the Roman-Parthian Wars.
Early Christian period[edit]
After the division of the Roman Empire, Anatolia became part of the East Roman, or Byzantine Empire. Anatolia was one of the first places where Christianity spread, so that by the 4th century AD, western and central Anatolia were overwhelmingly Christian and Greek-speaking. For the next 600 years, while Imperial possessions in Europe were subjected to barbarian invasions, Anatolia would be the center of the Hellenic world. Byzantine control was challenged by Arab raids starting in the eighth century (see Arab–Byzantine wars), but in the ninth and tenth century a resurgent Byzantine Empire regained its lost territories, including even long lost territory such as Armenia and Syria (ancient Aram).
Islamic rule replacing Byzantium[edit]




Byzantine Anatolia and the Byzantine-Arab frontier zone in the mid-9th century






Beyliks and other states around Anatolia, c. 1300.


In the 10 years following the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, the Seljuk Turks from Central Asia migrated over large areas of Anatolia, with particular concentrations around the northwestern rim.[32] The Turkish language and the Islamic religion were gradually introduced as a result of the Seljuk conquest, and this period marks the start of Anatolia's slow transition from predominantly Christian and Greek-speaking, to predominantly Muslim and Turkish-speaking (although ethnic groups such as Armenians, Greeks, and Assyrians remained numerous and retained Christianity and their native languages). In the following century, the Byzantines managed to reassert their control in western and northern Anatolia. Control of Anatolia was then split between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, with the Byzantine holdings gradually being reduced.[33]
In 1255, the Mongols swept through eastern and central Anatolia, and would remain until 1335. The Ilkhanate garrison was stationed near Ankara.[33][34] After the decline of the Ilkhanate from 1335–1353, the Mongol Empire's legacy in the region was the Uyghur Eretna Dynasty that was overthrown by Kadi Burhan al-Din in 1381.[35]
By the end of the 14th century, most of Anatolia was controlled by various Anatolian beyliks. Smyrna fell in 1330, and the last Byzantine stronghold in Anatolia, Philadelphia, fell in 1390. The Turkmen Beyliks were under the control of the Mongols, at least nominally, through declining Seljuk sultans.[36][37] The Beyliks did not mint coins in the names of their own leaders while they remained under the suzerainty of the Mongol Ilkhanids.[38] The Osmanli ruler Osman I was the first Turkish ruler who minted coins in his own name in 1320s, for it bears the legend "Minted by Osman son of Ertugul".[39] Since the minting of coins was a prerogative accorded in Islamic practice only to a sovereign, it can be considered that the Osmanli, or Ottoman Turks, became formally independent from the Mongol Khans.[40]
Ottoman Empire[edit]
Among the Turkish leaders, the Ottomans emerged as great power under Osman I and his son Orhan I.[citation needed] The Anatolian beyliks were successively absorbed into the rising Ottoman Empire during the 15th century.[citation needed] It is not well understood how the Osmanlı, or Ottoman Turks, came to dominate their neighbours, as the history of medieval Anatolia is still little known.[41] The Ottomans completed the conquest of the peninsula in 1517 with the taking of Halicarnassus (modern Bodrum) from the Knights of Saint John.[citation needed]
Modern times[edit]




Ethnographic map of Anatolia from 1911.


With the acceleration of the decline of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century, and as a result of the expansionist policies of Czarist Russia in the Caucasus, many Muslim nations and groups in that region, mainly Circassians, Tatars, Azeris, Lezgis, Chechens and several Turkic groups left their homelands and settled in Anatolia. As the Ottoman Empire further shrank in the Balkan regions and then fragmented during the Balkan Wars, much of the non-Christian populations of its former possessions, mainly Balkan Muslims (Bosnian Muslims, Albanians, Turks, Muslim Bulgarians and Greek Muslims such as the Vallahades from Greek Macedonia), were resettled in various parts of Anatolia, mostly in formerly Christian villages throughout Anatolia.
A continuous reverse migration occurred since the early 19th century, when Greeks from Anatolia, Constantinople and Pontus area migrated toward the newly independent Kingdom of Greece, and also towards the United States, southern part of the Russian Empire, Latin America and rest of Europe.
Following the Russo-Persian Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) and the incorporation of the Eastern Armenia into the Russian Empire, another migration involved the large Armenian population of Anatolia, which recorded significant migration rates from Western Armenia (Eastern Anatolia) toward the Russian Empire, especially toward its newly established Armenian provinces.
Anatolia remained multi-ethnic until the early 20th century (see the rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire). During World War I, the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide (especially in Pontus), and the Assyrian genocide almost entirely removed the ancient indigenous communities of Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian populations in Anatolia and surrounding regions. Following the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922, most remaining ethnic Anatolian Greeks were forced out during the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey. Many more have left Turkey since, leaving fewer than 5,000 Greeks in Anatolia today. Since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, Anatolia has been within Turkey, its inhabitants being mainly Turks and Kurds (see demographics of Turkey and history of Turkey).
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Turkey
Geology[edit]
Main article: Geology of Turkey
Anatolia's terrain is structurally complex. A central massif composed of uplifted blocks and downfolded troughs, covered by recent deposits and giving the appearance of a plateau with rough terrain, is wedged between two folded mountain ranges that converge in the east. True lowland is confined to a few narrow coastal strips along the Aegean, Mediterranean, and Black Sea coasts. Flat or gently sloping land is rare and largely confined to the deltas of the Kızıl River, the coastal plains of Çukurova and the valley floors of the Gediz River and the Büyük Menderes River as well as some interior high plains in Anatolia, mainly around Lake Tuz (Salt Lake) and the Konya Basin (Konya Ovasi).
Climate[edit]
Main article: Climate of Turkey

Temperatures of Anatolia






Ankara (central Anatolia)









Antalya (southern Anatolia)









Van (eastern Anatolia)




Anatolia has a varied range of climates. The central plateau is characterized by a continental climate, with hot summers and cold snowy winters. The south and west coasts enjoy a typical Mediterranean climate, with mild rainy winters, and warm dry summers.[42] The Black Sea and Marmara coasts have a temperate oceanic climate, with cool foggy summers and much rainfall throughout the year.
Ecoregions[edit]
There is a diverse number of plant and animal communities.
The mountains and coastal plain of northern Anatolia experiences humid and mild climate. There are temperate broadleaf, mixed and coniferous forests. The central and eastern plateau, with its drier continental climate, has deciduous forests and forest steppes. Western and southern Anatolia, which have a Mediterranean climate, contain Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions.

Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests: These temperate broadleaf and mixed forests extend across northern Anatolia, lying between the mountains of northern Anatolia and the Black Sea. They include the enclaves of temperate rainforest lying along the southeastern coast of the Black Sea in eastern Turkey and Georgia.[43]
Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests: These forests occupy the mountains of northern Anatolia, running east and west between the coastal Euxine-Colchic forests and the drier, continental climate forests of central and eastern Anatolia.[44]
Central Anatolian deciduous forests: These forests of deciduous oaks and evergreen pines cover the plateau of central Anatolia.[45]
Central Anatolian steppe: These dry grasslands cover the drier valleys and surround the saline lakes of central Anatolia, and include halophytic (salt tolerant) plant communities.[46]
Eastern Anatolian deciduous forests: This ecoregion occupies the plateau of eastern Anatolia. The drier and more continental climate is beneficial for steppe-forests dominated by deciduous oaks, with areas of shrubland, montane forest, and valley forest.[47]
Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests: These forests occupy the western, Mediterranean-climate portion of the Anatolian plateau. Pine forests and mixed pine and oak woodlands and shrublands are predominant.[48]
Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests: These Mediterranean-climate forests occupy the coastal lowlands and valleys of western Anatolia bordering the Aegean Sea. The ecoregion has forests of Turkish pine (Pinus brutia), oak forests and woodlands, and maquis shrubland of Turkish pine and evergreen sclerophyllous trees and shrubs, including Olive (Olea europaea), Strawberry Tree (Arbutus unedo), Arbutus andrachne, Kermes Oak (Quercus coccifera), and Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis).[49]
Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests: These mountain forests occupy the Mediterranean-climate Taurus Mountains of southern Anatolia. Conifer forests are predominant, chiefly Anatolian black pine (Pinus nigra), Cedar of Lebanon (Cedrus libani), Taurus fir (Abies cilicica), and juniper (Juniperus foetidissima and J. excelsa). Broadleaf trees include oaks, hornbeam, and maples.[50]
Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests: This ecoregion occupies the coastal strip of southern Anatolia between the Taurus Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea. Plant communities include broadleaf sclerophyllous maquis shrublands, forests of Aleppo Pine (Pinus halepensis) and Turkish Pine (Pinus brutia), and dry oak (Quercus spp.) woodlands and steppes.[51]

Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Turkey
Almost 80% of the people currently residing in Anatolia are Turks. Kurds constitute a major community in southeastern Anatolia,[52] and are the largest ethnic minority. Abkhazians, Albanians, Arabs, Arameans, Armenians, Assyrians, Azerbaijanis, Bosnian Muslims, Circassians, Gagauz, Georgians, Serbs, Greeks, Hemshin, Jews, Laz, Levantines, Pomaks, Zazas and a number of other ethnic groups also live in Anatolia in smaller numbers.[citation needed]
Cuisine[edit]
Bamia is a traditional Anatolian-era stew dish prepared using lamb, okra and tomatoes as primary ingredients.[53]
See also[edit]




Aeolis
Alacahöyük
Anatolian hypothesis
Anatolian languages
Anatolianism
Anatolian leopard
Anatolian Plate
Anatolian Shepherd
Anatolian beyliks
Ancient kingdoms of Anatolia
Antigonid dynasty
Attalid dynasty
Bithynia
Byzantine Empire
Cappadocia
Caria
Çatalhöyük
Cilicia





Doris (Asia Minor)
Empire of Nicaea
Empire of Trebizond
Ephesus
Galatia
Gordium
Halicarnassus
Hattusa
History of Anatolia
Hittites
Ionia
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Midas
Miletus
Myra
Mysia
Ottoman Empire
Pamphylia
Paphlagonia





Pentarchy
Pergamon
Phrygia
Pisidia
Pontic Greeks
Pontus
Rumi
Saint Anatolia
Saint John
Saint Nicholas
Saint Paul
Sardis
Seleucid Empire
Great Seljuq Empire
Seven churches of Asia
Seven Sleepers
Sultanate of Rum
Tarsus
Troad
Troy
Turkey
Turkic migration




References[edit]



^ a b Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary. 2001. p. 46. ISBN 0 87779 546 0. Retrieved 18 May 2001. 
^ a b c d Stephen Mitchell, Anatolia: Land, Men, and Gods in Asia Minor. The Celts in Anatolia and the impact of Roman rule. Clarendon Press, Aug 24, 1995 - 266 pages. ISBN 978-0198150299 [1]
^ Sansal, Burak. "History of Anatolia". 
^ (TÜİK), Türkiye İstatistik Kurumu. "Türkiye İstatistik Kurumu, Adrese Dayalı Nüfus Kayıt Sistemi Sonuçları, 2015". www.tuik.gov.tr. 
^ Adalian, Rouben Paul (2010). Historical dictionary of Armenia (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. pp. 336–8. ISBN 0810874504. 
^ Grierson, Otto Mørkholm ; edited by Philip; Westermark, Ulla (1991). Early Hellenistic coinage : from the accession of Alexander to the Peace of Apamea (336–188 B.C.) (Repr. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0521395046. 
^ Hooglund, Eric (2004). "Anatolia". Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa. Macmillan/Gale – via Encyclopedia.com. Anatolia comprises more than 95 percent of Turkey's total land area. 
^ Sahakyan, Lusine (2010). Turkification of the Toponyms in the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Turkey. Montreal: Arod Books. ISBN 978-0969987970. 
^ Hovannisian, Richard (2007). The Armenian genocide cultural and ethical legacies. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. p. 3. ISBN 1412835925. 
^ Ali Yiğit, "Geçmişten Günümüze Türkiye'yi Bölgelere Ayıran Çalışmalar ve Yapılması Gerekenler", Ankara Üniversitesi Türkiye Coğrafyası Araştırma ve Uygulama Merkezi, IV. Ulural Coğrafya Sempozyumu, "Avrupa Birliği Sürecindeki Türkiye'de Bölgesel Farklılıklar", pp. 34–35.
^ "Anatolia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 18 May 2012. 
^ "Anatolia entries from Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa, The Columbia Encyclopedia, and A Dictionary of World History". Encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 19 May 2012. 
^ Vazken Khatchig Davidian, "Imagining Ottoman Armenia: Realism and Allegory in Garabed Nichanian's Provincial Wedding in Moush and Late Ottoman Art Criticism", p7 & footnote 34, in Études arméniennes contemporaines volume 6, 2015.
^ Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, Ἀσία, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ Henry George Liddell; Robert Scott. "A Greek-English Lexicon". 
^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". 
^ "On the First Thema, called Anatolikón. This theme is called Anatolikón or Theme of the Anatolics, not because it is above and in the direction of the east where the sun rises, but because it lies to the East of Byzantium and Europe." Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, De Thematibus, ed. A. Pertusi. Vatican: Vatican Library, 1952, pp. 59–61.
^ John Haldon, Byzantium, a History, 2002. Page 32
^ "Çatalhöyük added to UNESCO World Heritage List". Global Heritage Fund. 3 July 2012. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2013. 
^ Stiner, Mary C.; Kuhn, Steven L.; Güleç, Erksin (2013). "Early Upper Paleolithic shell beads at Üçağızlı Cave I (Turkey): Technology and the socioeconomic context of ornament life-histories". Journal of Human Evolution. 64 (5): 380–398. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2013.01.008. ISSN 0047-2484. PMID 23481346. 
^ Bryce 2005:12
^ a b Freeman, Charles (1999). Egypt, Greece and Rome: Civilizations of the Ancient Mediterranean. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-872194-3. 
^ Carruba, O. Das Palaische. Texte, Grammatik, Lexikon. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970. StBoT 10
^ a b Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq
^ a b Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books, 1966.
^ Melchert 2003
^ Watkins 1994; id. 1995:144–51; Starke 1997; Melchert 2003; for the geography Hawkins 1998
^ a b Carl Roebuck, The World of Ancient Times
^ Howgego, C. J. (1995). Ancient History from Coins. ISBN 0-415-08992-1. 
^ Asia Minor Coins - an index of Greek and Roman coins from Asia Minor (ancient Anatolia)
^ Roisman, Joseph; Worthington, Ian (2010). A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 1-4051-7936-8. 
^ Angold, Michael (1997). The Byzantine Empire 1025–1204. p. 117. ISBN 0-582-29468-1. 
^ a b H. M. Balyuzi Muḥammad and the course of Islám, p. 342
^ John Freely Storm on Horseback: The Seljuk Warriors of Turkey, p. 83
^ Clifford Edmund Bosworth-The new Islamic dynasties: a chronological and genealogical manual, p. 234
^ Mehmet Fuat Köprülü, Gary Leiser-The origins of the Ottoman Empire, p. 33
^ Peter Partner God of battles: holy wars of Christianity and Islam, p. 122
^ Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire, p. 13
^ Artuk - Osmanli Beyliginin Kurucusu, 27f
^ Pamuk - A Monetary History, pp. 30–31
^ Finkel, Caroline (2007). Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire. Basic Books. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-465-00850-6. Retrieved 6 June 2013. 
^ Prothero, W.G. (1920). Anatolia. London: H.M. Stationery Office. 
^ "Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Central Anatolian deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Central Anatolian steppe". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Eastern Anatolian deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008. 
^ "A Kurdish Majority In Turkey Within One Generation?". May 6, 2012. 
^ Webb, L.S.; Roten, L.G. (2009). The Multicultural Cookbook for Students. EBL-Schweitzer. ABC-CLIO. pp. 286–287. ISBN 978-0-313-37559-0. 



Bibliography[edit]


Steadman, Sharon R.; McMahon, Gregory (2011). McMahon, Gregory; Steadman, Sharon, eds. The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia:(10,000–323 BCE). Oxford University Press Inc. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.001.0001. ISBN 9780195376142 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anatolia.






Links to related articles











v
t
e


Turkey articles



History




Pre-Turkish era



Prehistory of Anatolia & Thrace
Classical Anatolia & Thrace
Neo-Assyrian Empire
Byzantine Anatolia





Seljuq era



Sultanate of Rum
Mongol invasions of Anatolia
Ilkhanate





Ottoman era



Osman's Dream
Rise

Interregnum
Conquest of Constantinople


Classical Age
Transformation

Sultanate of Women
Köprülü era


Old Regime

Tulip period


Decline and modernization

Tanzimat
First Constitutional Era


Defeat and dissolution

Second Constitutional Era
Partitioning







Republican era



War of Independence
One-party period
Multi-party period





By topic




Ancient Anatolians
Constitutional
Economic
Military
Thracians
Timeline of Turkish history
Turkic migration








Geography











Capes
Cities
Districts
Earthquakes
Environmental issues
Gulfs and bays
Islands
Lakes
Metropolitan municipalities
Mountains
Peninsulas
Provinces
Regions
Rivers





Places



Anatolia
Thrace (Eastern)
Turkish Riviera
Çukurova











Politics











Cabinet
Elections
Foreign relations
Military
Parliament
President
Prime Minister





Legal system



Constitution
Constitutional Court
Law enforcement
Official gazette





Controversies



Deep state
Conspiracy theories in Turkey
EU accession
Kemalism
Neo-Ottomanism
Ottomanism
Political parties
Secularism
Northern Syria Security Belt
Northern Cyprus











Economy







Banks

central bank


Borsa Istanbul (stock exchange)
Companies
EU Customs Union
Industries
Lira (currency)
Southeastern Anatolia Project
Tourism
Transport

aviation
railways


Rankings








Society







Crime
Education
Languages

Turkish







Culture



Architecture

Ottoman architecture


Art
Cinema
Cuisine

wine


Dance
Drama (TV)
Festivals
Folklore
Human rights

LGBT


Literature
Media

newspapers
radio stations
TV


Music
Names
Public holidays
Religion

Islam


Smoking
Sport
Theatre





Demographics



Turkish people

list


Population

diaspora
immigration
Muhacir


Minorities

Arabs
Armenians
Bosniaks
Circassians
Kurds







Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Motto
Presidential seal












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category

















v
t
e


 Peninsulas of Turkey



Main peninsulas



Anadolu (Anatolia)
Trakya (Thrace)





Peninsulas in Thrace



Çatalca
Gelibolu





Peninsulas in Anatolia



Boztepe
Kocaeli
Armutlu
Kapıdağ
Biga
Karaburun
Güvercin
Dilek
Bodrum
Datça
Bozburun
Çukurbağ





Related geographical features



Capes of Turkey
Bays of Turkey
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anatolia&oldid=818430435"					Categories: AnatoliaPeninsulas of AsiaGeography of Western AsiaNear EastGeography of ArmeniaGeography of TurkeyPeninsulas of TurkeyRegions of TurkeyRegions of AsiaAncient Near EastAncient Greek geographyPhysiographic provincesHidden categories: Use mdy dates from June 2013Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Turkish-language textArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2012Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formats