This article is about churches in full communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury. For the Christian tradition originating in the Church of England, see Anglicanism.
"Anglican Church" redirects here. For other uses, see Anglican Church (disambiguation).



Anglican Communion



Canterbury Cathedral



Type
Communion


Classification
Protestant


Orientation
Anglican


Polity
Episcopal


Primate
of All England
Archbishop of Canterbury
Justin Welby


General Secretary
Josiah Idowu-Fearon


Headquarters
Canterbury Cathedral, Canterbury, England


Founder
Archbishop Charles Longley


Origin
1867
Lambeth Conference, London, England


Separations
Continuing Anglican movement (1977)


Members
85 million


Official website
www.anglicancommunion.org




Anglican Communion





Part of a series on Anglicanism


Organisation





Archbishop of Canterbury




Justin Welby




Anglican Communion history
Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting
Lambeth Conference
Anglican Consultative Council
Bishops
Episcopal polity





Theology





Christian theology

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Doctrine
Thirty-Nine Articles
Books of Homilies
Caroline Divines
Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral
Sacraments
Mary
Saints
Ecumenism
Ordination of women
Homosexuality
Windsor Report





Liturgy and worship





Book of Common Prayer
Morning / Evening Prayer
Eucharist
Liturgical year
Biblical Canon
Churchmanship

High
Low
Central
Broad







Other topics





Monasticism
Music
Christian prayer
Christian art





 Anglicanism portal





v
t
e





The Anglican Communion is the fourth largest Christian communion with 85 million members,[1][2] founded in 1867 in London, England. It consists of the Church of England and national and regional Anglican episcopal polities in full communion with it,[3] with traditional origins of their doctrines summarised in the Thirty-nine Articles (1571). Archbishop Justin Welby of Canterbury acts as a focus of unity, recognised as primus inter pares ("first among equals"), but does not exercise authority in the provinces outside England.
The Anglican Communion was founded at the Lambeth Conference in 1867 in London, England, under the leadership of Charles Longley, Archbishop of Canterbury. The churches of the Anglican Communion considers themselves to be part of the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church, and to be both Catholic and Reformed. Although aligned with the Church of England, the communion has a multitude of belief, liturgies, and practices, including evangelical, liberal and Anglo-Catholic. Each retain their own legislative process and episcopal polity under the leadership of local primates. For some adherents, Anglicanism represents a non-papal Catholicism, for others a form of Protestantism though without guiding figure such as Luther, Knox, Calvin, Zwingli or Wesley,[4] or for yet others a combination of the two.
Most of its 85 million members live in the Anglosphere of former British territories. Full participation in the sacramental life of each church is available to all communicant members. Due to their historical link to England (Ecclesia Anglicana means "English Church"), some of the member churches are known as Anglican, such as the Anglican Church of Canada. Some, for example the Church of Ireland, the Scottish and American Episcopal churches, and some other associated churches have a separate name.



Contents


1 Ecclesiology, polity and ethos
2 Chicago Lambeth Quadrilateral
3 Instruments of communion
4 Provinces

4.1 Notes


5 History

5.1 Global spread of Anglicanism
5.2 Lambeth 1998


6 Ecumenical relations
7 Historic episcopate
8 Controversies

8.1 Same-sex unions and LGBT clergy


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References

11.1 Citations
11.2 Bibliography


12 Further reading
13 External links



Ecclesiology, polity and ethos[edit]
Main article: Anglican doctrine






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Anglican Communion has no official legal existence nor any governing structure which might exercise authority over the member churches. There is an Anglican Communion Office in London, under the aegis of the Archbishop of Canterbury, but it only serves in a supporting and organisational role. The Communion is held together by a shared history, expressed in its ecclesiology, polity and ethos and also by participation in international consultative bodies.
Three elements have been important in holding the Communion together: first, the shared ecclesial structure of the component churches, manifested in an episcopal polity maintained through the apostolic succession of bishops and synodical government; second, the principle of belief expressed in worship, investing importance in approved prayer books and their rubrics; and third, the historical documents and the writings of early Anglican divines that have influenced the ethos of the Communion.
Originally, the Church of England was self-contained and relied for its unity and identity on its own history, its traditional legal and episcopal structure and its status as an established church of the state. As such Anglicanism was, from the outset, a movement with an explicitly episcopal polity, a characteristic which has been vital in maintaining the unity of the Communion by conveying the episcopate's role in manifesting visible catholicity and ecumenism.
Early in its development, Anglicanism developed a vernacular prayer book, called the Book of Common Prayer. Unlike other traditions, Anglicanism has never been governed by a magisterium nor by appeal to one founding theologian, nor by an extra-credal summary of doctrine (such as the Westminster Confession of the Presbyterian Church). Instead, Anglicans have typically appealed to the Book of Common Prayer (1662) and its offshoots as a guide to Anglican theology and practice. This had the effect of inculcating the principle of Lex orandi, lex credendi (Latin loosely translated as "the law of praying [is] the law of believing") as the foundation of Anglican identity and confession.
Protracted conflict through the seventeenth century with more radical Protestants on the one hand and Catholics who recognised the primacy of the Pope on the other, resulted in an association of churches that were both deliberately vague about doctrinal principles, yet bold in developing parameters of acceptable deviation. These parameters were most clearly articulated in the various rubrics of the successive prayer books, as well as the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion. These Articles have historically shaped and continue to direct the ethos of the Communion, an ethos reinforced by their interpretation and expansion by such influential early theologians as Richard Hooker, Lancelot Andrewes, John Cosin, and others.
With the expansion of the British Empire, and hence the growth of Anglicanism outside Great Britain and Ireland, the Communion sought to establish new vehicles of unity. The first major expression of this were the Lambeth Conferences of the communion's bishops, first convened by Archbishop of Canterbury Charles Longley in 1869. From the beginning, these were not intended to displace the autonomy of the emerging provinces of the Communion, but to "discuss matters of practical interest, and pronounce what we deem expedient in resolutions which may serve as safe guides to future action."
Chicago Lambeth Quadrilateral[edit]
One of the enduringly influential early resolutions of the conference was the so-called Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888. Its intent was to provide the basis for discussions of reunion with the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches, but it had the ancillary effect of establishing parameters of Anglican identity. It establishes four principles with these words:

That, in the opinion of this Conference, the following Articles supply a basis on which approach may be by God's blessing made towards Home Reunion:


(a) The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, as "containing all things necessary to salvation," and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith.
(b) The Apostles' Creed, as the Baptismal Symbol; and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the Christian faith.
(c) The two Sacraments ordained by Christ Himself - Baptism and the Supper of the Lord - ministered with unfailing use of Christ's Words of Institution, and of the elements ordained by Him.
(d) The Historic Episcopate, locally adapted in the methods of its administration to the varying needs of the nations and peoples called of God into the Unity of His Church.[5]

Instruments of communion[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



As mentioned above, the Anglican Communion has no international juridical organisation. The Archbishop of Canterbury's role is strictly symbolic and unifying and the communion's three international bodies are consultative and collaborative, their resolutions having no legal effect on the autonomous provinces of the communion. Taken together, however, the four do function as "instruments of communion", since all churches of the communion participate in them. In order of antiquity, they are:




The Chair of St Augustine (the episcopal throne in Canterbury Cathedral, Kent), seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury in his role as head of the Anglican Communion[a]



The Archbishop of Canterbury functions as the spiritual head of the Communion.[6] He is the focus of unity, since no church claims membership in the Communion without being in communion with him. The present incumbent is Justin Welby.
The Lambeth Conference[7] (first held in 1867) is the oldest international consultation. It is a forum for bishops of the Communion to reinforce unity and collegiality through manifesting the episcopate, to discuss matters of mutual concern, and to pass resolutions intended to act as guideposts. It is held roughly every ten years and invitation is by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The Anglican Consultative Council[7] (first met in 1971) was created by a 1968 Lambeth Conference resolution, and meets usually at three-yearly intervals. The council consists of representative bishops, clergy, and laity chosen by the thirty-eight provinces. The body has a permanent secretariat, the Anglican Communion Office, of which the Archbishop of Canterbury is president.
The Primates' Meeting[7] (first met in 1979) is the most recent manifestation of international consultation and deliberation, having been first convened by Archbishop Donald Coggan as a forum for "leisurely thought, prayer and deep consultation".

Since there is no binding authority in the Anglican Communion, these international bodies are a vehicle for consultation and persuasion. In recent years, persuasion has tipped over into debates over conformity in certain areas of doctrine, discipline, worship and ethics. The most notable example has been the objection of many provinces of the communion (particularly in Africa and Asia) to the changing role of homosexuals in the North American churches (e.g., by blessing same-sex unions and ordaining and consecrating gays and lesbians in same-sex relationships) and to the process by which changes were undertaken. (See Anglican realignment.)
Those who objected condemned these actions as unscriptural, unilateral, and without the agreement of the Communion prior to these steps being taken. In response, the American Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada answered that the actions had been undertaken after lengthy scriptural and theological reflection, legally in accordance with their own canons and constitutions and after extensive consultation with the provinces of the communion.
The Primates' Meeting voted to request the two churches to withdraw their delegates from the 2005 meeting of the Anglican Consultative Council. Canada and the United States decided to attend the meeting but without exercising their right to vote. They have not been expelled or suspended, since there is no mechanism in this voluntary association to suspend or expel an independent province of the communion. Since membership is based on a province's communion with Canterbury, expulsion would require the Archbishop of Canterbury's refusal to be in communion with the affected jurisdictions. In line with the suggestion of the Windsor Report, Rowan Williams (the previous Archbishop of Canterbury) established a working group to examine the feasibility of an Anglican covenant which would articulate the conditions for communion in some fashion.[8]
Provinces[edit]




A world map showing the provinces of the Anglican Communion:



  Autonomous churches
  Episcopal Church of the United States
  Church in the Province of the West Indies
  Anglican Church in Central America
  Anglican Church of the Southern Cone of America
  Anglican Church of Southern Africa
  Church of the Province of Central Africa
  Church of the Province of West Africa


  Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East
  Church of the Province of the Indian Ocean
  Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
  Church of the Province of Melanesia
  Diocese in Europe of the Church of England
  Extra-provincial to the Archbishop of Canterbury
  Church of the Province of South East Asia
  No organised Anglican presence



Note that the Church of Ireland serves both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland and the Anglican Church of Korea serves South Korea and, theoretically, North Korea. Indian Anglicanism is divided into a Church of North India and a Church of South India. The Diocese in Europe (formally the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe), in the Province of Canterbury, is also present in Portugal and Spain. The Episcopal Church, USA affiliated Convocation of Episcopal Churches in Europe has affiliates in France, Belgium, Austria, Switzerland, Italy and Kazakhstan.




All thirty-nine provinces of the Anglican Communion are autonomous, each with its own primate and governing structure. These provinces may take the form of national churches (such as in Canada, Uganda, or Japan) or a collection of nations (such as the West Indies, Central Africa, or Southeast Asia).


Provinces & National Churches
Territorial Jurisdiction
Membership (in thousands of people)


Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
Aotearoa New Zealand, Cook Islands, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga
581[9]


Anglican Church of Australia
Australia
3,900[10]


Church of Bangladesh
Bangladesh
16[11]


Anglican Episcopal Church of Brazil
Brazil
120[12]


Province of the Anglican Church of Burundi
Burundi
800[13]


Anglican Church of Canada
Canada
1,600[14]


Church of the Province of Central Africa
Botswana, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe
900[15]


Anglican Church in Central America
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama
35


Province of the Anglican Church of the Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo
500[16]


Church of England comprising the Province of Canterbury and the Province of York
England, Guernsey, Isle of Man, Jersey, Europe
26,000[17]


Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui
Hong Kong, Macau
29[18]


Church of the Province of the Indian Ocean
Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles
505


Church of Ireland comprising the Province of Armagh and the Province of Dublin
Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland
410[18]


Nippon Sei Ko Kai
Japan
57[19]


Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East
Algeria, Bahrain, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
40[20]


Anglican Church of Kenya
Kenya
5,000[21]


Anglican Church of Korea
South Korea, North Korea
65[22]


Anglican Church of Melanesia
New Caledonia, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
200[23]


Anglican Church of Mexico
Mexico
100[24]


Church of the Province of Myanmar
Myanmar
62[25]


Church of Nigeria
Nigeria
18,000[26]


Church of North India
Bhutan, India
1,500[27]


Church of Pakistan
Pakistan
500[28]


Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea
167


Episcopal Church in the Philippines
Philippines
125[29]


Province of the Anglican Church of Rwanda
Rwanda
1,000[30]


Scottish Episcopal Church
Scotland
44[31]


Anglican Church of South America
Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay
23[32]


Church of the Province of South East Asia
Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam
98


Church of South India
India, Sri Lanka
4,000[33]


Province of the Episcopal Church of South Sudan
South Sudan
3,500


Anglican Church of Southern Africa
Angola, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Saint Helena, South Africa, Swaziland
3,000 - 4,000[34]


Province of the Episcopal Church of Sudan
Sudan
1,100


Anglican Church of Tanzania
Tanzania
2,000[35]


Church of the Province of Uganda
Uganda
8,000[17]


Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America
British Virgin Islands, Colombia, Curaçao, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Europe, Guam, Haiti, Honduras, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, Taiwan, United States, United States Virgin Islands, Venezuela
2,000[36]


Church in Wales
Wales
84[18]


Church of the Province of West Africa
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Senegal, Sierra Leone
300[37]


Church in the Province of the West Indies
Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saba, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sint Eustatius, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands
770[38]


Notes[edit]

In addition, there are six extraprovincial churches, five of which are under the metropolitical authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury.


Extra-Provincial Church
Metropolitan
Territorial Jurisdiction


Anglican Church of Bermuda
Archbishop of Canterbury
Bermuda


Church of Ceylon
Archbishop of Canterbury
Sri Lanka


Episcopal Church of Cuba
Metropolitan Council comprising:



Primate of the Anglican Church of Canada
Archbishop of the West Indies
Presiding Bishop of the Episcopal Church (USA)




Cuba


Parish of the Falkland Islands
Archbishop of Canterbury
Falkland Islands


Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church
Archbishop of Canterbury
Portugal


Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church
Archbishop of Canterbury
Spain


In addition to other member churches, the churches of the Anglican Communion are in full communion with the Old Catholic churches of the Union of Utrecht and the Scandinavian Lutheran churches of the Porvoo Communion in Europe, the India-based Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian and Malabar Independent Syrian churches and the Philippine Independent Church, also known as the Aglipayan Church.
History[edit]
See also: History of the Anglican Communion






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Anglican Communion traces much of its growth to the older mission organisations of the Church of England such as the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (founded 1698), the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (founded 1701) and the Church Missionary Society (founded 1799).[39][b][c] The Church of England (which until the 20th century included the Church in Wales) initially separated from the Roman Catholic Church in 1538 in the reign of King Henry VIII, reunited in 1555 under Queen Mary I and then separated again in 1570 under Queen Elizabeth I (the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated Elizabeth I in 1570 in response to the Act of Supremacy 1559).
The Church of England has always thought of itself not as a new foundation but rather as a reformed continuation of the ancient "English Church" (Ecclesia Anglicana) and a reassertion of that church's rights. As such it was a distinctly national phenomenon. The Church of Scotland was formed as a separate church from the Roman Catholic Church as a result of the Scottish Reformation in 1560 and the later formation of the Scottish Episcopal Church began in 1582 in the reign of James VI of Scotland over disagreements about the role of bishops.
The oldest-surviving Anglican church building outside the British Isles (Britain and Ireland) is St Peter's Church in St. George's, Bermuda, established in 1612 (though the actual building had to be rebuilt several times over the following century). This is also the oldest surviving non-Roman Catholic church in the New World. It remained part of the Church of England until 1978 when the Anglican Church of Bermuda separated. The Church of England was the established church not only in England, but in its trans-Oceanic colonies.
Thus the only member churches of the present Anglican Communion existing by the mid-18th century were the Church of England, its closely linked sister church the Church of Ireland (which also separated from Roman Catholicism under Henry VIII) and the Scottish Episcopal Church which for parts of the 17th and 18th centuries was partially underground (it was suspected of Jacobite sympathies).
Global spread of Anglicanism[edit]
The enormous expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries of the British Empire brought Anglicanism along with it. At first all these colonial churches were under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. After the American Revolution, the parishes in the newly independent country found it necessary to break formally from a church whose supreme governor was (and remains) the British monarch. Thus they formed their own dioceses and national church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, in a mostly amicable separation.
At about the same time, in the colonies which remained linked to the crown, the Church of England began to appoint colonial bishops. In 1787 a bishop of Nova Scotia was appointed with a jurisdiction over all of British North America; in time several more colleagues were appointed to other cities in present-day Canada. In 1814 a bishop of Calcutta was made; in 1824 the first bishop was sent to the West Indies and in 1836 to Australia. By 1840 there were still only ten colonial bishops for the Church of England; but even this small beginning greatly facilitated the growth of Anglicanism around the world. In 1841 a "Colonial Bishoprics Council" was set up and soon many more dioceses were created.
In time, it became natural to group these into provinces and a metropolitan was appointed for each province. Although it had at first been somewhat established in many colonies, in 1861 it was ruled that, except where specifically established, the Church of England had just the same legal position as any other church. Thus a colonial bishop and colonial diocese was by nature quite a different thing from their counterparts back home. In time bishops came to be appointed locally rather than from England and eventually national synods began to pass ecclesiastical legislation independent of England.
A crucial step in the development of the modern communion was the idea of the Lambeth Conferences (discussed above). These conferences demonstrated that the bishops of disparate churches could manifest the unity of the church in their episcopal collegiality despite the absence of universal legal ties. Some bishops were initially reluctant to attend, fearing that the meeting would declare itself a council with power to legislate for the church; but it agreed to pass only advisory resolutions. These Lambeth Conferences have been held roughly every 10 years since 1878 (the second such conference) and remain the most visible coming-together of the whole Communion.
Lambeth 1998[edit]
See also: Homosexuality and the Anglican Communion and Lambeth Conferences § Thirteenth: 1998






The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The Lambeth Conference of 1998 included what has been seen by Philip Jenkins and others as a "watershed in global Christianity". The 1998 Lambeth Conference considered the issue of the theology of same-sex attraction in relation to human sexuality. At this 1998 conference for the first time in centuries the Christians of developing regions, especially, Africa, Asia, and Latin America, prevailed over the bishops of more prosperous countries (many from the USA, Canada, and the UK) who supported a redefinition of Anglican doctrine. Seen in this light 1998 is a date that marked the shift from a West-dominated Christianity to one wherein the growing churches of the two-thirds world are predominant,[42] but the gay bishop controversy in subsequent years led to the reassertion of Western dominance, this time of the liberal variety.[citation needed]
Ecumenical relations[edit]
For more details on the ongoing dialogue between Anglicanism and the wider Church, see Anglican Communion and ecumenism.
Historic episcopate[edit]
The churches of the Anglican Communion have traditionally held that ordination in the historic episcopate is a core element in the validity of clerical ordinations.[43] The Roman Catholic Church does not recognise most Anglican orders (see Apostolicae curae).[44] Some Eastern Orthodox Churches have issued statements to the effect that Anglican orders could be accepted, yet have still reordained former Anglican clergy; other Eastern Orthodox churches have rejected Anglican orders altogether. Eastern Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware explains this apparent discrepancy as follows:

Anglican clergy who join the Orthodox Church are reordained; but [some Orthodox Churches hold that] if Anglicanism and Orthodoxy were to reach full unity in the faith, perhaps such reordination might not be found necessary. It should be added, however, that a number of individual Orthodox theologians hold that under no circumstances would it be possible to recognise the validity of Anglican Orders.[45]

Controversies[edit]
See also: Homosexuality and Anglicanism and Anglican realignment
One effect of the communion's dispersed authority has been that conflict and controversy can arise over the effect divergent practices and doctrines in one part of the Communion have on others.[46] Disputes that had been confined to the Church of England could be dealt with legislatively in that realm, but as the Communion spread out into new nations and disparate cultures, such controversies multiplied and intensified. These controversies have generally been of two types: liturgical and social.[47]

Anglo-Catholicism

The first such controversy of note concerned that of the growing influence of the Catholic Revival manifested in the tractarian and so-called ritualism controversies of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.[48] This controversy produced the Free Church of England and, in the United States and Canada, the Reformed Episcopal Church.

Social changes

Later, rapid social change and the dissipation of British cultural hegemony over its former colonies contributed to disputes over the role of women, the parameters of marriage and divorce, and the practices of contraception and abortion.[citation needed] In the late 1970s, the Continuing Anglican movement produced a number of new church bodies in opposition to women's ordination, prayer book changes, and the new understandings concerning marriage.
Same-sex unions and LGBT clergy[edit]
More recently, disagreements over homosexuality have strained the unity of the communion as well as its relationships with other Christian denominations, leading to another round of withdrawals from the Anglican Communion.[49] Some churches were founded outside the Anglican Communion in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, largely in opposition to the ordination of openly homosexual bishops and other clergy and are usually referred to as belonging to the Anglican realignment movement, or else as "orthodox" Anglicans.[49] These disagreements were especially noted when the Episcopal Church (US) consecrated an openly gay bishop in a same-sex relationship, Gene Robinson, in 2003; then, the debate re-ignited when the Church of England agreed to allow clergy to enter into same-sex civil partnerships in 2005.[50] The Church of Nigeria opposed the Episcopal Church's decision as well as the Church of England's approval for civil partnerships.[51]
"The more liberal provinces that are open to changing Church doctrine on marriage in order to allow for same-sex unions include Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, Scotland, South India, South Africa, the US and Wales".[52] The Church of England does not allow same-gender marriages or blessing rites, but does permit special prayer services for same-sex couples following a civil marriage or partnership.[53] The Church of England also permits clergy to enter into same-sex civil partnerships.[54] The Church of Ireland has no official position on civil unions, and one senior cleric has entered into a same-sex civil partnership.[55] The Church of Ireland recognised that it will "treat civil partners the same as spouses."[56] The Anglican Church of Australia does not have an official position on homosexuality.[57]
The conservative Anglican churches, encouraging the realignment movement, are more concentrated in the Global South. For example, the Anglican Church of Kenya, the Church of Nigeria, and Church of Uganda have opposed homosexuality.[58] GAFCON, or a fellowship of conservative Anglican churches, has appointed 'missionary bishops' in response to the disagreements with the perceived liberalisation in the Anglican churches in North America and Europe.[59]
Such debates about social theology and ethics, have occurred at the same time as debates on prayer book revision and the acceptable grounds for achieving full communion with non-Anglican churches.[60]
See also[edit]


Anglicanism portal




Affirming Catholicism
Anglican ministry
Anglicans Online
Anglo-Catholicism
Church Mission Society
Church's Ministry Among Jewish People
Flag of the Anglican Communion
Liberal Anglo-Catholicism
Reform (Anglican)
List of the largest Protestant bodies


Notes[edit]


^ The Chair of St Augustine is the seat of the Archbishop of Canterbury in his role as head of the Anglican Communion. Archbishops of Canterbury are enthroned twice: firstly as diocesan ordinary (and Metropolitan and Primate of the Church of England) in the archbishop's throne, by the Archdeacon of Canterbury; and secondly as leader of the worldwide church in the Chair of St Augustine by the senior (by length of service) Archbishop of the Anglican Communion. The stone chair is therefore of symbolic significance throughout Anglicanism.
^ Efforts to grow and develop the church in lands outside the British Isles began with the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (1698) and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (1701) but received a significant boost from the Church Mission Society (1799).[40]
^ The Church Missionary Society, originally called the Society for Missions to Africa and the East, was founded in 1799... Though later in date than the S.P.C.K. and the S.P.G. it became the first effective organ of the C. of E. for missions to the heathen... Its theology has been consistently Evangelical.[41]


References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ The Anglican Communion official website - "Provincial Registry"
^ Worsley 2015.
^ "St Francis of Assisi Episcopal Church History". 20 July 2012. 
^ Avis 1998, pp. 417–419.
^ The Book of Common Prayer of the Episcopal Church, Seabury Press, 1979, p. 877
^ "Anglican Communion". www.archbishopofcanterbury.org. Retrieved 4 October 2015. 
^ a b c "Anglican international bodies". www.archbishopofcanterbury.org. Retrieved 4 October 2015. 
^ "Archbishop of Canterbury: address to General Synod on the Anglican Communion". ACNS. 7 July 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-07-14. 
^ Polynesia, Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and. "About / Home - Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia". www.anglican.org.nz. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of Australia — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of Bangladesh — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Episcopal Anglican Church of Brazil — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of Burundi — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Number of Canadian Anglicans, Parishes and Congregations - Anglican Church of Canada". Anglican Church of Canada. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of the Province of Central Africa — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Church of Christ in Congo - Anglican Community of Congo — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ a b "A History of Global Anglicanism - Cambridge University Press". www.cambridge.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ a b c "Church Society - Issues - Anglican Communion - How Big?". churchsociety.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church in Japan — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Anglican Church of Kenya — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of Korea — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of Melanesia — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Anglicanos mexicanos rechazan unirse a la Iglesia católica". www.cronica.com.mx. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of the Province of Myanmar — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Anglican Heritage With Emphasis on The Church of Nigeria (Anglican Communion)". anglican-nig.org. Church of Nigeria. August 15, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2016. 
^ "Church of North India — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of Pakistan — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Episcopal Church in the Philippines". archived.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Province of the Anglican Church in Rwanda — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Scottish Episcopal Church — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of South America — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "CSI Christ Church - Location Map". www.csimichigan.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of Southern Africa (ACSA)". www.anglicanchurchsa.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Anglican Church of Tanzania — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Episcopal Beliefs | Episcopal Diocese of Texas". www.epicenter.org. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "Church of the Province of West Africa — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "Church in the Province of the West Indies — World Council of Churches". www.oikoumene.org. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ "A brief history of CMS". Church Mission Society. 1999. Retrieved 2 December 2012. Much of what we call the Anglican Communion today traces its origins to CMS work. 
^ Melton 2005, p. 28.
^ Cross 1957, p. 305.
^ Jenkins 2002, pp. 202–203; Miller 2014, p. 68.
^ Whipple et al. 1896.
^ O'Riordan 1907.
^ "Excerpts from the Orthodox Church by Bishop Kallistos Ware". Fatheralexander.org. Retrieved 20 July 2012. 
^ McKinnon, Trzebiatowska & Brittain 2011, pp. 355-37.
^ Chapman 2006.
^ Pickering 2008.
^ a b Brittain & McKinnon 2011.
^ "BBC NEWS | UK | England | Beds/Bucks/Herts | Gay cleric's 'wedding' to partner". news.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-06-21. 
^ "Revd Akinola's Response to Church of England Civil Partnerships Stance | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2017-06-21. 
^ "Church split over homosexuality would be a failure - Welby". bbc.com. BBC. Retrieved April 11, 2016. 
^ "Church offers prayers after same-sex weddings - but bans gay priests from marrying". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-06-14. 
^ Bates, Stephen (2010-02-11). "Church of England General Synod extends pension rights for gay partners". The Guardian. Retrieved 2016-06-16. 
^ "Minister Rev Tom Gordon civil partnership 'welcomed' - BBC News". BBC News. Retrieved 2016-06-16. 
^ "Listening process vital to bring gay, lesbian clergy in from margins". The Irish Times. Retrieved 2017-06-21. 
^ "BBC NEWS | Special Reports | Anglican Church around the world". news.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-06-21. 
^ Sherwood, Harriet (2016-01-14). "Anglican church avoids split over gay rights – but liberals pay price". The Guardian. Retrieved 2016-06-16. 
^ "GAFCON considers a missionary bishop for UK". www.churchtimes.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-06-21. 
^ Ward 2006.


Bibliography[edit]


Avis, Paul (1998). "What is 'Anglicanism'?". In Booty, John E.; Sykes, Stephen; Knight, Jonathan. The Study of Anglicanism (rev. ed.). London: SPCK (published 2004). pp. 417–419. ISBN 978-1-4514-1118-8. 
Brittain, Christopher Craig; McKinnon, Andrew (2011). "Homosexuality and the Construction of "Anglican Orthodoxy": The Symbolic Politics of the Anglican Communion". Sociology of Religion. 72 (3): 351–373. doi:10.1093/socrel/srq088. hdl:2164/3055. ISSN 1069-4404. 
Chapman, Mark (2006). Anglicanism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-157819-9. 
Cross, F. L., ed. (1957). The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. London: Oxford University Press. 
Jenkins, Philip (2002). The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-803341-7. 
McKinnon, Andrew M.; Trzebiatowska, Marta; Brittain, Christopher Craig (2011). "Bourdieu, Capital, and Conflict in a Religious Field: The Case of the 'Homosexuality' Conflict in the Anglican Communion". Journal of Contemporary Religion. 26 (3): 355–370. doi:10.1080/13537903.2011.616033. hdl:2164/4260. ISSN 1353-7903. 
Melton, J. Gordon, ed. (2005). "Anglican Communion/Anglican Consultative Council". Encyclopedia of Protestantism. Encyclopedias of World Religions. New York: Facts on File. pp. 27–29. ISBN 978-0-8160-6983-5. Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
Miller, Duane Alexander (2014). "The Bricolage of Global Anglicanism". Anglican and Episcopal History. 83 (1): 67–73. ISSN 0896-8039. JSTOR 43049823. Retrieved 2 February 2015. 
O'Riordan, Michael (1907). "Apostolicae Curae". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company. pp. 644–645. 
Pickering, W. S. F. (2008). Anglo-Catholicism: A Study in Religious Ambiguity (rev. ed.). Cambridge, England: James Clarke & Co. ISBN 978-0-227-67988-3. 
Ward, Kevin (2006). A History of Global Anglicanism. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00866-2. 
Whipple, H. B.; Gilbert, M. N.; Nichols, Harry P.; Wright, John; Faude, John J.; Ten Broeck, Wm. P. (1896). Unity and the Lambeth Declaration: Lectures Under the Auspices of the Minnesota Church Club, 1896. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: The Young Churchman. Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
Worsley, Howard (2015). "Anglican Church Christian Education". In Kurian, George Thomas; Lamport, Mark A. Encyclopedia of Christian Education. 1. London: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-8108-8493-9. 


Further reading[edit]


D'Arcy, Charles Frederick; Jayne, Francis John; Paige Cox, W.L. (1923). Anglican Essays: A Collective Review of the Principles and Special Opportunities of the Anglican Communion as Catholic and Reformed : with Extracts from the Pastorals of the Late Bishop Jayne [Francis John Jayne]. Macmillan. 
Fahlbusch, Erwin; Bromiley, Geoffrey William, eds. (1999). The Encyclopedia of Christianity. Vol. 1. Eerdmans. pp. 57–59. ISBN 978-90-04-11316-9. 
Hebert, A. G. The Form of the Church. London: Faber and Faber, 1944.
Wild, John. What is the Anglican Communion?, in series, The Advent Papers. Cincinnati, Ohio: Forward Movement Publications, [196-]. Note.: Expresses the "Anglo-Catholic" viewpoint.


External links[edit]

Official website
Anglicans Online
Decentralised nature of worldwide Anglicanism
Project Canterbury Anglican historical documents from around the world
Brief description and history of the Anglican Communion







v
t
e


Anglican Communion



General



Supreme Governor of the Church of England
Episcopal polity

Archbishop of Canterbury
Anglican Communion Primates Meeting


Lambeth Conferences
Anglican Consultative Council
Homosexuality

Windsor Report


Ordination of women
Ecumenism








African provinces



Burundi
Central Africa
Congo
Indian Ocean
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Kenya
Nigeria
Rwanda
Southern Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
West Africa





American provinces



Brazil
Canada
Central America
Mexico
South America
United States of America
West Indies





Asian provinces



Bangladesh (United)
Hong Kong and Macao
Japan
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Korea
Myanmar (Burma)
North India (United)
Pakistan (United)
Philippines
South East Asia
South India (United)





European provinces



England
Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Oceanian provinces



Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
Australia
Melanesia
Papua New Guinea





Extra-provincial churches



Bermuda
Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
Cuba
Falkland Islands
Portugal
Spain





Churches in full communion



Mar Thoma Syrian Church
Malabar Syrian Church
Union of Utrecht
Philippine Independent Church
Porvoo Communion






 Anglicanism portal










v
t
e


Anglicanism



Communions



Anglican Communion
Anglican realignment
Continuing Anglican movement
Personal ordinariate








History



History of Christianity in Britain

Celtic Christianity
Anglo-Saxon Christianity


Æthelberht
Edwin
Offa
Augustine of Canterbury
Paulinus
Hygeberht
Bede
Medieval Architecture
Henry VIII
English Reformation
Cranmer
Dissolution of Monasteries
Church of England
Church of Ireland
Edward VI
Elizabeth I
Parker
Hooker
James I
King James Version
Charles I
Laud
Caroline Divines
Nonjuring schism
Oxford Movement
Anglo-Catholicism
Modern Church





Theology



Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Thirty-nine Articles
Lambeth Quadrilateral
Affirmation of St. Louis
Sacraments
Eucharist
Mary
Saints





Liturgy and worship



Book of Common Prayer
Morning / Evening Prayer
Liturgical year
Biblical canon
Books of Homilies
High / Low / Broad church





Other topics



Converts to Anglicanism
Ministry
Monasticism
Music
Anglican prayer beads
Anglicanism of the Americas






 Portal









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anglican_Communion&oldid=817798749"					Categories: Anglican Communion1867 establishments in EnglandReligious organizations established in 1867Hidden categories: Use British English from June 2016Articles needing additional references from June 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from November 2014NPOV disputes from October 2017All NPOV disputesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from October 2015