For other uses, see Angola (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 12°30′S 18°30′E﻿ / ﻿12.500°S 18.500°E﻿ / -12.500; 18.500


Republic of Angola
República de Angola (Portuguese)
Repubilika ya Ngola
(Kikongo, Kimbundu, Umbundu)







Flag



Emblem






Motto: 


Virtus Unita Fortior  (Latin)
(English: "Virtue is stronger when united")







Anthem: Angola Avante
Onwards Angola











Location of  Angola  (dark blue)
in the African Union  (light blue)





Capital
and largest city
Luanda
8°50′S 13°20′E﻿ / ﻿8.833°S 13.333°E﻿ / -8.833; 13.333


Official languages
Portuguese


Recognised national languages


6 languages

Kikongo
Chokwe
Umbundu
Kimbundu
Nganguela
Kwanyama





Ethnic groups (2000)
36% Ovimbundu
25% Ambundu
13% Bakongo
22% other African
2% Mestiço
1% Chinese
1% European


Demonym
Angolan


Government
Unitary dominant-party presidential constitutional republic



• President

João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço



• Vice President

Bornito de Sousa


Legislature
National Assembly


Formation



• Portuguese colonization

1575



• Independence from Portugal, under Communist rule

11 November 1975



• United Nations full membership

22 November 1976



• Current constitution

21 January 2010


Area



• Total

1,246,700 km2 (481,400 sq mi) (22nd)



• Water (%)

negligible


Population



• 2014 census

25,789,024[1]



• Density

20.69/km2 (53.6/sq mi) (199th)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$193.935 billion[2] (64th)



• Per capita

$6,881[2] (107th)


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

$122.365 billion[2] (61st)



• Per capita

$4,342[2] (91st)


Gini (2009)
42.7[3]
medium


HDI (2015)
 0.533[4]
low · 150th


Currency
Kwanza (AOA)


Time zone
WAT (UTC+1)


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+244


ISO 3166 code
AO


Internet TLD
.ao


Angola (/æŋˈɡoʊlə/), officially the Republic of Angola (Portuguese: República de Angola pronounced [ɐ̃ˈɡɔlɐ]; Kikongo, Kimbundu and Umbundu: Repubilika ya Ngola), is a country in Southern Africa. It is the seventh-largest country in Africa, bordered by Namibia to the south, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north, Zambia to the east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The exclave province of Cabinda borders the Republic of the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The capital and largest city of Angola is Luanda.
Although inhabited since the Paleolithic Era, what is now Angola was molded by Portuguese colonisation. It began with, and was for centuries limited to, coastal settlements and trading posts established starting in the 16th century. In the 19th century, European settlers slowly and hesitantly began to establish themselves in the interior. The Portuguese colony that became Angola did not have its present borders until the early 20th century because of resistance by groups such as the Cuamato, the Kwanyama and the Mbunda.
After a protracted anti-colonial struggle, independence was achieved in 1975 as the Marxist-Leninist People's Republic of Angola, a one-party state supported by the Soviet Union and Cuba. The civil war between the ruling People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the insurgent anti-communist National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), supported by the United States and apartheid South Africa, lasted until 2002. It has since become a relatively stable unitary presidential republic.
Angola has vast mineral and petroleum reserves, and its economy is among the fastest-growing in the world, especially since the end of the civil war. But the standard of living remains low for most of the population, and life expectancy in Angola is among the lowest in the world, while infant mortality is among the highest.[5] Angola's economic growth is highly uneven, with most of the nation's wealth concentrated in a disproportionately small sector of the population.[6]
Angola is a member state of the United Nations, OPEC, African Union, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, and the Southern African Development Community. A highly multiethnic country, Angola's 25.8 million people span tribal groups, customs, and traditions. Angolan culture reflects centuries of Portuguese rule, in the predominance of the Portuguese language and of the Catholic Church.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Early migrations and political units
2.2 Portuguese colonisation
2.3 Rise of Angolan nationalism
2.4 Civil war
2.5 Ceasefire with UNITA


3 Geography
4 Climate
5 Politics

5.1 Armed forces
5.2 Police
5.3 Justice
5.4 Foreign relations
5.5 Human rights


6 Administrative divisions

6.1 Exclave of Cabinda


7 Economy

7.1 Agriculture
7.2 Transport
7.3 Telecommunications
7.4 Technology


8 Demographics

8.1 Languages
8.2 Religion
8.3 Largest cities


9 Culture
10 Health
11 Education
12 Sports
13 See also
14 Notes
15 References
16 External links



Etymology[edit]
The name Angola comes from the Portuguese colonial name Reino de Angola (Kingdom of Angola), which appeared as early as Dias de Novais's 1571 charter.[7] The toponym was derived by the Portuguese from the title ngola held by the kings of Ndongo. Ndongo in the highlands, between the Kwanza and Lukala Rivers, was nominally a possession of the Kingdom of Kongo, but was seeking greater independence in the 16th century.
History[edit]
Main article: History of Angola
Early migrations and political units[edit]




Territory comprising Kingdom of Ndongo, present-day Angola


Modern Angola was populated predominantly by nomadic Khoi and San prior to the first Bantu migrations. The Khoi and San peoples were neither pastoralists nor cultivators, but hunter-gatherers.[8] They were displaced by Bantu peoples arriving from the north, most of whom likely originated in what is today northwestern Nigeria and southern Niger.[9] Bantu speakers introduced the cultivation of bananas and taro, as well as large cattle herds, to Angola's central highlands and the Luanda plain.[10] To its south lay the Kingdom of Ndongo, from which the area of the later Portuguese colony was sometimes known as Dongo.[11]
Portuguese colonisation[edit]
Main articles: Colonial history of Angola and Portuguese Angola




Queen Nzinga in peace negotiations with the Portuguese governor in Luanda, 1657.


Portuguese explorer Diogo Cão reached the area in 1484.[11] The previous year, the Portuguese had established relations with the Kongo, which stretched at the time from modern Gabon in the north to the Kwanza River in the south. The Portuguese established their primary early trading post at Soyo, which is now the northernmost city in Angola apart from the Cabinda exclave. Paulo Dias de Novais founded São Paulo de Loanda (Luanda) in 1575 with a hundred families of settlers and four hundred soldiers. Benguela was fortified in 1587 and became a township in 1617.
The Portuguese established several other settlements, forts and trading posts along the Angolan coast, principally trading in Angolan slaves for Brazilian plantations. Local slave dealers provided a large number of slaves for the Portuguese Empire,[12] usually in exchange for manufactured goods from Europe.[13][14]
This part of the Atlantic slave trade continued until after Brazil's independence in the 1820s.[15]
Despite Portugal's territorial claims in Angola, its control over much of the country's vast interior was minimal.[11] In the 16th century Portugal gained control of the coast through a series of treaties and wars. Life for European colonists was difficult and progress slow. John Iliffe notes that "Portuguese records of Angola from the 16th century show that a great famine occurred on average every seventy years; accompanied by epidemic disease, it might kill one-third or one-half of the population, destroying the demographic growth of a generation and forcing colonists back into the river valleys".[16]




An illustration depicting Portuguese encounter with Kongo Royal family.


During the Portuguese Restoration War, the Dutch West India Company occupied the principal settlement of Luanda in 1641, using alliances with local peoples to carry out attacks against Portuguese holdings elsewhere.[15] A fleet under Salvador de Sá retook Luanda in 1648; reconquest of the rest of the territory was completed by 1650. New treaties with the Kongo were signed in 1649; others with Njinga's Kingdom of Matamba and Ndongo followed in 1656. The conquest of Pungo Andongo in 1671 was the last major Portuguese expansion from Luanda, as attempts to invade Kongo in 1670 and Matamba in 1681 failed. Colonial outposts also expanded inward from Benguela, but until the late 19th century the inroads from Luanda and Benguela were very limited.[11] Hamstrung by a series of political upheavals in the early 1800s, Portugal was slow to mount a large scale annexation of Angolan territory.[15]
The slave trade was abolished in Angola in 1836, and in 1854 the colonial government freed all its existing slaves.[15] Four years later, a more progressive administration appointed by Lisbon abolished slavery altogether. However, these decrees remained largely unenforceable, and the Portuguese depended on assistance from the Royal Navy to enforce their ban on the slave trade.[15] This coincided with a series of renewed military expeditions into the hinterland. By the mid-nineteenth century Portugal had established its dominion as far east as the Congo River and as far south as Mossâmedes.[15] Until the late 1880s, Lisbon entertained proposals to link Angola with its colony in Mozambique but was blocked by British and Belgian opposition.[17] In this period, the Portuguese came up against different forms of armed resistance from various peoples in Angola.[18]
The Berlin Conference in 1884–1885 set the colony's borders, delineating the boundaries of Portuguese claims in Angola,[17] although many details were unresolved until the 1920s.[19] Trade between Portugal and her African territories also rapidly increased as a result of protective tariffs, leading to increased development, and a wave of new Portuguese immigrants.[17]
Rise of Angolan nationalism[edit]
Main articles: Angolan War of Independence and Portuguese Colonial War




Portuguese troops on patrol during the Portuguese Colonial War.


Under colonial law, black Angolans were forbidden from forming political parties or labour unions.[20] The first nationalist movements did not take root until after World War II, spearheaded by a largely Westernised, Portuguese-speaking urban class which included many mestiços.[21] During the early 1960s they were joined by other associations stemming from ad hoc labour activism in the rural workforce.[20] Portugal's refusal to address increasing Angolan demands for self-determination provoked an armed conflict which erupted in 1961 with the Baixa de Cassanje revolt and gradually evolved into a protracted war of independence that persisted for the next twelve years.[22] Throughout the conflict, three militant nationalist movements with their own partisan guerrilla wings emerged from the fighting between the Portuguese government and local forces, supported to varying degrees by the Portuguese Communist Party.[21][23]
The National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA) recruited from Bakongo refugees in Zaire.[24] Benefiting from particularly favourable political circumstances in Léopoldville, and especially from a common border with Zaire, Angolan political exiles were able to build up a power base among a large expatriate community from related families, clans, and traditions.[25] People on both sides of the border spoke mutually intelligible dialects and enjoyed shared ties to the historical Kingdom of Kongo.[25] Though as foreigners skilled Angolans could not take advantage of Mobutu Sese Seko's state employment programme, some found work as middlemen for the absentee owners of various lucrative private ventures. The migrants eventually formed the FNLA with the intention of making a bid for political power upon their envisaged return to Angola.[25]
A largely Ovimbundu guerrilla initiative against the Portuguese in central Angola from 1966 was spearheaded by Jonas Savimbi and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA).[24] It remained handicapped by its geographic remoteness from friendly borders, the ethnic fragmentation of the Ovimbundu, and the isolation of peasants on European plantations where they had little opportunity to mobilise.[25]




FNLA insurgents being trained in Zaire in 1973


During the late 1950s, the rise of the Marxist-Leninist Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) in the east and Dembos hills north of Luanda came to hold special significance. Formed as a coalition resistance movement by the Angolan Communist Party,[22] the organisation's leadership remained predominantly Ambundu and courted public sector workers in Luanda.[24] Although both the MPLA and its rivals accepted material assistance from the Soviet Union or the People's Republic of China, the former harboured strong anti-imperialist views and was openly critical of the United States and its support for Portugal.[23] This allowed it to win important ground on the diplomatic front, soliciting support from nonaligned governments in Morocco, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, and the United Arab Republic.[22]
The MPLA attempted to move its headquarters from Conakry to Léopoldville in October 1961, renewing efforts to create a common front with the FNLA, then known as the Union of Angolan Peoples (UPA) and its leader Holden Roberto. Roberto turned down the offer.[22] When the MPLA first attempted to insert its own insurgents into Angola, the cadres were ambushed and annihilated by UPA partisans on Roberto's orders—setting a precedent for the bitter factional strife which would later ignite the Angolan Civil War.[22]
Civil war[edit]
Main article: Angolan Civil War
Further information: Alvor Agreement and Cuban intervention in Angola




Monument to the memory of Agostinho Neto and Angolan independence, in Luanda


Throughout the war of independence, the three rival nationalist movements were severely hampered by political and military factionalism, as well as their inability to unite guerrilla efforts against the Portuguese.[26] Between 1961 and 1975 the MPLA, UNITA, and the FNLA competed for influence in the Angolan population and the international community.[26] The Soviet Union and Cuba became especially sympathetic towards the MPLA and supplied that party with arms, ammunition, funding, and training.[26] They also backed UNITA militants until it became clear that the latter was at irreconcilable odds with the MPLA.[27]
The collapse of Portugal's Estado Novo government following the 1974 Carnation Revolution suspended all Portuguese military activity in Africa and the brokering of a ceasefire pending negotiations for Angolan independence.[26] Encouraged by the Organisation of African Unity, Holden Roberto, Jonas Savimbi, and MPLA chairman Agostinho Neto met in Mombasa in early January 1975 and agreed to form a coalition government.[28] This was ratified by the Alvor Agreement later that month, which called for general elections and set the country's independence date for 11 November 1975.[28] All three factions, however, followed up on the ceasefire by taking advantage of the gradual Portuguese withdrawal to seize various strategic positions, acquire more arms, and enlarge their militant forces.[28] The rapid influx of weapons from numerous external sources, especially the Soviet Union and the United States, as well as the escalation of tensions between the nationalist parties, fueled a new outbreak of hostilities.[28] With tacit American and Zairean support the FNLA began massing large numbers of troops in northern Angola in an attempt to gain military superiority.[26] Meanwhile, the MPLA began securing control of Luanda, a traditional Ambundu stronghold.[26] Sporadic violence broke out in Luanda over the next few months after the FNLA attacked MPLA forces in March 1975.[28] The fighting intensified with street clashes in April and May, and UNITA became involved after over two hundred of its members were massacred by an MPLA contingent that June.[28] An upswing in Soviet arms shipments to the MPLA influenced a decision by the Central Intelligence Agency to likewise provide substantial covert aid to the FNLA and UNITA.[29]
In August 1975, the MPLA requested direct assistance from the Soviet Union in the form of ground troops.[29] The Soviets declined, offering to send advisers but no troops; however, Cuba was more forthcoming and in late September dispatched nearly five hundred combat personnel to Angola, along with sophisticated weaponry and supplies.[27] By independence there were over a thousand Cuban soldiers in the country.[29] They were kept supplied by a massive airbridge carried out with Soviet aircraft.[29] The persistent buildup of Cuban and Soviet military aid allowed the MPLA to drive its opponents from Luanda and blunt an abortive intervention by Zairean and South African troops, which had deployed in a belated attempt to assist the FNLA and UNITA.[28] The FNLA was largely annihilated, although UNITA managed to withdraw its civil officials and militia from Luanda and seek sanctuary in the southern provinces.[26] From there, Savimbi continued to mount a determined insurgent campaign against the MPLA.[29]




An MPLA staff car burns after being destroyed in the fighting outside Novo Redondo (present day Sumbe) in late 1975.


Between 1975 and 1991, the MPLA implemented an economic and political system based on the principles of scientific socialism, incorporating central planning and a Marxist–Leninist one-party state.[30] It embarked on an ambitious programme of nationalisation, and the domestic private sector was essentially abolished.[30] Privately owned enterprises were nationalised and incorporated into a single umbrella of state-owned enterprises known as Unidades Economicas Estatais (UEE).[30] Under the MPLA, Angola experienced a significant degree of modern industrialisation.[30] However, corruption and graft also increased and public resources were either allocated inefficiently or simply embezzled by officials for personal enrichment.[31] The ruling party survived an attempted coup d'état by the Maoist-oriented Communist Organisation of Angola (OCA) in 1977, which was suppressed after a series of bloody political purges left thousands of OCA supporters dead.[32]
The MPLA abandoned its former Marxist ideology at its third party congress in 1990, and declared social democracy to be its new platform.[32] Angola subsequently became a member of the International Monetary Fund; restrictions on the market economy were also reduced in an attempt to draw foreign investment.[33] By May 1991 it reached a peace agreement with UNITA, the Bicesse Accords, which scheduled new general elections for September 1992.[33] When the MPLA secured a major electoral victory, UNITA objected to the results of both the presidential and legislative vote count and returned to war.[33]
Ceasefire with UNITA[edit]
Main article: 2000s in Angola




  Cabinda Province
  Republic of the Congo
  Democratic Republic of the Congo
  The rest of Angola



On 22 March 2002, Jonas Savimbi was killed in action against government troops. UNITA and the MPLA reached a cease-fire shortly afterwards. UNITA gave up its armed wing and assumed the role of a major opposition party. Although the political situation of the country began to stabilise, regular democratic processes did not prevail until the elections in Angola in 2008 and 2012 and the adoption of a new constitution in 2010, all of which strengthened the prevailing dominant-party system.
Angola has a serious humanitarian crisis; the result of the prolonged war, of the abundance of minefields, of the continued political (and to a much lesser degree) military activities in favour of the independence of the exclave of Cabinda (carried out in the context of the protracted Cabinda Conflict by the Frente para a Libertação do Enclave de Cabinda, (FLEC)), but most of all, by the depredation of the country's rich mineral resources by the régime.[citation needed] While most of the internally displaced have now settled around the capital, in the so-called musseques, the general situation for Angolans remains desperate.[34][35]
Drought in 2016 caused the worst food crisis in Southern Africa in 25 years. Drought affected 1.4 million people across seven of Angola's 18 provinces. Food prices rose and acute malnutrition rates doubled, with more than 95,000 children affected. Food insecurity was expected[by whom?] to worsen from July to December 2016.[36]
Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Angola
At 1,246,620 km2 (481,321 sq mi),[37] Angola is the world's twenty-third largest country. It is comparable in size to Mali, or twice the size of France or Texas. It lies mostly between latitudes 4° and 18°S, and longitudes 12° and 24°E.
Angola is bordered by Namibia to the south, Zambia to the east, the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north-east and the South Atlantic Ocean to the west. The coastal exclave of Cabinda in the north, borders the Republic of the Congo to the north, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the south.[38] Angola's capital, Luanda, lies on the Atlantic coast in the northwest of the country.

Geography of Angola






Coatinha beach in Benguela.









Miradouro da Lua on the south coast of Luanda.









Epupa Falls, Cunene River on the border of Angola and Namibia.









Black Stones of Pungo Adongo near Malage, Angola.









Topographic map of Angola.




Climate[edit]
Main article: Climate of Angola




Angola map of Köppen climate classification.


Angola, although located in a tropical zone, has a climate that is not characterized for this region, due to the confluence of three factors:

The Benguela Current, cold, along the southern part of the coast;
The relief in the interior;
Influence of the Namib Desert in the southwest.

As a result, Angola's climate is characterized by two seasons: rainfall from October to April and drought, known as Cacimbo, from May to August, drier, as the name implies, and with lower temperatures. On the other hand, while the coastline has high rainfall rates, decreasing from North to South and from 800 mm to 50 mm, with average annual temperatures above 23 °C, the interior zone can be divided into three areas:

North, with high rainfall and high temperatures;
Central Plateau, with a dry season and average temperatures of the order of 19 °C;
South with very high thermal amplitudes due to the proximity of the Kalahari Desert and the influence of masses of tropical air.[39][40]

Politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Angola
See also: Elections in Angola, Constitution of Angola, List of political parties in Angola, Foreign relations of Angola, and List of diplomatic missions of Angola




José Eduardo dos Santos meets with Vladimir Putin.






The National Assembly building in Luanda was built by a Portuguese company in 2013 at a cost of US$185 million


The Angolan government is composed of three branches of government: executive, legislative and judicial. The executive branch of the government is composed of the President, the Vice-Presidents and the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch comprises a 220-seat unicameral legislature elected from both provincial and nationwide constituencies. For decades, political power has been concentrated in the presidency.
The Constitution of 2010 establishes the broad outlines of government structure and delineates the rights and duties of citizens. The legal system is based on Portuguese law and customary law but is weak and fragmented, and courts operate in only 12 of more than 140 municipalities.[41] A Supreme Court serves as the appellate tribunal; a Constitutional Court does not hold the powers of judicial review.[42] Governors of the 18 provinces are appointed by the president.
After the end of the civil war the regime came under pressure from within as well as from the international community to become more democratic and less authoritarian. Its reaction was to implement a number of changes without substantially changing its character.[43]
Angola is classified as 'not free' by Freedom House in the Freedom in the World 2014 report.[44] The report noted that the August 2012 parliamentary elections, in which the ruling Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola won more than 70% of the vote, suffered from serious flaws, including outdated and inaccurate voter rolls.[44] Voter turnout dropped from 80% in 2008 to 60%.[44]
Angola scored poorly on the 2013 Ibrahim Index of African Governance. It was ranked 39 out of 52 sub-Saharan African countries, scoring particularly badly in the areas of participation and human rights, sustainable economic opportunity and human development. The Ibrahim Index uses a number of variables to compile its list which reflects the state of governance in Africa.[45]




José Eduardo dos Santos, second President of Angola from 1979 to 2017.


The new constitution, adopted in 2010, did away with presidential elections, introducing a system in which the president and the vice-president of the political party that wins the parliamentary elections automatically become president and vice-president. Directly or indirectly, the president controls all other organs of the state, so there is de facto no separation of powers.[46] In the classifications used in constitutional law, this government falls under the category of authoritarian regime. [47]
On 16 October 2014, Angola was elected for the second time as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council, with 190 favourable votes out of 193. The mandate began on 1 January 2015 and lasts for two years.[48]
Also that month, the country took on the leadership of the African ministers and governors at the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, following debates at the annual meetings of both entities.[49]
Since January 2014 the Republic of Angola has held the rotating presidency of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).[50] In 2015, the executive secretary of ICGLR, Ntumba Luaba, called Angola an example to be followed because of the significant progress it made over the 12 years of peace, particularly in terms of socioeconomic and political-military stability.[51]
After 38 years of rule, in 2017 President dos Santos stepped down from MPLA leadership.[52] The leader of the winning party at the parliamentary elections in August 2017 become the next president of Angola. The MPLA selected Defense Minister General João Lourenço and won the election.[53]
In what has been described as a political purge[54][by whom?] to cement his power and reduce the influence of the Dos Santos family, Lourenço subsequently sacked the chief of the national police, Ambrósio de Lemos, and the head of the intelligence service, Apolinário José Pereira. Both are considered allies of former president Dos Santos.[55] He also removed Isabel Dos Santos, daughter of the former president, as head of the country's state oil company Sonangol.[56]
Armed forces[edit]
Main article: Angolan Armed Forces




Angolan Air Force Ilyushin Il-76TD Karpezo-1






Angolan Army training in Russia. From left to right, the ranks of the men are Second Lieutenant, First Lieutenant, and Captain.


The Angolan Armed Forces (AAF) is headed by a Chief of Staff who reports to the Minister of Defence. There are three divisions—the Army (Exército), Navy (Marinha de Guerra, MGA) and National Air Force (Força Aérea Nacional, FAN). Total manpower is about 110,000.[citation needed] Its equipment includes Russian-manufactured fighters, bombers and transport planes. There are also Brazilian-made EMB-312 Tucanos for training, Czech-made L-39s for training and bombing, and a variety of western-made aircraft such as the C-212\Aviocar, Sud Aviation Alouette III, etc. A small number of AAF personnel are stationed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Kinshasa) and the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville).
Police[edit]
The National Police departments are Public Order, Criminal Investigation, Traffic and Transport, Investigation and Inspection of Economic Activities, Taxation and Frontier Supervision, Riot Police and the Rapid Intervention Police. The National Police are in the process of standing up an air wing,[when?] to provide helicopter support for operations. The National Police are developing their criminal investigation and forensic capabilities. The force has an estimated 6,000 patrol officers, 2,500 taxation and frontier supervision officers, 182 criminal investigators and 100 financial crimes detectives and around 90 economic activity inspectors.[citation needed]
The National Police have implemented a modernisation and development plan to increase the capabilities and efficiency of the total force. In addition to administrative reorganisation, modernisation projects include procurement of new vehicles, aircraft and equipment, construction of new police stations and forensic laboratories, restructured training programmes and the replacement of AKM rifles with 9 mm Uzis for officers in urban areas.
Justice[edit]
A Supreme Court serves as a court of appeal. The Constitutional Court is the supreme body of the constitutional jurisdiction, its Organic Law was approved by Law no. 2/08, of June 17, and its first task was the validation of the candidacies of the political parties to the legislative elections of 5 September 2008. The legal system is based on Portuguese and customary laws, but it is weak and fragmented. There are only 12 courts in more than 140 counties in the country. A Supreme Court serves as a court of appeal. With the approval of Law no. 2/08, of June 17 – Organic Law of the Constitutional Court and Law n. 3/08, of June 17 – Organic Law of the Constitutional Process, the Legal Creation of the Constitutional Court. Thus, on June 25, 2008, the Constitutional Court was institutionalized and its Judicial Counselors assumed the position before the President of the Republic. On this date, seven advisory judges took office, four men and three women.
In 2014, a new penal code took effect in Angola. The classification of money-laundering as a crime is one of the novelties in the new legislation.[57]
Foreign relations[edit]




Diplomatic missions of Angola.


On 16 October 2014, Angola was elected for the second time a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, with 190 favorable votes out of a total of 193. The term of office begins on 1 January 2015 and lasts for two Years.[58]
Since January 2014, the Republic of Angola has been chairing the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region (CIRGL). [80] In 2015, CIRGL Executive Secretary Ntumba Luaba said that Angola is the example to be followed by the members of the organization, due to the significant progress made during the 12 years of peace, namely in terms of socio-economic stability and political- military.[59]
Human rights[edit]
See also: Human rights in Angola and LGBT rights in Angola
Homosexual acts are currently illegal in Angola.[60] However, in February 2017, the Angolan Parliament approved a new penal code which does not outlaw homosexual acts. The law will take effect in late 2017.[citation needed] In 2010, the Angolan Government refused to receive openly gay Isi Yanouka as the new Israeli ambassador, allegedly due to his sexual orientation.[61]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Provinces of Angola, Municipalities of Angola, and Communes of Angola




Map of Angola with the provinces numbered


As of March 2016[update], Angola is divided into eighteen provinces (províncias) and 162 municipalities. The municipalities are further divided into 559 communes (townships).[62] The provinces are:


Bengo
Benguela
Bié
Cabinda
Cuando Cubango
Cuanza Norte
Cuanza Sul
Cunene
Huambo
Huíla
Luanda
Lunda Norte
Lunda Sul
Malanje
Moxico
Namibe
Uíge
Zaire


Exclave of Cabinda[edit]
Main articles: Cabinda and Republic of Cabinda




Flag of the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC)


With an area of approximately 7,283 square kilometres (2,812 sq mi), the Northern Angolan province of Cabinda is unusual in being separated from the rest of the country by a strip, some 60 kilometres (37 mi) wide, of the Democratic Republic of Congo along the lower Congo River. Cabinda borders the Congo Republic to the north and north-northeast and the DRC to the east and south. The town of Cabinda is the chief population centre.
According to a 1995 census, Cabinda had an estimated population of 600,000, approximately 400,000 of whom live in neighbouring countries. Population estimates are, however, highly unreliable. Consisting largely of tropical forest, Cabinda produces hardwoods, coffee, cocoa, crude rubber and palm oil. The product for which it is best known, however, is its oil, which has given it the nickname, "the Kuwait of Africa". Cabinda's petroleum production from its considerable offshore reserves now accounts for more than half of Angola's output.[63] Most of the oil along its coast was discovered under Portuguese rule by the Cabinda Gulf Oil Company (CABGOC) from 1968 onwards.
Ever since Portugal handed over sovereignty of its former overseas province of Angola to the local independence groups (MPLA, UNITA and FNLA), the territory of Cabinda has been a focus of separatist guerrilla actions opposing the Government of Angola (which has employed its armed forces, the FAA—Forças Armadas Angolanas) and Cabindan separatists. The Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda-Armed Forces of Cabinda (FLEC-FAC) announced a virtual Federal Republic of Cabinda under the Presidency of N'Zita Henriques Tiago. One of the characteristics of the Cabindan independence movement is its constant fragmentation, into smaller and smaller factions.
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Angola




A booming economy due to oil revenues and stable politics, Angola has seen an increase in its international trading sector.






Luanda city centre.






The Banco Nacional de Angola building on the Marginal in Luanda dates from 1956.






TAAG Angolan Airlines is Angola's national airline.






New suburb (new housing area) in Luanda built in 2010.






Offshore petrol platform prepared for moving to final destination on high sea, Luanda, Angola, Atlantic Ocean


Angola has diamonds, oil, gold, copper and a rich wildlife (dramatically impoverished during the civil war), forest and fossil fuels. Since independence, oil and diamonds have been the most important economic resource. Smallholder and plantation agriculture dramatically dropped in the Angolan Civil War, but began to recover after 2002. The transformation industry[clarification needed] of the late colonial period collapsed at independence, because of the exodus of most of the ethnic Portuguese population, but it has begun to re-emerge with updated technologies, partly because of an influx of new Portuguese entrepreneurs. Similar developments have taken place in the service sector.
Angola's economy has in recent years moved on from the disarray caused by a quarter-century of Angolan civil war to become the fastest-growing economy in Africa and one of the fastest-growing in the world, with an average GDP growth of 20% between 2005 and 2007.[64] In the period 2001–10, Angola had the world's highest annual average GDP growth, at 11.1%.
In 2004, the Exim Bank of China approved a $2 billion line of credit to Angola, to be used for rebuilding Angola's infrastructure, and to limit the influence of the International Monetary Fund there.[65]
China is Angola's biggest trade partner and export destination as well as the fourth-largest source of imports. Bilateral trade reached $27.67 billion in 2011, up 11.5% year-on-year. China's imports, mainly crude oil and diamonds, increased 9.1% to $24.89 billion while China's exports to Angola, including mechanical and electrical products, machinery parts and construction materials, surged 38.8%.[citation needed] The oil glut led to a local price for unleaded gasoline of £0.37 a gallon.[66]
The Economist reported in 2008 that diamonds and oil make up 60% of Angola's economy, almost all of the country's revenue and all of its dominant exports.[67] Growth is almost entirely driven by rising oil production which surpassed 1.4 million barrels per day (220,000 m3/d) in late 2005 and was expected to grow to 2 million barrels per day (320,000 m3/d) by 2007. Control of the oil industry is consolidated in Sonangol Group, a conglomerate owned by the Angolan government. In December 2006, Angola was admitted as a member of OPEC.[68]
Operations in its diamond mines include partnerships between state-run Endiama and mining companies such as ALROSA which operate in Angola.[69]
The Angolan economy grew 18% in 2005, 26% in 2006 and 17.6% in 2007. Due to the global recession the economy contracted an estimated −0.3% in 2009.[42] The security brought about by the 2002 peace settlement has allowed the resettlement of 4 million displaced persons and a resulting large-scale increases in agriculture production.
Although the country's economy has grown significantly since Angola achieved political stability in 2002, mainly due to fast-rising earnings in the oil sector, Angola faces huge social and economic problems. These are in part a result of almost continual armed conflict from 1961 on, although the highest level of destruction and socio-economic damage took place after the 1975 independence, during the long years of civil war. However, high poverty rates and blatant social inequality chiefly stem from persistent authoritarianism, "neo-patrimonial" practices at all levels of the political, administrative, military and economic structures, and of a pervasive corruption.[70][71] The main beneficiaries are political, administrative, economic and military power holders, who have accumulated (and continue to accumulate) enormous wealth.[72]
"Secondary beneficiaries" are the middle strata which are about to become social classes. However, almost half the population has to be considered poor, with dramatic differences between the countryside and the cities (where by now slightly more than 50% of the people live).
A study carried out in 2008 by the Angolan Instituto Nacional de Estatística found that in rural areas roughly 58% must be classified as "poor" according to UN norms, but in the urban areas only 19%, and an overall rate of 37%.[73] In cities, a majority of families, well beyond those officially classified as poor, must adopt a variety of survival strategies.[74][clarification needed] In urban areas social inequality is most evident and it's extreme in Luanda.[75] In the Human Development Index Angola constantly ranks in the bottom group.[76]
According to the Heritage Foundation, a conservative American think tank, oil production from Angola has increased so significantly that Angola now is China's biggest supplier of oil.[77] “China has extended three multibillion dollar lines of credit to the Angolan government; two loans of $2 billion from China Exim Bank, one in 2004, the second in 2007, as well as one loan in 2005 of $2.9 billion from China International Fund Ltd.”[78]
Growing oil revenues also created opportunities for corruption: according to a recent Human Rights Watch report, 32 billion US dollars disappeared from government accounts in 2007–2010.[79] Furthermore, Sonangol, the state-run oil company, controls 51% of Cabinda’s oil. Due to this market control the company ends up determining the profit received by the government and the taxes it pays. The council of foreign affairs states that the World Bank mentioned that Sonangol " is a taxpayer, it carries out quasi-fiscal activities, it invests public funds, and, as concessionaire, it is a sector regulator. This multifarious work programme creates conflicts of interest and characterises a complex relationship between Sonangol and the government that weakens the formal budgetary process and creates uncertainty as regards the actual fiscal stance of the state."[80]
Before independence in 1975, Angola was a breadbasket of southern Africa and a major exporter of bananas, coffee and sisal, but three decades of civil war (1975–2002) destroyed fertile countryside, left it littered with landmines and drove millions into the cities. The country now depends on expensive food imports, mainly from South Africa and Portugal, while more than 90% of farming is done at the family and subsistence level. Thousands of Angolan small-scale farmers are trapped in poverty.[81]
The enormous differences between the regions pose a serious structural problem for the Angolan economy, illustrated by the fact that about one third of economic activities are concentrated in Luanda and neighbouring Bengo province, while several areas of the interior suffer economic stagnation and even regression.[82]
One of the economic consequences of the social and regional disparities is a sharp increase in Angolan private investments abroad. The small fringe of Angolan society where most of the asset accumulation takes place seeks to spread its assets, for reasons of security and profit. For the time being, the biggest share of these investments is concentrated in Portugal where the Angolan presence (including the family of the state president) in banks as well as in the domains of energy, telecommunications, and mass media has become notable, as has the acquisition of vineyards and orchards as well as of touristic enterprises.[83]
Sub-Saharan Africa nations are globally achieving impressive improvements in well-being, according to a report by Tony Blair's Africa Governance Initiative and the Boston Consulting Group.[84] Angola has upgraded critical infrastructure, an investment made possible by funds from the nation's development of oil resources. According to this report, just slightly more than ten years after the end of the civil war Angola's standard of living has overall greatly improved. Life expectancy, which was just 46 years in 2002, reached 51 in 2011. Mortality rates for children fell from 25 percent in 2001 to 19 percent in 2010 and the number of students enrolled in primary school has tripled since 2001.[85] However, at the same time the social and economic inequality that has characterised the country since long has not diminished, but on the contrary deepened in all respects.
With a stock of assets corresponding to 70 billion Kz (6.8 billion USD), Angola is now the third largest financial market in sub-Saharan Africa, surpassed only by Nigeria and South Africa. According to the Angolan Minister of Economy, Abraão Gourgel, the financial market of the country grew modestly from 2002 and now lies in third place at the level of sub-Saharan Africa.[86]
Angola's economy is expected to grow by 3.9 percent in 2014 said the International Monetary Fund (IMF), robust growth in the non-oil economy, mainly driven by a very good performance in the agricultural sector, is expected to offset a temporary drop in oil production.[87]
Angola's financial system is maintained by the National Bank of Angola and managed by governor Jose de Lima Massano. According to a study on the banking sector, carried out by Deloitte, the monetary policy led by Banco Nacional de Angola (BNA), the Angolan national bank, allowed a decrease in the inflation rate put at 7.96% in December 2013, which contributed to the sector's growth trend.[88] Estimates released by Angola's central bank, said country's economy should grow at an annual average rate of 5 percent over the next four years, boosted by the increasing participation of the private sector.[89]
On 19 December 2014, the Capital Market in Angola started. BODIVA (Angola Securities and Debt Stock Exchange, in English) received the secondary public debt market, and it is expected to start the corporate debt market by 2015, but the stock market should be a reality only in 2016.[90]
Agriculture[edit]
Agriculture and forestry is an area of opportunity for the country. “Angola requires 4.5 million tonnes a year of grain but grows only about 55% of the corn it needs, 20% of the rice and just 5% of its required wheat”(African economic Outlook)[91] but “less than 3 percent of Angola's abundant fertile land is cultivated and the economic potential of the forestry sector remains largely unexploited” (World Bank).[92]
Transport[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Transport in Angola




Quatro de Fevereiro Luanda Airport arrivals.






Train station in Benguela.






Ship loading minerals at Namibe harbour, Angola.


Transport in Angola consists of:

Three separate railway systems totalling 2,761 km (1,716 mi)
76,626 km (47,613 mi) of highway of which 19,156 km (11,903 mi) is paved
1,295 navigable inland waterways
Eight major sea ports
243 airports, of which 32 are paved.

Travel on highways outside of towns and cities in Angola (and in some cases within) is often not best advised for those without four-by-four vehicles. While a reasonable road infrastructure has existed within Angola, time and the war have taken their toll on the road surfaces, leaving many severely potholed, littered with broken asphalt. In many areas drivers have established alternate tracks to avoid the worst parts of the surface, although careful attention must be paid to the presence or absence of landmine warning markers by the side of the road. The Angolan government has contracted the restoration of many of the country's roads. The road between Lubango and Namibe, for example, was completed recently with funding from the European Union, and is comparable to many European main routes. Completing the road infrastructure is likely to take some decades, but substantial efforts are already being made.
Transport is an important aspect in Angola because it is strategically located and it could become a regional logistics hub. In addition Angola has some of the most important and biggest ports and so it is vital to connect them to the interior of the country as well as to neighbouring countries.
Tourism is creaking to its feet on the heels of the long ended stop in the civil war, and very few tourists venture anywhere in Angola yet due to lack of infrastructure.
Telecommunications[edit]
The telecommunications industry is considered one of the main strategic sectors in Angola.[93]
In October 2014, the building of an optic fiber underwater cable was announced.[94] This project aims to turn Angola into a continental hub, thus improving Internet connections both nationally and internationally.[95]
On 11 March 2015, the First Angolan Forum of Telecommunications and Information Technology was held in Luanda under the motto "The challenges of telecommunications in the current context of Angola",[96] to promote debate on topical issues on telecommunications in Angola and worldwide.[97] A study of this sector, presented at the forum, said Angola had the first telecommunications operator in Africa to test LTE – with speeds up to 400Mbit/s – and mobile penetration of about 75%; there are about 3.5 million smartphone in the Angolan market; There are about 25,000 kilometres (16,000 miles) of optical fibre installed in the country.[98][99]
The first Angolan satellite, AngoSat-1, will be ready for launch into orbit in 2017[100] and ensure telecommunications throughout the country.[101] According to Aristides Safeca, Secretary of State for Telecommunications, the satellite will provide telecommunications services, TV, internet and e-government and will remain into orbit "at best" for 18 years.[102]
Technology[edit]
The management of the top-level domain '.ao' will pass from Portugal to Angola in 2015, following new legislation.[103] A joint decree of minister of Telecommunications and Information Technologies José Carvalho da Rocha and the minister of Science and Technology, Maria Cândida Pereira Teixeira, states that "under the massification" of that Angolan domain, "conditions are created for the transfer of the domain root '.ao' of Portugal to Angola".[104]
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Angola




Population Pyramid of Angola in 2012




Population in Angola[105][106]


Year
Million


1950
4.1


2000
13.1


2014
25.8


Angola has a population of 24,383,301 inhabitants according to the preliminary results of its 2014 census, the first one conducted or carried out since 15 December 1970.[1] It is composed of Ovimbundu (language Umbundu) 37%, Ambundu (language Kimbundu) 23%, Bakongo 13%, and 32% other ethnic groups (including the Chokwe, the Ovambo, the Ganguela and the Xindonga) as well as about 2% mestiços (mixed European and African), 1.6% Chinese and 1% European.[42] The Ambundu and Ovimbundu ethnic groups combined form a majority of the population, at 62%.[107] The population is forecast to grow to over 60 million people to 2050, 2.7 times the 2014 population.[108] However, on 23 March 2016, official data revealed by Angola's National Statistic Institute – Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE), states that Angola has a population of 25.789.024 inhabitants.
It is estimated that Angola was host to 12,100 refugees and 2,900 asylum seekers by the end of 2007. 11,400 of those refugees were originally from the Democratic Republic of Congo, who arrived in the 1970s.[109] As of 2008[update] there were an estimated 400,000 Democratic Republic of the Congo migrant workers,[110] at least 220,000 Portuguese,[111] and about 259,000 Chinese living in Angola.[112]
Since 2003, more than 400,000 Congolese migrants have been expelled from Angola.[113] Prior to independence in 1975, Angola had a community of approximately 350,000 Portuguese,[114][115] but the vast majority left after independence and the ensuing civil war. However, Angola has recovered its Portuguese minority in recent years; currently, there are about 200,000 registered with the consulates, and increasing due to the debt crisis in Portugal and the relative prosperity in Angola.[116] The Chinese population stands at 258,920, mostly composed of temporary migrants.[117] Also, there is a small Brazilian community of about 5,000 people.[118]
The total fertility rate of Angola is 5.54 children born per woman (2012 estimates), the 11th highest in the world.[42]
Languages[edit]







This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This section is written like a personal reflection or opinion essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Languages of Angola




Ethnic groups of Angola 1970


The languages in Angola are those originally spoken by the different ethnic groups and Portuguese, introduced during the Portuguese colonial era. The most widely spoken indigenous languages are Umbundu, Kimbundu and Kikongo, in that order. Portuguese is the official language of the country.
Although the exact numbers of those fluent in Portuguese or who speak Portuguese as a first language are unknown, a 2012 study mentions that Portuguese is the first language of 39% of the population.[119] In 2014, a census carried out by the Instituto Nacional de Estatística in Angola mentions that 71.15% of the nearly 25.8 million inhabitants of Angola (meaning around 18.3 million people) use Portuguese as a first or second language.[120]
Religion[edit]
Main articles: Religion in Angola, Christianity in Angola, and Islam in Angola




Catholic church in Benguela


There are about 1,000 religious communities, mostly Christian, in Angola.[121] While reliable statistics are nonexistent, estimates have it that more than half of the population are Catholics, while about a quarter adhere to the Protestant churches introduced during the colonial period: the Congregationalists mainly among the Ovimbundu of the Central Highlands and the coastal region to its west, the Methodists concentrating on the Kimbundu speaking strip from Luanda to Malanje, the Baptists almost exclusively among the Bakongo of the north-west (now present in Luanda as well) and dispersed Adventists, Reformed and Lutherans.[122][123] In Luanda and region there subsists a nucleus of the "syncretic" Tocoists and in the north-west a sprinkling of Kimbanguism can be found, spreading from the Congo/Zaïre. Since independence, hundreds of Pentecostal and similar communities have sprung up in the cities, where by now about 50% of the population is living; several of these communities/churches are of Brazilian origin.
As of 2008[update] the U.S. Department of State estimates the Muslim population at 80,000–90,000, less than 1% of the population,[124] while the Islamic Community of Angola puts the figure closer to 500,000.[125] Muslims consist largely of migrants from West Africa and the Middle East (especially Lebanon), although some are local converts.[126] The Angolan government does not legally recognize any Muslim organizations and often shuts down mosques or prevents their construction.[127]
In a study assessing nations' levels of religious regulation and persecution with scores ranging from 0 to 10 where 0 represented low levels of regulation or persecution, Angola was scored 0.8 on Government Regulation of Religion, 4.0 on Social Regulation of Religion, 0 on Government Favoritism of Religion and 0 on Religious Persecution.[128]
Foreign missionaries were very active prior to independence in 1975, although since the beginning of the anti-colonial fight in 1961 the Portuguese colonial authorities expelled a series of Protestant missionaries and closed mission stations based on the belief that the missionaries were inciting pro-independence sentiments. Missionaries have been able to return to the country since the early 1990s, although security conditions due to the civil war have prevented them until 2002 from restoring many of their former inland mission stations.[129]
The Catholic Church and some major Protestant denominations mostly keep to themselves in contrast to the "New Churches" which actively proselytize. Catholics, as well as some major Protestant denominations, provide help for the poor in the form of crop seeds, farm animals, medical care and education.[130][131]
Largest cities[edit]



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Angola
Source?




Rank
Name
Province
Pop.




Luanda

Huambo
1
Luanda
Luanda
2,776,125

Lobito

Benguela


2
Huambo
Huambo
226,177


3
Lobito
Benguela
207,957


4
Benguela
Benguela
151,235


5
Lucapa
Lunda Norte
125,751


6
Kuito
Bié
113,624


7
Lubango
Huíla
102,541


8
Malanje
Malanje
87,047


9
Namibe
Namibe
80,150


10
Soyo
Zaire
67,553


Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of Angola
See also: Music of Angola and Angolan cuisine




Yombe-sculpture, 19th century


The substrate of Angolan culture is African, predominantly Bantu, while Portuguese culture has had a significant impact, specifically in terms of language and religion. The diverse ethnic communities – the Ovimbundu, Ambundu, Bakongo, Chokwe, Mbunda and other peoples – to varying degrees maintain their own cultural traits, traditions and languages, but in the cities, where slightly more than half of the population now lives, a mixed culture has been emerging since colonial times; in Luanda, since its foundation in the 16th century. In this urban culture, the Portuguese heritage has become more and more dominant. African roots are evident in music and dance, and is moulding the way in which Portuguese is spoken. This process is well reflected in contemporary Angolan literature, especially in the works of Angolan authors.
In 2014, Angola resumed the National Festival of Angolan Culture after a 25-year break. The festival took place in all the provincial capitals and lasted for 20 days, with the theme Culture as a Factor of Peace and Development.[132]
Health[edit]
Main article: Health in Angola




Angolan woman with children outside a health clinic


Epidemics of cholera, malaria, rabies and African hemorrhagic fevers like Marburg hemorrhagic fever, are common diseases in several parts of the country. Many regions in this country have high incidence rates of tuberculosis and high HIV prevalence rates. Dengue, filariasis, leishmaniasis and onchocerciasis (river blindness) are other diseases carried by insects that also occur in the region. Angola has one of the highest infant mortality rates in the world and one of the world's lowest life expectancies. A 2007 survey concluded that low and deficient niacin status was common in Angola.[133] Demographic and Health Surveys is currently conducting several surveys in Angola on malaria, domestic violence and more.[134]
In September 2014, the Angolan Institute for Cancer Control (IACC) was created by presidential decree, and it will integrate the National Health Service in Angola.[135] The purpose of this new centre is to ensure health and medical care in oncology, policy implementation, programmes and plans for prevention and specialised treatment.[136] This cancer institute will be assumed as a reference institution in the central and southern regions of Africa.[137]
In 2014, Angola launched a national campaign of vaccination against measles, extended to every child under ten years old and aiming to go to all 18 provinces in the country.[138] The measure is part of the Strategic Plan for the Elimination of Measles 2014–2020 created by the Angolan Ministry of Health which includes strengthening routine immunisation, a proper dealing with measles cases, national campaigns, introducing a second dose of vaccination in the national routine vaccination calendar and active epidemiological surveillance for measles. This campaign took place together with the vaccination against polio and vitamin A supplementation.[139]
A yellow fever outbreak, the worst in the country in three decades[140] began in December 2015. By August 2016, when the outbreak began to subside, nearly 4,000 people were suspected of being infected. As many as 369 may have died. The outbreak began in the capital, Luanda, and spread to at least 16 of the 18 provinces.
Education[edit]
Main article: Education in Angola




Lyceum Salvador Correia in Luanda






Kuito class, Angola


Although by law education in Angola is compulsory and free for eight years, the government reports that a percentage of pupils are not attending due to a lack of school buildings and teachers.[141] Pupils are often responsible for paying additional school-related expenses, including fees for books and supplies.[141]
In 1999, the gross primary enrollment rate was 74 percent and in 1998, the most recent year for which data are available, the net primary enrollment rate was 61 percent.[141] Gross and net enrollment ratios are based on the number of pupils formally registered in primary school and therefore do not necessarily reflect actual school attendance.[141] There continue to be significant disparities in enrollment between rural and urban areas. In 1995, 71.2 percent of children ages 7 to 14 years were attending school.[141] It is reported that higher percentages of boys attend school than girls.[141] During the Angolan Civil War (1975–2002), nearly half of all schools were reportedly looted and destroyed, leading to current problems with overcrowding.[141]
The Ministry of Education recruited 20,000 new teachers in 2005 and continued to implement teacher trainings.[141] Teachers tend to be underpaid, inadequately trained and overworked (sometimes teaching two or three shifts a day).[141] Some teachers may reportedly demand payment or bribes directly from their pupils.[141] Other factors, such as the presence of landmines, lack of resources and identity papers, and poor health prevent children from regularly attending school.[141] Although budgetary allocations for education were increased in 2004, the education system in Angola continues to be extremely under-funded.[141]
According to estimates by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics, the adult literacy rate in 2011 was 70.4%.[142] By 2015, this had increased to 71.1%.[143] 82.9% of males and 54.2% of women are literate as of 2001.[144] Since independence from Portugal in 1975, a number of Angolan students continued to be admitted every year at high schools, polytechnical institutes and universities in Portugal, Brazil and Cuba through bilateral agreements; in general, these students belong to the elites.
In September 2014, the Angolan Ministry of Education announced an investment of 16 million Euros in the computerisation of over 300 classrooms across the country. The project also includes training teachers at a national level, "as a way to introduce and use new information technologies in primary schools, thus reflecting an improvement in the quality of teaching."[145]
In 2010, the Angolan government started building the Angolan Media Libraries Network, distributed throughout several provinces in the country to facilitate the people's access to information and knowledge. Each site has a bibliographic archive, multimedia resources and computers with Internet access, as well as areas for reading, researching and socialising.[146] The plan envisages the establishment of one media library in each Angolan province by 2017. The project also includes the implementation of several media libraries, in order to provide the several contents available in the fixed media libraries to the most isolated populations in the country.[147] At this time, the mobile media libraries are already operating in the provinces of Luanda, Malanje, Uíge, Cabinda and Lunda South. As for REMA, the provinces of Luanda, Benguela, Lubango and Soyo have currently working media libraries.[148]
Sports[edit]




Interior of 11 November stadium in Luanda, Angola, with Tribunes and running track


Angola hosted the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations. Angola is the top basketball team of FIBA Africa, and a regular competitor at the Summer Olympic Games and the FIBA World Cup. The Angola national football team qualified for the 2006 FIFA World Cup, as this was their first appearance on the World Cup finals stage. They were eliminated after one defeat and two draws in the group stage. They won 3 COSAFA Cups and finished runner up in 2011 African Nations Championship. Angola has participated in the World Women's Handball Championship for several years. The country has also appeared in the Summer Olympics for seven years and both regularly competes in and once has hosted the FIRS Roller Hockey World Cup, where the best finish is sixth. Angola is also often believed to have historic roots in the martial art "Capoeira Angola" and "Batuque" which were practiced by enslaved African Angolans transported as part of the Atlantic slave trade.[149]
See also[edit]


Angola portal
Africa portal
Geography portal



Outline of Angola
Index of Angola-related articles


Notes[edit]


^ a b 2014 population census (INE Angola) Archived 6 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d "Angola". International Monetary Fund. 
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2011. 
^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2017. 
^ "Life expectancy at birth". World Fact Book. United States Central Intelligence Agency. 2014. 
^ "Transparency and Accountability in Angola". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 1 April 2016. 
^ Heywood, Linda M. & Thornton, John K. (2007) Central Africans, Atlantic Creoles, and the foundation of the Americas, 1585–1660. Cambridge University Press. p. 82. ISBN 0521770653
^ Henderson, Lawrence (1979). Angola: Five Centuries of Conflict. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. pp. 40–42. ISBN 978-0812216202. 
^ Miller, Josep h (1979). Kings and Kinsmen: Early Mbundu States in Angola. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. pp. 55–56. ISBN 978-0198227045. 
^ "The Story of Africa". BBC. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ a b c d EB (1878).
^ Fleisch, Axel (2004). "Angola: Slave Trade, Abolition of". In Shillington, Kevin. Encyclopedia of African History 3-Volume Set. 1. Routledge. pp. 131–133. ISBN 1-57958-245-1. 
^ Global Investment and Business Center (1 January 2006). Angola in the Eighteeth Century: Slave trading in the 1700s. Angola President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos Handbook. Int'l Business Publications. p. 153. ISBN 0739716069. 
^ World Bank. The History of Brazil–Africa Relations (PDF). Bridging the Atlantic. p. 27. Retrieved 14 May 2016. 
^ a b c d e f Collelo, Thomas, ed. (1991). Angola, a Country Study. Area Handbook Series (Third ed.). Washington, D.C.: Department of the Army, American University. pp. 14–26. ISBN 978-0160308444. 
^ Iliffe, John (2007) Africans: the history of a continent. Cambridge University Press. p. 68. ISBN 0-521-68297-5. For valuable complements for the 16th and 17th centuries see Beatrix Heintze, Studien zur Geschichte Angolas im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert, Colónia/Alemanha: Köppe, 1996
^ a b c Corrado, Jacopo (2008). The Creole Elite and the Rise of Angolan Protonationalism: 1870–1920. Amherst, New York: Cambria Press. pp. 11–13. ISBN 978-1604975291. 
^ See René Pélissier, Les guerres grises: Résistance et revoltes en Angola, (1845-1941), Éditions Pélissier, Montamets, 78630 Orgeval (France), 1977
^ See René Pélissier, La colonie du Minotaure. Nationalismes et révoltes en Angola (1926–1961), éditions Pélissier, Montamets, 78630 Orgeval (France), 1979
^ a b Okoth, Assa (2006). A History of Africa: African nationalism and the de-colonisation process. Nairobi: East African Educational Publishers. pp. 143–147. ISBN 9966-25-358-0. 
^ a b Dowden, Richard (2010). Africa: Altered States, Ordinary Miracles. London: Portobello Books. pp. 207–208. ISBN 978-1-58648-753-9. 
^ a b c d e Cornwell, Richard (1 November 2000). "The War of Independence" (PDF). Pretoria: Institute for Security Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2015. 
^ a b Stockwell, John (1979) [1978]. In Search Of Enemies. London: Futura Publications Limited. pp. 44–45. ISBN 978-0393009262. 
^ a b c Hanlon, Joseph (1986). Beggar Your Neighbours: Apartheid Power in Southern Africa. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 155. ISBN 978-0253331311. 
^ a b c d Chabal, Patrick (2002). A History of Postcolonial Lusophone Africa. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 142. ISBN 978-0253215659. 
^ a b c d e f g Rothschild, Donald (1997). Managing Ethnic Conflict in Africa: Pressures and Incentives for Cooperation. Washington: The Brookings Institution. pp. 115–120. ISBN 978-0815775935. 
^ a b Domínguez, Jorge (1989). To Make a World Safe for Revolution: Cuba's Foreign Policy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. pp. 131–133. ISBN 978-0674893252. 
^ a b c d e f g Weigert, Stephen (2011). Angola: A Modern Military History. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp. 56–65. ISBN 978-0230117778. 
^ a b c d e Vanneman, Peter (1990). Soviet Strategy in Southern Africa: Gorbachev's Pragmatic Approach. Stanford: Hoover Institution Press. pp. 48–49. ISBN 978-0817989026. 
^ a b c d Ferreira, Manuel (2002). Brauer, Jurgen; Dunne, J. Paul, eds. Arming the South: The Economics of Military Expenditure, Arms Production and Arms Trade in Developing Countries. Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp. 251–255. ISBN 978-0-230-50125-6. 
^ Akongdit, Addis Ababa Othow (2013). Impact of Political Stability on Economic Development: Case of South Sudan. Bloomington: AuthorHouse Ltd, Publishers. pp. 74–75. ISBN 978-1491876442. 
^ a b Tucker, Spencer (2013). Encyclopedia of Insurgency and Counterinsurgency: A New Era of Modern Warfare. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO Ltd, Publishers. pp. 374–375. ISBN 978-1610692793. 
^ a b c Tordoff, William (1997). Government and Politics in Africa (Third ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave-Macmillan. pp. 97–98. ISBN 978-0333694749. 
^ Lari (2004), Human Rights Watch (2005)
^ For an overall analysis see Ricardo Soares de Oliveira, Magnificant and Beggar Land: Angola since the Civil War, London: Hurst, 2015
^ "How southern Africa is coping with worst global food crisis for 25 years". The Guardian. Retrieved 31 December 2016. Drought is affecting 1.4 million people across seven of Angola’s 18 provinces. Food prices have rocketed and acute malnutrition rates have doubled, with more than 95,000 children affected. Food insecurity is expected to worsen from July to the end of the year. 
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Country Comparison :: Area". United States Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 13 July 2014. 
^ "Cabinda". Global Security. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. 
^ Mulenga, Henry Mubanga (1999). Southern African climate anomalies, summer rainfall and the Angola low. PhD Dissertation. University of Cape Town. OCLC 85939351. 
^ Jury, M. R.; Matari, E .E.; Matitu, M. (2008). "Equatorial African climate teleconnections". Theoretical and Applied Climatology. 95 (3–4): 407–416. Bibcode:2009ThApC..95..407J. doi:10.1007/s00704-008-0018-4. 
^ "Angola". State.gov. US Department of State. Retrieved 22 November 2016. 
^ a b c d "CIA – The World Factbook". United States Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ Péclard, Didier (ed.) (2008) L'Angola dans la paix: Autoritarisme et reconversions, special issue of Politique africains (Paris), p. 110.
^ a b c "Angola". Freedom in the World 2014. Freedom House. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ "Ibrahim Index of African Governance". Mo Ibrahim Foundation. Retrieved 9 August 2014. 
^ Miranda, Jorge (2010) "A Constituição de Angola de 2010", O Direito (Lisbon), vol. 142.
^ Amundsen, Inge (2011). Angola Party Politics: Into the African Trend (PDF). Chr. Michelsen Institute (CMI) and Centro de Estudos e Investigação Científica (CEIC). 
^ Venezuela, Malaysia, Angola, N.Z., Spain win U.N. Council seats Reuters, 16 October 2014
^ Angola assume presidência do grupo africano junto do FMI e BM (in Portuguese) Archived 20 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Rádio Nacional de Angola, 10 December 2014
^ in-50c6-47cf-9a2f-191c6d9d06ba.html Angola takes over rotative presidency of Great Lakes Region Angola Press Agency, 13 January 2014
^ Angola should be an example for Great Lakes region – Ntumba Luaba Angola Press Agency, 8 January 2015
^ Angolan Leader Dos Santos to Step Down After 38 Years in Power. Bloomberg (3 February 2017). Retrieved on 2017-04-26.
^ En Angola, le ministre de la Défense devrait succèder au président Dos Santos. Lefigaro.fr. Retrieved on 26 April 2017.
^ "Angola : une purge au sein de la Sonangol emporte Isabel dos Santos". BENIN WEB TV (in French). 2017-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
^ "Angola's Lourenco replaces police and intelligence chiefs". Reuters. 20 November 2017. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
^ "Angola sacks Africa's richest woman". BBC News. 2017-11-15. Retrieved 2017-11-21. 
^ Angola com novo Código Penal ainda este ano, Notícias ao Minuto, 24 September 2014
^ "Angola eleita para o Conselho de Segurança da ONU".  Public, 16 October 2014
^ "Angola deve servir de exemplo para os países da CIRGL – Ntumba Luaba".  Expansion, 08 January 2015
^ "LGBT relationships are illegal in 74 countries, research finds". The Independent. 17 May 2016. 
^ Hartman, Ben (2010-04-30). "Was diplomat denied post in Angola because he is openly gay?". Jpost.com. 
^ "Resultados Resultados Definitivos do Recenseamento Geral da População e da Habitação de Angola 2014" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estatística. March 2016. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 May 2016. 
^ "Angola profile". BBC News. 22 December 2013. 
^ Angola Financial Sector Profile: MFW4A – Making Finance Work for Africa. MFW4A. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
^ "The Increasing Importance of African Oil". Power and Interest Report. 20 March 2006. Archived from the original on 5 May 2006. 
^ Luanda, capital of Angola, retains title of world's most expensive for expats. The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 9 August 2013.
^ "Marching towards riches and democracy?" The Economist. 30 August 2008. p. 46.
^ "Angola: Country Admitted As Opec Member". Angola Press Agency. 14 December 2006. 
^ "Angolan Diamond Centenary Conference 2013 Highlights Endiama and Alrosa Joint Venture for Future Geological Exploration of diamond deposits of Angola's Territory" (PDF). Press release. angolancentenary.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 13 July 2014. 
^ Anti-corruption watchdog Transparency International rates Angola one of the 10 most corrupt countries in the world.
^ Dolan, Kerry A. (23 January 2013). "Isabel Dos Santos, Daughter Of Angola's President, Is Africa's First Woman Billionaire". Forbes.
^ This process is well analyzed by authors like Christine Messiant, Tony Hodges and others. For an eloquent illustration, see the Angolan magazine Infra-Estruturas África 7/2010.
^ País ao raios X. Angola Exame. 12 November 2010
^ Udelsmann Rodrigues, Cristina (2006) O Trabalho Dignifica o Homem: Estratégias de Sobrevivência em Luanda, Lisbon: Colibri.
^ As an excellent illustration see Luanda: A vida na cidade dos extremos, in: Visão, 11 November 2010.
^ The HDI 2010 lists Angola in the 146th position among 169 countries—one position below that of Haiti. MLP l Human Development Index and its components. Archived 28 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Alt, Robert. "Into Africa: China's Grab for Influence and Oil". Heritage.org. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ "Angola's Political and Economic Development". Council on Foreign Relations. 
^ "Angola: Explain Missing Government Funds". Human Rights Watch. 20 December 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2011. 
^ "Angola's political and economical development" (Council of Foreign Relation )http://www.cfr.org/world/angolas-political-economic-development/p16820
^ Redvers, Louise POVERTY-ANGOLA: Inter Press Service News Agency – NGOs Sceptical of Govt's Rural Development Plans Archived 12 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 6 June 2009
^ Manuel Alves da Rocha (2010) Desigualdades e assimetrias regionais em Angola: Os factores da competitividade territorial, Luanda: Centro de Estudos e Investigação Científica da Universidade Católica de Angola.
^ "A força do kwanza", Visão (Lisbon), 993, 15 May 2012, pp. 50–54
^ The New Prosperity: Strategies for Improving Well-Being in Sub-Saharan Africa Tony Blair Africa Governance Initiative 1 May 2013
^ The New Prosperity: Strategies for Improving Well-Being in Sub-Saharan Africa Report by The Boston Consulting Group and Tony Blair Africa Governance Initiative, May 2013
^ Angola is the third-largest sub-Saharan financial market, MacauHub, 23 July 2014
^ Angola’s economy to grow by 3.9 percent-IMF StarAfrica, 4 September 2014
^ Angola: Sector bancário mantém crescimento em 2013, Angola Press (26 September 2014)
^ Angola seen growing average 5 percent: Central Bank, Reuters (Africa), 10 June 2014
^ CMC prepares launch of debt secondary market Angola Press Agency, 16 December 2014
^ Muzima, Joel. Mazivila, Domingos. “Angola 2014” Retrieved from www.africaneconomicoutlook.org
^ “Country partnership strategy for the republic of Angola” (15 August 2013). World Bank (Report No. 76225-A0)
^ "Sectores Económicos Prioritários" (in Portuguese). ANIP. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013. 
^ "Angola Cables e parceiros estrangeiros anunciam construção de cabo submarino" (in Portuguese). ANGOP. 14 October 2014. 
^ Machado, André (30 January 2014). "Cabo submarino que ligará Brasil à África terá capacidade de 40 terabits por segundo" (in Portuguese). O Globo. 
^ Inácio, Adelina (12 March 2015). "Nação está mais ligada" (in Portuguese). Jornal de Angola. 
^ "Angola has about 14 million mobile phone network users – Minister". ANGOP. 12 March 2015. 
^ "Angola com crescimento anual superior a 55% no sector das TIC" (in Portuguese). Platina Line. 12 March 2015. 
^ "Sector das TIC com crescimento anual superior a 55 por cento na última década" (in Portuguese). Ver Angola. 13 March 2015. 
^ "Lançamento de satélite angolano volta a ser adiado, agora para 2017". br.sputniknews.com. Retrieved 19 November 2015. 
^ "Conclusion works of "Angosat" project set for 2016". ANGOP. 8 September 2014. 
^ Agência Lusa (4 November 2014). "Primeiro satélite angolano pronto para ser lançado em 2016" (in Portuguese). Observador. 
^ Angola to manage own internet domain from 2015 Telecompaper, 16 September 2014
^ Angola manages its own Internet domain Macauhub, 16 September 2014
^ "Table 2. Total population by country, 1950, 2000, 2015, 2025 and 2050 (medium-variant)". (PDF). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Population Division. p. 27.
^ "Angola". CIA World Factbook.
^ As no reliable census data exist at this stage (2011), all these numbers are rough estimates only, subject to adjustments and updates.
^ 2050 Population as a Multiple of 2014 Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine.. PRB 2014 World Population Data Sheet
^ U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. "World Refugee Survey 2008". p. 37
^ World Refugee Survey 2008 – Angola Archived 10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine., UNHCR. NB: This figure is highly doubtful, as it makes no clear distinction between migrant workers, refugees and immigrants.
^ "José Eduardo dos Santos diz que trabalhadores portugueses são bem-vindos em Angola". Observatório da Emigração. Retrieved 22 July 2013. …presença de cerca de 200 mil trabalhadores portugueses no país… 
^ "Angola: Cerca de 259.000 chineses vivem atualmente no país". Visão. 25 April 2012. Retrieved 13 January 2013. 
^ "Calls for Angola to Investigate Abuse of Congolese Migrants". Inter Press Service. 21 May 2012
^ Bender, Gerald; Yoder, Stanley (1974). "Whites in Angola on the Eve of Independence. The Politics of Numbers". Africa Today. 21 (4): 23–27. JSTOR 4185453. 
^ Flight from Angola, The Economist , 16 August 1975 puts the number at 500,000, but this is an estimate lacking appropriate sources.
^ Siza, Rita (6 June 2013). "José Eduardo dos Santos diz que trabalhadores portugueses são bem-vindos em Angola". Público. Lisbon. 
^ Phillips, Tom (26 August 2012) "Chinese 'gangsters' repatriated from Angola", The Daily Telegraph
^ Angola, Brazil – A culture shock divide[permanent dead link]
^ Silva, José António Maria da Conceição (2004) Angola. 7th World Urban Forum
^ "Angola: português é falado por 71,15% de angolanos" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2017. 
^ Viegas, Fátima (2008) Panorâmica das Religiões em Angola Independente (1975–2008), Ministério da Cultura/Instituto Nacional para os Assuntos Religiosos, Luanda
^ Schubert, Benedict (1997) Der Krieg und die Kirchen: Angola 1961–1991. Exodus, Luzern/Switzerland
^ Lawrence W. Henderson (1989) The Church in Angola: A river of many currents, Cleveland: Pilgrim Press
^ "Angola". State.gov. 19 September 2008. Retrieved 13 July 2014. 
^ Surgimento do Islão em Angola. O Pais. 2 September 2011. p. 18
^ Oyebade, Adebayo O. Culture And Customs of Angola, 2006. Pages 45–46.
^ "ANGOLA 2012 INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT" (PDF). state.gov. 
^ Angola: Religious Freedom Profile at the Association of Religion Data Archives Brian J Grim and Roger Finke. "International Religion Indexes: Government Regulation, Government Favoritism and Social Regulation of Religion". Interdisciplinary Journal of Research on Religion. 2 (2006) Article 1: www.religjournal.com.
^ "International Religious Freedom Report – Angola". U.S. Department of State. 1 January 2004. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ Culture and customs of Angola. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. 2007. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-313-33147-3. 
^ "International Grants 2005" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ Retrospect2014: Fenacult marks cultural year Angola Press Agency, 18 December 2014
^ Seal, AJ; Creeke; Dibari; Cheung; Kyroussis; Semedo; Van Den Briel (January 2007). "Low and deficient niacin status and pellagra are endemic in postwar Angola". Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 85 (1): 218–24. hdl:10144/125625 . PMID 17209199. 
^ Angola Surveys, measuredhs.com
^ Novo instituto oncológico de Angola quer ser referência em África, Notícias ao Minuto (Source: Lusa Agency), 9 September 2014
^ Novo instituto oncológico de Angola quer ser referência em África, Diário Digital (Source: Lusa Agency), 9 September 2014
^ Novo instituto oncológico angolano quer ser instituição de referência no continente, Ver Angola, 11 September 2014
^ Angola: Over 30,000 Children Vaccinated Against Measles in Huila, All Africa, 30 September 2014
^ Angola lança vacinação nacional contra sarampo, Notícias ao Minuto (Source: Lusa Agency), 18 September 2014
^ "WHO: Yellow fever outbreak is 'serious and of great concern'". 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "Botswana". 2005 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor. Bureau of International Labor Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor (2006). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
^ "National adult literacy rates (15+), youth literacy rates (15–24) and elderly literacy rates (65+)". UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 
^ http://data.uis.unesco.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=EDULIT_DS&popupcustomise=true&lang=en#
^ "Angola – Statistics". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 27 June 2010. 
^ Angola investe 16 milhões na informatização de 300 salas de aula em todo o país, jornal i (28 September 2014)
^ Sumário Executivo do Plano Director da ReMA. Rede de Mediatecas de Angola (May 2013)
^ Government to open digital libraries in every province Angola Press Agency, 8 January 2015
^ Mediateca móvel aberta ao público Archived 9 February 2015 at the Portuguese Web Archive Jornal de Angola, 9 January 2015
^ Poncianinho, Mestre; Almeida, Ponciano (2007). Capoeira: The Essential Guide to Mastering the Art. New Holland Publishers. pp. 18–. ISBN 978-1-84537-761-8. 


References[edit]

 Baynes, T.S., ed. (1878), "Angola", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 45 
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911), "Angola", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 38–40 
Much of the material in this article comes from the CIA World Factbook 2000 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website. The information given there is, however, corrected and updated on the basis of the other sources indicated.

External links[edit]

Find more aboutAngolaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity





The Wikibook Wikijunior:Countries A-Z has a page on the topic of: Angola





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Angola.



Official website (in Portuguese)
"Angola". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Angola at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Angola from UCB Libraries GovPubs.
Angola profile from the BBC News.
 Wikimedia Atlas of Angola
Key Development Forecasts for Angola from International Futures.
Bertelsmann Transformation Index 2012 – Angola Country Report
Markus Weimer, "The Peace Dividend: Analysis of a Decade of Angolan Indicators, 2002–2012".
The participation of Hungarian soldiers in UN peacekeeping operations in Angola







v
t
e


Angola articles



History



Precolonial history
Colonial history

Portuguese rule
Colonial governors


War of Independence
People's Republic
Civil War
2000s
2010s
2020s





Geography







Cities and towns
Ecoregions
Municipalities
National parks
Provinces
Wildlife








Politics







Cabinet
Constitution
Corruption
Elections
Flag
Foreign relations
Human rights

LGBT


Judiciary
Law enforcement
Military
National Assembly
Political parties
President
Vice President
Prime Minister








Economy







Agriculture
Airports
Banks
Communications
Companies
Health
Fishing
Kwanza (currency)
Mining
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Languages
Lists of Angolans
Public holidays
Women





Culture



Cinema
Films
Football
Literature
Media
Music
Religion












Outline
Index
Bibliography



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Countries and territories of Africa



Sovereign states




entirely
in Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





partly
in Africa



France

Mayotte
Réunion


Italy

Pantelleria
Pelagie Islands


Portugal

Madeira


Spain

Canary Islands
Ceuta
Melilla
Plazas de soberanía


Yemen

Socotra














Territories and
dependencies




Îles Éparses

France


Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha

UK


Southern Provinces (Western Sahara)1






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






1 Unclear sovereignty.








International membership and history











v
t
e


Southern African Development Community (SADC)



Member states



Angola
Botswana
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Seychelles
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Leaders




Chairpersons



Levy Mwanawasa
Kgalema Motlanthe





Secretaries-General



Kaire Mbuende
Prega Ramsamy
Tomaz Salomão








See also



Southern African Development Coordination Conference (forerunner)
Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
Common Monetary Area (CMA)
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)












v
t
e


African Union (AU)



History







Pan-Africanism
Casablanca Group
Monrovia Group
Abuja Treaty
Sirte Declaration
Lome Summit





Organisation of African Unity



Chairperson
Secretary General











Geography



Borders
Extreme points
Member states
Regions





Organs







Executive Council
Permanent Representatives' Committee
Specialized Technical Committees





Assembly



Chairperson





Commission



Chairperson
Deputy Chairperson
AUCC





Pan-African Parliament



Bureau
Secretariat
Gallagher Estate





African Court of Justice



African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights





ECOSOCC Committees



Peace and Security
Political Affairs
Infrastructure and Energy
Social Affairs and Health
HR, Sciences and Technology
Trade and Industry
Rural Economy and Agriculture
Economic Affairs
Women and Gender
Cross-Cutting Programs





Financial Institutions



African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank





Peace and Security Council



ACIRC
African Standby Force
Panel of the Wise
UNAMID
AMIB
AMIS
AMISOM
MISCA








Politics







APRM
Foreign relations
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Enlargement





Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag








Economy



Currencies
Development Bank
African Economic Community
NEPAD
African Free Trade Zone
Tripartite Free Trade Area





Culture



Africa Day
Languages





Theory



Afro
United States of Africa
United States of Latin Africa








 Category












v
t
e


Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP)






 Category





Membership




Members



Angola
Brazil
Cape Verde
East Timor
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Mozambique
Portugal
São Tomé and Príncipe





Observers



Georgia
Japan
Mauritius
Namibia
Senegal
Turkey











Organization



CPLP Games
Flag
TV CPLP








ACOLOP

Lusophony Games


Portuguese-using countries












v
t
e


Portuguese overseas empire








North Africa









15th century


1415–1640
Ceuta


1458–1550
Alcácer Ceguer (El Qsar es Seghir)


1471–1550
Arzila (Asilah)


1471–1662
Tangier


1485–1550
Mazagan (El Jadida)


1487–16th century
Ouadane


1488–1541
Safim (Safi)


1489
Graciosa




16th century


1505–1541
Santa Cruz do Cabo de Gué (Agadir)


1506–1525
Mogador (Essaouira)


1506–1525
Aguz (Souira Guedima)


1506–1769
Mazagan (El Jadida)


1513–1541
Azamor (Azemmour)


1515–1541
São João da Mamora (Mehdya)


1577–1589
Arzila (Asilah)





















Sub-Saharan Africa









15th century


1455–1633
Anguim


1462–1975
Cape Verde


1470–1975
São Tomé1


1471–1975
Príncipe1


1474–1778
Annobón


1478–1778
Fernando Poo (Bioko)


1482–1637
Elmina (São Jorge da Mina)


1482–1642
Portuguese Gold Coast


1508–15472
Madagascar3


1498–1540
Mascarene Islands




16th century


1500–1630
Malindi


1501–1975
Portuguese Mozambique


1502–1659
Saint Helena


1503–1698
Zanzibar


1505–1512
Quíloa (Kilwa)


1506–1511
Socotra


1557–1578
Accra


1575–1975
Portuguese Angola


1588–1974
Cacheu4


1593–1698
Mombassa (Mombasa)




17th century


1645–1888
Ziguinchor


1680–1961
São João Baptista de Ajudá


1687–1974
Bissau4


18th century


1728–1729
Mombassa (Mombasa)


1753–1975
Portuguese São Tomé and Príncipe


19th century


1879–1974
Portuguese Guinea


1885–1974
Portuguese Congo5








1 Part of São Tomé and Príncipe from 1753.
2 Or 1600.
3 A factory (Anosy Region) and small temporary coastal bases.
4 Part of Portuguese Guinea from 1879.
5 Part of Portuguese Angola from the 1920s.














Middle East [Persian Gulf]









16th century


1506–1615
Gamru (Bandar Abbas)


1507–1643
Sohar


1515–1622
Hormuz (Ormus)


1515–1648
Quriyat


1515–?
Qalhat


1515–1650
Muscat


1515?–?
Barka


1515–1633?
Julfar (Ras al-Khaimah)


1521–1602
Bahrain (Muharraq • Manama)


1521–1529?
Qatif


1521?–1551?
Tarut Island


1550–1551
Qatif


1588–1648
Matrah




17th century


1620–?
Khor Fakkan


1621?–?
As Sib


1621–1622
Qeshm


1623–?
Khasab


1623–?
Libedia


1624–?
Kalba


1624–?
Madha


1624–1648
Dibba Al-Hisn


1624?–?
Bandar-e Kong


















Indian subcontinent









15th century


1498–1545

Laccadive Islands
(Lakshadweep)



16th century
Portuguese India


 • 1500–1663
Cochim (Kochi)


 • 1501–1663
Cannanore (Kannur)



 • 1502–1658
 1659–1661


Quilon
(Coulão / Kollam)



 • 1502–1661
Pallipuram (Cochin de Cima)


 • 1507–1657
Negapatam (Nagapatnam)


 • 1510–1961
Goa



 • 1512–1525
 1750


Calicut
(Kozhikode)



 • 1518–1619
Portuguese Paliacate outpost (Pulicat)


 • 1521–1740
Chaul






 
(Portuguese India)


 • 1523–1662
Mylapore


 • 1528–1666

Chittagong
(Porto Grande De Bengala)



 • 1531–1571
Chaul


 • 1531–1571
Chalé


 • 1534–1601
Salsette Island


 • 1534–1661
Bombay (Mumbai)


 • 1535
Ponnani


 • 1535–1739
Baçaím (Vasai-Virar)


 • 1536–1662
Cranganore (Kodungallur)


 • 1540–1612
Surat


 • 1548–1658
Tuticorin (Thoothukudi)


 • 1559–1961
Daman and Diu


 • 1568–1659
Mangalore






 
(Portuguese India)


 • 1579–1632
Hugli


 • 1598–1610
Masulipatnam (Machilipatnam)




1518–1521
Maldives


1518–1658
Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka)


1558–1573
Maldives


17th century
Portuguese India


 • 1687–1749
Mylapore


18th century
Portuguese India


 • 1779–1954
Dadra and Nagar Haveli


















East Asia and Oceania









16th century


1511–1641
Portuguese Malacca [Malaysia]


1512–1621
Maluku [Indonesia]


 • 1522–1575
 Ternate


 • 1576–1605
 Ambon


 • 1578–1650
 Tidore


1512–1665
Makassar


1557–1999
Macau [China]


1580–1586
Nagasaki [Japan]


17th century


1642–1975
Portuguese Timor (East Timor)1




19th century
Portuguese Macau


 • 1864–1999
Coloane


 • 1851–1999
Taipa


 • 1890–1999
Ilha Verde


20th century
Portuguese Macau


 • 1938–1941
Lapa and Montanha (Hengqin)








1 1975 is the year of East Timor's Declaration of Independence and subsequent invasion by Indonesia. In 2002, East Timor's independence was fully recognized.














North America & North Atlantic









15th century [Atlantic islands]


1420
Madeira


1432
Azores




16th century [Canada]


1500–1579?
Terra Nova (Newfoundland)


1500–1579?
Labrador


1516–1579?
Nova Scotia



















South America & Antilles









16th century


1500–1822
Brazil


 • 1534–1549
 Captaincy Colonies of Brazil


 • 1549–1572
 Brazil


 • 1572–1578
 Bahia


 • 1572–1578
 Rio de Janeiro


 • 1578–1607
 Brazil


 • 1621–1815
 Brazil


1536–1620
Barbados




17th century


1621–1751
Maranhão


1680–1777
Nova Colónia do Sacramento


18th century


1751–1772
Grão-Pará and Maranhão


1772–1775
Grão-Pará and Rio Negro


1772–1775
Maranhão and Piauí




19th century


1808–1822
Cisplatina (Uruguay)


1809–1817
Portuguese Guiana (Amapá)


1822
Upper Peru (Bolivia)
















Coats of arms of Portuguese colonies
Evolution of the Portuguese Empire
Portuguese colonial architecture
Portuguese colonialism in Indonesia
Portuguese colonization of the Americas
Theory of the Portuguese discovery of Australia














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 152395020
LCCN: n80046439
ISNI: 0000 0004 0498 3083
GND: 4002050-2
BNF: cb11930899k (data)
HDS: 3435
NDL: 00560254











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Angola&oldid=818063554"					Categories: Angola1975 establishments in AngolaBantu countries and territoriesCentral African countriesCountries in AfricaFormer Portuguese coloniesLeast developed countriesMember states of OPECMember states of the African UnionMember states of the Community of Portuguese Language CountriesMember states of the United NationsPortuguese-speaking countries and territoriesRepublicsSouthern African countriesStates and territories established in 1975Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template other archivesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from April 2017Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersArticles containing Portuguese-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles needing additional references from November 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2008Wikipedia articles needing style editing from December 2016All articles needing style editingArticles needing additional references from December 2016Articles with multiple maintenance issuesWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with Portuguese-language external linksArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers