For the technology, see animated cartoon.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



An animated series is a set of animated works with a common series title, usually related to one another. These episodes should typically share the same main characters, some different secondary characters and a basic theme. Series can have either a finite number of episodes like a miniseries, a definite end, or be open-ended, without a predetermined number of episodes. They can be broadcast on television, shown in movie theatres, released direct-to-video or on the internet. Like animated films, animated series can be of a wide variety of genres and can also have different target audiences, from children to adults.



Contents


1 Television
2 Theatrical
3 Direct-to-video
4 Internet
5 See also
6 References



Television[edit]
See also: List of animated television series
Animated television series are regularly presented and can appear as much as up to once a week or daily during a prescribed time slot. The time slot may very, including morning, like saturday-morning cartoons, prime time, like prime time cartoons, to late night, like late night anime. They may also be broadcast on weekdays (weekday cartoons) or only on weekends.
The duration of each episode varies depending on the series. Traditionally, series are produced as complete half-hour or nearly half-hour programs; however, many are produced as animated shorts of 10–11 minutes, which can then paired with other shorts to fill a set time period. There are also some short series with a length of approximately five minutes; these have recently become more common in anime.
They are sometimes grouped together according to network programming demands. Thus a particular series may appear in a number of formats or time block.
Animated television series had historically been used for comedy, like the cartoons, a piece of art, usually developed for humorous intent, and so, called cartoon series. However, more recently animated television series have fallen into other genres such as action / adventure series like Speed Racer and G.I. Joe.
The first animated television series was Crusader Rabbit.
Animated sitcoms first appeared in the 1960s, with The Flintstones (1960–1966), followed by The Jetsons (1962–1987).
From 1972 to 1974, Hanna-Barbera produced Wait Till Your Father Gets Home, an adult-oriented sitcom in the style of All in the Family.
The 1980s and 1990s was a renaissance of the cartoon children's television series and adult's television series. Various broadcast networks and media companies began creating television channels and formats designed specifically for airing cartoon series. Companies that already had these types of formats in place began to revamp their existing models during this time. Examples of these are:


Cartoon Network
Fox Kids
Kids' WB
UPN Kids
Discovery Family
Nickelodeon
Nick Jr.
Nicktoons
Disney Channel
Disney XD
Disney Junior
Boomerang
ABC Kids
Adult Swim
Qubo
CBeebies
CBBC
PBS Kids


During the 1990s more mature content than those of traditional cartoon series began to appear more widely extending beyond a primary audience of children. These cartoon series included The Simpsons, The Ren & Stimpy Show, Rocko's Modern Life, Beavis and Butt-Head, King of the Hill, Duckman, South Park and Family Guy. ReBoot, which began as a child-friendly show, shifted its target age group to ages 12 and up (South Park is from ages 18 and up), resulting in a darker and more mature storyline.[1] Plus the cartoons for kids like SpongeBob SquarePants, Adventure Time, Phineas and Ferb, Gravity Falls, Rugrats, Hey Arnold!, The Fairly OddParents and Steven Universe.
Theatrical[edit]
See also: List of animated short series
Animated series shown in movie theatres include the Tom and Jerry animated cartoon short films that appeared in movie theaters from 1940 to 1967.
Direct-to-video[edit]
See also: List of animated direct-to-video series
Direct-to-video animated series include most Japanese original video animations (OVAs). The first OVA series (and also the first overall OVA) was Dallos (1983). Almost all hentai (pornographic) anime series are released as OVAs.
Internet[edit]
See also: List of animated internet series
Animated web series first appeared in the late 1990s, with the first internet animated cartoon series, The Goddamn George Liquor Program (1997–1998), followed by other early series that included WhirlGirl, Happy Tree Friends, Starship Regulars, Gotham Girls and Mr. Wong. Internet animated series include some Japanese original net animations like Hetalia: Axis Powers and Appleseed XIII (2011–2012).
See also[edit]


Animation portal
Cartoon portal


References[edit]


^ Hetherington, Janet L. "As Mainframe's technology reaches adolescence, there's a 'ReBoot' Renaissance". Animation Magazine #59. Vol. 11, Issue 8, September 1997.








v
t
e


Animation topics



By country







Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
Czech Republic
Estonia
India
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Thailand
United States
Vietnam





History



Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Hungary
Iran
Korea
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States








Industry



Animator

List


Animation department
Animation director
Story artist
Animation studios

List


Animation database
Biologist simulators
Animation film festivals

international
regional


Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends)
Outsourcing
International Animation Day





Works



Films

Based on cartoons
Computer-animated
Feature-length
Lost or unfinished
Package
Short
Short series
Stop-motion


Series

Direct-to-video
Internet
Television







Techniques




Traditional



Limited animation
Masking
Rotoscoping





Stop motion



Barrier grid
Clay

strata-cut


Cutout (silhouette)
Graphic
Model

go motion


Object
Pixilation
Puppetoon





Computer
(history, timeline)




2D



Flash
PowerPoint
SVG
CSS
Digital puppetry





3D



Cel shading
Crowd
Morph target
Motion capture
Non-photorealistic rendering
Procedural
Skeletal
Machinima
Digital puppetry
Virtual cinematography








Other methods



Blocking
Chuckimation
Drawn-on-film
Flip book
Inbetweening
Kinegram
Paint-on-glass
Pinscreen
Pixel art
Pose to pose
Rubber hose
Sand
Syncro-Vox
Zoetrope








Variants



Abstract animation (visual music)
Adult animation
Animated cartoon
Animated sitcom
Animated documentary
Cartoon pornography
Educational animation
Erotic animation
Independent animation
Instructional animation





Related topics



Animation music

Mickey Mousing


Character animation

model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model


Twelve principles
Motion comic
Films with live action and animation

highest grossing


Cartoon physics
Cartoon violence
Most expensive animated films








 Book
 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Animated_series&oldid=815258082"					Categories: Animated seriesTelevision genresHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2015All articles needing additional references