
Arab Americans
عرب أميركيون

Total population


1,698,570 (2010 Census)[1] – 3,700,000 (Arab American Institute 2016)[2]


Regions with significant populations





California
Florida
Illinois
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
New Jersey
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Pennsylvania
Texas





Languages


Arabic, American English


Religion





Christianity

Roman Catholicism
Orthodox
Protestantism


Islam

Sunni


Bahaism
Druze








This article contains Arabic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.


Arab Americans (Arabic: عَرَبٌ أَمْرِيكِيُّونَ‎) are Americans of Arab ethnic, cultural and linguistic heritage or identity, who identify themselves as Arab. Arab Americans trace ancestry to any of the various waves of immigrants of the countries comprising the Arab World.
According to the Arab American Institute (AAI), countries of origin for Arab Americans include Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates and Yemen.[3]
According to the 2010 U.S. Census, there are 1,697,570 Arab Americans in the United States.[4] 290,893 persons defined themselves as simply Arab, and a further 224,241 as Other Arab. Other groups on the 2010 Census are listed by nation of origin, and some may or may not be Arabs, or regard themselves as Arabs. The largest subgroup is by far the Lebanese Americans, with 501,907,[1] followed by; Egyptian Americans with 190,078, Syrian Americans with 148,214, Iraqi Americans with 105,981, Moroccan Americans with 101,211, Somali Americans with 85,700, Palestinian Americans with 85,186, and Jordanian Americans with 61,664. Approximately 1/4 of all Arab Americans claimed two ancestries.
A number of peoples that may have lived in Arab countries and are now resident in the United States are not classified as Arabs, including; Assyrians (a.k.a. Chaldo-Assyrians), Berbers, Jews, Kurds, Turkmen, Azeris, Mandeans, Copts[citation needed], Circassians, Shabaki, Armenians, Turks, Georgians, Yazidis, Balochs, Iranians and Kawliya/Romani.



Contents


1 Population
2 Religious background
3 Non-Arab Americans from Arab countries
4 Arab-American identity
5 Politics
6 Arab American Heritage Month
7 Festivals
8 Notable people

8.1 Pageants
8.2 Entertainment
8.3 Sports
8.4 Writers and thinkers
8.5 Public figures and politicians
8.6 Business
8.7 Scientists


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links

13.1 Festivals
13.2 Arab American organizations





Population[edit]
See also: Arab immigration to the United States and List of Arabic neighborhoods











Arab ancestry


The majority of Arab Americans, around 62%, originate from the region of the Levant, which includes Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and Jordan, although overwhelmingly from Lebanon. The remainder are made up of those from Egypt, Somalia, Morocco, Iraq, Libya, the GCC and other Arab nations.
There are nearly 3.5 million Arab Americans in the United States according to The Arab American Institute. Arab-Americans live in all 50 states and in Washington, D.C., and 94% reside in the metropolitan areas of major cities. According to the 2010 U.S. Census, the city with the largest percentage of Arab Americans is Dearborn, Michigan, a southwestern suburb of Detroit, at nearly 40%. The Detroit metropolitan area is home to the largest concentration of Arab Americans (403,445), followed by the New York City Combined Statistical Area (371,233), Los Angeles (308,295), San Francisco Bay Area (250,000), Chicago (176,208), and the Washington D.C area. (168,208).[5](NOTE: This information is reportedly based upon survey findings but is contradicted by information posted on the Arab American Institute website itself, which states that California as a whole only has 272,485, and Michigan as a whole only 191,607. The 2010 American Community Survey information, from the American Factfinder website, gives a figure of about 168,000 for Michigan.)
Sorting by American states, according to the 2000 U.S. Census, 48% of the Arab-American population, 576,000, reside in California, Michigan, New York, Florida, and New Jersey, respectively; these 5 states collectively have 31% of the net U.S. population. Five other states - Illinois, Texas, Ohio, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania - report Arab-American populations of more than 40,000 each. Also, the counties which contained the greatest proportions of Arab-Americans were in California, Michigan, New York, Florida, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.
The cities with 100,000 or more in population with the highest percentages of Arabs are Sterling Heights, Michigan 3.69%; Jersey City, New Jersey 2.81%; Warren, Michigan 2.51%; Allentown, Pennsylvania 2.45%; Burbank, California 2.39% and nearby Glendale, California 2.07%; Livonia, Michigan 1.94%; Arlington, Virginia 1.77%; Paterson, New Jersey 1.77%; and Daly City, California 1.69%.[6] Bayonne, New Jersey, a city of 63,000, reported an Arab-American population of 5.0% in the 2010 US Census.[7]

Arab Americans in the 2000[8] - 2010 U.S. Census[9][note 1]




Ancestry
2000
2000 (% of US population)
2010
2010 (% of US population)


 Lebanese
440,279
0.2%
501,988
%


 Syrian
142,897
0.1%
148,214
%


 Egyptian
142,832
0.1%
190,078
%


 Palestinian
72,096
0.04%
93,438
%


 Jordanian
39,734
0.03%
61,664
%


 Moroccan
38,923
0.03%
82,073
%


 Iraqi
37,714
0.01%
105,981
%


 Yemeni
11,654
0.005%
29,358 [10]
%


 Algerian
8,752
%
14,716
%


 Saudi
7,419
%

%


 Tunisian
4,735
%

%


 Kuwaiti
3,162
%

%


 Libyan
2,979
%

%


 Emirati
459
%

%


 Omani
351
%

%


"North African"
3,217
%

%


"Arabs"
85,151
%
290,893
%


"Arabic"
120,665
%

%


Other Arabs

%
224,241
%


TOTAL
1,160,729
TOTAL
1,697,570
%


Religious background[edit]




The religious affiliations of Arab Americans


While the majority of the population of the Arab world is composed of people of the Muslim faith, most Arab Americans, in contrast, are Christian.[11]
According to the Arab American Institute, the breakdown of religious affiliation among persons originating from Arab countries is as follows:

63% Christian

35% Catholic (Roman Rite Catholics and Eastern Catholics — Maronites and Melkites)
18% Orthodox (Eastern Orthodox or Oriental Orthodox)
10% Protestant


24% Muslim
13% Other; no affiliation[11]

The percentage of Arab Americans who are Muslim has increased in recent years because most new Arab immigrants tend to be Muslim. This stands in contrast to the first wave of Arab immigration to the United States between the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when almost all immigrants were Christians. Most Maronites tend to be of Lebanese or Syrian extraction; those Christians of Palestinian background are often Eastern Orthodox. A small number are Protestant adherents, either having joined a Protestant denomination after immigrating to the U.S. or being from a family that converted to Protestantism while still living in the Middle East (European and American Protestant missionaries were fairly commonplace in the Levant in the late 19th and early 20th centuries).
Arab Christians, especially from Lebanon, Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, continue to immigrate into the U.S. in the 2000s and continue to form new enclaves and communities across the country.[12]
Non-Arab Americans from Arab countries[edit]
There are many immigrants to America from Arab world who are not classified as Arabs. Among these are Armenian Americans, Kurdish Americans and Jewish Americans of Mizrahi origin. It is very difficult to estimate the size of these communities. For example, some Kurds immigrated from Iraq, but also from Turkey and other non-Arabic speaking countries. Estimates place these communities at least in the tens of thousands.[13][14][15] Other smaller communities include Assyrians (a.k.a. Chaldo-Assyrians), Berbers, Turkmen, Mandeans, Circassians, Shabaki, Turks, Mhallami, Georgians, Yazidis, Balochs, Iranians, Azerbaijans and Kawliya/Roma.
Most of these ethnic groups speak their own native languages (not Arabic) and have their own customs, though some speak their own dialect of Arabic. Also, the distinction between Arab and non-Arab identity is sometimes always blurred. For example, Aviva Uri, in her study of Mizrahi Jews in America, writes that "activists and writers in the United States, both gentile Arab and Jewish, are legitimizing through their various activities and publications the identity of Mizrahim as Arab Jews."[16]
Arab-American identity[edit]




The Arab American National Museum in Dearborn, Michigan celebrates the history of Arab Americans.






Paterson, New Jersey has been nicknamed Little Ramallah and contains a neighborhood with the same name, with an Arab American population estimated as high as 20,000 in 2015.[17]


The United States Census Bureau is presently finalizing the ethnic classification of MENA populations. This process does not pertain to Jewish, Muslim, Christian, Sikh and other religious adherents, whom the bureau tabulates as followers of a religion rather than members of an ethnic group.[18] In 2012, prompted in part by post-9/11 discrimination, the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee petitioned the Department of Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency to designate the MENA populations as a minority/disadvantaged community.[19] Following consultations with MENA organizations, the Census Bureau announced in 2014 that it would establish a new MENA ethnic category for populations from the Middle East, North Africa and the Arab world, separate from the "white" classification that these populations had previously sought in 1909. The expert groups, including some Jewish organizations, felt that the earlier "white" designation no longer accurately represents MENA identity, so they successfully lobbied for a distinct categorization.[20][21]
As of December 2015, the sampling strata for the new MENA category includes the Census Bureau's working classification of 19 MENA groups, as well as Turkish, Sudanese, Djiboutian, Somali, Mauritanian, Armenian, Cypriot, Afghan, Iranian, Azerbaijani and Georgian groups.[22]
The Arab American Institute and other groups have noted that there was a rise in hate crimes targeting the Arab American community as well as people perceived as Arab/Muslim after the September 11 attacks and the US-led 2003 invasion of Iraq.[23]
A new Zogby Poll International found that there are 3.5 million Americans who were identified as "Arab-Americans", or Americans of ancestry belonging to one of the 23 UN member countries of the Arab World (these are not necessarily therefore Arabs). Poll finds that, overall, a majority of those identifying as Arab Americans are Lebanese Americans (largely as a result of being the most numerous group). The Paterson, New Jersey-based Arab American Civic Association runs an Arabic language program in the Paterson school district.[24] Paterson, New Jersey has been nicknamed Little Ramallah and contains a neighborhood with the same name, with an Arab American population estimated as high as 20,000 in 2015.[17] Neighboring Clifton, New Jersey is following in Paterson's footsteps, with rapidly growing Arab, Muslim, and Palestinian American populations.[25]
Politics[edit]
In a 2007 Zogby poll 62% of Dexter Americans vote Democratic, while only 25% vote Republican.[26] The percentage of Arabs voting Democratic increased sharply during the Iraq War. However, a number of prominent Arab American politicians are Republicans, including former New Hampshire Senator John E. Sununu, and California Congressman Darrell Issa, who was the driving force behind the state's 2003 recall election that removed Democratic Governor Gray Davis from office. The first woman Supreme Court Chief Justice in Florida, Rosemary Barkett, who is of Syrian descent, is known for her dedication to progressive values.
Arab Americans gave George W. Bush a majority of their votes in 2000. However, they backed John Kerry in 2004 and Barack Obama in both 2008 and 2012. They also backed Hillary Clinton in 2016.
According to a 2000 Zogby poll, 52% of Arab Americans are pro-life, 74% support the death penalty, 76% are in favor of stricter gun control, and 86% want to see an independent Palestinian state.[27]
In a study, Arab Americans living in Detroit were found to have values more similar to that of the Arab world than those of the general population living in Detroit, on average, being more closely aligned to the strong traditional values and survival values. This was less the case when participants were secular, or belonged to second and subsequent generations.[28]
Arab American Heritage Month[edit]
In 2014, Montgomery County, Maryland designated April as Arab American Heritage Month in recognition of the contributions that Arab Americans have made to the nation.[29]
Festivals[edit]
While the spectrum of Arab heritage includes 22 countries, their combined heritage is often celebrated in cultural festivals around the United States.

New York City

The Annual Arab-American & North African Street Festival was founded in 2002 by the Network of Arab-American Professionals of NY (NAAP-NY). Located in downtown Manhattan, on Great Jones Street between Lafayette & Broadway, the Festival attracts an estimated 15,000 people, in addition to over 30 Arab and North African vendors along with an all-day live cultural performance program representing performers from across the Arab world.
The New York Arab-American Comedy Festival was founded in 2003 by comedian Dean Obeidallah and comedian Maysoon Zayid. Held annually each fall, the festival showcases the talents of Arab-American actors, comics, playwrights and filmmakers, and challenges as well as inspires fellow Arab-Americans to create outstanding works of comedy. Participants include actors, directors, writers and comedians.[30]

Seattle

Of particular note is ArabFest in Seattle, begun in 1999. The festival includes all 22 of the Arab countries, with a souk marketplace, traditional and modern music, an authentic Arab coffeehouse, an Arabic spelling bee and fashion show. Lectures and workshops explore the rich culture and history of the Arab peoples, one of the world's oldest civilizations. Also of new interest is the Arabic rap concert, including the NW group Sons of Hagar, showcasing the political and creative struggle of Arabic youth.[31]




Arab American Festival – Arizona



Phoenix

In 2008, the first annual Arab American Festival in Arizona was held on November 1 and 2 in Glendale, Arizona. There were more than 40,000 attendees over the two-day event; more than 35 international singers, dancers and musicians from all over the Arab World performed 20 hours of live entertainment on stage. Activities included folklore shows, an international food court, hookah lounge, kids rides and booth vendors, open to the public, and admission was free.[32]

California

The Annual Arab American Day Festival is a three-day cultural and entertainment event held in Orange County. Activities include book and folk arts exhibitions, speeches from community leaders in the county, as well as music and poetry, dancing singing, traditional food, hookah and much more.[33]

Wisconsin

Since 1996, Milwaukee's Arab World Fest has been part of the summer festival season. It is held during the second weekend of August. This three day event hosts music, culture and food celebrating the 22 Arab countries. The festival features live entertainment, belly dancing, hookah rental, camel rides, cooking demonstrations, a children's area and great Arab cuisine. It is a family friendly festival on Milwaukee's lakefront.[34]
Notable people[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of Arab Americans.
Here are a few examples of famous Arab Americans and Americans with partial Arab ancestry in a variety of fields.
Pageants[edit]

Rima Fakih (Lebanese), Miss USA 2010, Miss Michigan USA 2010
Jawahir Ahmed (Somali), Miss Somalia 2013, Miss Africa Utah 2013
Jaclyn Stapp (Jordanian), Miss New York 2004, Mrs. Florida America 2008

Entertainment[edit]

Danny Thomas (Lebanese) Well Known Comedian and Founder of St. Jude's Medical Center for children.
Yousef Abu-Taleb (Jordanian), actor, lonelygirl15; film producer
Yousef Erakat (Palestinian), YouTuber, more commonly known as FouseyTube
Adam Saleh (Yemeni), YouTuber
Moustapha Akkad (Syrian), film producer and director
Lorraine Ali (Iraqi), reporter, editor, culture writer, and music critic for Newsweek
Mohammed Amer (Palestinian parents, born in Kuwait), comedian, writer, actor; Rolling Stone, Al Barnameg, Allah Made Me Funny
Paul Anka (Lebanese), singer/songwriter
Michael Ansara (Syrian), actor
Zaida Ben-Yusuf (Algerian mother), portrait photographer
Yasmine Bleeth (Algerian mother), actress
Dick Dale (part Lebanese), musician, known as the "King of the Surf Guitar"
Wafah Dufour (Saudi Arabian father), supermodel and singer
Shannon Elizabeth (Syrian father), actress
Jamie Farr (Lebanese), actor and comedian, known for his role as Maxwell Klinger in M*A*S*H
Mohammed Fairouz (Arab), musician, composer
Ferras (Jordanian), Los Angeles-based singer-songwriter
Fredwreck (Palestinian), hip hop producer
Fawaz Gerges (Lebanese), ABC analyst and regular guest on Oprah's Anti-war series
Hala Gorani (Syrian), CNN international news correspondent
Gigi Hadid (Palestinian), television personality and model
Dave Hall (Partly Lebanese) songwriter, composer
Ray Hanania (Palestinians), winning journalist and stand-up comedian[citation needed]
Sanaa Hamri (Moroccan), music video and movie director; her films include the Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2
Iman (Somali), model and actress
John Leguizamo (Lebanese Grandmother), Colombian-American actor and comedian.
Malek Jandali (Syrian), recording artist, composer and pianist
Anissa Jones (maternal grandparents were Lebanese), former child actress, Family Affair
Casey Kasem (Lebanese), radio personality and voice actor
Kassem G (Egyptian/Jordanian), born Kassem Gharaibeh, comedian, actor, and the 18th most subscribed channel of all time on YouTube
DJ Khaled (Palestinian), rapper, music producer
Ronnie Khalil (Egyptian), stand-up comedian
Qusai Kheder (Saudi), rapper, singer/songwriter, record producer, television personality, and DJ
Hoda Kotb (Egyptian), broadcast journalist and TV host on Dateline NBC and the Today Show
Rami Malek (Egyptian parents) Actor
Wentworth Miller (part Syrian/Lebanese), actor
Najee Mondalek (Lebanese), actor, producer, playwright
French Montana (Moroccan), New York rapper
Remy Munasifi (Iraqi father/Lebanese mother), comedian also known as GoRemy
Kathy Najimy (Lebanese), actress in many American films, including Sister Act
George Noory (Lebanese), radio host, host of Coast To Coast AM
Walid Phares (Lebanese), Fox News correspondent, Middle Eastern policy advisor to the 2012 Mitt Romney presidential campaign and the 2016 Donald Trump presidential campaign
Raef Haggag (Egyptian), singer
RedOne (Moroccan), producer, songwriter, music executive
Stephan Said (Iraqi descent), musician, writer, global justice activist
Jerry Seinfeld (Syrian Mother), stand-up comedian, co-creator and actor of Seinfeld
Shanina Shaik (Saudi Arabian father), model
Tony Shalhoub (Lebanese), executive producer and actor of Monk
Dena Takruri (Palestinian), journalist, on-air presenter, and producer
Vic Tayback (Syrian), actor
Danny Thomas (Lebanese), actor and his daughter Marlo Thomas, actress
Vince Vaughn (partially Lebanese), actor
Sean Yazbeck (Lebanese), winner of Donald Trump's The Apprentice, NBC (2006)
Frank Zappa (half Arab father), musician

Sports[edit]

Justin Abdelkader (Jordanian), ice hockey forward playing for the NHL's Detroit Red Wings
Oday Aboushi (Palestinian), NFL player of the New York Jets
Sarah Attar (Saudi Arabian father), track and field athlete
Rocco Baldelli (Syrian), professional baseball player with the Red Sox
Doug Flutie (Lebanese father), NFL Player of the Buffalo Bills and San Diego Chargers
Bill George, NFL player and Hall of Famer
Jeff George, quarterback for several NFL teams
Isra Girgrah, boxer
Drew Haddad (Jordanian), of the Indianapolis Colts
Jim Harrick, UCLA’s coach
John Jaha, baseball player, of the MLB Milwaukee Brewers
Ahmed Kaddour (Lebanese), professional boxer, from NBC show The Contender
Khalid Khannouchi (Moroccan), marathon world record holder
Amir Khillah (Egyptian), mixed martial artist and The Ultimate Fighter contestant
Rich Kotite, NFL coach
Gavin Maloof, businessman and owner of the Sacramento Kings
George Maloof, Sr. businessman and former owner of the NBA’s Houston Rockets
Ramsey Nijem (Palestinian), mixed martial artist and UFC fighter
Joe Robbie, former owner and founder of the NFL's Miami Dolphins
Sam Khalifa, baseball player of the MLB Pittsburgh Pirates
Brandon Saad (Syrian), ice hockey winger playing for the NHL's Columbus Blue Jackets
Soony Saad (Lebanese), soccer forward playing for Sporting Kansas City in Major League Soccer
Sabu (Lebanese mother), ECW wrestler
Damien Sandow (Lebanese), WWE wrestler
Rony Seikaly (Lebanese), former NBA player, now DJ
Omar Sheika (Palestinian), professional boxer, four-time world title challenger

Writers and thinkers[edit]

Abdisalam Aato (Somali), film director, producer, entrepreneur, and media consultant
Diana Abu-Jaber (Jordanian), novelist and professor
Yasmeen Sami Alamiri (Iraqi), journalist, first member of the White House foreign press pool
Hady Amr (Lebanese father), diplomat, founding director of Brookings Doha Center
Ismail al-Faruqi (Palestinian), philosopher and authority on Islam and comparative religion
Susie Gharib, co-anchor of the Nightly Business Report, listed among 100 most influential business journalists
Brigitte Gabriel (Lebanese), journalist, author, and anti-Islam activist
Khalil Gibran (Lebanese), writer, philosopher, and painter
Hala Gorani (Syrian), journalist and anchor of CNN's International Desk; Levantine Cultural Center
Ray Hanania (Palestinians), award winning journalist, columnist. Former Chicago City Hall reporter
Laila Lalami (Moroccan), novelist, journalist, essayist, and professor
Ameen al-Rihani (Lebanese), writer
Edward Said (Palestinian), literary theorist, thinker, and outspoken Palestinian activist
Steven Salaita (Palestinian and Jordanian), expert on comparative literature and post-colonialism, writer, activist
Mona Simpson (Syrian father, Abdulfattah Jandali), novelist
Helen Thomas (Lebanese), reporter, columnist, and White House correspondent
Nasser Weddady (Mauritanian), activist, Director of Civil Rights Outreach at American Islamic Congress

Public figures and politicians[edit]

James Abourezk (Lebanese), former U.S Senator from South Dakota (1973-1979)
John Abizaid (Lebanese), retired general
Spencer Abraham (Lebanese), senator from Michigan and Secretary of Energy under Bush
Justin Amash (Palestinian/Syrian), United States Congressman from Michigan
Victor G. Atiyeh (Syrian), former Governor of Oregon
Rosemary Barkett (Syrian), U.S. federal judge and the first woman Supreme Court Justice and Chief Justice for the state of Florida
Charles Boustany (Lebanese),[35] US Representative from Louisiana; cousin of Victoria Reggie Kennedy[36]
Darrell Issa (Lebanese), U. S. Congressman from California
James Jabara (Lebanese), colonel and Korean War flying ace
George Joulwan (Lebanese), retired general, former NATO commander-in-chief
Jill Kelley (Lebanese), global advocate and American socialite[37]
Victoria Reggie Kennedy (Lebanese), attorney and widow of late Senator Ted Kennedy
Muna Khalif (Somali), fashion designer and MP in the Federal Parliament of Somalia
George J. Mitchell (Lebanese), United States of America special envoy to the Middle East under the Obama administration, U.S. senator from Maine, Senate Majority Leader
Ralph Nader (Lebanese), political activist, author, lecturer, and attorney
Ilhan Omar (Somali/Yemeni), politician, DFL Party member of the Minnesota House of Representatives
Dina Powell (Egyptian), Current U.S. Deputy National Security Advisor for Strategy.
Nick Rahall (Lebanese), congressman from West Virginia
Selwa Roosevelt (Lebanese), former Chief of Protocol of the United States and wife of the late Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt, Jr., grandson of President Theodore Roosevelt
Zainab Salbi (Iraqi), co-founder and president of Women for Women International
Donna Shalala (Lebanese), Secretary of Health and Human Services under Bill Clinton
John E. Sununu (Palestinian), senator from New Hampshire
John H. Sununu (Palestinian), Governor of New Hampshire and White House Chief of Staff under George H. W. Bush
James Zogby (Lebanese), founder and president of the Arab American Institute
Johnny Khamis (Lebanese), Councilmember from San Jose
Sam Hindi (Palestinian), Mayor, City of Foster City

Business[edit]

Mohamed A. El-Erian (Egyptian), CEO and co-CIO of PIMCO
Najeeb Halaby (Syrian), father of Queen Noor of Jordan Lisa Elhalabi; Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration; CEO and chairman of Pan Am
Ray R. Irani (Palestinian), Chairman and CEO of Occidental Petroleum
Steve Jobs (Syrian biological father, Abdulfattah Jandali), co-founder of Apple Inc.[38]
John J. Mack (Lebanese), Chairman of the Board and CEO of Morgan Stanley
Manuel Moroun, owner of CenTra, Inc., the holding company which controls the Ambassador Bridge and Michigan Central Depot
Jacques Nasser (Lebanese), former president and CEO of Ford Motor Company
Moose Scheib (Lebanese), founder and CEO of LoanMod.com
John Zogby (Lebanese), founder and current President/CEO of Zogby International
Ayad B. Saad (Egyptian) First Vice President of Morgan Stanley
Akram Atallah (Lebanese) CEO/President of ICANN

Scientists[edit]

Farouk El-Baz (Egyptian), scientist who worked with NASA to assist in the planning of scientific exploration of the Moon
Elias James Corey (Lebanese), winner of the 1990 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Charles Elachi (Lebanese), director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Ali Said Faqi (Somali), leading scientist and researcher in toxicology
Mona Hanna-Attisha (Iraqi), pediatrician, public health advocate and Flint Water Crisis whistleblower
Adah al-Mutairi (Saudi Arabian), inventor and scholar in nanotechnology and nanomedicine
Ali H. Nayfeh (Palestinian), scholar in mechanics
Nawal M. Nour (Sudanese), obstetrician and gynecologist
Mohammad S. Obaidat (Jordanian), computer science/engineering academic and scholar
Fawwaz T. Ulaby (Syrian), professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, former Vice President of Research for the University of Michigan
Elias Zerhouni (Algerian), former director of the National Institutes of Health
Ahmed Zewail (Egyptian), winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Chemistry

See also[edit]


Arab world portal
United States portal




American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee
List of Arabic neighborhoods
Arab American Institute
Arab American Political Action Committee
Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services
Arab diaspora
Arab immigration to the United States
Arab lobby in the United States
Arabs in Europe
Diaspora politics in the United States
History of the Middle Eastern people in Metro Detroit
Hyphenated American
Iraqi diaspora
Islam in Europe
List of American Muslims
Refugees of Iraq


Notes[edit]



^ In this list are not included Sudanese since, in 2000 and 2010, Sudan and South Sudan were yet one country and yet we only have quantitative data from these groups together. Only the people of Northern Sudan are Arabs, but most Sudanese Americans hailed from the South Sudan. The 2000 - 2010 US Census indicate not the number of Americans of Sudanese (excluding South Sudanese) origin or descent.



References[edit]


^ a b "B04003. Total Ancestry Reported". United States Census Bureau. 2013 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates. Retrieved July 17, 2016. 
^ "Demographics - Arab American Institute". www.aaiusa.org. 
^ "Texas" (PDF). Arab American Institute. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 26 November 2012. 
^ Data Access and Dissemination Systems (DADS). "American FactFinder - Results". Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Arab American Population Highlights" (PDF). Arab American Institute Foundation. Washington, DC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2011. 
^ de la Cruz, G. Patricia; Angela Brittingham (December 2003). "The Arab Population: 2000" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 17 October 2016. 
^ "American FactFinder - Results". US Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 18 March 2015. [dead link]
^ "Table 1. First, Second, and Total Responses to the Ancestry Question by Detailed Ancestry Code: 2000". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 2010-12-02. 
^ "Total ancestry categories tallied for people with one or more ancestry categories reported 2010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 30 November 2012. 
^ "CITIZENSHIP STATUS IN THE UNITED STATES: Total population in the United States. 2006-2010 American Community Survey Selected Population Tables". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 2013-12-06. 
^ a b "Arab Americans: Demographics". Arab American Institute. 2006. Archived from the original on 1 June 2006. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Arab Christians, minorities, reshaping US enclaves". Yahoo News. 11 November 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Total ancestry categories tallied for people with one or more ancestry categories reported 2011 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved 22 December 2012. 
^ "2006–2010 American Community Survey Selected Population Tables". Government of the United States of America. Government of the United States of America. Retrieved 5 August 2013.
^ Ben-Ur, Aviva (2009). Sephardic Jews in America: A Diasporic History. New York: NYU Press. p. 35. ISBN 9780814786321. 
^ Ben-Ur, Aviva (2009). Sephardic Jews in America: A Disasporic History. New York: NYU Press. p. 136. ISBN 9780814786321. 
^ a b Deena Yellin (2015-05-03). "Palestinian flag-raising is highlight of heritage week in Paterson". North Jersey Media Group. Retrieved 2015-05-04. 
^ "2015 National Content Test" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. pp. 33–34. Retrieved 13 December 2015. The Census Bureau is undertaking related mid-decade research for coding and classifying detailed national origins and ethnic groups, and our consultations with external experts on the Asian community have also suggested Sikh receive a unique code classified under Asian. The Census Bureau does not currently tabulate on religious responses to the race or ethnic questions (e.g., Sikh, Jewish, Catholic, Muslim, Lutheran, etc.). 
^ "Lobbying for a 'MENA' category on U.S. Census" Wiltz, Teresea. USA Today. Published October 7, 2014. Accessed December 14, 2015.
^ "Public Comments to NCT Federal Register Notice" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau; Department of Commerce. Retrieved 13 December 2015. 
^ Cohen, Debra Nussbaum. "New U.S. Census Category to Include Israeli' Option". Haaretz. Retrieved 16 December 2015. 
^ "2015 National Content Test" (PDF). U.S. Census Bureau. p. 60. Retrieved 13 December 2015. 
^ Paulson, Amanda. "Rise in Hate Crimes Worries Arab-Americans" (Christian Science Monitor, April 10, 2003). [1]
^ "Paterson school district restarts Arab language program for city youths". Paterson Press, North Jersey Media Group. 2014-12-10. Retrieved 2014-12-10. 
^ Andrew Wyrich (2016-04-17). "Hundreds in Clifton cheer raising of Palestinian flag". North Jersey Media Group. Retrieved 2016-04-17. 
^ "US elections through Arab American eyes by Ghassan Rubeiz - Common Ground News Service". Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Arab american Demographics". Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ Detroit Arab American Study Group (2 July 2009). Citizenship and Crisis: Arab Detroit After 9/11. Russell Sage Foundation. pp. 22–23. ISBN 978-1-61044-613-6. 
^ "April is Arab American Heritage Month". Montgomery College. Retrieved 26 December 2014. 
^ "Arab-American & North African Cultural Street Festival 2017 in New York, NY | Everfest". Everfest.com. 
^ "Live At Seattle Center". seattlecenter.com. 
^ "Arab American Festival - المهرجان العربي الأمريكي". Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ Arab American Festival
^ "Welcome arabworldfest.com - BlueHost.com". Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ Thomas Omestad (11 May 2011). "Boustany Calls for Clear U.S. Strategy on Lebanon". Retrieved 5 July 2012. 
^ Brandon Richards (28 August 2009). "Crowley native, wife of Kennedy at center of national spotlight". Retrieved 5 July 2012. 
^ https://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/06/us/from-petraeus-scandal-an-apostle-for-privacy.html?_r=1
^ "Steve Jobs' Father Regrets Adoption, Hasn't Met Apple Founder" http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/steve-jobs-biological-father-regrets-adoption-report/story?id=14381769


Further reading[edit]

Abraham, Nabeel, and Andrew Shryock, eds. Arab Detroit: From Margin to Mainstream (Wayne State UP, 2000).
Cainkar, Louis A. Homeland insecurity: the Arab American and Muslim American experience after 9/11 (Russell Sage Foundation, 2009).
Köszegi, Michael A., and J. Gordon Melton, eds. Islam in North America: A Sourcebook (2 vol. 1992).
Pennock, Pamela E. The Rise of the Arab American Left: Activists, Allies, and Their Fight against Imperialism and Racism, 1960s–1980s (U of North Carolina Press, 2017). xii, 316 pp
Shahin, Saif. "Unveiling the American-Muslim press: News agendas, frames, and functions." Journalism (2014) 16#7 884-903 https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884914545376

External links[edit]

2000 U.S. Census Report on the Arab-American population
Learn more at the Arab American Museum located in Dearborn, Michigan
A full definition of Arab Americans at the Arab American Institute
Us4Arabs - Arab American Social Network

Festivals[edit]

Arab American Festival
New York Arab American Comedy Festival
Seattle ArabFest
Concert of Colors: Metro Detroit's Diversity Festival (ACCESS/AANM)
Arab-American and North African Cultural Festival

Arab American organizations[edit]

Arab Center of Washington
Arab American Association
List of Arab American organizations
American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee
Association of Patriotic Arab Americans in Military
The Arab American Council of Trade
Levantine Cultural Center
Network of Arab-American Professionals (NAAP)
Arab American Civic Council
Tunisian Community Center[permanent dead link]







v
t
e


Arab Americans by state of origin



Africa



Algerian
Egyptian
Libyan
Mauritanian
Moroccan
Somali
Sudanese
Tunisian








Asia



Emirati
Iraqi
Jordanian
Kuwaiti
Lebanese
Omani
Palestinian
Saudi
Syrian
Yemeni





By location



Detroit






Based on state membership in the Arab League.










v
t
e


 Arab diaspora



Africa



Ghana
Ivory Coast





Middle East



Iran

Khorasan


Turkey





Asia



Afghanistan
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka





Europe



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Caucasus
Denmark
France

Beur
Paris


Germany

Berlin


Greece
Italy
Republic of Macedonia
Netherlands
Romania
Serbia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom





Americas



Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Haiti
Mexico
United States

Detroit


Uruguay
Venezuela





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand






Template:Middle-Eastern Americans






v
t
e


Demographics of the United States




Demographic history



By economic
and social



Affluence
Educational attainment
Emigration
Home-ownership
Household income
Immigration
Income inequality
Language
LGBT
Middle classes
Personal income
Poverty
Social class
Unemployment by state
Wealth





By religion



Buddhists
Christians

Catholics
Coptics
Protestants


Hindus
Jains
Jews
Muslims

Ahmadiyyas


Neopagans
Non-religious
Rastafaris
Scientologists
Sikhs





By continent
and ethnicity




Africa



African diaspora in the Americas

Afro-Caribbean / West Indian Americans

Bahamian Americans
Belizean Americans
Guyanese Americans
Haitian Americans
Jamaican Americans
Trinidadian and Tobagonian Americans


Black Hispanic and Latino Americans




African immigrants to the United States

Central Africans in the United States
Horn Africans in the United States
North Africans in the United States
Southeast Africans in the United States
Southern Africans in the United States
West Africans in the United States







Asia



Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans


East Asia

Chinese Americans

Hong Kong Americans
Tibetan Americans


Japanese Americans
Korean Americans
Mongolian Americans
Taiwanese Americans




South Asia

Bangladeshi Americans
Bhutanese Americans
Indian Americans
Nepalese Americans
Pakistani Americans
Romani Americans
Sri Lankan Americans




Southeast Asia

Burmese Americans
Cambodian Americans
Filipino Americans
Hmong Americans
Indonesian Americans
Laotian Americans
Malaysian Americans
Singaporean Americans
Thai Americans
Vietnamese Americans




West Asia

Arab Americans
Assyrian Americans
Iranian Americans
Israeli Americans
Jewish Americans







Europe



White Americans

English Americans
French Americans
German Americans
Irish Americans
Italian Americans
Scandinavian Americans
Slavic Americans
Spanish Americans


Non-Hispanic whites
White Hispanic and Latino Americans





Oceania



Pacific Islands Americans

Chamorro Americans
Native Hawaiians
Samoan Americans
Tongan Americans


Euro Oceanic Americans

Australian Americans
New Zealand Americans







North America



Native Americans and Alaska Natives
Canadian Americans
Cuban Americans
Mexican Americans
Puerto Ricans (Stateside)





South America



Hispanic and Latino Americans
Brazilian Americans
Colombian Americans
Ecuadorian Americans





Multiethnic



Melungeon








People of the United States / Americans
American ancestry
Maps of American ancestries
2010 Census
Race and ethnicity in the Census
Race and ethnicity in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Racism














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arab_Americans&oldid=817846553"					Categories: American people of Arab descentEthnic groups in the United StatesArab AmericanAmerican people of Middle Eastern descentMiddle Eastern AmericanHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from October 2016Use dmy dates from October 2016Articles containing Arabic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external links