

Archbishop of Canterbury





Archbishopric


anglican






Arms of the Archbishop of Canterbury: Azure, an episcopal staff in pale or, ensigned with a cross pattée argent, surmounted of a pall of the last, edged and fringed of the second charged with four crosses pattée fitchée (pointed) sable






Incumbent:
Justin Welby
since 4 February 2013


Style
The Most Reverend


Province
Province of Canterbury


Diocese
Diocese of Canterbury


Cathedral
Canterbury Cathedral


Residence



Lambeth Palace
Old Palace





First incumbent
Augustine of Canterbury


Formation
597 AD


Website
archbishopofcanterbury.org




Anglican Communion





Part of a series on Anglicanism


Organisation





Archbishop of Canterbury




Justin Welby




Anglican Communion history
Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting
Lambeth Conference
Anglican Consultative Council
Bishops
Episcopal polity





Theology





Christian theology

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Doctrine
Thirty-Nine Articles
Books of Homilies
Caroline Divines
Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral
Sacraments
Mary
Saints
Ecumenism
Ordination of women
Homosexuality
Windsor Report





Liturgy and worship





Book of Common Prayer
Morning / Evening Prayer
Eucharist
Liturgical year
Biblical Canon
Churchmanship

High
Low
Central
Broad







Other topics





Monasticism
Music
Christian prayer
Christian art





 Anglicanism portal





v
t
e





The Archbishop of Canterbury is the senior bishop and principal leader of the Church of England, the symbolic head of the worldwide Anglican Communion and the diocesan bishop of the Diocese of Canterbury. The current archbishop is Justin Welby. His enthronement took place at Canterbury Cathedral on 21 March 2013. Welby is the 105th in a line which goes back more than 1400 years to Augustine of Canterbury, the "Apostle to the English", sent from Rome in the year 597. Welby succeeded Rowan Williams.[1]
From the time of Augustine until the 16th century, the Archbishops of Canterbury were in full communion with the See of Rome and usually received the pallium from the Pope. During the English Reformation, the Church of England broke away from the authority of the Catholic Church. Thomas Cranmer became the first Protestant holder of the office in 1533, while Reginald Pole was the last Catholic in the position, serving from 1556 to 1558 during the Counter-Reformation. In the Middle Ages there was considerable variation in the methods of nomination of the Archbishop of Canterbury and other bishops. At various times the choice was made by the canons of Canterbury Cathedral, the Pope, or the King of England. Since the English Reformation, the Church of England has been more explicitly a state church and the choice is legally that of the Crown; today it is made by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister, who receives a shortlist of two names from an ad hoc committee called the Crown Nominations Commission.



Contents


1 Present roles and status

1.1 Additional roles
1.2 Ecumenical and interfaith


2 Origins
3 Province and Diocese of Canterbury
4 Styles and privileges

4.1 Lambeth degrees


5 Residences
6 List of Archbishops of Canterbury
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Present roles and status[edit]
Today the archbishop fills four main roles:[2]

He is the diocesan bishop of the Diocese of Canterbury, which covers the eastern parts of the County of Kent. Founded in 597, it is the oldest see in the English church.
He is the metropolitan archbishop of the Province of Canterbury, which covers the southern two-thirds of England.
He is the senior primate and chief religious figure of the Church of England (the British sovereign is the supreme governor of the church). Along with his colleague the Archbishop of York he chairs the General Synod and sits on or chairs many of the church's important boards and committees; power in the church is not highly centralised, however, so the two archbishops can often lead only through persuasion. The Archbishop of Canterbury plays a central part in national ceremonies such as coronations; due to his high public profile, his opinions are often in demand by the news media.
As spiritual leader of the Anglican Communion, the archbishop, although without legal authority outside England, is recognised by convention as primus inter pares ("first among equals") of all Anglican primates worldwide. Since 1867 he has convened more or less decennial meetings of worldwide Anglican bishops, the Lambeth Conferences.

In the last two of these functions, he has an important ecumenical and interfaith role, speaking on behalf of Anglicans in England and worldwide.
The archbishop's main residence is Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth. He also has lodgings in the Old Palace, Canterbury, located beside Canterbury Cathedral, where the Chair of St Augustine sits.
As holder of one of the "five great sees" (the others being York, London, Durham and Winchester), the Archbishop of Canterbury is ex officio one of the Lords Spiritual of the House of Lords. He is one of the highest-ranking men in England and the highest ranking non-royal in the United Kingdom's order of precedence.
Since Henry VIII broke with Rome, the Archbishops of Canterbury have been selected by the English (British since the Act of Union in 1707) monarch. Today the choice is made in the name of the monarch by the prime minister, from a shortlist of two selected by an ad-hoc committee called the Crown Nominations Commission. Since the 20th century, the appointment of Archbishops of Canterbury conventionally alternates between more moderate Anglo-Catholics and Evangelicals.[3]
The current archbishop, Justin Welby, the 105th Archbishop of Canterbury, was enthroned at Canterbury Cathedral on 4 February 2013. As archbishop he signs himself as + Justin Cantuar. His predecessor, Rowan Williams, 104th Archbishop of Canterbury, was enthroned at Canterbury Cathedral on 27 February 2003. Immediately prior to his appointment to Canterbury, Williams was the Bishop of Monmouth and Archbishop of Wales. On 18 March 2012, Williams announced he would be stepping down as Archbishop of Canterbury at the end of 2012 to become Master of Magdalene College, Cambridge.[4]
Additional roles[edit]
In addition to his office, the archbishop also holds a number of other positions; for example, he is Joint President of the Council of Christians and Jews in the United Kingdom. Some positions he formally holds ex officio and others virtually so (the incumbent of the day, although appointed personally, is appointed because of his office). Amongst these are:[5]

Chancellor of Canterbury Christ Church University[6]


Visitor for the following academic institutions:




All Souls College, Oxford
Selwyn College, Cambridge
Merton College, Oxford
Keble College, Oxford
Ridley Hall, Cambridge






The University of Kent (main campus located in Canterbury)
King's College London
University of King's College
Sutton Valence School
Benenden School
Cranbrook School
Haileybury and Imperial Service College
Harrow School
King's College School, Wimbledon
The King's School, Canterbury
St John's School, Leatherhead
Marlborough College
Dauntsey's School
Wycliffe Hall, Oxford (also Patron)


Governor of Charterhouse School
Governor of Wellington College
Visitor, The Dulwich Charities
Visitor, Whitgift Foundation
Visitor, Hospital of the Blessed Trinity, Guildford (Abbot's Fund)
Trustee, Bromley College
Trustee, Allchurches Trust
President, Corporation of Church House, Westminster
Director, Canterbury Diocesan Board of Finance
Patron, The Worshipful Company of Parish Clerks
Patron, Prisoners Abroad
Patron, The Kent Savers Credit Union

Ecumenical and interfaith[edit]
The Archbishop of Canterbury is also a president of Churches Together in England (an ecumenical organisation).[7] Geoffrey Fisher, 99th Archbishop of Canterbury, was the first since 1397 to visit Rome, where he held private talks with Pope John XXIII in 1960. In 2005, Rowan Williams became the first Archbishop of Canterbury to attend a papal funeral since the Reformation. He also attended the inauguration of Pope Benedict XVI. The 101st archbishop, Donald Coggan, was the first to attend a papal inauguration, that of Pope John Paul II in 1978.[8]
Since 2002, the Archbishop of Canterbury has co-sponsored the Alexandria Middle East Peace process with the Grand Mufti of Egypt. In July 2008, the archbishop attended a conference of Christians, Jews and Muslims convened by the King of Saudi Arabia at which the notion of the "clash of civilizations" was rejected. Delegates agreed "on international guidelines for dialogue among the followers of religions and cultures."[9] Delegates said that "the deepening of moral values and ethical principles, which are common denominators among such followers, would help strengthen stability and achieve prosperity for all humans."[10]
Origins[edit]




Arms of the see of Canterbury. Nearly 500 years after the Reformation, the arms still depict the pallium, a symbol of the authority of the Pope and metropolitan archbishops.


It has been suggested that the Roman province of Britannia had four archbishops, seated at London, York, Lincoln and Cirencester.[11] However, in the 5th and 6th centuries Britannia began to be overrun by pagan, Germanic peoples who came to be known collectively as the Anglo-Saxons. Of the kingdoms they created, Kent arguably had the closest links with European politics, trade and culture, because it was conveniently situated for communication with continental Europe. In the late 6th century, King Æthelberht of Kent married a Christian Frankish princess named Bertha, possibly before becoming king, and certainly a number of years before the arrival of the first Christian mission to England.[12] He permitted the preaching of Christianity.[13]
The first Archbishop of Canterbury was St Augustine (not to be confused with St Augustine of Hippo), who arrived in Kent in 597 AD, having been sent by Pope Gregory I on a mission to the English. He was accepted by King Æthelbert, on his conversion to Christianity, about the year 598. It seems that Pope Gregory, ignorant of recent developments in the former Roman province, including the spread of the Pelagian heresy, had intended the new archiepiscopal sees for England to be established in London and York.[14] In the event, Canterbury was chosen instead of London, owing to political circumstances.[15] Since then the Archbishops of Canterbury have been referred to as occupying the Chair of St. Augustine.
A Gospel Book believed to be directly associated with St Augustine's mission survives in the Parker Library, Corpus Christi College, Cambridge University, England. Catalogued as Cambridge Manuscript 286, it has been positively dated to 6th century Italy and this bound book, the St Augustine Gospels, is still used during the swearing-in ceremony of new archbishops of Canterbury.
Before the break with papal authority in the 16th century, the Church of England was an integral part of the Western European church. Since the break the Church of England, an established national church, still considers itself part of the broader Western Catholic tradition (although this is not accepted by the Roman Catholic Church which regards Anglicanism as schismatic[citation needed] and does not accept Anglican holy orders as valid) as well as being the "mother church" of the worldwide Anglican Communion.
Province and Diocese of Canterbury[edit]
The Archbishop of Canterbury exercises metropolitical (or supervisory) jurisdiction over the Province of Canterbury, which encompasses thirty of the forty-four dioceses of the Church of England, with the rest falling within the Province of York. The four dioceses of Wales were formerly also under the Province of Canterbury until 1920 when they were transferred from the established Church of England to the disestablished Church in Wales.




View of Canterbury Cathedral from the north west c. 1890–1900


The Archbishop of Canterbury has a ceremonial provincial curia, or court, consisting of some of the senior bishops of his province.[16] The Bishop of London—the most senior cleric of the church with the exception of the two archbishops—serves as Canterbury's provincial dean, the Bishop of Winchester as chancellor, the Bishop of Lincoln as vice-chancellor, the Bishop of Salisbury as precentor, the Bishop of Worcester as chaplain and the Bishop of Rochester as cross-bearer.
Along with primacy over the Archbishop of York, the Archbishop of Canterbury also has a precedence of honour over the other bishops of the Anglican Communion. He is recognised as primus inter pares, or first amongst equals. He does not, however, exercise any direct authority in the provinces outside England, except in certain minor roles dictated by Canon in those provinces (for example, he is the judge in the event of an ecclesiastical prosecution against the Archbishop of Wales). He does hold metropolitical authority over several extra-provincial Anglican churches, and he serves as ex officio Bishop of the Falkland Islands.
At present the archbishop has three suffragan bishops:


The Bishop of Dover is given the additional title of "Bishop in Canterbury" and empowered to act almost as if he were the diocesan bishop of the Diocese of Canterbury, since the archbishop is so frequently away fulfilling national and international duties.
Two further suffragans, the Bishop of Ebbsfleet and the Bishop of Richborough, are provincial episcopal visitors for the whole Province of Canterbury, licensed by the archbishop as "flying bishops" to visit parishes throughout the province who are uncomfortable with the ministrations of their local bishop who has participated in the ordination of women.

The Bishop of Maidstone was previously a second actual suffragan bishop working in the diocese, until it was decided at the diocesan synod of November 2010 that a new bishop will not be appointed.[17]
Styles and privileges[edit]
The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop of York are both styled as "The Most Reverend"; retired archbishops are styled as "The Right Reverend". Archbishops are, by convention, appointed to the Privy Council and may, therefore, also use the style of "The Right Honourable" for life (unless they are later removed from the council). In formal documents, the Archbishop of Canterbury is referred to as "The Most Reverend Father in God, Forenames, by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of All England and Metropolitan". In debates in the House of Lords, the archbishop is referred to as "The Most Reverend Primate, the Archbishop of Canterbury". "The Right Honourable" is not used in either instance. He may also be formally addressed as "Your Grace"—or, more often these days, simply as "Archbishop", or "Father".
The surname of the Archbishop of Canterbury is not always used in formal documents; often only the first name and see are mentioned. The archbishop is legally entitled to sign his name as "Cantuar" (from the Latin for Canterbury). The right to use a title as a legal signature is only permitted to bishops, Peers of the Realm and peers by courtesy. The current Archbishop of Canterbury usually signs as "+Justin Cantuar:".
In the English and Welsh order of precedence, the Archbishop of Canterbury is ranked above all individuals in the realm, with the exception of the Sovereign and members of the Royal Family.[18] Immediately below him is the Lord Chancellor and then the Archbishop of York.
Lambeth degrees[edit]
The Archbishop of Canterbury awards academic degrees, commonly called "Lambeth degrees".
Residences[edit]




The Archbishop of Canterbury's official London residence is Lambeth Palace, photographed looking east across the River Thames


The Archbishop of Canterbury's official residence in London is Lambeth Palace. He also has a residence, named The Old Palace, next to Canterbury Cathedral on the site of the medieval Archbishop's Palace. The archbishops had palaces on the periphery of London and on the route between London and Canterbury.
Former palaces of the archbishops include

Croydon Palace: the summer residence of the Archbishops from the 15th to the 18th centuries.
Addington Palace: purchased as a replacement for Croydon Palace in 1807; sold in 1897.
Archbishop's Palace, Maidstone: constructed in the 1390s, the palace was seized by the Crown at the time of the Reformation.
Otford Palace: a medieval palace, rebuilt by Archbishop Warham c. 1515 and forfeited to the Crown by Thomas Cranmer in 1537.
Archbishop's Palace, Charing: a palace existed from at least the 13th century; seized by the Crown after the Dissolution.
Knole House: built by Archbishop Bourchier in the second half of the 15th century, it was forfeited to the Crown by Archbishop Cranmer in 1538.
The Old Palace, Bekesbourne, built c. 1552 for Archbishop Cranmer[19]

List of Archbishops of Canterbury[edit]
Main article: List of Archbishops of Canterbury
Since 1900, the following have served as Archbishop of Canterbury:

1896–1902: Frederick Temple
1903–1928: Randall Davidson
1928–1942: Cosmo Gordon Lang
1942–1944: William Temple
1945–1961: Geoffrey Fisher
1961–1974: Michael Ramsey
1974–1980: Donald Coggan
1980–1991: Robert Runcie
1991–2002: George Carey
2002–2012: Rowan Williams
2013–present: Justin Welby

See also[edit]

Accord of Winchester
Religion in the United Kingdom
Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople

References[edit]


^ "Announcement of the 105th Archbishop of Canterbury". Archbishop of Canterbury Website. 9 November 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012. 
^ Archbishop's Roles and Responsibilities Archived 14 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine., Archbishop of Canterbury website. Retrieved 8 February 2008.
^ The Archbishop of Canterbury, website of the Archbishop of York. Retrieved 31 March 2009.
^ Dr Williams resigns
^ "Register of Lords' interests". House of Lords. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2007. 
^ "Archbishop installed as first Chancellor". Canterbury Christ Church University. 12 December 2005. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 7 August 2008. 
^ "The Presidents of Churches Together in England". Churches Together in England. Retrieved 23 February 2014. 
^ Hickman, Baden (19 May 2000). "Lord Coggan of Canterbury". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 February 2014. 
^ "Madrid Interfaith Dialogue Conference: Beginning of a Process". Saudi-US Relations Information Service. Archived from the original on 15 May 2010. Retrieved 6 May 2014. 
^ Niles, D. Preman (1989). Resisting the threats to life: covenanting for justice, peace, and the integrity of creation. Geneva: WCC Publications. ISBN 9782825409640. 
^ Wacher, J., The Towns of Roman Britain, Batsford, 1974, especially pp. 84–6.
^ Catholic Encyclopedia: Bertha.
^ Bede, Ecclesiastical History, i, 25.
^ Bede, Ecclesiastical History, i, 29.
^ Brooks, N., The Early History of the Church of Canterbury, Leicester University Press, 1984, pp. 3–14.
^ Order of Service from the Enthronement of the 104th Archbishop in 2003 Archived 2 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Canterbury Diocese — Synod News Archived 15 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Whitaker's Almanack, 2008, p43 – (Precedence, England and Wales)
^ http://www.gatehouse-gazetteer.info/English%20sites/4000.html
Tim Tatton Brown, Lambeth Palace: A History of the Archbishops of Canterbury and Their Houses (2000) p.73-4


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archbishops of Canterbury.



Archbishop of Canterbury – official website
The Archbishopric of Canterbury, from Its Foundation to the Norman Conquest, by John William Lamb", Published 1971, Faith Press, from Google Book Search







v
t
e


Archbishop of Canterbury






Justin Welby
Primate of All England
List of Archbishops of Canterbury
Lambeth Palace
Province of Canterbury
Diocese of Canterbury
Canterbury Cathedral
Old Palace, Canterbury
Tim Thornton, Bishop at Lambeth, Bishop to the Forces and Bishop for the Falkland Islands (episcopal chief of staff)





Historic palaces
(Canterbury—Lambeth chain)



The Old Palace, Bekesbourne (16th–17th centuries)
Archbishop's Palace, Charing (8th–16th)
Archbishop's Palace, Maidstone (14th–16th)
Knole House (15th–16th)
Otford Palace (8th–16th)
Addington Palace (19th)
Croydon Palace (c. 10th–18th)












v
t
e


Archbishops of Canterbury



Pre-Conquest



Augustine
Laurence
Mellitus
Justus
Honorius
Deusdedit
Wighard
Theodore of Tarsus
Berhtwald
Tatwine
Nothhelm
Cuthbert
Bregowine
Jænberht
Æthelhard
Wulfred
Feologild
Ceolnoth
Æthelred
Plegmund
Athelm
Wulfhelm
Oda
Ælfsige
Byrhthelm
Dunstan
Æthelgar
Sigeric the Serious
Ælfric of Abingdon
Ælfheah
Lyfing
Æthelnoth
Eadsige
Robert of Jumièges
Stigand





Conquest–Reformation



Lanfranc
Anselm
Ralph d'Escures
William de Corbeil
Theobald of Bec
Thomas Becket
Roger de Bailleul
Richard of Dover
Baldwin of Forde
Reginald Fitz Jocelin
Hubert Walter
Reginald
John de Gray
Stephen Langton
Walter d'Eynsham
Richard le Grant
Ralph Neville
John of Sittingbourne
John Blund
Edmund of Abingdon
Boniface
William Chillenden
Robert Kilwardby
Robert Burnell
John Peckham
Robert Winchelsey
Thomas Cobham
Walter Reynolds
Simon Mepeham
John de Stratford
John de Ufford
Thomas Bradwardine
Simon Islip
William Edington
Simon Langham
William Whittlesey
Simon Sudbury
William Courtenay
Thomas Arundel
Roger Walden
Thomas Arundel
Henry Chichele
John Stafford
John Kemp
Thomas Bourchier
John Morton
Thomas Langton
Henry Deane
William Warham
Thomas Cranmer
Reginald Pole





Post-Reformation



Matthew Parker
Edmund Grindal
John Whitgift
Richard Bancroft
George Abbot
William Laud
William Juxon
Gilbert Sheldon
William Sancroft
John Tillotson
Thomas Tenison
William Wake
John Potter
Thomas Herring
Matthew Hutton
Thomas Secker
Frederick Cornwallis
John Moore
Charles Manners-Sutton
William Howley
John Bird Sumner
Charles Longley
Archibald Campbell Tait
Edward White Benson
Frederick Temple
Randall Davidson
Cosmo Lang
William Temple
Geoffrey Fisher
Michael Ramsey
Donald Coggan
Robert Runcie
George Carey
Rowan Williams
Justin Welby






Italics indicate a person who was elected but not confirmed.










v
t
e


Anglican hierarchy in Great Britain and Ireland



 Church of England




Canterbury
Province




Diocesan
bishops



Archbishop of Canterbury
Bath & Wells
Birmingham
Bristol
Chelmsford
Chichester
Coventry
Derby
Ely
Exeter
Europe
Gloucester
Guildford
Hereford
Leicester
Lichfield
Lincoln
London
Norwich
Oxford
Peterborough
Portsmouth
Rochester
Saint Albans
St Edmundsbury & Ipswich
Salisbury
Southwark
Truro
Winchester
Worcester





Suffragan
bishops



Aston
Barking
Basingstoke
Bedford
Bradwell
Brixworth
Buckingham
Colchester
Crediton
Croydon
Dorchester
Dorking
Dover
Dudley
Dunwich
Ebbsfleet
Edmonton
Europe
Fulham
Grantham
Grimsby
Hertford
Horsham
Huntingdon
Kensington
Kingston-upon-Thames
Lewes
Loughborough
Ludlow
Lynn
Maidstone
Plymouth
Ramsbury
Reading
Repton
Richborough
Sherborne
Shrewsbury
Southampton
St Germans
Stafford
Stepney
Swindon
Taunton
Tewkesbury
Thetford
Tonbridge
Warwick
Willesden
Wolverhampton
Woolwich








York
Province




Diocesan
bishops



Archbishop of York
Blackburn
Carlisle
Chester
Durham
Leeds
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle
Sheffield
Sodor & Man
Southwell





Suffragan
bishops



Berwick
Beverley
Birkenhead
Bolton
Bradford
Burnley
Doncaster
Huddersfield
Hull
Jarrow
Lancaster
Middleton
Penrith
Richmond
Ripon
Selby
Sherwood
Stockport
Wakefield
Warrington
Whitby








Other



Bishop at Lambeth
Bishop to the Forces
Bishop to HM Prisons
Bishop for Urban Life and Faith
Bishop of the Falkland Islands
Chair of the CMDDP
Bishop for Higher and Further Education








 Church in Wales



Archbishop of Wales
Bangor
Llandaff
Monmouth
Saint Asaph
Saint David's
Swansea & Brecon





 Scottish Episcopal
Church



Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church
Aberdeen and Orkney
Argyll & The Isles
Brechin
Edinburgh
Glasgow & Galloway
Moray, Ross & Caithness
St Andrews, Dunkeld & Dunblane





 Church of Ireland




Armagh
Province



Archbishop of Armagh
Clogher
Connor
Derry and Raphoe
Down & Dromore
Kilmore, Elphin & Ardagh
Tuam, Killala & Achonry





Dublin
Province



Archbishop of Dublin
Cashel & Ossory
Cork, Cloyne & Ross
Limerick & Killaloe
Meath & Kildare















v
t
e


Anglican Communion



General



Supreme Governor of the Church of England
Episcopal polity

Archbishop of Canterbury
Anglican Communion Primates Meeting


Lambeth Conferences
Anglican Consultative Council
Homosexuality

Windsor Report


Ordination of women
Ecumenism








African provinces



Burundi
Central Africa
Congo
Indian Ocean
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Kenya
Nigeria
Rwanda
Southern Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
West Africa





American provinces



Brazil
Canada
Central America
Mexico
South America
United States of America
West Indies





Asian provinces



Bangladesh (United)
Hong Kong and Macao
Japan
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Korea
Myanmar (Burma)
North India (United)
Pakistan (United)
Philippines
South East Asia
South India (United)





European provinces



England
Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Oceanian provinces



Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
Australia
Melanesia
Papua New Guinea





Extra-provincial churches



Bermuda
Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
Cuba
Falkland Islands
Portugal
Spain





Churches in full communion



Mar Thoma Syrian Church
Malabar Syrian Church
Union of Utrecht
Philippine Independent Church
Porvoo Communion






 Anglicanism portal









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archbishop_of_Canterbury&oldid=818294869"					Categories: Church of EnglandChristianity in KentCulture in CanterburyPrimates of the Church of EnglandAnglican episcopal officesPeople associated with Canterbury Christ Church UniversityPeople associated with the University of KentPeople associated with King's College LondonPeople associated with the Royal National College for the BlindArchbishops of CanterburyEcclesiastical titles597 establishments in Europe6th-century establishments in EnglandHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from July 2013Use British English from June 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016