For other uses, see Archbishop (disambiguation).




St. John Chrysostom
Archbishop of Constantinople (398–404)


In Christianity, an archbishop (/ˌɑːrtʃˈbɪʃəp/, via Latin archiepiscopus, from Greek ἀρχιεπίσκοπος, from ἀρχι-, "chief", and ἐπίσκοπος, "bishop")[1][2][3] is a bishop of higher rank or office. In some cases, like the Lutheran Church of Sweden, it is the denomination leader title. Like popes, patriarchs, metropolitans, cardinal bishops, diocesan bishops, and suffragan bishops, archbishops are in the highest of the three traditional orders of bishops, priests (also called presbyters), and deacons. An archbishop may be granted the title, or ordained as chief pastor of a metropolitan see or another episcopal see to which the title of archbishop is attached.



Contents


1 Western Christianity

1.1 Metropolitan archbishops
1.2 Non-metropolitan archiepiscopal sees
1.3 Coadjutor archbishops
1.4 Archbishops ad personam
1.5 Titular archiepiscopal sees
1.6 Archbishops emeriti
1.7 Privileges of archbishops


2 Eastern Christianity
3 See also
4 References



Western Christianity[edit]





Part of a series on the


Hierarchy of the
Catholic Church



Saint Peter



Ecclesiastical titles (order of precedence)




Pope
Cardinal

Cardinal-nephew
Cardinal protector
Crown-cardinal
Cardinal Vicar


Moderator of the curia
Chaplain of His Holiness
Papal legate
Papal majordomo
Apostolic Nuncio
Apostolic Delegate
Apostolic Syndic
Apostolic visitor
Vicar Apostolic
Apostolic Exarch
Apostolic Prefect
Assistant at the Pontifical Throne
Eparch
Metropolitan
Patriarch
Bishop

Archbishop
Bishop Emeritus
Diocesan bishop
Major archbishop
Primate
Suffragan bishop
Titular bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop


Territorial prelate
Territorial abbot






Liturgical titles


Acolyte
Consecrator
Lector
Reader
Subdeacon








Administrative and pastoral titles


Auditor
Brother
Chancellor
Chaplain

Military chaplain
Military ordinary


Coarb
Confessor
Consultor
Curate
Deacon
Defender of the Bond
Definitor
Devil's advocate
Diocesan administrator
Ecclesiastical judge
Episcopal vicar
Exorcist
Judicial vicar
Lay brother
Lay cardinal
Monsignor
Officialis
Pastor

Assistant pastor


Personal prelate
Preacher
Prefect
Presbyter
Priest
Protonotary Apostolic
Saint

Blessed
Venerable


Seminarian
Vicar forane
Vicar general








Consecrated and professed titles


Abbess
Abbot
Consecrated virgin
Corrector
Custos
Friar
Dean
Grand Master
Hermit
Master general
Master of novices
Monk
Novice
Nun

Postulant


Oblate
Prior
Provincial superior
Rector
Religious
Superior general








Additional titles


Almoner
Altar server
Archimandrite
Archpriest
Archdeacon
Canon
Chorbishop
Commissary Apostolic
Datarius
Honorary Prelate
Minor canon
Notarius
Ostiarius
Peritus
Postulator
Precentor
Prince-bishop
Promotor Fidei
Protopriest
Protodeacon
Protosyncellus
Regionarius








Organization titles


Grand Master

Sovereign Military Order of Malta
Order of the Holy Sepulchre
Teutonic Knights










 Catholicism portal







v
t
e





Metropolitan archbishops[edit]
Main article: Metropolitan bishop
See also: Diocesan bishop
Episcopal sees are generally arranged in groups in which the bishop who is the ordinary of one of them has certain powers and duties of oversight over the other sees. He is known as the metropolitan archbishop of that see. In the Roman Catholic Church, canon 436 of the Code of Canon Law indicates what these powers and duties are for a Latin Rite metropolitan archbishop, while those of the head of an autonomous (sui iuris) Eastern Catholic Church are indicated in canon 157 of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches.
Non-metropolitan archiepiscopal sees[edit]
As well as the much more numerous metropolitan sees, there are 77 Roman Catholic sees that have archiepiscopal rank.[4] In some cases, such a see is the only one in a country, such as Luxembourg[5] or Monaco,[6] too small to be divided into several dioceses so as to form an ecclesiastical province. In others, the title of archdiocese is for historical reasons attributed to a see that was once of greater importance.
Some of these archdioceses are suffragans of a metropolitan archdiocese. An example is the Archdiocese of Avignon, which is a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Marseille,[7] Another such example is the Archdiocese of Trnava, Slovakia. Others are immediately subject to the Holy See and not to any metropolitan archdiocese. These are usually "aggregated" to an ecclesiastical province. An example is the Archdiocese of Hobart in Australia, associated with the Metropolitan ecclesiastical province of Melbourne, but not part of it.[8]
The ordinary of such an archdiocese is an archbishop, however, especially in the Anglican Communion, not all archbishops' dioceses are called archdioceses.
Coadjutor archbishops[edit]
Main article: Coadjutor bishop
Until 1970, a coadjutor archbishop, one who has special faculties and the right to succeed to the leadership of a see on the death or resignation of the incumbent,[9] was assigned also to a titular see, which he held until the moment of succession. Since then, the title of Coadjutor Archbishop of the see is considered sufficient and more appropriate.
Archbishops ad personam[edit]
The rank of archbishop is conferred on some bishops who are not ordinaries of an archdiocese. They hold the rank not because of the see that they head but because it has been granted to them personally ("ad personam"). Such a grant can be given when someone who already holds the rank of archbishop is transferred to a see that, though its present-day importance may be greater than the person's former see, is not archiepiscopal. The bishop transferred is then known as the Archbishop-Bishop of his new see. An example is Gianfranco Gardin, appointed Archbishop-Bishop of Treviso on 21 December 2009.[10] The title borne by the successor of such an archbishop-bishop is merely that of Bishop of the see, unless he also is granted the personal title of Archbishop.
Titular archiepiscopal sees[edit]
The distinction between metropolitan sees and non-metropolitan archiepiscopal sees exists for titular sees as well as for residential ones. The Annuario Pontificio marks titular sees of the former class with the abbreviation Metr. and the others with Arciv.[11]
Many of the titular sees to which nuncios and heads of departments of the Roman Curia who are not cardinals are assigned are not of archiepiscopal rank. In that case the person who is appointed to such a position is given the personal title of archbishop (ad personam). They are usually referred to as Archbishop of the see, not as its Archbishop-Bishop.
Archbishops emeriti[edit]
If an archbishop resigns his see without being transferred to another, as in the case of retirement or assignment to head a department of the Roman Curia, the word "emeritus" is added to his former title, and he is called Archbishop Emeritus of his former see. Until 1970, such archbishops were transferred to a titular see.
There can be several Archbishops Emeriti of the same see: the 2008 Annuario Pontificio listed three living Archbishops Emeriti of Taipei.[12]
There is no Archbishop Emeritus of a titular see: an archbishop who holds a titular see keeps it until death or until transferred to another see.
In the Anglican Communion, retired archbishops formally revert to being addressed as "bishop" and styled "The Right Reverend",[13] although they may be appointed "archbishop emeritus" by their province on retirement, in which case they retain the title "archbishop" and the style "The Most Reverend", as a right.[14] Archbishop Desmond Tutu is a prominent example, as Archbishop Emeritus of Cape Town. Former archbishops who have not received the status of archbishop emeritus may still be informally addressed as "archbishop" as a courtesy,[15] unless they are subsequently appointed to a bishopric (not an archbishopric) in which case the courtesy ceases.[16]
Privileges of archbishops[edit]




Roman Catholic archbishop's coat of arms (non-metropolitan)



Roman Catholic archbishop's coat of arms (version with pallium as for metropolitan archbishops)




While there is no difference between the official dress of archbishops, as such, and that of other bishops, Roman Catholic metropolitan archbishops are distinguished by the use in liturgical ceremonies of the pallium, but only within the province over which they have oversight.[17]
Roman Catholic bishops and archbishops are styled "The Most Reverend" and addressed as "Your Excellency" in most cases. In English-speaking countries (except the United States), a Catholic archbishop is addressed as "Your Grace", while a Catholic bishop is addressed as "Your Lordship". Before December 12, 1930, the title "Most Reverend" was only for archbishops, while bishops were styled as "Right Reverend."[18] This practice is still followed by Catholic bishops in the United Kingdom to mirror that of the Church of England.
In Roman Catholic heraldry, an archbishop has an ecclesiastical hat with ten tassels on each side of his coat of arms, while a bishop has only six. The archiepiscopal cross behind the shield has two bars instead of one. Such a cross may be borne before him in liturgical processions.
In processions and other occasions where strict protocol is observed, archbishops are ranked higher than diocesan bishops in the order of precedence.
In the Anglican Communion, archbishops are styled "The Most Reverend" and addressed as "Your Grace", while bishops are styled "The Right Reverend" and addressed as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship". (In some countries, this usage is followed also by the Roman Catholic Church, but in others no distinction is made and "The Most Reverend" and "Your Excellency" are used for archbishops and bishops alike.) Anglican archbishops are entitled to be preceded by a server carrying an archiepiscopal processional cross (with two bars instead of one) in liturgical processions.[19] The Archbishop of Canterbury's metropolitical processional cross is always carried before him by a priest-chaplain, and (like other archbishops) is a two-barred processional cross. However, the Archbishop of Canterbury is also entitled to be preceded by the ancient primatial cross of Canterbury (still in ceremonial use) which is of an ornate historical design, made of precious metal, and with precious stones inserted, but unlike his metropolitical cross (or those of other archbishops) it is not double-barred.[20]
Eastern Christianity[edit]




Archbishop Christodoulos of Athens and All Greece (1998–2008)


In the Eastern Orthodox Church of Greek tradition, the title of Archbishop usually indicates some form of leadership of the other bishops of the local church (who may be metropolitans), as in the Church of Greece and the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America. In the Russian Orthodox tradition, metropolitans outrank archbishops.
The Oriental Orthodox custom generally agrees with the Slavic rather than the Greek with respect to the archbishop/metropolitan distinction.
Instead of the term "archbishop", Eastern Catholic Churches sometimes use the word "archeparch" by analogy with "eparch", the term used for a diocesan (or eparchial) bishop. However, the word "archeparch" is not found in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches.[21]
See also[edit]

Apostolic succession
Lists of patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops

References[edit]



^ ἀρχιεπίσκοπος, ἐπίσκοπος. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project.
^ archiepiscopus. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short. A Latin Dictionary on Perseus Project.
^ "archbishop". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ Annuario Pontificio 2012 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2008 ISBN 978-88-209-8722-0), p. 1142
^ Annuario Pontificio 2012, 423
^ Annuario Pontificio 2012, p. 474
^ Catholic-hierarchy.org
^ Annuario Pontificio 2012, p. 296
^ Canon 403 §3 of the Code of Canon Law
^ Naming of the Archbishop-Bishop of Treviso, Italy – Friars Minor Conventual
^ Annuario Pontificio 2012, p. 819
^ Annuario Pontificio 2008, p. 733
^ See note 3 at "Addressing the Clergy" on the Church of England website.
^ See the example of Archbishop David Moxon, for example.
^ See "How to address the Clergy" in Crockford Clerical Directory, section "Archbishops", subsection "Notes".
^ See final notes on the Archbishops page of Debretts forms of address.
^ Canon 437 of the Code of Canon Law
^ Canon Law Digest, Bouscaren, Vol. 1, Page 20. Rt. Rev. Dominic Laurence Graessel Archived 2013-02-05 at the Wayback Machine.. Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Baltimore. Retrieved on 2016-11-19.
^ This Anglican news agency page has photographs of two-barred crosses being carried by Archbishop George Carey and by Presiding Bishop Frank Griswold.
^ The primatial cross is illustrated at the London SE1 community website.
^ Index of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches









v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject










Portals
Access related topics


Christianity portal
Anglicanism portal
Catholicism portal
Eastern Christianity portal








Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Definitions
from Wiktionary
Data
from Wikidata







Authority control



GND: 4015471-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archbishop&oldid=818480180"					Categories: ArchbishopsBishops by typeEastern Christian ecclesiastical officesEcclesiastical titlesAnglican episcopal officesEpiscopacy in Eastern OrthodoxyEpiscopacy in Roman CatholicismCatholic Church officesHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers