This article is about the modern-day republic. For other uses, see Armenia (disambiguation).
"Hayastan" and "Hayasdan" redirect here. For other uses, see Hayastan (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 40°N 45°E﻿ / ﻿40°N 45°E﻿ / 40; 45


Republic of Armenia
Հայաստանի Հանրապետություն
Hayastani Hanrapetut’yun  (Armenian)







Flag



Coat of arms






Anthem: 
Մեր Հայրենիք
Mer Hayrenik
"Our Fatherland"















Capital
and largest city
Yerevan
40°11′N 44°31′E﻿ / ﻿40.183°N 44.517°E﻿ / 40.183; 44.517


Official languages
Armenian[1]


Ethnic groups (2011)



98.1% Armenians
  1.2% Yazidis
  0.4% Russians
  0.3% other[2][3]





Religion
Armenian Apostolic Church[4]


Demonym
Armenian


Government
Unitary semi-presidential republic[5][6][7]



• President

Serzh Sargsyan



• President of the National Assembly

Ara Babloyan



• Prime Minister

Karen Karapetyan


Legislature
National Assembly


Formation and independence



• Traditional date

2492 BC



• Hayasa-Azzi

1500–1290 BC



• Arme-Shupria[8][9]

14th century–1190 BC



• Urartu[10]

860–590 BC



• Orontid dynasty

6th century BC



• Kingdom of Greater
Armenia united under
the Artaxiad Dynasty[11]

190 BC[12]



• Arsacid dynasty

52–428



• Bagratid Armenia

885–1045



• Kingdom of Cilicia

1198–1375



• First Republic of Armenia declared


28 May 1918



• Independence from the Soviet Union

23 August 1990b
21 September 1991c
26 December 1991d



• Full membership into the CIS

21 December 1991



• Admitted to the United Nations

2 March 1992


Area



• Total

29,743 km2 (11,484 sq mi) (138th)



• Water (%)

4.71[13]


Population



• 2016 estimate

2,924,816[14]



• 2011 census

 3,018,854[15][16] (134th)



• Density

101.5/km2 (262.9/sq mi) (99th)


GDP (PPP)
2016 estimate



• Total

$26.560 billion[17]



• Per capita

$8,881[17]


GDP (nominal)
2016 estimate



• Total

$10.754 billion[17]



• Per capita

$3,595[17]


Gini (2013)
31.5[18]
medium


HDI (2015)
 0.743[19]
high · 84th


Currency
Dram (֏) (AMD)


Time zone
AMT (UTC+4)


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+374


Patron saint
St. Gregory


ISO 3166 code
AM


Internet TLD
.am .հայ





Reformed orthography.[20]
Declared sovereignty.
Declared independence via a referendum
Independence was officially widely recognized after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The current constitution was adopted on 5 July 1995.





Armenia (/ɑːrˈmiːniə/ ( listen);[21] Armenian: Հայաստան, translit. Hayastan, IPA: [hɑjɑsˈtɑn]), officially the Republic of Armenia (Armenian: Հայաստանի Հանրապետություն, translit. Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun, IPA: [hɑjɑstɑˈni hɑnɾɑpɛtutʰˈjun]), is a country in the South Caucasus region of Eurasia. Located in West Asia[22][23] on the Armenian Highlands, it is bordered by Turkey to the west, Georgia to the north, the de facto independent Republic of Artsakh and Azerbaijan to the east, and Iran and Azerbaijan's exclave of Nakhchivan to the south.[24]
Armenia is a unitary, multi-party, democratic nation-state with an ancient cultural heritage. Urartu was established in 860 BC and by the 6th century BC it was replaced by the Satrapy of Armenia. The Kingdom of Armenia reached its height under Tigranes the Great in the 1st century BC and became the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its official religion in the late 3rd or early 4th century AD.[25][26][27] The official date of state adoption of Christianity is 301.[28] The ancient Armenian kingdom was split between the Byzantine and Sasanian Empires around the early 5th century. Under the Bagratuni dynasty, the Bagratid Kingdom of Armenia was restored in the 9th century. Declining due to the wars against the Byzantines, the kingdom fell in 1045 and Armenia was soon after invaded by the Seljuk Turks. An Armenian principality and later a kingdom Cilician Armenia was located on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea between the 11th and 14th centuries.
Between the 16th century and 19th century, the traditional Armenian homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia came under the rule of the Ottoman and Iranian empires, repeatedly ruled by either of the two over the centuries. By the 19th century, Eastern Armenia had been conquered by the Russian Empire, while most of the western parts of the traditional Armenian homeland remained under Ottoman rule. During World War I, Armenians living in their ancestral lands in the Ottoman Empire were systematically exterminated in the Armenian Genocide. In 1918, following the Russian Revolution, all non-Russian countries declared their independence after the Russian Empire ceased to exist, leading to the establishment of the First Republic of Armenia. By 1920, the state was incorporated into the Transcaucasian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, and in 1922 became a founding member of the Soviet Union. In 1936, the Transcaucasian state was dissolved, transforming its constituent states, including the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, into full Union republics. The modern Republic of Armenia became independent in 1991 during the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The Republic of Armenia recognises the Armenian Apostolic Church, the world's oldest national church, as the country's primary religious establishment.[29][30] The unique Armenian alphabet was invented by Mesrop Mashtots in 405 AD.
Armenia is a member of the Eurasian Economic Union, the Council of Europe and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Armenia supports the de facto independent Republic of Artsakh, which was proclaimed in 1991.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Antiquity
2.2 Middle Ages
2.3 Early Modern era
2.4 World War I and the Armenian Genocide
2.5 First Republic of Armenia
2.6 Soviet Armenia
2.7 Restoration of independence


3 Geography

3.1 Topography
3.2 Environment
3.3 Climate


4 Government and politics

4.1 Foreign relations
4.2 Human rights
4.3 Military
4.4 Administrative divisions


5 Economy

5.1 Exports and imports


6 Science and technology
7 Demographics

7.1 Ethnic groups
7.2 Languages
7.3 Cities
7.4 Religion
7.5 Health
7.6 Education


8 Culture

8.1 Media
8.2 Music and dance
8.3 Art
8.4 Cinema
8.5 Sport
8.6 Cuisine


9 See also
10 Notes
11 Sources
12 References
13 External links



Etymology
Main article: Name of Armenia
The original native Armenian name for the country was Հայք (Hayk’), however it is currently rarely used. The contemporary name Հայաստան (Hayastan) became popular in the Middle Ages by addition of the Persian suffix -stan (place).[citation needed]. However the origins of the name Hayastan trace back to much earlier dates and were first attested in circa 5th century in the works of Agathangelos[31][32], Faustus of Byzantium[33] [34], Ghazar Parpetsi[35], Koryun[36], and Sebeos[37].
The name has traditionally been derived from Hayk (Հայկ), the legendary patriarch of the Armenians and a great-great-grandson of Noah, who, according to the 5th-century AD author Moses of Chorene, defeated the Babylonian king Bel in 2492 BC and established his nation in the Ararat region.[38] The further origin of the name is uncertain. It is also further postulated[39][40] that the name Hay comes from one of the two confederated, Hittite vassal states—the Ḫayaša-Azzi (1600–1200 BC).
The exonym Armenia is attested in the Old Persian Behistun Inscription (515 BC) as Armina (    ). The ancient Greek terms Ἀρμενία (Armenía) and Ἀρμένιοι (Arménioi, "Armenians") are first mentioned by Hecataeus of Miletus (c. 550 BC – c. 476 BC).[41] Xenophon, a Greek general serving in some of the Persian expeditions, describes many aspects of Armenian village life and hospitality in around 401 BC. He relates that the people spoke a language that to his ear sounded like the language of the Persians.[42] According to the histories of both Moses of Chorene and Michael Chamchian, Armenia derives from the name of Aram, a lineal descendant of Hayk.[43][44] The Table of Nations lists Aram as the son of Shem, to whom the Book of Jubilees attests, "And for Aram there came forth the fourth portion, all the land of Mesopotamia between the Tigris and the Euphrates to the north of the Chaldees to the border of the mountains of Asshur and the land of 'Arara."[45] The lands attested to Aram, in the Book of Jubilees, roughly translate to the Geographical regions of Ancient Armenia. Historian Flavius Josephus states in his Antiquities of the Jews, "Aram had the Aramites, which the Greeks called Syrians;... Of the four sons of Aram, Uz founded Trachonitis and Damascus: this country lies between Palestine and Celesyria. Ul founded Armenia; and Gather the Bactrians; and Mesa the Mesaneans; it is now called Charax Spasini."[46]




Historical Armenia, 150 BC


History
Main article: History of Armenia
Antiquity
Main articles: Prehistoric Armenia, Prehistory of the Armenians, Satrapy of Armenia, Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity), Roman Armenia, Sasanian Armenia, and Lesser Armenia




A reconstruction of Herodotus' world map c. 450 BC, with Armenia shown in the centre






The Kingdom of Armenia at its greatest extent under Tigranes the Great, who reigned between 95 and 66 BC


Armenia lies in the highlands surrounding the mountains of Ararat. There is evidence of an early civilisation in Armenia in the Bronze Age and earlier, dating to about 4000 BC. Archaeological surveys in 2010 and 2011 at the Areni-1 cave complex have resulted in the discovery of the world's earliest known leather shoe,[47] skirt,[48] and wine-producing facility.[49]
Several Bronze Age states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia, including the Hittites (at the height of their power), Mitanni (southwestern historical Armenia), and Hayasa-Azzi (1500–1200 BC). The Nairi people (12th to 9th centuries BC) and Urartu (1000–600 BC) successively established their sovereignty over the Armenian Highlands. Each of the aforementioned nations and tribes participated in the ethnogenesis of the Armenians.[50][51][52][53] A large cuneiform lapidary inscription found in Yerevan established that the modern capital of Armenia was founded in the summer of 782 BC by King Argishti I. Yerevan is the world's oldest city to have documented the exact date of its foundation.
During the late 6th century BC, the first geographical entity that was called Armenia by neighbouring populations was established under the Orontid Dynasty within the Achaemenid Empire, as part of the latters' territories. The kingdom became fully sovereign from the sphere of influence of the Seleucid Empire in 190 BC under King Artaxias I and begun the rule of the Artaxiad dynasty. Armenia reached its height between 95 and 66 BC under Tigranes the Great, becoming the most powerful kingdom of its time east of the Roman Republic.
In the next centuries, Armenia was in the Persian Empire's sphere of influence during the reign of Tiridates I, the founder of the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, which itself was a branch of the Parthian Empire. Throughout its history, the kingdom of Armenia enjoyed both periods of independence and periods of autonomy subject to contemporary empires. Its strategic location between two continents has subjected it to invasions by many peoples, including Assyria (under Ashurbanipal, at around 669–627 BC, the boundaries of Assyria reached as far as Armenia and the Caucasus Mountains),[54] Medes, Achaemenid Empire, Greeks, Parthians, Romans, Sasanian Empire, Byzantine Empire, Arabs, Seljuk Empire, Mongols, Ottoman Empire, the successive Safavid, Afsharid, and Qajar dynasties of Iran, and the Russians.




The pagan Garni Temple, probably built in the first century, is the only "Greco-Roman colonnaded building" in the post-Soviet states.[55]


Religion in ancient Armenia was historically related to a set of beliefs which, in Persia, led to the emergence of Zoroastrianism. It particularly focused on the worship of Mithra and also included a pantheon of gods such as Aramazd, Vahagn, Anahit, and Astghik. The country used the solar Armenian calendar, which consisted of 12 months.
Christianity spread into the country as early as AD 40. Tiridates III of Armenia (238–314) made Christianity the state religion in 301,[56][57] partly, in defiance of the Sasanian Empire, it seems,[58] becoming the first officially Christian state, ten years before the Roman Empire granted Christianity an official toleration under Galerius, and 36 years before Constantine the Great was baptised. Prior to this, during the latter part of the Parthian period, Armenia was a predominantly Zoroastrian.[58]
After the fall of the Kingdom of Armenia in 428, most of Armenia was incorporated as a marzpanate within the Sasanian Empire. Following the Battle of Avarayr in 451, Christian Armenians maintained their religion and Armenia gained autonomy.
Middle Ages






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: Medieval Armenia




The Etchmiadzin Cathedral, Armenia's Mother Church traditionally dated 303 AD, is considered the oldest cathedral in the world.[59][60][61]


After the Sasanian period (428–636), Armenia emerged as Arminiya, an autonomous principality under the Umayyad Caliphate, reuniting Armenian lands previously taken by the Byzantine Empire as well. The principality was ruled by the Prince of Armenia, and recognised by the Caliph and the Byzantine Emperor. It was part of the administrative division/emirate Arminiya created by the Arabs, which also included parts of Georgia and Caucasian Albania, and had its centre in the Armenian city, Dvin. Arminiya lasted until 884, when it regained its independence from the weakened Abbasid Caliphate under Ashot I of Armenia.
The reemergent Armenian kingdom was ruled by the Bagratuni dynasty and lasted until 1045. In time, several areas of the Bagratid Armenia separated as independent kingdoms and principalities such as the Kingdom of Vaspurakan ruled by the House of Artsruni in the south, Kingdom of Syunik in the east, or Kingdom of Artsakh on the territory of modern Nagorno-Karabakh, while still recognising the supremacy of the Bagratid kings.




The Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, 1198–1375


In 1045, the Byzantine Empire conquered Bagratid Armenia. Soon, the other Armenian states fell under Byzantine control as well. The Byzantine rule was short lived, as in 1071 the Seljuk Empire defeated the Byzantines and conquered Armenia at the Battle of Manzikert, establishing the Seljuk Empire.[62] To escape death or servitude at the hands of those who had assassinated his relative, Gagik II of Armenia, King of Ani, an Armenian named Ruben I, Prince of Armenia, went with some of his countrymen into the gorges of the Taurus Mountains and then into Tarsus of Cilicia. The Byzantine governor of the palace gave them shelter where the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually established on 6 January 1198 under Leo I, King of Armenia, a descendant of Prince Ruben.
Cilicia was a strong ally of the European Crusaders, and saw itself as a bastion of Christendom in the East. Cilicia's significance in Armenian history and statehood is also attested by the transfer of the seat of the Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church, the spiritual leader of the Armenian people, to the region.
The Seljuk Empire soon started to collapse. In the early 12th century, Armenian princes of the Zakarid family drove out the Seljuk Turks and established a semi-independent principality in northern and eastern Armenia known as Zakarid Armenia, which lasted under the patronage of the Georgian Kingdom. The Orbelian Dynasty shared control with the Zakarids in various parts of the country, especially in Syunik and Vayots Dzor, while the House of Hasan-Jalalyan controlled provinces of Artsakh and Utik as the Kingdom of Artsakh.
Early Modern era
Further information: Iranian Armenia (1502–1828), Armenians in the Ottoman Empire, and Russian Armenia
During the 1230s, the Mongol Empire conquered Zakarid Armenia and then the remainder of Armenia. The Mongolian invasions were soon followed by those of other Central Asian tribes such as the Kara Koyunlu, Timurid dynasty and Ağ Qoyunlu, which continued from the 13th century until the 15th century. After incessant invasions, each bringing destruction to the country, with time Armenia became weakened.
In the 16th century, the Ottoman Empire and the Safavid dynasty of Iran divided Armenia. From the early 16th century, both Western Armenia and Eastern Armenia fell to the Safavid Empire.[63][64] Owing to the century long Turco-Iranian geopolitical rivalry that would last in Western Asia, significant parts of the region were frequently fought over between the two rivalling empires. From the mid 16th century with the Peace of Amasya, and decisively from the first half of the 17th century with the Treaty of Zuhab until the first half of the 19th century,[65] Eastern Armenia was ruled by the successive Safavid, Afsharid and Qajar empires, while Western Armenia remained under Ottoman rule.
From 1604 Abbas I of Iran implemented a "scorched earth" policy in the region to protect his north-western frontier against any invading Ottoman forces, a policy which involved a forced resettlement of masses of Armenians outside of their homelands.[66]




Capture of Erivan fortress by Russian troops in 1827 during the Russo-Persian War (1826–28) by Franz Roubaud


In the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan and the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay, following the Russo-Persian War (1804–13) and the Russo-Persian War (1826–28), respectively, the Qajar dynasty of Iran was forced to irrevocably cede Eastern Armenia, consisting of the Erivan and Karabakh Khanates, to Imperial Russia.[67][68]
While Western Armenia still remained under Ottoman rule, the Armenians were granted considerable autonomy within their own enclaves and lived in relative harmony with other groups in the empire (including the ruling Turks). However, as Christians under a strict Muslim social structure, Armenians faced pervasive discrimination. When they began pushing for more rights within the Ottoman Empire, Sultan Abdul Hamid II, in response, organised state-sponsored massacres against the Armenians between 1894 and 1896, resulting in an estimated death toll of 80,000 to 300,000 people. The Hamidian massacres, as they came to be known, gave Hamid international infamy as the "Red Sultan" or "Bloody Sultan."[69] This period is known as Russian Armenia.
During the 1890s, the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, commonly known as Dashnaktsutyun, became active within the Ottoman Empire with the aim of unifying the various small groups in the empire that were advocating for reform and defending Armenian villages from massacres that were widespread in some of the Armenian-populated areas of the empire. Dashnaktsutyun members also formed Armenian fedayi groups that defended Armenian civilians through armed resistance. The Dashnaks also worked for the wider goal of creating a "free, independent and unified" Armenia, although they sometimes set aside this goal in favour of a more realistic approach, such as advocating autonomy.
The Ottoman Empire began to collapse, and in 1908, the Young Turk Revolution overthrew the government of Sultan Hamid. In April 1909, the Adana massacre occurred in the Adana Vilayet of the Ottoman Empire resulting in the deaths of as many as 20,000–30,000 Armenians. The Armenians living in the empire hoped that the Committee of Union and Progress would change their second-class status. Armenian reform package (1914) was presented as a solution by appointing an inspector general over Armenian issues.[70]
World War I and the Armenian Genocide
Main article: Armenian Genocide




Armenian Genocide victims in 1915


When World War I broke out leading to confrontation between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire in the Caucasus and Persian Campaigns, the new government in Istanbul began to look on the Armenians with distrust and suspicion. This was because the Imperial Russian Army contained a contingent of Armenian volunteers. On 24 April 1915, Armenian intellectuals were arrested by Ottoman authorities and, with the Tehcir Law (29 May 1915), eventually a large proportion of Armenians living in Anatolia perished in what has become known as the Armenian Genocide.
The genocide was implemented in two phases: the wholesale killing of the able-bodied male population through massacre and subjection of army conscripts to forced labour, followed by the deportation of women, children, the elderly and infirm on death marches leading to the Syrian desert. Driven forward by military escorts, the deportees were deprived of food and water and subjected to periodic robbery, rape, and massacre.[71][72] There was local Armenian resistance in the region, developed against the activities of the Ottoman Empire. The events of 1915 to 1917 are regarded by Armenians and the vast majority of Western historians to have been state-sponsored mass killings, or genocide.[73]
Turkish authorities deny the genocide took place to this day. The Armenian Genocide is acknowledged to have been one of the first modern genocides.[74][75] According to the research conducted by Arnold J. Toynbee, an estimated 600,000 Armenians died during deportation from 1915–16. This figure, however, accounts for solely the first year of the Genocide and does not take into account those who died or were killed after the report was compiled on 24 May 1916.[76] The International Association of Genocide Scholars places the death toll at "more than a million".[77] The total number of people killed has been most widely estimated at between 1 and 1.5 million.[78]
Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for over 30 years. These events are traditionally commemorated yearly on 24 April, the Armenian Martyr Day, or the Day of the Armenian Genocide.
First Republic of Armenia
Main article: First Republic of Armenia




The Government house of the First Republic of Armenia (1918–1920)


Although the Russian Caucasus Army of Imperial forces commanded by Nikolai Yudenich and Armenians in volunteer units and Armenian militia led by Andranik Ozanian and Tovmas Nazarbekian succeeded in gaining most of Ottoman Armenia during World War I, their gains were lost with the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.[citation needed] At the time, Russian-controlled Eastern Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan attempted to bond together in the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. This federation, however, lasted from only February to May 1918, when all three parties decided to dissolve it. As a result, the Dashnaktsutyun government of Eastern Armenia declared its independence on 28 May as the First Republic of Armenia under the leadership of Aram Manukian.
The First Republic's short-lived independence was fraught with war, territorial disputes, and a mass influx of refugees from Ottoman Armenia, bringing with them disease and starvation. The Entente Powers, appalled by the actions of the Ottoman government, sought to help the newly founded Armenian state through relief funds and other forms of support.
At the end of the war, the victorious powers sought to divide up the Ottoman Empire. Signed between the Allied and Associated Powers and Ottoman Empire at Sèvres on 10 August 1920, the Treaty of Sèvres promised to maintain the existence of the Armenian republic and to attach the former territories of Ottoman Armenia to it. Because the new borders of Armenia were to be drawn by United States President Woodrow Wilson, Ottoman Armenia was also referred to as "Wilsonian Armenia." In addition, just days prior, on 5 August 1920, Mihran Damadian of the Armenian National Union, the de facto Armenian administration in Cilicia, declared the independence of Cilicia as an Armenian autonomous republic under French protectorate.[79]
There was even consideration of possibly making Armenia a mandate under the protection of the United States. The treaty, however, was rejected by the Turkish National Movement, and never came into effect. The movement used the treaty as the occasion to declare itself the rightful government of Turkey, replacing the monarchy based in Istanbul with a republic based in Ankara.




Advance of the 11th Red Army into the city of Yerevan


In 1920, Turkish nationalist forces invaded the fledgling Armenian republic from the east. Turkish forces under the command of Kazım Karabekir captured Armenian territories that Russia had annexed in the aftermath of the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War and occupied the old city of Alexandropol (present-day Gyumri). The violent conflict finally concluded with the Treaty of Alexandropol on 2 December 1920. The treaty forced Armenia to disarm most of its military forces, cede all former Ottoman territory granted to it by the Treaty of Sèvres, and to give up all the "Wilsonian Armenia" granted to it at the Sèvres treaty. Simultaneously, the Soviet Eleventh Army, under the command of Grigoriy Ordzhonikidze, invaded Armenia at Karavansarai (present-day Ijevan) on 29 November. By 4 December, Ordzhonikidze's forces entered Yerevan and the short-lived Armenian republic collapsed.
After the fall of the republic, the February Uprising soon took place in 1921, and led to the establishment of the Republic of Mountainous Armenia by Armenian forces under command of Garegin Nzhdeh on 26 April, which fought off both Soviet and Turkish intrusions in the Zangezur region of southern Armenia. After Soviet agreements to include the Syunik Province in Armenia's borders, the rebellion ended and the Red Army took control of the region on 13 July.
Soviet Armenia
Main article: Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic




The coat of arms of Soviet Armenia depicting Mount Ararat in the centre


Armenia was annexed by Bolshevist Russia and along with Georgia and Azerbaijan, it was incorporated into the Soviet Union as part of the Transcaucasian SFSR (TSFSR) on 4 March 1922.[80][81] With this annexation, the Treaty of Alexandropol was superseded by the Turkish-Soviet Treaty of Kars. In the agreement, Turkey allowed the Soviet Union to assume control over Adjara with the port city of Batumi in return for sovereignty over the cities of Kars, Ardahan, and Iğdır, all of which were part of Russian Armenia.[80][81]
The TSFSR existed from 1922 to 1936, when it was divided up into three separate entities (Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, and Georgian SSR). Armenians enjoyed a period of relative stability under Soviet rule. They received medicine, food, and other provisions from Moscow, and communist rule proved to be a soothing balm in contrast to the turbulent final years of the Ottoman Empire. The situation was difficult for the church, which struggled under Soviet rule. After the death of Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin took the reins of power and began an era of renewed fear and terror for Armenians.[82]
Armenia was not the scene of any battles in World War II. An estimated 500,000 Armenians (nearly a third of the population) served in the military during the war, and 175,000 died.[83]
Fears decreased when Stalin died in 1953 and Nikita Khruschev emerged as the Soviet Union's new leader. Soon, life in Soviet Armenia began to see rapid improvement. The church, which suffered greatly under Stalin, was revived when Catholicos Vazgen I assumed the duties of his office in 1955. In 1967, a memorial to the victims of the Armenian Genocide was built at the Tsitsernakaberd hill above the Hrazdan gorge in Yerevan. This occurred after mass demonstrations took place on the tragic event's fiftieth anniversary in 1965.




Armenians gather at Theater Square in central Yerevan to claim unification of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast with the Armenian SSR.


During the Gorbachev era of the 1980s, with the reforms of Glasnost and Perestroika, Armenians began to demand better environmental care for their country, opposing the pollution that Soviet-built factories brought. Tensions also developed between Soviet Azerbaijan and its autonomous district of Nagorno-Karabakh, a majority-Armenian region. About 484,000 Armenians lived in Azerbaijan in 1970.[84] The Armenians of Karabakh demanded unification with Soviet Armenia. Peaceful protests in Yerevan supporting the Karabakh Armenians were met with anti-Armenian pogroms in the Azerbaijani city of Sumgait. Compounding Armenia's problems was a devastating earthquake in 1988 with a moment magnitude of 7.2.[85]
Gorbachev's inability to alleviate any of Armenia's problems created disillusionment among the Armenians and fed a growing hunger for independence. In May 1990, the New Armenian Army (NAA) was established, serving as a defence force separate from the Soviet Red Army. Clashes soon broke out between the NAA and Soviet Internal Security Forces (MVD) troops based in Yerevan when Armenians decided to commemorate the establishment of the 1918 First Republic of Armenia. The violence resulted in the deaths of five Armenians killed in a shootout with the MVD at the railway station. Witnesses there claimed that the MVD used excessive force and that they had instigated the fighting.
Further firefights between Armenian militiamen and Soviet troops occurred in Sovetashen, near the capital and resulted in the deaths of over 26 people, mostly Armenians. The pogrom of Armenians in Baku in January 1990 forced almost all of the 200,000 Armenians in the Azerbaijani capital Baku to flee to Armenia.[86] On 23 August 1990, Armenia declared its sovereignty on its territory. On 17 March 1991, Armenia, along with the Baltic states, Georgia and Moldova, boycotted a nationwide referendum in which 78% of all voters voted for the retention of the Soviet Union in a reformed form.[87]
Restoration of independence
Main article: History of Armenia § Independent Armenia (1991-today)




Armenian soldiers during the Nagorno-Karabakh War


On 21 September 1991, Armenia officially declared its independence after the failed August coup in Moscow. Levon Ter-Petrosyan was popularly elected the first President of the newly independent Republic of Armenia on 16 October 1991. He had risen to prominence by leading the Karabakh movement for the unification of the Armenian-populated Nagorno-Karabakh.[88] On 26 December 1991, the Soviet Union ceased to exist and Armenia's independence was recognised.
Ter-Petrosyan led Armenia alongside Defense Minister Vazgen Sargsyan through the Nagorno-Karabakh War with neighbouring Azerbaijan. The initial post-Soviet years were marred by economic difficulties, which had their roots early in the Karabakh conflict when the Azerbaijani Popular Front managed to pressure the Azerbaijan SSR to instigate a railway and air blockade against Armenia. This move effectively crippled Armenia's economy as 85% of its cargo and goods arrived through rail traffic.[88] In 1993, Turkey joined the blockade against Armenia in support of Azerbaijan.[89]




The 21 September 2011 parade in Yerevan, marking the 20th anniversary of Armenia's re-independence


The Karabakh war ended after a Russian-brokered cease-fire was put in place in 1994. The war was a success for the Karabakh Armenian forces who managed to capture 16% of Azerbaijan's internationally recognised territory including Nagorno-Karabakh itself.[90] Since then, Armenia and Azerbaijan have held peace talks, mediated by the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The status of Karabakh has yet to be determined. The economies of both countries have been hurt in the absence of a complete resolution and Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan remain closed. By the time both Azerbaijan and Armenia had finally agreed to a ceasefire in 1994, an estimated 30,000 people had been killed and over a million had been displaced.[91]
As it enters the 21st century, Armenia faces many hardships. It has made a full switch to a market economy. One study ranks it the 41st most "economically free" nation in the world, as of 2014[update].[92] Its relations with Europe, the Middle East, and the Commonwealth of Independent States have allowed Armenia to increase trade.[93][94] Gas, oil, and other supplies come through two vital routes: Iran and Georgia. Armenia maintains cordial relations with both countries.[95]




Armenia and neighbouring countries


Geography
Main article: Geography of Armenia
Armenia is a landlocked country in the geopolitical Transcaucasus (South Caucasus) region, that is located in the Southern Caucasus Mountains and their lowlands between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea, and northeast of the Armenian Highlands. Armenia is bordered on the north by Georgia, the east by Azerbaijan; the south by Iran; and the southwest and west by Turkey. Armenia lies between latitudes 38° and 42° N, and meridians 43° and 47° E.
Topography




Armenia's mountainous and volcanic topography


The Republic of Armenia has a territorial area of 29,743 square kilometres (11,484 sq mi). The terrain is mostly mountainous, with fast flowing rivers, and few forests. The climate is highland continental, which means that Armenia is subjected to hot summers and cold winters. The land rises to 4,090 metres (13,419 feet) above sea level at Mount Aragats, and no point is below 390 metres (1,280 ft) above sea level.[96]

Mount Ararat

Mount Ararat, which was historically part of Armenia, is the highest mountain in the region. Now located in Turkey, but clearly visible from Armenia, it is regarded by the Armenians as a symbol of their land. Because of this, the mountain is present on the Armenian national emblem today.[97][98][99]
Environment
Armenia has established a Ministry of Nature Protection and introduced taxes for air and water pollution and solid-waste disposal, whose revenues are used for environmental protection activities. Waste management in Armenia is underdeveloped, as no waste sorting or recycling takes place at Armenia's 60 landfills.
Despite the availability of abundant renewable energy sources in Armenia (especially hydroelectric and wind power), the Armenian Government is working toward building a new nuclear power plant at Metsamor near Yerevan.[100]
Climate
Main article: Climate of Armenia
The climate in Armenia is markedly continental. Summers are dry and sunny, lasting from June to mid-September. The temperature fluctuates between 22 and 36 °C (72 and 97 °F). However, the low humidity level mitigates the effect of high temperatures. Evening breezes blowing down the mountains provide a welcome refreshing and cooling effect. Springs are short, while autumns are long. Autumns are known for their vibrant and colourful foliage.
Winters are quite cold with plenty of snow, with temperatures ranging between −10 and −5 °C (14 and 23 °F). Winter sports enthusiasts enjoy skiing down the hills of Tsakhkadzor, located thirty minutes outside Yerevan. Lake Sevan, nestled up in the Armenian highlands, is the second largest lake in the world relative to its altitude, at 1,900 metres (6,234 ft) above sea level.
Government and politics
Main articles: Government of Armenia and Politics of Armenia




The National Assembly in Yerevan


Politics of Armenia takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic. According to the Constitution of Armenia, the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the President and the Government. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the Parliament.[5][6][7]
The unicameral parliament (also called the Azgayin Zhoghov or National Assembly) is controlled by a coalition of four political parties: the conservative Republican party, the Prosperous Armenia party, the Rule of Law party and the Armenian Revolutionary Federation. The main opposition party is Raffi Hovannisian's Heritage party, which favours eventual Armenian membership in the European Union and NATO.
The Armenian government's stated aim is to build a Western-style parliamentary democracy as the basis of its form of government. It has universal suffrage above the age of eighteen.
International observers of Council of Europe and US Department of State have questioned the fairness of Armenia's parliamentary and presidential elections and constitutional referendum since 1995, citing polling deficiencies, lack of co-operation by the Electoral Commission, and poor maintenance of electoral lists and polling places. Freedom House categorised Armenia in its 2008 report as a "Semi-consolidated Authoritarian Regime" (along with Moldova, Kosovo, Kyrgyzstan, and Russia) and ranked Armenia 20th among 29 nations in transition, with a Democracy Score of 5.21 out of 7 (7 represents the lowest democratic progress).[101]
Since 1999, Freedom House's Democracy Score for Armenia has been steadily on the decline (from 4.79 to 5.21).[102] Furthermore, Freedom House ranked Armenia as "partly free" in its 2007 report, though it did not categorise Armenia as an "electoral democracy", indicating an absence of relatively free and competitive elections.[103] However, significant progress seems to have been made and the 2008 Armenian presidential election was hailed as largely democratic by OSCE and Western monitors.[104]
Foreign relations
Main articles: Foreign relations of Armenia, Armenia and the European Union, and Armenia–Turkey relations




Embassy of Armenia in Moscow


Armenia presently maintains positive relations with almost every country in the world, with two major exceptions being its immediate neighbours, Turkey and Azerbaijan. Tensions were running high between Armenians and Azerbaijanis during the final years of the Soviet Union. The Nagorno-Karabakh War dominated the region's politics throughout the 1990s.[105] To this day, Armenia's borders with Turkey and Azerbaijan are under severe blockade. In addition, a permanent solution for the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has not been reached despite the mediation provided by organizations such as the OSCE.
Armenia is a member of more than 40 international organisations, including the United Nations; the Council of Europe; the Asian Development Bank; the Commonwealth of Independent States; the World Trade Organization; World Customs Organization; the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation; and La Francophonie. It is a member of the CSTO military alliance, and also participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace program.
Turkey also has a long history of poor relations with Armenia over its refusal to acknowledge the Armenian Genocide, although Turkey was one of the first countries to recognize the Republic of Armenia (the 3rd republic) after its independence from the USSR in 1991. Despite this, for most of the 20th century and early 21st century, relations remain tense and there are no formal diplomatic relations between the two countries due to Turkey's refusal to establish them for numerous reasons. During the Nagorno-Karabakh War and citing it as the reason, Turkey illegally closed its border with Armenia in 1993. It has not lifted its blockade despite pressure from the powerful Turkish business lobby interested in Armenian markets.[105]
On 10 October 2009, Armenia and Turkey signed protocols on normalisation of relations, which set a timetable for restoring diplomatic ties and reopening their joint border.[106] The ratification of those had to be made in the national parliaments. In Armenia it passed through the legislatively required approval of the Constitutional Court and was sent to parliament for final ratification. The President had made multiple public announcements, both in Armenia and abroad, that as the leader of the political majority of Armenia he assured the ratification of the protocols if Turkey also ratified them. Despite this, the process stopped, as Turkey continuously added more preconditions to its ratification and also "delayed it beyond any reasonable time-period".
Due to its position between two unfriendly neighbours, Armenia has close security ties with Russia. At the request of the government of Armenia, Russia maintains a military base in the city of Gyumri located in Northwestern Armenia.[107] as a deterrent against Turkey.[citation needed] Despite this, Armenia has also been looking toward Euro-Atlantic structures in recent years. It maintains good relations with the United States especially through its Armenian diaspora. According to the US Census Bureau, there are 427,822 Armenians living in the country.[108]
Because of the illicit border blockades by Azerbaijan and Turkey, Armenia continues to maintain solid relations with its southern neighbour Iran especially in the economic sector. Economic projects such a gas pipeline going from Iran to Armenia are being developed.




Russian President Dmitry Medvedev at Armenian Genocide memorial in Yerevan


Armenia is also a member of the Council of Europe, maintaining friendly relations with the European Union, especially with its member states such as France and Greece. A 2005 survey reported that 64% of Armenia's population would be in favour of joining the EU.[109] Several Armenian officials have also expressed the desire for their country to eventually become an EU member state,[110] some[who?] predicting that it will make an official bid for membership in a few years.[citation needed] In 2004 its forces joined KFOR, a NATO-led international force in Kosovo. It is also an observer member of the Eurasian Economic Community and the Non-Aligned Movement.
A former republic of the Soviet Union, Armenia is an emerging democracy and as of 2011[update] was negotiating with the European Union to become an associate partner. Legally speaking, it has the right to be considered as a prospective EU member provided it meets necessary standards and criteria, although officially such a plan does not exist in Brussels.[111][112][113][114] The Government of Armenia, however, has joined the Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia[115] and the Eurasian Economic Union.[116][117]
Armenia is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
Human rights
Main article: Human rights in Armenia
Human rights in Armenia tend to be better than those in most former Soviet republics and have drawn closer to acceptable standards, especially economically.[citation needed] Still, there are several considerable problems. Overall, the country is classified "partly free" by Freedom House, which gives it a score of 46, falling two points below Bangladesh and one point above Honduras.[118]
Military
Main article: Armed Forces of Armenia




Armenian Army BTR-80s






Armenian soldiers at the 2010 Moscow Victory Day Parade


The Armenian Army, Air Force, Air Defence, and Border Guard comprise the four branches of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Armenia. The Armenian military was formed after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 and with the establishment of the Ministry of Defence in 1992. The Commander-in-Chief of the military is the President of Armenia, Serzh Sargsyan. The Ministry of Defence is in charge of political leadership, currently headed by Colonel General Seyran Ohanyan, while military command remains in the hands of the General Staff, headed by the Chief of Staff, who is currently Colonel General Yuri Khatchaturov.
Active forces now number about 81,000 soldiers, with an additional reserve of 32,000 troops. Armenian border guards are in charge of patrolling the country's borders with Georgia and Azerbaijan, while Russian troops continue to monitor its borders with Iran and Turkey. In the case of an attack, Armenia is able to mobilise every able-bodied man between the age of 15 and 59, with military preparedness.
The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of military equipment, was ratified by the Armenian parliament in July 1992. In March 1993, Armenia signed the multilateral Chemical Weapons Convention, which calls for the eventual elimination of chemical weapons. Armenia acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as a non-nuclear weapons state in July 1993.
Armenia is member of Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) along with Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. It participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PiP) program and is in a NATO organisation called Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC). Armenia has engaged in a peacekeeping mission in Kosovo as part of non-NATO KFOR troops under Greek command.[119] Armenia also had 46 members of its military peacekeeping forces as a part of the Coalition Forces in Iraq War until October 2008.[120]
Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Armenia


Shirak


Lori


Tavush


Aragatsotn


Armavir


Yerevan


Ararat


Kotayk


Gegharkunik


Vayots
Dzor


Syunik






Geghard monastery, Kotayk Province


Armenia is divided into ten provinces (marzer, singular marz), with the city (kaghak) of Yerevan (Երևան) having special administrative status as the country's capital. The chief executive in each of the ten provinces is the marzpet (marz governor), appointed by the government of Armenia. In Yerevan, the chief executive is the mayor, appointed by the president.
Within each province are communities (hamaynkner, singular hamaynk). Each community is self-governing and consists of one or more settlements (bnakavayrer, singular bnakavayr). Settlements are classified as either towns (kaghakner, singular kaghak) or villages (gyugher, singular gyugh). As of 2007[update], Armenia includes 915 communities, of which 49 are considered urban and 866 are considered rural. The capital, Yerevan, also has the status of a community.[121] Additionally, Yerevan is divided into twelve semi-autonomous districts.


Province
Capital
Area (km²)
Population †


Aragatsotn
Արագածոտն
Ashtarak
Աշտարակ
2,756
132,925


Ararat
Արարատ
Artashat
Արտաշատ
2,090
260,367


Armavir
Արմավիր
Armavir
Արմավիր
1,242
265,770


Gegharkunik  
Գեղարքունիք  
Gavar
Գավառ
5,349
235,075


Kotayk
Կոտայք
Hrazdan
Հրազդան
2,086
254,397


Lori
Լոռի
Vanadzor
Վանաձոր
3,799
235,537


Shirak
Շիրակ
Gyumri
Գյումրի
2,680
251,941


Syunik
Սյունիք
Kapan
Կապան
4,506
141,771


Tavush
Տավուշ
Ijevan
Իջևան
2,704
128,609


Vayots Dzor
Վայոց Ձոր
Yeghegnadzor  
Եղեգնաձոր  
2,308
52,324


Yerevan
Երևան
–
–
223
1,060,138


† 2011 census
Sources: Area and population of provinces.[122]
Economy
Main article: Economy of Armenia
The economy relies heavily on investment and support from Armenians abroad.[123] Before independence, Armenia's economy was largely industry-based – chemicals, electronics, machinery, processed food, synthetic rubber, and textile – and highly dependent on outside resources. The republic had developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine tools, textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange for raw materials and energy.[56] Recently, the Intel Corporation agreed to open a research centre in Armenia, in addition to other technology companies, signalling the growth of the technology industry in Armenia.[124]
Agriculture accounted for less than 20% of both net material product and total employment before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. After independence, the importance of agriculture in the economy increased markedly, its share at the end of the 1990s rising to more than 30% of GDP and more than 40% of total employment.[125] This increase in the importance of agriculture was attributable to food security needs of the population in the face of uncertainty during the first phases of transition and the collapse of the non-agricultural sectors of the economy in the early 1990s. As the economic situation stabilised and growth resumed, the share of agriculture in GDP dropped to slightly over 20% (2006 data), although the share of agriculture in employment remained more than 40%.[126]




Yerevan is the economic and cultural centre of Armenia.


Armenian mines produce copper, zinc, gold, and lead. The vast majority of energy is produced with fuel imported from Russia, including gas and nuclear fuel (for its one nuclear power plant); the main domestic energy source is hydroelectric. Small deposits of coal, gas, and petroleum exist but have not yet been developed.
Like other newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, Armenia's economy suffers from the breakdown of former Soviet trading patterns. Soviet investment in and support of Armenian industry has virtually disappeared, so that few major enterprises are still able to function. In addition, the effects of the 1988 Spitak earthquake, which killed more than 25,000 people and made 500,000 homeless, are still being felt. The conflict with Azerbaijan over Nagorno-Karabakh has not been resolved. The closure of Azerbaijani and Turkish borders has devastated the economy, because Armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials. Land routes through Georgia and Iran are inadequate or unreliable. The GDP fell nearly 60% between 1989 and 1993, but then resumed robust growth.[125] The national currency, the dram, suffered hyperinflation for the first years after its introduction in 1993.
Nevertheless, the government was able to make wide-ranging economic reforms that paid off in dramatically lower inflation and steady growth. The 1994 cease-fire in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has also helped the economy. Armenia has had strong economic growth since 1995, building on the turnaround that began the previous year, and inflation has been negligible for the past several years. New sectors, such as precious-stone processing and jewellery making, information and communication technology, and even tourism are beginning to supplement more traditional sectors of the economy, such as agriculture.




New buildings in the Ajapnyak District of Yerevan


This steady economic progress has earned Armenia increasing support from international institutions. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and other international financial institutions (IFIs) and foreign countries are extending considerable grants and loans. Loans to Armenia since 1993 exceed $1.1 billion. These loans are targeted at reducing the budget deficit and stabilising the currency; developing private businesses; energy; agriculture; food processing; transportation; the health and education sectors; and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone. The government joined the World Trade Organization on 5 February 2003. But one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains the Armenian diaspora, which finances major parts of the reconstruction of infrastructure and other public projects. Being a growing democratic state, Armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the Western World.
A liberal foreign investment law was approved in June 1994, and a law on privatisation was adopted in 1997, as well as a program of state property privatisation. Continued progress will depend on the ability of the government to strengthen its macroeconomic management, including increasing revenue collection, improving the investment climate, and making strides against corruption. However, unemployment, which was 18.5% in 2015,[127] still remains a major problem due to the influx of thousands of refugees from the Karabakh conflict.
Armenia ranked 85th on the 2015 UNDP Human Development Index, the lowest among the Transcaucasian republics.[128] In the 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), Armenia ranked 95 of 168 countries.[129] In the 2016 Index of Economic Freedom, Armenia ranked 54th, ahead of countries like France, Portugal and Italy.[92]
Exports and imports




Cigarettes are ranked first among Armenia's export of finished products




Exports to
Imports from


Country
Percentage
Country
Percentage


 Belgium
23%
 Russia
15%


 Russia
15%
 United States
12%


 United States
13%
 Belgium
10%


 Iran
10%
 Iran
9%


Others
39%
Others
54%


Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in Armenia
Research spending is low in Armenia, averaging 0.25% of GDP over 2010–2013. However, the statistical record of research expenditure is incomplete, as expenditure by privately owned business enterprises is not surveyed in Armenia. The world average for domestic expenditure on research was 1.7% of GDP in 2013.[130]




GERD GDP ratio for the Black Sea countries, 2001–2013. Source: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), Figure 12.3


The country's Strategy for the Development of Science 2011–2020 envisions that ‘by 2020, Armenia is a country with a knowledge-based economy and is competitive within the European Research Area with its level of basic and applied research.’ It fixes the following targets:[130]

Creation of a system capable of sustaining the development of science and technology;
Development of scientific potential, modernization of scientific infrastructure;
Promotion of basic and applied research;
Creation of a synergistic system of education, science and innovation; and
Becoming a prime location for scientific specialization in the European Research Area.

Based on this strategy, the accompanying Action Plan was approved by the government in June 2011. It defines the following targets:[130]

Improve the management system for science and technology and create the requisite conditions for sustainable development;
Involve more young, talented people in education and research, while upgrading research infrastructure;
Create the requisite conditions for the development of an integrated national innovation system; and
Enhance international co-operation in research and development.





GERD in the Black Sea region by sector of performance, 2005 and 2013. Source: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (2015), Figure 12.5


Although the Strategy clearly pursues a ‘science push’ approach, with public research institutes serving as the key policy target, it nevertheless mentions the goal of establishing an innovation system. However, the main driver of innovation, the business sector, is not mentioned. In between publishing the Strategy and Action Plan, the government issued a resolution in May 2010 on Science and Technology Development Priorities for 2010–2014. These priorities are:[130]

Armenian studies, humanities and social sciences;
Life sciences;
Renewable energy, new energy sources;
Advanced technologies, information technologies;
Space, Earth sciences, sustainable use of natural resources; and
Basic research promoting essential applied research.

The Law on the National Academy of Sciences was adopted in May 2011. This law is expected to play a key role in shaping the Armenian innovation system. It allows the National Academy of Sciences to extend its business activities to the commercialization of research results and the creation of spin-offs; it also makes provision for restructuring the National Academy of Sciences by combining institutes involved in closely related research areas into a single body. Three of these new centres are particularly relevant: the Centre for Biotechnology, the Centre for Zoology and Hydro-ecology and the Centre for Organic and Pharmaceutical Chemistry.[130]
The government is focusing its support on selected industrial sectors. More than 20 projects have been cofunded by the State Committee of Science in targeted branches: pharmaceuticals, medicine and biotechnology, agricultural mechanization and machine building, electronics, engineering, chemistry and, in particular, the sphere of information technology.[130]
Over the past decade, the government has made an effort to encourage science–industry linkages. The Armenian information technology sector has been particularly active: a number of public–private partnerships have been established between companies and universities, in order to give students marketable skills and generate innovative ideas at the interface of science and business. Examples are Synopsys Inc. and the Enterprise Incubator Foundation.[130]
Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of Armenia and Armenians
Armenia has a population of 2,924,816 (2016 est.)[14] and is the second most densely populated of the former Soviet republics. There has been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break-up of the USSR.[131] In the past years emigration levels have declined and there is steady population growth.




The Armenian population around the world


Armenia has a relatively large external diaspora (8 million by some estimates, greatly exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself), with communities existing across the globe. The largest Armenian communities outside of Armenia can be found in Russia, France, Iran, the United States, Georgia, Syria, Lebanon, Argentina, Australia, Canada, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Poland, Ukraine and Brazil. 40,000 to 70,000 Armenians still live in Turkey (mostly in and around Istanbul).[132]
About 1,000 Armenians reside in the Armenian Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem, a remnant of a once-larger community.[133] Italy is home to the San Lazzaro degli Armeni, an island located in the Venetian Lagoon, which is completely occupied by a monastery run by the Mechitarists, an Armenian Catholic congregation.[134] Approximately 139,000 Armenians live in the de facto country of Artsakh where they form a majority.[135]
Ethnic groups




Historical and modern distribution of Armenians.Settlement area of Armenians in early 20th century:
  >50%       25–50%       <25%
  Armenian settlement area today.



Ethnic Armenians make up 98.1% of the population. Yazidis make up 1.2%, and Russians 0.4%. Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians, Greeks (usually called Caucasus Greeks), Kurds, Georgians, Belarusians, and Jews. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also exist though they are heavily Russified.[136] As of 2016[update], there are an estimated 35,000 Yazidis in Armenia.[137]
During the Soviet era, Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest population in the country (forming about 2.5% in 1989).[138] However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan. Conversely, Armenia received a large influx of Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan, thus giving Armenia a more homogeneous character.
Languages
Main article: Languages of Armenia
Armenian is the only official language. The main foreign languages that Armenians know are Russian and English. Due to its Soviet past, most of the population can speak Russian quite well. According to a 2013 survey, 95% of Armenians said they had some knowledge of Russian (24% advanced, 59% intermediate) compared to 40% who said they knew some English (4% advanced, 16% intermediate and 20% beginner). However, more adults (50%) think that English should be taught in public secondary schools than those who prefer Russian (44%).[139]
Cities
See also: List of municipalities of Armenia



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Armenia
Armenia 2011 census[140][141][142][143][144][145][146][147][148][149][150]




Rank
Name
Province
Pop.
Rank
Name
Province
Pop.




Yerevan

Gyumri
1
Yerevan
Yerevan
1,060,138
11
Gavar
Gegharkunik
20,765

Vanadzor

Vagharshapat


2
Gyumri
Shirak
121,976
12
Goris
Syunik
20,591


3
Vanadzor
Lori
86,199
13
Charentsavan
Kotayk
20,363


4
Vagharshapat
Armavir
46,540
14
Ararat
Ararat
20,235


5
Abovyan
Kotayk
43,495
15
Masis
Ararat
20,215


6
Kapan
Syunik
43,190
16
Ashtarak
Aragatsotn
19,615


7
Hrazdan
Kotayk
41,875
17
Artik
Shirak
19,534


8
Armavir
Armavir
29,319
18
Sevan
Gegharkunik
19,229


9
Artashat
Ararat
22,269
19
Dilijan
Tavush
17,712


10
Ijevan
Tavush
21,081
20
Sisian
Syunik
14,894


Religion
See also: Religion in Armenia




The 7th-century Khor Virap monastery in the shadow of Mount Ararat, the peak on which Noah's Ark is said to have landed during the biblical flood.


Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, an event traditionally dated to AD 301.[151][152][153][154]
The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. The roots of the Armenian Church go back to the 1st century. According to tradition, the Armenian Church was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles – Thaddaeus and Bartholomew – who preached Christianity in Armenia between AD 40–60. Because of these two founding apostles, the official name of the Armenian Church is Armenian Apostolic Church.
Over 93% of Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of Oriental (Non-Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syriac churches.[155] The Armenian Apostolic Church is in communion only with a group of churches within Oriental Orthodoxy.
The Armenian Evangelical Church has a very sizeable and favourable presence among the life of Armenians with over several thousand members throughout the country. It traces its roots back to 1846 which was under patronage of the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople the aim of which was to train qualified clergy for the Armenian Apostolic Church.
Other Christian denominations practising faith based on Nicene Creed in Armenia are the Pentecostal branches of Protestant community such as the Word of Life, the Armenian Brotherhood Church,[156] the Baptists which are known as of the oldest existing denominations in Armenia and were permitted by the authorities of Soviet Union,[157][158] and Presbyterians.[159]
Catholics also exist in Armenia, both Latin rite and Armenian rite Catholics. The Mechitarists (also spelled "Mekhitarists" Armenian: Մխիթարեան), are a congregation of Benedictine monks of the Armenian Catholic Church founded in 1712 by Mekhitar of Sebaste. They are best known for their series of scholarly publications of ancient Armenian versions of otherwise lost ancient Greek texts.
The Armenian Catholic denomination is headquartered in Bzoummar, Lebanon.
Armenia is home to a Russian community of Molokans which practice a form of Spiritual Christianity originated from the Russian Orthodox Church.[160]
The Yazidis, who live in the western part of the country, practice Yazidism. As of 2016[update], the world's largest Yazidi temple is under construction in the small village of Aknalish.[137] There are also Kurds who practice Sunni Islam.[citation needed]
There is a Jewish community in Armenia diminished to 750 persons since independence with most emigrants leaving for Israel. There are currently two synagogues in Armenia – in the capital, Yerevan, and in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.
Health
Life expectancy at birth was 70 for males and 76 for females in 2006.[161] Health expenditures were about 5.6% of GDP in 2004.[161] Most of those expenditures were outside the private sector.[161] Government expenditures on health were US$112 per person in 2006.[162] Vast improvements of health services occurred in the past decade. Such improvements consisted of easier accessibility to health-care services and an Open Enrollment program which allows Armenians to freely choose their healthcare service provider.[163]
Education
Main article: Education in Armenia
In its first years of independence, Armenia made uneven progress in establishing systems to meet its national requirements in social services.[164] Education, held in particular esteem in Armenian culture, changed fastest of the social services, while health and welfare services attempted to maintain the basic state-planned structure of the Soviet era.[164]
A literacy rate of 100% was reported as early as 1960.[164] In the communist era, Armenian education followed the standard Soviet model of complete state control (from Moscow) of curricula and teaching methods and close integration of education activities with other aspects of society, such as politics, culture, and the economy.[164] As in the Soviet period, primary and secondary education in Armenia is free, and completion of secondary school is compulsory.[164]




Yerevan State Medical University named after Mkhitar Heratsi


In the 1988–89 school year, 301 students per 10,000 population were in specialised secondary or higher education, a figure slightly lower than the Soviet average.[164] In 1989 some 58% of Armenians over age fifteen had completed their secondary education, and 14% had a higher education.[164] In the 1990–91 school year, the estimated 1,307 primary and secondary schools were attended by 608,800 students.[164] Another seventy specialised secondary institutions had 45,900 students, and 68,400 students were enrolled in a total of ten postsecondary institutions that included universities.[164] In addition, 35% of eligible children attended preschools.[164] In 1992 Armenia's largest institution of higher learning, Yerevan State University, had eighteen departments, including ones for social sciences, sciences, and law.[164] Its faculty numbered about 1,300 teachers and its student population about 10,000 students.[164] The National Polytechnic University of Armenia is operating since 1933.[164]
In the early 1990s, Armenia made substantial changes to the centralised and regimented Soviet system.[164] Because at least 98% of students in higher education were Armenian, curricula began to emphasise Armenian history and culture.[164] Armenian became the dominant language of instruction, and many schools that had taught in Russian closed by the end of 1991.[164] Russian was still widely taught, however, as a second language.[164]
On the basis of the expansion and development of Yerevan State University a number of higher educational independent Institutions were formed including Medical Institute separated in 1930 which was set up on the basis of medical faculty. In 1980 Yerevan State Medical University was awarded one of the main rewards of the former USSR – the Order of Labor red Banner for training qualified specialists in health care and valuable service in the development of Medical Science. In 1995 YSMI was renamed to YSMU and since 1989 it has been named after Mkhitar Heratsi, the famous medieval doctor. Mkhitar Heratsi was the founder of Armenian Medical school in Cilician Armenia. The great doctor played the same role in Armenian Medical Science as Hippocrates in Western, Galen in Roman, Ibn Sīnā in Arabic medicine.




Graduates of the MAB program of the Agribusiness Teaching Center


Foreign students' department for Armenian diaspora established in 1957 later was enlarged and the enrolment of foreign students began. Nowadays the YSMU is a Medical Institution corresponding to international requirements, trains medical staff for not only Armenia and neighbour countries, i.e. Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Georgia, but also many other leading countries all over the world. A great number of foreign students from India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, the USA and Russian Federation study together with Armenian students. Nowadays the university is ranked among famous higher Medical Institutions and takes its honourable place in the World Directory of Medical Schools published by the WHO.
Other educational institutions in Armenia include the American University of Armenia and the QSI International School of Yerevan. The American University of Armenia has graduate programs in Business and Law, among others. The institution owes its existence to the combined efforts of the Government of Armenia, the Armenian General Benevolent Union, US Agency for International Development, and the University of California. The extension programs and the library at AUA form a new focal point for English-language intellectual life in the city. Armenia also hosts a deployment of OLPC – One Laptopschool Per child XO laptop-tablet schools.[165]
Culture
Main article: Culture of Armenia
Armenians have their own distinctive alphabet and language. The alphabet was invented in AD 405 by Mesrop Mashtots and consists of thirty-nine letters, three of which were added during the Cilician period. 96% of the people in the country speak Armenian, while 75.8% of the population additionally speaks Russian, although English is becoming increasingly popular.
Media
Main article: Media of Armenia
Television, magazines, and newspapers are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Armenia guarantees freedom of speech and Armenia ranks 78th in the 2015 Press Freedom Index report compiled by Reporters Without Borders, between Lesotho and Sierra Leone.[166] As a country in transition, Armenia's media system is under transformation.[167]
Frequent attacks on journalists of non-state sponsored media is a serious threat to Armenia's press freedom. The number of assaults has recently declined, but the physical integrity of journalists remain at stake.[168]
Music and dance
Main article: Music of Armenia












Djivan Gasparyan (left), Sirusho (middle) and Charles Aznavour (right) are among most popular musicians of Armenia.


Armenian music is a mix of indigenous folk music, perhaps best-represented by Djivan Gasparyan's well-known duduk music, as well as light pop, and extensive Christian music.
Instruments like the duduk, the dhol, the zurna, and the kanun are commonly found in Armenian folk music. Artists such as Sayat Nova are famous due to their influence in the development of Armenian folk music. One of the oldest types of Armenian music is the Armenian chant which is the most common kind of religious music in Armenia. Many of these chants are ancient in origin, extending to pre-Christian times, while others are relatively modern, including several composed by Saint Mesrop Mashtots, the inventor of the Armenian alphabet. Whilst under Soviet rule, Armenian classical music composer Aram Khatchaturian became internationally well known for his music, for various ballets and the Sabre Dance from his composition for the ballet Gayane.




Traditional Armenian dance


The Armenian Genocide caused widespread emigration that led to the settlement of Armenians in various countries in the world. Armenians kept to their traditions and certain diasporans rose to fame with their music. In the post-Genocide Armenian community of the United States, the so-called "kef" style Armenian dance music, using Armenian and Middle Eastern folk instruments (often electrified/amplified) and some western instruments, was popular. This style preserved the folk songs and dances of Western Armenia, and many artists also played the contemporary popular songs of Turkey and other Middle Eastern countries from which the Armenians emigrated.
Richard Hagopian is perhaps the most famous artist of the traditional "kef" style and the Vosbikian Band was notable in the 1940s and 1950s for developing their own style of "kef music" heavily influenced by the popular American Big Band Jazz of the time. Later, stemming from the Middle Eastern Armenian diaspora and influenced by Continental European (especially French) pop music, the Armenian pop music genre grew to fame in the 1960s and 1970s with artists such as Adiss Harmandian and Harout Pamboukjian performing to the Armenian diaspora and Armenia; also with artists such as Sirusho, performing pop music combined with Armenian folk music in today's entertainment industry.
Other Armenian diasporans that rose to fame in classical or international music circles are world-renowned French-Armenian singer and composer Charles Aznavour, pianist Sahan Arzruni, prominent opera sopranos such as Hasmik Papian and more recently Isabel Bayrakdarian and Anna Kasyan. Certain Armenians settled to sing non-Armenian tunes such as the heavy metal band System of a Down (which nonetheless often incorporates traditional Armenian instrumentals and styling into their songs) or pop star Cher. In the Armenian diaspora, Armenian revolutionary songs are popular with the youth. These songs encourage Armenian patriotism and are generally about Armenian history and national heroes.
Art
Main article: Armenian art




Ancient Armenian Khachkars (cross-stones)


Yerevan Vernissage (arts and crafts market), close to Republic Square, bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts on weekends and Wednesdays (though the selection is much reduced mid-week). The market offers woodcarving, antiques, fine lace, and the hand-knotted wool carpets and kilims that are a Caucasus speciality. Obsidian, which is found locally, is crafted into assortment of jewellery and ornamental objects. Armenian gold smithery enjoys a long tradition, populating one corner of the market with a selection of gold items. Soviet relics and souvenirs of recent Russian manufacture – nesting dolls, watches, enamel boxes and so on – are also available at the Vernisage.




Queen Zabel’s Return to the Palace, Vardges Sureniants, (1909)


Across from the Opera House, a popular art market fills another city park on the weekends. Armenia’s long history as a crossroads of the ancient world has resulted in a landscape with innumerable fascinating archaeological sites to explore. Medieval, Iron Age, Bronze Age and even Stone Age sites are all within a few hours drive from the city. All but the most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered, allowing visitors to view churches and fortresses in their original settings.
The National Art Gallery in Yerevan has more than 16,000 works that date back to the Middle Ages, which indicate Armenia's rich tales and stories of the times. It houses paintings by many European masters as well. The Modern Art Museum, the Children’s Picture Gallery, and the Martiros Saryan Museum are only a few of the other noteworthy collections of fine art on display in Yerevan. Moreover, many private galleries are in operation, with many more opening every year, featuring rotating exhibitions and sales.
On 13 April 2013, the Armenian government announced a change in law to allow freedom of panorama for 3D works of art.[169]
Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Armenia
Cinema in Armenia was born on April 16, 1923, when the Armenian State Committee of Cinema was established by a decree of the Soviet Armenian government.
However, the first Armenian film with Armenian subject called "Haykakan Sinema" was produced earlier in 1912 in Cairo by Armenian-Egyptian publisher Vahan Zartarian. The film was premiered in Cairo on March 13, 1913.[170]
In March 1924, the first Armenian film studio; Armenfilm (Armenian: Հայֆիլմ "Hayfilm," Russian: Арменкино "Armenkino") was established in Yerevan, starting with a documentary film called Soviet Armenia.
Namus was the first Armenian silent black-and-white film, directed by Hamo Beknazarian in 1925, based on a play of Alexander Shirvanzade, describing the ill fate of two lovers, who were engaged by their families to each other since childhood, but because of violations of namus (a tradition of honor), the girl was married by her father to another person. The first sound film, Pepo was shot in 1935, director Hamo Beknazarian.
Sport
Main articles: Sport in Armenia and Chess in Armenia




The Tsaghkadzor Olympic Sports complex






The Armenia national football team in Dublin, Ireland


A wide array of sports are played in Armenia, the most popular among them being wrestling, weightlifting, judo, association football, chess, and boxing. Armenia's mountainous terrain provides great opportunities for the practice of sports like skiing and climbing. Being a landlocked country, water sports can only be practised on lakes, notably Lake Sevan. Competitively, Armenia has been successful in chess, weightlifting and wrestling at the international level. Armenia is also an active member of the international sports community, with full membership in the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). It also hosts the Pan-Armenian Games.
Prior to 1992, Armenians would participate in the Olympics representing the USSR. As part of the Soviet Union, Armenia was very successful, winning plenty of medals and helping the USSR win the medal standings at the Olympics on numerous occasions. The first medal won by an Armenian in modern Olympic history was by Hrant Shahinyan (sometimes spelled as Grant Shaginyan), who won two golds and two silvers in gymnastics at the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki. To highlight the level of success of Armenians in the Olympics, Shahinyan was quoted as saying:
"Armenian sportsmen had to outdo their opponents by several notches for the shot at being accepted into any Soviet team. But those difficulties notwithstanding, 90 percent of Armenians athletes on Soviet Olympic teams came back with medals."[171]
Armenia first participated at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona under a unified CIS team, where it was very successful, winning three golds and one silver in weightlifting, wrestling and sharp shooting, despite only having 5 athletes. Since the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Armenia has participated as an independent nation.
Armenia participates in the Summer Olympic Games in boxing, wrestling, weightlifting, judo, gymnastics, track and field, diving, swimming and sharp shooting. It also participates in the Winter Olympic Games in alpine skiing, cross-country skiing and figure skating.




Chess Grandmaster Levon Aronian is a FIDE #2 rated player and the fourth highest rated player in history


Football is also popular in Armenia. The most successful team was the FC Ararat Yerevan team of the 1970s who won the Soviet Cup in 1973 and 1975 and the Soviet Top League in 1973. The latter achievement saw FC Ararat gain entry to the European Cup where – despite a home victory in the second leg – they lost on aggregate at the quarter final stage to eventual winner FC Bayern Munich. Armenia competed internationally as part of the USSR national football team until the Armenian national football team was formed in 1992 after the split of the Soviet Union. Armenia have never qualified for a major tournament although recent improvements saw the team to achieve 44th position in the FIFA World Rankings in September 2011. The national team is controlled by the Football Federation of Armenia. The Armenian Premier League is the highest level football competition in Armenia, and has been dominated by FC Pyunik in recent seasons. The league currently consists of eight teams and relegates to the Armenian First League.
Armenia and the Armenian diaspora have produced many successful footballers, including Youri Djorkaeff, Alain Boghossian, Andranik Eskandarian, Andranik Teymourian, Edgar Manucharyan and Nikita Simonyan. Djokaeff and Boghossian won the 1998 FIFA World Cup with France, Andranik Teymourian competed in the 2006 World Cup for Iran and Edgar Manucharyan played in the Dutch Eredivisie for Ajax.
Wrestling has been a successful sport in the Olympics for Armenia. At the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Armen Nazaryan won the gold in the Men's Greco-Roman Flyweight (52 kg) category and Armen Mkrtchyan won the silver in Men's Freestyle Paperweight (48 kg) category, securing Armenia's first two medals in its Olympic history.
Traditional Armenian wrestling is called Kokh and practised in traditional garb; it was one of the influences included in the Soviet combat sport of Sambo, which is also very popular.[172]
The government of Armenia budgets about $2.8 million annually for sports and gives it to the National Committee of Physical Education and Sports, the body that determines which programs should benefit from the funds.[173]
Due to the lack of success lately on the international level, in recent years, Armenia has rebuilt 16 Soviet-era sports schools and furnished them with new equipment for a total cost of $1.9 million. The rebuilding of the regional schools was financed by the Armenian government. $9.3 million has been invested in the resort town of Tsaghkadzor to improve the winter sports infrastructure because of dismal performances at recent winter sports events. In 2005, a cycling centre was opened in Yerevan with the aim of helping produce world class Armenian cyclists. The government has also promised a cash reward of $700,000 to Armenians who win a gold medal at the Olympics.[173]
Armenia has also been very successful in chess, winning the World Champion in 2011 and the World Chess Olympiad on three occasions.[174]
Cuisine
Main article: Armenian cuisine




Armenian cuisine


Armenian cuisine is closely related to eastern and Mediterranean cuisine, various spices, vegetables, fish, and fruits combine to present unique dishes. The main characteristics of Armenian cuisine are a reliance on the quality of the ingredients rather than heavily spicing food, the use of herbs, the use of wheat in a variety of forms, of legumes, nuts, and fruit (as a main ingredient as well as to sour food), and the stuffing of a wide variety of leaves.
The pomegranate, with its symbolic association with fertility, represents that nation. The apricot is the national fruit.
See also


Armenia portal
Asia portal
Europe portal



Outline of Armenia
Index of Armenia-related articles
 Armenia – Wikipedia book

Notes

Sources


This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030, 324–26, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing.
To learn how to add freely licensed text to Wikipedia articles, please see the terms of use.

References


^ "The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (with amendments)". Constitutional Court of the Republic of Armenia. 5 July 1995. Retrieved 14 October 2012. 
^ Asatryan, Garnik; Arakelova, Victoria (Yerevan 2002). The Ethnic Minorities in Armenia. Part of the OSCE. Archived copy at WebCite (16 April 2010).
^ Ministry of Culture of Armenia "The ethnic minorities in Armenia. Brief information". As per the most recent census in 2011. "National minority".
^ "The Republic of Armenia recognizes the exclusive historical mission of the Armenian Apostolic Holy Church as a national church" http://www.parliament.am/parliament.php?id=constitution&lang=eng
^ a b Shugart, Matthew Søberg (September 2005). "Semi-Presidential Systems: Dual Executive and Mixed Authority Patterns" (PDF). Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies. United States: University of California, San Diego. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2017. 
^ a b Shugart, Matthew Søberg (December 2005). "Semi-Presidential Systems: Dual Executive And Mixed Authority Patterns" (PDF). Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies, University of California, San Diego. French Politics. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. 3 (3): 323–351. doi:10.1057/palgrave.fp.8200087 . ISSN 1476-3427. OCLC 6895745903. Retrieved 13 October 2017. Table 1 shows that dissolution power as a presidential initiative is rare in the contemporary president-parliamentary systems. In fact, only in Armenia may the president dissolve (once per year) without a trigger (e.g. assembly failure to invest a government). 
^ a b Markarov, Alexander (2016). "Semi-presidentialism in Armenia" (PDF). In Elgie, Robert; Moestrup, Sophia. Semi-Presidentialism in the Caucasus and Central Asia. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK (published 15 May 2016). pp. 61–90. doi:10.1057/978-1-137-38781-3_3. ISBN 978-1-137-38780-6. LCCN 2016939393. OCLC 6039792321. Retrieved 8 October 2017. Markarov discusses the formation and development of the semi-presidential system in Armenia since its foundation in 1991. The author identifies and compares the formal powers of the president, prime minister, and parliament under the 1995 Constitution as well as the amendments introduced through the Constitutional referendum in 2005. Markarov argues that the highly presidentialized semi-presidential system that was introduced in the early 1990s gradually evolved into a Constitutionally more balanced structure. However, in practice, the president has remained dominant and backed by a presidential majority; the president has thus been able to set the policy agenda and implement his preferred policy. 
^ Lang, David Marshall. Armenia: Cradle of Civilization. London: Allen and Unwin, 1970, p. 114. ISBN 0-04-956007-7.
^ Redgate, Anna Elizabeth. The Armenians. Cornwall: Blackwell, 1998, pp. 16–19, 23, 25, 26 (map), 30–32, 38, 43 ISBN 0-631-22037-2.
^ Redgate, A. E. (2000). The Armenians (Reprint ed.). Oxford: Blackwell. p. 5. ISBN 0-631-22037-2. However, the most easily identifiable ancestors of the later Armenian nation are the Urartians. 
^ de Laet, Sigfried J.; Herrmann, Joachim, eds. (1996). History of Humanity: From the seventh century B.C. to the seventh century A.D (1st ed.). London: Routledge. p. 128. ISBN 9789231028120. The ruler of the part known as Greater Armenia, Artaxias (Artashes), the founder of a new dynasty, managed to unite the country... 
^ Encyclopedia Americana: Ankara to Azusa. Scholastic Library Publishing. 2005. p. 393. It was named for Artaxias, a general of Antiochus the Great, who founded the kingdom of Armenia about 190 B.C. 
^ "The World Fact Book – Armenia". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 19 July 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2010. 
^ a b "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ "Statistical Service of Armenia" (PDF). Armstat. Retrieved 20 February 2014. 
^ "Armenia Population". countrymeters.info. 
^ a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". World Economic Outlook Database, October 2016. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. 4 October 2016. Retrieved 26 October 2016. 
^ "Gini index". World Bank. Retrieved 12 May 2016. 
^ "Human Development Report 2016" (PDF). United Nations. 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2017. 
^ Dum-Tragut, Jasmine (2009). Armenian: Modern Eastern Armenian. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. p. 12. ISBN 9789027238146. The orthography used in Armenia nowadays goes back to the Soviet orthography reform of 1922 and its revision of 1940. 
^ "Armenia." Dictionary.com Unabridged. 2015.
^ Central Intelligence Agency."The CIA World Factbook 2015" Skyhorse Publishing Inc, 2014. ISBN 1-62914-903-9
^ The UN classification of world regions places Armenia in Western Asia; the CIA World Factbook "Armenia". The World Factbook. CIA. Archived from the original on 10 October 2010. Retrieved 2 September 2010.  "Armenia". National Geographic. , "Armenia". Encyclopædia Britannica. , Calendario Atlante De Agostini (in Italian) (111 ed.). Novara: Istituto Geografico De Agostini. 2015. p. sub voce. ISBN 9788851124908.  and Oxford Reference Online "Oxford Reference". Oxford Reference Online. doi:10.1093/acref/9780199546091.001.0001/acref-9780199546091-e-652 (inactive 2017-09-23). Retrieved 20 October 2012.  also place Armenia in Asia.
^ The Oxford Encyclopedia of Economic History. Oxford University Press. 2003. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-19-510507-0. 
^ (Garsoïan, Nina (1997). ed. R.G. Hovannisian, ed. Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 81, Vol. 1. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link) )
^ Stringer, Martin D. (2005). A Sociological History of Christian Worship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 92. ISBN 0-521-81955-5. 
^ Smaller nations that have claimed a prior official adoption of Christianity include Osroene, the Silures, and San Marino. See Timeline of official adoptions of Christianity.
^ Grousset, René (1947). Histoire de l'Arménie (1984 ed.). Payot. p. 122. . Estimated dates vary from 284 to 314. Garsoïan (op.cit. p. 82), following the research of Ananian, favours the latter.
^ The republic has separation of church and state
^ "The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, Article 8.1". President.am. Archived from the original on 20 December 2010. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 
^ Ագաթանգեղոս §§ 13 (ի Հայաստան աշխարհէս), 16 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս 2x, ի Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 35 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 160 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 249 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 715 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 776 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 784 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 796 (ի մէջ Հայաստան աշխարհի), 808 (հասանէին ի Հայաստան աշխարհն)։
^ Ագաթանգեղոս § 885 (ի Հայաստան երկրին)
^ Փաւստոս Բուզանդ 1883=1984, էջ 1 (Հայաստան աշխարհին)
^ Փաւստոս Բուզանդ 1883=1984, 4.բ, էջ 56 (Հայաստան երկրին)
^ 904=1985, էջ 2 (Հայաստան աշխարհիս), 110 (կանայս ի Հայաստան աշխարհիս)
^ Կորիւն 1994, էջ 83 (Հայաստան աշխարհի), 93 (Հայաստան աշխարհին), 103 (ի Հայաստան աշխարհին), 120 (ի Հայաստան աշխարհէս)
^ ժը (սեռ. Հայաստանեայց, բացառ. ի Հայաստանեայց), տես Աբգարյան 1979, էջ 66, 90
^ Razmik Panossian, The Armenians: From Kings And Priests to Merchants And Commissars, Columbia University Press (2006), ISBN 978-0-231-13926-7, p. 106.
^ Rafael Ishkhanyan, "Illustrated History of Armenia," Yerevan, 1989
^ Elisabeth Bauer. Armenia: Past and Present (1981), p. 49
^ "Χαλύβοισι πρὸς νότον Ἀρμένιοι ὁμουρέουσι (The Armenians border on the Chalybes to the south)". Chahin, Mark (2001). The Kingdom of Armenia. London: Routledge. p. fr. 203. ISBN 978-0-7007-1452-0. 
^ Xenophon. Anabasis. pp. IV.v.2–9. 
^ Moses of Chorene,The History of Armenia, Book 1, Ch. 12 (in Russian)
^ History of Armenia by Father Michael Chamich from B.C. 2247 to the Year of Christ 1780, or 1229 of the Armenian era, Bishop's College Press, Calcutta, 1827, p. 19: "[Aram] was the first to raise the Armenian name to any degree of renown; so that contemporary nations... called them the Aramians, or followers of Aram, a name which has been corrupted into Armenians; and the country they inhabited, by universal consent, took the name of Armenia."
^ Charles, R.H. (1913). The Book of Jubilees 9:5 from The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament. Clarendon Press. 
^ Josephus, Flavius. Antiquities of the Jews. p. Book 1, section 143. 
^ "The first leather shoe,". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 October 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2011. 
^ "5,900-year-old women's skirt discovered in Armenian cave". News Armenia. 13 September 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2011. 
^ "National Geographic: the first wine-making facility". National Geographic. Retrieved 11 January 2011. 
^ Kurkjian, Vahan (1958). History of Armenia (1964 ed.). Michigan: Armenian General Benevolent Union. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia. Yerevan: Armenian Encyclopedia. 1987. p. v. 12. 
^ Movsisyan, Artak (2000). Sacred Highland: Armenia in the spiritual conception of the Near East. Yerevan. 
^ Kavoukjian, Martiros (1982). The Genesis of Armenian People. Montreal. 
^ Joshua J. Mark. "Assyria". Ancient History Encyclopedia. 
^ Charles W. Hartley; G. Bike Yazicioğlu; Adam T. Smith, eds. (2012). The Archaeology of Power and Politics in Eurasia: Regimes and Revolutions. Cambridge University Press. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-107-01652-1. ...the unique temple-tomb at Garni, just east of Yerevan – the only Greco-Roman colonnaded building anywhere in the Soviet Union. 
^ a b "The World Factbook: Armenia". CIA. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 15 November 2007. 
^ Brunner, Borgna (2006). Time Almanac with Information Please 2007. New York: Time Home Entertainment. p. 685. ISBN 978-1-933405-49-0. 
^ a b Mary Boyce. Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices Psychology Press, 2001 ISBN 0-415-23902-8 p. 84
^ Stokes, Jamie, ed. (2008). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East. New York: Infobase Publishing. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4381-2676-0. Etchmiatzin is located in the west of modern Armenia, close to the border with Turkey, and its fourth-century cathedral is generally regarded as the oldest in the world. 
^ Bauer-Manndorff, Elisabeth (1981). Armenia: Past and Present. Lucerne: Reich Verlag. OCLC 8063377. Etchmiadzin, with the world's oldest cathedral and the seat of the Catholicos, draws tourists from all over the world. 
^ Utudjian, Édouard (1968). Armenian Architecture: 4th to 17th Century. Paris: Editions A. Morancé. p. 7. OCLC 464421. ...the oldest cathedral in Christendom, that of Etchmiadzin, founded in the 4th century. 
^ Holt, Peter Malcolm; Lambton, Ann Katharine Swynford & Lewis, Bernard (1977). "The Cambridge History of Islam": 231–32. 
^ Rayfield, Donald (2013). Edge of Empires: A History of Georgia. Reaktion Books. p. 165. ISBN 978-1-78023-070-2. 
^ Ward, Steven R. (2014). Immortal, Updated Edition: A Military History of Iran and Its Armed Forces. Georgetown University Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-62616-032-3. 
^ Herzig, Edmund; Kurkchiyan, Marina (2004). The Armenians: Past and Present in the Making of National Identity. Routledge. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-135-79837-6. 
^ H. Nahavandi, Y. Bomati, Shah Abbas, empereur de Perse (1587–1629) (Perrin, Paris, 1998)
^ Mikaberidze, Alexander (2011). Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 33, 351. ISBN 978-1-59884-337-8. 
^ Dowling, Timothy C. (2014). Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. pp. 728–. ISBN 978-1-59884-948-6. 
^ Minahan, James (2010). The complete guide to national symbols and emblems. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood Press. p. 310. ISBN 0-313-34497-3. 
^ Kirakosian, J. S. (1972). Hayastane michazkayin divanakitut'yan ew sovetakan artakin kaghakakanut'yan pastateghterum, 1828–1923 [Armenia in the documents of international diplomacy and Soviet foreign policy, 1828–1923] (in Armenian). Yerevan. pp. 149–358. 
^ Kieser, Hans-Lukas; Schaller, Dominik J. (2002), Der Völkermord an den Armeniern und die Shoah [The Armenian genocide and the Shoah] (in German), Chronos, p. 114, ISBN 3-0340-0561-X 
^ Walker, Christopher J. (1980), Armenia: The Survival of A Nation, London: Croom Helm, pp. 200–03 
^ "Extensive bibliography by University of Michigan on the Armenian Genocide". Umd.umich.edu. Archived from the original on 16 November 2001. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 
^ "Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Resolution". Armenian genocide. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West. New York: Penguin Press. p. 177. ISBN 1-59420-100-5. 
^ Robert Melson, Revolution and Genocide: On the Origins of the Armenian Genocide and the Holocaust, University Of Chicago Press, 15 October 1992, p. 147
^ Q&A: Armenian genocide dispute. BBC News. 10 July 2008.
^ "Tsitsernakaberd Memorial Complex". Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ Hovannisian, Richard, and Simon Payaslian. Armenian Cilicia. Costa Mesa: Mazda Publishers, Inc., 2008. 483. Print.
^ a b "The Soviet Period – History – Azerbaijan – Asia". Retrieved 25 July 2011. 
^ a b Закавказская федерация. Большая советская энциклопедия, 3-е изд., гл. ред. А. М. Прохоров. Москва: Советская энциклопедия, 1972. Т. 9 (A. M. Prokhorov; et al., eds. (1972). "Transcaucasian Federation". Great Soviet Encyclopedia (in Russian). 9. Moscow: Soviet Encyclopedia. )
^ Ronald G. Suny, James Nichol, Darrell L. Slider. Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. 1995. pp. 17 and following
^ C. Mouradian, L'Armenie sovietique, pp. 278–79
^ "Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic". The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979).
^ Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2004. p. 74 by Imogen Gladman, Taylor & Francis Group
^ Notes from Baku: Black January. Rufat Ahmedov. EurasiaNet Human Rights.
^ "The March Referendum". Archived from the original on 15 October 2006. Retrieved 10 November 2008. 
^ a b Croissant, Michael P. (1998). The Armenia-Azerbaijan Conflict: Causes and Implications. London: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-96241-8. 
^ "The Ties That Divide". Global Heritage Fund. 17 June 2006. Archived from the original on 20 August 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ De Waal, Thomas (2004). Black Garden: Armenia And Azerbaijan Through Peace and War. New York: New York University Press. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-8147-1945-9. 
^ A Conflict That Can Be Resolved in Time: Nagorno-Karabakh. International Herald Tribune. 29 November 2003.
^ a b "Heritage Index of Economic Freedom". The Heritage Foundation. 
^ "EU negotiations with Armenia and Georgia on Free Trade Agreements successfully concluded". EPP Group. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ "Armenia will significantly increase its revenues by reinforcing its role of a transit country between Europe, CIS and Middle East". Arka News Agency. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ "Europe Could Draw Gas Through Iran–Armenia Pipeline". European dialogue. Retrieved 10 February 2016. 
^ "Geographic Characteristic of The Republic of Armenia" (PDF). Marzes of the Republic of Armenia in Figures, 2002–2006. National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia. 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ Natasha May Azarian (2007). The Seeds of Memory: Narrative Renditions of the Armenian Genocide Across Generations. ProQuest. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-549-53005-3. Retrieved 28 April 2013. Mount Ararat is considered the 'heart' of historical Armenia as it is Armenian folklore which considers the majestic mountain to be the place where Noah's Arc landed. Armenian businesses, households, and schools almost ubiquitously have at ... 
^ Rouben Paul Adalian (13 May 2010). Historical Dictionary of Armenia. Scarecrow Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-8108-7450-3. Retrieved 28 April 2013. Although the mythology associated with the pagan worship of the mountain is now lost to popular belief, Mount Ararat has played a very ... 
^ James Minahan (1998). Miniature empires: a historical dictionary of the newly independent states. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 2–3. ISBN 978-0-313-30610-5. Retrieved 28 April 2013. Mount Ararat, the legendary landing place of Noah's Ark, is located in what is now modern Turkey. Situated near the border, the peak is visible from nearly every area of Armenia. Historically, the mountain has been the Armenian people's most ... 
^ "Address by President Serzh Sargsyan to the People of Armenia and the National Assembly on 2 October 2008". President.am. Archived from the original on 9 December 2010. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 
^ "Nations in Transit 2008" (PDF). Freedom House. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 1 March 2014. 
^ "Nations in Transit 2008: Armenia" (PDF). Freedom House. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 26 June 2008. 
^ "Freedom in the World 2007" (PDF). Freedom House. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2007. 
^ Danielyan, Emil (20 February 2008). "Armenian Vote 'Largely Democratic'". ArmeniaLiberty, Radio Free Europe. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008. Retrieved 20 February 2008. 
^ a b "Nagorno-Karabakh: The Crisis in the Caucasus". Retrieved 6 April 2007. 
^ "Armenia and Turkey sign peace deal". Archived from the original on 14 October 2009. 
^ "Baku and Moscow – 'One Hundred Percent Strategic Partners'". Hetq Online. 27 February 2006. Retrieved 20 April 2008. 
^ "Ancestry Data". U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 22 July 2009.  The 2001 Canadian Census determined that there are 40,505 persons of Armenian ancestry currently living in Canada. However, these are liable to be low numbers, since people of mixed ancestry, very common in North America tend to be under-counted: the 1990 census US indicates 149,694 people who speak the Armenian language at home. "The Armenian Embassy in Canada". Archived from the original on 26 August 2006. Retrieved 1 June 2016.  estimates 1 million ethnic Armenians in the US and 100,000 in Canada. The Armenian Church of America makes a similar estimate. By all accounts, over half of the Armenians in the United States live in California.
^ "RFE/RL Caucasus Report". Armenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 7 January 2005. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ "Interview with RA National Assembly Speaker Artur Baghdasaryan". ArmInfo News Agency. 26 October 2005. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ "How Armenia Could Approach the European Union" (PDF). Retrieved 12 March 2013. 
^ "EU launches negotiations on Association Agreements with Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia". Europa (web portal). 15 July 2010. Retrieved 21 September 2011. 
^ "Armenia-EU association agreement may be concluded shortly | Armenia News". News.am. Retrieved 21 September 2011. 
^ "3rd Plenary Round of the EU–Armenia Negotiation on the Association Agreement". Ec.europa.eu. 15 December 2010. Retrieved 28 August 2012. 
^ "Eurasian Economic Commission". www.eurasiancommission.org. Retrieved 13 October 2015. 
^ "ДОГОВОР О ПРИСОЕДИНЕНИИ РЕСПУБЛИКИ АРМЕНИЯ К ДОГОВОРУ О ЕВРАЗИЙСКОМ ЭКОНОМИЧЕСКОМ СОЮЗЕ ОТ 29 МАЯ 2014 ГОДА (Минск, 10 октября 2014 года)". www.customs-code.ru. Retrieved 13 October 2015. 
^ "Armenia To Join Russian-Led Customs Union". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 3 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013. 
^ "Armenia | Freedom House" (PDF). freedomhouse.org. Retrieved 2016-01-27. 
^ "KFOR Contingent: Armenia". Official Web Site of the Kosovo Force. 23 March 2007. Retrieved 27 October 2008. 
^ "Last shift of Armenian peacekeepers in Iraq returns home". Ministry of Defence. 7 October 2008. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2008. 
^ "Regional Administration Bodies". The Government of the Republic of Armenia. Retrieved 11 September 2008. 
^ Armstat:Provinces, area and population
^ Demourian, Avet (19 October 2007). "Armenian Eyes, Ears on US Genocide Vote". The Washington Post. Retrieved 7 July 2009. 
^ "Intel center to open in Armenia". Panarmenian.Net. 20 January 1990. Retrieved 12 March 2013. 
^ a b Z. Lerman and A. Mirzakhanian, Private Agriculture in Armenia, Lexington Books, Lanham, MD, 2001.
^ Statistical Yearbook 2007, Armenia National Statistical Service, Yerevan
^ "Unemployment Armenia". Armenian Statistical Service of Republic of Armenia. Retrieved 6 May 2016. 
^ "Human Development Report 2015 – "Rethinking Work for Human Development"" (PDF). HDRO (Human Development Report Office) United Nations Development Programme. Retrieved 14 December 2015. 
^ "CPI 2015 table". Transparency International. Retrieved 28 January 2016. 
^ a b c d e f g Erocal, Deniz; Yegorov, Igor (2015). Countries in the Black Sea basin. In: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (PDF). Paris: UNESCO. pp. 324–41. ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1. 
^ Paul, Amanda. "Armenia's disappearing population". Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011. 
^ Turay, Anna. "Tarihte Ermeniler". Bolsohays:Istanbul Armenians Like many other ethnicities Armenians in India too have played a role historically and had an impact historically. Today however the community has been reduced to about a hundred living in Calcutta. Archived from the original on 9 February 2008. Retrieved 4 January 2007. 
^ "Jerusalem – The Old City: The Armenian Quarter". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ "San Lazzaro degli Armeni – Venice for Visitors". Europeforvisitors.com. Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 
^ "Population in Nagorno-Karabakh 2007" (PDF). National Statistical Service of Nagorno-Karabakh Republic. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2009. 
^ Asatryan, Garnik; Arakelova, Victoria (2002). "The Ethnic Minorities of Armenia". Routledge. , part of the OSCE
^ a b Sherwood, Harriet (25 July 2016). "World's largest Yazidi temple under construction in Armenia". The Guardian. Retrieved 31 July 2016. 
^ (in Russian) The All-Union Population Census of 1989 Archived 4 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. Demoscope.ru
^ "The South Caucasus Between The EU And The Eurasian Union" (PDF). Caucasus Analytical Digest #51–52. Forschungsstelle Osteuropa, Bremen and Center for Security Studies, Zürich. 17 June 2013. pp. 22–23. ISSN 1867-9323. Retrieved 3 July 2013. 
^ Aragatsotn
^ Tavush
^ Kotayk
^ Vayots Dzor
^ Syunik
^ Shirak
^ Lori
^ Gegharkunik
^ Armavir
^ Ararat
^ Yerevan
^ "Armenia – Which Nation First Adopted Christianity?". Ancienthistory.about.com. 29 October 2009. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "Visit Armenia, It is Beautiful". Visitarmenia.org. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "Armenia Information – Welcome to Armenia". Welcomearmenia.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "Blog Archive " Which is the first country to adopt Christianity?". Did You Know it. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "The Armenian Apostolic Church (World Council of Churches)". 
^ "Armenian Brotherhood Church of Yerevan". 
^ "Armenian Evangelical Christian Baptist". Armbaplife.am. Retrieved 28 August 2012. 
^ "Despite poverty, Baptists prosper in Armenia" (PDF). Biblical Recorder. Baptist State convention of North Carolina. 17 July 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 November 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2010. 
^ "Armenian Presbyterian Church to Commemorate 1700th Anniversary of Christianity in Armenia with Concert and Khachkar Dedication". The Armenian Reporter. 20 October 2001. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. 
^ Lane, Christel (1978). Christian religion in the Soviet Union : a sociological study. Albany: State univ. of New York P. p. 107. ISBN 0-87395-327-4. 
^ a b c "Microsoft Word – cjl – ARM_MPSEURO_countryprofile.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2009. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ "Human Development Report 2009 – Armenia". Hdrstats.undp.org. Archived from the original on 9 January 2010. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ Knapp, Caprice; Madden, Vanessa; Fowler-Kerry, Susan (2011). Pediatric palliative care : global perspectives. Dordrecht: Springer. p. 84. ISBN 9400725698. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Curtis, Glenn E. and Ronald G. Suny. "Education". Armenia: A Country Study. Library of Congress Federal Research Division (March 1994). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
^ "Nagorno Karabakh and Armenia – One Laptop per Child". 
^ Freedom House, Armenia, 2015 Press Freedom report
^ Anais Melikyan, Armenia, EJC Press Landscapes (circa 2009)
^ Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, The Protection of media freedom in Europe.Background report prepared by Mr William Horsley, special representative for media freedom of the Association of European Journalists
^ "Legislation: National Assembly of RA". Parliament.am. Retrieved 26 April 2013. 
^ Armenian Cinema 100, by Artsvi Bakhchinyan, Yerevan, 2012, pp. 111-112
^ "Ambassadors in Sport?: Independent Armenia far below the glory of Soviet times on the pitch, mat – Features". ArmeniaNow.com. Retrieved 25 January 2010. 
^ Green, ed. by Thomas A. (2001). Martial arts of the world : en encyclopedia. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. p. 718. ISBN 978-1-57607-150-2. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ a b "Ambassadors in Sport?: Independent Armenia far below the glory of Soviet times on the pitch, mat – Features". ArmeniaNow.com. Retrieved 28 August 2012. 
^ "Chess News – BBC lecture: Armenia, the cleverest nation on earth". ChessBase.com. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 


External links

Find more aboutArmeniaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Government


Electronic Government of Armenia
Ministry of Economic Development and Investments


General information


The official tourism website of Armenia
The Armenian Church
Armenia on Twitter 
"Armenia". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Armenia at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Armenia profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of Armenia
Key Development Forecasts for Armenia from International Futures
Armeniapedia.org





Articles related to Armenia











v
t
e


Armenia articles



History 
(timeline)




Early



Origins
Name
Kura–Araxes culture
Hayk
Hayasa-Azzi
Mitanni
Nairi
Kingdom of Urartu
Median kingdom
Orontid dynasty
Achaemenid Empire

Satrapy of Armenia


Kingdom of Armenia
Roman Armenia
Parthian Empire
Byzantine Armenia
Sasanian Armenia





Middle



Emirate of Armenia
Sajids
Bagratuni Armenia
Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia
Sallarids
Ilkhanate
Chobanids
Ag Qoyunlu
Kara Koyunlu
Ottoman Armenia
1508–1828 Persian Armenia
Safavid Iran
Afsharid Iran
Qajar Iran

Erivan Khanate
Karabakh Khanate
Treaty of Turkmenchay


Russian Armenia





Modern



First Republic of Armenia
Soviet Armenia
Independent Armenia





By topic



Armenian Genocide
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
Armenian national liberation movement
more...








Geography







Ararat Plain
Armenian Highlands
Cities
Earthquakes
Extreme points
Lake Sevan
Mountains
Rivers and lakes
Shikahogh State Reserve
Shirak Plain
more...








Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Corruption
Elections
Foreign relations
Government
Human rights
Military
National Assembly
National Security Service
Police
Political parties
President
Prime Minister
President of the National Assembly
more on government
on politics








Economy







Agriculture
Armex (stock exchange)
Central Bank
Dram (currency)
Energy
Mining
Pension reform
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Waste management








Culture







Alphabet
Architecture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Language

Eastern
Western


Literature
Music
Sport
Theatre
more...





Demographics



Census
Crime
Education
Ethnic minorities
Health
People

diaspora


Social issues
Women
more...





Religion



Armenian Apostolic Church
Armenian Catholic Church
Armenian Evangelical Church
Armenian Brotherhood Church
Judaism
Islam
more...





Symbols



Armenian Cross
Armenian eternity sign
Coat of arms
Flag
Mount Ararat
National anthem
Apricot
Grape
Pomegranate












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Armenian nationalism



Ideology



United Armenia
Armenian national awakening
Tseghakronism
Miatsum





Organizations



Active political parties
Armenian Revolutionary Federation (Dashnak)
Social Democrat Hunchakian Party (Hunchak)
Armenian Democratic Liberal Party (Ramgavar)


Defunct parties
Armenakan Party
National United Party


Defunct militant organizations
Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia
Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide
Armenian Revolutionary Army





People



Thinkers
Khachatur Abovian
Mikael Nalbandian
Raffi
Mkrtich Khrimian
Shahan Natalie
Kevork Ajemian
Silva Kaputikyan


Militants and commanders
Arabo
Aghbiur Serob
Kevork Chavush
Andranik
Aram Manukian
Armen Garo
Garegin Nzhdeh
Hagop Hagopian
Movses Gorgisyan
Monte Melkonian
Vazgen Sargsyan
Jirair Sefilian





Historical events



Armenian national liberation movement
Battle of Sardarabad
February Uprising
Karabakh movement
Nagorno-Karabakh War





Political entities



Provisional Republic of Van
First Republic of Armenia
Republic of Mountainous Armenia
Armenia
Artsakh












v
t
e


Administrative divisions of Armenia



Provinces (մարզեր)



Aragatsotn
Ararat
Armavir
Gegharkunik
Kotayk
Lori
Shirak
Syunik
Tavush
Vayots Dzor








City with special status



Yerevan (capital)












v
t
e


Cities and towns in Armenia



Aragatsotn



Ashtarak
Aparan
Talin









Ararat



Artashat
Ararat
Masis
Vedi





Armavir



Armavir
Metsamor
Vagharshapat





Gegharkunik



Gavar
Chambarak
Martuni
Sevan
Vardenis





Kotayk



Hrazdan
Abovyan
Byureghavan
Charentsavan
Nor Hachn
Tsaghkadzor
Yeghvard





Lori



Vanadzor
Akhtala
Alaverdi
Spitak
Stepanavan
Tashir
Tumanyan





Shirak



Gyumri
Artik
Maralik





Syunik



Kapan
Goris
Kajaran
Meghri
Sisian





Tavush



Ijevan
Ayrum
Berd
Dilijan
Noyemberyan





Vayots Dzor



Yeghegnadzor
Jermuk
Vayk





Capital city



Yerevan












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in Armenia






Monasteries of Haghpat and Sanahin
Monastery of Geghard and the Upper Azat Valley
Cathedral and Churches of Echmiatsin

Saint Hripsime
Saint Gayane
Shoghakat


the Archaeological Site of Zvartnots


Sites on the Tentative List
The archaeological site of the city of Dvin
The basilica and archaeological site of Yererouk
The monastery of Noravank and the upper Amaghou Valley
The monasteries of Tatev and Tatevi Anapat
The adjacent areas of the Vorotan Valley













 Geographic locale











v
t
e


Countries and regions of the Caucasus







   









 Abkhazia1
 Adjara
 Adygea
 Armenia
 Artsakh1




 Azerbaijan
 Chechnya
 Dagestan
 Georgia




 Ingushetia
 Kabardino-Balkaria
 Karachay-Cherkessia
 Krasnodar Krai




 Nakhchivan
 North Ossetia-Alania
 South Ossetia1
 Stavropol Krai
















1 Partially-recognized states










v
t
e


Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland1
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria






Dependencies





Denmark



Faroe Islands1

autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark







United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia2

Sovereign Base Areas


Gibraltar

British Overseas Territory


Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey

Crown dependencies











Special areas of
internal sovereignty





Finland



Åland Islands

autonomous region subject to the Åland Convention of 1921







Norway



Svalbard

unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty







United Kingdom



Northern Ireland

country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement














1 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.
2 Some countries completely outside the conventional geographical boundaries of Europe are commonly associated with the continent due to ethnological links.
















International membership











v
t
e


International organizations with Armenia as member






ADB
BSEC
CE
CIS
CSTO
EAPC
EBRD
ECE
EAEC
UNESCAP
FAO
IAEA
IBRD
ICAO
ICFTU
ICRM
IDA
IFAD
IFC
IFRCS
ILO
IMF
Interpol
IOC
IOM
ISO
ITU
OIF
EAPC
NAM
OPCW
OSCE
PACE
PFP
UN
UNCTAD
UNESCO
UNIDO
UPU
UNWTO
WHO
WIPO
WMO
WNO
WTO






Italics indicates observer status










v
t
e


 Council of Europe



Institutions



Secretary General
Committee of Ministers
Parliamentary Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance








Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia1
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Observers



Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
Sovereign Military Order of Malta





Former members



Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)






1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.










v
t
e


Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)






Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
Eurasian Economic Union
Union State





Membership




Members



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan





Associate members



Turkmenistan
Ukraine





Former members



Georgia (1993–2009)





History



Russian Empire
Soviet Union
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Union of Sovereign States
Belavezha Accords (Near abroad)
Alma-Ata Protocol











Sports



Unified Team at the Olympics
Unified Team at the Paralympics
CIS national bandy team
CIS national football team
CIS national ice hockey team
CIS national rugby team
CIS Cup (football)





Military



Collective Security Treaty Organization
Collective Rapid Reaction Force
Joint CIS Air Defense System





Economics



Economic Court
CISFTA
Eurasian Economic Community
Eurasian Patent Convention
Eurasian Patent Organization
EU Technical Aid





Organization



Interstate Aviation Committee
Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS








 Category












v
t
e


Eurasian Economic Union (EEU)



Member states



Armenia
Belarus
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Russia










Observer members



Moldova





Prospective members



Mongolia
Syria
Tajikistan












v
t
e


La Francophonie



Membership




Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Belgium

French Community


Benin
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada

New Brunswick
Quebec


Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Cyprus1
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Dominica
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
France

French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
St. Pierre and Miquelon


Gabon
Ghana1
Greece
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Ivory Coast
Laos
Luxembourg
Lebanon
Macedonia2
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Moldova
Monaco
Morocco
Niger
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
St. Lucia
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Switzerland
Togo
Tunisia
Vanuatu
Vietnam








Observers



Austria
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Georgia
Hungary
Kosovo
Latvia
Lithuania
Montenegro
Mozambique
Ontario
Poland
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Thailand
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
Uruguay






1 Associate member.
2 Provisionally referred to by the Francophonie as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.






Organization



Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique
Agence universitaire de la Francophonie





Secretaries-General



Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Abdou Diouf
Michaëlle Jean





Culture



French language
UN French Language Day
International Francophonie Day
Jeux de la Francophonie
Prix des cinq continents de la francophonie
Senghor University
AFFOI
TV5Monde
LGBT rights








 Category












v
t
e


Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC)







   



 Albania
 Armenia
 Azerbaijan






 Bulgaria
 Georgia
 Greece






 Moldova
 Romania
 Russia






 Serbia
 Turkey
 Ukraine
















v
t
e


World Trade Organization



System



Accession and membership
Appellate Body
Dispute Settlement Body
International Trade Centre
Chronology of key events





Issues



Criticism
Doha Development Round
Singapore issues
Quota Elimination
Peace Clause





Agreements



General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Agriculture
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
Technical Barriers to Trade
Trade Related Investment Measures
Trade in Services
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Government Procurement
Information Technology
Marrakech Agreement
Doha Declaration
Bali Package





Ministerial
Conferences



1st (1996)
2nd (1998)
3rd (1999)
4th (2001)
5th (2003)
6th (2005)
7th (2009)
8th (2011)
9th (2013)
10th (2015)





People



Roberto Azevêdo (Director-General)
Pascal Lamy
Supachai Panitchpakdi
Alejandro Jara
Rufus Yerxa





Members



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Cuba
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Fiji
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong1
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Macau1
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Rwanda
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Suriname
Swaziland
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Taiwan2
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe




European Union



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom











Special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, participates as "Hong Kong, China" and "Macao China".
Officially the Republic of China, participates as "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu", and "Chinese Taipei" in short.

















v
t
e


National personifications






Argentina
Effigies of Argentina
Armenia
Mother Armenia
Australia
Boxing kangaroo
Little Boy from Manly
Bangladesh
Mother Bengal
Belgium
Leo Belgicus
Brazil
Efígie da República
Cambodia
Preah Thong and Neang Neak
Canada
Johnny Canuck
China
Yanhuang
Czech Republic
Čechie
Czech Vašek
Švejk
Denmark
Holger Danske
Finland
Finnish Maiden
France
Marianne
Georgia
Kartvlis Deda
Germany
Deutscher Michel
Germania
Greece
Athena
Heracles
Hoplite
Nike
Hungary
Lady of Hungaria
Iceland
Lady of the Mountain
India
Bharat Mata
Indonesia
Ibu Pertiwi
Ireland
Ériu
Hibernia
Kathleen Ni Houlihan
Israel
Srulik
Italy
Italia turrita
Japan
Amaterasu
Kenya
Wanjiku
Korea
Dangun
Ungnyeo
Malta
Melita
Montenegro
Fairy of Lovćen
Netherlands
Dutch Maiden
New Zealand
Zealandia
Norway
Ola Nordmann
Philippines
Juan dela Cruz
Maria Clara
Poland
Polonia
Portugal
Efígie da República
Zé Povinho
Russia
Mother Russia
Serbia
Mother Serbia
Kosovo Maiden
Spain
Hispania
Sweden
Mother Svea
Switzerland
Helvetia
Ukraine
Cossack Mamay
United Kingdom
Britannia
John Bull
Dame Wales
United States
Brother Jonathan
Columbia
Lady Liberty
Uncle Sam
Billy Yank

Northern states


Johnny Reb

Southern states








Other symbols of Liberty










v
t
e


States with limited recognition




Details concerning international recognition and foreign relations provided by the articles linked in parenthesis



UN member states




Partially unrecognised



Armenia

relations


China

relations


Cyprus

relations


Israel

recognition
relations


North Korea

relations


South Korea

relations











Non-UN member
states






Recognised by at least
one UN member




Abkhazia

recognition
relations


Kosovo

recognition
relations


Northern Cyprus

relations


Palestine

recognition
relations


Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic

recognition
relations


South Ossetia

recognition
relations


Taiwan

relations








Recognised only by
non-UN members




Artsakh

recognition
relations


Transnistria

recognition
relations







Unrecognised



Somaliland

relations



















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 138518304
LCCN: n92057129
GND: 4085931-9
HDS: 25005
NDL: 00560353











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Armenia&oldid=818273747"					Categories: ArmeniaTranscaucasiaEastern European countriesWestern Asian countriesLandlocked countriesLiberal democraciesRepublicsMember states of the Commonwealth of Independent StatesMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the United NationsMembers of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples OrganizationStates and territories established in 1918States and territories disestablished in 19201918 establishments in Asia1918 establishments in Europe1920 disestablishments in Asia1920 disestablishments in EuropeStates and territories established in 19911991 establishments in Asia1991 establishments in EuropeArmenian-speaking countries and territoriesRussian-speaking countries and territoriesCountries in AsiaCountries in EuropeChristian statesHidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Pages with DOIs inactive since 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: editors listArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles with Russian-language external linksArticles containing Armenian-language textCS1 Armenian-language sources (hy)CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesEngvarB from November 2016Coordinates on WikidataArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles needing additional references from September 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from July 2009Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2008All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009Articles containing Russian-language textFree-content attributionFree content from UNESCO PublishingArticles with DMOZ linksUse dmy dates from October 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers