The cities of Paris, Lyon and Marseille are also divided into municipal arrondissements, not to be confused with the arrondissements addressed in this article.







This article is part of the series on
Administrative divisions of France




Main article




Regions
(incl. overseas regions)




Departments
(incl. overseas departments)




Arrondissements




Cantons




Intercommunality
Métropole
Communauté urbaine
Communauté d'agglomération
Communauté de communes




Communes
Associated communes
Municipal arrondissements




Others in Overseas France
Overseas collectivities
Sui generis collectivity
Overseas country
Overseas territory
Clipperton Island



An arrondissement (French pronunciation: ​[aʁɔ̃dismɑ̃])[1] is a level of administrative division in France.
As of 2016[update], the 101 French departments were divided into 334 arrondissements (including 12 overseas).[2]
The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture. When an arrondissement contains the prefecture (capital) of the department, that prefecture is the capital of the arrondissement, acting both as a prefecture and as a subprefecture.
Arrondissements are further divided into cantons and communes.
The term arrondissement can be roughly translated into English as district.[3] A more etymologically precise, but less allegorical, definition would be encirclements, from the French arrondir, to encircle.[4] Because no single translation adequately conveys the layered sense of the word, the French term is usually used in English writing.



Contents


1 Role and administration
2 History
3 Statistics
4 References
5 See also



Role and administration[edit]
The administration of an arrondissement is assigned to a subprefect (French: sous-préfet) who assists the departmental prefect (préfet).
Unlike French regions, departments and communes, arrondissements do not have the status of legal entity in public law. In addition, unlike those other administrative divisions, they are not run by elected officials, but by political appointees, officials appointed by the French president.
History[edit]
The concept of arrondissements was proposed several times as an administrative reform during the Ancien Régime, notably by the intendant of the généralité of Brittany, Caze de La Bove, in his Mémoire concernant les subdélégués de l'intendance de Bretagne in 1775.
The arrondissements were created after the French Revolution by the Loi du 28 pluviôse in the year VIII of the Republican Calendar (17 February 1800) and replaced "districts". In certain periods in French history, they have served a role in legislative elections, especially during the Third Republic. In 1926, 106 arrondissements were suppressed by the government.[5][6] While it claimed it was to achieve fiscal savings, some political analysts considered the results electoral manipulation. Some of these suppressed arrondissements were restored in 1942.
Statistics[edit]
Most departments have only three or four arrondissements. The departments of Paris and of the Territory of Belfort have only one, while the department of Pas-de-Calais has seven. Mayotte has none.
References[edit]



^ "Circonscriptions administratives au 1er janvier 2015 : comparaisons départementales" [Administrative constituencies of 1 January 2015: departmental comparisons] (in French). INSEE. Retrieved 5 July 2015. 
^ Téléchargement - Année 2016: Liste des arrondissements
^ André de Laubadère, Jean-Claude Vénézia, Yves Gaudemet, Traité de droit administratif, 12th edition, LGDJ, 1992, vol. 1, nr 168-169
^ [1]
^ Nicolas Verdier, La réforme des arrondissements de 1926 : un choix d'intervention entre espace et territoire, online
^ List of the arrondissements suppressed in 1926



See also[edit]

Administrative divisions of France
List of arrondissements of France
Arrondissement
Municipal arrondissements of France
Arrondissements of Paris







v
t
e


Articles on third-level administrative divisions of countries






Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Chad
Chile
China
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Democratic Republic of the Congo
East Timor
England
Ecuador
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany
Guinea
Greece
Haiti
India
Indonesia

distrik
kecamatan


Iraq
Italy
Ivory Coast
Japan
Kenya
Liberia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malawi
Mali
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Northern Ireland
Niger
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Russia
Scotland
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Togo
Ukraine
United States
Vietnam
Wales
Zimbabwe






List of administrative divisions by country









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arrondissements_of_France&oldid=807579094"					Categories: Arrondissements of FranceSubdivisions of FranceCountry subdivisions in EuropeThird-level administrative country subdivisionsHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing French-language textUse dmy dates from January 2011