For other uses, see Artery (disambiguation).


Artery



Diagram of an artery.



Details


Identifiers


Latin
Arteria (plural: arteriae)


TA
A12.0.00.003
A12.2.00.001


FMA
50720


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



An artery (plural arteries) (from Greek ἀρτηρία (artēria), meaning 'windpipe, artery')[1] is a blood vessel that takes blood from the heart to all parts of the body. Most arteries carry oxygenated blood; the two exceptions are the pulmonary and the umbilical arteries, which carry deoxygenated blood to the organs that oxygenate it. The effective arterial blood volume is that extracellular fluid which fills the arterial system.
The arteries are part of the circulatory system, which is responsible for the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to all cells, as well as the removal of carbon dioxide and waste products, the maintenance of optimum blood pH, and the circulation of proteins and cells of the immune system. In developed countries, the two leading causes of death, myocardial infarction (heart attack), and stroke, may each directly result from an arterial system that has been slowly and progressively compromised by years of deterioration.



Contents


1 Structure

1.1 Development


2 Function

2.1 Aorta
2.2 Capillaries


3 Clinical significance
4 History
5 References
6 External links



Structure[edit]




Microscopic anatomy of an artery.






Cross-section of a human artery


See also: Arterial tree
The anatomy of arteries can be separated into gross anatomy, at the macroscopic level, and microanatomy, which must be studied with the aid of a microscope. The arterial system of the human body is divided into systemic arteries, carrying blood from the heart to the whole body, and pulmonary arteries, carrying deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs.
The outermost layer of an artery (or vein) is known as the tunica externa, also known as tunica adventitia, and is composed of connective tissue made up of collagen fibers. Inside this layer is the tunica media, or media, which is made up of smooth muscle cells and elastic tissue (also called connective tissue proper). The innermost layer, which is in direct contact with the flow of blood, is the tunica intima, commonly called the intima. This layer is mainly made up of endothelial cells. The hollow internal cavity in which the blood flows is called the lumen.
Development[edit]
Arterial formation begins when endothelial cells begin to express arterial specific genes, such as ephrin B2.[2]
Function[edit]




Arteries form part of the human circulatory system


Main article: Circulatory system
Arteries form part of the circulatory system. They carry blood that is oxygenated after it has been pumped from the heart. Coronary arteries also aid the heart in pumping blood. Arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart to the tissues, except for pulmonary arteries, which carry blood to the lungs for oxygenation (usually veins carry deoxygenated blood to the heart but the pulmonary veins carry oxygenated blood).[3] There are two types of unique arteries. The pulmonary artery carries blood from the heart to the lungs, where it receives oxygen. It is unique because the blood in it is not "oxygenated", as it has not yet passed through the lungs. The other unique artery is the umbilical artery, which carries deoxygenated blood from a fetus to its mother.
Arteries have a blood pressure higher than other parts of the circulatory system. The pressure in arteries varies during the cardiac cycle. It is highest when the heart contracts and lowest when heart relaxes. The variation in pressure produces a pulse, which can be felt in different areas of the body, such as the radial pulse. Arterioles have the greatest collective influence on both local blood flow and on overall blood pressure. They are the primary "adjustable nozzles" in the blood system, across which the greatest pressure drop occurs. The combination of heart output (cardiac output) and systemic vascular resistance, which refers to the collective resistance of all of the body's arterioles, are the principal determinants of arterial blood pressure at any given moment.
Systemic arteries are the arteries (including the peripheral arteries), of the systemic circulation, which is the part of the cardiovascular system that carries oxygenated blood away from the heart, to the body, and returns deoxygenated blood back to the heart. Systemic arteries can be subdivided into two types - muscular and elastic - according to the relative compositions of elastic and muscle tissue in their tunica media as well as their size and the makeup of the internal and external elastic lamina. The larger arteries (>10 mm diameter) are generally elastic and the smaller ones (0.1–10 mm) tend to be muscular. Systemic arteries deliver blood to the arterioles, and then to the capillaries, where nutrients and gases are exchanged.
After travelling from the aorta, blood travels through peripheral arteries into smaller arteries called arterioles, and eventually to capillaries. Arterioles help in regulating blood pressure by the variable contraction of the smooth muscle of their walls, and deliver blood to the capillaries.
Aorta[edit]
The aorta is the root systemic artery. In humans, it receives blood directly from the left ventricle of the heart via the aortic valve. As the aorta branches, and these arteries branch in turn, they become successively smaller in diameter, down to the arterioles. The arterioles supply capillaries, which in turn empty into venules. The very first branches off of the aorta are the coronary arteries, which supply blood to the heart muscle itself. These are followed by the branches off the aortic arch, namely the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid, and the left subclavian arteries.
Capillaries[edit]
Main article: Capillaries
The capillaries are the smallest of the blood vessels and are part of the microcirculation. The capillaries have a width of a single cell in diameter to aid in the fast and easy diffusion of gases, sugars and nutrients to surrounding tissues. Capillaries have no smooth muscle surrounding them and have a diameter less than that of red blood cells; a red blood cell is typically 7 micrometers outside diameter, capillaries typically 5 micrometers inside diameter. The red blood cells must distort in order to pass through the capillaries.
These small diameters of the capillaries provide a relatively large surface area for the exchange of gases and nutrients.
Clinical significance[edit]




Diagram showing the effects of atherosclerosis on an artery.


Systemic arterial pressures, are generated by the forceful contractions of the heart's left ventricle. High blood pressure is a factor in causing arterial damage. Healthy resting arterial pressures, are relatively low, mean systemic pressures typically being under 100 mmHg, about 1.8 lbf/in², above surrounding atmospheric pressure (about 760 mmHg or 14.7 lbf/in² at sea level). To withstand and adapt to the pressures within, arteries are surrounded by varying thicknesses of smooth muscle which have extensive elastic and inelastic connective tissues. The pulse pressure, i.e. systolic vs. diastolic difference, is determined primarily by the amount of blood ejected by each heart beat, stroke volume, versus the volume and elasticity of the major arteries.
A blood squirt also known as an arterial gush is the effect when an artery is cut due to the higher arterial pressures. Blood is spurted out at a rapid, intermittent rate, that coincides with the heartbeat.The amount of blood loss can be copious, can occur very rapidly, and be life-threatening.[4]
Over time, factors such as elevated arterial blood sugar (particularly as seen in diabetes mellitus), lipoprotein, cholesterol, high blood pressure, stress and smoking, are all implicated in damaging both the endothelium and walls of the arteries, resulting in atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a disease marked by the hardening of arteries. This is caused by an atheroma or plaque in the artery wall and is a build-up of cell debris, that contain lipids, (cholesterol and fatty acids), calcium[5][6] and a variable amount of fibrous connective tissue.
Accidental intra-arterial injection either iatrogenically or through recreational drug use can cause symptoms such as intense pain, paresthesia and necrosis. It usually causes permanent damage to the limb; often amputation is necessary.[7]
History[edit]
Among the ancient Greeks, the arteries were considered to be "air holders" that were responsible for the transport of air to the tissues and were connected to the trachea. This was as a result of finding the arteries of the dead devoid of blood.
In medieval times, it was recognized that arteries carried a fluid, called "spiritual blood" or "vital spirits", considered to be different from the contents of the veins. This theory went back to Galen. In the late medieval period, the trachea,[8] and ligaments were also called "arteries".[9]
William Harvey described and popularized the modern concept of the circulatory system and the roles of arteries and veins in the 17th century.
Alexis Carrel at the beginning of 20th century first described the technique for vascular suturing and anastomosis and successfully performed many organ transplantations in animals; he thus actually opened the way to modern vascular surgery that was before limited to vessels permanent ligation.
Theodor Kocher the Swiss researcher, reported that atherosclerosis often developed in patients who had undergone a thyroidectomy and suggested that hypothyroidism favors atherosclerosis, which was, in the 1900s at autopsies, seen more frequently in iodine-deficient Austrians compared to Icelanders, which are not deficient in iodine. Turner reported the effectiveness of iodide and dried extracts of thyroid in the prevention of atherosclerosis in laboratory rabbits.[10][citation needed]
References[edit]


^ ἀρτηρία, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ Swift, MR; Weinstein, BM (Mar 13, 2009). "Arterial-venous specification during development". Circulation Research. 104 (5): 576–88. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.188805. PMID 19286613. 
^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1999). Human Biology and Health. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-981176-1. 
^ "U.S. Navy Standard First Aid Manual, Chapter 3 (online)". Retrieved 3 Feb 2003. 
^ Bertazzo, S. et al. Nano-analytical electron microscopy reveals fundamental insights into human cardiovascular tissue calcification. Nature Materials 12, 576-583 (2013).
^ Miller, J. D. Cardiovascular calcification: Orbicular origins. Nature Materials 12, 476-478 (2013).
^ Sen MD, Surjya; Nunes Chini MD Phd, Eduardo; Brown MD, Michael J. (June 2005). "Complications After Unintentional Intra-arterial Injection of Drugs: Risks, Outcomes, and Management Strategies" (Online archive of Volume 80, Issue 6, Pages 783–795, June 2005 Mayo Clinic Proceedings). Mayo Clinic Proceedings. MAYO Clinic. Retrieved 25 August 2014. Unintentional intra-arterial injection of medication, either iatrogenic or self-administered, is a source of considerable morbidity. Normal vascular anatomical proximity, aberrant vasculature, procedurally difficult situations, and medical personnel error all contribute to unintentional cannulation of arteries in an attempt to achieve intravenous access. Delivery of certain medications via arterial access has led to clinically important sequelae, including paresthesias, severe pain, motor dysfunction, compartment syndrome, gangrene, and limb loss. We comprehensively review the current literature, highlighting available information on risk factors, symptoms, pathogenesis, sequelae, and management strategies for unintentional intra-arterial injection. We believe that all physicians and ancillary personnel who administer intravenous therapies should be aware of this serious problem. 
^ Oxford English Dictionary.
^ Shakespeare, William. Hamlet Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary Critical Perspectives. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martins Press, 1994. pg. 50.
^ Bruger, Maurice; Rosenkrantz, J. A. (1942-03-01). "Arteriosclerosis and Hypothyroidism: Observations on Their Possible Interrelationship". The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2 (3): 176–180. doi:10.1210/jcem-2-3-176. ISSN 0368-1610. 


External links[edit]



Look up artery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arteries.



Human arterial system







v
t
e


Human systems and organs



Musculoskeletal




Skeletal system



Bone

Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum


Cartilage





Joints



Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint





Muscular system



Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm








Circulatory system




Cardiovascular system



peripheral

Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel


Heart





Lymphatic system



primary

Bone marrow
Thymus


secondary

Spleen
Lymph node


CNS equivalent

Glymphatic system










Nervous system





Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve


Sensory system

Ear
Eye







Integumentary system



Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast

Mammary gland







Immune system



Myeloid

Myeloid immune system


Lymphoid

Lymphoid immune system







Respiratory system



Upper

Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx


Lower

Trachea
Bronchus
Lung







Digestive system



Mouth

Salivary gland
Tongue


upper GI

Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach


lower GI

Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus


accessory

Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas







Urinary system



Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra





Reproductive system



Female

Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta


Male

Scrotum
Penis
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle







Endocrine system



Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans












v
t
e


Arteries and veins



Vessels




Arteries



Nutrient artery
Arteriole

Metarteriole







Capillaries



Types

Continuous
Fenestrated
Sinusoidal


Precapillary sphincter
Precapillary resistance





Veins



Vena comitans
Superficial vein
Deep vein
Emissary veins
Venous plexus
Venule





Lymph



Lymphatic vessel
Lymph
Lymph capillary








Circulatory system




Systemic

Left heart → Aorta → Arteries → Arterioles → Capillaries → Venules → Veins → Vena cava → (Right heart)



Pulmonary

Right heart → Pulmonary arteries → Lungs → Pulmonary vein → Left heart






Microanatomy



Microcirculation
Tunica intima

Endothelium
Internal elastic lamina


Tunica media
Tunica externa
Vasa vasorum
Vasa nervorum
Vascular nerves
Rete mirabile
Circulatory anastomosis










Arteries in the human body











v
t
e


Arteries of the head and neck



CC




EC




sup. thyroid



superior laryngeal
sternocleidomastoid branch
infrahyoid branch
cricothyroid branch
glandular branches





asc. pharyngeal



posterior meningeal
pharyngeal branches
inferior tympanic





lingual



suprahyoid
dorsal lingual
deep lingual
sublingual





facial



cervical branches (ascending palatine, tonsillar, submental, glandular)
facial branches (inferior labial
superior labial / nasal septum
lateral nasal
angular)





occipital



sternocleidomastoid
meningeal
occipital
auricular
descending





post. auricular



stylomastoid
stapedial
auricular
occipital
Parotid





sup. temporal



transverse facial
middle temporal (zygomatico-orbital)
anterior auricular
frontal
parietal





maxillary




1st part / mandibular



anterior tympanic
deep auricular
middle meningeal (superior tympanic, petrosal)
accessory meningeal
inferior alveolar





2nd part / pterygoid



to muscles of mastication (deep temporal, pterygoid, masseteric)
buccal





3rd part / pterygopalatine



posterior superior alveolar
infraorbital (anterior superior alveolar)
descending palatine (greater palatine, lesser palatine)
artery of the pterygoid canal
sphenopalatine (posterior septal branches, posterior lateral nasal)
pharyngeal











IC




cervical



carotid sinus





petrous



Vidian
caroticotympanic





cavernous/
ophthalmic



orbital group:anterior ethmoidal
posterior ethmoidal
lacrimal (lateral palpebral)
medial palpebral
terminal (supraorbital, supratrochlear, dorsal nasal)

ocular group: central retinal

ciliary (short posterior, long posterior, anterior)
Circulus arteriosus major
hypophysial (superior, inferior)





brain



Circle of Willis
ACA (anterior communicating, medial striate, Orbitofrontal artery)
MCA (anterolateral central, Prefrontal artery, Superior terminal branch, Inferior terminal branch, Anterior temporal branch)
posterior communicating
anterior choroidal











SC




vertebral artery



meningeal
spinal (posterior, anterior)
basilar: pontine
labyrinthine
cerebellar (AICA, SCA, PICA)
cerebral (PCA)





thyrocervical trunk




inferior thyroid



inferior laryngeal
tracheal
esophageal
ascending cervical
pharyngeal
glandular branches





transverse cervical



superficial branch
deep branch / dorsal scapular

scapular anastomosis







suprascapular



acromial branch
scapular anastomosis








costocervical trunk



deep cervical
Supreme Intercostal artery















v
t
e


Arteries of the torso and chest



Lungs



Pulmonary artery

Right
Left (Ligamentum arteriosum)







Heart



Coronary circulation
Right coronary:

SA nodal
AV nodal
Atrial
Right marginal
Posterior interventricular




Left coronary:

Anterior interventricular
Left circumflex (Left marginal)







Aorta




Sections



Ascending aorta
Aortic arch
Descending aorta
Thoracic aorta
Abdominal aorta
Aortic body





Aortic arch




Brachiocephalic



Thyreoidea ima
Right subclavian
Right common carotid





Left
common carotid



External carotid
Internal carotid


Carotid body
Carotid sinus
Carotid bifurcation





Left
subclavian



Internal thoracic: Anterior intercostal
Thymic
Pericardiacophrenic
Perforating branches
terminal (Musculophrenic, superior epigastric)
Costocervical trunk: Highest intercostal (Posterior intercostal 1–2)
Deep cervical








Descending
aorta



visceral: Bronchial
Esophageal
Mediastinal


parietal: Posterior intercostal 3–11
Subcostal
Superior phrenic















v
t
e


Arteries of the abdomen and pelvis



Abdominal
aorta




Celiac




Left gastric



Esophageal branches





Common hepatic



Proper hepatic

cystic


Right gastric
Gastroduodenal

right gastroepiploic
superior pancreaticoduodenal
supraduodenal







Splenic



Pancreatic branches

greater
dorsal


Short gastrics
Left gastroepiploic








Superior mesenteric



Inferior pancreaticoduodenal
Intestinal

jejunal
ileal
arcades
vasa recta


Ileocolic

colic
anterior cecal
posterior cecal
ileal branch
appendicular


Right colic
Middle colic

Marginal







Suprarenal



Middle suprarenal





Renal



Inferior suprarenal
Ureteral





Gonadal



Testicular artery
Ovarian artery





Lumbar



Lumbar arteries





Inferior mesenteric



Left colic

Marginal


Sigmoid
Superior rectal





Common iliac




Internal iliac




Posterior surface




Iliolumbar



Lumbar branch
Iliac branch








Anterior surface




Superior vesical artery



Umbilical artery

Medial umbilical ligament


to ductus deferens





Obturator



Anterior branch

Pubic branch


Posterior branch

Acetabular branch
Cruciate anastomosis


Corona mortis





Middle rectal



Vaginal branch ♀ / Prostatic branch ♂





Uterine ♀



Arcuate
Vaginal branches
Ovarian branches
Tubal branches
Spiral








Vaginal ♀ / Inferior vesical ♂





Inferior gluteal



Accompanying of sciatic nerve
Cruciate anastomosis





Internal pudendal



Inferior rectal
Perineal

posterior scrotal
posterior labial


Bulb of penis/vestibule
Urethral
Deep artery of the penis

helicine


Deep artery of clitoris
Dorsal of the penis
Dorsal of the clitoris











External iliac



Inferior epigastric

Corona mortis


Deep circumflex iliac
Femoral

see arteries of lower limbs










Median sacral



Coccygeal glomus















v
t
e


Arteries of the human arm



Axillary




Shoulder (before teres minor)




1st part



Superior thoracic artery





2nd part



Thoracoacromial artery

pectoral branch
acromial branch
clavicular branch
deltoid branch


Lateral thoracic artery





3rd part



Subscapular artery

scapular anastomosis
circumflex scapular artery
thoracodorsal artery


anterior humeral circumflex artery
posterior humeral circumflex artery











Brachial




Forearm (before cubital fossa)



profunda brachii

radial collateral
medial collateral


ulnar collateral

superior
inferior







Radial artery




forearm



radial recurrent





wrist/carpus



Dorsal carpal branch

dorsal carpal arch


Palmar carpal branch

deep palmar arch







hand



Superficial palmar branch

princeps pollicis
radialis indicis artery
superficial palmar arch










Median artery



median artery





Ulnar artery




forearm



ulnar recurrent

anterior
posterior


common interosseous

anterior
posterior

interosseous recurrent









wrist/carpus



Dorsal carpal branch

dorsal carpal arch


Palmar carpal branch

superficial palmar arch













Arterial Arches




Dorsal carpal arch



dorsal metacarpal
dorsal digital





Palmar carpal arch



superficial palmar arch

common palmar digital


proper palmar digital
deep palmar arch

palmar metacarpal

















v
t
e


Arteries of the human leg



Inferior epigastric



cremasteric ♂ / round ligament ♀





Deep circumflex iliac



no major branches





Femoral




In femoral canal



superficial epigastric
superficial circumflex iliac
superficial external pudendal
deep external pudendal

(anterior scrotal ♂







Descending genicular



saphenous branch
articular branches





Profunda femoris



medial circumflex femoral

ascending
descending

superficial
deep
acetabular




lateral circumflex femoral

descending
transverse
ascending


perforating
Cruciate anastomosis
Trochanteric anastomosis








Popliteal




Genicular



superior genicular (medial, lateral)
middle genicular
inferior genicular (medial, lateral)





Sural



no major branches





Anterior tibial



tibial recurrent

posterior


anterior)
anterior malleolar

medial
lateral


dorsalis pedis: tarsal (medial, lateral)





Tibial-fibular (Tibial-peroneal) trunk



Posterior tibial

circumflex fibular
medial plantar
lateral plantar


fibular (peroneal)





Arches



arcuate

dorsal metatarsal
first dorsal metatarsal


deep plantar
dorsal digital arteries
plantar arch

plantar metatarsal
common plantar digital
proper plantar digital



















Authority control



GND: 4003066-0
NDL: 00561681











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artery&oldid=815089923"					Categories: AngiologyCardiovascular physiologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2013Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers