
Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands


NASA satellite image of Ashmore Reef






Geography


Location
Indian Ocean


Administration



 Commonwealth of Australia



Demographics


Population
0 (1 January 2011)






Ashmore and Cartier Islands


The Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands[1] is an uninhabited external territory[2] of Australia consisting of four low-lying tropical islands in two separate reefs, and the 12 nautical mile territorial sea generated by the islands.[3] The territory is located in the Indian Ocean situated on the edge of the continental shelf, about 320 km (199 mi) off the northwest coast of Australia and 144 km (89 mi) south of the Indonesian island of Rote.[3]
Ashmore Reef is called Pulau Pasir by Indonesians and it is called Nusa Solokaek in the Rotenese language. Both names have the meaning "sand island".[4]



Contents


1 Geography
2 History
3 Governance
4 Ecology and environment

4.1 Ashmore Reef Commonwealth Marine Reserve
4.2 Cartier Island Commonwealth Marine Reserve


5 Economy
6 Migration
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Notes


9 External links



Geography[edit]
The Territory comprises Ashmore Reef, which includes West, Middle, and East Islands, and two lagoons, and Cartier Reef, which includes Cartier Island. Ashmore Reef covers approximately 150 km2 (57.9 sq mi) and Cartier Reef 9 km2 (3 sq mi), both to the limits of the reefs.[5][citation needed] They have a total of 74.1 km (46 mi) of shoreline, measured along the outer edge of the reef.[clarification needed] Australia also claims a 12 nautical mile territorial sea generated by the islands.[3]
West, Middle, and East Islands have a combined land area variously reported as 54 ha, 93 ha, and 112 ha (1 hectare is 0.01 km2, or about 2.5 acres).[6][7][8] Cartier Island has a reported land area of 0.4 ha.[7]
History[edit]
By a British Order-in-council dated 23 July 1931, Ashmore and Cartier Islands were placed under the authority of the Commonwealth of Australia, but Australia officially accepted the Territory on 10 May 1934 when the Ashmore and Cartier Islands Acceptance Act 1933 came into operation. The Act authorised the Governor of Western Australia to make Ordinances for the Territory. In July 1938 the Territory was annexed to the Northern Territory, then also administered by the Commonwealth, whose laws, ordinances and regulations applied to the Territory. When self-government was granted to the Northern Territory on 1 July 1978, administration of the Territory was retained by the Commonwealth.[3][5]
Due to its proximity to Indonesia, and the area being traditional fishing grounds of Indonesian fishermen for centuries, some Indonesian groups claim Ashmore Reef to be part of Rote Ndao Regency of East Nusa Tenggara province. However, the Indonesian government does not appear to actively contest Australia's sovereignty of the Territory. Australia's sovereignty is backed up by the fact that the Territory was not administered by the Netherlands (Indonesia's former colonial power), but by the British before it was transferred to Australia.[9]
In 1983 the Territory was declared a nature reserve under the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975,[3] now replaced by the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.[10]
After the islands became a first point of contact with the Australian migration zone, in September 2001, the Australian government excised the Ashmore and Cartier Islands from the Australian migration zone.[3]
Governance[edit]
Today, the Territory is administered from Canberra by the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development, which is also responsible for the administration of the territories of Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, the Coral Sea Islands, Jervis Bay Territory and Norfolk Island.[11]
The Attorney-General's Department had been responsible for the administration of Australian territories until the 2010 federal election. In that year the responsibility for Australian territories was transferred to the then Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport,[3] and from 18 September 2013 the Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development has administered Australian territories.
Defence of Ashmore and Cartier Islands is the responsibility of Australia, with periodic visits by the Royal Australian Navy, Royal Australian Air Force and Australian Customs and Border Protection Service.
Nearby Hibernia Reef, 42 km (26 mi) northeast of Ashmore Reef, is not part of the Territory, but belongs to Western Australia.[12] It has no permanently dry land area, although large parts of the reef become exposed during low tide.
Ecology and environment[edit]
See also: Birds of Ashmore Reef
Main article: Flora of Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Ashmore Reef Commonwealth Marine Reserve[edit]




Cartier Island and surrounding reef (NASA satellite image)


The Ashmore Reef Commonwealth Marine Reserve (formerly Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve), established in August 1983,[13] comprises an area of approximately 583 km2 (225 sq mi).[14] It is of significant biodiversity value as it is in the flow of the Indonesian Throughflow ocean current from the Pacific Ocean through Maritime Southeast Asia to the Indian Ocean.[citation needed] It is also in a surface current west from the Arafura Sea and Timor Sea.
The Reserve comprises several marine habitats, including seagrass meadows, intertidal sand flats, coral reef flats, and lagoons, and supports an important and diverse range of species, including 14 species of sea snakes, a population of dugong that may be genetically distinct, a diverse marine invertebrate fauna, and many endemic species, especially of sea snakes and molluscs. There are feeding and nesting sites for loggerhead, hawksbill and green turtles. It is classified as an Important Bird Area and has 50,000 breeding pairs of various kinds of seabirds. A high abundance and diversity of sea cucumbers, over-exploited on other reefs in the region, is present, with 45 species recorded.[15]
In 2003 the nature reserve was recognised as a wetland of international importance due to the importance of its islands providing a resting place for migratory shorebirds and supporting large seabird breeding colonies.[13] It was designated Ramsar Site 1220 under the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands.[15]
Cartier Island Commonwealth Marine Reserve[edit]
The Cartier Island Commonwealth Marine Reserve (formerly Cartier Island Marine Reserve) was established in June 2000, and comprises an area of approximately 172 km2 (66 sq mi), within a 4 nautical mile radius from the center of Cartier Island, and extends to a depth of 1 km (0.6 mi) below the sea floor.[16] It includes the reef around Cartier island, a small submerged pinnacle called Wave Governor Bank, and two shallow pools to the island's northeast. The Reserve is part of the North-west Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network.[17]
Economy[edit]
There is no economic activity in the Territory, Ashmore and Cartier Islands being uninhabited. Cartier Island is an unvegetated sand island.[7] Access to Cartier Island is prohibited because of the risk of unexploded ordnances. There are no ports or harbours, only offshore anchorage. The customs vessel ACV Ashmore Guardian is stationed off the reef for up to 330 days per year.[18] The islands are also visited by seasonal caretakers and occasional scientific researchers.
The area has been a traditional fishing ground of Indonesian fishermen for centuries, and continues. In the 1850s, American whalers operated in the region. Mining of phosphate deposits took place on Ashmore Island in the latter half of the 19th century.[3] Today, all the wells in the Territory are infected with cholera or contaminated and undrinkable.[19]
Petroleum extraction activities take place at the Jabiru and Challis oil fields, which are adjacent to the Territory, and which are administered by the Northern Territory Department of Mines and Energy on behalf of the Commonwealth.[3]
Migration[edit]
As Ashmore Reef is the closest point of Australian territory to Indonesia, it was a popular target for people smugglers transporting asylum seekers en route to Australia.[20] Once they had landed on Ashmore Island, asylum seekers could claim to have entered Australian migration zone and request to be processed as refugees. The use of Ashmore Island for this purpose created great notoriety during late 2001, when refugee arrivals became a major political issue in Australia. The Australian Government argued that as Australia was not the country of first asylum for these "boat people", Australia did not have a responsibility to accept them.
A number of things were done to discourage the use of the Territory for this purpose, such as attempting to have the people smugglers arrested in Indonesia; the so-called Pacific Solution of processing them in third countries; the boarding and forced turnaround of the boats by Australian military forces; and finally excising the Territory and many other small islands from the Australian migration zone.
Two boatloads of asylum seekers were each detained for several days in the lagoon at Ashmore Island after failed attempts by the Royal Australian Navy to turn them back to Indonesia in October 2001.
See also[edit]


Geography portal
Islands portal
Australia portal



Immigration detention in Australia
Siev 36

References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ The Central Intelligence Agency (2010). The World Factbook. Potomac Books, Inc. p. 39. ISBN 978-1-59797-541-4. 
^ "10: External territories". Legal Risk in International Transactions (ALRC Report 80). Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC), Australian Government. 2006. ISBN 0642254877. Retrieved 2014-04-14. 
^ a b c d e f g h i "Ashmore and Cartier Islands". Territories of Australia. Department of the Infrastructure and Regional Development, Australian Government. 2014-01-29. Retrieved 2014-04-14. 
^ "A STUDY OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES FACING TRADITIONAL INDONESIAN FISHERS WHO ACCESS THE MOU BOX" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-08-27. 
^ a b Year Book Australia, 1981, p.2
^ Carter, Mike; Clarke, Rohan; Pierce, Frank; Dooley, Sean; Swann, George; Grant, Murray (2010). "Lesser Coucal 'Centropus bengalensis' on Ashmore Reef: First Record for Australia". Australian Field Ornithology. 27 (3). ISSN 1448-0107. Within the reef are three small islands: West, Middle and east Islands (total land area 54 ha). The largest and most heavily vegetated is West Island... 
^ a b c Taylor & Francis Group (2004). The Europa World Year Book 2004 (45th ed.). Europa Publications, Taylor & Francis Group. p. 611. ISBN 978-1-85743-254-1. 
^ "Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve and Cartier Island Marine Reserve". Marine Protected Areas. Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities, Australian Government. Archived from the original on 2011-07-09. 
^ Indonesia - Australia Fisheries Cooperation
^ Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
^ Assistant Director, Territories and Disaster Reconstruction Division (16 June 2012). "Territories of Australia". Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport. Archived from the original on 11 February 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2008. 
^ States of Australia Retrieved 2011-06-23
^ a b Ashmore Reef Commonwealth Marine Reserve
^ "Ashmore Reef Commonwealth Marine Reserve". Commonwealth Marine Reserves. Department of the Environment, Australian Government. 2013-06-17. Retrieved 2014-04-14. 
^ a b "The Annotated Ramsar List: Australia". The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. 4 January 2000. Retrieved 10 April 2010. 
^ "Cartier Island Commonwealth Marine Reserve". Commonwealth Marine Reserves. Department of the Environment, Australian Government. 2013-06-17. Retrieved 2014-04-14. 
^ "North-west Commonwealth Marine Reserves Network". Parks Australia, Department of the Environment. Retrieved 18 March 2015. 
^ "Australian Customs Vessel Ashmore Guardian" (PDF). Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. 
^ Bizarre Happenings at Reef, Royal Australian Navy News, 28 June 1999, accessed 29 July 2010
^ Anita Roberts "Don't let them drown" Inside Indonesia Apr–Jun 2001, vol. 64


External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Ashmore and Cartier Islands.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ashmore and Cartier Islands.



"Ashmore and Cartier Islands". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Geoscience Australia—Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Department of the Environment and Heritage—Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve
Department of the Environment and Heritage—Cartier Island Commonwealth Marine Reserve
First on list of Australian islands
"Ashmore Reef Belongs to Indonesia," posted on East Timor Action Network. [1]
"Ashmore Islands are member of ARABOSAI" [2]





Links to related articles











v
t
e


States and territories of Australia



Federal district



Australian Capital Territory





States



New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
Tasmania
Victoria
Western Australia





Internal territories



Jervis Bay Territory
Northern Territory





External territories



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island





Former territories



Central Australia (1927–1931)
North Australia (1927–1931)
Papua New Guinea (1949–1975)












v
t
e


Countries and territories of Oceania



Sovereign states




Entire



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





In part



Chile

Easter Island
Juan Fernández Islands


Indonesia

West Papua
Papua


Japan

Bonin Islands
Minami-Tori-Shima


United States

Hawaii
Palmyra Atoll














Associated states
of New Zealand




Niue
Cook Islands






Dependencies and
other territories





Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Kangaroo Island
Lord Howe Island
Macquarie Islands
Norfolk Island





United States



American Samoa
Baker Island
Guam
Howland Island
Jarvis Island
Johnston Atoll
Kingman Reef
Midway Atoll
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





New Zealand



Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Chatham Islands
Campbell Island
Tokelau





France



French Polynesia
New Caledonia
Wallis and Futuna





United Kingdom



Pitcairn Islands















v
t
e


Geography of Australia



States



New South Wales
Queensland
South Australia
Tasmania
Victoria
Western Australia





Territories



Australian Capital Territory
Jervis Bay Territory
Northern Territory





External territories



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Australian Antarctic Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Norfolk Island












v
t
e


Protected areas managed by the Australian Government



Terrestrial reserves




Botanical gardens



Australian National Botanic Gardens





National parks



Booderee
Christmas Island
Kakadu
Norfolk Island
Pulu Keeling
Uluru-Kata Tjuta








Marine reserves




South-west Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network



Abrolhos
Jurien
Two Rocks
Perth Canyon
Geographe
South-west Corner
Eastern Recherche
Twilight
Bremer
Great Australian Bight
Murat
Western Eyre
Western Kangaroo Island
Southern Kangaroo Island





North-west Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network



Carnarvon Canyon
Shark Bay
Gascoyne
Ningaloo
Montebello
Dampier
Eighty Mile Beach
Argo-Rowley Terrace
Mermaid Reef
Roebuck
Kimberley
Ashmore Reef
Cartier Island





North Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network



Oceanic Shoals
Joseph Bonaparte Gulf
Arafura
Arnhem
Wessel
Limmen
Gulf of Carpentaria
West Cape York





Coral Sea Commonwealth Marine Reserve



Coral Sea Commonwealth Marine Reserve





Temperate East Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network



Jervis
Hunter
Cod Grounds
Solitary Islands
Central Eastern
Gifford
Lord Howe
Norfolk





South-east Commonwealth Marine Reserve Network



Apollo
Beagle
Boags
East Gippsland
Flinders
Franklin
Freycinet
Huon
Macquarie Island
Murray
Nelson
South Tasman Rise
Tasman Fracture
Zeehan





The Heard Island and McDonald Islands Marine Reserve



The Heard Island and McDonald Islands Marine Reserve








Marine parks



Great Barrier Reef Marine Park





Reserves held in trust



Calperum Station (reserve)
Taylorville Station (reserve)





Historic shipwrecks with protected zones



Aarhus
SS Alert
Bega (1908)
Cato
AHS Centuar
Clonmel
SMS Emden
Foam
Florence D
SS Glenelg
SS Gothenburg
HSK Kormoran
Lady Darling
Llewellyn
Submarine M24
HMCS Mermaid
HMS Pandora
HMS Porpoise
Sanyo Maru
Submarine I-124
HMAS Sydney
SS Yongala
VOC Zuytdorp





Related topics



Biosphere reserves in Australia
A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia
Indigenous Protected Area
National Reserve System
Ramsar sites in Australia
World Heritage Sites in Oceania












v
t
e


Ramsar sites in Australia



Australian Capital Territory



Ginini Flats





New South Wales



Blue Lake
Central Murray Forests
Fivebough and Tuckerbil Swamps
Gwydir Wetlands
Hunter Estuary Wetlands
Lake Pinaroo
Little Llangothlin Lagoon
Macquarie Marshes
Myall Lakes
Narran Wetlands
Paroo Wetlands
Towra Point





Northern Territory



Cobourg Peninsula
Kakadu National Park





Queensland



Bowling Green Bay
Currawinya Lakes
Great Sandy Strait
Moreton Bay
Shoalwater Bay





South Australia



Banrock Station Wetland Complex
Bool and Hacks Lagoons
Coongie Lakes
Coorong and Lakes Alexandrina and Albert Wetland
Piccaninnie Ponds
Riverland





Tasmania



Apsley Marshes
Cape Barren Island east coast lagoons
Interlaken Lakeside Reserve
Jocks Lagoon
Lavinia Nature Reserve
Little Waterhouse Lake
Logan Lagoon
Lower Ringarooma River
Moulting Lagoon
Pittwater–Orielton Lagoon





Victoria



Barmah Forest
Corner Inlet
Edithvale-Seaford Wetlands
Gippsland Lakes
Gunbower Forest
Hattah-Kulkyne Lakes
Kerang Wetlands
Lake Albacutya
Port Phillip Bay and Bellarine Peninsula
Western District Lakes
Western Port Bay





Western Australia



Becher Point Wetlands
Eighty Mile Beach
Forrestdale and Thomsons Lakes
Lake Gore
Lake Warden System
Lakes Argyle and Kununurra
Muir-Byenup System
Ord River Floodplain
Peel-Yalgorup System
Roebuck Bay
Toolibin Lake
Vasse-Wonnerup System





External territories



Ashmore Reef
Coral Sea Reserves
The Dales (Christmas Island)
Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs
Hosnies Spring (Christmas Island)
Pulu Keeling











Coordinates: 12°15′30″S 123°02′30″E﻿ / ﻿12.25833°S 123.04167°E﻿ / -12.25833; 123.04167





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashmore_and_Cartier_Islands&oldid=799484835"					Categories: Ashmore and Cartier IslandsRamsar sites in AustraliaImportant Bird Areas of Australian External TerritoriesImmigration to AustraliaTerritorial disputes of AustraliaTerritorial disputes of IndonesiaIslands of OceaniaHidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2013Use Australian English from July 2012All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013Coordinates on Wikidata