






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: There are multiple sections included here that could form individual pages on their own. Suspicions of authors/academics adding their own works in the page without full disclosure Please help improve this article if you can. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Association of
Southeast Asian Nations
Burmese: အရှေ့တောင်အာရှနိုင်ငံများအသင်း

Filipino: Samahan ng mga Bansa sa Timog-Silangang Asya

Indonesian: Perhimpunan Bangsa-Bangsa Asia Tenggara

Khmer: សមាគមប្រជាជាតិអាស៊ីអាគ្នេយ៍

Lao: ສະມາຄົມປະຊາຊາດແຫ່ງອາຊີຕະເວັນອອກສຽງໃຕ້

Malay: Persatuan Negara-Negara Asia Tenggara

Mandarin: 东南亚国家联盟

Tamil: தென்கிழக்காசிய நாடுகளின் கூட்டமைப்பு

Thai: สมาคมประชาชาติแห่งเอเชียตะวันออกเฉียงใต้

Vietnamese: Hiệp hội các quốc gia Đông Nam Á








Flag



Emblem






Motto: "One Vision, One Identity, One Community"[1]




Anthem: "The ASEAN Way"

















Secretariat
Jakartaa
6°12′S 106°49′E﻿ / ﻿6.200°S 106.817°E﻿ / -6.200; 106.817


Working language
English[2]


Official languages
of contracting states


11 languages




Burmese
Filipino
Indonesian
Khmer
Lao
Malay
Mandarin
Tamil
Thai
Tetum
Vietnamese








Membership


10 states

Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam



2 observers

Timor Leste
Papua New Guinea





Leaders



• Chairman

Lee Hsien Loong



• Secretary General

Lim Jock Hoi


Establishment



• Bangkok Declaration

8 August 1967



• Charter

16 December 2008


Area



• Total

4,435,618[3] km2 (1,712,602 sq mi)


Population



• 2013 estimate

639 million[4][3]



• Density

141/km2 (365.2/sq mi)


GDP (PPP)
2014 estimate



• Total

US$7.6 trillion[5]



• Per capita

US$12,160[5]


GDP (nominal)
2015 estimate



• Total

US$2.8 trillion[5]



• Per capita

US$4,160[5]


HDI (2016)
 0.684b
medium


Time zone
ASEAN (UTC+6:30 to +9)



Website
www.asean.org






Address: Jalan Sisingamangaraja No.70A, South Jakarta.[6]
Calculated using UNDP data from member states.









ASEAN members' flags in their headquarters in Jakarta


The Association of Southeast Asian Nations[7] (ASEAN /ˈɑːsi.ɑːn/ AH-see-ahn,[8] /ˈɑːzi.ɑːn/ AH-zee-ahn)[9][10] is a regional intergovernmental organisation comprising ten Southeast Asian states which promotes Pan-Asianism and intergovernmental cooperation and facilitates economic, political, security, military, educational and socio-cultural integration amongst its members and Asian states. Since its formation on 8 August 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand,[11] the organisation's membership has expanded to include Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam. Its principal aims include accelerating economic growth, social progress, and sociocultural evolution among its members, alongside the protection of regional stability and the provision of a mechanism for member countries to resolve differences peacefully.[12][13] ASEAN is an official United Nations Observer, as well as an active global partner.[14][15][16] Communication by members across nations takes place in English.
ASEAN covers a land area of 4.4 million square kilometres, 3% of the total land area of Earth. ASEAN territorial waters cover an area about three times larger than its land counterpart, making it particularly important in terms of sea lanes and fisheries. Member countries have a combined population of approximately 640 million people, 8.8% of the world's population, more than EU28, though in terms of land, a bit smaller. In 2015, the organisation's combined nominal GDP had grown to more than USD $2.8 trillion. If ASEAN were a single entity, it would rank as the sixth largest economy in the world, behind the USA, China, Japan, France and Germany.[5] ASEAN shares land borders with India, China, Bangladesh, East Timor and Papua New Guinea, and maritime borders with India, China, Palau and Australia. Both East Timor and Papua New Guinea are backed by certain ASEAN members for their membership in the organisation.
ASEAN has established itself as a platform for Asian integrations and cooperations, working with other Asian nations to promote unity, prosperity, development and sustainability of the region, as well as working on solutions to resolve disputes and problems in the region. While mainly focusing on the Asia-Pacific nations, ASEAN also established communications with other parts of the world, to better promote world peace and stability. The organisation has a global reputation of promoting goodwill and diplomacy among nations, shutting out any opinion or decision considered biased while carrying the principle of non-interference and mutual respect.[17][18][19][20][21][22]
Due to its global influence and regional success, ASEAN has been credited as one of the world's most successful and influential organisations, and an "emerging powerhouse". The organisation received high praises from world leaders and international community, and is dubbed as the centrality in the political, economic, security and socio-cultural architecture of Asia-Pacific. It is lauded as the "best-established intergovernmental institution in Asia" while achieving high approval ratings in its own region. Throughout history, ASEAN has formed a global network of alliance, cooperation and dialogues among countries and sub-regional, regional and international organisations and institutions, solidifying itself as one of the biggest players on the international stage.[23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36]



Contents


1 Purpose
2 History

2.1 Foundation
2.2 Expansion and further integration
2.3 Charter
2.4 The ASEAN Way
2.5 ASEAN Plus Three
2.6 ASEAN Plus Six


3 Economy

3.1 Overview
3.2 Internal market

3.2.1 Free flow of skilled labour


3.3 Free trade
3.4 ASEAN six majors
3.5 ASEAN Capital Markets Forum (ACMF)
3.6 Development gap

3.6.1 Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)


3.7 Monetary union
3.8 Free-trade agreements
3.9 From CMI to AMRO
3.10 Megacity


4 Single aviation market
5 Tourism
6 Foreign affairs and summits

6.1 ASEAN identity
6.2 ASEAN Summit
6.3 East Asia Summit
6.4 Commemorative summit
6.5 Regional Forum
6.6 Other meetings


7 Mass media

7.1 ASEAN Ministers Responsible for Information (AMRI)
7.2 ASEAN Media Cooperation


8 ASEAN Community 2015
9 ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint

9.1 Reinforcing ASEAN relations
9.2 2020 ASEAN Banking Integration Framework
9.3 Roadmap for ASEAN financial integration
9.4 Food security
9.5 Reception and criticisms


10 ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint

10.1 ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration


11 ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint

11.1 The AEC Scorecard
11.2 Narrowing the Development Gap


12 ASEAN Communication Master Plan
13 ASEAN security blueprint
14 Environment
15 Education

15.1 Educational integration

15.1.1 ASEAN university network
15.1.2 Southeast Asia Engineering Education Development Network Project
15.1.3 ASEAN Scholarship


15.2 Literacy rates


16 Culture and sport

16.1 Heritage parks
16.2 Songs and music
16.3 ASEAN competitions
16.4 2030 FIFA world cup bid
16.5 Performance in international competitions


17 Reception
18 Current leaders
19 See also
20 Literature
21 References
22 Further reading
23 External links



Purpose[edit]
As set out in the ASEAN Declaration, the aims and purposes of ASEAN are:[37]

To accelerate economic growth, social progress, and cultural development in the region.
To promote regional peace.
To promote collaboration and mutual assistance on matters of common interest.
To provide assistance to each other in the form of training and research facilities.
To collaborate for the better utilisation of agriculture and industry to raise the living standards of the people.
To promote Southeast Asian studies.
To maintain close, beneficial co-operation with existing international organisations with similar aims and purposes.[38]

History[edit]
See also: Member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations



Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Bangkok Declaration








The member states of ASEAN



Myanmar


Laos


Vietnam


Thailand


Cam-
bodia


Philippines


Brunei


Malaysia


Malaysia


Singapore


I  n  d  o  n  e  s  i  a


Foundation[edit]
ASEAN was preceded by an organization formed in 31 July 1961 called the Association of Southeast Asia (ASA), a group consisting of the Philippines, Federation of Malaya, and Thailand. ASEAN itself was created on 8 August 1967, when the foreign ministers of five countries: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, signed the ASEAN Declaration, more commonly known as the Bangkok Declaration.
The creation of ASEAN was motivated by a common fear of communism,[39] and a thirst for economic development.
ASEAN grew when Brunei Darussalam became its sixth member on 7 January 1984, barely a week after gaining independence.[40]
Expansion and further integration[edit]
See also: Enlargement of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations



















































A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various Asian regional organisations v • d • e


ASEAN achieved greater cohesion in the mid-1970s following the changed balance of power in Southeast Asia after the end of the Vietnam War. The region's dynamic economic growth during the 1970s strengthened the organization, enabling ASEAN to adopt a unified response to Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in 1979. ASEAN's first summit meeting, held in Bali, Indonesia in 1976, resulted in an agreement on several industrial projects and the signing of a Treaty of Amity and Cooperation, and a Declaration of Concord. The end of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union at the end of the 1980s allowed ASEAN countries to exercise greater political independence in the region, and in the 1990s ASEAN emerged as a leading voice on regional trade and security issues.[41]
In 1987, Brunei became ASEAN's sixth member[42] and on 28 July 1995, Vietnam became ASEAN's seventh member.[43] Laos and Myanmar (Burma) joined two years later on 23 July 1997.[44] Cambodia was to have joined at the same time as Laos and Burma, but its entry was delayed due to the country's internal political struggle. It later joined on 30 April 1999, following the stabilization of its government.[44][45]
In 1990, Malaysia proposed the creation of an East Asia Economic Caucus[46] composed of the members of ASEAN as well as the People's Republic of China, Japan, and South Korea, with the intention of counterbalancing the growing influence of the United States in Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and in the Asian region as a whole.[47][48] However, the proposal failed because of heavy opposition from the US and Japan.[47][49] Member states continued to work for further integration, and ASEAN Plus Three was created in 1997.
In 1992, the Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) scheme was adopted as a schedule for phasing out tariffs with the goal to increase the "region's competitive advantage as a production base geared for the world market". This law would act as the framework for the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA). AFTA is an agreement by member nations concerning local manufacturing in ASEAN countries. The AFTA agreement was signed on 28 January 1992 in Singapore.[50]
After the East Asian Financial Crisis of 1997, a revival of the Malaysian proposal, known as the Chiang Mai Initiative, was put forward in Chiang Mai, Thailand. It called for better integration of the economies of ASEAN as well as the ASEAN Plus Three countries, China, Japan, and South Korea.
The bloc also focused on peace and stability in the region. On 15 December 1995, the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty was signed with the intention of turning Southeast Asia into a nuclear-weapon-free zone. The treaty took effect on 28 March 1997 after all but one of the member states had ratified it. It became fully effective on 21 June 2001 after the Philippines ratified it, effectively banning all nuclear weapons in the region.[51]
Charter[edit]
Main article: ASEAN Charter




The Secretariat of ASEAN at Jalan Sisingamangaraja No.70A, South Jakarta, Indonesia


On 15 December 2008, the members of ASEAN met in the Indonesian capital of Jakarta to launch a charter, signed in November 2007, with the aim of moving closer to "an EU-style community".[52] The charter turned ASEAN into a legal entity and aimed to create a single free-trade area for the region encompassing 500 million people. President of Indonesia Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono stated: "This is a momentous development when ASEAN is consolidating, integrating, and transforming itself into a community. It is achieved while ASEAN seeks a more vigorous role in Asian and global affairs at a time when the international system is experiencing a seismic shift". Referring to climate change and economic upheaval, he concluded: "Southeast Asia is no longer the bitterly divided, war-torn region it was in the 1960s and 1970s".
The 2008 global financial crisis was seen as being a threat to the goals envisioned by the charter,[53] and also set forth the idea of a proposed human rights body to be discussed at a future summit in February 2009. This proposition caused controversy, as the body would not have the power to impose sanctions or punish countries which violated citizens' rights and would therefore be limited in effectiveness.[54] The body was established later in 2009 as the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights (AICHR). In November 2012, the commission adopted the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration.[55]
The ASEAN Way[edit]
The 'ASEAN Way' refers to a methodology or approach to solving issues that respects the cultural norms of Southeast Asia. Masilamani and Peterson summarise it as:

A working process or style that is informal and personal. Policymakers constantly utilize compromise, consensus, and consultation in the informal decision-making process... it above all prioritizes a consensus-based, non-conflictual way of addressing problems. Quiet diplomacy allows ASEAN leaders to communicate without bringing the discussions into the public view. Members avoid embarrassment that may lead to further conflict.[56]

It has been said that the merits of the ASEAN Way might "be usefully applied to global conflict management". However, critics have argued that such an approach can be only applied to Asian countries to specific cultural norms and understandings notably due to a difference in mindset and level of tension.[57]:pp113-118
Critics object claiming that the ASEAN Way's emphasis on consultation, consensus, and non-interference, forces the organisation to adopt only those policies which satisfy the lowest common denominator. Decision making by consensus requires members to see eye-to-eye before ASEAN can move forward on an issue. Members may not have a common conception of the meaning of the ASEAN Way. Myanmar, Cambodia, and Laos emphasise non-interference while older member countries focus on co-operation and co-ordination. These differences hinder efforts to find common solutions to particular issues, but also make it difficult to determine when collective action is appropriate in a given situation.[58]:161-163
ASEAN Plus Three[edit]




The 16 member countries of the RCEP
Blue: ASEAN
Purple: ASEAN Plus Three
Teal: ASEAN Plus Six


The leaders of each country felt the need to further integrate the nations in the region. Beginning in 1997, the bloc started creating organisations with the intention of achieving this goal. "ASEAN Plus Three" was the first of these and was created to improve existing ties with the People's Republic of China, Japan, and South Korea. This was followed by the even larger East Asia Summit (EAS), which included ASEAN Plus Three countries as well as India, Australia, New Zealand. This new group acted as a prerequisite for the planned East Asia Community which was supposedly patterned after the now-defunct European Community. The ASEAN Eminent Persons Group was created to study the possible successes and failures of this policy as well as the possibility of drafting an ASEAN Charter.
In 2006, ASEAN was given observer status at the United Nations General Assembly.[59] In response, the organisation awarded the status of "dialogue partner" to the UN.[60]
ASEAN Plus Six[edit]
ASEAN became ASEAN Plus Six with additional countries: Australia, New Zealand and India. Codification of the relations between these nations has seen progress through the development of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), a proposed free-trade agreement involving the 16 countries of ASEAN plus six. RCEP would, in part, allow the members to protect local sectors and give more time to comply with the aim for developed country members.[61]
Economy[edit]




Selection of GDP PPP data (top 10 countries and blocks) in no particular order


Overview[edit]
ASEAN is built on three pillars:[7] the ASEAN Political-Security Community (APSC),[62] the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC),[63] and the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC).[64]
ASEAN sought economic integration by creating the AEC by the end of 2015. This established a common market.[65] The average economic growth of ASEAN's member nations during 1989–2009 was between 3.8% and 7%. This economic growth was greater than the average growth of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), which was 2.8%.[66]
The ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), which was established on 28 January 1992,[50] includes a Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) to promote the free flow of goods between member states.[65] When the AFTA agreement was originally signed, ASEAN had only six members: Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. Vietnam joined in 1995, Laos and Burma in 1997, and Cambodia in 1999. The newcomers have not fully met AFTA's obligations, but they are officially considered part of the AFTA as they were required to sign the agreement upon entry into ASEAN, and were given longer time frames in which to meet AFTA's tariff reduction obligations.[67]
The next steps are to create a single market and production base, a competitive economic region, a region of equitable economic development, and a region that is fully integrated into the global economy.
Since 2007, ASEAN countries have gradually lowered their import duties to member nations. The target is zero import duties by 2016.[68]
In February 2016, President Obama initiated the inaugural US-ASEAN Summit at Sunnylands for closer engagement with ASEAN, as China's economic and trade growth have dimmed. The territorial disputes in the South China Sea were also discussed. However, in a final joint statement, the Sunnylands Declaration did not allude to the South China Sea by name, instead calling for "respect for each nation's sovereignty and for international law". Analysts believe the wording indicated divides within the group on how to respond to China's maritime strategy.[69][70]
ASEAN countries have many economic zones (industrial parks, eco-industrial parks, special economic zones, technology parks, and innovation districts). UNIDO Viet Nam (United Nations Industrial Development Organization) has compiled in 2015 a list of economic zones in the ASEAN Economic Community in a report titled "Economic Zones in the ASEAN",[71] written by Arnault Morisson.
Internal market[edit]
By the end of 2015, ASEAN plans to establish a common market based upon the four freedoms. The single market will ensure the free flow of goods, services, skilled labour, and capital.
Until the end of 2010, intra-ASEAN trade was still low. Trade involved mainly exports to countries outside the region, with the exception of Laos and Myanmar, whose foreign trade was ASEAN-oriented, with 80% and 50% respectively of their exports going to other ASEAN countries.[72]
In 2009, realised foreign direct investment (FDI) was US$37.9 billion and increased two-fold in 2010 to US$75.8 billion. 22% of FDI came from the European Union, followed by ASEAN countries (16%), and by Japan and the USA.
The ASEAN Framework Agreement on Trade in Services (AFAS) was adopted at the ASEAN Summit in Bangkok in December 1995.[73] Under AFAS, ASEAN member states enter into successive rounds of negotiations to liberalise trade in services with the aim of submitting increasingly higher levels of commitment. At present, ASEAN has concluded seven packages of commitments under AFAS.[74]
Free flow of skilled labour[edit]
Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs) have been agreed upon by ASEAN for eight professions: physicians, dentists, nurses, architects, engineers, accountants, surveyors, and tourism professionals. Individuals in these professions will be free to work in any ASEAN nation after the AEC goes into effect on 31 December 2015.[75] Applicants must be licensed and recognised professionals in these fields in their home countries. They can move to other ASEAN countries to practice, but they must pass that country's licensing test. In Thailand, licensing tests will be in the Thai language. In addition, one cannot be an independent practitioner. Any foreign professional intending to work must collaborate with a local business. Given these hurdles, it is unlikely that there will be significant migrations of professionals in the near-term.[76] A Chulalongkorn University study predicts that more developed countries stand to benefit the most from the free flow of professionals.[77]
Free trade[edit]
Free trade initiatives in ASEAN are spearheaded by the implementation of the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (ATIGA) and the Agreement on Customs. These agreements are supported by work done by several sector bodies to plan and to execute free trade measures, guided by the provisions and the requirements of ATIGA and the Agreement on Customs. The progress being made by these sector bodies forms a backbone for achieving the targets of the AEC Blueprint and establishing the ASEAN Economic Community by the end of 2015.[78]
The year 2007 was the 40th anniversary of ASEAN's formation. It also marked 30 years of diplomatic relations with the USA.[79] On 26 August 2007, ASEAN stated that it aims to complete all of its free trade agreements with China, Japan, South Korea, India, Australia, and New Zealand by 2013. This is in line with the start of the ASEAN Economic Community by 2015.[80][81] In November 2007, ASEAN members signed the ASEAN Charter, a constitution governing relations among ASEAN members and establishing ASEAN itself as an international legal entity.[82] During the same year, the Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security was signed (15 January 2007) by ASEAN and the other members of the EAS (Australia, The People's Republic of China, India, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea), which pursues energy security by finding energy alternatives to conventional fuels.[83]
On 27 February 2009, a free trade agreement (FTA) with the ASEAN regional bloc of ten countries and Australia, and its close partner New Zealand was signed. It is believed that this FTA would boost combined GDP across the twelve countries by more than US$48 billion over the period between 2000 and 2020.[84][85] ASEAN members, together with the group's six major trading partners (Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea), began the first round of negotiations on 26–28 February 2013, in Bali, Indonesia on the establishment of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership.[86]
ASEAN six majors[edit]
Six majors refers to the six largest economies in the area that are many times larger than the remaining four ASEAN countries:


Country
Population[87]
(2016, millions)
GDP (nominal 2016)
(millions of US dollars)[88]
GDP (nominal per capita)
(US dollars)
GDP (PPP 2017)
(millions of US dollars)[88]
GDP (PPP per capita)
(US dollars)


 Indonesia
261.1
$932,448
$3,640
$3,257,123
$12,432


 Thailand
68.9
$406,949
$5,939
$1,226,407
$17,749


 Philippines
103.3
$304,696
$3,280
$878,980
$8,270


 Singapore
5.6
$296,967
$53,431
$514,837
$90,724


 Malaysia
31.2
$296,359
$9,360
$922,057
$28,636


 Vietnam
94.6
$201,326
$2,173
$648,234
$6,925


ASEAN Capital Markets Forum (ACMF)[edit]
The ACMF is a collaboration among the six stock exchanges of Malaysia, Vietnam (2 exchanges), Indonesia, Philippines, Thailand, and Singapore. It includes 70% of the transaction values of the six ASEAN stock exchanges.[89] Its objective is the integration of ASEAN stock exchanges so as to compete with international exchanges.
Development gap[edit]

ASEAN members by
Human Development Index[90]:22–24

Country
HDI (2016)


 Singapore
0.925
very high


 Brunei
0.865
very high


 Malaysia
0.789
high


 Thailand
0.740
high


 Indonesia
0.689
medium


ASEAN
0.684
medium


 Vietnam
0.683
medium


 Philippines
0.682
medium


 Laos
0.568
medium


 Cambodia
0.563
medium


 Myanmar
0.556
medium


When Vietnam, Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia joined ASEAN in the late 1990s, concerns were raised about a gap in average per capita GDP between older and newer members. In response, the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI) was formed by ASEAN as a regional integration policy with the goal of bridging this developmental divide, which, in addition to disparities in per capita GDP, is manifested by disparities in dimensions of human development such as life expectancy and literacy rates. Other than the IAI, other programmes for the development of the Mekong Basin—where all four newer ASEAN members are located—that tend to focus on infrastructure development were enacted. In general, ASEAN does not have the financial resources to extend substantial grants or loans to the new members. Therefore, it usually leaves the financing of these infrastructure projects to international financial institutions and to developed countries. Nevertheless, it mobilised funding from these institutions and countries, and from the ASEAN-6 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Brunei Darussalam, Singapore, and Thailand) themselves, for areas where the development gap needs to be bridged through the IAI programme. Other programmes intended for the development of the ASEAN-4 take advantage of the geographical proximity of the CLMV (Cambodia-Laos-Myanmar-Vietnam) countries and tend to focus on infrastructure development in areas like transport, tourism, and power transmission.[91]
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)[edit]
RCEP consists of all ten ASEAN countries plus six countries (China, Japan, South Korea, Australia, India, and New Zealand) which have trade agreements with ASEAN countries. RCEP covers 45% of the world's population and about a third of the world's total GDP. For example, 60% of New Zealand's exports are to RCEP countries. RCEP is an extension of ASEAN plus three, and then ASEAN plus six.[92][93][94]
Monetary union[edit]
The concept of an Asian Currency Unit (ACU) started in the middle of the nineties, prior to the 1997 Asian financial crisis.[95] It is a proposed basket of Asian currencies, similar to the European Currency Unit, which was the precursor of the Euro. The Asian Development Bank is responsible for exploring the feasibility and construction of the basket.[95][96]
Since the ACU is being considered to be a precursor to a common currency in the future, it has a dynamic outlook of the region.[97] The overall goal of a common currency is to contribute to the financial stability of a regional economy, including price stability. It means lower cost of cross-border business through the elimination of currency risk for the members of the monetary union. Greater flows of intra-regional trade would put pressure on prices, resulting in cheaper goods and services. Individuals benefit not only from the lowering of prices, they save by not having to change money when travelling within the union, by being able to compare prices more readily, and by the reduced cost of transferring money across borders. However, there are conditions for a common currency: the intensity of intra-regional trade and the convergence of macroeconomic conditions. Substantial intra-ASEAN trade and economic integration is an incentive for a monetary union. Intra-ASEAN trade is growing, partly as a result of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and the ASEAN Economic Community.
However, some obstacles remain. ASEAN currently trades more with other countries (80%) than among its member countries (20%). Therefore, ASEAN economies are more concerned about currency stability against major international currencies, like the US dollar. On macroeconomic conditions, ASEAN member countries have different levels of economic development, capacity, and priorities that translate into different levels of interest and readiness. Monetary integration however implies less control over national monetary and fiscal policy to stimulate the economy. Therefore, greater convergence in macroeconomic conditions is being enacted to improve conditions and confidence in a common currency.[98] On the other hand, there are also constraints on the adoption of one currency, such as the following: diversity in the level of economic development across countries, weaknesses in the financial sectors of many countries, inadequacy of regional-level resource pooling mechanisms and institutions required for forming and managing a currency union, and lack of political preconditions for monetary co-operation and a common currency.[99]
Free-trade agreements[edit]
ASEAN has concluded free trade agreements with China (expecting bilateral trade of $500 billion by 2015),[100] Korea, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and India.[101] ASEAN-India bilateral trade crossed the US$70 billion target in 2012 (target was to reach the level only by 2015).[citation needed] The agreement with People's Republic of China created the ASEAN–China Free Trade Area (ACFTA), which went into full effect on 1 January 2010. In addition, ASEAN is currently negotiating a free trade agreement with the European Union.[101] The Republic of China (Taiwan) has also expressed interest in an agreement with ASEAN but needs to overcome diplomatic objections from China.[102]
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation (TAC) in South-East Asia, signed at the First ASEAN Summit on 24 February 1976, declared that in their relations with one another, the High Contracting Parties should be guided by the following fundamental principles:

Mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty, equality, territorial integrity, and national identity of all nations
The right of every state to lead its national existence free from external interference, subversion or coercion
Non-interference in the internal affairs of one another
Settlement of differences or disputes by peaceful manner
Renunciation of the threat or use of force
Effective co-operation among themselves

From CMI to AMRO[edit]
Due to the Asian financial crisis of 1997 to 1998, and the long and difficult negotiations with the International Monetary Fund, ASEAN+3 agreed to set up a mainly bilateral currency swap scheme known as the 2000 Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) in anticipation of another financial crisis in the future. In 2006 they agreed to meld the CMI with multilateralisation and call it CMIM. On 3 May 2009, they agreed to make a currency pool consisting of contributions: US$38.4 billion each by China and Japan, US$19.2 billion by South Korea, and US$24 billion from all ASEAN members, totalling US$120 billion.[103] A key component has also been added recently, with the establishment of a surveillance unit.[104]
The ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic and Research Office (AMRO) started operations in Singapore in May 2011.[105] It performs a key regional surveillance function of the US$120 billion Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM) currency swap facility.[106]
Some analysts think that the sum of US$120 billion is relatively small (covering only about 20% of needs), so co-ordination or help from the IMF is still needed.[107] On 3 May 2012, ASEAN+3 finance ministers agreed to double emergency reserve funds to US$240 billion.[108]
Megacity[edit]
Only Metro Jakarta and Manila were listed in the top 5 megacities in the world by the International Monetary Fund in 2010. The IMF projects Metro Manila to be the only megacity in Southeast Asia included in the top 10 by 2050 and 2075. It is also projected that Metro Manila will surpass all megacities in all East Asian regions by 2100, including those in Japan.
Single aviation market[edit]
The ASEAN Single Aviation Market (ASEAN-SAM) is the region's aviation policy geared towards the development of a unified and single aviation market in Southeast Asia. The aviation policy was proposed by the ASEAN Air Transport Working Group, supported by the ASEAN Senior Transport Officials Meeting, and endorsed by the ASEAN Transport Ministers.[109] The ASEAN-SAM is expected to liberalise air travel between member-states in the ASEAN region, allowing ASEAN airlines to benefit directly from the growth in air travel, and also free up tourism, trade, investment, and service flows between member states.[109][110] Since 1 December 2008, restrictions on the third and fourth freedoms of the air between capital cities of member states for air passenger services have been removed,[111] while from 1 January 2009, full liberalisation of air freight services in the region took effect.[109][110] On 1 January 2011, full liberalisation on fifth freedom traffic rights between all capital cities took effect.[112] The ASEAN Single Aviation Market policy supersedes existing unilateral, bilateral, and multilateral air services agreements among member states which are inconsistent with its provisions.
Tourism[edit]
See also: Visa policy of ASEAN members
With the institutionalisation of visa-free travel between ASEAN member states, intra-ASEAN travel has boomed, a sign that endeavours to form an ASEAN community may bear fruit in years to come. In 2010, 47% or 34 million out of 73 million tourists in ASEAN member-states were from other ASEAN countries.[113]
ASEAN co-operation in tourism was formalised in 1976, following formation of the Sub-Committee on Tourism (SCOT) under the ASEAN Committee on Trade and Tourism. The 1st ASEAN Tourism Forum was held on 18–26 October 1981 in Kuala Lumpur. In 1986, ASEAN Promotional Chapters for Tourism (APCT) were established in Hong Kong, West Germany, the United Kingdom, Australia/New Zealand, Japan, and North America.[114]
Tourism has been one of the key growth sectors in ASEAN and has proven resilient amid global economic challenges. The wide array of tourist attractions across the region drew 109 million tourists to ASEAN in 2015, up by 34% compared to 81 million tourists in 2011. As of 2012, tourism was estimated to account for 4.6% of ASEAN GDP—10.9% when taking into account all indirect contributions. It directly employed 9.3 million people, or 3.2% of total employment, and indirectly supported some 25 million jobs.[115][116] In addition, the sector accounted for an estimated 8% of total capital investment in the region.[117]
In January 2012, ASEAN tourism ministers called for the development of a marketing strategy. The strategy represents the consensus of ASEAN National Tourism Organisations (NTOs) on marketing directions for ASEAN moving forward to 2015.[118]
In the 2013 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI) report, Singapore placed 1st, Malaysia placed 8th, Thailand placed 9th, Indonesia placed 12th, Brunei placed 13th, Vietnam placed 16th, Philippines placed 17th, and Cambodia placed 20th as the top destinations of travellers in the Asia Pacific region.[119]
Foreign affairs and summits[edit]
ASEAN identity[edit]




Royal Thai Embassy, Helsinki, flying its own national flag as well as ASEAN's flag


ASEAN's planned integration of its ten member nations has challenged its citizens to embrace a regional identity. The call for ASEAN identity delivers a challenge to construct dynamic institutions and foster sufficient amounts of social capital. The underlying assumption is that the creation of a regional identity is of special interest to ASEAN and the intent of the 2020 Vision policy document was to reassert the belief in a regional framework designed as an action plan related to human development and civic empowerment. Accordingly, these assumptions will be the basis for recommendations and strategies in developing a participatory regional identity.[120]
ASEAN Summit[edit]
Main article: ASEAN Summit




Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte poses for a photo with the ASEAN foreign ministers during the 50th anniversary of the group's foundation on August 8, 2017.






A billboard in Jakarta welcoming delegates for the 2011 ASEAN Summit


The organisation holds meetings, known as ASEAN Summits, where heads of government of each member meet to discuss and resolve regional issues, as well as to conduct other meetings with countries outside the bloc to promote external relations.
The first ASEAN summit was held in Bali in 1976. Its third meeting was in Manila in 1987 and during this meeting, it was decided that the leaders would meet every five years.[121] The fourth meeting was held in Singapore in 1992 where the leaders decided to meet more frequently, every three years.[121] In 2001, it was decided to meet annually to address urgent issues affecting the region. Member nations were assigned to be the summit host in alphabetical order except in the case of Burma which dropped its 2006 hosting rights in 2004 due to pressure from the United States and the European Union.[122]
In December 2008, the ASEAN Charter came into force and with it, the ASEAN Summit will be held twice a year.
The formal summit meets for three days. The typical agenda is as follows:

Leaders of member states would hold an internal organisation meeting.
Leaders of member states hold a conference together with foreign ministers of the ASEAN Regional Forum.
A meeting, known as ASEAN Plus Three, is set for leaders of three dialogue partners (People's Republic of China, Japan, South Korea)
A separate meeting, known as ASEAN-CER, is with the two dialogue partners (Australia and New Zealand).[123]

East Asia Summit[edit]
Main article: East Asia Summit




Participants of the East Asia Summit
  ASEAN
  ASEAN Plus Three
  Additional members
  Observer



The East Asia Summit (EAS) is a pan-Asian forum held annually by the leaders of eighteen countries in the East Asian region, with ASEAN in a leadership position. Membership was initially all ten members of ASEAN plus China, Japan, South Korea, India, Australia, and New Zealand, but was expanded to include the United States and Russia at the Sixth EAS in 2011.
The first summit was held in Kuala Lumpur on 14 December 2005, and subsequent meetings have been held after the annual ASEAN Leaders' Meeting. The summit has discussed issues including trade, energy, and security and the summit has a role in regional community building.


East Asia Summits


Meeting
Country
Location
Date
Note


First EAS
 Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
14 December 2005
Russia attended as a guest.


Second EAS
 Philippines
Cebu City
15 January 2007
Rescheduled from 13 December 2006.
Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security



Third EAS
 Singapore
Singapore
21 November 2007
Singapore Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and the Environment[124]
Agreed to establish Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia



Fourth EAS
 Thailand
Cha-am and Hua Hin
25 October 2009
The date and location of the venue was rescheduled several times, and then a Summit scheduled for 12 April 2009 at Pattaya, Thailand was cancelled when protesters stormed the venue. The Summit has been rescheduled for October 2009 and transferred again from Phuket[125] to Cha-am and Hua Hin.[126]


Fifth EAS
 Vietnam
Hanoi
30 October 2010
Officially invited the US and Russia to participate in future EAS as full-fledged members[127]


Sixth EAS
 Indonesia
Bali
19 November 2011
The United States and Russia to join the Summit.


Seventh EAS
 Cambodia
Phnom Penh
20 November 2012



Eighth East Asia Summit
 Brunei
Bandar Seri Begawan
10 October 2013



Ninth East Asia Summit
 Myanmar
Naypyidaw
13 November 2014



Tenth East Asia Summit
 Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur
21–22 November 2015



Eleventh East Asia Summit
 Laos
Vientiane
6–8 September 2016



Twelfth East Asia Summit
 Philippines
Pasay
13–14 November 2017



Thirteenth East Asia Summit
 Singapore
Central Area
2018



Commemorative summit[edit]
Main article: ASEAN Free Trade Area
A commemorative summit is a summit hosted by a non-ASEAN country to mark a milestone anniversary of the establishment of relations between ASEAN and the host country. The host country invites the heads of government of ASEAN member countries to discuss future co-operation and partnership.


Commemorative Summits


Meeting
Host
Location
Date
Note


ASEAN–Japan Commemorative Summit
 Japan
Tokyo
11–12 December 2003
To celebrate the 30th anniversary of the establishment of relations between ASEAN and Japan. The summit was also notable as the first ASEAN summit held between ASEAN and a non-ASEAN country outside the region.


ASEAN–China Commemorative Summit
 China
Nanning
30–31 October 2006
To celebrate the 15th anniversary of the establishment of relations between ASEAN and China.


ASEAN–Republic of Korea Commemorative Summit
 South Korea
Jeju-do
1–2 June 2009
To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the establishment of relations between ASEAN and Republic of Korea.


ASEAN–India Commemorative Summit
 India
New Delhi
20–21 December 2012
To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the establishment of relations between ASEAN and India.


Regional Forum[edit]




█ ASEAN full members
█ ASEAN observers
██ ASEAN Plus Three
███ East Asia Summit
██████ ASEAN Regional Forum


The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is a formal, official, multilateral, dialogue in the Asia Pacific region. As of July 2007, it consists of twenty-seven participants. ARF's objectives are to foster dialogue and consultation, and to promote confidence-building and preventive diplomacy in the region.[128] The ARF met for the first time in 1994. The current participants in the ARF are: all ASEAN members, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, China, the European Union, India, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Russia, East Timor, the United States, and Sri Lanka.[129]
Taiwan has been excluded since the establishment of the ARF, and issues regarding the Taiwan Strait are neither discussed at ARF meetings nor stated in the ARF Chairman's Statements.
Other meetings[edit]
Aside from the ones above, other regular meetings are also held.[12] These include the annual ASEAN Ministerial Meeting[130] as well as other smaller committees.[131] Meetings focus mostly on specific topics, such as defence or the environment,[132] and are attended by ministers, instead of heads of government.

The ASEAN Plus Three is a meeting between ASEAN, China, Japan, and South Korea, and is held primarily during each ASEAN Summit. Until now, China, Japan, and South Korea have not yet formed a Free Trade Area (FTA); the initial meeting about FTA among them was held at end of 2012.[133]
The Asia–Europe Meeting (ASEM) is an informal dialogue process initiated in 1996 with the intention of strengthening co-operation between the countries of Europe and Asia, especially members of the European Union and ASEAN in particular.[134] ASEAN, represented by its Secretariat, is one of the forty-five ASEM partners. It also appoints a representative to sit on the governing board of Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF), a socio-cultural organisation associated with the meeting.
The ASEAN–US Summit is an annual meeting between leaders of member states and the President of the US.
The ASEAN–Russia Summit is an annual meeting between leaders of member states and the President of Russia.
The ASEAN–India Summit is an annual meeting between leaders of member states and the Prime Minister of India.

Mass media[edit]
ASEAN Ministers Responsible for Information (AMRI)[edit]
ASEAN member states promote co-operation in information to help build an ASEAN identity. One of the main bodies in ASEAN co-operation in information is the ASEAN Committee on Culture and Information (COCI). Established in 1978, its mission is to promote effective co-operation in the fields of information, as well as culture, through its various projects and activities. The COCI includes representatives from national institutions like the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministries of Culture and Information, national radio and television networks, museums, archives and libraries, among others. Together, they meet once a year to formulate and agree on projects to fulfil their mission.[135]
ASEAN Media Cooperation[edit]
ASEAN Media Cooperation (AMC) sets digital television standards and policies in preparation for broadcasters to transition from analogue to digital broadcasting. This collaboration was conceptualised during the 11th ASEAN Ministers Responsible for Information (AMRI) Conference in Malaysia on 1 March 2012 where a consensus declared that both new and traditional media were keys to connecting ASEAN peoples and bridging cultural gaps in the region.[136]
Several key initiatives under the AMC include:[137]

The ASEAN Media Portal[138] was launched 16 November 2007. The portal aims to provide a one-stop site that contains documentaries, games, music videos, and multimedia clips on the culture, arts, and heritage of the ASEAN countries to showcase ASEAN culture and the capabilities of its media industry.
The ASEAN NewsMaker Project, an initiative launched in 2009, trains students and teachers to produce informational video clips about their countries. The project was initiated by Singapore. Students trained in NewsMaker software, video production, together with developing narrative storytelling skills. Dr Soeung Rathchavy, Deputy Secretary-General of ASEAN for ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community noted that: "Raising ASEAN awareness amongst the youth is part and parcel of our efforts to build the ASEAN Community by 2015. Using ICT and the media, our youths in the region will get to know ASEAN better, deepening their understanding and appreciation of the cultures, social traditions and values in ASEAN."[139]
The ASEAN Digital Broadcasting Meeting, is an annual forum for ASEAN members to set digital television (DTV) standards and policies, and to discuss progress in the implementation of the blueprint from analogue to digital TV broadcasting by 2020. During the 11th ASEAN Digital Broadcasting Meeting[140] members updated the status on DTV implementation and agreed to inform ASEAN members on the Guidelines for ASEAN Digital Switchover.[141] An issue was raised around the availability and affordability of set-top boxes (STB), thus ASEAN members were asked to make policies to determine funding for STBs, methods of allocation, subsidies and rebates, and other methods for the allocation of STBs. It was also agreed in the meeting to form a task force to develop STB specifications for DVB-T2 to ensure efficiency.

ASEAN Community 2015[edit]
For nearly two decades, the ASEAN was composed of only five countries, its 8 August 1967 founders: Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. Other southeast Asian countries joined at different times: Brunei (1984), Vietnam (1995), Laos and Myanmar (1997), and Cambodia (1999).
Beginning in 1997, heads of each member state adopted the ASEAN Vision 2020 during ASEAN's 30th anniversary meeting held in Kuala Lumpur. This vision, as a means for the realisation of a single ASEAN community, sees Southeast Asia becoming a group of nations which are: "outward looking, living in peace, stability and propsperity".[142] Included in ASEAN Vision 2020 were provisions on: peace and stability, being nuclear-free, closer economic integration, human development, sustainable development, cultural heritage, being drug-free, environment, among others. The Vision also aimed to: "see an outward-looking ASEAN playing a pivotal role in the international fora, and advancing ASEAN's common interests".[143] Such vision was formalised and made comprehensive through the Bali Concord II in 2003. Three major pillars of a single ASEAN community were originally established: (1) ASEAN Security Community, (2) ASEAN Economic Community and (3) ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community.[144] The ASEAN Community, initially planned to commence by 2020, was accelerated to begin by 31 December 2015.[145] This was decided upon by heads of member states during the 12th ASEAN Summit in Cebu in 2007.[146]
On 20 November 2007, the ASEAN Charter was signed in Singapore, forty years after the founding of ASEAN. Also concurrently signed was the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) Blueprint. This was to establish stronger rules-based norms and values shared among all member states. The charter was later ratified in 2008.[147] To full embody the three Bali Concord II pillars as part of the 2015 integration, blueprints for ASEAN Political-Security Community (APSC) and ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC) were subsequently adopted in 2009 in Cha-am, Thailand.[148]
ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint[edit]






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (January 2016)







ASEAN leaders sign the declaration of the ASEAN Economic Community during the 27th ASEAN Summit in Kuala Lumpur, 2015


The ASEAN Economic Community (AEC)[149] is now generally referred to as "AEC 2015" since its original implementation date was brought forward from 2020 to 31 December 2015. As one of the three pillars of the ASEAN, it aims to "implement economic integration initiatives" to create a single market across ASEAN nations. On 20 November 2007, during the 13th ASEAN Summit in Singapore, its blueprint, which serves as a master plan guiding the establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community 2015, was adopted.[150]
The ASEAN Economic Community is the goal of regional economic integration by 2015. Its characteristics include: (1) a single market and production base, (2) a highly competitive economic region, (3) a region of fair economic development, and (4) a region fully integrated into the global economy. The areas of co-operation include human resources development; recognition of professional qualifications; closer consultation on macroeconomic and financial policies; trade financing measures; enhanced infrastructure and communications connectivity; development of electronic transactions through e-ASEAN; integrating industries across the region to promote regional sourcing; and enhancing private sector involvement. Through the free movement of skilled labour, goods, services and investment, ASEAN will rise globally as one market with each member gaining from each other's strengths, thus increasing its competitiveness and opportunities for development.[151]
The AEC is the embodiment of the ASEAN's vision of: "...a stable, prosperous and highly competitive ASEAN economic region in which there is a free flow of goods, services, investment and a freer flow of capital, equitable economic development and reduced poverty and socio-economic disparities".[152]
The formulation of an AEC Blueprint established the members' commitment to a common goal as well as ensuring compliance with stated objectives and timelines. The AEC Blueprint lays out the overall vision as well as the goals, implementing plans and strategies (actions), as well as the strategic schedule (timeline) for achieving the establishment of the AEC by end-2015.[152]
ASEAN will officially declare the establishment of an ASEAN Economic Community by end-December 2015. For ASEAN economies and citizens, it will be business as usual because the key agreements and regulations that will govern the business and economic relationships under the AEC are already in place and operational.[152]
Reinforcing ASEAN relations[edit]
The conduct of the 2nd BIMP-EAGA and IMT-GT Trade Fair and Business Leaders Conference on 22–26 October 2014 in Davao City, Philippines, signified the renewed commitment of the four member countries namely, Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines (BIMP) to further the cause of the East ASEAN Growth Area (EAGA) co-operation as a model for the 2015 ASEAN Integration. During the Conference, Deputy Secretary General of ASEAN for the ASEAN Economic Community, Dr. Lim Hong Hin, said that the convergence of the BIMP-EAGA and Indonesia Malaysia Thailand – Growth Triangle (IMT-GT) will amplify the subregions’ full potential and maximise its initial gain towards greater engagement in the larger ASEAN community. The vision of the BIMP-EAGA initiative is to realise socially acceptable and sustainable economic development, and the full participation of the subregion in the ASEAN development process. BIMP-EAGA was proposed in 1992 by then Philippine President Fidel V. Ramos as a major economic initiative in ASEAN. The idea of expanding the economic co-operation among the border areas of Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines was supported by the leaders of the three countries which eventually led to the creation of BIMP-EAGA launched on 24 March 1994 in Davao City, Mindanao, Philippines. The subregion covers a land-area of 1.54 million square kilometres and a population of 70 million.[153]
The improved regional-subregional collaborations will spur trade, investment, and small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) development through enhanced backward linkages, production system, and forward linkages. The convergence will also facilitate the completion of region wide infrastructure projects such as the Sumatra Port Development, Melaka-Pekan Baru Power Interconnection, and Sumatra Toll Roads Project. The subregions’ convergence will create synergy in transport facilitation by forging the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) Cross Border Trade Arrangement and BIMP-EAGA Cross Border Arrangement, promote clustering and branding through collaborative tourism promotion, tailored agro-based industries strategies, and addressing environmental issues. The greater co-ordination among the subregions, maximising synergy with the full participation of the stakeholders will ensure equitable economic benefits of the ASEAN countries facing the challenge of globalisation.[154]
2020 ASEAN Banking Integration Framework[edit]
As the flow of goods, services, investment, capital, and skilled labour between countries is liberalised with the ASEAN Economic Integration in 2015, the need arises for ASEAN banking institutions to accommodate and expand their services to a greater intra-ASEAN market. While the ASEAN financial integration is not going to take effect until 2020, experts from the financial services industry have already forecast a shaky economic transition, especially for smaller players in the banking and financial services industry.
Two separate reports by Standard & Poor's, entitled ASEAN Financial Integration: The Long Road to Bank Consolidation and The Philippines' Banking System: The Good, the Bad and the Ambivalent, outline the challenges ASEAN financial institutions are facing as they prepare for the 2020 banking integration. The Philippines, with its overcrowded banking sector, for example, is among the ASEAN-member countries who are forecast to feel the most pressure as the integration welcomes tighter competition with the entry of bigger, more established foreign banks.[155] To lessen the impact of this consolidation, countries with banking sectors considered smaller by global standards must expand regionally. S&P in a follow up report recently cited the Philippines for "shoring up its network bases and building up capital ahead of the banking integration – playing defence and strengthening their domestic networks".[155]
Roadmap for ASEAN financial integration[edit]
The Roadmap for the Integration of ASEAN in Finance is the latest regional initiative, which aims to strengthen regional self-help and support mechanisms. The implementation of the roadmap will contribute to the realisation of the ASEAN Economic Community that was launched by the ASEAN leaders in October 2003 in Bali. The AEC is the end-goal of economic integration as outlined in the ASEAN Vision 2020 and the Bali Concord II to establish a single market and production base, characterised by the free movement of goods, services, investment, and a freer flow of capital. The AEC will also facilitate the movement of business professionals, skilled labour, and talent within the region. As in the EU, adoption of an ASEAN common currency, when conditions are ripe, could be the final stage of the ASEAN Economic Community. Under the roadmap, approaches and milestones have been identified in areas deemed crucial to financial and monetary integration, namely: (a) capital market development, (b) capital account liberalisation, (c) financial services liberalisation, and (d) ASEAN currency co-operation. Capital market development entails promoting institutional capacity, including the legal and regulatory framework, as well as the facilitation of greater cross-border collaboration, linkages, and harmonisation between capital markets in the region. Orderly capital account liberalisation will be promoted with adequate safeguards against volatility and systemic risks. To expedite the process of financial services liberalisation, ASEAN has agreed on a positive list modality and adopted milestones to facilitate negotiations. Currency co-operation would involve exploration of possible currency arrangements, including an ASEAN currency payment system for trade in local goods to reduce the demand for US dollars and to help promote stability of regional currencies, such as by settling intra-ASEAN trade using regional currencies.[98]
While in the offing of an ASEAN common currency, the leaders of the member-states of ASEAN agreed in November 1999 to create the establishment of currency swaps, and repurchase agreements, as a credit line against future financial shocks. In May 2000, the finance minister of the ASEAN agreed through the "Chiang Mai Initiative" to plan for closer monetary and financial co-operation.[156] The "Chiang Mai Initiative" or CMI, named after the City of Chiang Mai in Thailand, has two components: an expanded ASEAN Swap Arrangement, and a network of bilateral swap arrangements among ASEAN countries, China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea. The ASEAN Swap Arrangement or ASA preceded the regional financial crisis. ASA was originally established by the ASEAN central bank and monetary authorities of the five founding members of ASEAN with a view to help countries meet temporary liquidity problems. An expanded ASA now includes all ten ASEAN countries with an expanded facility of US$1 billion. In recognition of the economic interdependence of East Asia, which has a combined foreign exchange reserves amounting to about US$1 trillion, a network of bilateral swap arrangements and repurchase agreements among ASEAN countries, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea has been agreed upon. The supplementary facility aims to provide temporary financing for members which may be in balance-of-payments difficulties. In 200, 16 bilateral swap arrangements (BSAs) have been successfully concluded with a combined amount of about US$35.5 billion.[157] The original CMI was signed on 9 December 2009 which took effect on 20 March 2014, while the amended version, the multilateralisation of CMI (CMIM), was on 17 July 2014. CMIM is a multilateral currency swap arrangement with a total size of US$240 billion, governed by a single contractual agreement, while the CMI is a network of bilateral swap arrangements among the "Plus Three" and ASEAN countries' authorities. In addition, an independent regional surveillance unit called the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO) was established to monitor and analyse regional economies, and to support the CMIM decision-making process.[157] The amendments will effectively allow access of the ASEAN+3 member countries and Hong Kong to an enhanced CMIM package, which includes, among others, the doubling of the fund size from US$120 billion to US$240 billion, an increase in the level of access not linked to an International Monetary Fund program from 20%–30%, and the introduction of a crisis prevention facility. These amendments are expected to fortify CMIM as the region's financial safety net in the event of any potential or actual liquidity difficulty.[158]
The ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO) will serve as the independent regional surveillance unit of the CMIM. The establishment of AMRO will ensure timely monitoring and analysis of the ASEAN+3 economies, which will in turn aid in the early detection of risks, swift implementation of remedial actions, and effective decision-making of the CMIM. In particular, the AMRO will, during peace time, conduct annual consultations with individual member economies and, on this basis, prepare quarterly consolidated reports on the macroeconomic assessment of the ASEAN+3 region and individual member countries. On the other hand, the AMRO will, during crisis time, prepare recommendations on any swap request based on its macroeconomic analysis of the swap requesting member and monitor the use and impact of funds once any swap request is approved. AMRO was officially incorporated as a company limited by guarantee in Singapore on 20 April 2011 and its office is at the Monetary Authority of Singapore complex in Singapore. Governance of AMRO is being exercised by the Executive Committee (EC) and its operational direction by the Advisory Panel (AP). AMRO is currently headed by Dr Yoichi Nemoto of Japan, who is serving his second 2-year term until 26 May 2016.[157] Stability in the financial system is a precondition to maintain the momentum of ASEAN economic integration. In turn, the more ASEAN economies become integrated, the more feasible it is to adopt an ASEAN single currency, which is expected to reinforce even further stability and integration in Southeast Asia.[98]
Food security[edit]
ASEAN member nations recognise the importance of strengthening food security to maintain stability and prosperity in the region. The World Food Summit of 1996 defined food security as existing: "when all people at all times have access to sufficient, safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life".[159]
Part of the aim for ASEAN integration is to achieve food security collectively via trade in rice and maize. Trade facilitation measures and the harmonisation/equivalency of food regulation and control standards will reduce the cost of trade in food products. While specialisation and revealed comparative and competitive indices point to complementarities between trade patterns among the ASEAN member countries, intra-ASEAN trade in agriculture is quite small. However, integration could address this problem.[160] The MARKET project will provide flexible and demand-driven support to the ASEAN Secretariat, while bringing more private-sector and civil-society input into regional agriculture policy dialogue. By building an environment that reduces barriers to trade, ASEAN trade will increase, thereby decreasing the risk of another food price crisis.[161]
As ASEAN moves towards an integrated community in 2015 and beyond, food security should be an integral part of the ASEAN community building agenda and deserves more attention.[162]
Reception and criticisms[edit]
ASEAN's integration plan has raised concerns. In particular, meeting the 2015 deadline has been questioned. Business and economy experts who attended the Lippo-UPH Dialogue in Naypyidaw cited unresolved issues relating to aviation, agriculture, and human resources.[163] Some panellists, among them, Kishore Mahbubani, warned against high expectations at the onset. He stated:

Please do not expect a big bang event in 2015 where everything is going to happen overnight when the ASEAN Economic Community comes into being. We've made progress in some areas and unfortunately regressed in some areas.[164]

Some panellists enumerated other matters to be dealt with for a successful launch. Among them were the communications issues involving the 600 million citizens living in the region, creating a heightened level of understanding in the business sector, current visa arrangements, demand for specific skills, banking connections, and economic differences between member-nations. Former Philippine National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB) Secretary General Romulo A. Virola, said in 2012 that the Philippines does not appear to be ready to benefit from ASEAN integration due to its "wobbly" economic performance compared to other ASEAN member countries. According to Virola, the Philippines continues to lag behind in terms of employment rate, tourism, life expectancy, and cellular subscriptions.[165] Nestor Tan, head of BDO Unibank Inc., said that while some businesses see the Asian Economic Blueprint (AEC) as an opportunity, the integration would be more of a threat to local firms. Tan added that protecting the Philippines' agricultural and financial services sectors, as well as the labour sector, would be necessary for the implementation of AEC by 2015.[166] Standard & Poor's also believed that banks in the Philippines are not yet prepared for the tougher competition that would result from the integration of Southeast Asian economies. In one of its latest publications, S&P said banks in the country, although profitable and stable, operate on a much smaller scale than their counterparts in the region.[166]
The US Chamber of Commerce has highlighted the widespread concern that the much-anticipated AEC could not be launched by the end-2015 deadline.[167] In January 2014, former ASEAN Secretary-General Rodolfo C. Severino, wrote: "while ASEAN should not be condemned for its members' failure to make good on their commitments, any failure to deliver will likely lead to a loss of credibility and could mean that member countries fall further behind in the global competition for export markets and foreign direct investment (FDI)".[168] This is not the first time that AEC faces a probable delay. In 2012, the commencement of the AEC was postponed to 31 December 2015 from the original plan of 1 January 2015. Despite ASEAN Secretary-General Surin Pitsuwan's firm reassurance that: "[t]here will be no more delays and that all ten ASEAN countries will participate", even the most fervent proponents of AEC are beginning to worry about the increasingly diminishing chance of delivering AEC on time as December 2015 nears.[169]
An article published by Vietnam News echoed some of the challenges and opportunities that Vietnam faces in preparation for the AEC. The article said that the deputy head of the Import-Export Department under the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Tran Thanh Hai, was concerned about local enterprises' lack of knowledge of the AEC. It was said that 80% of local enterprises surveyed acknowledged that they have little information about the interests and challenges available for them in the ASEAN market. The article also noted that the general secretary of the Vietnam Steel Association, Chu Duc Khai, said that most of the local steel making enterprises lack information about doing business in the ASEAN market; they have not had a chance to study the ASEAN market, and have only exported small amounts of steel to ASEAN countries. Another challenge for Vietnam, the article stated, is the need to compete with other countries in the ASEAN market to export raw products since the country had mainly exported raw products.[170]
The Asian Development Bank also has doubts about Cambodia's ability to meet the AEC deadline in 2015. The leading economist of ADB, Jayant Menon, said that Cambodia needs to speed up its customs reform and to press ahead with automating processes to reduce trade costs and minimise the opportunities for corruption and be ready for the implementation of its National Single Window by 2015.[171]
ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint[edit]
During the 14th ASEAN Summit held 26 February to 1 March 2009, the ASEAN heads of state/governments adopted the ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint (APSC).[172] This document is aimed at creating a robust political-security environment within ASEAN, with programs and activities outlined to establish the APSC by 2016. The document is based on the principles and purposes of the ASEAN charter, the ASEAN Security Community Plan of Action, the Vientiane Action Programme, and other relevant decisions.
In essence, the APSC aims to create a community that portrays the following characteristics: a rules-based community of shared values and norms; a cohesive, peaceful, stable and resilient region with a shared responsibility toward comprehensive security; and a dynamic and outward-looking region in an increasingly integrated and interdependent world.
ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration[edit]
The ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration (ADIC) was proposed at the 4th ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting on 11 May 2010 in Hanoi.[173] The emergence of this concept was triggered by the fact that the majority of the ASEAN member states are regular importers of defence and security equipment. One of the purposes of this concept is to reduce defence imports from non-ASEAN countries by half (i.e., from US$25 billion down to US$12.5 billion a year) and to further develop the defence industry in the region.[174]
The concept was formally adopted during the 5th ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting (ADMM) on 19 May 2011, in Jakarta, Indonesia,[175] in line with the ADMM agreement to enhance security co-operation in the following areas: maritime security, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, counter-terrorism, and military medicine. Its goal points toward actions that will enhance security in each of the ASEAN member states.[176][177]
The main focus of the concept is to industrially and technologically boost the security capability of the ASEAN, consistent with the principles of flexibility and non-binding and voluntary participation among the ASEAN member states.[178][179] The concept revolves around education and capability building programmes to develop the skills and capabilities of manpower, sharing in the production of capital for defence equipment, components, and spares, and the provision of repair and maintenance services to address all the defence and security needs of each ASEAN country. It also aims to develop the defence trade in the region by encouraging ASEAN member states to participate in the intra-ASEAN defence trade and support trade shows and exhibitions.[173]
ADIC aims to establish a strong defence industry relying on the local capabilities of each ASEAN member state, and limit annual procurement from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) outside the region.[173] Countries like the USA, Germany, Russia, France, Italy, UK, China, South Korea, Israel, and the Netherlands are among the major suppliers to ASEAN.[180]
Military expenditures in ASEAN reached US$35.5 billion in 2013 (excluding Brunei and Myanmar), which surpassed the 2004 figure (US$14.4 billion) by 147% and is expected to exceed US$40 billion by 2016.[181] Factors affecting the increase in military budget are economic growth, ageing equipment, and the plan to strengthen the establishment of the defence industry in the region.[182]
There are challenges to the defence collaboration effort in the ASEAN; the unequal level of capabilities among ASEAN member states in the field of defence industry, and the lack of established defence trade among them.[176] Prior to the adoption of the ADIC concept, the status of the defence industry base in each of the ASEAN member states was at disparate level.[176] Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand are among the top ASEAN member states with an established defence industry base. But, even these four countries possess different levels of capacity, while the remaining member states like the Philippines, Lao PDR, Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia have yet to develop and enhance their capabilities in this aspect.[173][176]
Of the ten ASEAN member states, Singapore and Indonesia are among the most competitive players in the defence industry. Indonesia is the only ASEAN member state recognised as one of the top 100 global defence suppliers from 2010-2013.[183][184] ASEAN member states purchase virtually no defence products from within ASEAN. Singapore purchases defence products from Germany, France, and Israel, but none from any of the ASEAN member states. Malaysia purchased only 0.49% from ASEAN, Indonesia 0.1%, and Thailand 8.02%.[176]
ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint[edit]
It was also during the 14th ASEAN Summit that the member governments of ASEAN adopted the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint (ASCC).[185] The ASCC envisions an: "ASEAN Community that is people-centered and socially responsible with a view to achieving enduring solidarity and unity among the nations and peoples of ASEAN by forging a common identity and building a caring and sharing society which is inclusive and harmonious where the well-being, livelihood, and welfare of the peoples are enhanced". Among its focus areas are: human development, social welfare and protection, social justice and rights, ensuring environmental sustainability, building the ASEAN identity, and narrowing the development gap.
The AEC Scorecard[edit]
To track the progress of the AEC, the AEC Scorecard, a compliance tool was developed based on the EU Internal Market Scorecard, and was adopted by ASEAN.[169] This regional economic scorecard is the only scorecard in effect[186] and is expected to serve as an unbiased assessment tool to measure the extent of integration among its members, and the economic health of the region. It is expected to provide relevant information about regional priorities and in this way foster productive, inclusive, and sustainable growth. Moreover, scores create incentives for improvement by highlighting what is working and what is not.[187]
The AEC Scorecard is also a compliance tool that makes it possible to monitor the implementation of ASEAN agreements, and the achievement of milestones indicated in the AEC Strategic Schedule. The Scorecard outlines specific actions that must be undertaken by ASEAN collectively, and by its member states individually, to establish an AEC by 2015.[187]
To date, two official scorecards have been published, one in 2010,[188] and the other in 2012.[189] According to the AEC Scorecard 2012, the implementation rates of AEC's four primary objectives: (a) single market and production base; (b) competitive economic region; (c) equitable economic development; and (d) integration into the global economy were 65.9%, 67.9%, 66.7%, and 85.7%, respectively, with 187 out of 277 measures being fully implemented by 2011.[169]
The AEC Scorecard is purely quantitative. It only examines whether an ASEAN member state has performed the AEC task or not. The more "yes" answers, the higher the score.[186]
While Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand have eliminated 99.65% of their tariff lines, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam have decreased tariffs on 98.86% of their lines to the 0-5% tariff range in 2010, and are projected to eliminate tariffs on these goods by 2015, with the ability to do so for a few import duty lines until 2018.[190]
According to Lim Hng Kiang, Singapore's Minister for Trade and Industry, ASEAN was already the seventh largest economy in the world, and the third largest in Asia in 2013, estimated at US$2.3 trillion. A recent study by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited has projected that five of the top fifteen manufacturing locations in the world will be in ASEAN by 2018. Furthermore, by 2050, ASEAN is also expected to be the fourth-largest economy in the world (after the European Union, the US, and China).[190]
The AEC envisions the free flow of overseas labour. However, receiving countries may require would-be workers to take licensing examinations in those countries regardless of whether or not the worker has a professional license from their home country.[191]
Singapore is the major ASEAN destination for skilled migrants from other ASEAN countries, mostly from Malaysia and the Philippines. Total employment in Singapore doubled between 1992 and 2008 from 1.5 million to three million, and the number of foreign workers almost tripled, from fewer than 400,000 to almost 1.1 million. High-skilled foreign talents (customer service, nursing, engineering, IT) earn at least US$2,000 a month and with a credential (usually a college degree) receive S Passes, employment passes, including an EP-1 for those earning more than US$7,000 a month; EP-2 for those earning US$3,500—7,000 a month; and EP-3 for those earning US$2,500–3,500 a month.[192]
In the recent years, Singapore has been slowly cutting down the number of foreign workers to challenge companies to upgrade their hiring criteria and offer more jobs to local residents. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned that the Singapore policy of reducing the number of foreign workers could retard the country's economic growth and lower its competitiveness.[193]
Narrowing the Development Gap[edit]
Narrowing the Development Gap (NDG) is ASEAN's framework for addressing disparities among, and within, member-states where pockets of underdevelopment exist. Under NDG, ASEAN has continued co-ordinating closely with other subregional co-operation frameworks in the region (e.g., BIMP-EAGA, IMT-GT, GMS, Mekong programmes), viewing them as "equal partners in the development of regional production and distribution networks" in the AEC, and as a platform to "mainstream social development issues in developing and implementing projects," in the context of the ASCC.[194]
The six-year IAI Work Plans have been developed to assist the CLMV countries as well as ASEAN's other sub-regions to ensure that the economic wheels of their economies move at an accelerated pace. IAI Work Plan I was implemented from 2002 to 2008, prior to the development of the Roadmap for an ASEAN Community (2009-2015). IAI Work Plan II (2009-2015) supports the goals of the ASEAN Community and is composed of 182 prescribed actions, which includes studies, training programmes, and policy implementation support, conducted through projects supported by ASEAN-6 countries, and ASEAN's Dialogue partners and external parties. The IAI Work Plan is patterned after and supports the key programme areas in the three ASEAN Community Blueprints: ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint, ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint, and ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint.
The IAI Task Force, composed of representatives of the Committee of Permanent Representatives and its working group from all ten ASEAN member states, is in charge of providing general advice and policy guidelines and directions in the design and implementation of the IAI Work Plan. All ten ASEAN member-states are represented in the IAI Task Force, with the task force chaired by representatives of the four CLMV countries. Chairmanship is rotated annually in alphabetical order by country name.
The ASEAN Secretariat, in particular through the IAI and NDG Division, supports the implementation and management of the IAI Work Plan and coordinates activities related to sub-regional frameworks. This includes servicing meetings, assisting in the formulation, implementation, monitoring and reporting of projects, resource mobilisation, and overall operational co-ordination among various IAI&NDG-related stakeholders. The Division works closely with the Dialogue Partners, and international agencies, to develop strategies and programmes to assist in promoting and implementing IAI and NDG activities in ASEAN.[194]
ASEAN Communication Master Plan[edit]
ASEAN foreign ministers launched the ASEAN Communication Master Plan (ACPM) on 11 November 2014.[195]
The ACPM provides a framework for communicating the character, structure, and overall vision of ASEAN and the ASEAN community to key audiences within the region and globally.[196] The plan seeks to demonstrate the relevance and benefits of the ASEAN through fact-based and compelling communications, recognising that the ASEAN community is unique and different from other country integration models.
ASEAN security blueprint[edit]
The ASEAN Convention on Counter-Terrorism (ACCT) serves as a framework for regional co-operation to counter, prevent, and suppress terrorism and deepen counter-terrorism co-operation.[197]
ACCT was signed by ASEAN leaders in 2007. The sixth ASEAN member state, Brunei, ratified it on 28 April 2011 and on 27 May 2011, the convention came into force. Malaysia became the tenth member state to ratify ACCT on 11 January 2013.[197]
At the 23rd ASEAN Summit in November 2013, ASEAN Leaders took the decision to develop a Post-2015 Vision, and thus, got the High Level Task Force (HLTF) which consists of ten high-level Representatives from all ASEAN Member States. The Vision was adopted at the 27th ASEAN Summit in November 2015 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. ASEAN Community revises and renews its Vision in the term of ten years to provide a framework for continuous development and further integration of the community.
ASEAN Community Vision 2025
The terms in the Vision are divided into mainly four subcategories: ASEAN Political-Security Community, ASEAN Economic Community, ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community, and Moving Forward. ASEAN Political-Security issues are covered under article 7 and 8 of the Vision. Article 7 generally states the overall aspiration of the community aiming to achieve a united, inclusive and resilient community. It also puts human and enviroenmental security at the center of its aspirations. Deepening engagement with both internal Members and eternal parties are also stressed to contribute the international peace, security and stability.[198]
The final part of the Vision, under “Moving Forward” subcategory, implies the acknowledgement of the weakness of the institution capacity to process and coordinate ASEAN work. Strengthening ASEAN Secretariat and other ASEAN Organs and Bodies is desired. There is also a call for greater level of ASEAN institutional presence at the national, regional and international levels.
Environment[edit]




Haze over Borneo, 2006



Plastic waste dumping: A study based on 2010 data concluded that five ASEAN nations are among the top ten (of 192 countries with ocean shorelines, Laos not among them as it is landlocked) dumpers of plastic waste into the ocean. Indonesia was ranked the second worst polluter; the Philippines third; Vietnam fourth; Thailand sixth; and Malaysia eighth.[199]
Threatened mammal species: ASEAN nations fared poorly in this World Bank study: Indonesia was number one of 214 nations (1=worst, 214= best) on the world list of threatened mammals, with 184 species under threat. The remaining ASEAN nations were ranked, Malaysia, 7; Thailand, 9; Vietnam, 12; Myanmar, 14; Laos, 15; the Philippines, 19; Cambodia, 20; Brunei, 25; and Singapore, 93, of 214 countries.[200]
Threatened fish species: ASEAN member-state Indonesia ranked fifth of 215 nations (1=worst, 215=best) in fish species at risk; Thailand ranked 12; the Philippines, 18; Malaysia, 19; Vietnam, 20; Laos, 29; Cambodia, 51; Myanmar, 52; Singapore, 84; and Brunei, 175.[201]
Threatened (higher) plant species: The World Bank estimated in 2014 that, worldwide, 13,583 higher plant species are threatened. Of 215 nations, Malaysia ranked number two of 215 (1=worst, 216=best) in number of species threatened (133 species). Indonesia ranked sixth; the Philippines, 16; Vietnam, 21; Thailand, 26; Brunei, 33; Singapore, 53; Myanmar, 59; Cambodia, 74; and Laos, 75.[202]
Deforestation: Indonesia lost 17 million hectares of tree cover from 2001-2013, the fifth largest loss of 203 nations. Malaysia ranked eighth (5 Mha loss); Myanmar, 19 (2 Mha); Cambodia, 23 (1.5 Mha); Laos, 24 (1.4 Mha); Vietnam, 27 (1.3 Mha); Thailand, 29 (1.1 Mha); the Philippines, 39 (664 Kha); Brunei, 117 (18 Kha); and Singapore, 155 (867 ha).[203]

At the turn of the 21st century, ASEAN began to discuss environmental agreements. These included the signing of the ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution in 2002 as an attempt to control haze pollution in Southeast Asia.[204] Unfortunately, this was unsuccessful due to the outbreaks of haze in 2005, 2006, 2009, 2013, and 2015. As of 2015, thirteen years after signing the ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution, the situation with respect to the long term issue of Southeast Asian haze has not been changed for 50% of the ASEAN member states, and still remains as a crisis every two years during summer and fall.[205][206][207]
Yet other serious issues like the dumping of trash from foreign nations such as Japan and Canada to ASEAN has yet to be discussed. In 2015, tons of trash labelled as plastics for recycling, was shipped from Canada to Manila; an issue that has yet to be resolved.[208]
Education[edit]
While high performing Asian economies and the six oldest ASEAN members have invested heavily in public education at the primary and secondary levels, tertiary education has been left largely to the private sector.[209] Tertiary education in Southeast Asia is, in general, relatively weak in terms of technological capacity and integration such as in credit transfer schemes. Singapore is highly focused on innovation while the rest of the region lags behind.[210] In most cases, universities are focused on teaching and service to government rather than academic research. Universities in Southeast Asia, both in terms of academic salaries and research infrastructure (libraries, laboratories), tend to be poorly supported financially. Moreover, regional academic journals cater to their local audiences and respond less to international standards which makes universal or regional benchmarking difficult.[211]
Governments have a vested interest in investing in education and other aspects of human capital infrastructure, especially rapidly developing nations such as those within ASEAN. In the short run, investment spending directly supports aggregate demand and growth. In the longer term, investments in physical infrastructure, productivity enhancements, and provision of education and health services determine the potential for growth.[212]
Educational integration[edit]
To enhance regional co-operation in education, ASEAN education ministers have agreed four priorities for education: (1) Promoting ASEAN awareness among ASEAN citizens, particularly youth; (2) Strengthening ASEAN identity through education; (3) Building ASEAN human resources in the field of education; and (4) Strengthening the ASEAN University Network.[213]
At the 11th ASEAN Summit in December 2005, ASEAN leaders set new directions for regional education collaboration when they welcomed the decision of the ASEAN education ministers to convene meetings on a regular basis. The annual ASEAN Education Ministers Meeting oversees ASEAN co-operation efforts on education at the ministerial level. With regard to implementation, programmes, and activities are carried out by the ASEAN Senior Officials on Education (SOM-ED). SOM-ED also manages co-operation on higher education through the ASEAN University Network (AUN).[214]
ASEAN university network[edit]
Main article: ASEAN University Network
The ASEAN University Network (AUN) is a consortium of Southeast Asian tertiary institutions of which thirty currently belong as participating universities.[215] Founded in November 1995 by eleven universities within the member states,[216] the AUN was established to:[213]

Promote co-operation among ASEAN scholars, academics, and scientists in the region
Develop academic and professional human resources in the region
Promote information dissemination among the ASEAN academic community
Enhance awareness of a regional identity and the sense of "ASEAN-ness" among members

Southeast Asia Engineering Education Development Network Project[edit]
The Southeast Asia Engineering Education Development Network (SEED-Net) Project, was established as an autonomous sub-network of the ASEAN University Network (AUN) in April 2001. SEED-Net is aimed at promoting human resource development in engineering in ASEAN. The network consists of twenty-six member institutions selected by higher education ministries of each ASEAN member state, and eleven supporting Japanese universities selected by the Japanese government. This network is mainly supported by the Japanese government through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and partially supported by the ASEAN Foundation. SEED-Net activities are implemented by the SEED-Net secretariat with the support of the JICA Project for SEED-Net now based at Chulalongkorn University.
ASEAN Scholarship[edit]
The ASEAN Scholarship is a scholarship programme offered by Singapore to the nine other member states for secondary school, junior college, and university education. It covers accommodation, food, medical benefits and accident insurance, school fees, and examination fees. Scholarship recipients, who then perform well on the GCE Advanced Level Examination, may apply for ASEAN undergraduate scholarships, which are tailored specifically to undergraduate institutions in Singapore and other ASEAN member countries.[217] Singapore has used this programme effectively to attract many of the best students from the ASEAN region over the past several years, and scholars for the most part tend to remain in Singapore to pursue undergraduate studies through the ASEAN Undergraduate Scholarship programme.[218]
Literacy rates[edit]
The table below shows literacy rates among 15- to 24-year-old youths from 10 ASEAN member states as reported to the United Nations.[219]


Country
Year (most recent)
Adult (15+) literacy rate
Adult men
Adult women
Youth (15-24) literacy rate
Youth men
Youth women


 Brunei
2009
95%
97%
94%
100%
100%
100%


 Cambodia
2008
78%
85%
71%
87%
89%
86%


 Indonesia
2008
92%
95%
89%
99%
100%
99%


 Laos
2005
73%
82%
63%
84%
89%
79%


 Malaysia
2015
96%
95%
94%
93%
95%
96%


 Myanmar
2009
92%
95%
90%
96%
96%
95%


 Philippines
2015
98%
97%
96%
98%
98%
98%


 Singapore
2009
95%
97%
92%
100%
100%
100%


 Thailand
2015
94%
96%
92%
98%
98%
98%


 Vietnam
2009
93%
95%
91%
97%
97%
96%


Culture and sport[edit]
The organisation hosts cultural activities in an attempt to further integrate the region. These include sports and educational activities as well as writing awards. Examples of these include the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity and the ASEAN Outstanding Scientist and Technologist Award
Heritage parks[edit]
Main article: ASEAN Heritage Parks
ASEAN Heritage Parks aim to protect the region's natural treasures. There are now 37 such protected areas, including the Tubbataha Reef Marine Park and the Kinabalu National Park.[220]
Songs and music[edit]

"The ASEAN Way", the official regional anthem of ASEAN. Music by  Kittikhun Sodprasert and Sampow Triudom; lyrics by  Payom Valaiphatchra.
"ASEAN Song of Unity" or "ASEAN Hymn". Music by  Ryan Cayabyab.
"Let Us Move Ahead", an ASEAN song. Composed by  Candra Darusman.
"ASEAN Rise", ASEAN's 40th anniversary song. Music by  Dick Lee; lyrics by  Stefanie Sun.
"ASEAN Spirit", ASEAN's 50th anniversary song. Performed by  Christian Bautista; directed by  Joaquin Pedro Valdes.

ASEAN competitions[edit]

Southeast Asian Games
ASEAN University Games
ASEAN School Games
ASEAN Para Games
ASEAN Football Championship
SEABA Championship

2030 FIFA world cup bid[edit]
In January 2011 ASEAN foreign ministers agreed to bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2030 as a single entity.[221][222]
Performance in international competitions[edit]
Main article: Association of Southeast Asian Nations countries in sporting events
Reception[edit]
Throughout its existence, ASEAN has been lauded globally for its numerous achievements, including its efforts for making strides in the economic, political, socio-cultural and security arena, deterring large-scale regional conflicts, nurturing a habit of dialogues and cooperation to maximize its common interests, successfully leading several multilateral cooperation mechanisms for regional peace and prosperity, and being one of the main driving seats and the centrality in the Asia-Pacific region. It is credited as one of the most successful and influential intergovernmental organisations in the world.[223][224][225][226][227][31][228][229][230]
In 2017, ASEAN received high approval ratings, with 80 per cent of Southeast Asians having a positive view of the organisation, and 88 per cent of them expressing optimism about the grouping's future.[35]






The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



However, the success of ASEAN has been met with criticism. Critics have charged that ASEAN is too soft in its approach to promoting human rights and democracy, particularly in junta-led Burma.[231] Some scholars think that non-interference has hindered ASEAN efforts to handle the problems of Myanmar, human rights abuse, and haze pollution in the area. Despite global outrage at the military crack-down on unarmed protesters in Yangon, ASEAN has refused to suspend Burma as a member, and also rejects proposals for economic sanctions.[232] This has caused concern as the European Union has refused to conduct free trade negotiations at a regional level for these political reasons.[233] Some international observers view ASEAN as a "talk shop",[234] stating that the organisation is: "big on words, but small on action".[235] "ASEAN policies have proven to be mostly rhetoric, rather than actual implementation", according to Pokpong Lawansiri, a Bangkok-based independent analyst of ASEAN. "It has been noted that less than 50% of ASEAN agreements are actually implemented, while ASEAN holds more than six hundred meetings annually".[236]
The head of the International Institute of Strategic Studies – Asia, Tim Huxley, cites the diverse political systems present in the grouping, including many young states, as a barrier to far-reaching co-operation outside the economic sphere. He also asserts that, in the absence of an external threat to rally against with the end of the Cold War, ASEAN has begun to be less successful at restraining its members and resolving border disputes such as those between Burma and Thailand and Indonesia and Malaysia.[237] During the 12th ASEAN Summit in Cebu, several activist groups staged anti-globalisation protests.[238] According to the activists, the agenda of economic integration would negatively affect industries in the Philippines and would cause thousands of Filipinos to lose their jobs.[239]
There are also several territorial disputes between ASEAN members that affecting the unity between ASEAN nations such as the Cambodian–Thai border dispute (Khao Phra Wihan National Park) and the continuous claim over parts of Malaysia by certain politicians in the Philippines,[240] who also seems supporting militants raids over neighbouring country.[241][242][243] Beside that, the biggest criticism ASEAN currently facing is the tensions caused by the South China Sea dispute, which involves the following four member states: the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Brunei.
The Philippines has been the most vocal against Chinese incursions in the dispute, even bringing its case against China to a United Nations international tribunal in the Hague, the first case filed by a nation against China. Vietnam, Japan, and other Western countries,[vague] especially the United States, have strongly supported the Philippines. Vietnam, bordered both by land and sea with China, has also claims all the Spratly Islands. This dispute focuses on the Paracel Islands, which China has occupied following the Battle of the Paracel Islands, in 1974. Brunei, claiming only one reef, has been silent on the issue ever since it began, mostly because of its trade with China. Malaysia, a nation with deep economic ties to China, and a nation with billions in Chinese investment, has remained neutral and 'China-friendly' over the conflict. This despite China claiming various reefs and islands in the Spratlys as well as most of its territorial waters and exclusive economic zones in Borneo.
ASEAN has yet to be united in the face of China's massive reclamation activities and incursions in the South China Sea, especially when China is heavily supported by member states. Myanmar and Laos have been former 'satellite nations' of China and are still heavily influenced by China. Thailand has yet to take a concrete stand on the issue. Of the member states not yet involved in the dispute, Indonesia has supported the diplomatic approach of the Philippines many times.[vague][citation needed] Indonesia's exclusive economic zone in its Natuna Islands overlaps with the nine-dash line of China. Taiwan, also a claimant, has no concrete relations with any ASEAN states, but has an informal office in the Philippines. China has only accepted bilateral talks for solving the disputes. Vietnam, the Philippines, China, Malaysia, and even Taiwan have been building their military bases and there is great concern over the possibility of military conflict over the issue.
Corruption remains a widespread issue across the member states, as "tea money" remains an important requirement to grease business transactions and to receive public services in Southeast Asia. Following the release of the Corruption Perceptions Index 2015 by Berlin-based graft watchdog Transparency International on 27 January, its Asia Pacific director, Srirak Plipat, noted that: "if there was one common challenge to unite the Asia-Pacific region, it would be corruption", noting that: "from campaign pledges to media coverage to civil society forums, corruption dominates the discussion. Yet despite all this talk, there's little sign of action."[244]
During a general meeting in 2016, ASEAN failed to include a united statement which includes the International Court ruling on the South China Sea, filed and won by the Philippines against China, due to Cambodia's rejection of the ruling being part of the official ASEAN statement.
At the last summit in China, two countries, Turkey and Mongolia have spoken out to the chairman Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte about their intentions to join the association of countries. Duterte has stated that there is no problem with this and might consider their inclusion to the association despite their geographical locations.[245]
ASEAN has also failed to abolish human rights violations in West Papua, including Irian Jaya, committed by Indonesian military officials and political authorities. It is estimated that more than 500,000 indigenous Papuans have been killed in the name of Indonesian nationalism by Indonesian authorities. Native Papuans have been lobbying for independence from Indonesia since the 1900s, however, they have not succeeded due to intense Indonesian army operations which resulted in expansive genocide. Independence organizations in the western half of Papua vocalized their concerns and aspiration to ASEAN, however, no action was made by the association. In 2014, all independence movement groups in West Papua and Iriran Jaya finally formed under a single umbrella organization, the United Liberation Movement for West Papua (ULMWP).[246] Due to the December 2016 Independence Rally in West Papua,[247] where more than 500 native Papuans were arrested by Indonesian officials, a bloc of nations swore to support the West Papua Independence Movement in the entrance of 2017. Among these coalition of nations are Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Tonga, Tuvalu, Palau, and the Marshall Islands. The FLNKS, which represents New Caledonia Independence Movement, also supported the West Papua independence movement.[248] The bloc of nations lambasted Indonesia's human rights record in West Papua, which includes Irian Jaya, and the referendum conducted by Indonesia to control the region, where only 0.02% of the population were allowed by Indonesia to vote in a previous referendum marred by political threats from Indonesian authorities. The ambassador of Guinea-Bissau implied that the movement is the same with the movement made by Timor-Leste, and thus should be respected. The probable support base of the African leader is due to the support of the Bishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa, who backed West Papuan independence from Indonesia. On the other hand, the ambassador of Papua New Guinea spoke against the coalition of nations due to ties with Indonesia, despite being ethnically and geographically related to West Papua. All of the statements made were committed during the 2017 meeting of Council of Ministers of the 79-member Africa Caribbean Pacific Group of States (ACP). The indigenous Maori people of New Zealand also expressed their support for West Papua during the ULMWP's visit in the country. The Aborigines of Australia also expressed their support for the movement. In the 2017 United Nations General Assembly, a petition for a UN-backed referendum in West Papua was submitted by more than 1.5 million West Papuans through their leader, Benny Wanda, in the United Nations. However, the head of the committee in reference to the submission blocked the petition as Indonesia was a member of the committee.[249][250]
During a United Nations vote against the ethnic cleansing of Rohingya people in Myanmar, majority of Southeast Asian nations voted to either abstain or against the condemnation. Only Muslim-majority countries Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei voted in favor of condemning the Muslim Rohingya cleansing of Myanmar.[251]
Current leaders[edit]







 Brunei
Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah









 Cambodia
Prime Minister Hun Sen









 Indonesia
President Joko Widodo









 Laos
Prime Minister Thongloun Sisoulith









 Malaysia
Prime Minister Najib Razak









 Myanmar
President Htin Kyaw









 Philippines
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte









 Singapore
Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong









 Thailand
Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha









 Vietnam
Prime Minister Nguyễn Xuân Phúc




See also[edit]


Geography portal
Asia portal
Southeast Asia portal




ASEAN Common Time
ASEAN-India Car Rally 2012
ASEAN Sculpture Garden
Asian Monetary Unit
Asia Pacific Forum
Blue card system – ASEAN motor insurance scheme
Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia
List of ASEAN countries by GDP (nominal)
List of country groupings
List of multilateral free-trade agreements
Mekong-Ganga Cooperation
Southeast Asia Treaty Organisation



Literature[edit]

ASEAN Community in Figures (ACIF) 2012 (PDF), Jakarta: Association of Southeast Asian Nations, 2012, ISBN 978-602-7643-22-2, archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015 
Acharya, Amitav (2009), Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and the problem of regional order (2nd ed.), Abingdon Oxon/New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-41428-9 
Collins, Allan (2013), Building a People-oriented Security Community the ASEAN Way, Abingdon Oxon/New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-46052-1 
Fry, Gerald W. (2008), The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, New York: Chelsea House, ISBN 978-0-7910-9609-3 
Lee, Yoong Yoong, ed. (2011), ASEAN Matters! Reflecting on the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, ISBN 978-981-4335-06-5 CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Haacke, Jürgen; Morada, Noel M., eds. (2010), Cooperative Security in the Asia-Pacific: The ASEAN Regional Forum, Abingdon Oxon/New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-46052-1 CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Seah, Daniel (2015) Problems Concerning the International Law-Making Practice of ASEAN Asian Journal of International Law (Cambridge University Press)
Severino, Rodolfo (2008), ASEAN, Singapore: ISEAS Publications, ISBN 978-981-230-750-7 
Amador III J, Teodoro J. (2014), A united region: The ASEAN Community 2015

References[edit]


^ "ASEAN Motto". ASEAN.org. ASEAN. Retrieved 9 May 2015. 
^ ASEAN Charter (PDF). Association of Southeast Asian Nations. p. 29. Article 34. The working language of ASEAN shall be English. 
^ a b "Selected Basic ASEAN Indicators" (PDF). ASEAN.org. ASEANstats. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2015. 
^ https://aseanup.com/asean-infographics-population-market-economy/
^ a b c d e ASEAN Community in Figures (ACIF) 2013 (PDF) (6th ed.). Jakarta: ASEAN. Feb 2014. p. 1. ISBN 978-602-7643-73-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2015. 
^ "ASEAN Centres & Facilities". ASEAN. Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Retrieved 16 September 2015. 
^ a b "Overview". ASEAN. Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ "How do you say ASEAN?". Voice of America Pronunciation Guide. VOA. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ "NLS/BPH: Other Writings, The ABC Book, A Pronunciation Guide". 8 May 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 12 January 2009. 
^ Asean.org Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine., ASEAN-10: Meeting the Challenges, by Termsak Chalermpalanupap, Asean.org, ASEAN Secretariat official website. Retrieved 27 June 2008."Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 2016-02-06. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Bangkok Declaration. Wikisource. Retrieved 14 March 2007.
^ a b "ASEAN Notional Calendar 2015" (PDF). asean.org. ASEAN. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ Long, Simon (20 November 2014). "Asia: Safety in Numbers". The Economist (The World in 2015). Retrieved 8 February 2015. 
^ "ASEAN-UN Partnership". Asia-Pacific Regional Coordination Mechanism. 20 December 2016. 
^ "An Overview of ASEAN-United Nations Cooperation - ASEAN - ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". 
^ "Intergovernmental Organizations". www.un.org. 
^ "History - ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY. 
^ "Asean: Next 50 years". The Straits Times. 23 April 2017. 
^ "ASEAN's Bright Future: Growth Opportunities for Corporates in the ASEAN Region | J.P. Morgan". www.jpmorgan.com. 
^ "'Asean needs to develop solutions to resolve disputes' - Regional | The Star Online". 
^ "Dispute Settlement in ASEAN | Centre for International Law". cil.nus.edu.sg. 
^ "ASEAN and the Principle of Non-Interference". E-International Relations. 
^ "ASEAN-UN Strive for Closer Cooperation - ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY. 9 October 2012. 
^ "World leaders praised the Philippines on how it hosted the ASEAN Summit | UNTV News". www.untvweb.com. 
^ "Russia supports increasing ASEAN's global influence". 
^ "Singapore Institute of International Affairs | A think tank for thinking people". www.siiaonline.org. 
^ Center, East-West (15 November 2017). "The 2017 APEC Summit: A Game Changer for the Asia-Pacific?". Huffington Post. 
^ "Striking a balance: Asian institutions and global influence". East Asia Forum. 11 July 2013. 
^ "ASEAN Summit: Narendra Modi says India supports rules-based security architecture". Firstpost. 14 November 2017. 
^ "The Asean Miracle – Kishore Mahbubani". mahbubani.net. 
^ a b "At 50, Asean is a neighbourhood, not yet community". The Straits Times. 29 July 2017. 
^ Than, Mya; Gates, Carolyn L. (2001). ASEAN Enlargement: Impacts & Implications. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 9789812300812. 
^ "Asean is emerging as a consumption powerhouse - The Nation". The Nation. 
^ Hong, Chiu Wu. "Exploring new frontiers". The Business Times. 
^ a b "Southeast Asians positive about ASEAN". TodayOnline. 
^ "External Relations - ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY. 
^ "The Asean Declaration (Bangkok Declaration) Bangkok, 8 August 1967". ASEAN. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ "Overview". asean.org. ASEAN. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ Bernard Eccleston; Michael Dawson; Deborah J. McNamara (1998). The Asia-Pacific Profile. Routledge (UK). ISBN 0-415-17279-9. 
^ "Background Note:Brunei Darussalam/Profile:/Foreign Relations". US State Department. Archived from the original on 2 March 2007. Retrieved 6 March 2007. 
^ Moon, C. (2014). ASEAN. Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Woon, Walter (2016). The Asean Charter: A Commentary. Singapore: NUS Press Singapore. p. 10. ISBN 978-981-4722-08-7. 
^ "Vietnam in ASEAN : Toward Cooperation for Mutual Benefits". ASEAN Secretariat. 2007. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2009. 
^ a b Carolyn L. Gates; Mya Than (2001). ASEAN Enlargement: impacts and implications. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 981-230-081-3. 
^ "Statement by the Secretary-General of ASEAN Welcoming the Kingdom of Cambodia as the Tenth Member State of ASEAN: 30 April 1999, ASEAN Secretariat". ASEAN Secretariat. 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2009. 
^ East Asia Economic Caucus. ASEAN Secretariat. Retrieved 14 March 2007. Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b Asiaviews.org, Whither East Asia? Retrieved 14 March 2007. Archived 5 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ UNT.edu, Asia's Reaction to NAFTA, Nancy J. Hamilton. CRS – Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 14 March 2007.
^ IHT.com, Japan Straddles Fence on Issue of East Asia Caucus. International Herald Tribune. Retrieved 14 March 2007. Archived 12 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "Agreement on the Common Effective Preferential Tariff Scheme for the ASEAN Free Trade Area, Singapore, 28 Jan 1992". Asean.org. Archived from the original on 14 April 2009. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ Bangkok Treaty (in alphabetical order) At UNODA United Nations. Retrieved 4 September 2008. Archived 28 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "'Momentous' day for ASEAN as charter comes into force". Agence France-Presse. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 14 January 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2008. 
^ Olivia Rondonuwu and Suhartono, Harry (15 December 2008). "ASEAN launches charter under shadow of crisis". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 16 December 2008. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "ASEAN charter comes into force". International Herald Tribune. Associated Press. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ Wong, Chun Han (18 November 2012). "Asean Human-Rights Pledge Leaves Critics Cool". Wall Street Journal Asia. Retrieved 8 February 2015. 
^ Masilamani, Logan; Peterson, Jimmy (15 October 2014). "The "ASEAN Way": The Structural Underpinnings of Constructive Engagement". Foreign Policy Journal. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ Goh, Gillian (Spring 2003). "The 'ASEAN Way'; Non-Intervention and ASEAN's Role in Conflict Management" (PDF). Stanford Journal of East Asian Affairs. pp. 113–18. Retrieved 2 March 2003. 
^ Leviter, Lee (2010). "The ASEAN Charter: ASEAN Failure or Member Failure?". New York University Journal of International Law and Politics. 43: 159–210.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ RP resolution for observer status in UN assembly OK'd, Philippine Daily Inquirer, 13 March 2007. Archived 26 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Philippines to Represent ASEAN in UN Meetings in NY, Geneva". Yahoo! News. 7 March 2007. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 13 March 2007. 
^ "TPP, RCEP, FTAAP - a user's guide to alphabet soup of trade deals". November 20, 2016. 
^ Fact Sheet ASEAN Political-Security Community (APSC) (PDF). Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat. Jun 2013. ISBN 978-602-7643-49-9. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ Fact Sheet ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) (PDF). Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat. Jun 2013. ISBN 978-602-7643-50-5. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ Fact Sheet of ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community (ASCC) (PDF). Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat. Jun 2013. ISBN 978-602-7643-51-2. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ a b Sim, Edmund "Introduction to the ASEAN Economic Community", https://web.archive.org/web/20120218183029/http://www.asil.org/aseanevent/Sim_Intro_to_ASEAN.pdf
^ "ASEAN economies past and future". The Jakarta Post. 29 July 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ "Overview". ASEAN. Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ "ASEAN Economic Community (AEC)". Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Malaysia). 24 April 2013. Archived from the original on 20 August 2014. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ Obama Unveils New ASEAN Economic Initiative at Sunnylands Summit | The Diplomat, 18 February 2016
^ US seeking stronger trade ties with Asean | Inquirer Global Nation, 17 February 2016
^ ""Economic Zones in the ASEAN"" (PDF). 
^ "ASEAN feared to become multinational companies market only". Anatara News. 10 November 2011. 
^ "ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services (1995)". ASEAN. Archived from the original on 26 December 2009. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ "Overview". ASEAN. Archived from the original on 6 February 2011. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ Buranasomphop, Duangkamol (14 June 2014). "Asean 2015: Free movement of labour". AEC Tourism Thailand. Retrieved 11 May 2015. 
^ "Why the AEC in 2015 Will Lead to Few Changes in Thailand". Thai-Norwegian Chamber of Commerce. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ "Concern over free flow of labour after AEC starts". The Nation. 13 July 2014. Retrieved 11 May 2015. 
^ "The ASEAN Economic Community's Progress". InvestAsian. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ Forss, Pearl (27 August 2007). "US and ASEAN seeking to enhance relationship: Dr Balaji". Channel NewsAsia. Retrieved 27 August 2007. [dead link]
^ "ASEAN to complete free trade agreements by 2013". Forbes. 26 August 2007. Archived from the original on 12 October 2008. Retrieved 27 August 2007. 
^ Ong, Christine (27 August 2007). "ASEAN confident of concluding FTAs with partners by 2013". Channel NewsAsia. Retrieved 27 August 2007. [dead link]
^ "ASEAN Charter". ASEAN. Retrieved 4 March 2016. 
^ "CEBU DECLARATION ON EAST ASIAN ENERGY SECURITY". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Retrieved 4 March 2016. 
^ "ASEAN, Australia and New Zealand Free Trade Agreement – NZ Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade". Mfat.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 15 April 2009. Retrieved 21 May 2009. 
^ "Asean, Australia, New Zealand Sign Free-Trade Deal (Update1)". Bloomberg. 27 February 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 21 May 2009. 
^ "ASEAN+6 trade bloc in the making". Investvine.com. 23 February 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. 
^ "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ a b "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2016; Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". 
^ Anna Suci Perwitasari. "Indonesia belum akan masuk Asean Linkage". Retrieved 17 January 2014. 
^ Global 2016 Human Development Report Overview - English (PDF). New York: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2017. pp. 22–24. Retrieved 22 March 2017. 
^ Severino, Rodolfo. "The ASEAN Developmental Divide and the Initiative for ASEAN Integration." ASEAN Economic Bulletin 24.1 (2007): 35-44.
^ "Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)". Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 29 October 2014. 
^ "Factsheet on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)" (PDF). Retrieved 29 October 2014. [permanent dead link]
^ Regional integration: the ASEAN vision in 2020 by Rosabel B. Guerrero; Director, Department of Economic Statistics, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, Philippines.
^ a b Baby Steps To A Common Currency
^ Asian Currency Unit
^ Prospects for a Single Asian Currency
^ a b c Towards ASEAN Financial Integration
^ Cost and Benefits for A Common Currency in ASEAN
^ China signs S.China Sea guidelines, seeks to turn page on row Reuters, Michael Martina, 21 July 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011
^ a b "Welcome to Singapore FTA Network". Fta.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 9 December 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ "Siew calls for pragmatic approach to ASEAN ties". The Taipei Times. Taiwan (ROC). Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ An Asian monetary fund? http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_6991/is_6_34/ai_n45060521/[dead link]
^ "Does Asia need the IMF?". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ "ASEAN's AMRO may 'replace' IMF financial role". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ "ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic and Research Office (AMRO)". Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 11 April 2011. 
^ "Asian financial arrangement: Regionalism vs multilateralism". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ Chaitrong, Wichit (4 May 2012). "Asean+3 ministers agree to double emergency reserve fund to $240b". Jakarta Post. Asia News Network. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ a b c "Asean Single Aviation Market". Straits Times. Singapore. 2 February 2008. Archived from the original on 9 December 2008. Retrieved 26 September 2008. 
^ a b "Singaporean PM urges ASEAN to liberalise aviation". chinaview.cn. Xinhua News Agency. 1 November 2007. Retrieved 26 September 2008. 
^ Kaur, Karamjit (25 September 2008). "Tiger offers 50,000 free seats". Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 27 September 2008. Retrieved 26 September 2008. 
^ "Three quarters of a million more seats and counting- KL-Singapore benefits from liberalisation". Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation. 28 September 2008. Archived from the original on 29 April 2006. Retrieved 26 September 2008. 
^ Anjaiah, Veeramalla (27 September 2011). "Perfect 10 Paradise: ASEAN tourist industry is booming with intra-ASEAN travelers". The Jakarta Post. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ Thoeun, In. "Tourism Cooperation Towards AEC" (PDF). Kingdom of Cambodia, Ministry of Commerce. Workshop On ASEAN Economic Community Outreach. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ "Tourism Statistics - ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY. 
^ "World Economic Forum - Home" (PDF). www3.weforum.org. 
^ ("Archived copy". Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 2014-11-01. )
^ ASEAN Tourism Marketing Strategy (ATMS) 2012-2015 (PDF). Jakarta: The ASEAN Secretariat Public Outreach and Civil Society Division. Mar 2012. ISBN 978-602-8411-97-4. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_TT_Competitiveness_Report_2013.pdf
^ Jones, Michael E. (2004). "Forging an ASEAN Identity: The Challenge to Construct a Shared Destiny". Contemporary Southeast Asia. 26 (1): 140–154. doi:10.1355/cs26-1g. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ a b ASEAN Structure, ASEAN Primer Archived 22 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Denis Hew (2005). Roadmap to an ASEAN Economic Community. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 981-230-347-2. 
^ ASEAN-CER Meeting: Trade is the Key Driver in Fostering Growth, August 31st, 2012, ASEAN Secretariat News
^ "Singapore Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and the Environment". ASEAN. 21 November 2007. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 12 January 2009. 
^ "Thai PM woos Chinese businesses". Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ "Thailand changes venue for ASEAN+3, East Asia summits". Findarticles.com. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ "Invitation to US & Russia". Asean.org. 30 October 2010. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ About Us Archived 25 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine., ASEAN Regional Forum official website. Retrieved 12 June 2006.
^ "ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)". Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Government of Australia. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ ASEAN Ministerial Meetings, ASEAN Secretariat. Retrieved 13 March 2007. Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Asean.org, ASEAN Secretariat. Retrieved 16 March 2007. Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Malaysians have had enough of haze woes". The Malaysian Bar. Archived from the original on 19 December 2012. Retrieved 13 March 2007. 
^ "Cina, Jepang dan Korsel Bangun Perdagangan Bebas". 14 May 2012. 
^ Lay Hwee Yeo (2003). Asia and Europe: the development and different dimensions of ASEM. Routledge (UK). ISBN 0-415-30697-3. 
^ "ASEAN Ministers Responsible for Information (AMRI)". Archived from the original on 27 June 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ "ASEAN Promotes Use of Social Media". Philippine Information Agency. Archived from the original on 22 December 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2012. 
^ "Deepening ASEAN Media Cooperation Within and Beyond". Media Development Authority. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2012. 
^ Media Development Authority. "New Media Portal to Enhance ASEAN'S COCI Website and Offer Access to the Region's Media Industry". Archived from the original on 6 February 2011. Retrieved 1 October 2012. 
^ "Launch of the ASEAN NewsMaker Project: Students to promote cross-cultural understanding by creating video clips for ASEAN Media Portal, Singapore, 2 June 2009". www.asean.org. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2015. 
^ "11th ASEAN Digital Broadcasting Meeting". ASEAN Secretariat News. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. 
^ "Guidelines for ASEAN Digital Switch-Over" (PDF). ASEAN. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ Julio Amador; Joycee A. Teodoro (2 May 2014). "A united region: The ASEAN Community 2015". Rappler. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ "ASEAN Vision 2020" Archived 29 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. 15 December 1997. Retrieved 10 December 2014.
^ "Declaration of ASEAN Concord II (Bali Concord II)". ASEAN. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ "TODAY Online - Countries must work together to deal with shared problems: PM Lee". Government of Singapore. Retrieved 25 November 2015. 
^ "Cebu declaration on the acceleration of the establishment of an ASEAN Community by 2015". Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ S. Pushpanathan (2012). "ASEAN's readiness in achieving the AEC 2015: Prospects and challenges". In Sanchita Basu Das. Achieving the ASEAN Economic Community 2015: Challenges for Member Countries & Business. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. pp. 10–20. 
^ The Association of Academies of Sciences in Asia (2011). Towards A Sustainable Asia: Environment and Climate Change. Beijing: Science Press. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "ASEAN Economic Community - ASEAN - ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". 
^ ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint (PDF). Jakarta: Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Jan 2008. p. 56. ISBN 978-979-3496-77-1. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ Rising as One: The Filipino Nation Towards the ASEAN Economic Integration (PDF). Local Government Academy of the Philippines. 2013. p. 23. ISBN 978-971-0576-41-8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 July 2014. Retrieved 11 February 2015. 
^ a b c Understanding the ASEAN Economic Community; A Primer (PDF) (1st ed.). Department of Trade and Industry (Philippines). 28 February 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ "Untitled Page". Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ "ASEAN Economic Community 2015: Transforming ASEAN Economies" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2014. 
^ a b Manila Bulletin. "S&P cites moves by Philippine banks". Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ Financial Integration and Common Currency Area in ASEAN
^ a b c Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralzation
^ The Amended Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM) Comes Into Effect Today, 17 July 2014 Media Releases
^ "Food Security". World Health Organisation. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ Bello, Amelia L. "Ensuring Food Security--A Case for ASEAN Integration". Asian Journal of Agriculture and Development. Southeast Asian Regional Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture (SEARCA). 2 (1,2). ISSN 1656-4383. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ "Strengthening Food Security for ASEAN Citizens: ASEAN – U.S. Cooperation on Food Security initiative "MARKET" Project Reduces Market Volatility through Increased Regional Trade". Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ Desker, Barry; Caballero-Anthony, Mely; Teng, Paul (Oct 2013). Thought/Issues Paper on ASEAN Food Security: Towards a more Comprehensive Framework (PDF). Singapore: Nanyang Technological University. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ K., Reid (27 January 2015). "Southeast Asia is Not Ready for AEC". InvestAsian. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ "ASEAN people unaware of 2015 economic integration". ABS-CBNNews.com. Reuters. 10 June 2013. 
^ "PH may not be ready for ASEAN integration - expert". Rappler. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ a b "News Analysis: ASEAN economic integration in 2015 draws conflicting views in Phl". The Philippine Star. 24 April 2014. 
^ McNutt, Thomas H (2014). ASEAN Business Outlook Survey 2015 (PDF). Singapore: US Chamber of Commerce. p. 56. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ Severino, Rodolfo C (31 January 2014). "Let's be honest about what ASEAN can and cannot do". East Asia Forum. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ a b c Xianbai, Ji (24 September 2014). "Why the ASEAN Economic Community Will Struggle". The Diplomat. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ "New ASEAN community offers export opportunities". Vietnam News. 19 April 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ Maierbrugger, Arno (1 October 2014). "Cambodia May Miss Date For ASEAN Economic Community". Investvine. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ ASEAN Political-Security Community Blueprint (PDF). Jakarta: Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Jun 2009. p. 20. ISBN 978-602-8411-06-6. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ a b c d "Annex 10- ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting: Concept Paper on Establishing ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration". admm.asean.org.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ Sneha Raghavan and Guy Ben-Ari (7 September 2011) Current Issues- No. 25: ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration -www.csis.org/ISP/DIIG
^ "2011 JOINT DECLARATION OF THE ASEAN DEFENCE MINISTERS ON STRENGTHENING DEFENCE COOPERATION OF ASEAN IN THE GLOBAL COMMUNITY TO FACE NEW CHALLENGES". www.asean.org. Archived from the original on 9 January 2015. 
^ a b c d e "Sneha Raghavan and Guy Ben-Ari (2011, September 7) Current Issues- No. 25: ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration". www.csis.org/ISP/DIIG.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Last Meeting: 2nd ADMM-Plus, Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam, 29 August 2013". ADMM.ASEAN.org.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "3rd ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration Workshop". www2.mindef.gov.bn.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "ASEAN Defence Ministers' Meeting: Concept Paper on Establishing ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration". admm.asean.org.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Sneha Raghavan and Guy Ben-Ari (2011, September 7) Current Issues- No. 25: ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration". www.csis.org/ISP/DIIG/.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Fear Us: Military Expenditures in Southeast Asia (11 Sep 2014)". www.IndoPacificReview.com.  Missing or empty |url= (help)[dead link]
^ J. Dowdy, D. Chinn, M. Mancini, J. Ng (Feb 2014). "Southeast Asia: The next growth opportunity in defence McKinsey - Innovation Campus Aerospace and Defence Practice".  Missing or empty |url= (help)CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "Sneha Raghavan and Guy Ben-Ari (2010, September 7) Current Issues- No. 25: ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration". www.csis.org/ISP/DIIG.  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Defense News Top 100 for 2013". special.DefenseNews.com.  Missing or empty |url= (help)[dead link]
^ ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint (PDF). Jakarta: Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Jun 2009. p. 32. ISBN 978-602-8411-07-3. Retrieved 7 February 2015. 
^ a b Edmund Sim. "AEC Blog: Grading the ASEAN Economic Community Scorecard". Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ a b "A critical look at the ASEAN Economic Community Scorecard". East Asia Forum. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ ASEAN Economic Community Scorecard: Charting Progress Towards Regional Economic Integration (PDF). Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat. Mar 2010. ISBN 978-602-8411-35-6. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ ASEAN Economic Community Scorecard (PDF). Jakarka: ASEAN Secretariat. Mar 2012. ISBN 978-602-8411-96-7. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ a b Swire, Mary (10 September 2014). "Singapore Plugs ASEAN Trade Integration". Tax-News. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ "What the AEC 2015 means for Singaporean businesses". Singapore Business Review. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ "Southeast Asia: ASEAN 2015". Migration News. 20 (4). Oct 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ "IMF warns Singapore over migrant worker cuts". The Nation. 20 October 2014. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ a b "Overview". Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2015. 
^ ASEAN Communication Master Plan – ASEAN: A Community of Opportunities (PDF). Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat; Public Outreach and Civil Society Division. Oct 2014. ISBN 978-602-0980-02-7. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ "Opening Remarks by Secretary-General of ASEAN, H.E. Le Luong Minh at the Launching of the ASEAN Communication Master Plan" (PDF). ASEAN. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. 
^ a b "ASEAN Convention on Counter-Terrorism Completes Ratification Process". ASEAN. ASEAN News. 22 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2015. 
^ "ASEAN COMMUNITY VISION 2025" (PDF). 
^ Jambeck, Jenna R. (13 February 2015). "Plastic Waste Inputs from Land into the Ocean". Science. 347 (6223): 768–771. doi:10.1126/science.1260352. PMID 25678662. Cited in "Thailand big contributor to plastic trash on ocean floors", The Nation, Bangkok, 14 February 2015 [1] 
^ "Mammal species, threatened". World Bank. UN Environmental Forum; World Conservation Monitoring Centre; International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2015. 
^ "Fish species, threatened". The World Bank. Retrieved 24 June 2015. 
^ "Plant species (higher), threatened". The World Bank. Retrieved 24 June 2015. 
^ "Country Rankings". Global Forest Loss. Retrieved 2 March 2015. 
^ ASEAN Secretariat. ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution. Extracted 12 October 2006 Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Travel Advise for Swiss Abroad in Singapore (German)". Retrieved 19 September 2015. 
^ "Travel advise for Swiss abroad in Malaysia". Retrieved 19 September 2015. 
^ "Travel advise for Swiss abroad in Indonesia". Retrieved 19 September 2015. 
^ "Years after 2,500 tonnes of Canadian trash landed in Manila, Philippines demanding we take it back". National Post,. Retrieved 4 March 2016. 
^ Booth, Anne. Education and Economic Development in Southeast Asia: Myths and Realities. 290. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), n.d. Web. 23 October 2012.
^ Bindu N. Lohani (11 May 2013). "How to build the knowledge economy in the ASEAN". University World News. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ Savage, Victor. "Problems of Tertiary Education and Regional Academic Journals: A View from Southeast Asia". 219. Asia Pacific Viewpoint, August 2011. Web. 23 October 2012.
^ Green, David. "Bridging the ASEAN Development Divide: Challenges and Prospects - A Regional Overview". ASEAN Economic Bulletin. 24. 1. (2007).
^ a b "ASEANWEB - Education." ASEANWEB - Education. N.p., 2009. Web. 23 October 2012.
^ ASEAN. "ASEAN Education Ministers Meeting". Association of Southeast Asian Nations. ASEAN Secretariat. 2012. <http://www.asean.org/communities/asean-socio-cultural-community/category/asean-education-ministers-meeting-ased>.
^ "ASEAN University Network/Board Member". Aun-sec.org. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ "ASEAN University Network/Agreement". Aun-sec.org. Archived from the original on 1 February 2009. Retrieved 21 December 2008. 
^ "About the ASEAN Scholarships". Ministry of Education Singapore. Retrieved 11 May 2015. 
^ Keong, Lee Chu. "Knowledge Management: Some Definitions." http://ascklee.org/CV/iKMS-Article-2010.pdf. N.p., n.d. Web. 29 November 2012.
^ United Nations. "United Nations Statistics Division - Demographic and Social Statistics." United Nations Statistics Division - Demographic and Social Statistics. N.p., 2012. Web. 28 November 2012. <http://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/products/socind/>.
^ "ASEAN Heritage Parks". Biodiversity Information Sharing Service. ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (ACB). Retrieved 25 June 2015. 
^ "Challenges to ASEAN's bid to host W. Cup". Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011. 
^ "Asean to proceed with bid for 2030 Fifa World Cup". Straits Times. Singapore. 9 May 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. 
^ Limited, Bangkok Post Public Company. "Growth 'vital for Asean success'". bangkokpost.com. 
^ Herald, The Korea (4 September 2017). "'ASEAN, Korea pave way for prosperous, secure future'". 
^ "Costa Rica seeks to establish closer relations with ASEAN - ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY". ASEAN | ONE VISION ONE IDENTITY ONE COMMUNITY. 5 September 2017. 
^ "CO08077 | Is the ASEAN Charter Necessary? | RSIS". www.rsis.edu.sg. 
^ Li, Mingjiang; Kemburi, Kalyan M. (2014). China's Power and Asian Security. Routledge. ISBN 9781317668176. 
^ "The Asean Miracle – Kishore Mahbubani". mahbubani.net. 
^ "Commentary: 50 years on, is ASEAN a community?". Channel NewsAsia. 
^ Sumsky, Victor; Hong, Mark; Lugg, Amy (2012). ASEAN-Russia: Foundations and Future Prospects. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 9789814379571. 
^ "ADB president calls for building Asian economic integration". Peace Journalism. 3 January 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2007. 
^ "Japan Cancels Burma Grant". Associated Press. 17 October 2007. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 18 October 2007. 
^ Silp, Sai (15 February 2007). "Burma an Issue in Asean-EU Trade Talks". The Irawaddy News Magazine Online Edition. Retrieved 4 March 2007. [dead link]
^ "Malaysian foreign minister says ASEAN is no 'talk shop'". Asian Political News. 5 December 2005. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 6 March 2007. 
^ "BBC Country/International Organisation Profile: Association of Southeast Asian Nations". BBC News. 11 January 2007. Archived from the original on 15 March 2007. Retrieved 6 March 2007. 
^ McLean, John. "Will ASEAN's New Charter Bring Greater Cooperation?". Development Asia. Asian Development Bank. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 25 June 2015. 
^ Huxley, Tim (2010). "ASEAN's Mixed Bag". The Diplomat. Retrieved 11 February 2015. 
^ "About 100 militants stage protest vs Asean Summit in Cebu". GMANews.tv. 13 January 2007. Retrieved 6 March 2007. 
^ "ASEAN protests in Cebu will also underscore massive opposition to Charter Change". Kilusang Mayo Uno. 7 December 2006. Archived from the original on 9 October 2007. 
^ Helen Flores; Alexis Romero (27 February 2016). "Binay to pursue territorial claim to Sabah if elected". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016. 
^ "Marcos order: Destabilize, take Sabah". Philippine Daily Inquirer. 2 April 2000. Retrieved 19 June 2015. 
^ Yiswaree Palansamy (15 March 2016). "Citing militant threats on Sabah, BN MP tells Putrajaya to cut diplomatic ties to Manila". The Malay Mail. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016. 
^ Sumisha Naidu (2 March 2016). "Malaysia asks Philippines not to threaten ties over Sabah claim". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016. 
^ Maierbrugger, Arno. "Corruption still widespread in Southeast Asia | Investvine". Investvine. Retrieved 3 March 2016. 
^ "Philippines' Duterte Says Turkey, Mongolia Could Join ASEAN". Retrieved May 11, 2017. 
^ "Morning star rising". 10 May 2017. 
^ "West Papua: More than 500 arrested marching for independence". 21 December 2016. 
^ Diplomat, Grant Wyeth, The. "Solomon Islands Seeks Balance in Relations With Indonesia and West Papua". 
^ "Pacific nations back West Papuan self-determination". 6 May 2017. 
^ "Pacific nations condemn Indonesia's human rights violations at ACP meeting". pasifik.news. May 5, 2017. Archived from the original on 2017-05-05. 
^ http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2017/11/18/1760042/philippines-wont-join-un-condemnation-attacks-rohingya


Further reading[edit]

Taiwan ASEAN Studies Center; ASEAN Outlook Magazine; May 2013. Myanmar's Overlooked Industry Opportunities and Investment Climate, by David DuByne

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Association of Southeast Asian Nations.


Organisations

ASEAN Secretariat, retrieved 13 March 2007.
ASEAN Regional Forum, retrieved 13 March 2007.
BBC Country Profile/Asean, retrieved 13 March 2007.

ASEAN Summits

24th ASEAN Summit
23rd ASEAN Summit
14th ASEAN Summit
13th ASEAN Summit official site. Retrieved 16 September 2007.
12th ASEAN Summit, retrieved 13 March 2007.
11th ASEAN Summit (official site)[permanent dead link] 12–14 December 2005 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Retrieved 13 March 2007.

ASEAN organisations

ASEAN's official directory of ASEAN organisations
ASEAN Architect
ASEAN Law Association
ASEAN Ports Association
US-ASEAN Business Council
ASEAN-China Free Trade Area

ASEAN related websites

ASEAN Economic Community
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN); U.S. State Department





Articles related to ASEAN











v
t
e


Association of Southeast Asian Nations



Politics







Charter
Customs union
Date of Establishment
Organisations
Secretariat
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
Visa policies





Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag
Hymn








Membership







Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam





Observer and Candidate for Member



Papua New Guinea
East Timor








Events




Summits



ASEAN Summit
East Asia Summit





Other



ASEAN Plus Three
Asian Monetary Unit
ASEAN Regional Forum
Asia–Europe Meeting
Chiang Mai Initiative
Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership








Competitions



SEA Games
ASEAN University Games
ASEAN School Games
ASEAN Para Games
ASEAN Football Championship
ASEAN Armies Rifle Meet





Related



ASEAN Football Federation
ASEAN Free Trade Area
ASEAN–China Free Trade Area
ASEAN–India Free Trade Area
Common Time
Economy












v
t
e


Current leaders of ASEAN






 Bolkiah
 Hun
 Jokowi
 Sisoulith
 Najib
 Htin
 Duterte
 Lee
 Prayut
 Phúc












v
t
e


Current Foreign Ministers of ASEAN






 Bolkiah / Lim
 Prak
 Marsudi
 Kommasith
 Anifah
 Suu Kyi
 Cayetano
 Balakrishnan
 Pramudwinai
 Minh












v
t
e


Militaries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations



Royal Brunei Armed Forces



Royal Brunei Land Forces
Royal Brunei Air Force
Royal Brunei Navy










Royal Cambodian Armed Forces



Royal Cambodian Army
Royal Cambodian Air Force
Royal Cambodian Navy
Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia





Indonesian National Armed Forces



Indonesian Army
Indonesian Air Force
Indonesian Navy (Indonesian Marine Corps)





Lao People's Armed Forces



Lao People's Army
Lao People's Liberation Army Air Force
Lao People's Navy





Malaysian Armed Forces



Malaysian Army
Royal Malaysian Air Force
Royal Malaysian Navy





Myanmar Armed Forces



Myanmar Armed Forces (Tatmadaw)
Myanmar Air Force
Myanmar Navy
Myanmar Police Force





Armed Forces of the Philippines



Philippine Army
Philippine Air Force
Philippine Navy
Philippine Coast Guard





Singapore Armed Forces



Singapore Army
Republic of Singapore Air Force
Republic of Singapore Navy





Royal Thai Armed Forces



Royal Thai Army
Royal Thai Air Force
Royal Thai Navy





Vietnam People's Armed Forces



Vietnam People's Ground Force
Vietnam People's Air Force
Vietnam People's Navy
Vietnam Border Defence Force
Vietnam Coast Guard








ASEAN member states
 Brunei
 Cambodia
 Indonesia
 Laos
 Malaysia
 Myanmar
 Philippines
 Singapore
 Thailand
 Vietnam












v
t
e


Asia articles



History




Chronology



Indian Ocean trade
Silk Road
Imperialism
Decolonisation





By topic



Military

conflicts


Sovereignty








Geography











Cities

metropolitan areas
tallest buildings


Countries and territories

by population


Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers





Regions



Asia-Pacific
Central Asia
East Asia
Eurasia
Inner Asia
North Asia
Northeast Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Western Asia











Politics











Heads of government
Heads of state
Elections

political parties


Human rights
Law
Military





Intergovernmental



Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Bay of Bengal Initiative (BIMSTEC)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (CCASG / GCC)
Mekong–Ganga Cooperation (MGC)
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)











Economy











Countries by GDP (PPP)
Countries by HDI
Currencies
Stock exchanges
Technology

renewable energy


Transport

airports
high-speed rail







Markets



Bond markets
Property markets











Society







Demographics
Education
Etiquette
Health
Languages
People

ethnic groups







Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Literature
Music
Philosophy
Religion
Sport








Future



Asian Century

Chinese Century
Indian Century
Pacific Century











Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal
Maps












v
t
e


Regional organizations



Bodies



African Union
Arab League
Asia Cooperation Dialogue
Association of Caribbean States
ASEAN
BBIN
BIMSTEC
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Commonwealth of Independent States
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Council of Europe
East African Community
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Cooperation Organization
Eurasian Economic Union
European Union
GUAM
Gulf Cooperation Council
Latin American Parliament
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Mercosur
NATO
Nordic Council
Organization of American States
Pacific Islands Forum
Polynesian Leaders Group
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
SCO
SAARC
TAKM
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat
Turkic Council
Union of South American Nations
NORDEFCO
West Nordic Council





Topics



Regional integration
Regional organizations by population
Regionalism (international relations)












v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)



Summits



Beijing 2012
Dushanbe 2014
Astana 2017





Member states



China
India
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Pakistan
Russia
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan





Observer states



Afghanistan
Belarus
Iran
Mongolia





Dialogue partners



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Cambodia
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Turkey





Guests



ASEAN
CIS
Turkmenistan





See also



Eurasian Land Bridge
Three Evils
Working languages

Chinese
Russian














v
t
e


South–South cooperation and Third Worldism



Global South




Development



Landlocked developing countries
Least Developed Countries
Heavily indebted poor countries





Markets



Emerging markets
Newly industrialized country
Transition economy





Worlds Theory



First World
Second World
Third World
Fourth World








Geopolitics







Decolonization
Cold War
Neocolonialism
Multipolarity
World Conference against Racism

Durban I
Durban II
Durban III


Globalization





BRICS



Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
BASIC (BRICS less Russia)
BRIC (BRICS less South Africa)
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)








Finance



Debt
Asian Clearing Union
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
Asian Development Bank
Arab Monetary Fund
BancoSur
Caribbean Development Bank
Common Fund for Commodities






Trade and
development




Developmental state
Flying geese paradigm
Infrastructure-based development
Sustainable development
Global System of Trade Preferences
Protocol on Trade Negotiations
New International Economic Order
New World Information and Communication Order
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Industrial Development Organization





Public health



Generic drugs

biosimilar


Pharmaceutical patents

criticism


Test data exclusivity
Doha Declaration
World Health Organization






Organizations
and groups




G-77
G-15
D-8
G20 developing nations (G-20)
G-24
G33 developing countries (G-33)
G-11
G-90
Non-Aligned Movement
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group
African Union
Afro–Asian Conference
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Colombo Plan
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
International Solar Alliance
Like Minded Group
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Next Eleven
North–South Summit
Polynesian Leaders Group
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
Small Island Developing States
South Centre
Third World Network






North–South
divide




Brandt Report
Global financial system

International Monetary Fund
World Bank
World Trade Organization


Fair trade
Financial regulation
Global digital divide












v
t
e


Power in international relations







Types



Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Power politics
Realpolitik
Smart
Soft





Status



Emerging
Small
Middle
Regional
Great
Super
Hyper





Geopolitics



American
Asian
British
Chinese
Indian
Pacific





History



List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)





Theory



Balance of power

European


Center of power
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement





Studies



Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power













Organizations and groups by region or regions affected







Africa



African Union
Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–Asia



Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)





Americas



Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (Unasur)





Asia



Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)





Europe



Council of Europe (CE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegrád Group





Eurasia



Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Turkic Council





North America–Europe



North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Arctic Council





Africa–Asia–Europe



Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–South America



South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone





Oceania-Pacific



Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)





Non-regional



Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
Commonwealth of Nations
Francophonie
Colombia–Indonesia–Vietnam–Egypt–Turkey–South Africa (CIVETS)
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico–Indonesia–Nigeria–Turkey (MINT)
Next Eleven (N-11)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Uniting for Consensus





Global



United Nations (UN)























v
t
e


History of Thailand (1932–73)







Office holders
Individuals and institutions
Key events




The Monarchy

Prajadhipok (Rama VII)
Ananda Mahidol (Rama VIII)
Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX)

Regents of Thailand

Rama VII

The Prince of Nakhon Sawan
The Prince Narisara Nuwattiwong


Rama VIII

The Prince Anuvatana
Prince Aditya Dibabha
Chao Phraya Yomarath (Pan Sukhum)
Chao Phraya Bijayendra Yodhin (General Um Indrayodhin)
Luang Praditmanutham (Dr. Pridi Banomyong)


Rama IX

Phra Suthamawinichay
Phraya Nolarajasuwach (Thongdi Nolarajasuwach)
Sa-nguan Chuthatemi
The Prince of Chainat
Phraya Manovaratsevi (Plod Vichear na Songkhla)
The Prince Adireksorn Udomsakdi
The Prince Bidyalabh Bridhyakon
Luang Adulyadejchrat (Bhat Phuengphrakhun)
Queen Sirikit
Princess Srisangwan



Prime Ministers of Thailand

Phraya Manopakorn Nititada (Kon Hutasingha)
General Phraya Phahonphonphayuhasena (Phot Phahonyothin)
Field Marshal Plaek Phibunsongkhram
Major Khuang Aphaiwong
Thawi Bunyaket
Seni Pramoj
Pridi Banomyong
Rear Admiral Thawan Thamrongnawasawat
Pote Sarasin
Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn
Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat





Military

Field Marshal Phin Choonhavan
General Phao Sriyanond
Lieutenant-General Kat Katsongkhram
Marshal of the Air Force Fuen Ronnaphagrad Ritthakhanee

Others

Direk Jayanama
Luang Wichitwathakan

Institutions

Khana Ratsadon
Free Thai Movement
Coup Group
Communist Party of Thailand
Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
Association of Southeast Asian Nations





Key events

Rattanakosin Kingdom
Siamese revolution of 1932
Constitutions of Thailand
Siamese coup d'état of 1933
Boworadet Rebellion
Rebellion of the Sergeants
Songsuradet Rebellion
Franco-Thai War
Japanese invasion of Thailand
World War II
Thai cultural restoration
Siamese coup d'état of 1947
Korean War
Army General Staff Plot
Palace Rebellion
Manhattan Rebellion
Silent Coup (Thailand)
1957 Thai coup d'état
1958 Thai coup d'état
Vietnam War
Communist insurgency in Thailand
1971 Thai coup d'état
14 October 1973 Uprising
History of Thailand since 1973













Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 145098799
LCCN: n80020520
ISNI: 0000 0001 2177 0221
GND: 116362-0
SELIBR: 109403
SUDOC: 02735041X
BNF: cb119894254 (data)
NLA: 35177729
NDL: 00573265
NKC: kn20020321266
BNE: XX112913











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Association_of_Southeast_Asian_Nations&oldid=818115452"					Categories: Association of Southeast Asian NationsSupranational unionsUnited Nations General Assembly observersOrganizations established in 1967Ramon Magsaysay Award winnersOrganizations based in JakartaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterPages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Articles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2015Pages using web citations with no URLArticles with dead external links from February 2015EngvarB from March 2016Use dmy dates from March 2016Articles needing additional references from March 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from December 2014All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2014Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2014Articles that may contain original research from December 2014All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Burmese-language textArticles containing Tagalog-language textArticles containing Indonesian-language textArticles containing Khmer-language textArticles containing Lao-language textArticles containing Malay-language textArticles containing Chinese-language textArticles containing Tamil-language textArticles containing Thai-language textArticles containing Vietnamese-language textPages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2016All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingNPOV disputes from April 2017All NPOV disputesAll Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with dead external links from December 2017Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers