"Assunta" redirects here. For the hospital in Malaysia, see Assunta Hospital.
"Santa Maria Assunta" redirects here. For churches with this dedication, see Santa Maria Assunta (churches).
"Saint Mary of the Assumption" redirects here. For cathedrals with this dedication, see Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption.
This article is about the theological concept. For works of art with this title, see Assumption of the Virgin Mary in Art.


Assumption of Mary



De hemelvaart van Maria, Rubens, circa A.D. 1626



Also called
The Assumption
Feast of Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ[1]
Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin Mary[2]


Observed by
Catholic Church (see calendar),
Anglican Communion (see calendars),
Eastern Orthodox Church (see calendar),
Oriental Orthodox Churches


Type
Christian


Significance
the bodily taking up of the Virgin Mary into Heaven


Observances
Attending mass or service


Date
August 15


Frequency
annual


The Assumption of Mary into Heaven, often shortened to the Assumption and also known as the Feast of Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ and the Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin Mary (the Dormition),[3][4] according to the beliefs of the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and parts of Anglicanism, was the bodily taking up of the Virgin Mary into Heaven at the end of her earthly life.
The Catholic Church teaches as dogma that the Virgin Mary "having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory".[5] This doctrine was dogmatically defined by Pope Pius XII on 1 November 1950, in the apostolic constitution Munificentissimus Deus by exercising papal infallibility.[6] While the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church believe in the Dormition of the Theotokos, which is the same as the Assumption,[7] whether Mary had a physical death has not been dogmatically defined.
In Munificentissimus Deus (item 39) Pope Pius XII pointed to the Book of Genesis (3:15) as scriptural support for the dogma in terms of Mary's victory over sin and death as also reflected in 1 Corinthians 15:54: "then shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory".[8][9][10]
In the churches that observe it, the Assumption is a major feast day, commonly celebrated on 15 August. In many countries, the feast is also marked as a Holy Day of Obligation in the Roman Catholic Church and as a festival (under various names) in the Anglican Communion.



Contents


1 History of the belief
2 Catholic teaching

2.1 Dogmatic definition
2.2 Theological issues
2.3 Scriptural basis


3 Assumption vs. Dormition
4 Protestant views

4.1 Anglican views
4.2 Other Protestant views


5 Feasts

5.1 Public holidays


6 See also
7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



History of the belief[edit]
The Assumption (Latin: assumptio, "a taking") was defined as dogma by the Catholic Church in 1950, when Pope Pius XII defined it ex cathedra in his Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus.[11] The Catholic Church itself interprets chapter 12 of the Book of Revelation as referring to it.[12] The earliest known narrative is the so-called Liber Requiei Mariae (The Book of Mary's Repose), which survives intact only in an Ethiopic translation.[13][14][15] Probably composed by the 4th century, this Christian apocryphal narrative may be as early as the 3rd century. Also quite early are the very different traditions of the "Six Books" Dormition narratives.[16] The earliest versions of this apocryphon are preserved in several Syriac manuscripts of the 5th and 6th centuries, although the text itself probably belongs to the 4th century.[17][18][19]




Assumption statue, 1808 by Mariano Gerada, Ghaxaq, Malta


Later apocrypha based on these earlier texts include the De Obitu S. Dominae,[20] attributed to St. John, a work probably from around the turn of the 6th century that is a summary of the "Six Books" narrative. The story also appears in De Transitu Virginis,[21] a late 5th-century work ascribed to St. Melito of Sardis that presents a theologically redacted summary of the traditions in the Liber Requiei Mariae. The Transitus Mariae tells the story of the apostles being transported by white clouds to the deathbed of Mary, each from the town where he was preaching at the hour. The Decretum Gelasianum in the 490s declared some transitus Mariae literature apocryphal.
An Armenian letter attributed to Dionysus the Areopagite also mentioned the supposed event, although this was written sometime after the 6th century. John of Damascus, from this period, is the first church authority to advocate the doctrine under his own name. His contemporaries, Gregory of Tours and Modestus of Jerusalem, helped promote the concept to the wider church.
In some versions of the story, the event is said to have taken place in Ephesus, in the House of the Virgin Mary. This is a much more recent and localized tradition. The earliest traditions say that Mary's life ended in Jerusalem (see "Mary's Tomb"). By the 7th century, a variation emerged, according to which one of the apostles, often identified as St Thomas, was not present at the death of Mary but his late arrival precipitates a reopening of Mary's tomb, which is found to be empty except for her grave clothes. In a later tradition, Mary drops her girdle down to the apostle from heaven as testament to the event.[22] This incident is depicted in many later paintings of the Assumption.
Teaching of the Assumption of Mary became widespread across the Christian world, having been celebrated as early as the 5th century and having been established in the East by Emperor Maurice around AD 600.[23] St. John Damascene records the following:

"St. Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, at the Council of Chalcedon (451), made known to the Emperor Marcian and Pulcheria, who wished to possess the body of the Mother of God, that Mary died in the presence of all the Apostles, but that her tomb, when opened upon the request of St. Thomas, was found empty; wherefrom the Apostles concluded that the body was taken up to heaven."[24]

The Assumption of Mary was celebrated in the West under Pope Sergius I in the 8th century and Pope Leo IV confirmed the feast as official.[23] Theological debate about the Assumption continued, following the Reformation. But the people celebrated the Assumption as part of the cult of Mary that flourished from the Middle Ages. In 1950 Pope Pius XII defined it as dogma for the Catholic Church.[25] Catholic theologian Ludwig Ott stated, "The idea of the bodily assumption of Mary is first expressed in certain transitus-narratives of the fifth and sixth centuries.... The first Church author to speak of the bodily assumption of Mary, in association with an apocryphal transitus B.M.V., is St. Gregory of Tours."[26] The Catholic writer Eamon Duffy states that "there is, clearly, no historical evidence whatever for it."[27] However, the Catholic Church has never asserted nor denied that its teaching is based on the apocryphal accounts. The Church documents are silent on this matter and instead rely upon other sources and arguments as the basis for the doctrine.
Psychologist Carl Jung, who was deeply interested in archetypes and comparative religion, celebrated that the Catholic Church had officially elevated the Virgin Mary (whom he noted as symbolizing the feminine principle) to standing with three masculine figures in the panoply of the church.[citation needed]
Catholic teaching[edit]





Part of a series on the


Mariology
of the Catholic Church



Virgo by Josef Moroder-Lusenberg





Overview


Prayers
Antiphons
Hymns to Mary
Devotional practices








Prayers


Angelus
Fátima Prayers
Flos Carmeli
Hail Mary
Hail Mary of Gold
Immaculata prayer
Magnificat
Mary, Mother of Grace
Mary Our Queen
Memorare
Sub tuum praesidium








Antiphons


Alma Redemptoris Mater
Ave Maris Stella
Ave Regina Caelorum
Salve Regina








Hymns to Mary


Hail Queen of Heaven, the Ocean Star
Immaculate Mary
Lo, How a Rose E'er Blooming
O Sanctissima
Regina Coeli
Stabat Mater








Devotional practices


Acts of Reparation
Consecration to Mary
First Saturdays
Rosary
Seven Joys of the Virgin
Seven Sorrows of Mary
Three Hail Marys
Litany of the Blessed Virgin Mary






 Catholicism portal





v
t
e





Dogmatic definition[edit]
On 1 November 1950, in the Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus Pope Pius XII declared the Assumption of Mary as a dogma:

By the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by our own authority, we pronounce, declare, and define it to be a divinely revealed dogma: that the Immaculate Mother of God, the ever Virgin Mary, having completed the course of her earthly life, was assumed body and soul into heavenly glory.[28]

Pope Pius XII deliberately left open the question of whether Mary died before her Assumption.[29][30]
Before the dogmatic definition, in Deiparae Virginis Mariae Pope Pius XII sought the opinion of Catholic Bishops. A large number of them pointed to the Book of Genesis (3:15) as scriptural support for the dogma.[8] In Munificentissimus Deus (item 39) Pius XII referred to the "struggle against the infernal foe" as in Genesis 3:15 and to "complete victory over the sin and death" as in the Letters of Paul as a scriptural basis for the dogmatic definition, Mary being assumed to heaven as in 1 Corinthians 15:54: "then shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory".[8][9][10]
Theological issues[edit]




Our Lady of Assumption, San Luis Potosi, Mexico.


In Pius XII's dogmatic statement, the phrase "having completed the course of her earthly life," leaves open the question of whether the Virgin Mary died before her assumption or not. Mary's assumption is said to have been a divine gift to her as the 'Mother of God'. Ludwig Ott's view is that, as Mary completed her life as a shining example to the human race, the perspective of the gift of assumption is offered to the whole human race.[31]
Ludwig Ott writes in his book, Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma, that "the fact of her death is almost generally accepted by the Fathers and Theologians, and is expressly affirmed in the Liturgy of the Church", to which he adds a number of helpful citations. He concludes: "for Mary, death, in consequence of her freedom from original sin and from personal sin, was not a consequence of punishment of sin.[32] However, it seems fitting that Mary's body, which was by nature mortal, should be, in conformity with that of her Divine Son, subject to the general law of death".[32]
The point of her bodily death has not been infallibly defined by any pope. Many Catholics believe that she did not die at all, but was assumed directly into Heaven. The dogmatic definition within the Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus which, according to Roman Catholic dogma, infallibly proclaims the doctrine of the Assumption leaves open the question of whether, in connection with her departure, Mary underwent bodily death. It does not dogmatically define the point one way or the other, as shown by the words "having completed the course of her earthly life".[25]
Scriptural basis[edit]
In Munificentissimus Deus, near the end of the review of the doctrine's history, Pope Pius XII stated : "All these proofs and considerations of the holy Fathers and the theologians are based upon the Sacred Writings as their ultimate foundation." Precedent to this, he cited many passages that have been offered in support of this teaching.
The pope cited 1st Corinthians 15. In this passage Paul alludes to Genesis 3:15 (in addition to the primary reference of Psalms 8:6), where it is prophesied that the seed of the woman will crush Satan with his feet. Since, then, Jesus arose to Heaven to fulfill this prophecy, it follows that the woman would have a similar end, since she shared this enmity with Satan.
The pope also mentioned (in paragraph 26) Psalm 132, a psalm commemorating the return of the Ark of God to Jerusalem and lamenting its subsequent loss. The second half of the psalm says that the loss will be recompensed in the New Covenant, and so it is hopefully prayed, "Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the ark, which thou hast sanctified" (v. 8). Since the Church sees this New Covenant ark in Mary, it understands that she was taken into Heaven in the same manner as the Lord – that is, body and soul.
Finally, he mentioned in the next paragraph "that woman clothed with the sun [Revelation 12:1–2] whom John the Apostle contemplated on the Island of Patmos" was support for the creating this dogmatic doctrine for Catholics.
Assumption vs. Dormition[edit]




The Dormition: ivory plaque, late 10th-early 11th century (Musée de Cluny).


The Latin Catholic Feast of the Assumption is celebrated on 15 August, and the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholics celebrate the Dormition of the Theotokos (the falling asleep of the Mother of God) on the same date, preceded by a 14-day fast period. Eastern Christians believe that Mary died a natural death, that her soul was received by Christ upon death, and that her body was resurrected on the third day after her death and that she was taken up into heaven bodily in anticipation of the general resurrection. Her tomb was found empty on the third day.
"... Orthodox tradition is clear and unwavering in regard to the central point [of the Dormition]: the Holy Virgin underwent, as did her Son, a physical death, but her body – like His – was afterwards raised from the dead and she was taken up into heaven, in her body as well as in her soul. She has passed beyond death and judgement, and lives wholly in the Age to Come. The Resurrection of the Body ... has in her case been anticipated and is already an accomplished fact. That does not mean, however, that she is dissociated from the rest of humanity and placed in a wholly different category: for we all hope to share one day in that same glory of the Resurrection of the Body which she enjoys even now."[33]
Many Catholics also believe that Mary first died before being assumed, but they believe that she was miraculously resurrected before being assumed. Others believe she was assumed bodily into Heaven without first dying.[34][35] As mentioned earlier, this aspect of the Assumption is not authoritatively described in Catholic theology, and either understanding may be legitimately held by Catholics, with Eastern Catholics observing the Feast as the Dormition.
Many theologians note by way of comparison that in the Catholic Church, the Assumption is dogmatically defined, while in the Eastern Orthodox tradition, the Dormition is less dogmatically than liturgically and mystically defined. Such differences spring from a larger pattern in the two traditions, wherein Catholic teachings are often dogmatically and authoritatively defined – in part because of the more centralized structure of the Catholic Church – while in Eastern Orthodoxy, many doctrines are less authoritative.[36]
Protestant views[edit]
Views differ greatly within protestantism with churches with a theology closer to Catholicism having a teaching closer while those that have departed to a greater extent having a very different opinion.
Anglican views[edit]
Within Anglican doctrine, the Assumption of Mary is regarded as adiaphora ("a thing indifferent") rather than dogma as it is not directly mentioned in the canon of Sacred Scripture or the first five Ecumenical Councils. Even so, 15 August is observed by some within the Anglican Communion as a holy day in honour of Mary. The official name of the Festival varies in the different provinces of the Anglican Communion. In the Church of England, the day is a festival and is called the Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin Mary, as with the Eastern Orthodox Church.[3][4] The Book of Common Prayer in the versions of the Scottish Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada mark the date as a commemoration of "The Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin Mary",[37] and in the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, it is observed as the holy day of "Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ".[38]
In some churches of the Anglican Communion and the Continuing Anglican movement, many Anglicans of Anglo-Catholics churchmanship observe the feast day as the Assumption.
The Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission agreed statement on the Virgin Mary assigns a place for both the Dormition and the Assumption in Anglican devotion.[39]
Other Protestant views[edit]
The Protestant Reformer Heinrich Bullinger believed in the assumption of Mary. His 1539 polemical treatise against idolatry[40] expressed his belief that Mary's sacrosanctum corpus ("sacrosanct body") had been assumed into heaven by angels:

Hac causa credimus ut Deiparae virginis Mariae purissimum thalamum et spiritus sancti templum, hoc est, sacrosanctum corpus ejus deportatum esse ab angelis in coelum.[41]
For this reason, we believe that the Virgin Mary, Begetter of God, the most pure bed and temple of the Holy Spirit, that is, her most holy body, was carried to heaven by angels.[42]

Most modern Protestants neither teach nor believe in the Assumption of Mary, as they see no biblical basis or extra-biblical basis for it. Although many churches within Lutheranism do not teach the Assumption of Mary, 15 August remains a Lesser Feast in celebration of "Mary, Mother of Our Lord", according to the Calendar of Saints.[43][44]
Feasts[edit]




The feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary at Novara di Sicilia in August






Possibly the most famous rendition of the subject in Western art, Titian's Assunta (1516–18).


The Assumption is important to many Catholic and Orthodox Christians as the Virgin Mary's heavenly birthday (the day that Mary was received into Heaven). Belief about her acceptance into the glory of Heaven is seen by some Christians as the symbol of the promise made by Jesus to all enduring Christians that they too will be received into paradise. The Assumption of Mary is symbolised in the Fleur-de-lys Madonna.
The present Italian name of the holiday, "Ferragosto", may derive from the Latin name, Feriae Augusti ("Holidays of the Emperor Augustus"),[45] since the month of August took its name from the emperor. The Solemnity of the Assumption on 15 August was celebrated in the eastern Church from the 6th Century. The Catholic Church adopted this date as a Holy Day of Obligation to commemorate the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a reference to the belief in a real, physical elevation of her sinless soul and incorrupt body into Heaven.
Public holidays[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Assumption Day on 15 August is a nationwide public holiday in Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chile, Republic of Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, East Timor, France, Gabon, Greece, Georgia (Eurasia), Republic of Guinea, Haiti, Italy, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Macedonia, Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro (Albanian Catholics), Paraguay, Poland (Polish Army Day), Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovenia, Spain, Syria, Tahiti, Togo, and Vanuatu;[46] and was also in Hungary until 1948. British India, was partitioned into India and Pakistan following which, Indian Independence Act (1947) was official on August 15, 1947. It is a day of obligation for all Catholics and it provides an opportunity for all Catholic Indians to attend Mass on for the Feast of the Assumption which is Independence Day and pray for the Indian Nation demonstrating their patriotism[47][better source needed].
It is also a public holiday in parts of Germany (Bavaria and Saarland) and Switzerland (in 14 of the 26 cantons). In Guatemala, it is observed in Guatemala City and in the town of Santa Maria Nebaj, both of which claim her as their patron saint. Also, this day is combined with Mother's Day in Costa Rica and parts of Belgium.
Prominent Catholic and Orthodox countries in which Assumption Day is an important festival but is not recognized by the state as a public holiday include Brazil, Czech Republic, Ireland, Mexico, the Philippines and Russia.
In many places, religious parades and popular festivals are held to celebrate this day. In Canada, Assumption Day is the Fête Nationale of the Acadians, of whom she is the patron saint. Some businesses close on that day in heavily francophone parts of New Brunswick, Canada. The Virgin Assumed in Heaven is also patroness of the Maltese Islands and her feast, celebrated on 15 August, apart from being a public holiday in Malta is also celebrated with great solemnity in the local churches especially in the seven localities known as the Seba' Santa Marijiet. The hamlet of Praha, Texas holds a festival during which its population swells from approximately 25 to 5000 people.
In Anglicanism and Lutheranism, the feast is kept, but without official use of the word "Assumption". In the Armenian tradition, a cultural custom of blessing of the grapes is annually observed each 12 August in religious commemoration of the Feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos.[citation needed] In Eastern Orthodox churches following the Julian Calendar, the feast day of Assumption of Mary falls on 28 August.
See also[edit]

Ascension of Jesus
Cathedral of the Assumption
Dormition of the Mother of God
Immaculate Conception

References[edit]


^ Episcopal Advance. 99–101. Episcopal Diocese of Chicago. February 1970. On the fifteenth of August, the Feast of Saint Mary the Virgin, Mother of Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Episcopal Church prays: "O God, you have taken to yourself the blessed Virgin Mary, mother of your incarnate Son: Grant that we, who have been redeemed by his blood, may share with her the glory of your eternal kingdom; through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with you, in the unity of the Holy Spirit, one God, now and for ever. Amen. 
^ Brown, Alan (1 January 1986). Festivals in World Religions. Longman. ISBN 9780582361966. Retrieved 15 August 2015. This festival is observed by the Orthodox and Anglican Churches as the Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 
^ a b Brown, Alan (1 January 1986). Festivals in World Religions. Longman. ISBN 9780582361966. Retrieved 15 August 2015. This festival is observed by the Orthodox and Anglican Churches as the Falling Asleep of the Blessed Virgn Mary. 
^ a b England, Church of (1907). The Annotated Book of Common Prayer: An Historical, Ritual, and Theological Commentary on the Devotional System of the Church of England. Longmans, Green and Company. p. 159. Retrieved 15 August 2015. 
^ Pope Pius XII: "Munificentissimus Deus – Defining the Dogma of the Assumption" Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine., par. 44. Vatican, 1 November 1950
^ Encyclopedia of Catholicism by Frank K. Flinn, J. Gordon Melton 207 ISBN 0-8160-5455-X page 267
^ Munificentissimus Deus, 17 Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. In the liturgical books which deal with the feast either of the dormition or of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin there are expressions that agree in testifying that, when the Virgin Mother of God passed from this earthly exile to heaven, what happened to her sacred body was, by the decree of divine Providence, in keeping with the dignity of the Mother of the Word Incarnate, and with the other privileges she had been accorded.
^ a b c Introduction to Mary by Mark Miravalle (1993) Queenship Pub. Co. ISBN 978-1-882972-06-7 pages 75–78
^ a b Paul Haffner in Mariology: A Guide for Priests, Deacons, seminarians, and Consecrated Persons (2008) ISBN 9781579183554 edited by M. Miravalle, pages 328–350
^ a b Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus item 39at the Vatican web site Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Dustin Resch (8 April 2016). Barth's Interpretation of the Virgin Birth: A Sign of Mystery. Routledge. p. 171. ISBN 978-1-317-17611-4. 
^ Apostolic Constitution, Munificentissimus Deus, para 27, Vaticsn (1950)
^ Stephen J. Shoemaker, Ancient Traditions of the Virgin Mary's Dormition and Assumption
^ "Ancient Traditions of the Virgin Mary's Dormition and Assumption". Oup.com. 19 October 2006. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002, 2006). A complete translation of this earliest text appears at pp. 290–350
^ ""Six Books" Dormition narratives" (PDF). Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ William Wright, "The Departure of my Lady Mary from this World,"
^ "The Departure of my Lady Mary from this World," (PDF). Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ The Journal of Sacred Literature and Biblical Record, 6 (1865): 417–48 and 7 (1865): 108–60. See also Agnes Smith Lewis, ed., Apocrypha Syriaca, Studia Sinaitica, XI (London: C. J. Clay and Sons, 1902).
^ "De Obitu S. Dominae". Uoregon.edu. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ "De Transitu Virginis". Uoregon.edu. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ Ante-Nicene Fathers – The Writings of the Fathers Down to A.D. 325, vol. 8 page 594
^ a b Butler's Lives of the Saints by Alban Butler, Paul Burns 1998 ISBN 0860122573 pp. 140–141
^ [1] More on the Assumption of Mary by Fr. William Saunders, EWTN
^ a b "Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus, no 44". Vatican.va. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ Ludwig Ott, Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma (Rockford: Tan, 1974), pp. 209–210
^ Eamon Duffy, What Catholics Believe About Mary (London: Catholic Truth Society, 1989), p. 17
^ Apostolic Constitution Munificentissimus Deus item 44 at the Vatican web site Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ According to Catholic dogma, because the Virgin Mary remained an ever-virgin and sinless, the church believed that the Virgin Mary could not suffer the consequences of Original Sin, which is death. Nicea II Session 6 Decree
^ "Nicaea II Definition, "without blemish" a EWTN". Ewtn.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ Ludwig Ott's Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma, pp250 ff
^ a b Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma, Ludwig Ott, Book III, Pt. 3, Ch. 2, §6, ISBN 0-89555-009-1
^ Bishop Kallistos (Ware) of Diokleia, in: Festal Menaion [London: Faber and Faber, 1969], p. 64.
^ The Catholicism Answer Book: The 300 Most Frequently Asked Questions by John Trigilio, Kenneth Brighenti 2007 ISBN 1-4022-0806-5 page 64
^ The Ancient Traditions of the Virgin Mary's Dormition and Assumption by Stephen J. Shoemaker 2006 ISBN 0-19-921074-8 page 201
^ See Three Sermons on the Dormition of the Virgin by John of Damascus, from the Medieval Sourcebook
^ "The Calendar [page ix]". Prayerbook.ca. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ Sheena Lawrence. "The Calendar of the Church Year". Sheena.home.mindspring.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ "Mary: Grace and Hope in Christ". Vatican.va. 26 June 2000. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ De origine erroris libri duo (On the Origin of Error, Two Books) [2]. "In the De origine erroris in divorum ac simulachrorum cultu he opposed the worship of the saints and iconolatry; in the De origine erroris in negocio Eucharistiae ac Missae he strove to show that the Catholic conceptions of the Eucharist and of celebrating the Mass were wrong. Bullinger published a combined edition of these works in 4 ° (Zurich 1539), which was divided into two books, according to themes of the original work." The Library of the Finnish nobleman, royal secretary and trustee Henrik Matsson (ca. 1540–1617), Terhi Kiiskinen Helsinki: Academia Scientarium Fennica (Finnish Academy of Science), 2003, ISBN 951-41-0944-9 ISBN 9789514109447, p. 175 [3]
^ Froschauer. De origine erroris, Caput XVI (Chapter 16), p.70
^ The Thousand Faces of the Virgin Mary (1996), George H. Tavard, Liturgical Press ISBN 0-8146-5914-4 ISBN 9780814659144, p. 109. [4]
^ "Mary, Mother of Our Lord". Liturgybytlw.com. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ "St. Mary, Mother of Our Lord". Wmltblog.org. 15 August 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2013. 
^ Pianigiani, Ottorino (1907). "Vocabolario etimologico della lingua italiana". 
^ Columbus World Travel Guide, 25th Edition
^ Indian Independence Act 1947


Bibliography[edit]

Duggan, Paul E. (1989). The Assumption Dogma: Some Reactions and Ecumenical Implications in the Thought of English-speaking Theologians. Emerson Press, Cleveland, Ohio.
Mimouni, Simon Claude (1995). Dormition et assomption de Marie: Histoire des traditions anciennes. Beauchesne, Paris.
Shoemaker, Stephen J. (2002, 2006). Ancient Traditions of the Virgin Mary's Dormition and Assumption. Oxford University Press, Oxford. ISBN 0-19-925075-8 (Hardcover 2004, Reprint), ISBN 0-19-921074-8 (Paperback 2006)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Assumption of Mary.



"Munificentissimus Deus – Defining the Dogma of the Assumption" Vatican, 1 November 1950
Footage of the Assumption proclamation (1950) (British Pathé)







v
t
e


Mary, mother of Jesus



General



Mary, mother of Jesus
Jesus
Joseph (husband)
Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church





Mariology



Anglicanism
Catholicism
Christianity (ecumenical)
Orthodoxy
Islam
Protestantism

Lutheranism







Life




In the Bible



Annunciation
Visitation
Magnificat
Nativity
Presentation of Jesus at the Temple
Flight into Egypt
Finding in the Temple
Marriage at Cana
Crucifixion
Deposition
Resurrection
Pentecost





In Tradition



History of Roman Catholic Mariology
Nativity of Mary
Theotokos: Mother of God
Dormition
Akathist
Hodegetria
Panagia
Presentation of Mary
Virgin birth of Jesus
Assumption
Immaculata
Perpetual Virginity
Immaculate Heart
Woman of the Apocalypse
Queen of Heaven








Lists



Apparitions
Devotions
Devotions in May
Feast days
Hymns
Patronage
Shrines





Titles



Theotokos
Christotokos
Co-Redemptrix
Help of Christians
Immaculate Conception
Life-giving Spring
Mediatrix
Nova Eva
Our Lady of Banneux
Our Lady of Beauraing
Our Lady Derzhavnaya
Our Lady of Fátima
Our Lady of Guadalupe
Our Lady of the Hens
Our Lady of the Holy Rosary
Our Lady of Laus
Our Lady of Lourdes
Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal
Our Lady of Mount Carmel
Our Lady of Nazaré
Our Lady of Peñafrancia
Our Lady of the Pillar
Our Lady of the Snow
Our Lady of Sorrows
Our Lady, Star of the Sea
Queen of Heaven
Seat of Wisdom
Theotokos of Vladimir





Related



Antidicomarianites
Black Madonna
Marriage
Pietà
Protoevangelium of James
Rosary
Virgin Mary in art

Marian art










Category
Saints Portal












v
t
e


Liturgical year of the Catholic Church




Based on the General Roman Calendar (1969)



Advent



Advent Sunday
Immaculate Conception^
Gaudete Sunday
(O Antiphons)








Christmastide



Christmas (Nativity of Jesus)^
Holy Family
Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God^
Epiphany^
Baptism of the Lord





Ordinary Time I



Presentation of Jesus at the Temple (Candlemas)
Saint Joseph's Day^
Feast of the Annunciation
(Carnival)





Lent



Ash Wednesday
Laetare Sunday
Holy Week: Palm Sunday, Holy Wednesday, Maundy Thursday (Mass of the Chrism)





Paschal Triduum



Maundy Thursday (Mass of the Lord's Supper)
Good Friday

Liturgy of the Word, Adoration of the Cross, Holy Communion


Holy Saturday
Easter Vigil





Eastertide



Easter Sunday: Resurrection of Jesus
Octave of Easter (Divine Mercy Sunday)
Feast of the Ascension^
Pentecost





Ordinary Time II



Trinity Sunday
Corpus Christi^
Sacred Heart
Visitation of Mary
Saint John the Baptist
Feast of Saints Peter and Paul^
Transfiguration of Jesus
Assumption of Mary^
Nativity of Mary
Feast of the Cross
All Saints' Day^
All Souls' Day
Presentation of Mary
Feast of Christ the King








Legend
^ = Holy days of obligation (10)
 Catholicism portal
See also: Computus
Liturgical colours
Solemnity


Older calendars: General Roman Calendar of 1960
General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII of 1950
General Roman Calendar of 1954
Tridentine Calendar












v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Assumption_of_Mary&oldid=817600330"					Categories: Marian dogmasGlorious MysteriesMarian feast daysEastern Orthodox liturgical daysRoman Catholic MariologyPope Pius XII mariologyAugust observancesPublic holidays in CroatiaCatholic holy daysHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from August 2016Moveable holidays (to check)Infobox holiday (other)All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles needing additional references from August 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013