"Athanasius" redirects here. For other people named Athansius or Athanasios, see Athanasius (given name).
For people named Athanasius of Alexandria, see Patriarch Athanasius of Alexandria and Pope Athanasius.


Saint Athanasius of Alexandria



Icon of St Athanasius



Patriarch of Alexandria; Saint and Doctor of the Church


Born
c. 296–298[1]
Alexandria, Egypt


Died
2 May 373 (aged 75–79)
Alexandria, Egypt


Venerated in
Eastern Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, Oriental Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Anglican Communion, and among the Continuing Anglican Movement


Major shrine
Saint Mark Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo, Egypt


Feast
15 May = 7 Pashons, 89 A.M. (Coptic Orthodox)
2 May (Western Christianity)
18 January (Eastern Orthodox Church)


Attributes
Bishop arguing with a pagan; bishop holding an open book; bishop standing over a defeated heretic




Part of a series on the


Eastern Orthodox Church



Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator, Hagia Sophia



Overview





Structure
Theology (History of theology)
Liturgy
Church history
Holy Mysteries
View of salvation
View of Mary
View of icons







Background



Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension
of Jesus




Christianity
Christian Church
Apostolic succession
Four Marks of the Church
Orthodoxy









Organization



Autocephaly
Patriarchate
Ecumenical Patriarch
Episcopal polity
Clergy
Bishops
Priests
Deacons
Monasticism
Degrees of monasticism









Autocephalous jurisdictions



Constantinople
Alexandria
Antioch
Jerusalem
Russia
Serbia
Romania
Bulgaria
Georgia
Cyprus
Greece
Poland
Albania
Czech lands and Slovakia
North America









Ecumenical Councils


Seven Ecumenical Councils:



First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh



Other important councils:



Quinisext Council
Constantinople IV
Constantinople V
Jassy
Jerusalem









History



Church Fathers
Pentarchy
Byzantine Empire
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
Great Schism
Russia
Ottoman Empire
North America









Theology


History of Orthodox Theology

(20th century (Neo-Palamism))





Apophaticism
Chrismation
Contemplative prayer
Essence vs. Energies
Hesychasm
Holy Trinity
Hypostatic union
Icons
Metousiosis
Mystical theology
Nicene Creed
Nepsis
Oikonomia
Ousia
Palamism
Philokalia
Phronema
Sin
Theosis
Theotokos



Differences from the Catholic Church
Opposition to the Filioque
Opposition to papal supremacy








Liturgy and worship


Divine Liturgy
Divine Services



Akathist
Apolytikion
Artos
Ectenia
Euchologion
Holy Water
Iconostasis
Jesus Prayer
Kontakion
Liturgical entrances
Liturgical fans
Lity
Memorial service
Memory Eternal
Omophorion
Orthodox bowing
Orthodox marriage
Praxis
Paraklesis
Paschal greeting
Paschal Homily
Paschal troparion
Prayer rope
Prosphora
Russian bell ringing
Semantron
Sign of the cross
Sticheron
Troparion
Vestments
Use of incense









Liturgical calendar


Paschal cycle
12 Great Feasts
Other feasts:



Feast of Orthodoxy
Intercession of the Theotokos



The four fasting periods:



Nativity Fast
Great Lent
Apostles' Fast
Dormition Fast









Major figures



Athanasius of Alexandria
Ephrem the Syrian
Basil of Caesarea
Cyril of Jerusalem
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
John Chrysostom
Cyril of Alexandria
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
John of Damascus
Theodore the Studite
Kassiani
Cyril and Methodius
Photios I of Constantinople
Gregory Palamas









Other topics



Architecture
Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs
Orthodox cross
Saint titles
Statistics by country










v
t
e





Athanasius of Alexandria (/ˌæθəˈneɪʃəs/; Greek: Ἀθανάσιος Ἀλεξανδρείας, Athanásios Alexandrías; c. 296–298 – 2 May 373), also called Athanasius the Great, Athanasius the Confessor or, primarily in the Coptic Orthodox Church, Athanasius the Apostolic, was the 20th bishop of Alexandria (as Athanasius I). His episcopate lasted 45 years (c. 8 June 328 – 2 May 373), of which over 17 were spent in five exiles ordered by four different Roman emperors. Athanasius was a Christian theologian, a Church Father, the chief defender of Trinitarianism against Arianism, and a noted Egyptian leader of the fourth century.
Conflict with Arius and Arianism as well as successive Roman emperors shaped Athanasius' career. In 325, at the age of 27, Athanasius began his leading role against the Arians as a deacon and assistant to Bishop Alexander of Alexandria during the First Council of Nicaea. Roman emperor Constantine the Great had convened the council in May–August 325 to address the Arian position that the Son of God, Jesus of Nazareth, is of a distinct substance from the Father.[2] Three years after that council, Athanasius succeeded his mentor as archbishop of Alexandria. In addition to the conflict with the Arians (including powerful and influential Arian churchmen led by Eusebius of Nicomedia), he struggled against the Emperors Constantine, Constantius II, Julian the Apostate and Valens. He was known as Athanasius Contra Mundum (Latin for Athanasius Against the World).
Nonetheless, within a few years after his death, Gregory of Nazianzus called him the "Pillar of the Church". His writings were well regarded by all following Church fathers in the West and the East, who noted their rich devotion to the Word-become-man, great pastoral concern and profound interest in monasticism. Athanasius is counted as one of the four great Eastern Doctors of the Church in the Roman Catholic Church.[3] In the Eastern Orthodox Church, he is labeled as the "Father of Orthodoxy". Some Protestants label him as "Father of the Canon". Athanasius is venerated as a Christian saint, whose feast day is 2 May in Western Christianity, 15 May in the Coptic Orthodox Church, and 18 January in the other Eastern Orthodox Churches. He is venerated by the Oriental and Eastern Orthodox Churches, the Roman Catholic Church, the Lutherans, and the Anglican Communion.



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Education
1.2 Opposition to Arianism
1.3 Patriarch

1.3.1 First exile
1.3.2 Second exile
1.3.3 Third exile
1.3.4 Fourth exile
1.3.5 Fifth exile
1.3.6 Final years and death




2 Works

2.1 Polemical and theological works
2.2 Biographical and ascetic
2.3 Misattributed works


3 Veneration
4 Character
5 Historical significance and controversies

5.1 New Testament canon
5.2 Episcopal consecration
5.3 Supporters
5.4 Critics
5.5 In popular culture


6 Selected works
7 See also
8 References
9 Sources
10 Further reading
11 External links



Biography[edit]




A statue of Athanasius in Catania, Sicily.


Athanasius was born to a Christian family in the city of Alexandria[4] or possibly the nearby Nile Delta town of Damanhur sometime between the years 293 and 298. The earlier date is sometimes assigned due to the maturity revealed in his two earliest treatises Contra Gentes (Against the Heathens) and De Incarnatione (On the Incarnation), which were admittedly written about the year 318 before Arianism had begun to make itself felt, as those writings do not show an awareness of Arianism.[1]
However Cornelius Clifford places his birth no earlier than 296 and no later than 298, based on the fact that Athanasius indicates no first hand recollection of the Maximian persecution of 303, which he suggests Athanasius would have remembered if he had been ten years old at the time. Secondly, the Festal Epistles state that the Arians had accused Athanasius, among other charges, of not having yet attained the canonical age (30) and thus could not have been properly ordained as Patriarch of Alexandria in 328. The accusation must have seemed plausible.[1] The Orthodox Church places his year of birth around 297.[4]
Education[edit]
His parents were wealthy enough to afford giving him a fine secular education.[1] He was, nevertheless, clearly not a member of the Egyptian aristocracy.[5] Some Western scholars consider his command of Greek, in which he wrote most (if not all) of his surviving works, evidence that he may have been a Greek born in Alexandria. Historical evidence, however, indicates that he was fluent in Coptic as well given the regions of Egypt where he preached.[5] Some surviving copies of his writings are in fact in Coptic, though scholars differ as to whether he himself wrote them in Coptic originally (which would make him the first patriarch to do so), or whether these were translations of writings originally in Greek.[6][5]
Rufinus relates a story that as Bishop Alexander stood by a window, he watched boys playing on the seashore below, imitating the ritual of Christian baptism. He sent for the children and discovered that one of the boys (Athanasius) had acted as bishop. After questioning Athanasius, Bishop Alexander informed him that the baptisms were genuine, as both the form and matter of the sacrament had been performed through the recitation of the correct words and the administration of water, and that he must not continue to do this as those baptized had not been properly catechized. He invited Athanasius and his playfellows to prepare for clerical careers.[7]
Alexandria was the most important trade center in the whole empire during Athanasius's boyhood. Intellectually, morally, and politically—it epitomized the ethnically diverse Graeco-Roman world, even more than Rome or Constantinople, Antioch or Marseilles.[7] Its famous catechetical school, while sacrificing none of its famous passion for orthodoxy since the days of Pantaenus, Clement of Alexandria, Origen of Alexandria, Dionysius and Theognostus, had begun to take on an almost secular character in the comprehensiveness of its interests, and had counted influential pagans among its serious auditors.[8]
Athanasius recounts being a student, as well as being educated by the Martyrs of the Great (tenth) and last persecution of Christianity by pagan Rome.[citation needed] This persecution was most severe in the East, particularly in Egypt and Palestine. Peter of Alexandria, the 17th archbishop of Alexandria, was martyred in 311 in the closing days of that persecution, and may have been one of those teachers. His successor as bishop of Alexandria, Alexander of Alexandria (312–328) was an Origenist as well as a documented mentor of Athanasius.[citation needed]. According to Sozomen; "the Bishop Alexander 'invited Athanasius to be his commensal and secretary. He had been well educated, and was versed in grammar and rhetoric, and had already, while still a young man, and before reaching the episcopate, given proof to those who dwelt with him of his wisdom and acumen' ".(Soz., II, xvii) [1]
Athanasius' earliest work, Against the Heathen – On the Incarnation (written before 319), bears traces of Origenist Alexandrian thought (such as repeatedly quoting Plato and using a definition from Aristotle's Organon) but in an orthodox way. Athanasius was also familiar with the theories of various philosophical schools, and in particular with the developments of Neo-Platonism. Ultimately, Athanasius would modify the philosophical thought of the School of Alexandria away from the Origenist principles such as the "entirely allegorical interpretation of the text". Still, in later works, Athanasius quotes Homer more than once (Hist. Ar. 68, Orat. iv. 29). In his letter to Emperor Constantius, he presents a defense of himself bearing unmistakable traces of a study of Demosthenes de Corona.[citation needed]




St. Athanasius (1883–84), by Carl Rohl-Smith, Frederik's Church, Copenhagen, Denmark.


Athanasius knew Greek and admitted not knowing Hebrew [see, e.g., the 39th Festal Letter of St. Athan.]. The Old Testament passages he quotes frequently come from the Septuagint Greek translation. Only rarely did he use other Greek versions (to Aquila once in the Ecthesis, to other versions once or twice on the Psalms), and his knowledge of the Old Testament was limited to the Septuagint.[9] Nonetheless, during his later exile, with no access to a copy of the Scriptures, Athanasius could quote from memory every verse in the Old Testament with a supposed reference to the Trinity without missing any.[citation needed] The combination of Scriptural study and of Greek learning was characteristic of the famous Alexandrian School.
Bishop (or Patriarch, the highest ecclesial rank in the Centre of the Church, in Alexandria) Alexander ordained Athanasius a deacon in 319.[10] In 325, Athanasius served as Alexander's secretary at the First Council of Nicaea. Already a recognized theologian and ascetic, he was the obvious choice to replace his aging mentor Alexander as the Patriarch of Alexandria,[11] despite the opposition of the followers of Arius and Meletius of Lycopolis.[10]
At length, in the Council of Nicaea, the term "consubstantial" (homoṏusion) was suggested by Athanasius: it was immediately adopted, and a formulary of faith embodying it was drawn up by Hosius of Córdoba. From this time to the end of the Arian controversies the word "consubstantial" continued to be the test of Catholic orthodoxy. The formulary of faith drawn up by Hosius is known as the Nicene Creed.[12]. However, "he was not the originator of the famous 'homoṏusion'. The term had been proposed in a non-obvious and illegitimate sense by Paul of Samosata to the Fathers at Antioch, and had been rejected by them as savouring of materialistic conceptions of the Godhead."[1]
While still a deacon under Alexander's care (or early in his patriarchate as discussed below) Athanasius may have also become acquainted with some of the solitaries of the Egyptian desert, and in particular Anthony the Great, whose life he is said to have written.[7]
Opposition to Arianism[edit]
Further information: Arian controversy
In about 319, when Athanasius was a deacon, a presbyter named Arius came into a direct conflict with Alexander of Alexandria. It appears that Arius reproached Alexander for what he felt were misguided or heretical teachings being taught by the bishop.[13] Arius' theological views appear to have been firmly rooted in Alexandrian Christianity.[14] He embraced a subordinationist Christology which taught that Christ was the divine Son (Logos) of God, made, not begotten, heavily influenced by Alexandrian thinkers like Origen,[15] and which was a common Christological view in Alexandria at the time.[16] Arius had support from a powerful bishop named Eusebius of Nicomedia (not to be confused with Eusebius of Caesarea),[17] illustrating how Arius's subordinationist Christology was shared by other Christians in the Empire. Arius was subsequently excommunicated by Alexander, and he would begin to elicit the support of many bishops who agreed with his position.
Patriarch[edit]
Frances A. M. Forbes writes that when the Patriarch Alexander was on his death-bed he called Athanasius, who fled fearing he would be constrained to be made Bishop. "When the Bishops of the Church assembled to elect their new Patriarch, the whole Catholic population surrounded the church, holding up their hands to Heaven and crying; "Give us Athanasius!" The Bishops had nothing better. Athanasius was thus elected, as Gregory tells us..." (Pope Gregory I, would have full access to the Vatican Archives).[18]
T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII: "On the death of Alexander, five months after the termination of the Council of Nicaea, Athanasius was unanimously elected to fill the vacant see. He was most unwilling to accept the dignity, for he clearly foresaw the difficulties in which it would involve him. The clergy and people were determined to have him as their bishop, Patriarch of Alexandria, and refused to accept any excuses. He at length consented to accept a responsibility that he sought in vain to escape, and was consecrated in 326, when he was about thirty years of age."[12]
Athanasius' episcopate began on 9 May 328 as the Alexandrian Council elected Athanasius to succeed the aged Alexander. That council also denounced various heresies and schisms, many of which continued to preoccupy his 45-year-long episcopate (c. 8 June 328 – 2 May 373). Patriarch Athanasius spent over 17 years in five exiles ordered by four different Roman Emperors, not counting approximately six more incidents in which Athanasius fled Alexandria to escape people seeking to take his life. This gave rise to the expression "Athanasius contra mundum" or "Athanasius against the world".[11]
During his first years as bishop, Athanasius visited the churches of his territory, which at that time included all of Egypt and Libya. He established contacts with the hermits and monks of the desert, including Pachomius, which proved very valuable to him over the years. Shortly thereafter, Athanasius became occupied with the theological disputes against Arians within the Byzantine Empire that would occupy much of his life.[11]
First exile[edit]
Athanasius' first problem lay with Meletius of Lycopolis and his followers, who had failed to abide by the First Council of Nicaea. That council also anathematized Arius. Accused of mistreating Arians and Meletians, Athanasius answered those charges at a gathering of bishops in Tyre, the First Synod of Tyre, in 335. There, Eusebius of Nicomedia and other supporters of Arius deposed Athanasius.[10] On 6 November, both sides of the dispute met with Emperor Constantine I in Constantinople.[19] At that meeting, the Arians claimed Athanasius would try to cut off essential Egyptian grain supplies to Constantinople. He was found guilty, and sent into exile to Augusta Treverorum in Gaul (now Trier in Germany).[10][11][20]
When Athanasius reached his destination in exile in 336, Maximinus of Trier received him, but not as a disgraced person. Athanasius stayed with him for two years. Paul I of Constantinople, who was banished by the Emperor Constantius, also stayed with him. Maximinus cautioned the Emperor Constans against the Arians, revealing their plots.[21]
Second exile[edit]




Fresco at Hosios Loukas, Greece (11th century)






Statue of the saint in St Athanasius's Roman Catholic Church in Evanston, Illinois


When Emperor Constantine I died, Athanasius was allowed to return to his See of Alexandria. Shortly thereafter, however, Constantine's son, the new Roman Emperor Constantius II, renewed the order for Athanasius's banishment in 338. Athanasius went to Rome, where he was under the protection of Constans, the Emperor of the West. During this time, Gregory of Cappadocia was installed as the Patriarch of Alexandria, usurping the absent Athanasius. Athanasius did, however, remain in contact with his people through his annual Festal Letters, in which he also announced on which date Easter would be celebrated that year.[11]
In 339 or 340, nearly one hundred bishops met at Alexandria, declared in favor of Athanasius,[22] and vigorously rejected the criticisms of the Eusebian faction at Tyre. Plus, Pope Julius I wrote to the supporters of Arius strongly urging Athanasius's reinstatement, but that effort proved in vain. Pope Julius I called a synod in Rome in 340 to address the matter, which proclaimed Athanasius the rightful bishop of Alexandria.[23]
Early in the year 343 we find Athanasius had travelled, via Rome, from Alexandria, North Africa, to Gaul; nowadays Belgium / Holland and surrounding areas, where Hosius of Córdoba was Bishop, the great champion of orthodoxy in the West. Together they set out for Sardica, Sofia. A full Council of the Church was convened / summoned there in deference to the Roman pontiff's wishes. The travel was a mammoth task in itself. At this great gathering of prelates, leaders of the Church, the case of Athanasius was taken up once more, that is, Athanasius was formally questioned over misdemeanours and even murder, (a man called Arsenius and using his body for magic, – an absurd charge. They even produced Arsenius' severed hand.[20]).[1]
The Council was convoked for the purpose of inquiring into the charges against Athanasius and other bishops, on account of which they were deposed from their sees by the Semi-Arian Synod of Antioch (341), and went into exile. It was called according to Socrates, (E. H. ii. 20) by the two Emperors, Constans and Constantius; but, according to Baronius by Pope Julius (337–352), (Ad an. 343). One hundred and seventy six attended. Eusebian bishops objected to the admission of Athanasius and other deposed bishops to the Council, except as accused persons to answer the charges brought against them. Their objections were overridden by the orthodox bishops, about a hundred were orthodox, who were the majority. The Eusebians, seeing they had no chance of having their views carried, retired to Philoppopolis in Thrace, Philippopolis (Thracia), where they held an opposition council, under the presidency of the Patriarch of Antioch, and confirmed the decrees of the Synod of Antioch.[12]
His innocence was reaffirmed at the Council of Sardica. Two conciliar letters were prepared, one to the clergy and faithful of Alexandria, the other to the bishops of Egypt and Libya, in which the will of the Council was made known. Meanwhile, the Eusebian party had gone to Philippopolis, where they issued an anathema against Athanasius and his supporters. The persecution against the orthodox party broke out with renewed vigour, and Constantius was induced to prepare drastic measures against Athanasius and the priests who were devoted to him. Orders were given that if the Saint attempt to re-enter his see, he should be put to death. Athanasius, accordingly, withdrew from Sardica to Naissus in Mysia, where he celebrated the Easter festival of the year 344.[1] It was Hosius who presided over the Council of Sardica, as he did for the First Council of Nicaea, which like the 341 synod, found Athanasius innocent.[24] &.[12] He celebrated his last Easter in exile in Aquileia in April 345, received by bishop Fortunatianus.[25]
Eastern Bishop Gregory of Cappadocia died, probably of violence in June of 345. (Gregory, an Arian bishop, had taken over the See of Alexandria.) The emissary to the Emperor Constantius sent by the bishops of the Sardica Council to report the finding of the Council, who had been met at first with most insulting treatment, now received a favourable hearing. Constantius was forced to reconsider his decision, owing to a threatening letter from his brother Constans and the uncertain conditions of affairs on the Persian border, and he accordingly made up his mind to yield. But three separate letters were needed to overcome the natural hesitation of Athanasius. He passed rapidly from Aquileia to Treves, from Treves to Rome and from Rome by way of the northern route to Adrianople, Edirne, and Antioch, Ankara, where he met Constantius. He was accorded a gracious interview by the Emperor, and sent back to his See in triumph, and began his memorable ten years of peace, which lasted to the third exile, 356.[1]
Pope Julius died in April 352, and was succeeded by Liberius. For two years Liberius had been favourable to the cause of Athanasius; but driven at last into exile, he was induced to sign an ambiguous formula, from which the great Nicene text, the "homoousion", had been studiously omitted. In 355 a council was held at Milan, where in spite of the vigorous opposition of a handful of loyal prelates among the Western bishops, a fourth condemnation of Athanasius was announced to the world. With his friends scattered, the saintly Hosius in exile, and Pope Liberius denounced as acquiescing in Arian formularies, Athanasius could hardly hope to escape. On the night of 8 February 356, while engaged in services in the Church of St. Thomas, a band of armed men burst in to secure his arrest. It was the beginning of his third exile.[1]
T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII: By Constantius' order, the sole ruler of The Roman Empire at the death of his brother Constans, the Council of Arles in 353, was held, which was presided over by Vincent, Bishop of Capua, in the name of Pope Liberius. The fathers terrified of the threats of the Emperor, an avowed Arian, they consented to the condemnation of Athanasius. The Pope refused to accept their decision, and requested the Emperor to hold another Council, in which the charges against Athanasius could be freely investigated. To this Constantius consented, for he felt able to control the Council in Milan.[12]
Three hundred bishops assembled in Milan, most from the West, only a few from the East, in 355. They met in the Church of Milan. Shortly, the Emperor ordered them to a hall in the Imperial Palace, thus ending any free debate. He presented an Arian formula of faith for their acceptance. He threatened any who refused with exile and death. All, with the exception of Dionysius (bishop of Milan), and the two Papal Legates, viz., Eusebius of Vercelli and Lucifer of Cagliari, consented to the Arian Creed and the condemnation of Athanasius. Those who refused were sent into exile. The decrees were forwarded to the Pope for approval, but were rejected, because of the violence to which the bishops were subjected.[12]
Third exile[edit]




Athanasius at the Council of Nicea, William of Tyre manuscripts.


Through the influence of the Eusebian faction at Constantinople, an Arian bishop, George of Cappadocia, was now appointed to rule the see of Alexandria. Athanasius, after remaining some days in the neighbourhood of the city, finally withdrew into the desert of Upper Egypt, where he remained for a period of six years, living the life of the monks, devoting himself to the composition of a group of writings; "Apology to Constantius", the "Apology for his Flight", the "Letter to the Monks", and the "History of the Arians".[1]
Constantius, renewing his previous policies favoring the Arians, banished Athanasius from Alexandria once again. This was followed, in 356, by an attempt to arrest Athanasius during a vigil service.[26] Athanasius fled to Upper Egypt, where he stayed in several monasteries and other houses. During this period, Athanasius completed his work Four Orations against the Arians and defended his own recent conduct in the Apology to Constantius and Apology for His Flight. Constantius' persistence in his opposition to Athanasius, combined with reports Athanasius received about the persecution of non-Arians by the new Arian bishop George of Laodicea, prompted Athanasius to write his more emotional History of the Arians, in which he described Constantius as a precursor of the Antichrist.[11]
Constantius ordered Liberius into exile in 356 giving him three days to comply. He was ordered into banishment to Beroea, in Thrace. He sent expensive presents if he were to accept the Arian position, which Liberius refused. He sent him five hundred pieces of gold "to bear his charges" which Liberius refused, saying he might bestow them on his flatters; as he did also a like present from the empress, bidding the messenger learn to believe in Christ, and not to persecute the Church of God. Attempts were made to leave the presents in The Church, but Liberius threw them out. Constantius hereupon sent for him under a strict guard to Milan, where in a conference recorded by Theodore, he boldly told Constantius that Athanasius had been acquitted at Sardica, and his enemies proved calumniators (see: "calumny") and impostors, and that it was unjust to condemn a person who could not be legally convicted of any crime. The emperor was reduced to silence on every article, but being the more out of patience, ordered him into banishment.[12]
Liberius went into exile. Constantius, after two years went to Rome to celebrate the twentieth year of his reign. The ladies joined in a petition to him that he would restore Liberius. He assented, upon condition that he should comply with the bishops, then, at court. He subscribed the condemnation of Athanasius, and a confession or creed which had been framed by the Arians at Sirmium. And he no sooner had recovered his see that he declared himself for the Creed of Niceae, as Theodoret testifies. (Theodoret, Hist. lib. ii. c. 17.).[27] The Emperor knew what he wanted people to believe. So did the bishops at his court. Athanasius stuck by the orthodox creed.[20] Constantius was an avowed Arian, became sole ruler in 350, at the death of his brother, Constans.[12]
T. Gilmartin, (Professor of History, Maynooth, 1890), writes in Church History, Vol. 1, Ch XVII:

The Arians sought the approval of an Ecumenical Council. They sought to hold two councils. Constantius, summoned the bishops of the East to meet at Seleucia in Isauria, and those of the West to Rimini in Italy. A preliminary conference was held by the Arians at Sirmium, to agree a formula of faith. A "Homoeon" creed was adopted, declaring The Son to be "like the Father". The two met in autumn of 359. At Seleucia, one hundred and fifty bishops, of which one hundred and five were semi-Arian. The semi-Arians refused to accept anything less than the "Homoiousion", (see: Homoiousian), formulary of faith. The Imperial Prefect was obliged to disband, without agreeing on any creed.[12]

Acacius, the leader of the "Homoean" party went to Constantinople, where the Sirmian formulary of faith was approved by the "Home Synod", (consisted of those bishops who happened to be present at the Court for the time), and a decree of deposition issued against the leaders of the semi-Arians. At Rimini were over four hundred of which eighty were Arian, the rest were orthodox. The orthodox fathers refused to accept any creed but the Nicene, while the others were equally in favour of the Sirmian. Each party sent a deputation to the Emperor to say there was no probability to agreement, and asked for the bishops to return to their dioceses. For the purpose of wearing-down the orthodox bishops; (Sulpitius Severius says), Constantius delayed his answer for several months, and finally prevailed on them to accept the Sirmian creed. It was after this Council that Jerome said: " ...the whole world groaned in astonishment to find itself Arian."[12]
The Arians no longer presented an unbroken front to their orthodox opponents. The Emperor Constantius, who had been the cause of so much trouble, died on 4 November 361 and was succeeded by Julian. The proclamation of the new prince's accession was the signal for a pagan outbreak against the still dominant Arian faction in Alexandria. George, the usurping Bishop, was flung into prison and murdered. An obscure presbyter of the name of Pistus was immediately chosen by the Arians to succeed him, when fresh news arrived that filled the orthodox party with hope. An edict had been put forth by Julian permitting the exiled bishops of the "Galileans" to return to their "towns and provinces". Athanasius received a summons from his own flock, and he accordingly re-entered his episcopal capitol on 22 February 362.[1]
In 362 he convened a council at Alexandria, and presided over it with Eusebius of Vercelli. Athanasius appealed for unity among all those who had faith in Christianity, even if they differed on matters of terminology. This prepared the groundwork for his definition of the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity. However, the council also was directed against those who denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit, the human soul of Christ, and Christ's divinity. Mild measures were agreed on for those heretic bishops who repented, but severe penance was decreed for the chief leaders of the major heresies.[28]
With characteristic energy he set to work to re-establish the somewhat shattered fortunes of the orthodox party and to purge the theological atmosphere of uncertainty. To clear up the misunderstandings that had arisen in the course of the previous years, an attempt was made to determine still further the significance of the Nicene formularies. In the meanwhile, Julian, who seems to have become suddenly jealous of the influence that Athanasius was exercising at Alexandria, addressed an order to Ecdicius, the Prefect of Egypt, peremptorily commanding the expulsion of the restored primate, on the ground that he had never been included in the imperial act of clemency. The edict was communicated to the bishop by Pythicodorus Trico, who, though described in the "Chronicon Athanasianum" (XXXV) as a "philosopher", seems to have behaved with brutal insolence. On 23 October the people gathered about the proscribed bishop to protest against the emperor's decree; but Athanasius urged them to submit, consoling them with the promise that his absence would be of short duration.[1]
Fourth exile[edit]
In 362, the new Emperor Julian, noted for his opposition to Christianity, ordered Athanasius to leave Alexandria once again. Athanasius left for Upper Egypt, remaining there with the Desert Fathers until Julian's death on 26 June 363. Athanasius returned in secret to Alexandria, where he soon received a document from the new emperor, Jovian, reinstating him once more in his episcopal functions.[1]
His first act was to convene a council which reaffirmed the terms of the Nicene Creed. Early in September 363 he set out for Antioch on the Orontes, bearing a synodal letter, in which the pronouncements of this council had been embodied. At Antioch he had an interview with the new emperor, who received him graciously and even asked him to prepare an exposition of the orthodox faith. The following February Jovian died; and in October, 364, Athanasius was once more an exile.[1]
Fifth exile[edit]
Two years later, the Emperor Valens, who favored the Arian position, in his turn exiled Athanasius. This time Athanasius simply left for the outskirts of Alexandria, where he stayed for only a few months before the local authorities convinced Valens to retract his order of exile.[11] Some early reports state that Athanasius spent this period of exile at his family's ancestral tomb[10] in a Christian cemetery. It was during this period, the final exile, that he is said to have spent four months in hiding in his father's tomb. (Soz., "Hist. Eccl.", VI, xii; Soc., "Hist. Eccl.", IV, xii).[1]
The accession of Valens gave a fresh lease of life to the Arian party. He issued a decree banishing the bishops who had been deposed by Constantius, but who had been permitted by Jovian to return to their sees. The news created the greatest consternation in the city of Alexandria itself, and the prefect, in order to prevent a serious outbreak, gave public assurance that the very special case of Athanasius would be laid before the emperor. But Athanasius seems to have divined what was preparing in secret against him. He quietly withdrew from Alexandria, 5 October, and took up his abode in a country house outside the city. Valens, who seems to have sincerely dreaded the possible consequences of another popular outbreak, within a few weeks issued orders allowing Athanasius to return to his episcopal see.[1]
In 366 Pope Liberius died and was succeeded by Pope Damasus, a man of strong character and holy life. Two years later, in a council of the Church, it was decreed that no Bishop should be consecrated unless he held the Creed of Nicea. (F. A. Forbes).[18]
Final years and death[edit]
After returning to Alexandria in early 366, Athanasius spent his final years repairing all the damage done during the earlier years of violence, dissent, and exile. He resumed writing and preaching undisturbed, and characteristically re-emphasized the view of the Incarnation which had been defined at Nicaea. On 2 May 373, having consecrated Peter II, one of his presbyters as his successor, Athanasius died peacefully in his own bed, surrounded by his clergy and faithful supporters.[7]
Works[edit]
In Coptic literature, Athanasius is the first patriarch of Alexandria to use Coptic as well as Greek in his writings.[6]
Polemical and theological works[edit]
Athanasius was not a speculative theologian. As he stated in his First Letters to Serapion, he held on to "the tradition, teaching, and faith proclaimed by the apostles and guarded by the fathers."[10] He held that not only was the Son of God consubstantial with the Father, but so was the Holy Spirit, which had a great deal of influence in the development of later doctrines regarding the Trinity.[10]
Athanasius' "Letter Concerning the Decrees of the Council of Nicaea" (De Decretis), is an important historical as well as theological account of the proceedings of that council, and another letter from 367 is the first known listing of all those books now accepted as the New Testament.[10] (Earlier similar lists vary by the omission or addition of a few books.)
Examples of Athanasius' polemical writings against his theological opponents include Orations Against the Arians, his defence of the divinity of the Holy Spirit (Letters to Serapion in the 360s, and On the Holy Spirit), against Macedonianism and On the Incarnation.
Athanasius also wrote a two-part Against the Heathen and The Incarnation of the Word of God. Completed probably early in his life, before the Arian controversy,[29] they constitute the first classic work of developed Orthodox theology. In the first part, Athanasius attacks several pagan practices and beliefs. The second part presents teachings on the redemption.[10] Also in these books, Athanasius put forward the belief, referencing John 1:1–4, that the Son of God, the eternal Word (Logos) through whom God created the world, entered that world in human form to lead men back into the harmony from which they had earlier fallen away.
His other important works include his Letters to Serapion, which defends the divinity of the Holy Spirit. In a letter to Epictetus of Corinth, Athanasius anticipates future controversies in his defense of the humanity of Christ. Another of his letters, to Dracontius, urges that monk to leave the desert for the more active duties of a bishop.[11]
Athanasius also wrote several works of Biblical exegesis, primarily on Old Testament materials. The most important of these is his Epistle to Marcellinus (PG 27:12–45) on how to incorporate Psalm saying into one's spiritual practice. Excerpts remain of his discussions concerning the Book of Genesis, the Song of Solomon, and Psalms.
Perhaps his most notable letter was his Festal Letter, written to his Church in Alexandria when he was in exile, as he could not be in their presence. This letter clearly shows his stand that accepting Jesus as the Divine Son of God is not optional but necessary:

I know moreover that not only this thing saddens you, but also the fact that while others have obtained the churches by violence, you are meanwhile cast out from your places. For they hold the places, but you the Apostolic Faith. They are, it is true, in the places, but outside of the true Faith; while you are outside the places indeed, but the Faith, within you. Let us consider whether is the greater, the place or the Faith. Clearly the true Faith. Who then has lost more, or who possesses more? He who holds the place, or he who holds the Faith?[30]

Biographical and ascetic[edit]


Part of a series on


Christian mysticism







Theology · Philosophy


Apophatic
Ascetical
Cataphatic
Catholic spirituality
Hellenistic
Mystical theology
Neoplatonic

Henosis










Practices


Monasticism


Monasticism
Asceticism
Spiritual direction


Meditation


Meditation
Lectio Divina


Active ascetism


Contemplation




Hesychasm
Jesus prayer
Quietism




Stages of Christian perfection
Divinization




Catharsis
Theosis




Kenosis
Spiritual dryness


Passive ascetism


Abstinence








People (by era or century)





Antiquity


Ancient African
Origen
Gregory of Nyssa
Pseudo-Dionysius








Desert Fathers


Paul of Thebes
Anthony the Great
Arsenius the Great
Poemen
Macarius of Egypt
Moses the Black
Syncletica
Athanasius
John Chrysostom
Hilarion
John Cassian








11th · 12th


Bernard of Clairvaux
Guigo II
Hildegard of Bingen
Hadewijch
Symeon the New Theologian








13th · 14th



Dominican




Dominic de Guzmán




Franciscan




Francis of Assisi
Anthony of Padua
Bonaventure
Jacopone da Todi
Angela of Foligno




English




Richard Rolle
Walter Hilton
Julian of Norwich
Margery Kempe




Flemish




Beatrice of Nazareth
John of Ruysbroeck




German




Meister Eckhart
Johannes Tauler
Henry Suso




Female




Beatrice of Nazareth
Bridget of Sweden
Catherine of Siena











15th · 16th



Spanish




Ignatius of Loyola
Francisco de Osuna
John of Ávila
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross




Others




Catherine of Genoa











17th · 18th



French




Pierre de Bérulle
Jean-Jacques Olier
Louis de Montfort
Charles de Condren
John Eudes
John of St. Samson




Others




María de Ágreda
Anne Catherine Emmerich
Veronica Giuliani
Francis de Sales











19th


Dina Bélanger
Catherine Labouré
Mélanie Calvat
Maximin Giraud
Bernadette Soubirous
Conchita de Armida
Luisa Piccarreta
Mary of the Divine Heart
Thérèse of Lisieux
Gemma Galgani








20th


Padre Pio
Therese Neumann
Marthe Robin
Adrienne von Speyr
Alexandrina of Balazar
Faustina Kowalska
Berthe Petit
Sister Lúcia of Fátima
Edgar Cayce
Simone Weil
Alfred Delp
Thomas Merton
Charles de Foucauld








Contemporary papal views

Aspects of meditation
(Orationis Formas, 1989)
Reflection on the New Age (2003)











Literature · Media


Lingua Ignota
Ordo Virtutum
Scivias
Ascent of Mount Carmel
Dark Night of the Soul
Spiritual Canticle
Way of Perfection
Book of the First Monks
The Interior Castle
Abbey of the Holy Ghost
A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation
Diary: Divine Mercy in My Soul
From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart
The Glories of Mary
The Imitation of Christ
The Ladder of Divine Ascent
Philokalia
Revelations of Divine Love
Spiritual Canticle
The Story of a Soul
Theologia Germanica
Devotio Moderna
The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima
Sol de Fátima
The Cloud of Unknowing
The Consolation of Philosophy
The Mirror of Simple Souls
Sister Catherine Treatise
Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii
The Vision of Adamnán
Divine Comedy

Inferno
Purgatorio
Paradiso











v
t
e





His biography of Anthony the Great entitled Life of Antony[31](Βίος καὶ Πολιτεία Πατρὸς Ἀντωνίου, Vita Antonii) became his most widely read work. Translated into several languages, it became something of a best seller in its day and played an important role in the spreading of the ascetic ideal in Eastern and Western Christianity.[11] It depicted Anthony as an illiterate yet holy man who continuously engaged in spiritual exercises in the Egyptian desert and struggled against demonic powers. It later served as an inspiration to Christian monastics in both the East and the West.[32]
Athanasius' works on ascetism also include a Discourse on Virginity, a short work on Love and Self-Control, and a treatise On Sickness and Health (of which only fragments remain).
Misattributed works[edit]
There are several other works ascribed to him, although not necessarily generally accepted as being his own. These include the so-called Athanasian creed (which is today generally seen as being of 5th-century Galician origin), and a complete Expositions on the Psalms (PG 27: 60–545).[10]
Veneration[edit]
Athanasius was originally buried in Alexandria, Egypt, but his remains were later transferred to the Chiesa di San Zaccaria in Venice, Italy. During Pope Shenouda III's visit to Rome from 4 to 10 May 1973, Pope Paul VI gave the Coptic Patriarch a relic of Athanasius,[33] which he brought back to Egypt on 15 May.[34] The relic is currently preserved under the new Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo, Egypt. However, the majority of Athanasius's corpse remains in the Venetian church.[35]
All major Christian denominations which officially recognize saints venerate Athanasius. Western Christians observe his feast day on 2 May, the anniversary of his death. The Roman Catholic Church considers Athanasius a Doctor of the Church.[3] For Coptic Christians, his feast day is Pashons 7 (now circa 15 May). Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendars remember Athanasius on 18 January.
Gregory of Nazianzus (330–390, also a Doctor of the Church), said: "When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the Church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith."[7]







Tomb of Saint Zaccaria and Saint Athanasius in Venice









Athanasius's Shrine (where a portion of his relics are preserved) under St. Mark's Cathedral, Cairo









Procession of a statue at Bellante




Character[edit]
Historian Cornelius Clifford said in his account: "Athanasius was the greatest champion of Catholic belief on the subject of the Incarnation that the Church has ever known and in his lifetime earned the characteristic title of "Father of Orthodoxy", by which he has been distinguished ever since." [1]
Bl. John Henry Newman described him as a "principal instrument, after the Apostles, by which the sacred truths of Christianity have been conveyed and secured to the world". [Letters..]
Historian Cornelius Clifford says: "His career almost personifies a crisis in the history of Christianity; and he may be said rather to have shaped the events in which he took part than to have been shaped by them." [1]
The greater majority of Church leaders and the emperors fell into support for Arianism, so much so that Jerome, 340–420, wrote of the period: "The whole world groaned and was amazed to find itself Arian".[12] He, Athanasius, even suffered an unjust excommunication from Pope Liberius (325–366) who was exiled and leant towards the Arians, until he was allowed back to the See of Rome. Athanasius stood virtually alone against the world.[21] (..see: "Third Exile", above.)
Historical significance and controversies[edit]
New Testament canon[edit]
See also: Biblical canon
It was the custom of the bishops of Alexandria to circulate a letter after Epiphany each year establishing the date of Easter, and therefore other moveable feasts. They also took the occasion to discuss other matters. Athanasius wrote forty-five festal letters.[36] Athanasius' 39th Festal Letter, written in 367, is widely regarded as a milestone in the evolution of the canon of New Testament books.[37]
Athanasius is the first person to identify the same 27 books of the New Testament that are in use today. Up until then, various similar lists of works to be read in churches were in use. Athanasius compiled the list to resolve questions about such texts as The Epistle of Barnabas. Athanasius includes the Book of Baruch and the Letter of Jeremiah and places the Book of Esther among the "7 books not in the canon but to be read" along with the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Judith, Tobit, the Didache, and the Shepherd of Hermas.[38]
Athanasius' list is similar to the Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican Library, probably written in Rome, in 340 by Alexandrian scribes for Emperor Constans, during the period of Athanasius' seven-year exile in the city. The establishment of the canon was not a unilateral decision by a bishop in Alexandria, but the result of a process of careful investigation and deliberation, as documented in a codex of the Greek Bible and, twenty-seven years later, in his festal letter.[36]
Pope Damasus I, the Bishop of Rome in 382, promulgated a list of books which contained a New Testament canon identical to that of Athanasius. A synod in Hippo in 393 repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' New Testament list (without the Epistle to the Hebrews), and the Council of Carthage (397) repeated Athanasius' and Damasus' complete New Testament list.[39]
Scholars debate whether Athanasius' list in 367 formed the basis for later lists. Because Athanasius' Canon is the closest canon of any of the Church Fathers to the one used by Protestant churches today, many Protestants point to Athanasius as the Father of the Canon.[38][40]
Episcopal consecration[edit]
In the light of Mother F. A. Forbes' research and reference to Pope Saint Gregory's writings, it would appear that Athanasius was constrained to be Bishop: She writes that when the Patriarch Alexander was on his death-bed he called Athanasius, who fled fearing he would be constrained to be made Bishop. "When the Bishops of the Church assembled to elect their new Patriarch, the whole Catholic population surrounded the church, holding up their hands to Heaven and crying; "Give us Athanasius!" The Bishops had nothing better. Athanasius was thus elected, as Gregory tells us..." (Pope Gregory I, would have full access to the Vatican Archives).[18]
Alban Butler, writes on the subject: "Five months after this great Council, Nicae, St Alexander lying on his death-bed, recommended to his clergy and people the choice of Athanasius for his successor, thrice repeating his name. In consequence of his recommendation, the bishops of all Egypt assembled at Alexandria, and finding the people and clergy unanimous in their choice of Athanasius for patriarch, they confirmed the election about the middle of year 326. He seems, then, to have been about thirty years of age."[21]
Supporters[edit]




Athanasius (left) and his supporter Cyril of Alexandria. 17th century depiction.


Christian denominations worldwide revere Athanasius as a saint, teacher, and father. They cite his defense of the Christology described in the first chapter of the Gospel of St. John[1:1–4] and his significant theological works (C. S. Lewis calls On the Incarnation of the Word of God a "masterpiece")[41] as evidence of his righteousness. They also emphasize his close relationship with Anthony the Great, the ancient monk who was one of the founders of the Christian monastic movement.
The Gospel of St. John and particularly the first chapter demonstrates the Divinity of Jesus. This Gospel in itself is the greatest support of Athanasius' stand. The Gospel of St. John's first chapter began to be said at the end of Mass, we believe as a result of Athanasius, and his life's stand, but quietly. The Last Gospel of The Mass, The Eucharist, St. John[1:1–14], together with the prayer; "Placeat tibi", the Blessing, are all private devotions that have been gradually absorbed by the liturgical service. The beginning of John's Gospel was much used as an object of special devotion throughout the Middle Ages. Nevertheless, the practice of saying it at the altar grew; eventually Pius V made this practice universal for the Roman Rite in his edition of the Missal (1570).[42] It became a firm custom with exceptions in using an other Gospel in use from 1920. So the Missals showed different last Gospel for certain Feast days. A Prayer Card for the St. John's Gospel.[43] Also:[44]
Gregory of Nazianzus (330–390) begins Or. 21 with: "When I praise Athanasius, virtue itself is my theme: for I name every virtue as often as I mention him who was possessed of all virtues. He was the true pillar of the church. His life and conduct were the rule of bishops, and his doctrine the rule of the orthodox faith."[7]
Cyril of Alexandria (370–444) in the first letter says: "Athanasius is one who can be trusted: he would not say anything that is not in accord with sacred scripture." (Ep 1).
Many modern historians point out that such a hostile attitude towards Athanasius is based on an unfair judgment of historical sources.[45]
Saint Pope Pius X said in a letter to philosopher-friend and correspondent in the closing years of his life, (Epist. lxxi, ad Max.): "Let what was confessed by the fathers of Nicaea prevail".[7]
Critics[edit]
Throughout most of his career, Athanasius had many detractors. Classics scholar Timothy Barnes recounts ancient allegations against Athanasius: from defiling an altar, to selling Church grain that had been meant to feed the poor for his own personal gain, and even violence and murder to suppress dissent.[46] Athanasius used "Arian" to describe both followers of Arius, and as a derogatory polemical term for Christians who disagreed with his formulation of the Trinity.[47] Athanasius called many of his opponents "Arian", except for Meletius (Miletus).[48]
Scholars now believe that the Arian Party was not monolithic,[49] but held drastically different theological views that spanned the early Christian theological spectrum.[50][51][52] They supported the tenets of Origenist thought and subordinationist theology,[53] but had little else in common. Moreover, many labelled "Arian" did not consider themselves followers of Arius.[54] In addition, non-Homoousian bishops disagreed with being labeled as followers of Arius, since Arius was merely a presbyter, while they were fully ordained bishops.[55] However, others point to the Council of Nicaea as proof in and of itself that Arianism was a real theological ideology.[citation needed]
The old allegations continue to be made against Athanasius however many centuries later. For example, Richard E. Rubenstein suggests that Athanasius ascended to the rank of bishop in Alexandria under questionable circumstances because some questioned whether he had reached the minimum age of 30 years, and further that Athanasius employed force when it suited his cause or personal interests. Thus, he argues that a small number of bishops who supported Athanasius held a private consecration to make him bishop.[56]
In popular culture[edit]
A detailed depiction of Athanasius as a villain is given in the 2016 novel, The Secular Gospel of Sophia, by Daniel G. Helton.[57]
Selected works[edit]

Athanasius. Contra Gentes – De Incarnatione (translated by Thompson, Robert W.), text and ET (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971).
On the Incarnation at theologynetwork.org
Letters to Serapion (on the Holy Spirit) at archive.org

See also[edit]

Athanasian Creed
Apostles' Creed
Homoousian
Pontifical Greek College of Saint Athanasius
Eastern Catholic Church
Orthodox Church
Eugenius of Carthage

References[edit]



^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Clifford, Cornelius. "St. Athanasius." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 4 Aug. 2014
^ Durant, Will. Caesar and Christ. New York: Simon and Schuster. 1972.
^ a b Chapman, John. "Doctors of the Church". The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 6 December 2015
^ a b "St Athanasius the Great the Patriarch of Alexandria", Orthodox Church in America
^ a b c Barnes, Timothy David (2001). Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire. p. 13. 
^ a b "Coptic literature". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved May 9, 2017. 
^ a b c d e f g Clifford, Cornelius, Catholic Encyclopedia 1930, Volume 2, pp. 35–40 "Athanasius".
^ Eusebius, Hist. Eccl., VI, xix
^ Ἀλεξανδρεὺς τῷ γένει, ἀνὴρ λόγιος, δυνατὸς ὢν ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς
^ a b c d e f g h i j Encyclopedia Americana, vol. 2 Danbury, Connecticut: Grolier Incorporated, 1997. ISBN 0-7172-0129-5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Encyclopædia Britannica, 15th edition. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. ISBN 0-85229-633-9
^ a b c d e f g h i j k T. Gilmartin, Manual of Church History, Vol. 1. Ch XVII, 1890
^ Kannengiesser, Charles, "Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians", Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1-2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990), 398
^ Williams, Rowan, Arius: Heresy and Tradition (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1987),175
^ Williams, 175
^ Williams 154–155
^ Alexander of Alexandria's Catholic Epistle
^ a b c F. A. Forbes; "Saint Athanasius", 1919
^ Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1993), 23
^ a b c Christianity, Daily Telegraph 1999
^ a b c Butler, Albin, Butler's Lives of The Saints 1860, Volume 1.
^ Clark, William R. (2007). A History of the Councils of the Church: from the Original Documents, to the close of the Second Council of Nicaea A.D. 787. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 47. ISBN 9781556352478. 
^ Davis, Leo Donald (1983). The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325–787): Their History and Theology. Liturgical Press. p. 82. ISBN 9780814656167. 
^ "St. Athanasius", Encyclopædia Britannica, 9th Edition, Vol. II, Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1878
^ Barnes, Timothy David, Athanasius and Constantius, Harvard 2001, p. 66
^ Graves, Dan. Athanasius Exiled Again Christianity.com. Web. Retrieved 8 March 2016.
^ Butler, Albin, Butler's Lives of The Saints 1860, Volume 1
^  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Councils of Alexandria". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
^ Justo L. Gonzalez in A History of Christian Thought notes (p. 292) that E. Schwartz places this work later, around 335, but "his arguments have not been generally accepted". The introduction to the CSMV translation of On the Incarnation places the work in 318, around the time Athanasius was ordained to the diaconate (St Athanasius On the Incarnation, Mowbray, England 1953)
^ fragment conjectured to belong to a festal letter
^ "Athanasius of Alexandria: Vita S. Antoni [Life of St. Antony] (written bwtween 356 and 362)". Fordham University. Retrieved 14 July 2016. 
^ "Athanasius", Christian History, 8 August 2008
^ "Metropolitan Bishoy of Damiette". Retrieved 2012-09-25. 
^ "Saint Athanasius". Avarewase.org. Retrieved 2012-09-25. 
^ "The Incorrupt Relics of Saint Athanasios the Great". Johnsanidopoulos.com. Retrieved 2 May 2014. 
^ a b Thiede, Carsten Peer. "367 Athanasius Defines the New Testament", Christian History, 1 October 1990
^ Gwynn, David M., Athanasius of Alexandria, Oxford University Press, 2012 ISBN 9780199210954
^ a b Aboagye-Mensah, Robert. "Bishop Athanasius: His Life, Ministry and Legacy to African Christianity and the Global Church", Seeing New Facets of the Diamond, (Gillian Mary Bediako, Bernhardt Quarshie, J. Kwabena Asamoah-Gyadu, ed.), Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2015 ISBN 9781498217293
^ Von Dehsen, Christian. "St. Athanasius", Philosophers and Religious Leaders, Routledge, 2013 ISBN 9781135951023
^ "Excerpt from Letter 39". Ccel.org. 2005-07-13. Retrieved 2012-09-25. 
^ Introduction to St. Athanasius on the Incarnation. Translated and edited by Sister Penelope Lawson, published by Mowbray 1944. p. 9
^ Fortescue, Adrian, Catholic Encyclopedia 1907, Volume 6, pp. 662–663 "Gospel"
^ Pope Benedict XV, Missale Romanum, IX Additions & Variations of the Rubrics of The Missal
^ Jungmann, El Sacrificio de la Misa, No. 659, 660
^ Arnold, 24–99; Ng, 273–292.
^ Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1993), 37
^ Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius", 14, 128
^ Barnes "Athanasius and Constantius",135
^ Haas, Christopher, "The Arians of Alexandria", Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 239
^ Chadwick, Henry, "Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea", Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: 1960),173
^ Williams, 63
^ Kannengiesser "Alexander and Arius", 403
^ Kannengiesser, "Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis", in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity), ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986),208
^ Williams, 82
^ Rubinstein, Richard, When Jesus Became God, The Struggle to Define Christianity during the Last Days of Rome, 1999
^ Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ's Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999), 105–106
^ ISBN 978-1-78535-181-5



Sources[edit]

Alexander of Alexandria "Catholic Epistle", The Ecole Initiative, ecole.evansville.edu
Anatolios, Khaled, Athanasius: The Coherence of His Thought (New York: Routledge, 1998).
Arnold, Duane W.-H., The Early Episcopal Career of Athanasius of Alexandria (Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame, 1991).
Arius, "Arius's letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia", Ecclesiastical History, ed. Theodoret. Ser. 2, Vol. 3, 41, The Ecole Initiative, ecole.evansville.edu
Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. 3rd edition. (New York: Penguin, 1993). ISBN 0-14-051312-4.
Barnes, Timothy D., Athanasius and Constantius: Theology and Politics in the Constantinian Empire (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1993).
Barnes, Timothy D., Constantine and Eusebius (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1981)
Bouter, P.F. (2010). Athanasius (in Dutch). Kampen: Kok. 
Brakke, David. Athanasius and the Politics of Asceticism (1995)
Clifford, Cornelius, "Athanasius", Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 2 (1907), 35–40
Chadwick, Henry, "Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea", Harvard Theological Review LIII (Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press, 1960), 171–195.
Ernest, James D., The Bible in Athanasius of Alexandria (Leiden: Brill, 2004).
Freeman, Charles, The Closing of the Western Mind: The Rise of Faith and the Fall of Reason (Alfred A. Knopf, 2003).
Haas, Christopher. "The Arians of Alexandria", Vigiliae Christianae Vol. 47, no. 3 (1993), 234–245.
Hanson, R.P.C., The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God: The Arian Controversy, 318–381 (T.&T. Clark, 1988).
Kannengiesser, Charles, "Alexander and Arius of Alexandria: The last Ante-Nicene theologians", Miscelanea En Homenaje Al P. Antonio Orbe Compostellanum Vol. XXXV, no. 1-2. (Santiago de Compostela, 1990), 391–403.
Kannengiesser, Charles "Athanasius of Alexandria vs. Arius: The Alexandrian Crisis", in The Roots of Egyptian Christianity (Studies in Antiquity and Christianity), ed. Birger A. Pearson and James E. Goehring (1986), 204–215.
Ng, Nathan K. K., The Spirituality of Athanasius (1991).
Pettersen, Alvyn (1995). Athanasius. Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: Morehouse. 
Rubenstein, Richard E., When Jesus Became God: The Epic Fight over Christ's Divinity in the Last Days of Rome (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1999).
Williams, Rowan, Arius: Heresy and Tradition (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1987).

Further reading[edit]

Anatolios, Khaled. Athanasius (London: Routledge, 2004). [Contains selections from the Orations against the Arians (pp. 87–175) and Letters to Serapion on the Holy Spirit (pp. 212–33), together with the full texts of On the Council of Nicaea (pp. 176–211) and Letter 40: To Adelphius (pp. 234–42)]
Gregg, Robert C. Athanasius: The Life of Antony and the Letter to Marcellinus, Classics of Western Spirituality (New York: Paulist Press, 1980).
Schaff, Philip (1867). History of the Christian Church: Nicene and Post-Nicene Christianity, AD 311–600. 3rd. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson. 
Schaff, Philip; Henry Wace (1903). A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church: St. Athanasius: Select Works and Letters. 4th. New York: Scribner. 

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Athanasius of Alexandria





Wikisource has the text of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article St. Athanasius.



 Media related to Saint Athanasius at Wikimedia Commons
 Works written by or about Athanasius of Alexandria at Wikisource
 Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἀθανάσιος Ἀλεξανδρείας
Official web site of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa
Works by Patriarch of Alexandria Saint Athanasius at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Athanasius of Alexandria at Internet Archive
Works by Athanasius of Alexandria at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Archibald Robinson, Athanasius: Select Letters and Works (Edinburgh 1885)
The so-called Athanasian Creed (not written by Athanasius, see Athanasian Creed above)
Athanasius Select Resources, Bilingual Anthology (in Greek original and English)
Two audio lectures about Athanasius on the Deity of Christ, Dr N Needham
Concorida Cyclopedia: Athanasius
Christian Cyclopedia: Athanasius
Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes
St Athanasius the Great the Archbishop of Alexandria Orthodox icon and synaxarion
English Key to Athanasius Werke
The Writings of Athanasius in Chronological Order
Introducing...Athanasius audio resource by Dr. Michael Reeves. Two lectures on theologynetwork.org
Letter of Saint Athanasius to His Flock at the Our Lady of the Rosary Library
St. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria at the Christian Classics Ethereal Library
Colonnade Statue in St Peter's Square



Titles of the Great Christian Church


Preceded by
Alexander I
Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria
328–373
or
328–339
346–373
Succeeded by
Peter II
Gregory of Cappadocia (Anti-patriarch)
Peter II








v
t
e


Popes and Patriarchs of Alexandria of the See of Saint Mark



Patriarchs prior to the
Chalcedonian schism
(43–451)



Mark I the Evangelist (founder)
Anianus
Avilius
Kedronos
Primus
Justus
Eumenius
Markianos*
Celadion
Agrippinus
Julian
Demetrius I
Heraclas
Dionysius
Maximus
Theonas
Peter I
Achillas
Alexander I
Athanasius I
Peter II
Timothy I
Theophilus I
Cyril I
Dioscorus I








Coptic Orthodox
Popes and Patriarchs
(451–present)



Timothy II
Peter III
Athanasius II
John I
John II
Dioscorus II
Timothy III
Theodosius I
Peter IV
Damian
Anastasius
Andronicus
Benjamin I
Agathon
John III
Isaac
Simeon I
Alexander II
Cosmas I
Theodore I
Michael I
Mina I
John IV
Mark II
James
Simeon II
Joseph I
Michael II
Cosmas II
Shenouda I
Michael III
Gabriel I
Cosmas III
Macarius I
Theophilus II (AKA Theophanes)
Mina II
Abraham
Philotheos
Zacharias
Shenouda II
Christodolos
Cyril II
Michael IV
Macarius II
Gabriel II
Michael V
John V
Mark III
John VI
Cyril III
Athanasius III
John VII
Gabriel III
John VII
Theodosius III
John VIII
John IX
Benjamin II
Peter V
Mark IV
John X
Gabriel IV
Matthew I
Gabriel V
John XI
Matthew II
Gabriel VI
Michael VI
John XII
John XIII
Gabriel VII
John XIV
Gabriel VIII
Mark V
John XV
Matthew III
Mark VI
Matthew IV
John XVI
Peter VI
John XVII
Mark VII
John XVIII
Mark VIII
Peter VII
Cyril IV
Demetrius II
Cyril V
John XIX
Macarius III
Joseph II
Cyril VI
Shenouda III
Tawadros II (current)





Greek Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs
(451–present)



Proterius
Timothy II
Timothy III
John I
Peter III
Athanasius II
John II
John III
Dioscorus II
Timothy IV
Theodosius I
Gainas
Paul
Zoilus
Apollinarius
John IV
Eulogius
Theodore I
John V
George I
Cyrus
Peter IV
Peter V
Peter VI
Cosmas I
Politianus
Eustatius
Christopher I
Sophronius I
Michael I
Michael II
Christodoulos
Eutychius
Sophronius II
Isaac
Job
Elias I
Arsenius
Theophilus II
George II
Leontius
Alexander II
John VI
Cyril II
Sabbas
Sophronius III
Elias II
Eleutherius
Mark III*
Nicholas I
Gregory I
Nicholas II
Athanasius III
Gregory II
Gregory III
Niphon
Mark IV
Nicholas III
Gregory IV
Nicholas IV
Athanasius IV
Mark V
Philotheus
Mark VI
Gregory V
Joachim I
Silvester
Meletius I Pegas
Cyril III
Gerasimus I
Metrophanes
Nicephorus
Joannicius
Paisius
Parthenius I
Gerasimus II
Samuel
Cosmas II
Cosmas III
Matthew
Cyprian
Gerasimus III
Parthenius II
Theophilus III
Hierotheus I
Artemius
Hierotheus II
Callinicus
Jacob
Nicanor
Sophronius IV
Photius
Meletius II
Nicholas V
Christopher II
Nicholas VI
Parthenius III
Peter VII
Theodore II (current)





Latin Catholic Patriarchs
(1276 –1954 )



Atanasio (Athanasius)
Egidio da Ferrara (Giles)
 ?Humbert II, Dauphin of Vienne
Juan (John)
Guillaume de Chanac
Arnaud Bernard du Pouget (Arnaldo Bernardi)
uncanonical Jean de Cardaillac
Pietro Amely di Brunac
 ? Johannes Walteri von Sinten
uncanonical Simon of Cramaud
Pietro Amely di Brunac
Leonardo Dolfin
Ugo Roberti
Pietro Amaury di Lordat
Lancelotus de Navarra
Giovanni Contarini
Pietro
Vitalis di Mauléon
Giovanni Vitelleschi
Marco Condulmer
Jean d’Harcourt
Arnaldo Rogerii de Palas
Pedro de Urrea
Pedro González de Mendoza
Diego Hurtado de Mendoza
Alonso de Fonseca y Acevedo
Bernardino Carafa
Cesare Riario
Guido Ascanio Sforza di Santa Fiora
Ottaviano Maria Sforza
Julius Gonzaga
Cristoforo Guidalotti Ciocchi del Monte
Jacques Cortès
Tommaso
Alessandro Riario
Enrico Caetani
Giovanni Battista Albani
Camillo Caetani
Séraphin Olivier-Razali
Alessandro di Sangro
Honoratus Caetani
Federico Borromeo
Allesandro Crescenzi
Aloysius Bevilacqua
Pietro Draghi Bartoli
Gregorio Giuseppe Gaetani de Aragonia
Carlo Ambrosio Mezzabarba
Filippo Carlo Spada
Girolamo Crispi
Giuseppe Antonio Davanzati
Lodovico Agnello Anastasi
Francisco Mattei
Augustus Foscolo
Paolo Angelo Ballerini
Domenico Marinangeli
Paolo de Huyn
Luca Ermenegildo Pasetto





Melkite Catholic Titular Patriarchs
(1724–present)



Cyril VI Tanas
Athanasius IV Jawhar
Maximos II Hakim
Theodosius V Dahan
Athanasius IV Jawhar
Cyril VII Siaj
Agapius II Matar
Ignatius IV Sarrouf
Athanasius V Matar
Macarius IV Tawil
Ignatius V Qattan
Maximos III Mazloum
Clement Bahouth
Gregory II Youssef-Sayur
Peter IV Jaraijiry
Cyril VIII Geha
Demetrius I Qadi
Cyril IX Moghabghab
Maximos IV Sayegh
Maximos V Hakim
Gregory III Laham
Youssef I Absi





Coptic Catholic Patriarchs
(1824–present)



Maximos Jouwed
Kyrillos Makarios
Stéphanos I Sidarouss
Stéphanos II Ghattas
Antonios I Naguib
Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak








*Markianos is considered Mark II on the Greek side of the subsequent schism, hence this numbering of Mark III.
Category
Commons












v
t
e


Doctors of the Catholic Church






Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Saints of the Catholic Church



Virgin Mary



Mother of God (Theotokos)
Immaculate Conception
Perpetual virginity
Assumption
Marian apparition

Guadalupe
Laus
Miraculous Medal
Lourdes
Fatima


Titles of Mary








Apostles



Andrew
Barnabas
Bartholomew
James of Alphaeus
James the Greater
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Paul
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas





Archangels



Gabriel
Michael
Raphael





Confessors



Anatolius
Chariton the Confessor
Edward the Confessor
Maximus the Confessor
Michael of Synnada
Paphnutius the Confessor
Paul I of Constantinople
Salonius
Theophanes the Confessor





Disciples



Apollos
Mary Magdalene
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples





Doctors







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Evangelists



Matthew
Mark
Luke
John





Church
fathers



Alexander of Alexandria
Alexander of Jerusalem
Ambrose of Milan
Anatolius
Athanasius of Alexandria
Augustine of Hippo
Caesarius of Arles
Caius
Cappadocian Fathers
Clement of Alexandria
Clement of Rome
Cyprian of Carthage
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
Damasus I
Desert Fathers
Desert Mothers
Dionysius of Alexandria
Dionysius of Corinth
Dionysius
Ephrem the Syrian
Epiphanius of Salamis
Fulgentius of Ruspe
Gregory the Great
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
Hilary of Poitiers
Hippolytus of Rome
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus of Lyons
Isidore of Seville
Jerome of Stridonium
John Chrysostom
John of Damascus
Maximus the Confessor
Melito of Sardis
Quadratus of Athens
Papias of Hierapolis
Peter Chrysologus
Polycarp of Smyrna
Theophilus of Antioch
Victorinus of Pettau
Vincent of Lérins
Zephyrinus





Martyrs



Canadian Martyrs
Carthusian Martyrs
Forty Martyrs of England and Wales
Four Crowned Martyrs
Great Martyr
The Holy Innocents
Irish Martyrs
Joan of Arc
Lübeck martyrs
Korean Martyrs
Martyrology
Martyrs of Albania
Martyrs of China
Martyrs of Japan
Martyrs of Laos
Martyrs of Natal
Martyrs of Otranto
Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War
Maximilian Kolbe
Perpetua and Felicity
Saints of the Cristero War
Stephen
Three Martyrs of Chimbote
Uganda Martyrs
Vietnamese Martyrs





Patriarchs



Adam
Abel
Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph
Joseph (father of Jesus)
David
Noah
Solomon
Matriarchs





Popes



Adeodatus I
Adeodatus II
Adrian III
Agapetus I
Agatho
Alexander I
Anacletus
Anastasius I
Anicetus
Anterus
Benedict II
Boniface I
Boniface IV
Caius
Callixtus I
Celestine I
Celestine V
Clement I
Cornelius
Damasus I
Dionysius
Eleuterus
Eugene I
Eusebius
Eutychian
Evaristus
Fabian
Felix I
Felix III
Felix IV
Gelasius I
Gregory I
Gregory II
Gregory III
Gregory VII
Hilarius
Hormisdas
Hyginus
Innocent I
John I
John XXIII
John Paul II
Julius I
Leo I
Leo II
Leo III
Leo IV
Leo IX
Linus
Lucius I
Marcellinus
Marcellus I
Mark
Martin I
Miltiades
Nicholas I
Paschal I
Paul I
Peter
Pius I
Pius V
Pius X
Pontian
Sergius I
Silverius
Simplicius
Siricius
Sixtus I
Sixtus II
Sixtus III
Soter
Stephen I
Stephen IV
Sylvester I
Symmachus
Telesphorus
Urban I
Victor I
Vitalian
Zachary
Zephyrinus
Zosimus





Prophets



Agabus
Amos
Anna
Baruch ben Neriah
David
Dalua
Elijah
Ezekiel
Habakkuk
Haggai
Hosea
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Job
Joel
John the Baptist
Jonah
Judas Barsabbas
Malachi
Melchizedek
Micah
Moses
Nahum
Obadiah
Samuel
Seven Maccabees and their mother
Simeon
Zechariah (prophet)
Zechariah (NT)
Zephaniah





Virgins



Agatha of Sicily
Agnes of Rome
Bernadette Soubirous
Brigid of Kildare
Cecilia
Clare of Assisi
Eulalia of Mérida
Euphemia
Genevieve
Kateri Tekakwitha
Lucy of Syracuse
Maria Goretti
Mother Teresa
Narcisa de Jesús
Rose of Lima





See also



Military saints
Virtuous pagan








 Catholicism portal
 Saints portal












v
t
e


Coptic Orthodox Saints



Theotokos



Our Lady of Assiut
Our Lady of Warraq
Our Lady of Zeitoun




,




,




,



Seven Archangels



Michael
Gabriel
Raphael
Suriel
Zedekiel
Serathiel
Ananiel





Patriarchs



Abraham
Isaac
Jacob
Joseph





Prophets



Moses
Job
Samuel
David
Hosea
Amos
Micah
Joel
Obadiah
Jonah
Nahum
Habakkuk
Zephaniah
Haggai
Zechariah
Malachi
Isaiah
Jeremiah
Baruch
Ezekiel
Daniel
John the Baptist





Apostles



Andrew
Bartholomew
James, son of Alphaeus
James, son of Zebedee
John
Jude
Matthew
Matthias
Peter
Philip
Simon
Thomas





Evangelists



Matthew
Mark
Luke
John





Disciples



Apollos
Barnabas
Mary Magdalene
Philemon
Priscilla and Aquila
Silvanus
Stephen
Timothy
Titus
Seventy disciples





Martyrs



21 martyrs in Libya
Abāmūn
Abāmūn
Abanoub
Abaskhiron
Alexandrian Martyrs
Apollonia
Barbara
Bashnouna
Basilides
Catherine
Chiaffredo
Chrysanthus
Colluthus
Cyprian
Cyrus
Damian
Daria
Dasya
Dorothea
Epimachus
Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius]]
Felix
Gallicanus
George
George el-Mozahem
Gereon
Hor, Besoy, and Daydara
Imbaba Martyrs
John
John of Senhout
Justina
Kosheh Martyrs
Malati
Maspero Martyrs
Maurice
Menas
Mohrael
Nah Hammadi
Philotheos
Potamiana
Regula
Sidhom Bishay
Thecla
Theoclia
Veronica
Wanas





Popes



Mark I
Anianus
Avilius
Kedron
Primus
Justus
Eumenes
Markianos
Celadion
Agrippinus
Julian
Demetrius I
Heraclas
Dionysius
Maximus
Theonas
Peter I
Achillas
Alexander I
Athanasius I
Peter II
Timothy I
Theophilus I
Cyril I
Dioscorus I
Timothy II
Peter III
Athanasius II
John I
John II
Dioscorus II
Timothy III
Theodosius I
Peter IV
Damian
Anastasius
Andronicus
Benjamin I
Agathon
John III
Isaac
Simeon I
Alexander II
Cosmas I
Theodore I
Michael I
Mina I
John IV
Mark II
James
Simeon II
Joseph I
Michael II
Cosmas II
Shenouda I
Michael III
Gabriel I
Cosmas III
Macarius I
Theophanes
Mina II
Abraham
Philotheos
Zacharias
Shenouda II
Christodolos
Cyril II
Michael IV
Macarius II
Gabriel II
Michael V
John V
Mark III
John VI
Cyril III
Athanasius III
John VII
Gabriel III
John VII
Theodosius III
John VIII
John IX
Benjamin II
Peter V
Mark IV
John X
Gabriel IV
Matthew I
Cyril VI
Shenouda III
Tawadros II (current)





Bishops



Abadiu of Antinoe
Abraam of Faiyum
Alexander of Jerusalem
Amun of Scetes
Athanasius of Beni Suef
Basil of Caesarea
Cyril of Jerusalem
Epiphanius of Cyprus
Eusebius of Caesarea
Gregory of Nyssa
Gregory of Neocaesarea
Hadra of Aswan
Ignatius of Antioch
Isidorus of Hermonpolis
Jacob of Nisibis
James of Cairo
James of Jerusalem
John of Nikiu
John of Jerusalem
Karas of California
Macarius of Edkow
Mikhaeil of Asyut
Narcissus of Jerusalem
Nicholas of Myra
Paphnutius of Scetes
Paphnutius of Thebes
Peter Elrahawy of Gaza
Pisentius of Qift
Pisentius of Hermonthis
Pisora of Masil
Polycarp of Smyrna
Porphyry of Gaza
Ptolemy of Minuf
Psote of Ebsay
Sarapamon of Monufia
Sarapamon of Niku
Serapion of Thmuis
Severian of Gabala
Yousab el-Abah of Girga
Timothy of Ansena
Zacharias of Sakha





Anchorites



Anasimon
Babnuda
Balamon
Elisa
Ezekiel
Ghalion
Hedra
Hermina
Karas
Keriakos
Latsoun
Mary
Misael
Olaghi
Onuphrius
Paphnutius
Paul
Pijimi
Shenouda
Silas
Stephanos
Stratios
Timothy
Thomas
Yousab
Zosimas





Monks



Ababius
Abdel Messih El-Makari
Abib and Apollo
Abraham of Farshut
Abraham of Scetes
Amun
Anthony the Great
Awgin
Bashnouna
Hilarion
Isaac of Nineveh
Isidore of Pelusium
John Climacus
John the Dwarf
Macarius of Alexandria
Macarius of Egypt
Moses the Black
Mother Irini
Nilus of Sinai
Pachomius the Great
Pambo
Parsoma
Paul of Tammah
Paul the Simple
Pishoy
Poemen
Samuel the Confessor
Tekle Haymanot





Other saints



Ambrose
Didymus the Blind
Euphrosyne
Freig
Simon the Tanner
Verena








 Oriental Orthodoxy portal












v
t
e


Autocephalous and autonomous churches of Oriental Orthodoxy



Autocephalous
churches



Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Armenian Apostolic Church
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Syriac Orthodox Church
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church





Autonomous
churches



Coptic Orthodox:
French Coptic Orthodox Church


Armenian Apostolic:
Holy See of Cilicia
Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople
Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem


Syriac Orthodox:
Malankara Jacobite


Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church:
Brahmavar (Goan) Orthodox Church












v
t
e


Ethiopian Saints by Feast Day



January



Abeluzius (15th)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)








February



Tekle Haymanot (24th)





March



Tekle Haymanot (24th)





April



Tekle Haymanot (24th)





May



Saint Abraham (5th)
Yared (19th)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)
Kaleb (28th)
Ablak (30th)





June



Tekle Haymanot (24th)





July



Moses the Black (1st)
Giyorgis of Segla (14th)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)





August



Frumentius (1st)
Abraham, Ethnus, Acrates, James, and John (3rd)
Tekle Haymanot (17th and 24th)





September



Abnodius (3rd)
Melki of Clysma (11th)
Daysa the Egyptian (12th)
Anbas (13th)
Mamas the Martyr (15th)
Lebna Dengel (15th)
Fasilidas (19th)
Yasay (19th)
Matronya (20th)
Aflahos (22nd)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)
Absadi (27th)





October



Sharda Hawaryat (1st)
Matlan the physician (4th)
Lawa-Krestos (5th)
Basalota Mika’el (5th)
‘Oyoranos (5th)
‘Abtlemanos of Shoka (7th)
Abuna Aregawi (24th)
Ezana (1st)
Saizana (1st)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)





November



Tekle Haymanot (24th)





December



Iyasus Mo'a (5th)
Samuel of Waldebba (21st)
Tekle Haymanot (24th)








Related topics

Giustino de Jacobis (Roman Catholic), Nine Saints •  Armenian Apostolic liturgical calendar, Coptic calendar, Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar •   Category:Ethiopian saints








Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 105155222
LCCN: n79145591
ISNI: 0000 0001 2103 5972
GND: 118504843
SELIBR: 174815
SUDOC: 026693895
BNF: cb11889341x (data)
BIBSYS: 90276470
NLA: 35009755
NDL: 00462526
NKC: jn19981000155
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\007443
IATH: w6028qvf











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Athanasius_of_Alexandria&oldid=818333683"					Categories: Ethiopian saints290s births373 deaths4th-century archbishops4th-century Byzantine people4th-century Christian saints4th-century Christian theologians4th-century philosophers4th-century RomansChristologistsChurch FathersCoptic Christians from EgyptDoctors of the ChurchEgyptian Christian clergySaints from Roman EgyptEgyptian saintsEgyptian Christian saintsEgyptian theologiansOpponents of ArianismPatriarchs of AlexandriaPopes of the Coptic Orthodox Church of AlexandriaRoman-era AlexandriansCoptic ChristiansCoptsCoptic Orthodox saintsHidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from July 2012Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2014Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles containing Latin-language textArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers