Coordinates: 21°22′N 157°57′W﻿ / ﻿21.367°N 157.950°W﻿ / 21.367; -157.950


Attack on Pearl Harbor


Part of the Asia and the Pacific Theater of World War II



Photograph of Battleship Row taken from a Japanese plane at the beginning of the attack. The explosion in the center is a torpedo strike on USS West Virginia. Two attacking Japanese planes can be seen: one over USS Neosho and one over the Naval Yard.





Date
December 7, 1941; 76 years ago (1941-12-07)


Location
Primarily Pearl Harbor, Hawaii Territory, U.S.


Result

Major Japanese tactical victory; precipitated the entrance of the United States into World War II

See consequences of the attack on Pearl Harbor







Belligerents


 United States
 Japan


Commanders and leaders


 ADM Husband E. Kimmel
 LTG Walter Short
 VADM Chūichi Nagumo
 ADM Isoroku Yamamoto
 CDR Mitsuo Fuchida


Strength


8 battleships
8 cruisers
30 destroyers
4 submarines
3 USCG Cutters[nb 1]
47 other ships[4]
≈390 aircraft
Mobile Unit:
6 aircraft carriers
2 battleships
2 heavy cruisers
1 light cruiser
9 destroyers
8 tankers
23 fleet submarines
5 midget submarines
414 aircraft


Casualties and losses


4 battleships sunk
4 battleships damaged
2 other ships sunk[nb 2]
3 cruisers damaged[nb 3]
3 destroyers damaged
3 other ships damaged
188 aircraft destroyed
159[6] aircraft damaged
2,335 killed
1,143 wounded
4 midget submarines sunk
1 midget submarine grounded
29 aircraft destroyed
64 killed
1 sailor captured[7]



Civilian casualties
68 killed[8][9]
35 wounded[10]
3 aircraft shot down








v
t
e


Hawaiian Islands Campaign






Pearl Harbor
Niihau
1st Midway
Johnston and Palmyra
2nd Midway
K
3rd Midway












v
t
e


Japanese offensives,
1940–1942






French Indochina
Thailand
Malaya
Borneo
Pearl Harbor
Hong Kong
Philippines
Guam
Wake
Dutch East Indies
New Guinea
Singapore
Burma
Australia
Indian Ocean
Solomons
Coral Sea
North America












v
t
e


Pacific War




Central Pacific

Hawaii
Marshalls-Gilberts raids
Doolittle Raid
Coral Sea
Midway
RY
Solomons
Gilberts & Marshalls
Marianas & Palau
Volcano & Ryukyu
Truk

Southeast Asia

Indochina (1940)
Indian Ocean (1940–45)
Philippines 1941–42
Franco-Thai War
Thailand
Dutch East Indies
Malaya
Hong Kong
Burma (1941–42)
Singapore
Burma (1942–43)
Burma (1944)
Burma (1944–45)
Indochina (1945)
Malacca Strait
Jurist
Tiderace
Zipper
Strategic bombing (1944–45)

Southwest Pacific

Dutch East Indies 1941–42
Portuguese Timor
Australia
New Guinea
Philippines 1944–45
Borneo 1945

North America

Attack on Pearl Harbor
Ellwood
K
Aleutian Islands
Estevan Point Lighthouse
Fort Stevens
Lookout Air Raids
Fire balloon
Project Hula
PX

Japan

Air raids
Mariana Islands
Volcano & Ryukyu Is
Tokyo
Starvation
Naval bombardments
Yokosuka
Sagami Bay
Kure
Downfall
Hiroshima & Nagasaki
Kurils
Karafuto
Japanese surrender

Manchuria

Kantokuen
Manchuria (1945)
Mutanchiang
Sakhalin Island
Kuril Islands
Shumshu


Second Sino-Japanese War




The attack on Pearl Harbor was a surprise military strike by the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service against the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii Territory, on the morning of December 7, 1941. The attack, also known as the Battle of Pearl Harbor,[11] led to the United States' entry into World War II. The Japanese military leadership referred to the attack as the Hawaii Operation and Operation AI,[12][13] and as Operation Z during its planning.[14]
Japan intended the attack as a preventive action to keep the U.S. Pacific Fleet from interfering with military actions that were planned in Southeast Asia against overseas territories of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and the United States. Over the next seven hours there were coordinated Japanese attacks on the U.S.-held Philippines, Guam and Wake Island and on the British Empire in Malaya, Singapore, and Hong Kong.[15]
The attack commenced at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time (18:18 GMT).[nb 4][16] The base was attacked by 353[17] Imperial Japanese aircraft (including fighters, level and dive bombers, and torpedo bombers) in two waves, launched from six aircraft carriers.[17] All eight U.S. Navy battleships were damaged, with four sunk. All but the USS Arizona were later raised, and six were returned to service and went on to fight in the war. The Japanese also sank or damaged three cruisers, three destroyers, an anti-aircraft training ship,[nb 5] and one minelayer. One hundred eighty-eight U.S. aircraft were destroyed; 2,403 Americans were killed and 1,178 others were wounded.[19] Important base installations such as the power station, dry dock, shipyard, maintenance, and fuel and torpedo storage facilities, as well as the submarine piers and headquarters building (also home of the intelligence section), were not attacked. Japanese losses were light: 29 aircraft and five midget submarines lost, and 64 servicemen killed. One Japanese sailor, Kazuo Sakamaki, was captured.
The surprise attack came as a profound shock to the American people and led directly to the American entry into World War II in both the Pacific and European theaters. The following day, December 8, the United States declared war on Japan,[20][21] and several days later, on December 11, Germany and Italy declared war on the U.S. The U.S. responded with a declaration of war against Germany and Italy. Domestic support for non-interventionism, which had been fading since the Fall of France in 1940,[22] disappeared.[21]
There were numerous historical precedents for unannounced military action by Japan, but the lack of any formal warning, particularly while negotiations were still apparently ongoing, led President Franklin D. Roosevelt to proclaim December 7, 1941, "a date which will live in infamy". Because the attack happened without a declaration of war and without explicit warning, the attack on Pearl Harbor was later judged in the Tokyo Trials to be a war crime.[23][24]



Contents


1 Background to conflict

1.1 Diplomatic background
1.2 Military planning
1.3 Objectives


2 Approach and attack

2.1 Submarines
2.2 Japanese declaration of war
2.3 First wave composition
2.4 Second wave composition
2.5 American casualties and damage
2.6 Japanese losses
2.7 Possible third wave


3 Ships lost or damaged

3.1 Battleships
3.2 Ex-battleship (target/AA training ship)
3.3 Cruisers
3.4 Destroyers
3.5 Auxiliaries


4 Salvage
5 Aftermath

5.1 Niihau Incident
5.2 Strategic implications
5.3 Retrospective debate on American intelligence


6 In popular culture
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Background to conflict
Main article: Events leading to the attack on Pearl Harbor
Diplomatic background
War between Japan and the United States had been a possibility that each nation had been aware of (and developed contingency plans for) since the 1920s, though tensions did not begin to grow seriously until Japan's 1931 invasion of Manchuria. Over the next decade, Japan continued to expand into China, leading to all-out war between those countries in 1937. Japan spent considerable effort trying to isolate China and achieve sufficient resource independence to attain victory on the mainland; the "Southern Operation" was designed to assist these efforts.[25]




Pearl Harbor on October 30, 1941, looking southwest


From December 1937, events such as the Japanese attack on USS Panay, the Allison incident, and the Nanking Massacre (the International Military Tribunal of the Far East concluded that more than 200,000 Chinese non-combatants were killed in indiscriminate massacres, though other estimates have ranged from 40,000 to more than 300,000) swung public opinion in the West sharply against Japan. Fearing Japanese expansion,[26] the United States, the United Kingdom, and France provided loan assistance for war supply contracts to China.
In 1940, Japan invaded French Indochina in an effort to control supplies reaching China. The United States halted shipments of airplanes, parts, machine tools, and aviation gasoline to Japan, which was perceived by Japan as an unfriendly act.[nb 6] The U.S. did not stop oil exports to Japan at that time in part because prevailing sentiment in Washington was that such an action would be an extreme step that Japan would likely consider a provocation, given Japanese dependence on U.S. oil.[28][29]
Early in 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt moved the Pacific Fleet to Hawaii from its previous base in San Diego and ordered a military buildup in the Philippines in the hope of discouraging Japanese aggression in the Far East. Because the Japanese high command was (mistakenly) certain that any attack on the UK's Southeast Asian colonies, including Singapore,[30] would bring the U.S. into war, a devastating preventive strike appeared to be the only way to avoid U.S. naval interference.[31] An invasion of the Philippines was also considered necessary by Japanese war planners. The U.S. War Plan Orange had envisioned defending the Philippines with a 40,000-man elite force. This was opposed by Douglas MacArthur, who felt that he would need a force ten times that size, and was never implemented.[32][self-published source] By 1941, U.S. planners anticipated abandonment of the Philippines at the outbreak of war and orders to that effect were given in late 1941 to Admiral Thomas Hart, commander of the Asiatic Fleet.[33]
The U.S. ceased oil exports to Japan in July 1941, following Japanese expansion into French Indochina after the Fall of France, in part because of new American restrictions on domestic oil consumption.[34] This in turn caused the Japanese to proceed with plans to take the Dutch East Indies, an oil-rich territory.[nb 7] On August 17, Roosevelt warned Japan that the U.S. was prepared to take steps against Japan if it attacked "neighboring countries".[36] The Japanese were faced with the option of either withdrawing from China and losing face or seizing and securing new sources of raw materials in the resource-rich, European-controlled colonies of Southeast Asia.
Japan and the U.S. engaged in negotiations during the course of 1941 in an effort to improve relations. During these negotiations, Japan offered to withdraw from most of China and Indochina when peace was made with the Nationalist government, adopt an independent interpretation of the Tripartite Pact, and not to discriminate in trade provided all other countries reciprocated. Washington rejected these proposals. Japanese Prime Minister Konoye then offered to meet with Roosevelt, but Roosevelt insisted on coming to an agreement before any meeting.[37] The U.S. ambassador to Japan repeatedly urged Roosevelt to accept the meeting, warning that it was the only way to preserve the conciliatory Konoye government and peace in the Pacific.[38] His recommendation was not acted upon. The Konoye government collapsed the following month when the Japanese military refused to agree to the withdrawal of all troops from China.[39]
Japan's final proposal, on November 20, offered to withdraw their forces from southern Indochina and not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia provided that the U.S., the UK, and the Netherlands ceased aiding China and lifted their sanctions against Japan.[39] The American counter-proposal of November 26 (November 27 in Japan) (the Hull note) required Japan to evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with Pacific powers. However the day before the Hull Note was delivered, on November 26 in Japan, the main Japanese attack fleet left port for Pearl Harbor.
Military planning
Preliminary planning for an attack on Pearl Harbor to protect the move into the "Southern Resource Area" (the Japanese term for the Dutch East Indies and Southeast Asia generally) had begun very early in 1941 under the auspices of Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, then commanding Japan's Combined Fleet.[40] He won assent to formal planning and training for an attack from the Imperial Japanese Navy General Staff only after much contention with Naval Headquarters, including a threat to resign his command.[41] Full-scale planning was underway by early spring 1941, primarily by Rear Admiral Ryūnosuke Kusaka, with assistance from Captain Minoru Genda and Yamamoto's Deputy Chief of Staff, Captain Kameto Kuroshima.[42] The planners studied the 1940 British air attack on the Italian fleet at Taranto intensively.[nb 8][nb 9]
Over the next several months, pilots were trained, equipment was adapted, and intelligence was collected. Despite these preparations, Emperor Hirohito did not approve the attack plan until November 5, after the third of four Imperial Conferences called to consider the matter.[45] Final authorization was not given by the emperor until December 1, after a majority of Japanese leaders advised him the "Hull Note" would "destroy the fruits of the China incident, endanger Manchukuo and undermine Japanese control of Korea."[46]
By late 1941, many observers believed that hostilities between the U.S. and Japan were imminent. A Gallup poll just before the attack on Pearl Harbor found that 52% of Americans expected war with Japan, 27% did not, and 21% had no opinion.[47] While U.S. Pacific bases and facilities had been placed on alert on many occasions, U.S. officials doubted Pearl Harbor would be the first target; instead, they expected the Philippines would be attacked first. This presumption was due to the threat that the air bases throughout the country and the naval base at Manila posed to sea lanes, as well as to the shipment of supplies to Japan from territory to the south.[48] They also incorrectly believed that Japan was not capable of mounting more than one major naval operation at a time.[49]
Objectives
The Japanese attack had several major aims. First, it intended to destroy important American fleet units, thereby preventing the Pacific Fleet from interfering with Japanese conquest of the Dutch East Indies and Malaya and to enable Japan to conquer Southeast Asia without interference. Second, it was hoped to buy time for Japan to consolidate its position and increase its naval strength before shipbuilding authorized by the 1940 Vinson-Walsh Act erased any chance of victory.[50][51] Third, to deliver a blow to America's ability to mobilize its forces in the Pacific, battleships were chosen as the main targets, since they were the prestige ships of any navy at the time.[50] Finally, it was hoped that the attack would undermine American morale such that the U.S. government would drop its demands contrary to Japanese interests, and would seek a compromise peace with Japan.[52][53]
Striking the Pacific Fleet at anchor in Pearl Harbor carried two distinct disadvantages: the targeted ships would be in very shallow water, so it would be relatively easy to salvage and possibly repair them; and most of the crews would survive the attack, since many would be on shore leave or would be rescued from the harbor. A further important disadvantage—this of timing, and known to the Japanese—was the absence from Pearl Harbor of all three of the U.S. Pacific Fleet's aircraft carriers (Enterprise, Lexington, and Saratoga). IJN top command was so imbued with Admiral Mahan's "decisive battle" doctrine—especially that of destroying the maximum number of battleships—that, despite these concerns, Yamamoto decided to press ahead.[54][page needed]
Japanese confidence in their ability to achieve a short, victorious war also meant other targets in the harbor, especially the navy yard, oil tank farms, and submarine base, were ignored, since—by their thinking—the war would be over before the influence of these facilities would be felt.[55]
Approach and attack
See also: Order of battle of the Attack on Pearl Harbor




Route followed by the Japanese fleet to Pearl Harbor and back






An Imperial Japanese Navy Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter on the aircraft carrier Akagi


On November 26, 1941, a Japanese task force (the Striking Force) of six aircraft carriers—Akagi, Kaga, Sōryū, Hiryū, Shōkaku, and Zuikaku—departed Hittokapu Bay on Kasatka (now Iterup) Island in the Kurile Islands, en route to a position northwest of Hawaii, intending to launch its 408 aircraft to attack Pearl Harbor: 360 for the two attack waves and 48 on defensive combat air patrol (CAP), including nine fighters from the first wave.
The first wave was to be the primary attack, while the second wave was to attack carriers as its first objective and cruisers as its second, with battleships as the third target.[56] The first wave carried most of the weapons to attack capital ships, mainly specially adapted Type 91 aerial torpedoes which were designed with an anti-roll mechanism and a rudder extension that let them operate in shallow water.[57] The aircrews were ordered to select the highest value targets (battleships and aircraft carriers) or, if these were not present, any other high value ships (cruisers and destroyers). First wave dive bombers were to attack ground targets. Fighters were ordered to strafe and destroy as many parked aircraft as possible to ensure they did not get into the air to intercept the bombers, especially in the first wave. When the fighters' fuel got low they were to refuel at the aircraft carriers and return to combat. Fighters were to serve CAP duties where needed, especially over U.S. airfields.[citation needed]
Before the attack commenced, two reconnaissance aircraft launched from cruisers Chikuma and Tone were sent to scout over Oahu and Maui and report on U.S. fleet composition and location. Reconnaissance aircraft flights risked alerting the U.S.,[58] and were not necessary. U.S. fleet composition and preparedness information in Pearl Harbor was already known due to the reports of the Japanese spy Takeo Yoshikawa. A report of the absence of the U.S. fleet in Lahaina anchorage off Maui was received from the fleet submarine I-72.[59] Another four scout planes patrolled the area between the Japanese carrier force (the Kidō Butai) and Niihau, to detect any counterattack.[60]
Submarines
Fleet submarines I-16, I-18, I-20, I-22, and I-24 each embarked a Type A midget submarine for transport to the waters off Oahu.[61] The five I-boats left Kure Naval District on November 25, 1941.[62] On December 6, they came to within 10 nmi (19 km; 12 mi) of the mouth of Pearl Harbor[63] and launched their midget subs at about 01:00[clarification needed] on December 7.[64] At 03:42[65] Hawaiian Time, the minesweeper Condor spotted a midget submarine periscope southwest of the Pearl Harbor entrance buoy and alerted the destroyer Ward.[66] The midget may have entered Pearl Harbor. However, Ward sank another midget submarine at 06:37[66][nb 10] in the first American shots in the Pacific Theater. A midget submarine on the north side of Ford Island missed the seaplane tender Curtiss with her first torpedo and missed the attacking destroyer Monaghan with her other one before being sunk by Monaghan at 08:43.[66]
A third midget submarine, Ha-19, grounded twice, once outside the harbor entrance and again on the east side of Oahu, where it was captured on December 8.[68] Ensign Kazuo Sakamaki swam ashore and was captured by Hawaii National Guard Corporal David Akui, becoming the first Japanese prisoner of war.[nb 11] A fourth had been damaged by a depth charge attack and was abandoned by its crew before it could fire its torpedoes.[69] Japanese forces received a radio message from a midget submarine at 00:41 on December 8 claiming damage to one or more large warships inside Pearl Harbor.[70]
In 1992, 2000, and 2001, Hawaii Undersea Research Laboratory's submersibles found the wreck of the fifth midget submarine lying in three parts outside Pearl Harbor. The wreck was in the debris field where much surplus U.S. equipment was dumped after the war, including vehicles and landing craft. Both of its torpedoes were missing. This correlates with reports of two torpedoes fired at the light cruiser St. Louis at 10:04 at the entrance of Pearl Harbor, and a possible torpedo fired at destroyer Helm at 08:21.[71]
Japanese declaration of war
See also: Japanese war crimes
The attack took place before any formal declaration of war was made by Japan, but this was not Admiral Yamamoto's intention. He originally stipulated that the attack should not commence until thirty minutes after Japan had informed the United States that peace negotiations were at an end.[citation needed] However, the attack began before the notice could be delivered. Tokyo transmitted the 5000-word notification (commonly called the "14-Part Message") in two blocks to the Japanese Embassy in Washington. Transcribing the message took too long for the Japanese ambassador to deliver it on schedule; in the event, it was not presented until more than an hour after the attack began. (In fact, U.S. code breakers had already deciphered and translated most of the message hours before he was scheduled to deliver it.)[72] The final part is sometimes described as a declaration of war. While it was viewed by a number of senior U.S government and military officials as a very strong indicator negotiations were likely to be terminated[73] and that war might break out at any moment,[74] it neither declared war nor severed diplomatic relations. A declaration of war was printed on the front page of Japan's newspapers in the evening edition of December 8,[75] but not delivered to the U.S. government until the day after the attack.
For decades, conventional wisdom held that Japan attacked without first formally breaking diplomatic relations only because of accidents and bumbling that delayed the delivery of a document hinting at war to Washington. In 1999, however, Takeo Iguchi, a professor of law and international relations at International Christian University in Tokyo, discovered documents that pointed to a vigorous debate inside the government over how, and indeed whether, to notify Washington of Japan's intention to break off negotiations and start a war, including a December 7 entry in the war diary saying, "[O]ur deceptive diplomacy is steadily proceeding toward success." Of this, Iguchi said, "The diary shows that the army and navy did not want to give any proper declaration of war, or indeed prior notice even of the termination of negotiations ... and they clearly prevailed."[76][77]
In any event, even if the Japanese had decoded and delivered the 14-Part Message before the beginning of the attack, it would not have constituted either a formal break of diplomatic relations or a declaration of war. The final two paragraphs of the message read:

Thus the earnest hope of the Japanese Government to adjust Japanese-American relations and to preserve and promote the peace of the Pacific through cooperation with the American Government has finally been lost.

The Japanese Government regrets to have to notify hereby the American Government that in view of the attitude of the American Government it cannot but consider that it is impossible to reach an agreement through further negotiations.[78]
First wave composition




The Japanese attacked in two waves. The first wave was detected by U.S. Army radar at 136 nautical miles (252 km), but was misidentified as USAAF bombers arriving from the American mainland
Top:
A. Ford Island NAS B. Hickam Field C. Bellows Field D. Wheeler Field
E. Kaneohe NAS F. Ewa MCAS R-1. Opana Radar Station R-2. Kawailoa RS R-3. Kaaawa RS
G. Haleiwa H. Kahuku I. Wahiawa J. Kaneohe K. Honolulu
0. B-17s from mainland 1. First strike group 1-1. Level bombers 1–2. Torpedo bombers 1–3. Dive bombers 2. Second strike group 2-1. Level bombers 2-1F. Fighters 2-2. Dive bombers
Bottom:
A. Wake Island B. Midway Islands C. Johnston Island D. Hawaii
D-1. Oahu 1. USS Lexington 2. USS Enterprise 3. First Air Fleet






  < 21 feet (6.4 m)
  22–23 feet (6.7–7.0 m)
  29 feet (8.8 m)
  30–32 feet (9.1–9.8 m)
  33–34 feet (10.1–10.4 m)
  34–35 feet (10.4–10.7 m)
  36–37 feet (11.0–11.3 m)
  38–39 feet (11.6–11.9 m)
  40–41 feet (12.2–12.5 m)
  42–48 feet (12.8–14.6 m)
  > 49 feet (14.9 m)
  City
  Army base
  Navy base
Attacked targets:
1: USS California
2: USS Maryland
3: USS Oklahoma
4: USS Tennessee
5: USS West Virginia
6: USS Arizona
7: USS Nevada
8: USS Pennsylvania
9: Ford Island NAS
10: Hickam field
Ignored infrastructure targets:
A: Oil storage tanks
B: CINCPAC headquarters building
C: Submarine base
D: Navy Yard


The first attack wave of 183 planes was launched north of Oahu, led by Commander Mitsuo Fuchida.[79] Six planes failed to launch due to technical difficulties.[60] It included:[nb 12]

1st Group (targets: battleships and aircraft carriers)[81]

49 Nakajima B5N Kate bombers armed with 800 kg (1760 lb) armor-piercing bombs, organized in four sections (1 failed to launch)
40 B5N bombers armed with Type 91 torpedoes, also in four sections


2nd Group – (targets: Ford Island and Wheeler Field)

51 Aichi D3A Val dive bombers armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general-purpose bombs (3 failed to launch)


3rd Group – (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)

43 Mitsubishi A6M "Zero" fighters for air control and strafing[80] (2 failed to launch)



As the first wave approached Oahu, it was detected by the U.S. Army SCR-270 radar at Opana Point near the island's northern tip. This post had been in training mode for months, but was not yet operational.[82] The operators, Privates George Elliot Jr. and Joseph Lockard, reported a target.[83] But Lieutenant Kermit A. Tyler, a newly assigned officer at the thinly manned Intercept Center, presumed it was the scheduled arrival of six B-17 bombers from California. The Japanese planes were approaching from a direction very close (only a few degrees difference) to the bombers,[84] and while the operators had never seen a formation as large on radar, they neglected to tell Tyler of its size.[85] Tyler, for security reasons, could not tell the operators of the six B-17s that were due (even though it was widely known).[85]
As the first wave planes approached Oahu, they encountered and shot down several U.S. aircraft. At least one of these radioed a somewhat incoherent warning. Other warnings from ships off the harbor entrance were still being processed or awaiting confirmation when the attacking planes began bombing and strafing. Nevertheless, it is not clear any warnings would have had much effect even if they had been interpreted correctly and much more promptly. The results the Japanese achieved in the Philippines were essentially the same as at Pearl Harbor, though MacArthur had almost nine hours warning that the Japanese had already attacked Pearl Harbor.
The air portion of the attack began at 7:48 a.m. Hawaiian Time[16] (3:18 a.m. December 8 Japanese Standard Time, as kept by ships of the Kido Butai),[86][nb 4] with the attack on Kaneohe. A total of 353[17] Japanese planes in two waves reached Oahu. Slow, vulnerable torpedo bombers led the first wave, exploiting the first moments of surprise to attack the most important ships present (the battleships), while dive bombers attacked U.S. air bases across Oahu, starting with Hickam Field, the largest, and Wheeler Field, the main U.S. Army Air Forces fighter base. The 171 planes in the second wave attacked the Army Air Forces' Bellows Field near Kaneohe on the windward side of the island, and Ford Island. The only aerial opposition came from a handful of P-36 Hawks, P-40 Warhawks, and some SBD Dauntless dive bombers from the carrier Enterprise.[nb 13]




A destroyed Vindicator at Ewa field, the victim of one of the smaller attacks on the approach to Pearl Harbor


In the first wave attack, about eight of the forty-nine 800 kg (1760 lb) armor-piercing bombs dropped hit their intended battleship targets. At least two of those bombs broke up on impact, another detonated before penetrating an unarmored deck, and one was a dud. Thirteen of the forty torpedoes hit battleships, and four torpedoes hit other ships.[87] Men aboard U.S. ships awoke to the sounds of alarms, bombs exploding, and gunfire, prompting bleary-eyed men to dress as they ran to General Quarters stations. (The famous message, "Air raid Pearl Harbor. This is not drill.",[nb 14] was sent from the headquarters of Patrol Wing Two, the first senior Hawaiian command to respond.) The defenders were very unprepared. Ammunition lockers were locked, aircraft parked wingtip to wingtip in the open to prevent sabotage,[88] guns unmanned (none of the Navy's 5"/38s, only a quarter of its machine guns, and only four of 31 Army batteries got in action).[88] Despite this low alert status, many American military personnel responded effectively during the attack.[nb 15] Ensign Joe Taussig Jr., aboard Nevada, commanded the ship's antiaircraft guns and was severely wounded, but continued to be on post. Lt. Commander F. J. Thomas commanded Nevada in the captain's absence and got her under way until the ship was grounded at 9:10 a.m.[89] One of the destroyers, Aylwin, got underway with only four officers aboard, all ensigns, none with more than a year's sea duty; she operated at sea for 36 hours before her commanding officer managed to get back aboard.[90] Captain Mervyn Bennion, commanding West Virginia, led his men until he was cut down by fragments from a bomb which hit Tennessee, moored alongside.
Second wave composition
The second planned wave consisted of 171 planes: 54 B5Ns, 81 D3As, and 36 A6Ms, commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Shigekazu Shimazaki.[80] Four planes failed to launch because of technical difficulties.[60] This wave and its targets comprised:[80]

1st Group – 54 B5Ns armed with 550 lb (249 kg) and 132 lb (60 kg) general-purpose bombs[81]

27 B5Ns – aircraft and hangars on Kaneohe, Ford Island, and Barbers Point
27 B5Ns – hangars and aircraft on Hickam Field


2nd Group (targets: aircraft carriers and cruisers)

78 D3As armed with 550 lb (249 kg) general-purpose bombs, in four sections (3 aborted)


3rd Group – (targets: aircraft at Ford Island, Hickam Field, Wheeler Field, Barber's Point, Kaneohe)

35 A6Ms for defense and strafing (1 aborted)



The second wave was divided into three groups. One was tasked to attack Kāneʻohe, the rest Pearl Harbor proper. The separate sections arrived at the attack point almost simultaneously from several directions.
American casualties and damage
Ninety minutes after it began, the attack was over. Two thousand and eight sailors were killed, and 710 others wounded; 218 soldiers and airmen (who were part of the Army until the independent U.S. Air Force was formed in 1947) were killed and 364 wounded; 109 marines were killed and 69 wounded; and 68 civilians were killed and 35 wounded. In total, 2,403 Americans died and 1,178 were wounded.[91][self-published source] Eighteen ships were sunk or run aground, including five battleships.[10][92] All of the Americans killed or wounded during the attack were non-combatants, given the fact there was no state of war when the attack occurred.[23][24][93]




USS Arizona during the attack






USS Nevada, on fire and down at the bow, attempting to leave the harbor before being deliberately beached


Of the American fatalities, nearly half were due to the explosion of Arizona's forward magazine after it was hit by a modified 16-inch (410 mm) shell.[nb 16]
Already damaged by a torpedo and on fire amidships, Nevada attempted to exit the harbor. She was targeted by many Japanese bombers as she got under way and sustained more hits from 250 lb (113 kg) bombs, which started further fires. She was deliberately beached to avoid blocking the harbor entrance.




USS West Virginia was sunk by six torpedoes and two bombs during the attack


California was hit by two bombs and two torpedoes. The crew might have kept her afloat, but were ordered to abandon ship just as they were raising power for the pumps. Burning oil from Arizona and West Virginia drifted down on her, and probably made the situation look worse than it was. The disarmed target ship Utah was holed twice by torpedoes. West Virginia was hit by seven torpedoes, the seventh tearing away her rudder. Oklahoma was hit by four torpedoes, the last two above her belt armor, which caused her to capsize. Maryland was hit by two of the converted 16" shells, but neither caused serious damage.
Although the Japanese concentrated on battleships (the largest vessels present), they did not ignore other targets. The light cruiser Helena was torpedoed, and the concussion from the blast capsized the neighboring minelayer Oglala. Two destroyers in dry dock, Cassin and Downes were destroyed when bombs penetrated their fuel bunkers. The leaking fuel caught fire; flooding the dry dock in an effort to fight fire made the burning oil rise, and both were burned out. Cassin slipped from her keel blocks and rolled against Downes. The light cruiser Raleigh was holed by a torpedo. The light cruiser Honolulu was damaged, but remained in service. The repair vessel Vestal, moored alongside Arizona, was heavily damaged and beached. The seaplane tender Curtiss was also damaged. The destroyer Shaw was badly damaged when two bombs penetrated her forward magazine.[94]




This message denotes the first U.S. ship, St. Louis to clear Pearl Harbor. (National Archives and Records Administration) (Note that this is in answer to question "Is channel clear?" and faint writing at bottom concerning the answer being held until St. Louis had successfully cleared.)


Of the 402[17] American aircraft in Hawaii, 188 were destroyed and 159 damaged,[17] 155 of them on the ground. Almost none were actually ready to take off to defend the base. Eight Army Air Forces pilots managed to get airborne during the attack[95] and six were credited with downing at least one Japanese aircraft during the attack: 1st Lt. Lewis M. Sanders, 2nd Lt. Philip M. Rasmussen, 2nd Lt. Kenneth M. Taylor, 2nd Lt. George S. Welch, 2nd Lt. Harry W. Brown, and 2nd Lt. Gordon H. Sterling Jr. Sterling was shot down by Lt. Fujita over Kaneohe Bay and is listed as Body Not Recovered (not Missing In Action). Lt. John L. Dains was killed by friendly fire returning from a victory over Kaawa.[96][97] Of 33 PBYs in Hawaii, 24 were destroyed, and six others damaged beyond repair. (The three on patrol returned undamaged.) Friendly fire brought down some U.S. planes on top of that, including five from an inbound flight from Enterprise. Japanese attacks on barracks killed additional personnel.
At the time of the attack, nine civilian aircraft were flying in the vicinity of Pearl Harbor. Of these, three were shot down.[91]
Japanese losses
Fifty-five Japanese airmen and nine submariners were killed in the attack, and one was captured. Of Japan's 414[80] available planes, 29 were lost during the battle (nine in the first attack wave, 20 in the second),[98][nb 17] with another 74 damaged by antiaircraft fire from the ground.
Possible third wave
Several Japanese junior officers including Fuchida and Genda urged Nagumo to carry out a third strike in order to destroy as much of Pearl Harbor's fuel and torpedo[nb 18] storage, maintenance, and dry dock facilities as possible.[99] Genda, who had unsuccessfully advocated for invading Hawaii after the air attack, believed that without an invasion three strikes were necessary to disable the base as much as possible.[100] The captains of the other five carriers in the task force reported they were willing and ready to carry out a third strike.[101] Military historians have suggested the destruction of these shore facilities would have hampered the U.S. Pacific Fleet far more seriously than the loss of its battleships.[102] If they had been wiped out, "serious [American] operations in the Pacific would have been postponed for more than a year";[103] according to Admiral Chester W. Nimitz, later Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet, "it would have prolonged the war another two years."[104] Nagumo, however, decided to withdraw for several reasons:

American anti-aircraft performance had improved considerably during the second strike, and two thirds of Japan's losses were incurred during the second wave.[105]
Nagumo felt if he launched a third strike, he would be risking three quarters of the Combined Fleet's strength to wipe out the remaining targets (which included the facilities) while suffering higher aircraft losses.[105]
The location of the American carriers remained unknown. In addition, the admiral was concerned his force was now within range of American land-based bombers.[105] Nagumo was uncertain whether the U.S. had enough surviving planes remaining on Hawaii to launch an attack against his carriers.[106]
A third wave would have required substantial preparation and turnaround time, and would have meant returning planes would have had to land at night. At the time, only the Royal Navy had developed night carrier techniques, so this was a substantial risk.[107]
The task force's fuel situation did not permit him to remain in waters north of Pearl Harbor much longer, since he was at the very limit of logistical support. To do so risked running unacceptably low on fuel, perhaps even having to abandon destroyers en route home.[108]
He believed the second strike had essentially satisfied the main objective of his mission—the neutralization of the Pacific Fleet—and did not wish to risk further losses.[109] Moreover, it was Japanese Navy practice to prefer the conservation of strength over the total destruction of the enemy.[110]

At a conference aboard his flagship the following morning, Yamamoto supported Nagumo's withdrawal without launching a third wave.[109] In retrospect, sparing the vital dockyards, maintenance shops, and the oil tank farm meant the U.S. could respond relatively quickly to Japanese activities in the Pacific. Yamamoto later regretted Nagumo's decision to withdraw and categorically stated it had been a great mistake not to order a third strike.[111]
Ships lost or damaged
Seventeen ships were damaged or lost in the attack, of which fourteen were repaired and returned to service.[112]
Battleships

Arizona (RADM Kidd's flagship of Battleship Division One): hit by four armor-piercing bombs, exploded; total loss. 1,177 dead.
Oklahoma: hit by five torpedoes, capsized; total loss. 429 dead.
West Virginia: hit by two bombs, seven torpedoes, sunk; returned to service July 1944. 106 dead.
California: hit by two bombs, two torpedoes, sunk; returned to service January 1944. 100 dead.
Nevada: hit by six bombs, one torpedo, beached; returned to service October 1942. 60 dead.
Pennsylvania (ADM Kimmel's flagship of the United States Pacific Fleet):[113] in drydock with Cassin and Downes, hit by one bomb and debris from USS Cassin; remained in service. 9 dead.
Tennessee: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 5 dead.
Maryland: hit by two bombs; returned to service February 1942. 4 dead (including floatplane pilot shot down).

Ex-battleship (target/AA training ship)

Utah: hit by two torpedoes, capsized; total loss. 64 dead.

Cruisers

Helena: hit by one torpedo; returned to service January 1942. 20 dead.
Raleigh: hit by one torpedo; returned to service February 1942.
Honolulu: Near miss, light damage; remained in service.

Destroyers

Cassin: in drydock with Downes and Pennsylvania, hit by one bomb, burned; returned to service February 1944.
Downes: in drydock with Cassin and Pennsylvania, caught fire from Cassin, burned; returned to service November 1943.
Shaw: hit by three bombs; returned to service June 1942.

Auxiliaries

Oglala (minelayer): Damaged by torpedo hit on Helena, capsized; returned to service (as engine-repair ship) February 1944.
Vestal (repair ship): hit by two bombs, blast and fire from Arizona, beached; returned to service by August 1942.
Curtiss (seaplane tender): hit by one bomb, one crashed Japanese aircraft; returned to service January 1942. 19 dead.
Sotoyomo (harbor tug): damaged by explosion and fires in Shaw; sunk; returned to service August 1942.

Salvage




Captain Homer N. Wallin (center) supervises salvage operations aboard USS California, early 1942


After a systematic search for survivors, formal salvage operations began. Captain Homer N. Wallin, Material Officer for Commander, Battle Force, U.S. Pacific Fleet, was immediately ordered to lead salvage operations. "Within a short time I was relieved of all other duties and ordered to full time work as Fleet Salvage Officer."[114][nb 19]
Around Pearl Harbor, divers from the Navy (shore and tenders), the Naval Shipyard, and civilian contractors (Pacific Bridge and others) began work on the ships that could be refloated. They patched holes, cleared debris, and pumped water out of ships. Navy divers worked inside the damaged ships. Within six months, five battleships and two cruisers were patched or refloated so they could be sent to shipyards in Pearl Harbor and on the mainland for extensive repair.
Intensive salvage operations continued for another year, a total of some 20,000 man-hours under water.[116] Oklahoma, while successfully raised, was never repaired, and capsized while under tow to the mainland in 1947. Arizona and the target ship Utah were too heavily damaged for salvage, though much of their armament and equipment was removed and put to use aboard other vessels. Today, the two hulks remain where they were sunk,[117] with Arizona becoming a war memorial.

Aftermath
Main article: Consequences of the attack on Pearl Harbor




U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt signing declaration of war against Imperial Japan on December 8, 1941


In the wake of the attack, 15 Medals of Honor, 51 Navy Crosses, 53 Silver Stars, four Navy and Marine Corps Medals, one Distinguished Flying Cross, four Distinguished Service Crosses, one Distinguished Service Medal, and three Bronze Star Medals were awarded to the American servicemen who distinguished themselves in combat at Pearl Harbor.[118] Additionally, a special military award, the Pearl Harbor Commemorative Medal, was later authorized for all military veterans of the attack.
The day after the attack, Roosevelt delivered his famous Infamy Speech to a Joint Session of Congress, calling for a formal declaration of war on the Empire of Japan. Congress obliged his request less than an hour later. On December 11, Germany and Italy declared war on the United States, even though the Tripartite Pact did not require it.[nb 20] Congress issued a declaration of war against Germany and Italy later that same day. The UK actually declared war on Japan nine hours before the U.S. did, partially due to Japanese attacks on Malaya, Singapore and Hong Kong, and partially due to Winston Churchill's promise to declare war "within the hour" of a Japanese attack on the United States.[119]




Pennsylvania, behind the wreckage of Downes and Cassin


The attack was an initial shock to all the Allies in the Pacific Theater. Further losses compounded the alarming setback. Japan attacked the Philippines hours later (because of the time difference, it was December 8 in the Philippines). Only three days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the battleships Prince of Wales and Repulse were sunk off the coast of Malaya, causing British Prime Minister Winston Churchill later to recollect "In all the war I never received a more direct shock. As I turned and twisted in bed the full horror of the news sank in upon me. There were no British or American capital ships in the Indian Ocean or the Pacific except the American survivors of Pearl Harbor who were hastening back to California. Over this vast expanse of waters Japan was supreme and we everywhere were weak and naked".[120]




Remember December 7th! propaganda issued in 1942


Throughout the war, Pearl Harbor was frequently used in American propaganda.[121]
One further consequence of the attack on Pearl Harbor and its aftermath (notably the Niihau incident) was that Japanese American residents and citizens were relocated to nearby Japanese-American internment camps. Within hours of the attack, hundreds of Japanese American leaders were rounded up and brought to high-security camps such as Sand Island at the mouth of Honolulu harbor and Kilauea Military Camp on the island of Hawaii.[122][123] Eventually, more than 110,000 Japanese Americans, nearly all who lived on the West Coast, were forced into interior camps, but in Hawaii, where the 150,000-plus Japanese Americans composed over one-third of the population, only 1,200 to 1,800 were interned.[124][125][126]
The attack also had international consequences. The Canadian province of British Columbia, bordering the Pacific Ocean, had long had a large population of Japanese immigrants and their Japanese Canadian descendants. Pre-war tensions were exacerbated by the Pearl Harbor attack, leading to a reaction from the Government of Canada. On February 24, 1942, Order-in-Council P.C. no. 1486 was passed under the War Measures Act allowing for the forced removal of any and all Canadians of Japanese descent from British Columbia, as well as the prohibiting from them returning to the province. On 4 March, regulations under the Act were adopted to evacuate Japanese-Canadians.[127] As a result, 12,000 were interned in interior camps, 2,000 were sent to road camps and another 2,000 were forced to work in the prairies at sugar beet farms.[128]




Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi's aircraft shown ten days after it crashed


Niihau Incident
Main article: Niihau incident
The Japanese planners had determined that some means was required for rescuing fliers whose aircraft were too badly damaged to return to the carriers. The island of Niihau, only 30 minutes flying time from Pearl Harbor, was designated as the rescue point.
The Zero flown by Petty Officer Shigenori Nishikaichi of Hiryu was damaged in the attack on Wheeler, so he flew to the rescue point on Niihau. The aircraft was further damaged on landing. Nishikaichi was helped from the wreckage by one of the native Hawaiians, who, aware of the tension between the United States and Japan, took the pilot's maps and other documents. The island's residents had no telephones or radio and were completely unaware of the attack on Pearl Harbor. Nishikaichi enlisted the support of three Japanese-American residents in an attempt to recover the documents. During the ensuing struggles, Nishikaichi was killed and a Hawaiian civilian was wounded; one collaborator committed suicide, and his wife and the third collaborator were sent to prison.
The ease with which the local ethnic Japanese residents had apparently gone to the assistance of Nishikaichi was a source of concern for many, and tended to support those who believed that local Japanese could not be trusted.[129]
Strategic implications
Admiral Hara Tadaichi summed up the Japanese result by saying, "We won a great tactical victory at Pearl Harbor and thereby lost the war."[130] To a similar effect, see Isoroku Yamamoto's alleged "sleeping giant" quote.
While the attack accomplished its intended objective, it turned out to be largely unnecessary. Unbeknownst to Yamamoto, who conceived the original plan, the U.S. Navy had decided as far back as 1935 to abandon 'charging' across the Pacific towards the Philippines in response to an outbreak of war (in keeping with the evolution of Plan Orange).[31] The U.S. instead adopted "Plan Dog" in 1940, which emphasized keeping the IJN out of the eastern Pacific and away from the shipping lanes to Australia, while the U.S. concentrated on defeating Nazi Germany.[131]
Fortunately for the United States, the American aircraft carriers were untouched by the Japanese attack; otherwise the Pacific Fleet's ability to conduct offensive operations would have been crippled for a year or more (given no diversions from the Atlantic Fleet). As it was, the elimination of the battleships left the U.S. Navy with no choice but to rely on its aircraft carriers and submarines—the very weapons with which the U.S. Navy halted and eventually reversed the Japanese advance. While six of the eight battleships were repaired and returned to service, their relatively low speed and high fuel consumption limited their deployment, and they served mainly in shore bombardment roles (their only major action being the Battle of Surigao Strait in October 1944). A major flaw of Japanese strategic thinking was a belief that the ultimate Pacific battle would be fought by battleships, in keeping with the doctrine of Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan. As a result, Yamamoto (and his successors) hoarded battleships for a "decisive battle" that never happened.[132]
The Japanese confidence in their ability to achieve a short, victorious war meant that they neglected Pearl Harbor's navy repair yards, oil tank farms, submarine base, and old headquarters building.[55] All of these targets were omitted from Genda's list, yet they proved more important than any battleship to the American war efforts in the Pacific. The survival of the repair shops and fuel depots allowed Pearl Harbor to maintain logistical support to the U.S. Navy's operations,[133][134] such as the Battles of Coral Sea and Midway. It was submarines that immobilized the Imperial Japanese Navy's heavy ships and brought Japan's economy to a virtual standstill by crippling the transportation of oil and raw materials: by the end of 1942, import of raw materials was cut to half of what it had been, "to a disastrous ten million tons", while oil import "was almost completely stopped".[nb 21] Lastly, the basement of the Old Administration Building was the home of the cryptanalytic unit which contributed significantly to the Midway ambush and the Submarine Force's success.[135]
Retrospective debate on American intelligence
Main article: Pearl Harbor advance-knowledge conspiracy theory
Ever since the Japanese attack, there has been debate as to how and why the United States had been caught unaware, and how much and when American officials knew of Japanese plans and related topics. Military officers including Gen. Billy Mitchell had pointed out the vulnerability of Pearl to air attack. At least two naval war games, one in 1932 and another in 1936, proved that Pearl was vulnerable to such an attack. Admiral James Richardson was removed from command shortly after protesting President Roosevelt's decision to move the bulk of the Pacific fleet to Pearl Harbor.[136][137] The decisions of military and political leadership to ignore these warnings has contributed to conspiracy theories. Several writers, including journalist Robert Stinnett and former United States Rear Admiral Robert Alfred Theobald, have argued that various parties high in the U.S. and British governments knew of the attack in advance and may even have let it happen or encouraged it in order to force the U.S. into war via the so-called "back door". However, this conspiracy theory is rejected by mainstream historians.[138][139][140][141][nb 22]
In popular culture
Main article: Attack on Pearl Harbor in popular culture
See also





Battle of Taranto
Operation K
Air warfare of World War II
Attack on Howland Island




List of United States Navy ships present at Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941
List of Medal of Honor recipients for the Attack on Pearl Harbor
Nagai Kita
Edwin T. Layton




National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day
Pearl Harbor Survivors Association
Winds Code





References
Informational notes


^ USCGC Taney (WHEC-37), USCGC Reliance (WSC-150), USCGC Tiger (WSC-152).[1][2][3]
^ Utah and Oglala
^ Unless otherwise stated, all vessels listed were salvageable.[5]
^ a b In 1941, Hawaii was a half-hour different from the majority of other time zones. See UTC−10:30.
^ USS Utah (AG-16, formerly BB-31); Utah was moored in the space intended to have been occupied by the aircraft carrier Enterprise which, returning with a task force, had been expected to enter the channel at 0730 on December 7; delayed by weather, the task force did not reach Pearl Harbor until dusk the following day.[18]
^ After it was announced in September iron and steel scrap export would also be prohibited, Japanese Ambassador Horinouchi protested to Secretary Hull on October 8, 1940 warning this might be considered an "unfriendly act".[27]
^ This was mainly a Japanese Navy preference; the Japanese Army would have chosen to attack the Soviet Union.[35]
^ "The Dorn report did not state with certainty that Kimmel and Short knew about Taranto. There is, however, no doubt that they did know, as did the Japanese. Lt. Cdr. Takeshi Naito, the assistant naval attaché to Berlin, flew to Taranto to investigate the attack first hand, and Naito subsequently had a lengthy conversation with Cdr. Mitsuo Fuchida about his observations. Fuchida led the Japanese attack on December 7, 1941."[43]
^ "A torpedo bomber needed a long, level flight, and when released, its conventional torpedo would plunge nearly a hundred feet deep before swerving upward to strike a hull. Pearl Harbor deep averages 42 feet. But the Japanese borrowed an idea from the British carrier-based torpedo raid on the Italian naval base of Taranto. They fashioned auxiliary wooden tail fins to keep the torpedoes horizontal, so they would dive to only 35 feet, and they added a breakaway "nosecone" of soft wood to cushion the impact with the surface of the water."[44]
^ She was located by a University of Hawaii research submersible on August 28, 2002 in 400 m (1,300 ft) of water, 6 nmi (11 km) outside the harbor.[67]
^ While the nine sailors who died in the attack were quickly lionized by the Japanese government as Kyūgunshin ("The Nine War Heroes"), the news of Sakamaki's capture, which had been publicized in U.S. news broadcasts, was kept secret. Even after the war, however, he received recriminating correspondence from those who despised him for not sacrificing his own life.
^ The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor, Planning and Execution. First wave: 189 planes, 50 Kates w/bombs, 40 Kates with torpedoes, 54 Vals, 45 Zekes Second wave: 171 planes, 54 Kates w/bombs, 81 Vals, 36 Zekes. The Combat Air Patrol over the carriers alternated 18 plane shifts every two hours, with 18 more ready for takeoff on the flight decks and an additional 18 ready on hangar decks.[80]
^ In the twenty-five sorties flown, USAF Historical Study No.85 credits six pilots with ten planes destroyed: 1st Lt Lewis M. Sanders (P-36) and 2nd Lts Philip M Rasmussen (P-36), Gordon H. Sterling Jr. (P-36, killed in action), Harry W. Brown (P-36), Kenneth M. Taylor (P-40, 2), and George S. Welch (P-40, 4). Three of the P-36 kills were not verified by the Japanese and may have been shot down by naval anti-aircraft fire.
^ Odd though it may sound, "not" is correct, in keeping with standard Navy telegraphic practice. This was confirmed by Beloite and Beloite after years of research and debate.
^ The gunners that did get in action scored most of the victories against Japanese aircraft that morning, including the first of the attack by Tautog, and Dorie Miller's Navy Cross-worthy effort. Miller was an African-American cook aboard West Virginia who took over an unattended anti-aircraft gun on which he had no training. He was the first African-American sailor to be awarded the Navy Cross.
^ The wreck has become a memorial to those lost that day, most of whom remain within the ship. She continues to leak small amounts of fuel oil, over 70 years after the attack.
^ USAAF pilots of the 46th and 47th Pursuit Squadrons, 15th Pursuit Group, claim to have destroyed 10.
^ In the event, loss of these might have been a net benefit to the U.S. Blair, passim.
^ Wallin had been assigned to go to Massawa in East Africa. The harbor there was blocked by scuttled Italian and German ships, which prevented British use of the port. Commander Edward Ellsberg was sent instead.[115]
^ The pact had one of its objectives limiting U.S. intervention in conflicts involving the three nations.
Liddell Hart, B. H. (1970) History of the Second World War London: Weidenfeld Nicolson. p.206
Shirer, William L. (1960) The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich:A History of Nazi Germsny New York: Simon and Shuster. p.873
Keegan, John (1990) The Second World War New York: Viking. p.130. ISBN 0670823597
^ In less than eleven months, most of Japan's elite naval aviators who had been at Pearl Harbor were lost in subsequent battles. Lack of fuel and an inflexible training policy meant that they could not be replaced.[35]
^ Gordon Prange specifically addresses some revisionist works, including Charles A. Beard. President Roosevelt and the Coming War 1941; William Henry Chamberlin, America's Second Crusade; John T. Flynn, The Roosevelt Myth; George Morgenstern, Pearl Harbor; Frederic R. Sanborn, Design for War; Robert Alfred Theobald, The Final Secret of Pearl Harbor; Harry E. Barnes, ed., Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace and The Court Historians versus Revisionism; Husband E. Kimmel, Admiral Kimmel's Story."[142]


Citations


^ "The Long Blue Line: The attack on Pearl Harbor—"a date that will live in infamy"". coastguard.dodlive.mil. Retrieved 8 December 2017. These units included high-endurance cutter Taney and patrol cutters Tiger and Reliance 
^ "U.S. COAST GUARD UNITS IN HAWAII" (PDF). media.defense.gov. Retrieved 8 December 2017. USCGC Tiger (WSC-152); Commanding Officer: CWO William J. Mazzoni, USCG; 125-foot cutter 
^ "Active Class, U.S. Coast Guard Cutters". pwencycl.kgbudge.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. 
^ "Ships and District Craft Present at Pearl Harbor, 0800 7 December 1941 U.S. Navy Historical Center". History.navy.mil. Archived from the original on July 10, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2015. 
^ CinCP report of damage to ships in Pearl Harbor from ibiblio.org/hyperwar.
^ "Overview of The Pearl Harbor Attack, 7 December 1941". Archived from the original on August 6, 2010. Retrieved October 5, 2014. 
^ Gilbert 2009, p. 272.
^ Gailey 1995
^ "Pearl Harbor Casualty List". USSWestVirginia.org. Retrieved December 7, 2012. 
^ a b Conn 2000, p. 194
^ Morison 2001, pp. 101, 120, 250
^ Prange, Gordon W., Goldstein, Donald, & Dillon, Katherine. The Pearl Harbor Papers (Brassey's, 2000), p. 17ff; Google Books entry on Prange et al.
^ For the Japanese designator of Oahu. Wilford, Timothy. "Decoding Pearl Harbor", in The Northern Mariner, XII, #1 (January 2002), p. 32fn81.
^ Fukudome, Shigeru, "Hawaii Operation". United States Naval Institute, Proceedings, 81 (December 1955), pp. 1315–1331
^ Gill, G. Hermon (1957). Royal Australian Navy 1939–1942. Australia in the War of 1939–1945. Series 2 – Navy. 1. Canberra: Australian War Memorial. p. 485. LCCN 58037940. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved June 16, 2015. 
^ a b Prange et al. December 7, 1941, p. 174.
^ a b c d e Parillo 2006, p. 288
^ Thomas 2007, pp. 57–59.
^ "Pearl Harbor Facts". About. Retrieved October 5, 2014. 
^ "United States declares war". Abilene Reporter-News. December 8, 1941. p. 1. Retrieved August 12, 2014 – via Newspapers.com.  
^ a b Bromwich, Jonah Engel (2016-12-07). "How Pearl Harbor Shaped the Modern World". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-03-25. 
^ Braumoeller, Bear F. (2010) "The Myth of American Isolationism." Foreign Policy Analysis 6: 349–371.
^ a b Yuma Totani (April 1, 2009). The Tokyo War Crimes Trial: The Pursuit of Justice in the Wake of World War II. Harvard University Asia Center. p. 57. 
^ a b Stephen C. McCaffrey (September 22, 2004). Understanding International Law. AuthorHouse. pp. 210–229. 
^ Barnhart 1987.
^ Werner Gruhl (2007). Imperial Japan's World War Two, 1931–1945. Transaction Publishers. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-7658-0352-8
^ GPO 1943, p. 96
^ GPO 1943, p. 94
^ Toland, Japan's War.[clarification needed]
^ Harper, Tim (2009-09-07). "Japan's gigantic second world war gamble". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-12-07. 
^ a b Peattie 1997
^ William Chalek (2002), "8. War Plan Orange", Guest of the Emperor, iUniverse, pp. 45–52, ISBN 978-0-595-23996-2 
^ Edward S. Miller (2007), War Plan Orange: The U.S. Strategy to Defeat Japan, 1897–1945, Naval Institute Press, pp. 63, ISBN 978-1-59114-500-4 
^ GPO 1943, p. 125
^ a b Peattie 1997; Coox, Kobun.
^ Chapter IV The Showdown With Japan August–December 1941 Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942
^ Chapter IV: The Fatal Turn Morton, Louis. Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
^ Review of the Diplomatic Conversations REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE INVESTIGATION OF THE PEARL HARBOR ATTACK (1946)
^ a b Chapter V: The Decision for War Morton, Louis. Strategy and Command: The First Two Years
^ Gailey 1995, p. 68
^ Gailey 1995, p. 70
^ Lord, Walter (2012). Day of Infamy. Open Road Media. p. 14. ISBN 1-4532-3842-5. 
^ Borch & Martinez 2005, pp. 53–54.
^ Hellions of the Deep: The Development of American Torpedoes in World War II. By Robert Gannon, Published by Penn State Press, 1996, p. 49. ISBN 0-271-01508-X
^ Wetzler 1998, p. 39.
^ Bix 2000, p. 417, citing the Sugiyama memo
^ The Canadian Institute of Public Opinion (December 8, 1941). "Gallup Poll Found 52 p.c. of Americans Expected War". Ottawa Citizen. p. 1. Retrieved November 28, 2011. 
^ Noted by Arthur MacArthur in the 1890s. Manchester, William. American Caesar
^ Peattie & Evans, Kaigun
^ a b Willmott 1983, p. 14.
^ Fukudome, Shigeru. Shikan: Shinjuwan Kogeki (Tokyo, 1955), p. 150.
^ Gordon W. Prange, Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon, At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor (1982)
^ Alan Zimm, The Attack on Pearl Harbor: Strategy, Combat, Myths, Deceptions (2011)
^ Kaigun; Wilmott, Barrier and the Javelin; Blair, Silent Victory
^ a b Willmott 1983
^ Zimm 2011, p. 132
^ Peattie 2001 p. 145.
^ Zimm 2011, pp. 173, 174
^ Zimm 2011, p. 153
^ a b c Tony DiGiulian. "Order of Battle – Pearl Harbor – December 7, 1941". Navweaps.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2011. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
^ Stewart, A.J., Lieutenant Commander, USN. "Those Mysterious Midgets", United States Naval Institute Proceedings, December 1974, p. 56
^ Stewart, p. 56
^ Goldstein 2000, p. 146
^ Stewart, "Those Mysterious Midgets", p. 57
^ Smith 1999, p. 36
^ a b c Stewart, "Those Mysterious Midgets", p. 58
^ "Japanese Midget Submarine". Retrieved January 20, 2014. 
^ Stewart, pp. 59–61
^ Stewart, Those Mysterious Midgets, pp. 61–62
^ Ofstie, R. A., Rear Admiral, USN. The Campaigns of the Pacific War (United States Government Printing Office, 1946), p. 19
^ Zimm 2011, pp. 330–341
^ Toland, Infamy
^ Prange, Goldstein, and Dillon, At Dawn We Slept, pp. 424 and 475
^ Prange, Goldstein, and Dillon, At Dawn We Slept, pp. 493–494
^ Declaration of War handout Retrieved August 9, 2012.
^ Howard W. French (December 9, 1999). "Pearl Harbor Truly a Sneak Attack, Papers Show". The New York Times. 
^ Kawabata, Tai, "Historian seeks to clear embassy of Pearl Harbor 'sneak attack' infamy", Japan Times, December 10, 2014, p. 3
^ "Japanese 'Fourteen Part' Message of December 7, 1941" HyperWar
^ Shinsato, Douglas and Tadanori Urabe, For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor, Chapters 19 and 20, eXperience, inc., Kamuela, Hawaii, 2011. ISBN 978-0-9846745-0-3
^ a b c d e "Aircraft Attack Organization". Ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
^ a b NavSource 2003
^ Prange, Goldstein, Dillon. At Dawn We Slept. pages 730–31 'Short mishandled radar ...' In his (Short's) words '... more for training than any idea it would be real'
^ Evans, Harold. The American Century London: Jonathan Cape, 1998. p. 309.
^ Prange 1988, p. 98[citation needed]
^ a b Prange et al., At Dawn We Slept, p. 500-501.
^ Symonds, Craig L. The Battle Of Midway, (Oxford University Press, 2011), p. 218.
^ Hone, Thomas C. (1977). "The Destruction of the Battle Line at Pearl Harbor". Proceedings. United States Naval Institute. 103 (12): 56&57. 
^ a b Parillo 2006, p. 293
^ Bonner, Kermit. Final Voyages p. 105
^ Aylwin, Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships.
^ a b Patrick Watson (December 1, 2007). Watson's Really Big WWII Almanac, Volume 2: July to December. Xlibris Corporation. p. 592. 
^ GPO 1946, pp. 64–65
^ Dennis W. Shepherd (September 22, 2004). Returning Son: From Baghdad, Kentucky to Baghdad, Iraq (and back). AuthorHouse. p. 57. 
^ USS Shaw (DD-373)
^ Dorr, Robert F.; Fred L. Borch. "Pyjama-clad pilot took on Japanese at Pearl Harbor". Army Times. United States Army. Retrieved October 12, 2010. 
^ "HyperWar: 7 December 1941: The Air Force Story [Chapter 4]". Ibiblio.org. Retrieved July 10, 2013. 
^ Potter, Lt Col Joseph V. (Winter 1982). "A Handful of Pilots" (PDF). JOURNAL. American Aviation Historical Society. pp. 282–285. Retrieved October 12, 2010. 
^ Ofstie 1946, p. 18
^ Gailey 1997, p. 68
^ Caravaggio, Angelo N. (Winter 2014). ""Winning" the Pacific War". Naval War College Review. 67 (1): 85–118. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. 
^ Horn, Steve . The Second Attack on Pearl Harbor: Operation K and Other Japanese Attempts to Bomb America in World War II (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2005), p. 16
^ Willmott 1983;[page needed] Blair, Silent Victory.[page needed]
^ Gailey 1997, pp. 97–98
^ Yergin, Daniel (1991), The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power, New York: Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-671-79932-0  p. 327
^ a b c Hoyt 2000, p. 190
^ Hoyt 2000, p. 191
^ Stephen, Martin; Grove, Eric (Ed) (1988), Sea Battles in Close-up: World War 2, Volume 1, Shepperton, Surrey: Ian Allan, pp. 34–38, ISBN 0-7110-1596-1 CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Prange 1988[citation needed]
^ a b Gailey 1997, p. 97
^ Willmott 1983, p. 16.
^ Gailey 1997, p. 98
^ Courtney, Will Sabel (December 7, 2016). "These 13 U.S. Navy Ships Rose from the Dead After Pearl Harbor". The Drive. Retrieved December 8, 2016. 
^ Prange, Goldstein, Dillon. At Dawn We Slept page 49
^ Wallin, Homer. Pearl Harbor: Why, How Fleet Salvage and Final Appraisal. Naval History Division, 1968
^ Commander Edward Ellsberg, O.B.E. Under the Red Sea Sun Dodd, Mead, and Co., 1946.
^ Raymer, E.C. Descent Into Darkness. Presidio Press, 1996.
^ "Post-attack ship salvage 1942–1944". Geocities. October 27, 2009. Archived from the original on October 27, 2009. Retrieved July 17, 2011. 
^ Smith 1999, p. [page needed].
^ "The U.S. At War, The Last Stage". Time. December 15, 1941. 
^ Churchill, Winston; Martin Gilbert (2001), "December 1941", The Churchill War Papers: The Ever-Widening War, Volume 3: 1941, London, New York: W.W. Norton, pp. 1593–1594, ISBN 0-393-01959-4 
^ Anthony Rhodes, Propaganda: The art of persuasion: World War II, p. 257 1976, Chelsea House Publishers, New York
^ "World War II Internment in Hawai'i". Education through Cultural & Historical Organizations. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved November 13, 2011. 
^ Levine, E. (1995). A Fence Away from Freedom: Japanese Americans and World War II. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on December 1, 2011. Retrieved 2011-11-13.  Pearl Harbor Oahu website, retrieved on November 12, 2011.
^ Daniels, R. (1972). Concentration camps USA: Japanese Americans and World War II. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
^ "New Mexico Office of the State Historian – people". 
^ Regulations made 4 March 1942
^ War Measures Act Conference (1977: McMaster University). (1978). The Japanese Canadian experience: the October crisis [proceedings]. Wilfrid Laurier University Book Shelves: London, Ontario: P. Anas Pub. pp. 12–14. 
^ Douglas Shinsato, Translator/Publisher of For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor, 2011, pp. 293–294
^ Haufler, Herve. Codebreaker's Victory: How the Allied Cryptographers Won World War II (New York: NAL, 2003), quoted p. 127.
^ Hakim 1995
^ Willmott 1983, War Plan Orange[clarification needed]
^ "Attack on Pearl Harbor | Nihon Kaigun". Combinedfleet.com. Retrieved March 6, 2014. 
^ "Pearl Harbor vet remembers Dec. 7, 1941, sneak attack". The Kalona News. April 17, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2014. 
^ Blair, pp. 360, 816
^ Rehearsals for Pearl Harbor[unreliable source?]
^ Wallin, Vice Admiral, Homer N. (July 2, 2017). "Pearl Harbor: Why, How, Fleet Salvage and Final Appraisal". Hyperwar. 
^ Prange, Gordon W.; Donald M. Goldstein; Katherinve V. Dillon (1991). Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0140159097. 
^ Prados, John (1995). Combined Fleet Decoded: The Secret History of American Intelligence and the Japanese Navy in World War II. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. pp. 161–177. ISBN 1-55750-431-8. 
^ Budiansky, Stephen (2002). Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II. Free Press. ISBN 978-0743217347. 
^ Stevenson, Richard W. "New Light Shed on Churchill and Pearl Harbor". The New York Times. Retrieved March 4, 2014. 
^ Prange, Gordon W.; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1991). At Dawn We Slept: The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor. New York: Penguin Books. p. 867. ISBN 9780140157345. 


Bibliography




Books




Barnhart, Michael A. (1987), Japan prepares for total war: the search for economic security, 1919–1941, Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-1915-7 
Bix, Herbert P. (2000), Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan, Diane Pub Co, ISBN 978-0-7567-5780-9 
Borch, Frederic L.; Martinez, Daniel (2005), Kimmel, Short, and Pearl Harbor: the final report revealed, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-59114-090-0 
Conn, Stetson; Fairchild, Byron; Engelman, Rose C. (2000), "7 – The Attack on Pearl Harbor", Guarding the United States and Its Outposts, Washington D.C.: Center of Military History United States Army 
Gailey, Harry A. (1997), War in the Pacific: From Pearl Harbor to Tokyo Bay, Presidio, ISBN 0-89141-616-1 
Gilbert, Martin (2009), The Second World War, Phoenix, ISBN 978-0-7538-2676-8 
Goldstein, Donald M. (2000), Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V., eds., The Pearl Harbor papers: inside the Japanese plans, Brassey's, ISBN 978-1-57488-222-3 
Hakim, Joy (1995), A History of US: Book 9: War, Peace, and All that Jazz, Oxford University Press, U.S., ISBN 978-0-19-509514-2 
Hixson, Walter L. (2003), The American Experience in World War II: The United States and the road to war in Europe, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-415-94029-0 
Hoyt, Edwin P. (2000), Pearl Harbor, G. K. Hall, ISBN 0-7838-9303-5 
Morison, Samuel Eliot (2001), History of United States Naval Operations in World War II: The rising sun in the Pacific, 1931 – April 1942, University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-06973-0 
Ofstie, Ralph, A., RADM USN, Naval Analysis Division, United States Strategic Bombing Survey (Pacific) (1946), The Campaigns of the Pacific War, United States Government Printing Office 
Peattie, Mark R.; Evans, David C. (1997), Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 0-87021-192-7 
Peattie, Mark R. (2001), Sunburst: The Rise of Japanese Naval Air Power, 1909–1941, Naval Institute Press, ISBN 1-59114-664-X 
Parillo, Mark (2006), "The United States in the Pacific", in Higham, Robin; Harris, Stephen, Why Air Forces Fail: the Anatomy of Defeat, The University Press of Kentucky, ISBN 978-0-8131-2374-5 
Prange, Gordon William; Goldstein, Donald M.; Dillon, Katherine V. (1988). December 7, 1941: The Day the Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-050682-4. 
Smith, Carl (1999), Pearl Harbor 1941: The Day of Infamy; Osprey Campaign Series #62, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 1-85532-798-8 
Stille, Mark E. (2011), Tora! Tora! Tora!: Pearl Harbor 1941; Osprey Raid Series #26, Osprey Publishing, ISBN 978-1-84908-509-0 
Thomas, Evan (2007), Sea of Thunder: Four Commanders and the Last Great Naval Campaign 1941–1945, Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-7432-5222-5 
Willmott, H. P. (1983), The barrier and the javelin: Japanese and Allied Pacific strategies, February to June 1942, Naval Institute Press 
Zimm, Alan D. (2011), Attack on Pearl Harbor: Strategy, Combat, Myths, Deceptions, Havertown, Pennsylvania: Casemate Publishers, ISBN 978-1-61200-010-7 




U.S. government documents




"Document text", U.S. Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor, United States National Archives, Modern Military Branch, 1942, archived from the original on January 13, 2008, retrieved December 25, 2007 
"Document text", Peace and War, United States Foreign Policy 1931–1941, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1943, retrieved December 8, 2007 
"Damage to United States Naval Forces and Installations as a Result of the Attack", Report of the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack, Washington D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1946, retrieved December 8, 2007 




Magazine articles




Rodgaard, John; Peter Hsu; Carroll Lucas & Captain Andrew Biach (December 1999), "Pearl Harbor – Attack from Below", Naval History, United States Naval Institute, 13 (6), archived from the original on September 30, 2006  (requires subscription)
Wetzler, Peter (1998), Hirohito and war: imperial tradition and military decision making in prewar Japan, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-1925-5 




Online sources




Organization of the Japanese Air Attack Units December 7, 1941, NavSource Naval History, 2003, archived from the original on December 13, 2007, retrieved December 8, 2007 
USS Shaw, destroyerhistory.org, archived from the original on June 17, 2011, retrieved January 5, 2017 
Homer N. Wallin, "Pearl Harbor: Why, How, Fleet Salvage and Final Appraisal", Hyperwar, ibiblio.org, retrieved October 10, 2011 


Further reading


Edwin T. Layton, Roger Pineau, and John Costello (1985), And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway—Breaking the Secrets, New York: Morrow. Layton, Kimmel's Combat Intelligence Officer, says that Douglas MacArthur was the only field commander who had received any substantial amount of Purple intelligence.
George Edward Morgenstern. Pearl Harbor: The Story of the Secret War. (The Devin-Adair Company, 1947) ISBN 978-1-299-05736-4. Conspiracy theory.
James Dorsey. "Literary Tropes, Rhetorical Looping, and the Nine Gods of War: 'Fascist Proclivities' Made Real," in The Culture of Japanese Fascism, ed. by Alan Tansman (Durham & London: Duke UP, 2009), pp. 409–431. A study of Japanese wartime media representations of the submarine component of the attack on Pearl Harbor.
McCollum memo A 1940 memo from a Naval headquarters staff officer to his superiors outlining possible provocations to Japan, which might lead to war (declassified in 1994).
Gordon W. Prange, At Dawn We Slept (McGraw-Hill, 1981), Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History (McGraw-Hill, 1986), and December 7, 1941: The Day the Japanese Attacked Pearl Harbor (McGraw-Hill, 1988). This monumental trilogy, written with collaborators Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon, is considered the authoritative work on the subject.
Larry Kimmett and Margaret Regis, The Attack on Pearl Harbor: An Illustrated History (NavPublishing, 2004). Using maps, photos, unique illustrations, and an animated CD, this book provides a detailed overview of the surprise attack that brought the United States into World War II.
Walter Lord, Day of Infamy (Henry Holt, 1957) is a very readable, and entirely anecdotal, re-telling of the day's events.
W. J. Holmes, Double-Edged Secrets: U.S. Naval Intelligence Operations in the Pacific During World War II (Naval Institute, 1979) contains some important material, such as Holmes' argument that, had the U.S. Navy been warned of the attack and put to sea, it would have likely resulted in an even greater disaster.
Michael V. Gannon, Pearl Harbor Betrayed (Henry Holt, 2001) is a recent examination of the issues surrounding the surprise of the attack.
Frederick D. Parker, Pearl Harbor Revisited: United States Navy Communications Intelligence 1924–1941 (Center for Cryptologic History, 1994) contains a detailed description of what the Navy knew from intercepted and decrypted Japan's communications prior to Pearl.
Henry C. Clausen and Bruce Lee, Pearl Harbor: Final Judgment, (HarperCollins, 2001), an account of the secret "Clausen Inquiry" undertaken late in the war by order of Congress to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.
Robert A. Theobald, Final Secret of Pearl Harbor (Devin-Adair Pub, 1954) ISBN 0-8159-5503-0 ISBN 0-317-65928-6 Foreword by Fleet Admiral William F. Halsey, Jr.
Albert C. Wedemeyer, Wedemeyer Reports! (Henry Holt Co, 1958) ISBN 0-89275-011-1 ISBN 0-8159-7216-4
Hamilton Fish III, Tragic Deception: FDR and America's Involvement in World War II (Devin-Adair Pub, 1983) ISBN 0-8159-6917-1
John Toland, Infamy: Pearl Harbor and Its Aftermath (Berkley Reissue edition, 1986 ISBN 0-425-09040-X).
Mary Ellen Condon-Rall, "The U.S. Army Medical Department and the Attack on Pearl Harbor". (The Journal of Medical History, January 1989). PMID 11617401. This article discusses the state of medical readiness prior to the attack, and the post-attack response by medical personnel.
Robert Stinnett, Day of Deceit: The Truth About FDR and Pearl Harbor (Free Press, 1999) A study of the Freedom of Information Act documents that led Congress to direct clearance of Kimmel and Short. ISBN 0-7432-0129-9
Edward L. Beach, Jr., Scapegoats: A Defense of Kimmel and Short at Pearl Harbor ISBN 1-55750-059-2
Andrew Krepinevich. "Lighting the Path Ahead: Field Exercises and Transformation (186 KB)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 13, 2007. Retrieved January 5, 2017.  (Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments) contains a passage regarding the Yarnell attack, as well as reference citations.
Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, (Stanford University Press: 1962). The most cited scholarly work on the intelligence failure at Pearl Harbor. Her introduction and analysis of the concept of "noise" persists in understanding intelligence failures.

Roberta Wohlstetter, "Cuba and Pearl Harbor: Hindsight and Foresight." Foreign Affairs 43.4 (1965): 691-707. online


John Hughes-Wilson, Military Intelligence Blunders and Cover-Ups. Robinson, 1999 (revised 2004). Contains a brief but insightful chapter on the particular intelligence failures, and broader overview of what causes them.
Douglas T. Shinsato and Tadanori Urabe, "For That One Day: The Memoirs of Mitsuo Fuchida, Commander of the Attack on Pearl Harbor". (eXperience: 2011) ISBN 978-0-9846745-0-3
Horn, Steve (2005). The Second Attack on Pearl Harbor: Operation K And Other Japanese Attempts to Bomb America in World War II. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-59114-388-8. 
Seki, Eiji. (2006). Mrs. Ferguson's Tea-Set, Japan and the Second World War: The Global Consequences Following Germany's Sinking of the SS Automedon in 1940. London: Global Oriental. ISBN 1-905246-28-5; ISBN 978-1-905246-28-1 (cloth) Published by BRILL/Global Oriental, 2006. Previously announced as Sinking of the SS Automedon and the Role of the Japanese Navy: A New Interpretation.
Daniel Madsen, Resurrection-Salvaging the Battle Fleet at Pearl Harbor. U.S. Naval Institute Press. 2003. Highly readable and thoroughly researched account of the aftermath of the attack and the salvage efforts from December 8, 1941 through early 1944.
Takeo, Iguchi, Demystifying Pearl Harbor: A New Perspective From Japan, I-House Press, 2010, ASIN: B003RJ1AZA.
Haynok, Robert J. (2009). How the Japanese Did It. Naval History Magazine. 23. United States Naval Institute. 
Melber, Takuma, Pearl Harbor. Japans Angriff und der Kriegseintritt der USA. C.H. Beck, München 2016, ISBN 978-3-406-69818-7. A concise introduction with a good focus oo what came before the attack and on the Japanese perspective.
Moorhead, John J. 1942 "Surgical Experience at Pearl Harbor", The Journal of the American Medical Association. An overview of different surgical procedures at the hospital at the scene of the event.


External links

Listen to this article (2 parts) ·  (info)
Part 1 • Part 2



This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Attack on Pearl Harbor" dated 2006-01-12, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pearl Harbor attack.




Library resources about
Attack on Pearl Harbor





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Navy History Heritage Command Official Overview
History.com Account With Video
About Education Account
"Remembering Pearl Harbor:The USS Arizona Memorial", a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
Hawaii War Records Depository, Archives & Manuscripts Department, University of Hawaii at Manoa Library
7 December 1941, The Air Force Story
The "Magic" Background (PDFs or readable online)
The Congressional investigation

Accounts

Guarding The United States And Its Outposts, in Guarding the United States and Its Outposts Official U.S. Army history of Pearl Harbor by the United States Army Center of Military History
War comes to Hawaii Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Monday, September 13, 1999

Media

Video of first Newsreel from December 23, 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor
Bombing of Pearl Harbour – 1941
Attack on Pearl Harbor 1, Nippon News, No. 82. in the official website of NHK.
Attack on Pearl Harbor 2, Nippon News, No. 84. in the official website of NHK.
Historic footage of Pearl Harbor during and immediately following attack on December 7, 1941

Historical documents

WW2DB: U.S. Navy Report of Japanese Raid on Pearl Harbor
Second World War – USA Declaration of War on Japan.
Collection of extensive Japanese preparation military documents







v
t
e


Pearl Harbor attack



Attack



Events leading to the attack
Order of battle
Present US ships
Battleship Row
Niihau incident





Japanese carriers involved



Akagi
Kaga
Sōryū
Hiryū
Shōkaku
Zuikaku





United States ships sunk



Arizona

salvaged artifacts


California
Oglala
Oklahoma
Shaw
Utah
West Virginia





Aftermath



Consequences
Sleeping giant quote
Infamy Speech
U.S. declaration of war
Roberts Commissions





Remembrance



Remembrance Day
USS Arizona Memorial
Survivors Association
Commemorative Medal





Books



Crisis: The Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor and Southeast Asia (1992)
Day of Deceit (2001)
Days of Infamy series (2004–05)
Pacific War series (2007–08)





Films



Secret Agent of Japan (1942)
This Is the Army (1943)
December 7th: The Movie (1943)
Task Force (1949)
From Here to Eternity (1953)
The Revolt of Mamie Stover (1956)
In Harm's Way (1965)
Tora! Tora! Tora! (1970)
1941 (1979)
The Final Countdown (1980)
Pearl Harbor (2001)





Other



Advance-knowledge conspiracy theory
In popular culture












v
t
e


United States in World War II



Home front



American music during World War II
United States aircraft production during World War II
Arizona during World War II
Nevada during World War II
New Mexico during World War II
Greatest Generation




American women



Women Airforce Service Pilots
Women's Army Corps
Woman's Land Army of America
Rosie the Riveter





Minorities



Hispanic Americans in World War II
Native Americans and World War II
Puerto Ricans in World War II











Military participation



Army (Uniforms)
Army Air Force
Marine Corps
Navy
Service medals (Medal of Honor recipients)




Events



List of battles
Attack on Pearl Harbor
Normandy landings
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki





Minorities



African Americans (Tuskegee Airmen)
Asian Americans (Japanese Americans)
Jewish Americans








Diplomatic participation



Lend-Lease
Destroyers for Bases Agreement
Project Hula












v
t
e


World War II






Asia and the Pacific

China
South-East Asia
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific


Europe

Western
Eastern


Mediterranean and Middle East

North Africa
East Africa
Italy


West Africa
Atlantic
North America
South America


Casualties
Military engagements
Conferences
Commanders





Participants





Allies
(leaders)




Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
France
Free France (from June 1940)
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines (Commonwealth)
Poland
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
United States

Puerto Rico


Yugoslavia






Axis and
Axis-aligned
(leaders)




Albania
Bulgaria
Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China
Independent State of Croatia
Finland
Germany
Hungary
Free India
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines (Second Republic)
Romania
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France

Armed neutrality







Resistance



Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jewish
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland

Anti-communist


Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Yugoslavia

Monarchists










Timeline




Prelude



Africa
Asia
Europe





1939



Poland
Phoney War
Winter War
Atlantic
Changsha
China





1940



Weserübung
Netherlands
Belgium
France

Armistice of 22 June 1940


Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
North China
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass





1941



East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union (Barbarossa)
Finland
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor

The outbreak of the Pacific War


Hong Kong
Philippines
Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941–42)





1942



Burma
Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch





1943



Tunisia
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy

Armistice of Cassibile


Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde





1944



Monte Cassino / Shingle
Narva
Korsun–Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Normandy
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Hungary
Leyte
Ardennes

Bodenplatte


Philippines (1944–1945)
Burma (1944–45)





1945



Vistula–Oder
Iwo Jima
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Italy (Spring 1945)
Borneo
Syrmian Front
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Budapest
West Hunan
Guangxi
Surrender of Germany
Project Hula
Manchuria
Manila
Borneo
Taipei
Atomic bombings

Debate


Kuril Islands

Shumshu


Surrender of Japan

End of World War II in Asia










Aspects




General




Famines



Bengal famine of 1943
Chinese famine of 1942–43
Greek Famine of 1941-1944
Dutch famine of 1944–45
Vietnamese Famine of 1945








Air warfare of World War II
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Diplomacy
Home front

United States
Australian
United Kingdom


Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology

Allied cooperation


Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II








Aftermath



Expulsion of Germans
Operation Paperclip
Operation Osoaviakhim
Operation Keelhaul
Occupation of Germany
Territorial changes of Germany
Soviet occupations

Romania
Poland
Hungary
Baltic States


Occupation of Japan
First Indochina War
Indonesian National Revolution
Cold War
Decolonization
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
Popular culture





War crimes



Allied war crimes

Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes


German (Forced labour) / Wehrmacht war crimes

Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Prosecution


Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes

Unit 731
Prosecution


Croatian war crimes

against the Serbs
against the Jews


Romanian war crimes





Wartime
sexual violence



German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Rape of Nanking
Rape of Manila
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the liberation of Poland





Prisoners



Finnish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the United States
Italian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in World War II
German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war
Polish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union











Bibliography
Category
Portal












v
t
e


 Empire of Japan



Overview



Agriculture
Censorship
Demographics
Economy
Economic history
Education
Eugenics
Foreign commerce and shipping
Industrial production
Militarism
Nationalism
Statism
Internal politics
State Shinto
Kazoku








Emperors



Meiji (Mutsuhito)
Taishō (Yoshihito)
Shōwa (Hirohito)





Symbols



Flag of Japan
Rising Sun Flag
Imperial Seal of Japan
Government Seal of Japan
State Seal of Japan
Privy Seal of Japan
Kimigayo





Government



Constitution
Charter Oath
Privy Council
Administrative structure
Imperial Diet

Peers
Representatives


Daijō-kan
Ministry of the Imperial Household
Ministry of the Treasury
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Ministry of Munitions
East Asia Development Board (Kōain)
Foreign relations
Government and military commanders of World War II
Gozen Kaigi
Ministry of Colonial Affairs
Ministry of Greater East Asia
Home Ministry
Imperial Rescript on Education
Imperial Way Faction (Kōdōha)
Kokutai
National Spiritual Mobilization Movement
Peace Preservation Law
Political parties
Supreme Court of Judicature
Taisei Yokusankai
Tokkō
Tonarigumi
Tōseiha
Greater East Asia Conference





Military



Armed Forces
Imperial General Headquarters
Imperial Japanese Army

Air Service
General Staff Office
Railways and Shipping


Imperial Japanese Navy

Air Service
General Staff
Land Forces


Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors

Senjinkun military code


Ministry of the Military
Ministry of the Army
Ministry of the Navy
Taiwanese Imperial Japan Serviceman
Imperial Guard
Nuclear weapons program
Kamikaze
War crimes
Supreme War Council
Japanese holdout





History





Meiji period




Meiji Restoration
Boshin War
Satsuma Rebellion
First Sino-Japanese War
Triple Intervention
Boxer Rebellion
Anglo-Japanese Alliance
Russo-Japanese War





Taishō period



World War I
Siberian Intervention
General Election Law
Washington Naval Treaty





Shōwa period



Shōwa financial crisis
Pacification of Manchukuo
Anti-Comintern Pact
Second Sino-Japanese War
Tripartite Pact
Soviet–Japanese Border War (1939)
Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact
Pacific War
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Soviet–Japanese War (1945)
Surrender (Potsdam Declaration, Gyokuon-hōsō)
Occupation








Territories





Greater East Asia
Co-Prosperity Sphere




Karafuto
Korea
Kwantung
Manchukuo
South Pacific
Taiwan





Occupied territories



Borneo
Burma
Hong Kong
Dutch East Indies
Malaya
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam








Other topics



Sonnō jōi
Fukoku kyōhei
Hakkō ichiu
Internment camps
German pre–World War II industrial co-operation
Racial Equality Proposal
Shinmin no Michi
Shōwa Modan
Socialist thought
Yasukuni Shrine
International Military Tribunal for the Far East
Japanese dissidence during the Shōwa period









Authority control



GND: 4127711-9








Portals
Access related topics


Military of the United States portal
World War II portal








Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attack_on_Pearl_Harbor&oldid=817368546"					Categories: Attack on Pearl Harbor1941 in Hawaii1941 in the United StatesConflicts in 1941December 1941 eventsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2010All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2015CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2011All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from December 2015Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from December 2015Coordinates on WikidataAccuracy disputes from December 2017Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2015Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2012Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015Spoken articlesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers