



An audio engineer at an audio console.


An audio engineer (also sometimes recording engineer or a vocal engineer) helps to produce a recording or a performance, editing and adjusting sound tracks using equalization and audio effects, mixing, reproduction, and reinforcement of sound. Audio engineers work on the "...technical aspect of recording—the placing of microphones, pre-amp knobs, the setting of levels. The physical recording of any project is done by an engineer ... the nuts and bolts."[1] It's a creative hobby and profession where musical instruments and technology are used to produce sound for film, radio, television, music, and video games.[2] Audio engineers also set up, sound check and do live sound mixing using an audio console and a sound reinforcement system for music concerts, theatre, sports games and corporate events.
Alternatively, the term "audio engineer" can refer to a scientist or professional engineer who holds an engineering degree and who designs, develops and builds audio or musical technology working under terms such as acoustical engineering, electronic/electrical engineering or (musical) signal processing.[3]



Contents


1 Research and development

1.1 Education
1.2 Sub-disciplines

1.2.1 Audio signal processing
1.2.2 Architectural acoustics
1.2.3 Electroacoustics
1.2.4 Musical acoustics
1.2.5 Psychoacoustics
1.2.6 Speech




2 Practitioner

2.1 Education and training


3 Training and background

3.1 Practitioners

3.1.1 Role of women


3.2 Sub-disciplines
3.3 Equipment
3.4 Recording engineers of note
3.5 Mastering engineers of note
3.6 Live sound engineers of note


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Research and development[edit]
Research and development audio engineers invent new technologies, equipment and techniques, to enhance the process and art of audio engineering.[4] They might design acoustical simulations of rooms, shape algorithms for audio signal processing, specify the requirements for public address systems, carry out research on audible sound for video game console manufacturers, and other advanced fields of audio engineering. They might also be referred to as acoustic engineers.[5][6]
Education[edit]
See also: Category:Audio engineering schools
Audio engineers working in research and development may come from backgrounds such as acoustics, computer science, broadcast engineering, physics, acoustical engineering, electrical engineering and electronics. Audio engineering courses at university or college fall into two rough categories: (i) training in the creative use of audio as a sound engineer, and (ii) training in science or engineering topics, which then allows students to apply these concepts while pursuing a career developing audio technologies. Audio training courses give you a good knowledge of technologies and their application to recording studio and sound reinforcement systems, but do not have sufficient mathematical and scientific content to allow you to get a job in research and development in the audio and acoustic industry.[7]




Noted audio engineer Roger Nichols at a vintage Neve recording console.


Audio engineers in research and development usually possess a bachelor's degree, master's degree or higher qualification in acoustics, physics, computer science or another engineering discipline. They might work in acoustic consultancy, specializing in architectural acoustics.[8] Alternatively they might work in audio companies (e.g. headphone manufacturer), or other industries that need audio expertise (e.g., automobile manufacturer), or carry out research in a university. Some positions, such as faculty (academic staff) require a Doctor of Philosophy. In Germany a Toningenieur is an audio engineer who designs, builds and repairs audio systems.
Sub-disciplines[edit]
The listed subdisciplines are based on PACS (Physics and Astronomy Classification Scheme) coding used by the Acoustical Society of America with some revision.[9]
Audio signal processing[edit]
Main article: Audio signal processing
Audio engineers develop algorithms to allow the electronic manipulation of audio signals. These can be processed at the heart of much audio production such as reverberation, Auto-Tune or perceptual coding (e.g. mp3 or Opus). Alternatively, the algorithms might carry out echo cancellation on Skype, or identify and categorize audio tracks through Music Information Retrieval (e.g., Shazam).[10]
Architectural acoustics[edit]
Main article: Architectural acoustics




Acoustic diffusing mushrooms hanging from the roof of the Royal Albert Hall.


Architectural acoustics is the science and engineering of achieving a good sound within a room.[11] For audio engineers, architectural acoustics can be about achieving good speech intelligibility in a stadium or enhancing the quality of music in a theatre.[12] Architectural Acoustic design is usually done by acoustic consultants.[8]
Electroacoustics[edit]
See also: Sound reinforcement system




The Pyramid Stage


Electroacoustics is concerned with the design of headphones, microphones, loudspeakers, sound reproduction systems and recording technologies.[6] Examples of electroacoustic design include portable electronic devices (e.g. mobile phones, portable media players, and tablet computers), sound systems in architectural acoustics, surround sound in movie theater and vehicle audio.
Musical acoustics[edit]
Main article: Musical acoustics
Musical acoustics is concerned with researching and describing the science of music. In audio engineering, this includes the design of electronic instruments such as synthesizers; the human voice (the physics and neurophysiology of singing); computer analysis of audio; music therapy, and the perception and cognition of music.[13]
Psychoacoustics[edit]
Main article: Psychoacoustics
Psychoacoustics is the scientific study of how humans respond to what they hear. At the heart of audio engineering are listeners who are the final arbitrator as to whether an audio design is successful, such as whether a binaural recording sounds immersive.[10]
Speech[edit]
Main article: Speech
The production, computer processing and perception of speech is an important part of audio engineering. Ensuring speech is transmitted intelligibly, efficiently and with high quality; in rooms, through public address systems and through mobile telephone systems are important areas of study.[14]
Practitioner[edit]




Live sound mixing


A variety of terms are used to describe audio engineers who install or operate sound recording, sound reinforcement, or sound broadcasting equipment, including large and small format consoles. Terms such as "audio technician," "sound technician," "audio engineer," "audio technologist," "recording engineer," "sound mixer" and "sound engineer" can be ambiguous; depending on the context they may be synonymous, or they may refer to different roles in audio production. Such terms can refer to a person working in sound and music production; for instance, a "sound engineer" or "recording engineer" is commonly listed in the credits of commercial music recordings (as well as in other productions that include sound, such as movies). These titles can also refer to technicians who maintain professional audio equipment. Certain jurisdictions specifically prohibit the use of the title engineer to any individual not a registered member of a professional engineering licensing body.
In German, the "Tontechniker" (audio technician) is the one who operates the audio equipment and the "Tonmeister" (sound master) is a person who creates recordings or broadcasts of music, who is both deeply musically trained (in classical and non-classical genres), and who also has a detailed theoretical and practical knowledge of virtually all aspects of sound.[citation needed]
Education and training[edit]
See also: Category:Audio engineering schools
Audio engineers come from backgrounds or postsecondary training in fields such as audio, fine arts, broadcasting, music, or electrical engineering. Training in audio engineering and sound recording is offered by colleges and universities. Some audio engineers are autodidacts with no formal training, but who have attained professional skills in audio through extensive on-the-job experience.
Training and background[edit]
Audio engineers must have extensive knowledge of audio engineering principles and techniques. They have to understand, to name a few, how to mic different instruments and amplifiers, what types of mics to use, where to place the mics, how to attenuate "hot" instrument signals that are overloading and clipping the channel, how to prevent audio feedback, how to set the audio compression for different instruments and vocals, and how to prevent unwanted distortion of the sound. However, to be a professional sound engineer, an individual needs more than just technical knowledge. She or he must also understand the types of sounds and tones that rock and pop music bands and other musical ensembles expect in different genres. This knowledge of musical styles is typically learned from years of experience listening to and mixing bands in recording or live sound contexts.
Practitioners[edit]




At the front of house position, mixing sound for a band


In the recording studio environment, a sound engineer records, edits, manipulates, mixes, or masters sound by technical means to realize the creative vision of the artist and record producer. While usually associated with music production, an audio engineer deals with sound for a wide range of applications, including post-production for video and film, live sound reinforcement, advertising, multimedia, and broadcasting. In larger productions, an audio engineer is responsible for the technical aspects of a sound recording or other audio production, and works together with a record producer or director, although the engineer's role may also be integrated with that of the producer. In smaller productions and studios the sound engineer and producer are often the same person.
In typical sound reinforcement applications, audio engineers often assume the role of producer, making artistic and technical decisions, and sometimes even scheduling and budget decisions.[15]
Role of women[edit]
According to Women's Audio Mission (WAM), a nonprofit organization based in San Francisco dedicated to the advancement of women in music production and the recording arts, less than 5% of the people creating sound and media are women.[16] "Only three women have ever been nominated for best producer at the Brits or the Grammys" and none won either award.[17] "Women who want to enter the [producing] field face a boys' club, or a guild mentality".[17] The UK "Music Producers' Guild says less than 4% of its members are women" and at the Liverpool Institute of Performing Arts, "...only 6% of the students enrolled on its sound technology course are female."[17]
Women's Audio Mission was started in 2003 to address the lack of women in professional audio by training over 6,000 women and girls in the recording arts and is the only professional recording studio built and run by women.[18] Notable recording projects include the Grammy Award-winning Kronos Quartet, Angelique Kidjo (2014 Grammy winner), author Salman Rushdie, the Academy Award-nominated soundtrack to “Dirty Wars”,[19] Van-Ahn Vo (NPR’s top 50 albums of 2013), Grammy-nominated St. Lawrence Quartet, and world music artists Tanya Tagaq and Wu Man.[citation needed]
One of the first women to produce, engineer, arrange and promote music on her own rock and roll music label was Cordell Jackson (1923-2004). Trina Shoemaker is a mixer, record producer and sound engineer who became the first woman to win the Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album in 1998 for her work on The Globe Sessions.[20]
Gail Davies was the '...first female producer in country music, delivering a string of Top 10 hits in the '70s and '80s including "Someone Is Looking for Someone Like You," "Blue Heartache" and "I'll Be There (If You Ever Want Me)." [21] When she moved to Nashville in 1976, men "...didn't want to work for a woman" and she was told women in the city were "...still barefoot, pregnant and [singing] in the vocal booth." [21]
Wendy Waldman, who became a producer after Davies, saw that Davies had a difficult time. When Jonell Polansky arrived in Nashville in 1994, with a degree in electrical engineering and recording experience in the Bay Area, she was told "...[y]ou're a woman, and we already had one"–a reference to Waldman.[21] KK Proffitt, who is a studio "owner and chief engineer" states that men in Nashville do not want to have women in the recording booth. At a meeting of the Audio Engineering Society, Proffitt was told to "shut up" by a male producer when she raised the issue of updating studio recording technologies.[21] Proffitt said she finds "...finds sexism rampant in the industry".[21]
Other notable women include:

Sylvia Robinson, early hip hop music producer
Susan Rogers, engineer for Purple Rain
Genya Ravan, producer The Dead Boys' Young, Loud and Snotty;
Delia Derbyshire, British electronics pioneer
Lari White, a co-producer on Toby Keith's White Trash With Money
Leslie Ann Jones
Beyoncé, for I Am ... Sasha Fierce.[21]

Sub-disciplines[edit]
There are four distinct steps to commercial production of a recording: recording, editing, mixing, and mastering. Typically, each is performed by a sound engineer who specializes only in that part of production.

Studio engineer – an engineer working within a studio facility, either with a producer or independently.
Recording engineer – engineer who records sound.
Assistant engineer – often employed in larger studios, allowing them to train to become full-time engineers. They often assist full-time engineers with microphone setups, session breakdowns and in some cases, rough mixes.[15]
Mixing engineer – a person who creates mixes of multi-track recordings. It is common to record a commercial record at one studio and have it mixed by different engineers in other studios.
Mastering engineer – typically the person who mixes the final stereo tracks (or sometimes just a few tracks or stems) that the mix engineer produces. The mastering engineer makes any final adjustments to the overall sound of the record in the final step before commercial duplication. Mastering engineers use principles of equalization and compression to affect the coloration of the sound.
Audio/sound designer – broadly an artist who produces sound tracks or sound effects content for media.
Live sound engineer

Front of House (FOH) engineer, or A1.[22] – a person dealing with live sound reinforcement. This usually includes planning and installation of loudspeakers, cabling and equipment and mixing sound during the show. This may or may not include running the foldback sound. A live/sound reinforcement engineer hears source material and tries to correlate that sonic experience with system performance.[23]
Wireless microphone engineer, or A2. This position is responsible for wireless microphones during a theatre production, a sports event or a corporate event.
Foldback or Monitor engineer – a person running foldback sound during a live event. The term "foldback" comes from the old practice of "folding back" audio signals from the front of house) (FOH) mixing console to the stage so musicians can hear themselves while performing. Monitor engineers usually have a separate audio system from the FOH engineer and manipulate audio signals independently from what the audience hears so they can satisfy the requirements of each performer on stage. In-ear systems, digital and analog mixing consoles, and a variety of speaker enclosures are typically used by monitor engineers. In addition most monitor engineers must be familiar with wireless or RF (radio-frequency) equipment and must communicate personally with the artist(s) during each performance.
Systems engineer – responsible for the design setup of modern PA systems, which are often very complex. A systems engineer is usually also referred to as a "crew chief" on tour and is responsible for the performance and day-to-day job requirements of the audio crew as a whole along with the FOH audio system. This is a sound-only position concerned with implementation, not to be confused with the interdisciplinary field of system engineering, which typically requires a college degree.


Re-recording mixer – a person in post-production who mixes audio tracks for feature films or television programs.

Equipment[edit]




Correcting a room's frequency response.


An audio engineer is proficient with different types of recording media, such as analog tape, digital multi-track recorders and workstations, and computer knowledge. With the advent of the digital age, it is increasingly important for the audio engineer to understand software and hardware integration, from synchronization to analog to digital transfers. In their daily work, audio engineers use many tools, including:

Tape machines
Analog-to-digital converters
Digital-to-analog converters
Digital audio workstations (DAWs)
Dynamic range compressors
Audio data compressors
Music sequencers
Signal processors
Microphones
Preamplifiers
Mixing consoles
Amplifiers
Loudspeakers

Recording engineers of note[edit]

List 



Steve Albini
Jim Anderson
Michael J. Bishop
Bill Bottrell
David Bottrill
Helmut Burk
Chuck Britz
Patrick Brown
Terry Brown
John Burns
Dru Castro
Fred Catero
Roy Cicala
Bob Clearmountain
Mike Crossey
Terry Date
Rhett Davies
Nick Davis
Charles De Schutter
Tom Dowd
Mark "Flood" Ellis
Geoff Emerick
Jack Endino
Bob Ezrin
David R. Ferguson
Dave Fridmann
Rudy Van Gelder
Nigel Godrich
Doug Grean
James Guthrie
Mick Guzauski
Roy Halee
Wally Heider
David Hentschel
Bones Howe
Andrew Jackson
Andy Johns
Glyn Johns
Leslie Ann Jones
Neil Kernon
Jacquire King
Eddie Kramer
Greg Ladanyi
Maxime Le Guil
James Lock
Chris Lord-Alge
Tom Lord-Alge
Reinhold Mack
Mike Marciano
George Martin
Tony Maserati
George Massenburg
Mario J. McNulty
Joe Meek
Yuri Morozov
Alan Moulder
Jack Mullin
Evgeny Murzin
Roger Nichols
Clif Norrell
Justin Niebank[24]
Paul Northfield
Gary Paczosa
Hugh Padgham
Robert Parker
Alan Parsons
Les Paul
Dave Pensado
Lynn Peterzell
Tony Platt
Resul Pookutty
Bill Porter
Bill Putnam
Phil Ramone
Emitt Rhodes
Bruce Robb (producer)
Susan Rogers
Scott Salem
Elliot Scheiner
Andrew Scheps[25]
Al Schmitt
Tom Scholz
Jim Scott
Ken Scott
Da-Hong Seetoo
Eberhard Sengpiel
Norman Smith
H. Sridhar
Chris Steinmetz
Mike Stone
Neil Strauch
Stephen Street
Bruce Swedien
Bill Szymczyk
Mike Terry
Wharton Tiers
Devin Townsend
Ken Townshend
Phil Thornalley
John Travis
Robert Venable
Tony Visconti
Andy Wallace
Dave Aron
Kenneth Wilkinson
Jonathan Wilson[26]




Mastering engineers of note[edit]

List 



Bernie Grundman
Steve Hoffman
Ted Jensen
Bob Katz
Bob Ludwig
Rodney Mills
George Peckham
Tom Coyne




Live sound engineers of note[edit]

List 



Dan Healy
"Big Mick" Hughes
Hutch
Bruce Jackson
Bill Porter
Dave Rat
Charlie Richmond
Owsley Stanley
Charles De Schutter




See also[edit]





Category:Audio engineers
Category:Acoustical engineers
Audio Engineering Society
Institute of Broadcast Sound
Professional Lighting and Sound Association
Acoustical engineering




Broadcast engineering
Electrical engineering
Audio restoration
Audiography
History of sound recording
Live sound mixing
Professional audio




Record producer
Recording studio
Sound designer
Sound follower
Sound operator
Sound recording
Tape op





References[edit]


^ "Interview with Phil Ek". HitQuarters. 25 May 2009. Retrieved Sep 3, 2010. 
^ Dawn Rosenberg McKay. "Audio Engineer". About.com Careers. 
^ wiseGeek. "What Is Audio Engineering?". Retrieved 17 May 2013. 
^ Daley, Dan, "The Engineers Who Changed Recording: Fathers Of Invention", Sound on Sound magazine, October 2004
^ University of Salford. "Graduate Jobs in Acoustics". Retrieved 13 May 2013. 
^ a b Acoustical Society of America. "Acoustics and You". Retrieved 13 May 2013. 
^ University of Salford, Acoustics. "Physics and music technology degrees". Retrieved 17 May 2013. 
^ a b National Careers Service. "Job profiles: Acoustics consultant". Retrieved 13 May 2013. 
^ Acoustical Society of America. "PACS 2010 Regular Edition—Acoustics Appendix". Retrieved 22 May 2013. 
^ a b Pohlmann, Ken (2010). Principles of Digital Audio, Sixth Edition. McGraw Hill Professional. p. 336. ISBN 978-0-07-166347-2. 
^ Morfey, Christopher (2001). Dictionary of Acoustics. Academic Press. p. 32. 
^ Templeton, Duncan (1993). Acoustics in the Built Environment: Advice for the Design Team. Architectural Press. ISBN 978-0-7506-0538-0. 
^ Technical Committee on Musical Acoustics (TCMU) of the Acoustical Society of America (ASA). "ASA TCMU Home Page". Retrieved 22 May 2013. 
^ Speech Communication Technical Committee. "Speech Communication". Acoustical Society of America. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. 
^ a b Huber, D.M. (1995). Modern Recording Techniques. (5th ed.). Burlington, MA: Focal Press
^ Ncube, Rosina (September 2013). "Sounding Off: Why So Few Women In Audio?". Sound on Sound. 
^ a b c "Why are female record producers so rare?". BBC News. 
^ "Women's Audio Mission." Pro Sound News, Oct. 2009, p. 72. Fine Arts and Music Collection, libraries.state.ma.us/login?gwurl=http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?p=PPFA&sw=w&u=mlin Accessed 2 Mar. 2017.
^ "Womens Audio Mission - GuideStar Profile". www.guidestar.org. Retrieved 2017-03-02. 
^ Dunbar, Julie C. (2010). Women, Music, Culture: An Introduction. Taylor & Francis. p. 304. ISBN 0415875625. 
^ a b c d e f "Women account for less than 5 percent of producers and engineers — but maybe not for long - Cover Story - Nashville Scene". Nashville Scene. 
^ "Front of House (FOH) Engineer", Get in Media Entertainment Careers
^ Davis, G., Jones R. (1990). Yamaha Sound Reinforcement Handbook. (2nd ed.) Milwaukee, WI: Hal Leonard Corp.
^ "Justin Niebank Discography". AllMusic. Retrieved 28 October 2015. 
^ "Andrew Scheps". McDonough Management. Retrieved 27 October 2015. 
^ "Jonathan Wilson: Fanfare Reviving The West Coast Sound". Sound On Sound. Retrieved 27 October 2015. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Audio engineers.



Audio Engineering Society
Audio engineering formulas and calculators
Recording engineer video interviews
A free collection of online audio tools for audio engineers
Audio Engineering online course under Creative Commons Licence
Audio White Papers, Articles and Books
Audio Engineering School Directory
Rane Pro Audio Reference
Audio Engineers Freelancer Marketplace
Audio Engineering Articles, Tutorials and Interviews
Audio Engineer Salary Survey







v
t
e


Music industry



Companies and
organizations




Representatives



ARIA
BPI
Music Canada
FIMI
IFPI (worldwide)
PROMUSICAE
RIAA
SNEP





Music publishers



BMG Rights Management
EMI Music Publishing
Fox Music
Imagem
MGM Music
Music catalog
Sony/ATV Music Publishing
Universal Music Publishing Group
Warner/Chappell Music





Record labels



Major: Sony Music
Universal Music Group
Warner Music Group
Independent: Independent UK record labels





Live music



CTS Eventim
Live Nation
LiveStyle
Ticketmaster








Genres



Avant-garde
Blues
Contemporary R&B
Country
Crossover
Dance
Disco
Drum and bass
Easy listening
Electronica
Experimental
Folk
Funk
Gospel
Hip hop
Instrumental
Jazz
Latin
Metal
Motown
New Age
Operatic pop
Pop
Punk
Reggae
Rock
Soul
Soundtrack
World





Sectors and
roles



Album cover design
Artists and repertoire (A&R)
Disc jockey
Distribution
Entertainment law
Music education
Music executive
Music journalism
Music publisher
Music store
Music venue
Musical instruments
Professional audio store
Promotion
Radio promotion
Record label
Record shop
Road crew
Talent manager
Tour promoter




Production



Arrangement
Composer
Conductor
Disc jockey
Hip hop producer
Horn section
Record producer
Recording artist
Rhythm section
Orchestrator
Session musician
Singer

Backup singer
Ghost singer
Vocal coach


Songwriter

Ghostwriter


Sound engineer








Release
formats



Album
Extended play (EP)/Mini album
Single
Music video
Promotional recording
Phonograph record
Eight-track
Compact cassette
CD
DVD
Airplay
Music download
Streaming media





Live shows



Concert
Concert tour
Concert residency
Music festival
Music competition





Charts



ARIA Charts
Billboard Hot 100
Brasil Hot 100 Airplay
Canadian Hot 100
Gaon Music Chart
Irish Singles Chart
Italian Singles Chart
GfK Entertainment Charts
Entertainment Monitoring Africa
Oricon Charts
New Zealand Singles Chart
SNEP Singles Chart
Sverigetopplistan
UK Singles Chart





Publications



Billboard
HitQuarters
Hot Press
Kerrang!
Mojo
Musica e dischi
NME
Q
Rolling Stone
Smash Hits
Top of the Pops





Television




Channels



CMT
TheCoolTV
Fuse
Heartland
Juice
MTV
MTV2
Tr3s
MuchMusic
The Music Factory
Viva
VH1
The Country Network





Series



Idols
Popstars
Star Academy
The Voice
The X Factor
Rising Star








Achievements



Music award
Best-selling music artists
Best-selling albums
Best-selling albums by country
Best-selling singles
Highest-grossing concert tours
Highest-attended concerts
Global Recording Artist of the Year





Other



Album sales
Album-equivalent unit
A-side and B-side
Backmasking
Christian music industry
Hidden track
Grammy Museum
White label








 Category









Authority control



LCCN: sh99003386
GND: 4375554-9
SUDOC: 033726124
BNF: cb124564341 (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Audio_engineer&oldid=818187472"					Categories: Audio electronicsAudio engineeringBroadcasting occupationsFilmmaking occupationsMedia occupationsOccupations in musicAudio engineersHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers