For other uses, see Audit (disambiguation).
"Auditing" redirects here. For the Scientology practice, see Auditing (Scientology).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Some typical stages in the audit process


An audit is a systematic and independent examination of books, accounts, statutory records, documents and vouchers of an organization to ascertain how far the financial statements as well as non-financial disclosures present a true and fair view of the concern. It also attempts to ensure that the books of accounts are properly maintained by the concern as required by law. Auditing has become such a ubiquitous phenomenon in the corporate and the public sector that academics started identifying an "Audit Society".[1] The auditor perceives and recognises the propositions before them for examination, obtains evidence, evaluates the same and formulates an opinion on the basis of his judgement which is communicated through their audit report.[2]
Any subject matter may be audited. Auditing is a safeguard measure since ancient times (Loeb & Shamoo,1989).[3] Audits provide third party assurance to various stakeholders that the subject matter is free from material misstatement. The term is most frequently applied to audits of the financial information relating to a legal person. Other areas which are commonly audited include: secretarial & compliance audit, internal controls, quality management, project management, water management, and energy conservation.
As a result of an audit, stakeholders may effectively evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and the governance process over the subject matter.
The word audit is derived from a Latin word "audire" which means "to hear".[4] During the medieval times when manual book-keeping was prevalent, auditors in Britain used to hear the accounts read out for them and checked that the organisation's personnel were not negligent or fraudulent.[5] Moyer(1951)[6] identified that the most important duty of the auditor was to detect fraud. Chatfield(1974)[7] documented that early United States auditing was viewed mainly as verification of bookkeeping detail.



Contents


1 Information technology audit
2 Accounting

2.1 Integrated audits
2.2 Assessments
2.3 Auditors


3 Performance audits
4 Quality audits
5 Project management
6 Energy audits
7 Operations audit
8 Forensic audits
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading



Information technology audit[edit]
Main article: Information technology audit
Main article: Software audit review
An information technology audit, or information systems audit, is an examination of the management controls within an Information technology (IT) infrastructure. The evaluation of obtained evidence determines if the information systems are safeguarding assets, maintaining data integrity, and operating effectively to achieve the organization's goals or objectives. These reviews may be performed in conjunction with a financial statement audit, internal audit, or other form of attestation engagement.
Accounting[edit]
Main article: Financial audit
Due to strong incentives (including taxation, misselling and other forms of fraud) to misstate financial information, auditing has become a legal requirement for many entities who have the power to exploit financial information for personal gain. Traditionally, audits were mainly associated with gaining information about financial systems and the financial records of a company or a business.
Financial audits are performed to ascertain the validity and reliability of information, as well as to provide an assessment of a system's internal control. As a result of this, a third party can express an opinion of the person / organisation / system (etc.) in question. The opinion given on financial statements will depend on the audit evidence obtained.
Due to constraints, an audit seeks to provide only reasonable assurance that the statements are free from material error. Hence, statistical sampling is often adopted in audits. In the case of financial audits, a set of financial statements are said to be true and fair when they are free of material misstatements – a concept influenced by both quantitative (numerical) and qualitative factors. But recently, the argument that auditing should go beyond just true and fair is gaining momentum.[8] And the US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board has come out with a concept release on the same.[9]
Cost accounting is a process for verifying the cost of manufacturing or producing of any article, on the basis of accounts measuring the use of material, labor or other items of cost. In simple words, the term, cost audit means a systematic and accurate verification of the cost accounts and records, and checking for adherence to the cost accounting objectives. According to the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of Pakistan, a cost audit is "an examination of cost accounting records and verification of facts to ascertain that the cost of the product has been arrived at, in accordance with principles of cost accounting."[citation needed]
In most nations, an audit must adhere to generally accepted standards established by governing bodies. These standards assure third parties or external users that they can rely upon the auditor's opinion on the fairness of financial statements, or other subjects on which the auditor expresses an opinion.
Integrated audits[edit]
In the US, audits of publicly traded companies are governed by rules laid down by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which was established by Section 404 of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002. Such an audit is called an integrated audit, where auditors, in addition to an opinion on the financial statements, must also express an opinion on the effectiveness of a company's internal control over financial reporting, in accordance with PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5.[10]
There are also new types of integrated auditing becoming available that use unified compliance material (see the unified compliance section in Regulatory compliance). Due to the increasing number of regulations and need for operational transparency, organizations are adopting risk-based audits that can cover multiple regulations and standards from a single audit event.[citation needed] This is a very new but necessary approach in some sectors to ensure that all the necessary governance requirements can be met without duplicating effort from both audit and audit hosting resources.[citation needed]
Assessments[edit]
The purpose of an assessment is to measure something or calculate a value for it. Although the process of producing an assessment may involve an audit by an independent professional, its purpose is to provide a measurement rather than to express an opinion about the fairness of statements or quality of performance.[11]
Auditors[edit]
Auditors of financial statements & non-financial information (including compliance audit) can be classified into three categories:

External auditor / Statutory auditor is an independent firm engaged by the client subject to the audit, to express an opinion on whether the company's financial statements are free of material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error. For publicly traded companies, external auditors may also be required to express an opinion over the effectiveness of internal controls over financial reporting. External auditors may also be engaged to perform other agreed-upon procedures, related or unrelated to financial statements. Most importantly, external auditors, though engaged and paid by the company being audited, should be regarded as independent[citation needed]
Cost auditor / Statutory Cost auditor is an independent firm engaged by the client subject to the Cost audit, to express an opinion on whether the company's Cost statements and Cost Sheet are free of material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error. For publicly traded companies, external auditors may also be required to express an opinion over the effectiveness of internal controls over Cost reporting. These are Specialised Persons called Cost Accountants in India & CMA globally either Cost & Management Accountants or Certified Management Accountants.
Further information: Cost auditing
Government Auditors review the finances and practices of federal agencies. These auditors report their finds to congress, which uses them to create and manage polices and budgets. Government auditors work for the U.S. Government Accountability Office, and most state governments have similar departments to audit state and municipal agencies. Further information: Internal auditors
Secretarial auditor / Statutory Secretarial auditor is an independent firm engaged by the client subject to the audit of Secretarial & applicable laws / Compliances of other applicable laws, to express an opinion on whether the company's Secretarial records and Compliance of applicable laws are free of material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error and inviting heavy fines or penalties. For Bigger Public companies, external Secretarial auditors may also be required to express an opinion over the effectiveness of internal controls over compliances system management of the Company. These are Specialized Persons called Company Secretaries in India who are the members of Institute of Company Secretaries of India and holding Certificate of Practice. (http://www.icsi.edu/)

The most commonly used external audit standards are the US GAAS of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants; and the ISA International Standards on Auditing developed by the International Auditing and Assurance Standard

Internal auditors are employed by the organisations they audit. They work for government agencies (federal, state and local); for publicly traded companies; and for non-profit companies across all industries. The internationally recognised standard setting body for the profession is the Institute of Internal Auditors - IIA (www.theiia.org). The IIA has defined internal auditing as follows: "Internal auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and improve an organisation's operations. It helps an organisation accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes".[12] Thus professional internal auditors provide independent and objective audit and consulting services focused on evaluating whether the board of directors, shareholders, stakeholders, and corporate executives have reasonable assurance that the organization's governance, risk management, and control processes are designed adequately and function effectively. Internal audit professionals (Certified Internal Auditors - CIAs) are governed by the international professional standards and code of conduct of the Institute of Internal Auditors.[13] While internal auditors are not independent of the companies that employ them, independence and objectivity are a cornerstone of the IIA professional standards; and are discussed at length in the standards and the supporting practice guides and practice advisories. Professional internal auditors are mandated by the IIA standards to be independent of the business activities they audit. This independence and objectivity are achieved through the organizational placement and reporting lines of the internal audit department. Internal auditors of publicly traded companies in the United States are required to report functionally to the board of directors directly, or a sub-committee of the board of directors (typically the audit committee), and not to management except for administrative purposes. As described often in the professional literature for the practice of internal auditing (such as Internal Auditor, the journal of the IIA) -,[14] or other similar and generally recognized frameworks for management control when evaluating an entity's governance and control practices; and apply COSO's "Enterprise Risk Management-Integrated Framework" or other similar and generally recognized frameworks for entity-wide risk management when evaluating an organization's entity-wide risk management practices. Professional internal auditors also use Control Self-Assessment (CSA) as an effective process for performing their work.
Consultant auditors are external personnel contracted by the firm to perform an audit following the firm's auditing standards. This differs from the external auditor, who follows their own auditing standards. The level of independence is therefore somewhere between the internal auditor and the external auditor. The consultant auditor may work independently, or as part of the audit team that includes internal auditors. Consultant auditors are used when the firm lacks sufficient expertise to audit certain areas, or simply for staff augmentation when staff are not available.

Performance audits[edit]
Safety, security, information systems performance, and environmental concerns are increasingly the subject of audits.[15] There are now audit professionals who specialize in security audits and information systems audits. With nonprofit organisations and government agencies, there has been an increasing need for performance audits, examining their success in satisfying mission objectives.
Quality audits[edit]
Main article: Quality audit
Quality audits are performed to verify conformance to standards through review of objective evidence. A system of quality audits may verify the effectiveness of a quality management system. This is part of certifications such as ISO 9001. Quality audits are essential to verify the existence of objective evidence showing conformance to required processes, to assess how successfully processes have been implemented, and to judge the effectiveness of achieving any defined target levels. Quality audits are also necessary to provide evidence concerning reduction and elimination of problem areas, and they are a hands-on management tool for achieving continual improvement in an organization.
To benefit the organisation, quality auditing should not only report non-conformance and corrective actions but also highlight areas of good practice and provide evidence of conformance. In this way, other departments may share information and amend their working practices as a result, also enhancing continual improvement.
Project management[edit]
A project audit provides an opportunity to uncover issues, concerns and challenges encountered during the project lifecycle.[16] Conducted midway through the project, an audit affords the project manager, project sponsor and project team an interim view of what has gone well, as well as what needs to be improved to successfully complete the project. If done at the close of a project, the audit can be used to develop success criteria for future projects by providing a forensic review. This review identifies which elements of the project were successfully managed and which ones presented challenges. As a result, the review will help the organisation identify what it needs to do to avoid repeating the same mistakes on future projects
Projects can undergo 2 types of Project audits:[15]

Regular Health Check Audits: The aim of a regular health check audit is to understand the current state of a project in order to increase project success.
Regulatory Audits: The aim of a regulatory audit is to verify that a project is compliant with regulations and standards. Best practices of NEMEA Compliance Centre describe that, the regulatory audit must be accurate, objective, and independent while providing oversight and assurance to the organisation.

Other forms of Project audits:
Formal: Applies when the project is in trouble, sponsor agrees that the audit is needed, sensitivities are high, and need to be able prove conclusions via sustainable evidence.
Informal: Apply when a new project manager is provided, there is no indication the projects in trouble and there is a need to report whether the project is as opposed to where its supposed to Informal audits can apply the same criteria as formal audit but there is no need for such a in depth report or formal report.[17]
Energy audits[edit]
Main article: Energy audit
An energy audit is an inspection, survey and analysis of energy flows for energy conservation in a building, process or system to reduce the amount of energy input into the system without negatively affecting the output(s).
Operations audit[edit]
Further information: Operational audit
An operations audit is an examination of the operations of the client's business. In this audit the auditor thoroughly examines the efficiency, effectiveness and economy of the operations with which the management of the entity (client) is achieving its objective. The operational audit goes beyond the internal controls issues since management does not achieve its objectives merely by compliance of satisfactory system of internal controls. Operational audits cover any matters which may be commercially unsound. The objective of operational audit is to examine Three E's, namely:[citation needed] Effectiveness – doing the right things with least wastage of resources. Efficiency – performing work in least possible time. Economy – balance between benefits and costs to run the operations[citation needed]
A control self-assessment is a commonly used tool for completing an operations audit.[18]
Forensic audits[edit]
Also refer to forensic accountancy, forensic accountant or forensic accounting. It refers to an investigative audit in which accountants with specialised on both accounting and investigation seek to uncover frauds, missing money and negligences
See also[edit]


Academic audit
Accounting
Audit plan
Big Four accounting firms
Clinical audit
Comptroller, Comptroller General, and Comptroller General of the United States
Continuous auditing
Cost auditing
COSO framework, Risk management
EarthCheck
Financial audit, External auditor, Certified Public Accountant (CPA), and Audit risk
Information technology audit, History of information technology auditing, and Information security audit
Internal audit
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI)
Lead auditor, under the Chief audit executive or Director of audit
Management auditing
Operational auditing
Peer review
Quality audit
Risk based internal audit
Technical audit
Value for money audit


References[edit]


^ Power, Michael. 1999. The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
^ "Audit assurance". 
^ Loeb, Stephen E.; Shamoo, Adil E. (1989-09-01). "Data audit: Its place in auditing". Accountability in Research. 1 (1): 23–32. doi:10.1080/08989628908573771. ISSN 0898-9621. PMID 26859053. 
^ Assurance, Auditing and. Chapter 1, Volume 1: Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. p. 1 http://www.icai.org/post.html?post_id=6193.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Derek Matthews, History of Auditing. The changing audit process from the 19th century till date. Routledge-Taylor & Francis Group. p. 6. 
^ C. A., Moyer (January 1951). "Early Developments in American Auditing". Accounting Review. 26: 6 – via JSTOR. 
^ Michael, Chatfield (1974). "A History of Accounting Thought". Business History Review. 49. 
^ McKenna, Francine. "Auditors and Audit Reports: Is The Firm's "John Hancock" Enough?". Forbes. Retrieved 22 July 2011. 
^ "CONCEPT RELEASE ON POSSIBLE REVISIONS TO PCAOB STANDARDS RELATED TO REPORTS ON AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS" (PDF). Retrieved 22 July 2011. 
^ "Auditing Standard No. 5". pcaobus.org. Retrieved 2016-06-28. 
^ Ladda, R.L. Basic Concepts Of Accounting. Solapur: Laxmi Book Publication. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-312-16130-6. 
^ "Pages - Definition of Internal Auditing". Na.theiia.org. 2000-01-01. Retrieved 2013-09-02. 
^ "Pages - International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF)". Na.theiia.org. 2000-01-01. Retrieved 2013-09-02. 
^ "Professional internal auditors, in carrying out their responsibilities, apply COSO's Integrated Framework-Internal Control". Theiia.org. 
^ a b Different Types of Audits (June 2013) Auditronix Guidance Note Archived July 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Stanleigh, Micheal (2009). "UNDERTAKING A SUCCESSFUL PROJECT AUDIT" (PDF). PROJECT SMART. Retrieved 2016.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)[permanent dead link]
^ Clarke. K, Walsh. K & Flanagan. J (2015). "How prevalent are post-completion audits in australia. Accounting, Accountability & Performance,". Accounting, Accountability & Performance. 
^ Gilbert W. Joseph and Terry J. Engle (December 2005). "The Use of Control Self-Assessment by Independent Auditors". The CPA Journal. Retrieved 10 March 2012. 


Further reading[edit]

Amat, O. (2008). Earnings management and audit adjustments: An empirical study of IBEX 35 constituents. Available at SSRN 1374232.







v
t
e


Social and environmental accountability



Ethics and
principles



Aarhus Convention
Corporate accountability / behaviour / social responsibility
Ethical banking
Ethical code
Extended producer responsibility
Organizational ethics
Organizational justice
Principles for Responsible Investment
Social responsibility
Stakeholder theory
Sullivan principles
Transparency (behavioral
social)
UN Global Compact








Social
accounting



Double bottom line
Ethical Positioning Index
Higg Index
Impact assessment (environmental
equality
social)
ISO 26000
Genuine progress indicator
OHSAS 18001
Performance indicator
SA8000
Social return on investment
Whole-life cost





Environmental
accounting



Carbon accounting
Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
Emission inventory
Environmental full-cost accounting / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account
ISO 14000
ISO 14031:1999
Life-cycle assessment
Pollutant release and transfer register
Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain
Toxics Release Inventory
Triple bottom line





Reporting



Global Reporting Initiative
GxP guidelines
Sustainability reporting





Auditing



Community-based monitoring
Environmental (certification)
Fair trade (certification)
ISO 19011





Related



Bangladesh Accord
Benefit corporation
Child labour
Community interest company
Conflict of interest
Disasters
Disinvestment
Eco-labeling
Environmental pricing reform
Environmental, social and corporate governance
Ethical consumerism
Euthenics
Health impact assessment
Market governance mechanism
Product certification
Public participation
Social enterprise
Socially responsible investing
Stakeholder (engagement)
Supply chain management








 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Organizations











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Audit&oldid=816328898"					Categories: AuditingHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: datesAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing additional references from October 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles with limited geographic scope from January 2010Articles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2012Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011