"ANU" redirects here. For other uses, see ANU (disambiguation).

The Australian National University


Coat of arms of ANU



Motto
Naturam Primum Cognoscere Rerum



Motto in English

"First to learn the nature of things"


Type
Public, National


Established
1946


Endowment
A$1.13 billion[1]


Chancellor
Gareth Evans AC


Vice-Chancellor
Brian Schmidt AC



Administrative staff

3,753


Undergraduates
10,052


Postgraduates
10,840


Location
Acton, Australian Capital Territory, Australia


Affiliations
IARU, Group of Eight, APRU, AURA, ASAIHL


Website
anu.edu.au





The Australian National University (ANU) is a national research university located in Canberra, the capital of Australia. Its main campus in Acton encompasses seven teaching and research colleges, in addition to several national academies and institutes.[2]
Founded in 1946, it is the only university to have been created by the Parliament of Australia. Originally a postgraduate research university, ANU commenced undergraduate teaching in 1960 when it integrated the Canberra University College, which had been established in 1929 as a campus of the University of Melbourne.[3] ANU enrolls 10,052 undergraduate and 10,840 postgraduate students and employs 3,753 staff.[4] The university's endowment stood at A$1.13 billion in 2012.[1]
ANU is ranked 1st in Australia and the whole of Oceania, 20th in the world by the 2018 QS World University Rankings,[5] and 47th in the world (second in Australia) by the 2016/17 Times Higher Education.[6] ANU was named the world's 7th (first in Australia) most international university in a 2017 study by Times Higher Education.[7] In the 2017 Times Higher Education Global Employability University Ranking, an annual ranking of university graduates' employability, ANU was ranked 21st in the world (first in Australia).[8] ANU is ranked 100th (first in Australia) in the CWTS Leiden ranking.[9][10]
ANU counts six Nobel laureates and 49 Rhodes scholars [11] among its faculty and alumni.[12] The university has educated two prime ministers, 30 current Australian ambassadors and more than a dozen current heads of Government departments of Australia.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Post-war origins
1.2 Canberra University College
1.3 Modern era


2 Campus

2.1 Library
2.2 Residential halls and colleges


3 Organisation

3.1 Colleges

3.1.1 Arts and Social Sciences
3.1.2 Asia and the Pacific
3.1.3 Business and Economics
3.1.4 Engineering and Computer Science
3.1.5 Law
3.1.6 Medicine, Biology and Environment
3.1.7 Physical and Mathematical Sciences




4 Academics

4.1 Governance
4.2 Finances
4.3 Rankings


5 Student life

5.1 Woroni


6 Notable alumni and faculty
7 Affiliations
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
Post-war origins[edit]
Calls for the establishment of a national university in Australia began as early as 1900.[13] After the location of the nation's capital, Canberra, was determined in 1908, land was set aside for the university at the foot Black Mountain in the city designs by Walter Burley Griffin.[13] Planning for the university was disrupted by World War II but resumed with the creation of the Department of Post-War Reconstruction in 1942, ultimately leading to the passage of the Australian National University Act 1946 by the Parliament of Australia on 1 August 1946.[13]




Remains of the ANU homopolar generator designed by Mark Oliphant


A group of eminent Australian scholars returned from overseas to join the university, including Sir Howard Florey (co-developer of medicinal penicillin), Sir Mark Oliphant (a nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project), Sir Keith Hancock (the Chichele Professor of Economic History at Oxford) and Sir Raymond Firth (a professor of anthropology at LSE).[13] Economist Sir Douglas Copland was appointed as ANU's first Vice-Chancellor and former Prime Minister Stanley Bruce served as the first Chancellor.[14] ANU was originally organised into four centres—the Research Schools of Physical Sciences, Social Sciences and Pacific Studies and the John Curtin School of Medical Research.[13]
The first residents’ hall, University House, was opened in 1954 for faculty members and postgraduate students.[3] Mount Stromlo Observatory, established by the federal government in 1924, became part of ANU in 1957.[3] The first locations of the ANU Library, the Menzies and Chifley buildings, opened in 1963.[3] The Australian Forestry School, located in Canberra since 1927, was amalgamated by ANU in 1965.[3]
 Canberra University College[edit]
Canberra University College (CUC) was the first institution of higher education in the national capital, having been established in 1929 and enrolling its first undergraduate pupils in 1930.[13][15] Its founding was led by Sir Robert Garran, one of the drafters of the Australian Constitution and the first Solicitor-General of Australia.[16] CUC was affiliated with the University of Melbourne and its degrees were granted by that university.[13] Academic leaders at CUC included historian Manning Clark, political scientist Finlay Crisp, poet A. D. Hope and economist Heinz Arndt.[16]
In 1960, CUC was integrated into ANU as the School of General Studies, initially with faculties in arts, economics, law and science.[3] Faculties in Oriental studies and engineering were introduced later.[3] Bruce Hall, the first residential college for undergraduates, opened in 1961.[3]




ANU School of Art located at the former Canberra High School building


Modern era[edit]
The Canberra School of Music and the Canberra School of Art were amalgamated by ANU in 1992.[3]
ANU established its Medical School in 2002, after obtaining federal government approval in 2000.[17]
On 18 January 2003, the Canberra bushfires largely destroyed the Mount Stromlo Observatory.[18] ANU astronomers now conduct research from the Siding Spring Observatory, which contains 10 telescopes including the Anglo-Australian Telescope.[19]
In February 2013, financial entrepreneur and ANU graduate Graham Tuckwell made the largest university donation in Australian history by giving $50 million to fund an undergraduate scholarship program at ANU.[20]
ANU is well known for its history of student activism and, in recent years, its fossil fuel divestment campaign, which is one of the longest-running and most successful in the country.[21] The decision of the ANU Council to divest from two fossil fuel companies in 2014 was criticised by ministers in the Abbott government, but defended by Vice Chancellor Ian Young, who noted:

On divestment, it is clear we were in the right and played a truly national and international leadership role. [...] [W]e seem to have played a major role in a movement which now seems unstoppable.[22]

As of 2014 ANU still had investments in major fossil fuel companies.[23]
A survey conducted by the Australian Human Rights Commission in 2017 found that the ANU had the second highest incidence of sexual assault and sexual harassment.[24][25] 3.5 per cent of respondents from the ANU reported being sexually assaulted in 2016. Vice Chancellor Brian Schmidt apologised to victims of sexual assault and harassment.[26]
In recent years the ANU has come under pressure with funding and staff cuts in the School of Music in 2011-15[27] and in the School of Culture, History and Language in 2016.[28][29][30] However, there is a range of global (governmental) endowments available for Arts and Social Sciences, designated only for ANU.[31] Some courses are now delivered online.[32]
Campus[edit]




Acton, Canberra


The main campus of ANU extends across the Canberra suburb of Acton, which consists of 358 acres (1.45 km2) of mostly parkland with university buildings landscaped within.[33] ANU is roughly bisected by Sullivans Creek, part of the Murray–Darling basin, and is bordered by the native bushland of Black Mountain, Lake Burley Griffin, the suburb of Turner and the Canberra central business district. Many university sites are of historical significance dating from the establishment of the national capital, with over 40 buildings recognised by the Commonwealth Heritage List and several others on local lists.[34]
With over 10,000 trees on its campus,[35] ANU won an International Sustainable Campus Network Award in 2009[36] and was ranked the 2nd greenest university campus in Australia in 2011.[37]
Four of Australia's five learned societies are based at ANU—the Australian Academy of Science, the Australian Academy of the Humanities, the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and the Australian Academy of Law. The Australian National Centre for the Public Awareness of Science and the National Film and Sound Archive are also located at ANU, while the National Museum of Australia and CSIRO are situated next to the campus.
ANU occupies additional locations including Mount Stromlo Observatory on the outskirts of Canberra, Siding Spring Observatory near Coonabarabran, a campus at Kioloa on the South Coast of New South Wales and a research unit in Darwin.[38]




Chifley Library


Library[edit]
Main article: Australian National University Library
The library of ANU originated in 1948 with the appointment of the first librarian, Arthur McDonald.[3] The library holds over 2.5 million physical volumes[39] distributed across six branches—the Chifley, Menzies, Hancock, Art & Music, and Law Libraries and the external Print Repository.[40] Chifley library is accessible for ANU staff and students 24 hours a day.[41]
Residential halls and colleges[edit]
Main article: Residential colleges of the Australian National University
Eight residential facilities are affiliated with ANU—Bruce Hall, Ursula Hall, Burgmann College, John XXIII College, Toad Hall, Burton & Garran Hall, Graduate House and Fenner Hall.[42] All are located on campus except Fenner Hall, which is located in the nearby suburb of Braddon. Students also reside in the privately run units adjoining the campus—Davey Lodge, Kinloch Lodge, Warrumbul Lodge and Lena Karmel Lodge. In 2010, the non-residential Griffin Hall was established for students living off-campus. Another off-campus student accommodation was launched by UniGardens Pty, University Gardens[43] located in Belconnen.







Kinloch Lodge









Lena Karmel Lodge









Fenner Hall









Davey Lodge




Organisation[edit]
Main article: Academic structure of the Australian National University
Colleges[edit]
ANU was reorganised in 2006 to create seven Colleges, each College leads both teaching and research.[3]
Arts and Social Sciences[edit]




ANU School of Music, LLewellyn Hall


The ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences is divided into the Research School of Social Sciences (RSSS) and the Research School of Humanities and the Arts (RSHA). Within RSSS there are schools dedicated to history, philosophy, sociology, political science and international relations, Middle Eastern studies and Latin American studies.[44] RSHA contains schools focusing on anthropology, archaeology, classics, art history, English literature, drama, film studies, gender studies, linguistics, European languages as well as an art and music school.[45] In 2017, ANU ranked 6th in the world for politics, 8th in the world for Social Policy and Administration and 11th in the world for development studies.[46]
Asia and the Pacific[edit]
The ANU College of Asia and the Pacific is a specialist centre of Asian and Pacific studies and languages, formerly among the largest collections of experts in these fields of any university in the English-speaking world.[47] The College is home to three academic schools: the Crawford School of Public Policy, a research intensive public policy school; the School of Culture History and Language, the nation's centre dedicated to investigating and learning with and about the people, languages, and lands of Asia and the Pacific; and Coral Bell School of Asia Pacific Affairs, Australia's foremost collection of expertise in the politics and international affairs of Asia and the Pacific.[48] The Strategic and Defence Studies Centre is also a component of the College. Peter Drysdale laid the intellectual foundation of APEC. The college also houses the Australian Centre on China in the World (CIW), the Regulatory Institutions Network (RegNet) and the CSCAP Australia.[49] Year in Asia program students with ANU GPA 5.0 or above will be able to travel to one Asian country to study for one year to specialize in one Asian language.[50] The College is affiliated with Columbia University's Weatherhead East Asian Institute[51] and Indiana University's Pan Asia Institute.[52]
Business and Economics[edit]




Paraboloidal dish for concentrated solar power at ANU


The ANU College of Business and Economics comprises four Research Schools, which carries research and teaching in economics, finance, accounting, actuarial studies, statistics, marketing and management.[53] The college is professionally accredited with the Institute of Chartered Accountants, CPA Australia, the Australian Computer Society, the Actuaries Institute Australia, the Institute of Public Accountants, the Association of International Accountants, Chartered Financial Analyst Institute[54] and attains membership of World Wide Web Consortium.[55]
Engineering and Computer Science[edit]
Main article: ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science
The ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science is divided into two Research Schools, which study a range of engineering and computer science topics respectively. ANU is home to the National Computational Infrastructure National Facility and was a co-founder of NICTA, the chief information and communications technology research centre in Australia. Research groups in ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science include Algorithms and Data, Applied Signal Processing, Artificial Intelligence, Centre for Sustainable Energy Systems, Computer Systems, Computer Vision and Robotics, Data-Intensive Computing, Information and Human Centred Computing, Logic & Computation, Materials and Manufacturing, Semiconductor and Solar Cells, Software Intensive Systems Engineering, Solar Thermal Group, Systems and Control.[56] Disciplinary areas include theories, operations and cutting-edge research that will enhance user experience by integrating ever-evolving information technology methods in engineering applications,[57][58] with the emphasis on energy source.[59]




ANU College of Law


Law[edit]
Main article: ANU College of Law
The ANU College of Law is covering legal research and teaching, with centres dedicated to commercial law, international law, public law and environmental law.[60] In addition to numerous research programs, the College offers the professional LL.B. and J.D. degrees. It is the 7th oldest[61] of Australia's 36 law schools and was ranked 3rd among Australian and 14th among world law schools by the 2012 QS Rankings.[62] Students are given the chance to spend three weeks in Geneva concerning the institutional practice of International Law.[63]
Medicine, Biology and Environment[edit]




John Curtin School of Medical Research


The ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment encompasses the John Curtin School of Medical Research (JCSMR), the ANU Medical School, the Fenner School of Environment & Society and Research Schools of Biology, Psychology and Population Health.[64] JCSMR was established in 1948 as a result of the vision of Nobel laureate Howard Florey.[65] Three further Nobel Prizes have been won as a result of research at JCSMR—in 1963 by John Eccles and in 1996 by Peter Doherty and Rolf M. Zinkernagel.
Physical and Mathematical Sciences[edit]
Main article: ANU College of Physical & Mathematical Sciences
The ANU College of Physical & Mathematical Sciences comprises the Research Schools of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Mathematical Sciences and Physics. Under the direction of Mark Oliphant, nuclear physics was one the university's most notable early research priorities, leading to the construction of a 500 megajoule homopolar generator and a 7.7 megaelectronvolts cyclotron in the 1950s.[66] These devices were to be used as part of a 10.6 gigaelectronvolt synchrotron particle accelerator that was never completed, however they remained in use for other research purposes.[66] ANU has been home to eight particle accelerators over the years and operates the 14UD and LINAS accelerators.[67] Brian Schmidt (astrophysicist at Mount Stromlo Observatory) received the 2011 Nobel Prize for Physics for his work on the accelerating expansion of the universe.




Linnaeus Way at ANU


Academics[edit]
Governance[edit]
ANU is governed by a 15-member Council, whose members include the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor.[68] Gareth Evans, a former Foreign Minister of Australia, has been ANU Chancellor since 2010 and Brian Schmidt, an astrophysicist and Nobel Laureate, became Vice-Chancellor on 1 January 2016.[69] Ian Chubb, Vice-Chancellor from 2001 to 2011, was Chief Scientist of Australia from 2011 to 2016.
Finances[edit]
In its most recent disclosure at the end of 2012, ANU recorded an endowment of A$1.13 billion.[1]
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


Australian National University


QS World[70]
20


THE-WUR World[71]
48


ARWU World[72]
97


USNWR World[73]
80=


CWTS Leiden World[74]
86


Australian rankings


QS National[70]
1


THE-WUR National [75]
2


ARWU National[76]
3


USNWR National[77]
5


CWTS Leiden National[74]
1


ERA National[78]
3


ANU was ranked 20th in the world (first in Australia) by the 2018 QS World University Rankings,[5] and 47nd in the world (second in Australia) by the 2016/17 Times Higher Education.[79] ANU was named the world's seventh (first in Australia) most international university in a 2017 study by Times Higher Education.[7] In the 2015 Times Higher Education Global Employability University Ranking, an annual ranking of university graduates' employability, ANU was ranked 32nd in the world (first in Australia).[80] ANU was ranked 100th in the world (first in Australia) in the CWTS Leiden ranking.
In the QS World University Rankings by Subject 2017, ANU was ranked sixth in the world for politics, eighth in the world for social policy and administration, tenth in the world for arts and humanities, thirteenth in the world for archaeology and fourteenth in the world for history.[81]
Students entering ANU in 2013 had a median Australian Tertiary Admission Rank of 93,[82][83] the equal-highest among Australian universities.
Student life[edit]
Australian National University Students' Association (ANUSA) is the student's union of the Australian National University and represents undergraduate student, while the Postgraduate and Research Students' Association (PARSA) represents postgraduates. The Australian National University Union manages catering and retail outlets and function amenities on behalf of all students.
Woroni[edit]
Woroni is the student newspaper of the Australian National University. Woroni is published fortnightly in full colour tabloid format, and features broad coverage of university and local news, opinion, features, arts and culture, sports, and leisure.
Notable alumni and faculty[edit]
Main article: List of Australian National University people






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Kevin Rudd, Former Prime Minister of Australia


Notable past faculty include Mark Oliphant, Keith Hancock, Manning Clark, Derek Freeman, H. C. Coombs, John Crawford, Hedley Bull, Frank Fenner, C. P. Fitzgerald, Pierre Ryckmans and A. L. Basham. Nobel Prizes have been awarded to former ANU Chancellor Howard Florey and faculty members John Eccles, John Harsanyi, Rolf M. Zinkernagel, Peter Doherty and Brian Schmidt.[12] Notable present scholars include Hilary Charlesworth, Ian McAllister, Hugh White, Warwick McKibbin, Keith Dowding, Amin Saikal and Jeremy Shearmur.
ANU alumni are often visible in government. Bob Hawke and Kevin Rudd, former Australian Prime Ministers, attended the university, as did senior politicians Barry O'Farrell, Nick Minchin, Kim Beazley Sr, Peter Garrett, Craig Emerson, Stephen Conroy, Gary Gray, Warren Snowdon, Joe Ludwig and Catherine King and Michael Keenan. ANU has produced 30 current Australian Ambassadors and more than a dozen current heads of Australian Public Service departments, including Prime Minister & Cabinet secretary Michael Thawley, Treasury secretary Martin Parkinson, Finance secretary Jane Halton, Education secretary Lisa Paul, Agriculture secretary Paul Grimes, Attorney-General's secretary Chris Moraitis, Environment secretary Gordon de Brouwer, Employment secretary Renee Leon, Social Services secretary Finn Pratt, Industry secretary Glenys Beauchamp, ASIS director-general Nick Warner and ACCC chairman Rod Sims. Graduates also include Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands Gordon Darcy Lilo, former Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa, former Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Don Brash, former British cabinet minister Patricia Hewitt and former U.S. Ambassador to Israel Martin Indyk.
Other notable alumni include High Court of Australia judges Stephen Gageler and Geoffrey Nettle, Chief Federal Magistrate John Pascoe, human rights lawyer Jennifer Robinson, Kellogg's CEO John Bryant, former Singapore Airlines CEO Cheong Choong Kong, Indiana University president Michael McRobbie, University of Melbourne Vice-Chancellors Alan Gilbert and Glyn Davis, mathematician John H. Coates, public intellectuals Clive Hamilton and economists Ross Garnaut, Peter Drysdale and John Quiggin.
Affiliations[edit]
ANU is a member of the Group of Eight, Association of Pacific Rim Universities and the International Alliance of Research Universities.
ANU participates in the US Financial Direct Loan program.[84] The RG Menzies Scholarship to Harvard University is awarded annually to at least one talented Australian who has gained admission to a Harvard graduate school.[85] ANU and University of Melbourne are the only two Australian partner universities of Yale University's Fox Fellowship program.[86]
See also[edit]




Australia portal
University portal





List of universities in Australia
Demos Journal (student publication)
Australian National University Boat Club

References[edit]


^ a b c "Investment Performance Summary for Year Ended 31 December 2012" (PDF). Australian National University. Retrieved 15 March 2015. 
^ "Academic Structure". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Timeline". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Quick Stats". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b "QS World University Rankings Results 2018". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016–2017". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 17 November 2016. 
^ a b "The 25 Most International Universities". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 1 February 2017. 
^ Elmes, John. "Times Higher Education Global Employability University Ranking 2016". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 17 November 2016. 
^ Hare, J. (2 May 2014). "UTS kicks Harvard's butt in ranking". The Australian. Retrieved 20 December 2016. 
^ "JCU surprise package in Leiden ranking". The Australian. 19 May 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2017. 
^ "ANU by numbers: global alumni - ANU Reporter". 
^ a b "Nobel Prize winners". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b c d e f g "History of ANU". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Chancellors & Vice-Chancellors". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Ordinance establishing Canberra University College" (PDF). ACT Legislation Register. Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b "Canberra University College" (PDF). Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "History of ANU Medical School". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Mount Stromlo Observatory". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Telescopes". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Billionaire gives back with $50m uni donation". The Canberra Times. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ Klee, Louis (23 October 2014). "Students put the Coalition on notice over climate change". The Age. Retrieved 26 January 2016. 
^ ANU Vice-Chancellor (17 December 2015). "Farewell ANU". Retrieved 26 January 2016. 
^ "ANU sale of fossil fuel holdings not enough: students". ABC News. Retrieved 26 January 2016. 
^ "Search how every university in Australia ranks for sexual harassment and assault". The Age. 1 August 2017. Retrieved 2 August 2017. 
^ Bagshaw, Eryk (2 August 2017). "'We should all be shocked' leader of university with worst results comforts students". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 2 August 2017. 
^ Pianegonda, Elise; Dorsett, Jesse (1 August 2017). "Sexual assault rate at ANU double that of universities nationally". ABC News. Retrieved 1 August 2017. 
^ "Puzzling rationale to ANU budget cuts", The Canberra Times, 29 March 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2017.
^ Rowan Callick, "ANU’s Brian Schmidt faces test with language school cuts", The Australian, 6 April 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2017.
^ William Sima, "ANU celebrates excellence in Asia-Pacific studies by axing it", The Sydney Morning Herald, 28 March 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2017.
^ Emma Macdonald, ANU Asian language budget cuts see top academics placed on fixed-term contracts, The Sydney Morning Herald, 29 March 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2017
^ http://cass.anu.edu.au/cass-giving/languages-endowments
^ Learning anytime, anywhere, ANU TV on youtube.com. Retrieved 22 October 2017.
^ "ANU Tour". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "ANU Heritage Strategy" (PDF). Australian National University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Acton Tree Trail". Australian National University. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Sustainability awards". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Australia's 10 greenest universities". The Australian. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Campus - About ANU". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Collections - ANU Library". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Branches- ANU Library". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Chifley Level 3 now open 24/7 - ANU Library - ANU". anulib.anu.edu.au. Retrieved 15 May 2017. 
^ "Residential Halls and Colleges". Australian National University. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "UniGardens, ANU & UC student accommodation and apartments, Canberra, Belconnen". UniGardens. 
^ "RSSS Schools". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "RSHA Schools". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Top Universities - Subject Guide". ANU College of Arts & Social Sciences. Retrieved 10 March 2017. 
^ "Our story - College of Asia and the Pacific". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "College at a glance - College of Asia and the Pacific". Australian National University. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "Australian member committee of the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (Aus-CSCAP)". ANU Strategic & Defence Studies Centre. Retrieved 2 June 2015. 
^ "Year in Asia - College of Asia and the Pacific". Australian National University. Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ Pacific, Dean, ANU College of Asia & the. "Our academic units & institutes". 
^ "Welcome from the Inaugural Directors «  Pan Asia Institute". 
^ "Schools & centres - ANU College of Business and Economics". Australian National University. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Professional organisations & accreditation - ANU College of Business and Economics". Australian National University. Retrieved 2 June 2015. 
^ "Current Members". World Wide Web Consortium. Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ "Research Groups - College of Engineering and Computer Science". Australian National University. Retrieved 2 June 2015. 
^ "Intelligence - ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science". Australian National University. Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ "Information - ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science". Australian National University. Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ "Energy - ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science". Australian National University. Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ "ANU College of Law research centres". Australian National University. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "ANU Brochure" (PDF). Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "QS Rankings - Law". Quacquarelli Symonds. Archived from the original on 8 April 2013. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "International Organisations (Geneva)". ANU Law School. Retrieved 2 June 2015. 
^ "About us - Science, Medicine & Health". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "About us - JCSMR". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b "The Big Machine" (PDF). Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "The Accelerators of Nuclear Physics" (PDF). Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "ANU Council". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ "Council membership". Australian National University. Retrieved 6 April 2013. 
^ a b "QS World University Rankings 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 
^ "World University Rankings 2017-2018". TSL Education Limited. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 
^ "U.S. News and World Report Best Global Universities Rankings 2016". U.S. News and World Report. 
^ a b "CWTS Leiden Ranking 2017". Centre for Science and Technology Studies, Leiden University. 
^ "THE 2016-2017 - Australia". Times Higher Education. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017 - Australia". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 
^ "U.S. News and World Report Best Global Universities in Australia/New Zealand". U.S. News and World Report. 
^ "Australian University Rankings". Australian Education Network. 
^ "World University Rankings 2015–2016". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 20 April 2016. 
^ Elmes, John. "Times Higher Education Global Employability University Ranking 2015". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 20 April 2016. 
^ "QS World University Rankings by Subject". QS World University Rankings. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Retrieved 11 March 2017. 
^ "2014-16 Mission-based Compact: Commonwealth and ANU". Australian Government Department of Education and Training. Retrieved 4 February 2014. 
^ "University performance: where we are now (video)". Australian National University. Retrieved 4 February 2014. 
^ "US Financial Aid". 8 November 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2017. 
^ "R.G. Menzies Scholarship to Harvard". 24 May 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2017. 
^ "The Australian National University & The University of Melbourne, Australia - Yale Fox International Fellowships". 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Australian National University.



Australian National University

Coordinates: 35°16′40″S 149°07′14″E﻿ / ﻿35.2778°S 149.1205°E﻿ / -35.2778; 149.1205






v
t
e


Australian National University




Canberra, Australia



Campuses



Acton Campus
Kioloa Coastal Campus
Mount Stromlo Observatory
Siding Spring Observatory





Colleges



ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences
ANU College of Asia and the Pacific
ANU College of Business and Economics
ANU College of Engineering and Computer Science
ANU College of Law
ANU College of Medicine and Health Science
ANU College of Physical & Mathematical Sciences





The Institute of
Advanced Studies



ANU School of Music
Coral Bell School of Asia Pacific Affairs
Research School of Physics and Engineering
John Curtin School of Medical Research





University centres



ANU Medical School
Crawford School of Public Policy

Development Policy Centre
Indonesia Project


Centre for the Public Awareness of Science
Energy Change Institute
Strategic and Defence Studies Centre





Residence halls
and colleges



Bruce Hall
Burgmann College
Burton & Garran Hall
Fenner Hall
Graduate House
John XXIII College
Toad Hall
University House
Ursula Hall





Student life



Students' Association
Australian National University Boat Club
Australian National University Union
Inward Bound
Uni-Norths Owls
Woroni





Buildings



ANU Classics Museum
Library





Lists



List of Australian National University people










Links to related articles











v
t
e


 Universities in Australia






Tertiary education in Australia





Australian Capital Territory



Australian Defence Force Academy (UNSW accredited degrees)
Australian National University
University of Canberra





New South Wales



Charles Sturt University
Macquarie University
Southern Cross University
University of Newcastle
University of New England
University of New South Wales
University of Sydney
University of Technology Sydney
University of Wollongong
Western Sydney University





Northern Territory



Charles Darwin University





Queensland



Bond University
Central Queensland University
Griffith University
James Cook University
University of Queensland
Queensland University of Technology
University of Southern Queensland
University of the Sunshine Coast





South Australia



University of Adelaide
Carnegie Mellon University, Australia
Flinders University
University of South Australia
Torrens University Australia
UCL Australia





Tasmania



Australian Maritime College (UTAS accredited degrees)
University of Tasmania





Victoria



Deakin University
University of Divinity
Federation University Australia
La Trobe University
University of Melbourne
Monash University
RMIT University
Swinburne University of Technology
Victoria University





Western Australia



Curtin University
Edith Cowan University
Murdoch University
University of Notre Dame Australia
University of Western Australia





National



Australian Catholic University








Education in Australia












v
t
e


University groupings in Australia













Australian Technology Network



Curtin University
Queensland University of Technology
RMIT University
University of South Australia
University of Technology Sydney





Group of Eight



University of Adelaide
Australian National University
University of Melbourne
Monash University
University of New South Wales
University of Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Western Australia





Innovative Research Universities



Flinders University
Griffith University
James Cook University
La Trobe University
Murdoch University
Charles Darwin University





NUW Alliance



University of Newcastle
University of New South Wales
University of Wollongong





Regional Universities Network



Central Queensland University
Federation University Australia
Southern Cross University
University of New England
University of Southern Queensland
University of the Sunshine Coast





Sandstone Universities



University of Adelaide
University of Melbourne
University of Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Tasmania
University of Western Australia















v
t
e


International Alliance of Research Universities (IARU)






ANU
UC Berkeley
Cambridge
Cape Town
Copenhagen
ETH Zurich
Oxford
Peking
NUS
Tokyo
Yale












v
t
e


Association of Pacific Rim Universities






Australia
Australian National
Melbourne
Sydney
UNSW
Canada
British Columbia
Chile
Chile
China
Fudan
Nanjing
Peking
Tsinghua
USTC
Zhejiang
Hong Kong
HKU
HKUST
Indonesia
Indonesia
Japan
Keio
Kyoto
Osaka
Tohoku
Tokyo
Waseda
Malaysia
Malaya
Mexico
Monterrey Institute of Technology
UNAM
New Zealand
Auckland
Philippines
Philippines

Baguio
Cebu
Diliman
Los Baños
Manila
Mindanao
Open University
Visayas




Russia
Far Eastern Federal (FEFU)
Singapore
NUS
South Korea
Seoul National
Korea
Yonsei
Taiwan
National Taiwan
Thailand
Chulalongkorn
USA
Caltech
Stanford
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Oregon
USC
Washington












v
t
e


Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning








Southeast Asia







Brunei



Universiti Brunei Darussalam





Cambodia



Build Bright University, Phnom Penh
International University, Cambodia





Indonesia



Airlangga University
Andalas University
Bandung Institute of Technology
Bogor Agricultural University
University of Brawijaya
Cenderawasih University
Diponegoro University
Gadjah Mada University
Hasanuddin University
Indonesia University of Education
IKIP Padang
Syarif Hidayatullah State Islamic University Jakarta
Jember University
Lampung University
Manado State University
Muhammadiyah University of Magelang
Padjadjaran University
Riau University
Sebelas Maret University
Sriwijaya University
State Institute for Islamic Studies North Sumatera
State University of Semarang
STIE Perbanas Surabaya
Surabaya State University
Tadulako University
Tanjungpura University
Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology
Udayana University
Universitas Islam Negeri Alauddin Makassar
Universitas Merdeka Malang
Yogyakarta State University
University of Bengkulu
University of Indonesia
University of North Sumatra





Malaysia



INTI International University
International Islamic University Malaysia
Multimedia University
National University of Malaysia
Taylor's University
Universiti Malaysia Perlis
Universiti Malaysia Sarawak
Universiti Malaysia Sabah
Universiti Malaysia Terengganu
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
Universiti Teknologi Petronas
Universiti Tenaga Nasional
Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka
Universiti Utara Malaysia
Universiti Tun Abdul Razak
University of Malaya





Myanmar



University of Yangon





Philippines



Adamson University
Baliuag University
Benguet State University
Bicol University
Central Colleges of the Philippines
Centro Escolar University
De La Salle University
De La Salle University – Dasmariñas
Emilio Aguinaldo College
Eulogio "Amang" Rodriguez Institute of Science and Technology
Far Eastern University
José Rizal University
La Consolacion College Manila
La Consolacion College–Bacolod
La Consolacion University Philippines
Lyceum of the Philippines University
Mindanao State University
National University
Philippine Normal University
Philippine Women's University
Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Rizal Technological University
Saint Louis University
Saint Mary's College of Quezon City
St. Paul University Quezon City
St. Scholastica's College, Manila
San Beda College
San Sebastian College – Recoletos de Manila
Technological Institute of the Philippines
Technological University of the Philippines
University of Batangas
University of Iloilo
University of Manila
University of Perpetual Help System DALTA
University of Santo Tomas
University of the City of Manila
University of the East
University of the Philippines





Singapore



Nanyang Technological University
National University of Singapore





Thailand



Asian Institute of Technology
Assumption University
Bangkok University
Burapha University
Chiang Mai University
Chulalongkorn University
Dhurakij Pundit University
Hatyai University
Kasem Bundit University
Kasetsart University
Khon Kaen University
King Mongkut's University of Technology North Bangkok
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
Maejo University
Mahasarakham University
Mahidol University
Mae Fah Luang University
Naresuan University
Nakhon Phanom University
National Institute of Development Administration
Payap University
Prince of Songkla University
Ramkhamhaeng University
Rangsit University
Siam University
Silpakorn University
Srinakharinwirot University
Sripatum University
Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University
Suranaree University of Technology
Thaksin University
Thammasat University
University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce
Ubon Ratchathani University
Walailak University





Vietnam



Vietnam National University, Hanoi
















South Asia







India



Karnatak Lingayat Education Society





Iran



Islamic Azad University





Sri Lanka



University of Colombo
University of Kelaniya
















East Asia







Hong Kong



Chinese University of Hong Kong
City University of Hong Kong
Lingnan University
Hong Kong Baptist University
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong Shue Yan University
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
University of Hong Kong





Japan



Keio University
Kyoto University
Sōka University
University of the Ryukyus





Republic of China
(Taiwan)



National Taiwan University
















Oceania







Australia



Australian National University
Curtin University
Deakin University
Edith Cowan University
Griffith University
Macquarie University
Monash University
RMIT University
Swinburne University of Technology
University of Western Australia
University of Adelaide
University of Canberra
University of Queensland
University of Southern Queensland
University of Sydney
University of Tasmania
University of Technology, Sydney
University of Wollongong





New Zealand



Auckland University of Technology
Lincoln University
Massey University
University of Otago
University of Waikato
















Europe







Belgium



Groep T





France



Montpellier 2 University





Sweden



Lund University
















North America







Canada



Carleton University
University of British Columbia





United States



Baylor University
California State University, Long Beach
Kansas State University
Keuka College
Pittsburg State University
University of Hawaii at Manoa
University of Maryland University College






















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_National_University&oldid=818239162"					Categories: Australian National UniversityNational universities1946 establishments in AustraliaEducational institutions established in 1946Universities in the Australian Capital TerritoryBuildings and structures in CanberraGroup of Eight (Australian universities)Hidden categories: Use Australian English from April 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Australian EnglishUse dmy dates from August 2017Pages using deprecated image syntaxInstances of Infobox university using image sizeArticles needing additional references from April 2015All articles needing additional referencesCoordinates on Wikidata