This article is about authoritarianism in political science and organizational studies. For authoritarianism in psychology, see Authoritarian personality.


Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure





Separation




Associated state
Dominion
Chiefdom




Federalism




Federation
Confederation
Devolution




Integration




Empire
Hegemony
Unitary state




Administrative division





Power source





Democracy
power of many




Direct
Representative
Liberal
Social
Demarchy
others




Oligarchy
power of few




Aristocracy
Plutocracy
Kraterocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy
Meritocracy
Technocracy
Geniocracy
Noocracy
Kritarchy
Particracy
Ergatocracy
Netocracy




Autocracy
power of one




Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship




Others




Anocracy
Anarchy
Theocracy







Power ideology





Monarchy vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies




Absolute
Legalist
Constitutional
Parliamentary
Directorial
Semi-presidential
Presidential




Authoritarian vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies




Tribalism
Despotism
Feudalism
Colonialism
Minarchism
Distributism
Anarchism
Socialism
Communism
Totalitarianism




Global vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies




Commune
City-state
National government
Intergovernmental organisation
World government







Politics portal





v
t
e







Part of the Politics and elections and Politics series on


Neo-fascism




Core ideas



Fascism
Nationalism
Authoritarianism
One-party state
Dictatorship
Social Darwinism
Social interventionism
Indoctrination
Propaganda
Eugenics
Heroism
Militarism
Economic interventionism
Extremism
Christian Identity
Anti-communism









Varieties


Neo-Nazism
Third Position
White nationalism
White supremacy
Pan-European nationalism








Origins



Clerical fascism
Fascism
Italian Fascism
Nazism
Japanese statism
Strasserism
Iron Guard
Falange









Movements and parties


American Nazi Party
Aryan Nations
Australia First Party
British Movement
CasaPound
Deutsche Reichspartei
European Social Movement
Forza Nuova
Tricolour Flame
Golden Dawn
Grey Wolves
International Third Position
Italian Social Movement
National Action (UK)
National Alliance
National Democratic Party of Germany
National Front (UK)
National Renaissance Party
National Revival of Poland
National Front (Italy)
National Socialist Front
National Socialist Movement (USA)
National Socialist Party of America
New European Order
Noua Dreaptă
November 9th Society
Official National Front
Patriot of Ukraine
Russian National Unity
Social Action
Social-National Assembly (Ukraine)
Socialist Reich Party
SUMKA
Tsagaan Khas
Union Movement
World Union of National Socialists








People


Giorgio Almirante
Alexander Barkashov
Gianfranco Fini
Yoshio Kodama
Georgios Papadopoulos
Jim Saleam








History


Operation Condor
1963 Guatemalan coup d'etat
Greek military junta of 1967–74
Borghese coup
Piazza Fontana bombing
Neo-Nazism in America
2011 Norway attacks








Related topics



Far-right politics
Right-wing populism
British Fascism
Italian Fascism
Ku Klux Klan
Nazi punk
National Socialist black metal
Political Soldier
White power music
White power skinhead
National Bolshevism
Third Position
Alt-right
Radical right







Fascism portal
Politics portal





v
t
e





Authoritarianism is a form of government characterized by strong central power and limited political freedoms. Individual freedoms are subordinate to the state and there is no constitutional accountability under an authoritarian regime.[1] Juan Linz's influential 1964 description of authoritarianism[2] characterized authoritarian political systems by four qualities:

Limited political pluralism, that is such regimes place constraints on political institutions and groups like legislatures, political parties and interest groups;
A basis for legitimacy based on emotion, especially the identification of the regime as a necessary evil to combat "easily recognizable societal problems" such as underdevelopment or insurgency;
Minimal social mobilization most often caused by constraints on the public such as suppression of political opponents and anti-regime activity;
Informally defined executive power with often vague and shifting powers.[3]

Modern democratic elective dictatorships use an authoritarian concept to form a government.[1]



Contents


1 Authoritarian government and states

1.1 Authoritarianism and totalitarianism
1.2 Authoritarianism and democracy
1.3 Examples of states considered to be authoritarian
1.4 Examples of states which were historically authoritarian


2 Authoritarian weakness and resilience
3 Anti-authoritarianism
4 Gender and authoritarianism
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Works cited
8 External links



Authoritarian government and states
Linz distinguished new forms of authoritarianism from personalistic dictatorships and totalitarian states, taking Francoist Spain as an example. Unlike personalistic dictatorships, new forms of authoritarianism have institutionalized representation of a variety of actors (in Spain's case, including the military, the Catholic Church, Falange, monarchists, technocrats and others). Unlike totalitarian states, the regime relies on passive mass acceptance rather than popular support.[4]
Several subtypes of authoritarian regimes have been identified by Linz and others.[5] Linz identified the two most basic subtypes as traditional authoritarian regimes and bureaucratic-military authoritarian regimes:

Traditional authoritarian regimes are those "in which the ruling authority (generally a single person)" is maintained in power "through a combination of appeals to traditional legitimacy, patron-client ties and repression, which is carried out by an apparatus bound to the ruling authority through personal loyalties". An example is Ethiopia under Haile Selassie I.[5]
Bureaucratic-military authoritarian regimes are those "governed by a coalition of military officers and technocrats who act pragmatically (rather than ideologically) within the limits of their bureaucratic mentality.[5] Mark J. Gasiorowski suggests that it is best to distinguish "simple military authoritarian regimes" from "bureaucratic authoritarian regimes" in which "a powerful group of technocrats uses the state apparatus to try to rationalize and develop the economy" such as South Korea under Park Chung-hee.[5]

Linz also has identified three other subtypes of authoritarian regime: corporatist or organic-statistic, racial and ethnic "democracy" and post-totalitarian.[5]

Corporatist authoritarian regimes "are those in which corporatism institutions are used extensively by the state to coopt and demobilize powerful interest groups". This type has been studied most extensively in Latin America.[5]
Racial and ethnic "democracies" are those in which "certain racial or ethnic groups enjoy full democratic rights while others are largely or entirely denied those rights", such as in South Africa under apartheid.[5]
Post-totalitarian authoritarian regimes are those in which totalitarian institutions (such as the party, secret police and state-controlled mass media) remain, but where "ideological orthodoxy has declined in favor of routinization, repression has declined, the state's top leadership is less personalized and more secure, and the level of mass mobilization has declined substantially".[5] Examples include the Russian Federation and Soviet Eastern bloc states in the mid-1980s.[5]

Authoritarian regimes are also sometimes subcategorized by whether they are personalistic or populist.[5] Personalistic authoritarian regimes are characterized by arbitrary rule and authority exercised "mainly through patronage networks and coercion rather than through institutions and formal rules".[5] Personalistic authoritarian regimes have been seen in post-colonial Africa. By contrast, populist authoritarian regimes "are mobilizational regimes in which a strong, charismatic, manipulative leader rules through a coalition involving key lower-class groups".[5] Examples include Argentina under Perón,[5] Egypt under Nasser[5] and Venezuela under Chávez and Maduro.[6][7]
Authoritarianism is characterized by highly concentrated and centralized power maintained by political repression and the exclusion of potential challengers. It uses political parties and mass organizations to mobilize people around the goals of the regime.[8] Adam Przeworski has theorized that "authoritarian equilibrium rests mainly on lies, fear and economic prosperity".[9]
Authoritarianism also tends to embrace the informal and unregulated exercise of political power, a leadership that is "self-appointed and even if elected cannot be displaced by citizens' free choice among competitors", the arbitrary deprivation of civil liberties and little tolerance for meaningful opposition.[8]
A range of social controls also attempt to stifle civil society,[10] while political stability is maintained by control over and support of the armed forces, a bureaucracy staffed by the regime and creation of allegiance through various means of socialization and indoctrination.[8]
Authoritarian political systems may be weakened through "inadequate performance to demands of the people".[8] Vestal writes that the tendency to respond to challenges to authoritarianism through tighter control instead of adaptation is a significant weakness and that this overly rigid approach fails to "adapt to changes or to accommodate growing demands on the part of the populace or even groups within the system".[8] Because the legitimacy of the state is dependent on performance, authoritarian states that fail to adapt may collapse.[8]
Authoritarianism is marked by "indefinite political tenure" of the ruler or ruling party (often in a one-party state) or other authority.[8] The transition from an authoritarian system to a more democratic form of government is referred to as democratization.[8]
John Duckitt suggests a link between authoritarianism and collectivism, asserting that both stand in opposition to individualism.[11] Duckitt writes that both authoritarianism and collectivism submerge individual rights and goals to group goals, expectations and conformities.[12]
Authoritarianism and totalitarianism


Part of a series on


Revolution







Types


Colour
Communist
Democratic
Nonviolent
Permanent
Political
Proletarian
Social
Wave








Methods


Boycott
Civil disobedience
Civil war
Class conflict
Coup d'état
Demonstration
Guerrilla warfare
Insurgency
Nonviolent resistance
Protest
Rebellion
Revolutionary terror
Samizdat
Strike action
Tax resistance








Causes


Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Capitalism
Collaborationism
Colonialism
Cronyism
Despotism
Dictatorship
Discrimination
Economic depression
Economic inequality
Electoral fraud
Famine
Fascism
Feudalism
Imperialism
Military occupation
Monarchy
Natural disaster
Nepotism
Persecution
Political corruption
Political repression
Poverty
Totalitarianism
Unemployment








Examples


Commercial Revolution
Industrial Revolution
English Revolution
Atlantic Revolutions
American Revolution
French Revolution
Haitian Revolution
Serbian Revolution
Revolutions of 1820
Revolutions of 1830
Belgian Revolution
Texas Revolution
Revolutions of 1848
Hungarian Revolution of 1848
Philippine Revolution
Persian Constitutional Revolution
Young Turk Revolution
Mexican Revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Revolutions of 1917–23
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Spanish Revolution of 1936
Guatemalan Revolution
Chinese Communist Revolution
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Cuban Revolution
Rwandan Revolution
Cultural Revolution
Nicaraguan Revolution
Iranian Revolution
Saur Revolution
People Power Revolution
Carnation Revolution
Revolutions of 1989
Velvet Revolution
Romanian Revolution
Singing Revolution
Bolivarian Revolution
Bulldozer Revolution
Rose Revolution
Orange Revolution
Tulip Revolution
Kyrgyz Revolution of 2010
Arab Spring
Tunisian Revolution
Yemeni Revolution
Euromaidan






 Politics portal





v
t
e





Totalitarianism is an extreme version of authoritarianism. Authoritarianism primarily differs from totalitarianism in that social and economic institutions exist that are not under governmental control. Building on the work of Yale political scientist Juan Linz, Paul C. Sondrol of the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs has examined the characteristics of authoritarian and totalitarian dictators and organized them in a chart:[13]



Totalitarianism
Authoritarianism


Charisma
High
Low


Role conception
Leader as function
Leader as individual


Ends of power
Public
Private


Corruption
Low
High


Official ideology
Yes
No


Limited pluralism
No
Yes


Legitimacy
Yes
No


Sondrol argues that while both authoritarianism and totalitarianism are forms of autocracy, as they differ in "key dichotomies":

(1) Unlike their bland and generally unpopular authoritarian brethren, totalitarian dictators develop a charismatic "mystique" and a mass-based, pseudo-democratic interdependence with their followers via the conscious manipulation of a prophetic image.
(2) Concomitant role conceptions differentiate totalitarians from authoritarians. Authoritarians view themselves as individual beings largely content to control and often maintain the status quo. Totalitarian self-conceptions are largely teleological. The tyrant is less a person than an indispensable function to guide and reshape the universe.
(3) Consequently, the utilisation of power for personal aggrandizement is more evident among authoritarians than totalitarians. Lacking the binding appeal of ideology, authoritarians support their rule by a mixture of instilling fear and granting rewards to loyal collaborators, engendering a kleptocracy.[13]

Compared to totalitarianism, "the authoritarian state still maintains a certain distinction between state and society. It is only concerned with political power and as long as that is not contested it gives society a certain degree of liberty. Totalitarianism, on the other hand, invades private life and asphyxiates it".[14] Another distinction is that "authoritarianism is not animated by utopian ideals in the way totalitarianism is. It does not attempt to change the world and human nature".[14] Carl Joachim Friedrich writes that "a totalist ideology, a party reinforced by a secret police, and monopoly control of ... industrial mass society" are the three features of totalitarian regimes that distinguish them from other autocracies.[14]
Authoritarianism and democracy


Part of a series on


Individualism




Topics and concepts


Autonomy
Civil liberties
Do it yourself
Eremitism
Free love
Freethought
Human rights
Individual
Individual rights
Individual reclamation
Individuation
Laissez-faire
Libertinism
Liberty
Methodological individualism
Negative liberty
Personal property
Positive liberty
Private property
Self-actualization
Self-ownership
Self reliance
Subjectivity








Thinkers


Antiphon
Aristippus
Aristotle
Émile Armand
Albert Camus
Diogenes of Sinope
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Epicurus
William Godwin
Emma Goldman
Friedrich Hayek
Karl Hess
Miguel Giménez Igualada
Thomas Jefferson
Laozi
Albert Libertad
John Locke
Hipparchia of Maroneia
H. L. Mencken
John Stuart Mill
Ludwig von Mises
Michel de Montaigne
Friedrich Nietzsche
Renzo Novatore
Robert Nozick
Michel Onfray
Georges Palante
Horst Matthai Quelle
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Han Ryner
Marquis de Sade
Arthur Schopenhauer
Adam Smith
Herbert Spencer
Lysander Spooner
Max Stirner
Henry David Thoreau
Benjamin Tucker
James L. Walker
Josiah Warren
Oscar Wilde
Zeno
Yang Zhu








Philosophies


Anarchism
Anarcho-capitalism
Classical liberalism
Egoist anarchism
Ethical egoism
Existentialism
Hedonism
Humanism
Individualist anarchism
Individualist feminism

Equity feminism
Liberal feminism


Left-libertarianism
Left-wing market anarchism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Libertarian socialism
Minarchism
Mutualism
Objectivism
Right libertarianism
Social anarchism
Voluntaryism








Principal concerns


Anti-individualism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Conformity
Dogmatism
Group rights
Herd mentality
Indoctrination
Mass society
Mobbing
Social engineering
Statism
Tyranny
Tyranny of the majority
Theocracy
Totalitarianism









v
t
e





Authoritarianism and democracy are not fundamentally opposed to one another, as it is possible for democracies to possess authoritarian elements. An illiberal democracy (or procedural democracy) is distinguished from liberal democracy (or substantive democracy) in that illiberal democracies lack features such as the rule of law, protections for minority groups and an independent judiciary.[15]
A further distinction that liberal democracies have rarely made war with one another; research has extended the theory and finds that more democratic countries tend to have few wars (sometimes called militarized interstate disputes) causing fewer battle deaths with one another and that democracies have far fewer civil wars.[16][17]
Some commentators, such as Seymour Martin Lipset, believed that low-income authoritarian regimes have certain technocratic "efficiency-enhancing advantages" over low-income democracies, helping authoritarian regimes generate development.[18] Morton H. Halperin, Joseph T. Siegle and Michael M. Weinstein (2005) counter this belief, arguing that the evidence has showed that there is no "authoritarian advantage" and that there is a "democratic advantage" instead.[18] Halperin et al. argue that democracies "realize superior development performance" over authoritarianism. They point out that poor democracies are more likely to have steadier economic growth and less likely to experience economic and humanitarian catastrophes than authoritarian regimes; that civil liberties act as a curb on corruption and misuse of resources; and that democracies are more adaptable.[18] Halperin point out that the vast majority of refugee crises and financial catastrophes occur in authoritarian regimes.[18]
Studies suggest that several health indicators (life expectancy and infant and maternal mortality) have a stronger and more significant association with democracy than they have with GDP per capita, size of the public sector or income inequality.[19] Prominent economist Amartya Sen has theorized that no functioning liberal democracy has ever suffered a large-scale famine.[20]
Research shows that the democratic nations have much less democide or murder by government. However, it should be noted that those were also moderately developed nations before applying liberal democratic policies.[21] Research by the World Bank suggests that political institutions are extremely important in determining the prevalence of corruption and that parliamentary systems, political stability and freedom of the press are all associated with lower corruption.[22] One study has concluded that terrorism is most common in nations with intermediate political freedom. The nations with the least amount of terrorism are the most and least democratic nations.[23]
Examples of states considered to be authoritarian
There is no precise definition of authoritarianism, but several annual measurements are attempted, including Freedom House’s annual Freedom in the World report.
The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of states which are currently (or frequently) characterized as authoritarian:

 Azerbaijan under Ilham Aliyev (2003–)[24]
 Bahrain under the House of Khalifa (1746–)[25]
 Belarus under Alexander Lukashenko (1994–)[26][27] on account of Lukashenko's self-described authoritarian style of government[28][29][30]
 Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge and Hun Sen (1985–)[31]
 Cameroon under Paul Biya (1982–)[32][33]
 People's Republic of China under the Communist Party of China (1949–) “Some scholars have deemed the Chinese system a 'fragmented authoritarianism' (Lieberthal), a 'negotiated state' or a 'consultative authoritarian regime'"[34]
 Cuba under Fidel and Raúl Castro (1959–)[35]
 Egypt under Hosni Mubarak (1981–2011) and Abdel Fattah el-Sisi (2014–)[36]
 Iran under Ruhollah Khomeini and Ali Khamenei (1981–)[37] Linz wrote in 2000 that "it is difficult to fit the Iranian regime into the existing typology, as it combines the ideological bent of totalitarianism with the limited pluralism of authoritarianism and holds regular elections in which candidates advocating differing policies and incumbents are often defeated"[38]
 Jordan under Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein[39]
 Kazakhstan under Nursultan Nazarbayev[32]
 Laos under the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (1975–)[40]
 Morocco under Mohammed VI[39]
 North Korea under the rule of the Kim dynasty and the Korean Workers' Party (1947–)[41]
 Qatar under the House of Thani.[42]
 Russian Federation under Vladimir Putin (1999–) (see Putinism for more) has tendencies towards authoritarianism, described as "really a mixture of authoritarianism and managed democracy"[43][44][45]
 Singapore is considered authoritarian, especially under the Lee Kuan Yew until 2015.[46][47]
 Saudi Arabia under the House of Saud (1744–)[48]
 Sudan under Omar al-Bashir (1989–)[32]
 Syria under Hafez and Bashar al-Assad (1970–)[49]
 Thailand under General Prayut Chan-o-cha who overthrew the democratically elected government of Yingluck Shinawatra in a military coup and installed a military junta to oversee the governance of Thailand (2014–)[50]
 Turkey under Recep Tayyip Erdogan (2003–) described as a “competitive authoritarian regime”[51]
 Turkmenistan under Saparmurat Nyazow (1991–2006) and Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow (2006–)[52]
 United Arab Emirates under the six royal families of the United Arab Emirates (10 February 1972–)[53][54]
 Uzbekistan under Islam Karimov (1989–2016)[55][56] and Shavkat Mirziyoyev(2016-)[57]
 Venezuela under Hugo Chávez and Nicolás Maduro (1999–)[58]
 Vietnam under the Vietnamese Communist Party (1976–)[59]

Examples of states which were historically authoritarian


State
Time Period
Ruling Group or Person
Notes


 Argentina
1966–1973[60]
Military government
Argentine Revolution period of military rule


1973–1974[61]
Justicialista rule of Juan Perón
Ideology is populist authoritarianism


 Brazil[62]
1937–1945
Getúlio Vargas
Estado Novo period


1964–1985
Military government



 Burma[63]
1962–2011
Military government and Socialist Programme Party



 Chile[64]
1973–1990
Augusto Pinochet



 Egypt[65]
1952–2011
Gamal Abdel Nasser, Anwar Sadat and Hosni Mubarak



 Indonesia
1967–1998
Soeharto



Libya[66]
1969–2011
Muammar Gaddafi



 Lithuania[67]
1926–1940
Antanas Smetona



 Macedonia[68][69]
2006–2016
Nikola Gruevski



 Portugal[70]
1932–1974
António de Oliveira Salazar and Marcelo Caetano
Under Estado Novo regime


 Spain[71]
1936–1975
Francisco Franco



 South Africa[72][73]
1948–1994
National Party
Regime ended with the end of apartheid


 South Korea[74]
1948–1960[75]
Syngman Rhee



1962–1987
Park Chung-hee and Chun Doo-hwan



 Taiwan[76]
1945–1990
Kuomintang



 Turkey[77][78]
1925–1945
Republican People's Party



 Zimbabwe[79]
1980–2017
Robert Mugabe



Authoritarian weakness and resilience
Andrew J. Nathan notes that "regime theory holds that authoritarian systems are inherently fragile because of weak legitimacy, overreliance on coercion, overcentralization of decision making, and the predominance of personal power over institutional norms....Few authoritarian regimes—be they communist, fascist, corporatist, or personalist—have managed to conduct orderly, peaceful, timely, and stable successions".[80] One exception to this general trend is the endurance of the authoritarian rule of the Chinese Communist Party, which has been unusually resilient among authoritarian regimes. Nathan posits that this can be attributed to four factors: (1) "the increasingly norm-bound nature of its succession politics"; (2) "the increase in meritocratic as opposed to factional considerations in the promotion of political elites"; (3) "the differentiation and functional specialization of institutions within the regime"; and (4) "the establishment of institutions for political participation and appeal that strengthen the CCP's legitimacy among the public at large".[80]
Anti-authoritarianism
Main article: Anti-authoritarianism
After World War II there was a strong sense of anti-authoritarianism based on anti-fascism in Europe. This was attributed to the active resistance from occupation and to fears arising from the development of superpowers.[81] Anti-authoritarianism also became associated with countercultural and bohemian movements such as the Beat Generation in the 1950s,[82] the hippies in the 1960s[83] and punks in the 1970s.[84]
Gender and authoritarianism
According to a study by Brandt and Henry, there is a direct correlation between the rates of gender inequality and the levels of authoritarian ideas in the male and female populations. It was found that in countries with less gender equality where individualism was encouraged and men occupied the dominant societal roles, women were more likely to support traits such as obedience which would allow them to survive in an authoritarian environment and less likely to encourage ideas such as independence and imagination. In countries with higher levels of gender equality, men held less authoritarian views. It is theorized that this occurs due to the stigma attached to individuals who question the cultural norms set by the dominant individuals and establishments in an authoritarian society as a way to prevent the psychological stress caused by the active ostracizing of the stigmatized individuals.[85]
See also

Totalitarianism
Anti-democratic thought
Autocracy
Centralisation
Criticism of liberal democracy
Illiberal democracy
Managed democracy

Notes


^ a b Sekiguchi, Masashi. Government and Politics - Volume I. EOLSS Publications. p. 92. ISBN 9781905839698. Retrieved 26 December 2016. 
^ Richard Shorten, Modernism and Totalitarianism: Rethinking the Intellectual Sources of Nazism and Stalinism, 1945 to the Present (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012), p. 256 (note 67).
^ Gretchen Casper, Fragile Democracies: The Legacies of Authoritarian Rule, pp. 40–50 (citing Linz 1964).
^ Todd Landman, Studying Human Rights (Routledge, 2003), p. 71 (citing Linz 1964 and others).
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Mark J. Gasiorowski, The Political Regimes Project, in On Measuring Democracy: Its Consequences and Concomitants (ed. Alex Inketes), 2006, p. 110–11.
^ Juan de Onis, "After Chavez, Authoritarianism Still Threatens Latin America", World Affairs (May 15, 2013): "the followers of the late President Hugo Chávez continue to apply the playbook of authoritarian populism throughout Latin America in their pursuit of more power...one of the Mercosur partners are challenging the basic political practices of authoritarian populism implanted in Venezuela."
^ Kurt Weyland, "Latin America's Authoritarian Drift: The Threat from the Populist Left", Journal of Democracy, Vol. 23, Issue 3 (July 2013), pp. 18–32.
^ a b c d e f g h Theodore M. Vesta, Ethiopia: A Post-Cold War African State. Greenwood, 1999, p. 17.
^ Przeworski, Adam (1991-07-26). Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic Reforms in Eastern Europe and Latin America. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521423359. 
^ Hsu, Jennifer Y. J.; Hsu, Carolyn L.; Hasmath, Reza (2016). "NGO Strategies in an Authoritarian Context, and their Implications for Citizenship: The Case of the People's Republic of China". American Sociological Association Annual Meeting (Seattle), August 20–23.: 1. SSRN 2657187 . 
^ Duckitt, J. (1989). "Authoritarianism and Group Identification: A New View of an Old Construct". Political Psychology. 10 (1): 63–84. doi:10.2307/3791588. JSTOR 3791588. (Registration required (help)). 
^ Kemmelmeier, M.; Burnstein, E.; Krumov, K.; Genkova, P.; Kanagawa, C.; Hirshberg, M. S.; Erb, H. P.; Wieczorkowska, G.; Noels, K. A. (2003). "Individualism, Collectivism, and Authoritarianism in Seven Societies". Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 34 (3): 304. doi:10.1177/0022022103034003005. 
^ a b Sondrol, P. C. (2009). "Totalitarian and Authoritarian Dictators: A Comparison of Fidel Castro and Alfredo Stroessner". Journal of Latin American Studies. 23 (3): 599. doi:10.1017/S0022216X00015868. 
^ a b c Radu Cinpoes, Nationalism and Identity in Romania: A History of Extreme Politics from the Birth of the State to EU Accession, p. 70.
^

Thomas H. Henriksen, American Power after the Berlin Wall (Palgrave MacMillian: 2007), p. 199: "experts emphasize that elections alone, without the full democratic panoply of an independent judiciary, free press, and viable political parties, constitute, in reality, illiberal democracies, which still menace their neighbors and destabilize their regions."
David P. Forsythe, Human Rights in International Relations (Cambridge University Press, 2012), p. 231: "Illiberal democracies may have reasonably free and fair national elections based on broad suffrage, but they do not counteract the tyranny of the majority with effective protections for ethnic and religious minorities or various types of dissenters."
Rod Hague & Martin Harrop, Political Science: A Comparative Introduction (7th ed.: Palgrave MacMillian: 2007), p. 259: "The gradual implementation of the rule of law and due process is an accomplishment of liberal politics, provide a basis for distinguishing liberal from illiberal democracies, and both from authoritarian regimes."
Vladimir Popov, "Circumstances versus Policy Choices: Why Has the Economic Performance of the Soviet Successor States Been So Poor" in After the Collapse of Communism: Comparative Lessons of Transition (eds. Michael McFaul & Kathryn Stoner-Weiss: Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 20: "The least efficient institutions are in illiberal democracies combining poor rule of law with democracy ... Less democratic regimes with weak rule of law ... appear to do better than illiberal democracies in maintaining institutional capacity."


^ Hegre, Håvard; Tanja Ellington; Scott Gates & Nils Petter Gleditsch (2001). "Towards A Democratic Civil Peace? Opportunity, Grievance and Civil War 1816-1992". American Political Science Review. 95: 33–48. Archived from the original on 2004-04-06. 
^ Ray, James Lee (2013). Colin Elman; Miriam Fendius Elman, eds. A Lakatosian View of the Democratic Peace Research Program From Progress in International Relations Theory (PDF). MIT Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-06-25. 
^ a b c d Morton H. Halperin, Joseph T. Siegle, & Michael M. Weinstein, The Democracy Advantage: How Democracies Promote Prosperity and Peace (Council on Foreign Relations/Psychology Press, 2005).
^ Franco, Á.; Álvarez-Dardet, C.; Ruiz, M. T. (2004). "Effect of democracy on health: ecological study". BMJ. 329 (7480): 1421–23. doi:10.1136/bmj.329.7480.1421. PMC 535957 . PMID 15604165. 
^ Sen, A. K. (1999). "Democracy as a Universal Value". Journal of Democracy. 10 (3): 3–17. doi:10.1353/jod.1999.0055. 
^ R. J. Rummel (1997). Power kills: democracy as a method of nonviolence. New Brunswick, New Jersey, United States U.S.A: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 1-56000-297-2. 
^ Daniel Lederman, Norman Loayza, & Rodrigo Res Soares, "Accountability and Corruption: Political Institutions Matter", World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2708 (November 2001).
^ Harvard News Office (2004-11-04). "Harvard Gazette: Freedom squelches terrorist violence". News.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on 2015-09-19. Retrieved 2012-02-02. 
^ Vincent, Rebecca (19 May 2013). "When the music dies: Azerbaijan one year after Eurovision". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 10 June 2013. Over the past several years, Azerbaijan has become increasingly authoritarian, as the authorities have used tactics such as harassment, intimidation, blackmail, attack and imprisonment to silence the regime’s critics, whether journalists, bloggers, human rights defenders, political activists or ordinary people taking to the streets in protest. 
^ Nebil Husayn, Authoritarianism in Bahrain: Motives, Methods and Challenges, AMSS 41st Annual Conference (September 29, 2012); Parliamentary Elections and Authoritarian Rule in Bahrain (January 13, 2011), Stanford University
^ Rausing, Sigrid (7 October 2012). "Belarus: inside Europe's last dictatorship". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 7 August 2014. 
^ "Belarus's Lukashenko: "Better a dictator than gay"". Berlin. Reuters. 4 March 2012. ...German Foreign Minister's branding him 'Europe's last dictator' 
^ "Profile: Alexander Lukashenko". BBC News. BBC. 9 January 2007. Retrieved 7 August 2014. '..an authoritarian ruling style is characteristic of me [Lukashenko]' 
^ "Essential Background – Belarus". Human Rights Watch. 2005. Retrieved 26 March 2006. 
^ "Human rights by country – Belarus". Amnesty International Report 2007. Amnesty International. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 22 December 2007. 
^ Elisabeth Bumiller (November 16, 2012). "In Cambodia, Panetta Reaffirms Ties With Authoritarian Government". New York Times. 
^ a b c Freedom House (2016). Freedom in the World 2016: Anxious Dictators, Wavering Democracies: Global Freedom Under Pressure (PDF). 
^ ""Amnesty International Report 2009: State of the World's Human Rights"". Amnesty International. 2009. Archived from the original on 2011-10-08. 
^ Ming Xia, China Rises Companion: Political Governance, New York Times. See also Cheng Li, The End of the CCP’s Resilient Authoritarianism? A Tripartite Assessment of Shifting Power in China (September 2012), The China Quarterly, Vol. 211; Perry Link and Joshua Kurlantzick, China's Modern Authoritarianism (May 25, 2009), Wall Street Journal; Ariana Eunjung Cha, China, Cuba, Other Authoritarian Regimes Censor News From Iran (June 27, 2009), Washington Post.
^ Ariana Eunjung Cha, China, Cuba, Other Authoritarian Regimes Censor News From Iran (June 27, 2009), Washington Post; Shanthi Kalathil and Taylor Boas, Internet and State Control in Authoritarian Regimes: China, Cuba and the Counterrevolution (July 16, 2001), Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
^ Amr Adly, The Economics of Egypt’s Rising Authoritarian Order, Carnegie Middle East Center, June 18, 2014; Nathan J. Brown & Katie Bentivoglio, Egypt's Resurgent Authoritarianism: It's a Way of Life, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 9, 2014; Roula Khalaf, Sisi’s Egypt: The march of the security state, Financial Times (December 19, 2016); Peter Hessler, Egypt's Failed Revolution, New Yorker, January 2, 2017.
^ Mehrdad Kia, The Making of Modern Authoritarianism in Contemporary Iran, in Modern Middle East Authoritarianism: Roots, Ramifications, and Crisis (Routledge: 2013; eds. Noureddine Jebnoun, Mehrdad Kia & Mimi Kirk), pp. 75–76.
^ Juan José Linz, Totalitarian and Authoritarian Regimes (Lynne Rienner, 2000), p. 36.
^ a b Yom, Sean (16 May 2017). "Why Jordan and Morocco are doubling down on royal rule". Washington Post. 
^ Beckert, Jen. "Communitarianism." International Encyclopedia of Economic Sociology. London: Routledge, 2006. 81.
^ Daniel Byman, Pyongyang’s Survival Strategy: Tools of Authoritarian Control in North Korea, International Security, Vol. 35, issue 1, pp. 44–74 (Summer 2010); Chico Harlan, In authoritarian North Korea, hints of reform, Washington Post, September 3, 2012.
^ "Dictators Continue to Score in International Sporting Events". Freedom House. 
^ Nikolay Petrov and Michael McFaul, The Essence of Putin's Managed Democracy (October 18, 2005), Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; Tom Parfitt, Billionaire tycoon Mikhail Prokhorov who is running in the 4 March election says it is time for evolution not revolution (January 11, 2012), Guardian; Richard Denton, Russia's 'managed democracy' (May 11, 2006), BBC News.
^ "Nations in Transit 2014 – Russia". Freedom House. 
^ "The Myth of the Authoritarian Model – How Putin's Crackdown Holds Russia Back" (PDF). The Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies, Stanford. 
^ "Lee Kuan Yew leaves a legacy of authoritarian pragmatism". Retrieved 5 May 2017. 
^ "January 5, 2017 Fear, smear and the paradox of authoritarian politics in Singapore". Retrieved 5 May 2017. 
^ Toby Craig Jones, Desert Kingdom: How Oil and Water Forged Modern Saudi Arabia (2011), Harvard University Press, pp. 5, 14–15; Kira D. Baiasu, Sustaining Authoritarian Rule Archived January 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine., Fall 2009, Volume 10, Issue 1 (September 30, 2009), Northwestern Journal of International Affairs.
^ Heydemann, Steven; Leenders, Reinoud (2013). Middle East Authoritarianisms: Governance, Contestation, and Regime Resilience in Syria and Iran. Stanford University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0804793339. 
^ Jakubowski, Andrzej (2016). Cultural Rights as Collective Rights: An International Law Perspective. Brill – Nijhoff. p. 196. ISBN 978-9004312012. 
^ Berk Esena & Sebnem Gumuscub, Rising competitive authoritarianism in Turkey, Third World Quarterly (February 19, 2016). doi:10.1080/01436597.2015.1135732; Ramazan Kılınç, Turkey: from conservative democracy to popular authoritarianism, openDemocracy (December 5, 2015).
^ "Turkmenistan". hrw.org. Retrieved 4 September 2016. 
^ "The dark side of the United Arab Emirates". newint.org. 7 September 2015. Retrieved 22 October 2017. 
^ "United Arab Emirates profile". 29 August 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017 – via www.bbc.com. 
^ Neil J. Melvin, Uzbekistan: Transition to Authoritarianism on the Silk Road (Harwood Academic, 2000), pp. 28–30.
^ Shahram Akbarzadeh, "Post-Soviet Central Asia: The Limits of Islam" in Constitutionalism in Islamic Countries: Between Upheaval and Continuity (Oxford University Press, 2012: eds. Rainer Grote & Tilmann J. Röder), p. 428.
^ https://www.economist.com/news/asia/21732574-new-president-less-brutal-his-predecessor-no-democrat-uzbek-spring-has-sprung
^ Human Rights Watch, Venezuela: Chávez’s Authoritarian Legacy: Dramatic Concentration of Power and Open Disregard for Basic Human Rights, March 5, 2013; Kurt Weyland, Latin America's Authoritarian Drift: The Threat from the Populist Left, Journal of Democracy, Vol. 24, No. 3 (July 2013), pp. 18–32.
^ Thomas Fuller, In Hard Times, Open Dissent and Repression Rise in Vietnam (April 23, 2013), New York Times
^ Todd L. Edwards, Argentina: A Global Studies Handbook (2008), pp. 45–46; Steven E. Sanderson, The Politics of Trade in Latin American Development (1992), Stanford University Press, p. 133; William C. Smith, Reflections on the Political Economy of Authoritarian Rule and Capitalist Reorganization in Contemporary Argentina, in Generals in Retreat: The Crisis of Military Rule in Latin America (1985), eds. Philip J. O'Brien & Paul A. Cammack, Manchester University Press.
^ Guillermo A. O'Donnell, Bureaucratic Authoritarianism: Argentina, 1966–1973, in Comparative Perspective (University of California Press, 1988); James M. Malloy, Authoritarianism and Corporatism in Latin America: The Modal Pattern, in Democracy in Latin America: Patterns and Cycles (1996; ed. Roderic A. Camp), p. 122; Howard J. Wiards, Corporatism and Comparative Politics: The Other Great "ism" (1997), pp. 113–14.
^ James M. Malloy, Authoritarianism and Corporatism in Latin America: The Modal Pattern, in Democracy in Latin America: Patterns and Cycles (ed. Roderic A. Camp), p. 122; Thomas E. Skidmore, The Political Economy of Policy-making in Authoritarian Brazil, 1967–70, in Generals in Retreat: The Crisis of Military Rule in Latin America (1985), eds. Philip J. O'Brien & Paul A. Cammack, Manchester University Press.
^ Thomas Carothers, Q&A: Is Burma Democratizing? (April 2, 2012), Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; President Discusses Burma/Myanmar in Transition at World Affairs Council Sacramento (April 3, 2013), Asia Foundation; Louise Arbour, In Myanmar, Sanctions Have Had Their Day (March 5, 2012), New York Times.
^ Steven E. Sanderson, The Politics of Trade in Latin American Development (1992), Stanford University Press, p. 133; Carlos Huneeus, Political Mass Mobilization Against Authoritarian Rule: Pinochet's Chile, 1983–88, in Civil Resistance and Power Politics:The Experience of Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present (2009), Oxford University Press (eds. Adam Roberts & Timothy Garton Ash).
^ Maye Kassem, Egyptian Politics: The Dynamics of Authoritarian Rule (2004); Andrea M. Perkins, Mubarak's Machine: The Durability of the Authoritarian Regime in Egypt (M.A. thesis, April 8, 2010, University of South Florida).
^ Gaddafi's 41-Year-Long Rule, Washington Post; Martin Asser, The Muammar Gaddafi Story (October 21, 2011), BBC News; Alistair Dawber, One Libyan in three wants return to authoritarian rule (February 16, 2012), Independent.
^ Misiunas, Romuald J. (1970). "Fascist Tendencies in Lithuania". Slavonic and East European Review. 48 (110): 88–109. JSTOR 4206165. 
^ Matthew Brunwasser, Concerns Grow About Authoritarianism in Macedonia, The New York Times, October 13, 2011.
^ Andrew MacDowall, Fears for Macedonia's fragile democracy amid 'coup' and wiretap claims, The Guardian, February 27, 2015.
^ Pinto, António Costa (2006). "Authoritarian legacies, transitional justice and state crisis in Portugal's democratization". Democratization. 13 (2): 173–204. doi:10.1080/13510340500523895.  Working paper.
^ Richard Gunther, The Spanish Model Revisited, in The Politics and Memory of Democratic Transition: The Spanish Model, (eds. Diego Muro & Gregorio Alonso), Taylor & Francis 2010, p. 19.
^ Tracy Kuperus, Building a Pluralist Democracy: An Examination of Religious Associations in South Africa and Zimbabwe, in Race and Reconciliation in South Africa: A Multicultural Dialogue in Comparative Perspective (eds. William E. Van Vugt & G. Daan Cloete), Lexington Books, 2000.
^ The South Africa Reader: History, Culture, Politics (eds. Clifton Crais & Thomas V. McClendon; Duke University Press, 2014), p. 279.
^ The Other R.O.K.: Memories of Authoritarianism in Democratic South Korea (October 11, 2011), Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars; Sangmook Lee, Democratic Transition and the Consolidation of Democracy in South Korea Archived December 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., July 2007, Taiwan Journal of Democracy, Volume 3, No. 1, pp. 99–125.
^ Hyug Baeg Im, The Rise of Bureaucratic Authoritarianism in South Korea, World Politics Vol. 39, Issue 2 (January 1987), pp. 231–57
^ Leng, Shao-chuan; Lin, Cheng-yi (1993). "Political Change on Taiwan: Transition to Democracy?". The China Quarterly. Cambridge University Press (136): 805–39. ISSN 0305-7410. JSTOR 655592. (Registration required (help)). ; Shirley A. Kan, Congressional Research Service, Democratic Reforms in Taiwan: Issues for Congress (May 26, 2010); Taiwan's Electoral Politics and Democratic Transition: Riding the Third Wave (1996), eds. Charles Chi-Hsiang Chang & Hung-Mao Tien; Edward S. Steinfeld, Playing Our Game:Why China's Rise Doesn't Threaten the West (2010), Oxford University Press, pp. 217–22.
^ Erik J. Zürcher, Turkey: A Modern History (I.B. Tauris: rev. ed. 1997), pp. 176–206.
^ Ayse Gül Altinay, The Myth of the Military-Nation: Militarism, Gender, and Education in Turkey (Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), pp. 19–20.
^ Daniel Compagnon, A Predictable Tragedy: Robert Mugabe and the Collapse of Zimbabwe (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011).
^ a b Andrew J. Nathan, "Authoritarian Resilience", Journal of Democracy, 14.1 (2003), pp. 6–17.
^ Cox, David (2005). Sign Wars: The Culture Jammers Strike Back!. LedaTape Organisation. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-9807701-5-5. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 
^ "Retired Site PBS Programs". pbs.org. Retrieved 4 September 2016. 
^ "The way of the hippie is antithetical to all repressive hierarchical power structures since they are adverse to the hippie goals of peace, love and freedom ... Hippies don't impose their beliefs on others. Instead, hippies seek to change the world through reason and by living what they believe."Stone 1994, "The Way of the Hippy"
^ McLaughlin, Paul (2007). Anarchism and Authority. Aldershot: Ashgate. p. 10. ISBN 0-7546-6196-2. 
^ Brandt, Mark J.; Henry, P. J. (2012). "Gender Inequality and Gender Differences in Authoritarianism". Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 38 (10): 1301–15. doi:10.1177/0146167212449871. PMID 22733982. 


Works cited

Juan J. Linz, An Authoritarian Regime: The Case of Spain, in Cleavages, Ideologies and Party Systems (eds. Eric Allard & Yrjo Littunen) (Helsinki: Academic, 1964)

External links

Are we entering the age of the autocrat? Francis Fukuyama, Washington Post, August 24, 2008







v
t
e


Fascism








Theory







Core tenets



Nationalism
Imperialism
Authoritarianism
One-party state
Dictatorship
Social Darwinism
Social interventionism
Proletarian nation
Propaganda
Eugenics
Heroism
Militarism
Economic interventionism
Anti-communism





Topics



Definitions
Economics
Fascism and ideology
Fascism worldwide
Symbolism





Ideas



Actual Idealism
Class collaboration
Corporatism
Heroic capitalism
National Socialism
National syndicalism
State capitalism
Supercapitalism
Third Position
Totalitarianism
Social order
















Variants






Italian
National Socialism
Japanese fascism
Islamofascism
Falangism
British
Austrian
Metaxism
National Radicalism
Rexism
Clerical
Legionarism
Integralism













Movements







Africa



Greyshirts
Ossewabrandwag





Asia



Brit HaBirionim
Ganap Party
Sakurakai
Tōhōkai
Blue Shirts Society





Northern / Northwestern Europe



Ailtirí na hAiséirghe
Black Front (Netherlands)
Blueshirts
Breton Social-National Workers' Movement
British Fascists
British People's Party (1939)
British Union of Fascists
La Cagoule
Clerical People's Party
Faisceau
Flemish National Union
French Popular Party
General Dutch Fascist League
Imperial Fascist League
Lapua Movement
Nasjonal Samling
National Corporate Party (Greenshirts)
National Fascisti
Nationalist Party (Iceland)
National Socialist Bloc
National Socialist Dutch Workers Party
National Socialist League
National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands
National Socialist Movement of Norway
National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden)
New Party (UK)
Patriotic People's Movement (Finland)
Pērkonkrusts
Rexism





Central Europe



Arrow Cross Party
Austrian National Socialism
Fatherland Front (Austria)
Hungarian National Socialist Party
National Front (Switzerland)
Nazism
Nazi Party
Sudeten German Party





Southern Europe



Albanian Fascist Party
Democratic Fascist Party
Falange
Greek National Socialist Party
Italian Fascism
Italian Social Republic
Metaxism
National Fascist Party
National Union (Portugal)
Republican Fascist Party
Sammarinese Fascist Party
Ustaše
ZBOR





Eastern and Southeastern Europe



Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party
Crusade of Romanianism
Iron Guard
National Fascist Community
National Fascist Movement
National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement
National Social Movement (Bulgaria)
National Radical Camp Falanga
National Romanian Fascio
National Renaissance Front
Ratniks (Bulgaria)
Romanian Front
Russian Fascist Party
Russian Women's Fascist Movement
Slovak People's Party
Union of Bulgarian National Legions
Vlajka





North America



Fascism in Canada

Canadian Union of Fascists
Parti national social chrétien


Gold shirts
German American Bund
Silver Legion of America





South America



Falangism in Latin America
Brazilian Integralism
Bolivian Socialist Falange
National Socialist Movement of Chile
Revolutionary Union
















People






Abba Ahimeir
Nimio de Anquín
Sadao Araki
Marc Augier
Maurice Bardèche
Jacques Benoist-Méchin
Henri Béraud
Zoltán Böszörmény
Giuseppe Bottai
Robert Brasillach
Alphonse de Châteaubriant
Corneliu Zelea Codreanu
Gustavs Celmiņš
Enrico Corradini
Carlo Costamagna
Richard Walther Darré
Marcel Déat
Léon Degrelle
Pierre Drieu La Rochelle
Gottfried Feder
Giovanni Gentile
Joseph Goebbels
Hans F. K. Günther
Heinrich Himmler
Adolf Hitler
Ikki Kita
Fumimaro Konoe
Vihtori Kosola
Agostino Lanzillo
Dimitrije Ljotić
Leopoldo Lugones
Curzio Malaparte
Ioannis Metaxas
Robert Michels
Oswald Mosley
Benito Mussolini
Eoin O'Duffy
Gearóid Ó Cuinneagáin
Sergio Panunzio
Giovanni Papini
Ante Pavelić
William Dudley Pelley
Alfred Ploetz
Robert Poulet
Vidkun Quisling
José Antonio Primo de Rivera
Lucien Rebatet
Dionisio Ridruejo
Alfredo Rocco
Konstantin Rodzaevsky
Alfred Rosenberg
Plínio Salgado
Rafael Sánchez Mazas
Margherita Sarfatti
Carl Schmitt
Ardengo Soffici
Othmar Spann
Ugo Spirito
Ferenc Szálasi
Hideki Tojo
Gonzalo Torrente Ballester
Georges Valois
Anastasy Vonsyatsky













Works







Literature



The Doctrine of Fascism
Fascist Manifesto
Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals
Mein Kampf
My Life
The Myth of the Twentieth Century
Zweites Buch
Zaveshchanie russkogo fashista





Periodicals



La Conquista del Estado
Das Reich
Der Angriff
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung
Deutsche Zeitung in Norwegen
Deutsche Zeitung in den Niederlanden
Figli d'Italia
Fronten
Gândirea
Gioventù Fascista
Je suis partout
La France au travail
Münchener Beobachter
Novopress
NS Månedshefte
Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift
Das Schwarze Korps
Der Stürmer
Il Popolo d'Italia
Sfarmă-Piatră
Signal
Vlajka
Völkischer Beobachter
Nash Put'
Fashist
l'Alba





Film



Der Sieg des Glaubens
Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht
Triumph of the Will





Sculpture



Allach





Related topics



Art of the Third Reich
Fascist architecture
Heroic realism
Nazi architecture
Nazism and cinema
Nazi plunder
Syndicalism
Conservatism
















Organizations







Institutional



Ahnenerbe
Chamber of Fasci and Corporations
Grand Council of Fascism
Imperial Way Faction
Italian Nationalist Association
Nationalsozialistischer Reichsbund für Leibesübungen
Quadrumvirs





Activist



Fascist Union of Youth
German American Bund
National Youth Organisation (Greece)
Russian Fascist Organization
Union of Fascist Little Ones
Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys)
Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls)





Paramilitary



Albanian Militia
Black Brigades
Blackshirts
Blueshirts
Einsatzgruppen
Gold shirts
Greenshirts
Greyshirts
Hitler Youth
Heimwehr
Iron Wolf (organization)
Lăncieri
Makapili
Silver Legion of America
Schutzstaffel
Sturmabteilung
Waffen-SS
Werwolf





International



Axis powers
NSDAP/AO
ODESSA
















History







1910s



Arditi
Fascio





1920s



Aventine Secession
Acerbo Law
Corfu incident
March on Rome
Beer Hall Putsch
Italian economic battles





1930s



March of the Iron Will
German federal election, November 1932
German federal election, March 1933
Enabling Act
6 February 1934 crisis
1934 Montreux Fascist conference
Spanish Civil War
4th of August Regime
Anti-Comintern Pact





1940s



World War II
The Holocaust
End in Italy
Denazification
Nuremberg Trials
















Lists






Anti-fascists
Books about Hitler
British fascist parties
Fascist movements by country (A-F
G-M
N-T
U-Z)
Nazi ideologues
Nazi leaders
Speeches by Hitler
SS personnel













Related topics






Alt-right
Anti-fascism
Anti-Nazi League
Christofascism
Clerical fascism
Cryptofascism
Esoteric Nazism
Fascist (epithet)
Fascist mysticism
Germanisation
Glossary of Nazi Germany
Hitler salute
Italianization
Italianization of South Tyrol
Islamofascism
Japanization
Ku Klux Klan
Neo-fascism
Neo-Nazism
Roman salute
Social fascism
Synarchism
Unite Against Fascism
Völkisch movement
Women in Nazi Germany











Category
Portal












v
t
e


Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government



Forms



Absolute monarchy
Benevolent dictatorship
Enlightened absolutism
Fascism
Imperialism
Military dictatorship
Nazism
Ochlocracy
Self-coup
Stalinism
Theocracy





Concepts



Illiberal democracy
Totalitarian democracy
Inverted totalitarianism
Authoritarian democracy
Authoritarian socialism
Autocracy
Constitutional dictatorship
Corporate republic
Despotism
Dictatorship
Dominant-party state
Tsarist autocracy
Tyranny
Oligarchy
One-party state
Police state
Counterintelligence state
Mafia state
Right-wing authoritarianism
Third Positionism
Tyranny of the majority












v
t
e


Forms of government






Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Autocracy
Dictatorship
Direct democracy
Oligarchy
Monarchy
Republic
Plutocracy
Theocracy
Totalitarianism












v
t
e


Political ideologies






Left-wing politics
Centrism
Right-wing politics








Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Authoritarianism&oldid=816525084"					Categories: AuthoritarianismFascismForms of governmentOligarchyPolitical culturePolitical theoriesSocial theoriesSociological terminologyAuthorityHidden categories: Pages with login required references or sourcesWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism