This article is about the motorsport. For the video game, see Auto Racing (video game).
"Auto race" redirects here. For other uses, see Auto race (disambiguation).
"Racing cars" redirects here. For the Welsh pop band, see Racing Cars.
"Race driver" redirects here. For the racing simulation video game series, see TOCA Race Driver.

Auto racing


Jimmie Johnson leads the field racing three-wide multiple rows back at Daytona International Speedway in the 2015 Daytona 500.



Highest governing body
FIA


First contested
April 28, 1887


Characteristics


Mixed gender
Yes


Type
Outdoor and Indoor


Presence


Olympic
1900 Summer Olympics (demonstration only)


Auto racing (also known as car racing, motor racing,[1] or automobile racing) is a motorsport involving the racing of automobiles for competition.
Almost as soon as automobiles had been invented, races of various sorts were organised, with the first recorded as early as 1867. Many of the earliest events were effectively reliability trials, aimed at proving these new machines were a practical mode of transport, but soon became an important way for competing makers to demonstrate their machines. By the 1930s specialist racing cars had developed.
There are now numerous different categories, each with different rules and regulations.



Contents


1 History
2 Categories

2.1 Open-wheel racing
2.2 Touring car racing
2.3 Sports car racing
2.4 Production-car racing
2.5 One-make racing
2.6 Stock car racing
2.7 Rallying
2.8 Drag racing
2.9 Off-road racing
2.10 Kart racing
2.11 Historical racing
2.12 Other categories


3 Use of flags
4 Accidents
5 Racing-car setup

5.1 Aerodynamics
5.2 Suspension
5.3 Tires
5.4 Brakes
5.5 Engine


6 Racing driver
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of auto racing
The first prearranged match race of two self-powered road vehicles over a prescribed route occurred at 4:30 A.M. on August 30, 1867, between Ashton-under-Lyne and Old Trafford, a distance of eight miles. It was won by the carriage of Isaac Watt Boulton.[2]
Internal combustion auto racing events began soon after the construction of the first successful gasoline-fueled automobiles. The first organized contest was on April 28, 1887, by the chief editor of Paris publication Le Vélocipède, Monsieur Fossier.[3] It ran 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) from Neuilly Bridge to the Bois de Boulogne.




Albert Lemaître classified first in his Peugeot Type 5 3hp in the Paris–Rouen.


On July 22,[4] 1894, the Parisian magazine Le Petit Journal organized what is considered to be the world's first motoring competition, from Paris to Rouen. One hundred and two competitors paid a 10-franc entrance fee.[3]
The first American automobile race is generally held to be the Thanksgiving Day Chicago Times-Herald race of November 28, 1895.[5] Press coverage of the event first aroused significant American interest in the automobile.[5]




Fernand Gabriel driving a Mors in Paris-Madrid 1903


With auto construction and racing dominated by France, the French automobile club ACF staged a number of major international races, usually from or to Paris, connecting with another major city, in France or elsewhere in Europe.




A remaining section of the Brooklands track in 2007


Brooklands, in Surrey, was the first purpose-built motor racing venue, opening in June 1907.[6] It featured a 4.43 km (2.75 mi) concrete track with high-speed banked corners.
One of the oldest existing purpose-built automobile racing circuits in the United States, still in use, is the 2.5-mile-long (4.0 km) Indianapolis Motor Speedway in Speedway, Indiana. It is the largest capacity sports venue of any variety worldwide, with a top capacity of some 257,000+ seated spectators.[7]
NASCAR was founded by Bill France, Sr. on February 21, 1948, with the help of several other drivers of the time. The first NASCAR "Strictly Stock" race ever was held on June 19, 1949, at Daytona Beach, Florida.
From 1962, sports cars temporarily took a back seat to GT cars, with the FIA replacing the World Championship for Sports Cars with the International Championship for GT Manufacturers.[8]
From 1972 through 2003, NASCAR's premier series was called the Winston Cup Series, sponsored by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company cigarette brand Winston. The changes that resulted from RJR's involvement, as well as the reduction of the schedule from 48 to 31 races a year, established 1972 as the beginning of NASCAR's "modern era".
The IMSA GT Series evolved into the American Le Mans Series, which ran its first season in 1999.[9] The European races eventually became the closely related Le Mans Series, both of which mix prototypes and GTs.
Turismo Carretera (Road racing, lit., Road Touring) is a popular touring car racing series in Argentina, and the oldest car racing series still active in the world. The first TC competition took place in 1937 with 12 races, each in a different province. Future Formula One star Juan Manuel Fangio (Chevrolet) won the 1940 and 1941 editions of the TC. It was during this time that the series' Chevrolet-Ford rivalry began, with Ford acquiring most of its historical victories.
Categories[edit]
Open-wheel racing[edit]
Main articles: Formula racing and Open wheel car




Giedo van der Garde driving the Caterham CT03 at Sepang International Circuit


The two most popular varieties of open wheel racing are Formula One and the IndyCar Series.
Formula One is a European-based series that runs only street and road courses. These cars are very technologically advanced, and are very fast through turns. These cars can go 375 kph (233 mph). Some of the famous races they run are the Monaco Grand Prix, the Italian Grand Prix, and the British Grand Prix. The season ends with the crowning of the World Championship for drivers and constructors.
In single-seater (open-wheel), the wheels are not covered, and the cars often have aerofoil wings front and rear to produce downforce and enhance adhesion to the track. In Europe and Asia, open-wheeled racing is commonly referred to as "Formula", with appropriate hierarchical suffixes. In North America, the "Formula" terminology is not followed (with the exception of F1). The sport is usually arranged to follow an international format (such as F1), a regional format (such as the Formula 3 Euro Series), and/or a domestic, or country-specific, format (such as the German Formula 3 championship, or the British Formula Ford).




Tony Kanaan during 2007 Indy 500 practice


In the Americas, the most popular series is the National Championship, more commonly known as the IndyCar Series and previously known as CART). The cars have traditionally been similar though less technologically sophisticated than F1 cars, with more restrictions on technology aimed at controlling costs. While these cars are not as technologically advanced, they are faster, being able to average a lap at 388 kph (241 mph). The series' biggest race is the Indianapolis 500, which is commonly referred to as "The Greatest Spectacle in Racing" due to being the longest continuously run race and having the largest crowd for a single-day sporting event (350,000+).




Formula Three car racing at the Hockenheimring, 2008


The other major international single-seater racing series is GP2 (formerly known as Formula 3000 and Formula Two). Regional series include Formula Nippon and Formula V6 Asia (specifically in Asia), Formula Renault 3.5 (also known as the World Series by Renault, succession series of World Series by Nissan), Formula Three, Formula Palmer Audi and Formula Atlantic. In 2009, the FIA Formula Two Championship brought about the revival of the F2 series. Domestic, or country-specific, series include Formula Three and Formula Renault, with the leading introductory series being Formula Ford.[citation needed]
Single-seater racing is not limited merely to professional teams and drivers. There exist many amateur racing clubs. In the UK, the major club series are the Monoposto Racing Club, BRSCC F3 (Formerly ClubF3, formerly ARP F3), Formula Vee and Club Formula Ford. Each series caters for a section of the market, with some primarily providing low-cost racing, while others aim for an authentic experience using the same regulations as the professional series (BRSCC F3).
There are other categories of single-seater racing, including kart racing, which employs a small, low-cost machine on small tracks. Many of the current top drivers began their careers in karts. Formula Ford represents the most popular first open-wheel category for up-and-coming drivers stepping up from karts. The series is still the preferred option, as it has introduced an aero package and slicks, allowing the junior drivers to gain experience in a race car with dynamics closer F1. The Star Mazda Series is another entry-level series.




The full electric Formula Student/Formula SAE car of the Eindhoven University of Technology


Students at colleges and universities can also take part in single-seater racing through the Formula SAE competition, which involves designing and building a single-seater car in a multidisciplinary team and racing it at the competition. This also develops other soft skills, such as teamwork, while promoting motorsport and engineering.
The world's first all-female Formula racing team was created in 2006. The group was an assemblage of drivers from different racing disciplines and formed for an MTV reality pilot, which was shot at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca.




Racing Drivers View.


In December 2005, the FIA gave approval to Superleague Formula racing, which debuted in 2008, whereby the racing teams are owned and run by prominent sports clubs such as A.C. Milan and Liverpool F.C.
After 25 years away from the sport, former Formula 2 champion Jonathan Palmer reopened the F2 category again; most drivers have graduated from the Formula Palmer Audi series. The category is officially registered as the FIA Formula Two championship. Most rounds have two races and are support races to the FIA World Touring Car Championship.

Touring car racing[edit]
Main article: Touring car racing




Opening lap of 2012 WTCC Race of Japan


Touring car racing is a style of road racing that is run with production-derived race cars. It often features full-contact racing due to the small speed differentials and large grids.
The major touring car championships conducted worldwide are the Supercars Championship (Australia), British Touring Car Championship, Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM), and the World Touring Car Championship. The European Touring Car Cup is a one-day event open to Super 2000 specification touring cars from Europe's many national championships.
The Sports Car Club of America's SPEED World Challenge Touring Car and GT championships are dominant in North America. America's historic Trans-Am Series is undergoing a period of transition, but is still the longest-running road racing series in the U.S. The National Auto Sport Association also provides a venue for amateurs to compete in home-built factory-derived vehicles on various local circuits.

Sports car racing[edit]
Main article: Sports car racing




FIA GT1 at Silverstone in 2011


In sports car racing, production-derived versions of sports cars, also known as grand tourers (GTs), and purpose-built sports prototype cars compete within their respective classes on closed circuits. The premier championship series of sports car racing is the FIA World Endurance Championship. The main series for GT car racing is the FIA GT1 World Championship. There is also the FIA GT3 European Championship as well as the less powerful GT4 European Cup. Previously, an intermediate FIA GT2 European Championship existed, but the FIA dropped it to cut costs. Other major GT championships include the Japanese Super GT championship and the International GT Open for GT2 and GT3 cars. There are also national GT championships using mainly GT3 and GT4 cars featuring professional and amateur drivers alike.




The Audi R18, a Le Mans Prototype car, during an endurance race


Sports prototypes, unlike GT cars, do not rely on road-legal cars as a base. They are closed-wheel and often closed-cockpit purpose-built race cars intended mainly for endurance racing. They have much lower weight and more down force compared to GT cars, making them much faster. They are raced in the 24 hours of Le Mans (held annually since 1923) and in the (European) Le Mans series, Asian Le Mans Series and the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship. These cars are referred to as LMP (Le Mans prototype) cars with LMP1 being run mainly by manufacturers and the slightly less powerful LMP2 cars run by privateer teams. All three Le Mans Series run GT cars in addition to Le Mans Prototypes; these cars have different restrictions than the FIA GT cars.
Another prototype and GT racing championship exists in the United States; the Grand-Am, which began in 2000, sanctions its own endurance series, the Rolex Sports Car Series, which consists of slower and lower-cost race cars compared to LMP and FIA GT cars. The Rolex Sports Car Series and American Le Mans Series announced a merger between the two series forming the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship starting in 2014.
These races are often conducted over long distances, at least 1,000 km (621 mi), and cars are driven by teams of two or more drivers, switching every few hours. Due to the performance difference between production-based sports cars and purpose-built sports prototypes, one race usually involves several racing classes, each fighting for their own championship.
Famous sports car races include the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the Rolex 24 at Daytona, 24 Hours of Spa-Franchorchamps, the 12 Hours of Sebring, the 6 Hours of Watkins Glen, and the 1,000-mile (1,600 km) Petit Le Mans at Road Atlanta. There is also the 24 Hours of the Nürburgring on the infamous Nordschleife track and the Dubai 24 Hour, which is aimed at GT3 and below cars with a mixture of professional and pro-am drivers.

Production-car racing[edit]
Main article: Production car racing
Production-car racing, otherwise known as "showroom stock" in the US, is an economical and rules-restricted version of touring-car racing, mainly used to restrict costs. Numerous production racing categories are based on particular makes of cars.
Most series follow the Group N regulation with a few exceptions. There are several different series that are run all over the world, most notably, Japan's Super Taikyu and IMSA's Firehawk Series, which ran in the 1980s and 1990s all over the United States.

One-make racing[edit]
See also: One-Design and Spec racing
One-make, or single marque, championships often employ production-based cars from a single manufacturer or even a single model from a manufacturer's range. There are numerous notable one-make formulae from various countries and regions, some of which – such as the Porsche Supercup and, previously, IROC – have fostered many distinct national championships. Single marque series are often found at club level, to which the production-based cars, limited modifications, and close parity in performance are very well suited. Some of the better-known single-make series are the Mini 7 Championship (Europe's longest-running one make championship), the Radical European Masters, John Cooper Mini Challenge, Clio Cup, Ginettas, Caterhams, BMWs, and MX5s. There are also single-chassis single seater formulae, such as Formula Renault and Formula BMW, usually as "feeder" series for "senior" race formula (in the fashion of farm teams).

Stock car racing[edit]
Main article: Stock car racing
In North America, stock car racing is the most popular form of auto racing.[10] Primarily raced on oval tracks, stock cars vaguely resemble production cars, but are in fact purpose-built racing machines that are built to tight specifications and also called Silhouette racing cars.




NASCAR green flag start at Daytona International Speedway for the 2015 Daytona 500.


The largest stock car racing governing body is NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing). NASCAR's premier series is the Monster Energy Cup Series, its most famous races being the Daytona 500, the Southern 500, the Coca-Cola 600, and the Brickyard 400. NASCAR also runs several feeder series, including the Xfinity Series and Camping World Truck Series (a pickup truck racing series). The series conduct races across the entire continental United States. The NASCAR Pinty's Series conducts races across Canada and the NASCAR PEAK Mexico Series conducts races across Mexico.
NASCAR also governs several smaller regional series, such as the Whelen Modified Tour. Modified cars are best described as open-wheel cars. Modified cars have no parts related to the stock vehicle for which they are named after. A number of modified cars display a "manufacturer's" logo and "vehicle name", yet use components produced by another automobile manufacturer.




An ASA Late Model Series stock car on an asphalt track.


There are also other stock car governing bodies, most notably the Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA).
In the UK, British Stock car racing is also referred to as "Short Circuit Racing". This takes place on shale or tarmac tracks – usually around 1/4 mile long. The governing bodies for the sport are the Oval Racing Council (ORC) and BriSCA. Both bodies are made up of individual stadium promoters. There are around 35 tracks in the UK and upwards of 7000 active drivers. The sport is split into three basic divisions – distinguished by the rules regarding car contact during racing. The most famous championship is the BriSCA F1 Stock Cars. Full-contact formulas include Bangers, Bombers and Rookie Bangers – and racing features Demolitions Derbies, Figure of Eight racing and Oval Racing.
Semi Contact Formulas include BriSCA F1, F2 and Superstox – where bumpers are used tactically.
Non-contact formulas include National Hot Rods, Stock Rods and Lightning Rods.
UK Stock car racing started in the 1950s and grew rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s.

Rallying[edit]
Main article: Rallying




Andreas Mikkelsen driving a VW Polo R WRC during the 2013 Rally de Portugal


Rallying at international and most national championship levels involves two classes of homologated road-legal production-based cars; Group N production cars and more modified Group A cars. Cars compete on closed public roads or off-road areas on a point-to-point format where participants and their co-drivers "rally" to a set of points, leaving in regular intervals from start points. A rally is typically conducted over a number of "special stages" on any terrain, which entrants are often allowed to scout beforehand at reduced speeds compiling detailed shorthand descriptions of the track or road as they go. These detailed descriptions are known as pace notes. During the actual rally, the co-driver reads the pace notes aloud (using an in-helmet intercom system) to the driver, enabling them to complete each stage as quickly as possible. Competition is based on lowest total elapsed time over the course of an event's special stages, including penalties.
The top series is the World Rally Championship (WRC), first contested in 1973, but there are also regional championships, and many countries have their own national championships. Some famous rallies include the Monte Carlo Rally, Rally Argentina, Rally Finland and Rally GB. Another famous event (actually best described as a rally raid) is the Paris-Dakar Rally, conceived in 1978. There are also many smaller, club level, categories of rallies, which are popular with amateurs, making up the "grass roots" of motor sports. Cars at this level may not comply fully with the requirements of group A or group N homologation. Other major rally events include the British Rally Championship, Intercontinental Rally Challenge, African Rally Championship, Asia-Pacific Rally Championship and endurance rally events like the Dakar Rally.




"Der Panzerwagen" at the 2010 Targa Tasmania


The Targa Tasmania, held on the Australian island state of Tasmania and run annually since 1992, takes its name from the Targa Florio, a former motoring event held on the island of Sicily. The competition concept is drawn directly from the best features of the Mille Miglia, the Coupe des Alpes and the Tour de Corse.[citation needed] Similarly named events around the world include the Targa Newfoundland based in Canada, Targa West based in Western Australia, Targa New Zealand and other smaller events.

Drag racing[edit]
Main article: Drag racing




Jet-propulsed dragster in Tarlton, South Africa


In drag racing, the objective is to complete a given straight-line distance, from a standing start, ahead of a vehicle in a parallel lane. This distance is traditionally 1⁄4 mile (400 m), though 1⁄8 mile (200 m) has become popular since the 1990s. The vehicles may or may not be given the signal to start at the same time, depending on the class of racing. Vehicles range from the everyday car to the purpose-built dragster. Speeds and elapsed time differ from class to class. Average street cars cover the ¼ mile in 12 to 16 seconds, whereas a top fuel dragster takes 4.5 seconds or less, reaching speeds of up to 530 km/h (329 mph). Drag racing was organized as a sport by Wally Parks in the early 1950s through the NHRA (National Hot Rod Association). The NHRA was formed to discourage street racing.
When launching, a top fuel dragster will accelerate at 3.4 g (33 m/s²), and when braking parachutes are deployed the deceleration is 4 g (39 m/s²), more than the Space Shuttle experiences. A top fuel car can be heard over 8 miles (13 km) away and can generate a reading from 1.5 to 3.9 on the Richter scale.[11]
Drag racing is two cars head-to-head, the winner proceeding to the next round. Professional classes are all first to the finish line wins. Sportsman racing is handicapped (slower car getting a head start) using an index (a lowest e.t. allowed), and cars running under (quicker than) their index "break out" and lose. The slowest cars, bracket racers, are also handicapped, but rather than an index, they use a dial-in.

Off-road racing[edit]
Main article: Off-road racing




Rod Hall in a Hummer H3 during a Best in the Desert race


In off-road racing, various classes of specially modified vehicles, including cars, compete in races through off-road environments. In North America these races often take place in the desert, such as the famous Baja 1000. Another format for off-road racing happens on closed-course short course tracks such as Crandon International Off-Road Raceway. In the 1980s and 1990s, short course was extended to racing inside stadiums in the Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group; this format was revived by Robby Gordon in 2013 with his Speed Energy Formula Off-Road series.
In Europe, "offroad" refers to events such as autocross or rallycross, while desert races and rally-raids such as the Paris-Dakar, Master Rallye or European "bajas" are called "cross-country rallies."

Kart racing[edit]




A sprint kart race in Atwater California hosted by the International Karting Federation


Main article: Kart racing
The modern kart was invented by Art Ingels, a fabricator at the legendary Indianapolis-car manufacturer Kurtis-Kraft, in Southern California in 1956. Ingels took a small chainsaw engine and mounted it to a simple tube-frame chassis weighing less than 100 lb. Ingels, and everyone else who drove the kart, were startled at its performance capabilities. The sport soon blossomed in Southern California, and quickly spread around the world. Although often seen as the entry point for serious racers into the sport, kart racing, or karting, can be an economical way for amateurs to try racing and is also a fully fledged international sport in its own right. A large proportion of professional racing drivers began in karts, often from a very young age, such as Michael Schumacher and Fernando Alonso. Several former motorcycle champions have also taken up the sport, notably Wayne Rainey, who was paralysed in a racing accident and now races a hand-controlled kart. As one of the cheapest ways to race, karting is seeing its popularity grow worldwide.
Despite their diminutive size, karting's most powerful class, superkart, can have a power-to-weight ratio of 440 hp/tonne.

Historical racing[edit]




Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca, Monterey, 2008


Main article: Historic motorsport
As modern motor racing is centered on modern technology with a lots of corporate sponsors and politics involved, historical racing tends to be the opposite. Because it is based on a particular era it is more hobbyist oriented, reducing corporate sponsorship and politics. Events are regulated to only allow cars of a certain era to participate. The only modern equipment used is related to safety and timing. A historical event can be of a number of different motorsport disciplines. Notably some of the most famous events of them all are the Goodwood Festival of Speed and Goodwood Revival in Britain and Monterey Historic in the United States. Championships range from "grass root" Austin Seven racing to the FIA Thoroughbred Grand Prix Championship for classic Formula One chassis.
While there are several professional teams and drivers in historical racing, this branch of auto sport tends to be contested by wealthy car owners and is thus more amateur and less competitive in its approach.
Other categories[edit]
See also: Category:Auto racing by type


Autocross
Autograss
Banger racing
Board track racing
Demolition derby
Dirt speedway racing
Dirt track racing
Drifting (motorsport)
Eco-Marathon
Folkrace
High Performance Drivers Education
Hillclimbing
Ice racing
Legends car racing
Midget car racing
Mini Sprint
Monster truck
Mud bogging
Power Wheels Racing
Pickup truck racing
Rallycross
Road racing
Short track motor racing
Slalom
Solar car racing
Sprint car racing
Swamp Buggy racing
Wheelstand Competition


Use of flags[edit]
Main article: Racing flags
In many types of auto races, particularly those held on closed courses, flags are displayed to indicate the general status of the track and to communicate instructions to competitors. While individual series have different rules, and the flags have changed from the first years (e.g., red used to start a race), these are generally accepted.


Flag
Displayed from start tower
Displayed from observation post



The session has started or resumed after a full course caution or stop.
End of hazardous section of track.



Full course caution condition for ovals. On road courses, it means a local area of caution. Depending on the type of racing, either two yellow flags will be used for a full course caution or a sign with 'SC' (Safety car) will be used as the field follows the pace/safety car on track and no cars may pass.
Local caution condition —no cars may pass at the particular corner where being displayed. When Stationary indicates hazard off-course, when Waving indicates hazard on-course.



Debris, fluid, or other hazard on the track surface.
Debris, fluid, or other hazard on the track surface.



The car with the indicated number must pit for consultation.
The session is halted, all cars on course must return to pit lane. May also be seen combined with a green flag to indicate oil on track, typically referred to as a 'pickle' flag combination.



The car with the indicated number has mechanical trouble and must pit.




The driver of the car with the indicated number has been penalized for misbehaviour.




The driver of the car with the indicated number is disqualified or will not be scored until they report to the pits.




The car should give way to faster traffic. Depending on the series this may be a command or merely advisory.
A car is being advised to give way to faster traffic approaching.



The session is stopped. All cars must halt on the track or return to pit lane.




Depending on the series, either one lap remains or a slow vehicle is on the track.
A slow vehicle is on the track.



The session has concluded.



Accidents[edit]
See also: Deaths in motorsports
For the worst accident in racing history see 1955 Le Mans disaster.
Racing-car setup[edit]
Main article: Racing setup
In auto racing, the racing setup or car setup is the set of adjustments made to the vehicle to optimize its behaviour (performance, handling, reliability, etc.). Adjustments can occur in suspensions, brakes, transmissions, engines, tires, and many others.
Aerodynamics[edit]
Aerodynamics and airflow play big roles in the setup of a racecar. Aerodynamic downforce improves the race car’s handling by lowering the center of gravity and distributing the weight of the car equally on each tire.[12] Once this is achieved, fuel consumption decreases and the forces against the car are significantly lowered. Many aerodynamic experiments are conducted in wind tunnels, to simulate real life situations while measuring the various drag forces on the car.[13] These “Rolling roads” produce many wind situations and direct air flow at certain speeds and angles.[14] When a diffuser is installed under the car, the amount of drag force is significantly lowered, and the overall aerodynamics of the vehicle is positively adjusted.[13] Wings and canards channel the airflow in the most efficient way to get the least amount of drag from the car. It is experimentally proven that downforce is gained and the vehicles handling is considerably changed when aerodynamic wings on the front and rear of the vehicle are installed.[13]
Suspension[edit]
Suspension plays a huge part in giving the racecar the ability to be driven optimally. Shocks are mounted vertically or horizontally to prevent the body from rolling in the corners. The suspension is important because it makes the car stable and easier to control and keeps the tires on the road when driving on uneven terrain. It works in three different ways including vertically, longitudinally, and laterally to control movement when racing on various tracks.[12]
Tires[edit]
Tires called R-Compounds are commonly used in motorsports for high amounts of traction. The soft rubber allows them to expand when they are heated up, making more surface area on the pavement, therefore producing the most amount of traction.[12] These types of tires do not have treads on them. Tire pressure is dependent on the temperature of the tire and track when racing. Each time a driver pulls into the pits, the tire pressure and temperature should be tested for optimal performance. When the tires get too hot they will swell or inflate and need to be deflated to the correct pressure.[12] When the tires are not warmed up they will not perform as well.
Brakes[edit]
Brakes on a race car are imperative in slowing and stopping the car at precise times and wear quickly depending on the road or track on which the car is being raced, how many laps are being run, track conditions due to weather, and how many caution runs require more braking. There are three variables to consider in racing: brake pedal displacement, brake pedal force, and vehicle deceleration.[15] Various combinations of these variables work together to determine the stiffness, sensitivity, and pedal force of the brakes. When using the brakes effectively, the driver must go through a buildup phase and end with a modulating phase. These phases include attaining maximum deceleration and modulating the brake pressure.[15] Brake performance is measured in bite and consistency. Bite happens when the driver first applies the brakes and they have not warmed up to the correct temperature to operate efficiently. Consistency is measured in how consistent the friction is during the entire time of braking. These two measurements determine the wear of the brakes.[15]
Engine[edit]
The race car’s engine needs a considerable amount of air to produce maximum power. The air intake manifold sucks the air from scoops on the hood and front bumper and feeds it into the engine. Many engine modifications to increase horsepower and efficiency are commonly used in many racing sanctioning bodies.[12] Engines are tuned on a machine called a dynamometer that is commonly known in the racing world as a DYNO. The car is driven onto the DYNO and many gauges and sensors are hooked up to the car that are controlled on an online program to test force, torque, or power. Through the testing, the car's engine maps can be changed to get the most amount of horsepower and ultimately speed out of the vehicle.
Racing driver[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Racing drivers at the highest levels are usually paid by the team, or by sponsors, and can command very substantial salaries.
Contrary to what may be popularly assumed, racing drivers as a group do not have unusually good reflexes. During countless physiological (and psychological) evaluations of professional racing drivers, the two characteristics that stand out are racers' near-obsessive need to control their surroundings (the psychological aspect), and an unusual ability to process fast-moving information (physiological). In this, researchers have noted a strong correlation between racers' psychological profiles and those of fighter pilots. In tests comparing racers to members of the general public, the greater the complexity of the information processing matrix, the greater the speed gap between racers and the public. Due partly to the performance capabilities of modern racing cars, racing drivers require a high level of fitness, focus and the ability to concentrate at high levels for long periods in an inherently difficult environment. Racing drivers mainly complain about pains in the lumbar, shoulder and neck regions.[16]
In particular, racing cars such as formula cars and sports prototypes that generate a substantial amount of downforce are able to corner at speeds that impose extremely large g-forces on drivers.[17] Formula 1 drivers routinely experience g-loadings in excess of 4.5 g.[18]
See also[edit]


Motorsport portal



Outline of auto racing
List of auto racing tracks
Motorcycle racing
Race track
Racing video game
List of auto racing governing bodies in the United States

References[edit]



^ Macmillan Dictionary
^ "Isaac Watt Boulton". www.gracesguide.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-07-27. 
^ a b Rémi Paolozzi (May 28, 2003). "The cradle of motorsport". Welcome to Who? What? Where? When? Why? on the World Wide Web. Forix, Autosport, 8W. 
^ Le Petit Journal, publishing of monday 23 july 1894
^ a b Michael L. Berger (2001). The automobile in American history and culture: a reference guide. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 278. ISBN 978-0-313-24558-9. 
^ Sammy Davis (August 17, 1967). "How Brooklands started". Autocar. Vol. 127 no. 3731. p. 43. 
^ "Stadium List :: 100 000+ Stadiums". World Stadiums. Retrieved 2013-09-02. 
^ Denis Jenkinson, Automobile Year Book Of Sports Car Racing, 1982
^ Perez, A.J. (August 30, 2007). "Le Mans series showcases prototype race cars". USA Today. Gannett Company. Retrieved August 20, 2008. 
^ Fryer, Jenna (November 8, 2007). "Addition of IndyCar champ Hornish will give Penske third Cup team". ESPN News Services. Charlotte, North Carolina: ESPN Internet Ventures. Associated Press. Retrieved February 8, 2009. 
^ "Herbert's engine thunders to 3.9 on Richter scale". NHRA.com. July 26, 2007. Retrieved August 11, 2010. 
^ a b c d e Adams, Eric, and Joe Brown. "The Perfect Racecar." Popular Science 268.4 (2006): 50-51. Academic Search Complete. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.
^ a b c Diba, Fereydoon, Ahmad Barari, and Ebrahim Esmailzadeh. "Handling And Safety Enhancement Of Race Cars Using Active Aerodynamic Systems." Vehicle System Dynamics 52.9 (2014): 1171-1190. Academic Search Complete. Web. 28 Oct. 2016.
^ Marston, Steve. "Spectacles Of Speed: Modernity, Masculinity, And Auto Racing In Kansas, 1909-1918." Kansas History 38.3 (2015): 192-207. Academic Search Complete. Web. 28 Oct. 2016.
^ a b c de Groot, S., et al. "Car Racing In A Simulator: Validation And Assessment Of Brake Pedal Stiffness." Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 20.1 (2011): 47-61. Academic Search Complete. Web. 7 Dec. 2016.
^ Koutras C, Buecking B, Jaeger M, Ruchholtz S, Heep H (2014). "Musculoskeletal injuries in auto racing: a retrospective study of 137 drivers". Phys Sportsmed. 42 (4): 80–6. doi:10.3810/psm.2014.11.2094. PMID 25419891. 
^ "Driving a Race Car Takes Strength and Stamina : These Athletes Travel in Fast Lane but Keep Fit". Los Angeles Times. Indianapolis: Tribune Publishing. Associated Press. May 19, 1985. Retrieved February 24, 2013. 
^ Norton, Charlie (May 10, 2010). "Formula One drivers feel the G-force". The Daily Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. Retrieved April 11, 2013. 



External links[edit]
 Media related to Automobile racing at Wikimedia Commons

Sanctioning bodies


Motor Sports Association (MSA UK)
American Le Mans Series (ALMS)
Indy Racing League (IRL)
World Rally Championship (WRC)
Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA)
Grand American Road Racing Association
International Hot Rod Association (IHRA)
International Motor Sports Association (IMSA)
National Auto Sport Association
National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR)
National Hot Rod Association (NHRA)
SCORE International Off-Road Racing
Sports Car Club of America (SCCA)
United States Auto Club (USAC)
Formula One (F1)
Confederation of Australian Motorsport (CAMS)







v
t
e


Classes of auto racing



Formula racing



F1
F2
F3
F4
F500
Formula 1000
Formula Atlantic
Formula Car Challenge
Formula Continental
Formula E
Formula Ford
FF1600
Formula Libre
Formula Vee
IndyCar
Super Formula
Supermodified
BOSS GP
Monoposto Racing Club





Defunct Formula racing



F3000
F5000
Formula A (SCCA)
Formula B (SCCA)
Formula C (SCCA)
FCJ
Formula Dream
Formula Holden
Formula Junior
Formula Mondial
Formula Pacific
Formula Super Vee
Australian National Formula
Grand Prix Masters
Tasman Formula





One-make formulae



CFGP
Formula Abarth
Formula Car Challenge
Formula LGB

Swift
Hyundai


Formula Maruti
Formula Masters China
Formula Mazda
Formula Renault
Formula Toyota
GP3
Indy Lights
SRF
USF2000
FIA Formula 2 Championship





Defunct one-make formulae



A1GP
ADAC Formel Masters
Auto GP
Barber Pro
FA1
Formula Alfa
Formula Asia
Formula BMW
FC Euro Series
Formula König
Formula Lightning
Formula Nissan
Formula Opel/Vauxhall
Formula Palmer Audi
Formula RUS
Formula Rolon
Formula SCCA
Grand Prix Masters
GP2
International Formula Master
Superleague Formula
World Series Formula V8 3.5





Karting



KF1
KF2
KF3
KZ1
KZ2
Superkart





Touring car racing



DTM
WTCC
BTCC
Group F
Group G
Group H
Super 2000
Diesel 2000
NGTC (TCN-1)
TCR (TCN-2)
Supercars
TC2000





Defunct touring car racing



Appendix J
BTC-T
Group 1
Group 2
Group 5
Group A
Group C (Australia)
Group E
Group N
Group N (Australia)
Group S
Class 1
Super Touring (Class 2)
Superstars
V8Star





Stock car racing



ARCA
Allison Legacy Series
AUSCAR
IMCA Sport Compact
Late model
Legends
Modifieds
NASCAR

Monster Energy NASCAR Cup
Xfinity
Truck
Pinty's
Whelen Euro Series
PEAK Mexico


Super Stock
Street Stock
Brasil
Turismo Carretera





Oval racing



BriSCA F1
BriSCA F2
Hot Rods
Superstocks
Sprint car racing
Midget car racing
Quarter Midget racing
V8 Hotstox





Rallying



Group R
Group R-GT
Super 2000
Super 1600
WRC





Defunct rallying



Group 1
Group 2
Group 4
Group A
Group B
Group N
Group S





Sports prototypes



Clubmans
DP
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 6
Group 7
Group A Sports Cars
Group C
GC
GC-21
Group CN
IMSA GTP
LMP
LMPC
S2000





Grand touring



LM GTE (GT2)
GT3
GT4
GT500
GT300
Trans-Am
Appendix K
Group D GT Cars





Defunct grand touring



Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group B
Group D Production Sports Cars
GT1 (1993–99)
GT2 (1993–99)
FIA GT1 (2000-12)
IMSA AAGT
IMSA GTO/GTS
IMSA GTU
IMSA GTX





Drag racing



Top Fuel Dragster (TF/D)
Top Alcohol Dragster (TA/D)
Top Fuel Funny Car (TF/FC)
Pro Stock (PS)
Pro Modified (Pro Mod)
Pro FWD
Super Comp/Quick Rod
Top Doorslammer





Defunct drag racing



Top Gas
Modified
Altered
Competition
Super Stock





Off-road racing



Baja Bug
Dune buggy
Rallycross
Trophy Truck
Group T4
Truggy
Side by Side (UTV)












v
t
e


Automobile endurance races



24 hours



24 Hours of Le Mans
Spa 24 Hours
24 Hours Nürburgring
Dubai 24 Hour
24 Hours of Daytona
Longest Day of Nelson
24 Hours of Zolder
24H Silverstone – European Touring Car Edition
Willhire 24 Hour
Bathurst 24 Hour
2CV 24 Hour Race
Tokachi 24 Hours
Barcelona 24 Hour Fermín Vélez Trophy





12 hours



12 Hours of Sebring
Bathurst 12 Hour
Sepang 12 Hours
12 Hours at the Point
12 Hours of Reims
Rothmans 12 hours
12 Hours of Brno





10 hours



Petit Le Mans





6 hours



LA Times GP
6 Hour Le Mans
6 Hours of Atlanta
6 Hours of Bahrain
Bathurst 6 Hour
6 Hours of Castellet
6 Hours of Circuit of the Americas
6 Hours of Donington
6 Hours of Estoril
6 Hours of Fuji
6 Hours of Imola
6 Hours of Mexico
Mid-Ohio 6 Hours
Monterey 6 Hours
Mosport 6 Hours
6 Hours of Nürburgring
6 Hours of São Paulo
6 Hours of Shanghai
6 Hours of Silverstone
6 Hours of Spa-Francorchamps
6 Hours of Vallelunga
6 Hours of Watkins Glen
6 Hours of Zhuhai





1000 miles



Mille Miglia
Mil Milhas Brasil





1000 km



1000 km Algarve
Bathurst 1000
Baja 1000
1000 km Brands Hatch
1000 km Buenos Aires
1000 km Catalunya
Fuji 1000 km
1000 km Jarama
1000 km Le Mans
1000 km Monza
1000 km Mosport
1000 km Okayama
Sepang 1000 km
1000 km Suzuka
1000 km Zeltweg
Race of a Thousand Years





Other



Carrera Panamericana
Kyalami 9 Hours
Targa Florio
25 Hours of Spa
Charge of the Headlight Brigade






Defunct races are indicated in italics







Authority control



GND: 4003988-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Auto_racing&oldid=818318260"					Categories: Auto racingHidden categories: Use mdy dates from June 2012All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2011Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011Articles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers