"The Commentator" redirects here. For the centre-Right website of the same name, see Robin Shepherd § The Commentator.


Ibn Rušd
ابن رشد
Averroes



Statue of Ibn Rushd in Córdoba, Spain



Born
14 April 1126
Córdoba, Al-Andalus, Almoravid emirate (in present-day Spain)[1][2][3]


Died
10 December 1198
(aged 72 years)
Marrakesh, Maghreb, Almohad Caliphate (in present-day Morocco)





Era
Medieval philosophy (Islamic Golden Age)


Region
Islamic philosophy


School
Averroism
Metaphysical intellectualism



Main interests

Islamic theology, Philosophy, Islamic Jurisprudence, Mathematics, Medicine, Physics, Astronomy



Notable ideas

Reconciliation of Aristotelianism with Islam




Influences


Aristotle, Prophet Muhammad, Alexander of Aphrodisias, Philoponus, Al-Farabi, Ibn Bājja, Ibn Tufail, Ibn Zuhr








Influenced


Ibn Ṭumlūs, Siger de Brabant, Boetius of Dacia, Robert Grosseteste,[4] Thomas Aquinas,[5] Maimonides,[6] Spinoza[7]












This article contains Arabic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.


Ibn Rushd (Arabic: ابن رشد‎; full name Arabic: أبو الوليد محمد ابن احمد ابن رشد‎, translit. ʾAbū l-Walīd Muḥammad Ibn ʾAḥmad Ibn Rushd; 14 April 1126 – 10 December 1198), often Latinized as Averroes (/əˈvɛroʊˌiːz/), was a medieval Andalusian polymath. He wrote on logic, Aristotelian and Islamic philosophy, Islamic theology, the Maliki school of Islamic jurisprudence, psychology, political theory and the theory of Andalusian classical music, geography, mathematics, as well as the medieval sciences of medicine, astronomy, physics, and celestial mechanics. Ibn Rushd was born in Córdoba, Al Andalus (present-day Spain), and died at Marrakesh in present-day Morocco. His body was interred in his family tomb at Córdoba.[8] The 13th-century philosophical movement in Latin Christian and Jewish tradition based on Ibn Rushd's work is called Averroism.
Ibn Rushd was a defender of Aristotelian philosophy against Ash'ari theologians led by Al-Ghazali. Although highly regarded as a legal scholar of the Maliki school of Islamic law, Ibn Rushd's philosophical ideas were considered controversial in Ash'arite Muslim circles.[9] Whereas al-Ghazali believed that any individual act of a natural phenomenon occurred only because God willed it to happen, Ibn Rushd insisted phenomena followed natural laws that God created.[10][11][12]
Ibn Rushd had a greater impact on Christian Europe, being known by the sobriquet "the Commentator" for his detailed emendations to Aristotle. Latin translations of Ibn Rushd's work led the way to the popularization of Aristotle.[13]



Contents


1 Name
2 Biography
3 Works

3.1 Commentaries on Aristotle and Plato
3.2 Medicine
3.3 Physics
3.4 Astronomy
3.5 Psychology
3.6 Jurisprudence and law


4 Philosophical ideas

4.1 The tradition of Islamic philosophy
4.2 Reconciliation of religion and philosophy
4.3 Nature of God
4.4 Eternity of the world


5 Significance
6 Legacy
7 See also
8 References

8.1 Works cited


9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Works of Averroes
10.2 Information about Averroes





Name[edit]
See also: Latinization of names
Ibn Rushd's full, transliterated Arabic name is "ʾAbū l-Walīd Muḥammad Ibn ʾAḥmad Ibn Rushd".[14][15] "Averroes" is the Medieval Latin form of "Ibn Rushd", derived from the Spanish pronunciation of the original Arabic name, wherein "Ibn" becomes "Aben" or "Aven".[16] The Latinized name is also spelled in some instances as "Averroës", "Averrhoës", or "Averroès", with the varying accents to mark that the "o" and "e" are separate vowels and not an "œ" diphthong.[17] Other forms of the name include: "Ibin-Ros-din", "Filius Rosadis", "Ibn-Rusid", "Ben-Raxid", "Ibn-Ruschod", "Den-Resched", "Aben-Rassad", "Aben-Rasd", "Aben-Rust", "Avenrosdy", "Avenryz", "Adveroys", "Benroist", "Avenroyth", and "Averroysta".[18]
Biography[edit]




Ibn Rushd was the preeminent philosopher in the history of Al-Andalus. 14th-century painting by Andrea di Bonaiuto


Ibn Rushd was born in Córdoba to a family with a long and well-respected tradition of legal and public service. His grandfather Abu Al-Walid Muhammad (d. 1126) was chief judge of Córdoba under the Almoravids. His father, Abu Al-Qasim Ahmad, held the same position until the Almoravids were replaced by the Almohads in 1146.[19]
Ibn Rushd's education followed a traditional path, beginning with studies in Hadith, linguistics, jurisprudence and scholastic theology. Throughout his life he wrote extensively on philosophy and religion, attributes of God, origin of the universe, metaphysics and psychology. It is generally believed that he was once tutored by Ibn Bajjah (Avempace). His medical education was directed under Abu Jafar ibn Harun of Trujillo in Seville.[20] Ibn Rushd began his career with the help of Ibn Tufail ("Aben Tofail" to the West), the author of Hayy ibn Yaqdhan and philosophic vizier of Almohad king Abu Yaqub Yusuf who was an amateur of philosophy and science. It was Ibn Tufail who introduced him to the court and to Ibn Zuhr ("Avenzoar" to the West), the great Muslim physician, who became Ibn Rushd's teacher and friend. Ibn Rushd's aptitude for medicine was noted by his contemporaries and can be seen in his major enduring work Kitab al-Kulyat fi al-Tibb (Generalities), influenced by the Kitab al-Taisir fi al-Mudawat wa al-Tadbir (Particularities) of Ibn Zuhr.[21] Ibn Rushd later reported how it was also Ibn Tufail that inspired him to write his famous commentaries on Aristotle:

Abu Bakr ibn Tufayl summoned me one day and told me that he had heard the Commander of the Faithful complaining about the disjointedness of Aristotle's mode of expression—or that of the translators—and the resultant obscurity of his intentions. He said that if someone took on these books who could summarize them and clarify their aims after first thoroughly understanding them himself, people would have an easier time comprehending them. "If you have the energy, " Ibn Tufayl told me, "you do it. I'm confident you can, because I know what a good mind and devoted character you have, and how dedicated you are to the art. You understand that only my great age, the cares of my office—and my commitment to another task that I think even more vital—keep me from doing it myself. "[22]

Ibn Rushd also studied the works and philosophy of Ibn Bajjah ("Avempace" to the West), another famous Islamic philosopher who greatly influenced his own Averroist thought.
However, while the thought of his mentors Ibn Tufail and Ibn Bajjah were mystic to an extent, the thought of Ibn Rushd was purely rationalist. Together, the three men are considered the greatest Andalusian philosophers.[19] Ibn Rushd devoted the next 30 years to his philosophical writings.
In 1160, Ibn Rushd was made Qadi (judge) of Seville and he served in many court appointments in Seville, Cordoba, and Morocco during his career. Sometime during the reign of Yaqub al-Mansur, Ibn Rushd's political career was abruptly ended and he faced severe criticism from the Fuqaha (Islamic jurists) of the time.[23]
A contemporary of Ibn Rushd, Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi writing in 1224, reported that there were secret and public reasons for his falling out of favor with Yaqub al-Mansour:[23]

And in his days [Yaqub al-Mansur], Abu al-Walid Ibn Rushd faced his severe ordeal and there were two causes for this; one is known and the other is secret. The secret cause, which was the major reason, is that Abu al-Walid—may God have mercy on his soul—when summarizing, commenting and expending upon Aristotle's book "History of Animals" wrote: "And I saw the Giraffe at the garden of the king of the Berbers".
And that is the same way he would mention another king of some other people or land, as it is frequently done by writers, but he omitted that those working for the service of the king should glorify him and observe the usual protocol. This was why they held a grudge against him but initially, they did not show it and in reality, Abu al-Walid wrote that inadvertently ... Then a number of his enemies in Cordoba, who were jealous of him and were competing with him both in knowledge and nobility, went to Yaqub al-Mansur with excerpts of Abu Walid's work on some old philosophers which were in his own handwriting. They took one phrase out of context that said: "and it was shown that Venus is one of the Gods" and presented it to the king who then summoned the chiefs and noblemen of Córdoba and said to Abu al-Walid in front of them "Is this your handwriting?". Abu al-Walid then denied and the king said "May God curse the one who wrote this" and ordered that Abu al-Walid be exiled and all the philosophy books to be gathered and burned ... And I saw, when I was in Fes, these books being carried on horses in great quantities and burned[23]
— Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi, "The Pleasant Book in Summarizing the History of the Maghreb", (1224)

Ibn Rushd's strictly rationalist views collided with the more orthodox views of Abu Yusuf Ya'qub al-Mansur, who therefore eventually banished Ibn Rushd in 1195 and ordered his writings burned, though he had previously appointed him as his personal physician. Ibn Rushd was not allowed to return to Marrakesh until 1197, shortly before his death in the year 1198 AD. His body was returned to Córdoba for burial.[24]
Works[edit]




Imaginary debate between Ibn Rushd and Porphyry. Monfredo de Monte Imperiali Liber de herbis, 14th century.[25]


See also: List of works by Averroes
Ibn Rushd's first writings date from his age of 31 (year 1157).[26] His works were spread over 20,000 pages covering a variety of different subjects, including early Islamic philosophy, logic in Islamic philosophy, Islamic medicine, mathematics, astronomy, Arabic grammar, Islamic theology, Sharia (Islamic law), and Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence). In particular, his most important works dealt with Islamic philosophy, medicine and Fiqh. He wrote at least 80 original works, which included 28 works on philosophy, 20 on medicine, 8 on law, 5 on theology, and 4 on grammar, in addition to his commentaries on most of Aristotle's works and his commentary on Plato's The Republic.[19]
Ibn Rushd commentaries on Aristotle were the foundation for the Aristotelian revival in the 12th and 13th centuries. Ibn Rushd wrote short commentaries on Aristotle's work in logic, physics, and psychology. Ibn Rushd long commentaries provided an in depth line by line analysis of Aristotle's "Posterior Analytics," "De Anima," "Physics," "De Caelo," and the "Metaphysics."[27]
His most important original philosophical work was The Incoherence of the Incoherence (Tahafut al-tahafut), in which he defended Aristotelian philosophy against al-Ghazali's claims in The Incoherence of the Philosophers (Tahafut al-falasifa).
In Fasl al-Maqal fi ma bayn al-Hikma wa al-Shariah min Ittisal (فصل المقال في ما بين الحكمة و الشريعة من إتصال translated as The Harmony of Religion and Philosophy, or The Decisive Treatise, Determining the Nature of the Connection between Religion and Philosophy), Ibn Rushd argues that philosophy and revelation do not contradict each other, and are essentially different means of reaching the same truth.[28][29] However, he warns against teaching philosophical methods to the general populace.
Other works include Kitab al-Kashf an Manahij al-Adilla كتاب الكشف عن مناهج الادلة .
Ibn Rushd is also a highly regarded legal scholar of the Maliki school. Perhaps his best-known work in this field is Bidāyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihāyat al-Muqtaṣid ( بداية المجتهد و نهاية المقتصد), a textbook of Maliki doctrine in a comparative framework.
Jacob Anatoli translated several of the works of Ibn Rushd from Arabic into Hebrew in the 13th century. Many of them were later translated from Hebrew into Latin by Jacob Mantino and Abraham de Balmes. Other works were translated directly from Arabic into Latin by Michael Scot. Many of his works in logic and metaphysics have been permanently lost, while others, including some of the longer Aristotelian commentaries, have only survived in Latin or Hebrew translation, not in the original Arabic. The fullest version of his works is in Latin, and forms part of the multi-volume Juntine edition of Aristotle published in Venice 1562–1574.

Commentaries on Aristotle and Plato[edit]




Commentarium magnum Averrois in Aristotelis De Anima libros, French Manuscript, third quarter of the 13th century.


Ibn Rushd wrote commentaries on most of the surviving works of Aristotle working from Arabic translations. He wrote three types of commentaries. The short commentary (jami) is generally an epitome; the middle commentary (talkhis) is a paraphrase; the long commentary (tafsir) includes the whole text with a detailed analysis of each line.[30]
Not having access to Aristotle's Politics, Ibn Rushd substituted Plato's Republic. He advances an authoritarian ideal, following Plato's paternalistic model. Absolute monarchy, led by a philosopher-king, creates a justly ordered society. This requires extensive use of coercion,[31] although persuasion is preferred and is possible if the young are properly raised.[32] Rhetoric, not logic, is the appropriate road to truth for the common man. Demonstrative knowledge via philosophy and logic requires special study. Rhetoric aids religion in reaching the masses.[33]
Following Plato, Ibn Rushd accepts the principle of women's equality. They should be educated and allowed to serve in the military; the best among them might be tomorrow's philosophers or rulers.[34][35] He also accepts Plato's illiberal measures such as the censorship of literature. He uses examples from Arab history to illustrate just and degenerate political orders.[36]
Medicine[edit]




Title page from Colliget


Ibn Rushd wrote a medical encyclopedia called Kulliyat ("Generalities", i. e. general medicine), known in its Latin translation as Colliget.[37] He also made a compilation of the works of Galen, and wrote a commentary on The Canon of Medicine (Al-Qanun fi 't-Tibb) of Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (980–1037).
Physics[edit]
Ibn Rush also authored three books on physics namely: Short Commentary on the Physics, Middle Commentary on the Physics and Long Commentary on the Physics. Ibn Rushd defined and measured force as "the rate at which work is done in changing the kinetic condition of a material body" and correctly argued "that the effect and measure of force is change in the kinetic condition of a materially resistant mass". He took a particular and keen interest in the understanding of "motor force".[38][39]
Ibn Rushd also developed the notion that bodies have a (non-gravitational) inherent resistance to motion into physics. This idea in particular was adopted by Thomas Aquinas and subsequently by Johannes Kepler, who referred to this fact as "Inertia".[40][41]
In optics, Ibn Rushd followed Alhazen's incorrect explanation that a rainbow is due to reflection, not refraction.[42]
Astronomy[edit]
Regarding his studies in astronomy, Ibn Rushd argued for a strictly concentric model of the universe, and explained sunspots and scientific reasoning regarding the occasional opaque colors of the moon. He also worked on the description of the spheres, and movement of the spheres.[43]
Psychology[edit]
Ibn Rushd also made some studies regarding Active intellect and Passive intellect, both of the following were formerly regarded subjects of Psychology.[9][44][45]
Jurisprudence and law[edit]
Ibn Rushd is also a highly regarded legal scholar of the Maliki school. Perhaps his best-known work in this field is "Bidāyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihāyat al-Muqtaṣid, "a textbook of Maliki doctrine in a comparative framework, which is rendered in English as The Distinguished Jurist's Primer.[46] He is also the author of "al-Bayān wa'l-Taḥṣīl, wa'l-Sharḥ wa'l-Tawjīh wa'l-Ta`līl fi Masā'il al-Mustakhraja, "a long and detailed commentary based on the "Mustakhraja" of Muḥammad al-`Utbī al-Qurtubī.
Philosophical ideas[edit]
Main article: Averroism
The tradition of Islamic philosophy[edit]
Ibn Rushd furthered the tradition of Greek philosophy in the Islamic world (falsafa). His commentaries removed the neo-Platonic bias of his predecessors.[2] Criticizing al-Farabi's attempt to merge Plato and Aristotle's ideas, Ibn Rushd argued that Aristotle's philosophy diverged in significant ways from Plato's.[47] Ibn Rushd rejected Avicenna's Neoplatonism[48] which was partly based on the works of neo-Platonic philosophers, Plotinus and Proclus, which were mistakenly attributed to Aristotle.[49]
In metaphysics, or more exactly ontology, Ibn Rushd rejects the view advanced by Avicenna that existence is merely accidental. Avicenna holds that "essence is ontologically prior to existence". The accidental are attributes which are not essential, but rather are additional contingent characteristics. Ibn Rushd, following Aristotle, holds that individual existing substances are primary. One may separate them mentally; however, ontologically speaking, existence and essence are one.[50][51][52] According to Fakhry,[53] this represents a change from Plato's theory of Ideas, where ideas precede particulars, to Aristotle's theory where particulars come first and the essence is "arrived at by a process of abstraction."
Reconciliation of religion and philosophy[edit]
His most important original philosophical work was The Incoherence of the Incoherence (Tahafut al-tahafut), in which he defended Aristotelian philosophy against al-Ghazali's (AD 1058–1111) claims in The Incoherence of the Philosophers (Tahafut al-falasifa).[54] Al-Ghazali had argued that Aristotelianism, especially as presented in the writings of Avicenna, was self-contradictory and an affront to the teachings of Islam. In particular he argued that three philosophical points (viz. a pre-eternal world, God only knowing universal—that is to say, Platonic—characteristics of particulars, and a spiritual rather than physical resurrection) constituted not just heresy, but rather disbelief in Islam itself.[55] Ibn Rushd's rebuttal was two-pronged: First, he contended that al-Ghazali's arguments were mistaken, arguing that the Qur'an actually commanded devout Muslims to study of philosophy.[20] Second, Ibn Rushd contended that he actually agreed with al-Ghazali in regards to a number of the latter's criticisms of Avicenna; Ibn Rushd argued that the system of Avicenna was a distortion of genuine Aristotelianism, and as a result, al-Ghazali was effectively aiming at the wrong target. Ibn Rushd thus argues that his own system is, as Roger Arnaldez notes, "a reconstruction of the true philosophy, that of Aristotle himself, against the false, that of the neo-Platonic falāsifa, which distorted the thinking of Aristotle".[14]
Whereas al-Ghazali believed that phenomenon such as cotton burning when coming into contact with fire happened each and every time only because God willed it to happen: "all earthly occurrences depend on heavenly occurrences."[56] Ibn Rushd, by contrast insisted while God created the natural law, humans "could more usefully say that fire cause cotton to burn—because creation had a pattern that they could discern."[10][11][12]
In Fasl al-Maqal (Decisive Treatise), Ibn Rushd argues for the legality of philosophical investigation under Islamic law, and that there is no inherent contradiction between philosophy and religion[57]
In Kitab al-Kashf, which argued against the proofs of Islam advanced by the Ash'arite school and discussed what proofs, on the popular level, should be used instead[citation needed].
Nature of God[edit]
In the treatise Al-Kashf 'an Manahij al-Adilla fi ‘Aqaid al-Milla (The Exposition of the Methods of Proof Concerning the Beliefs of the Community), Ibn Rushd examined and critiqued the doctrines of four sects of Islam: the Asharites, Mutazilites, the Sufis and the those whom he deems "literalists." While his work focuses on many topics, part of it examines the various sects' proofs for the existence of God, many of which Ibn Rushd finds objectionable. After considering and critiquing the various argument, he argues that there are only two arguments that are worth upholding: the arguments from "providence" and "invention". The first argument considers the fact that the world and the universe seem fine-tuned to support human life. According to Ibn Rushd, given the fact that the universe seems to have been made just for humans, this suggests a creator who set the parameters of the universe in the first place. The second argument, also known as the teleological argument, contends that everything in the world appears as if it were invented. This leads to the conclusion that there is a designer behind creation.[20]
In his philosophical treatises, Ibn Rushd affirms the doctrine of divine unity. Ibn Rushd also argues that God has seven divine attributes: knowledge, life, power, will, hearing, vision, and speech. In regards to the first, the philosopher argued that "God, being the cause of the universe, has knowledge based on being its cause; while humans have knowledge based on the effects of such causes."[20] Thus human knowledge and divine knowledge, while related, are different attributes. Given that life necessarily results from the natural world, and God is the creator of said world, Ibn Rushd thus contends that life is by necessity the second attribute of the divine. The attributes of will and power are essential aspects of what it means to be "God", and given that God exists (per the arguments given in the above paragraph), Ibn Rushd logically concludes that he must also have these attributes by definition. As to speech, Ibn Rushd argues that knowledge and power inevitably give rise to speech, and given that God has the first two, he thus has the third. Finally, in regards to vision and speech, Ibn Rushd points out that because God created the world, he necessarily knows every part of it, just like an artist that understands their work intimately. Given that two elements of the world are the visual and the auditory, God must necessarily possess the vision and speech.[20]
Eternity of the world[edit]
Ibn Rushd looked to Aristotle as to whether the world was eternal. In his Physics, the Greek philosopher argues that everything that comes into existence does so from a substratum. Therefore, if the underlying matter of the universe came into existence, it would come into existence from a substratum. But the nature of matter is precisely to be the substratum from which other things arise. Consequently, the underlying matter of the universe could have come into evidence only from an already existing matter exactly like itself; to assume that the underlying matter of the universe came into existence would require assuming that an underlying matter already existed. As this assumption is self-contradictory, Aristotle argued, matter must be eternal.[58] Because in his eyes, "Aristotle demonstrated the eternity of matter", Ibn Rushd "abandon[ed] belief in the creation out of nothing."[14]
This is not to say that Ibn Rushd denied the Creation; rather, he proposed an eternal creation. Oliver Leaman explains Ibn Rushd's argument as such:

We [as humans] can decide to do something, we can wait for a certain time before acting, we can wonder about our future actions; but such possibilities cannot arise for [an eternal, omnipotent, omnipresent] God. In his case there is no gap between desire and action, nothing stands in the way of his activity; and yet we are told by al-Ghazali that God suddenly created the world. What differentiates one time from another for God? What could motivate him to create the world at one particular time as opposed to another? For us, different times are different because they have different qualitative aspects, yet before the creation of the world, when there was nothing around to characterize one time as distinct from another, there is nothing to characterize one time over another as the time for creation to take place.[59]

Significance[edit]




Ibn Rushd, detail of the fresco The School of Athens by Raphael.


Ibn Rushd is most famous for his commentaries of Aristotle's works, which had been mostly forgotten in the West. Before 1150, only a few of Aristotle's works existed in translation in Latin Europe, although the tradition of great philosophers and poets of antiquity continued to be studied and copied in the Greek Byzantium. It was to some degree through the Latin translations of Ibn Rushd's work beginning in the thirteenth century, that the legacy of Aristotle was recovered in the Latin West.
Ibn Rushd's work on Aristotle spans almost three decades, and he wrote commentaries on almost all of Aristotle's work except for Aristotle's Politics, to which he did not have access. Hebrew translations of his work also had a lasting impact on Jewish philosophy. Moses Maimonides, Samuel Ben Tibbon, Juda Ben Solomon Choen, and Shem Tob Ben Joseph Falaquera were Jewish philosophers influenced by Ibn Rushd.[60] In regards to Muslim philosophy, in his work Fasl al-Maqāl (often translated into English as The Decisive Treatise), he stresses the importance of analytical thinking as a prerequisite to interpret the Qur'an. However, because his death coincided with a change in the culture of Al-Andalus, Ibn Rushd had no major influence on Islamic philosophic thought until modern times.[61] Those Islamic philosophers who did comment on his work often condemned his writings as unorthodox.[54]
In the Christian West, Ibn Rushd's ideas were assimilated by Siger of Brabant and Thomas Aquinas and others (especially those from the University of Paris) who situated themselves in the Christian scholastic tradition, which valued Aristotelian logic. With that said, famous scholastics such as Aquinas did not refer to Ibn Rushd by name, instead choosing to refer to him simply as "The Commentator" (with Aristotle in turn being given the sobriquet "The Philosopher"). Ultimately, Ibn Rushd received a mixed reception from Christian Europe: while he was regarded fairly highly for his detailed commentaries on the works of Aristotle, his person philosophy—which came to be known as Averroism—was criticized for not being compatible with Christian doctrine. The Catholic Encyclopedia, for instance, notes:

His doctrines had a varying fortune in Christian schools. At first they secured a certain amount of adherence, then, gradually, their incompatibility with Christian teaching became apparent, and finally, owing to the revolt of the Renaissance from everything Scholastic, they secured once more a temporary hearing. His commentaries, however, had immediate and lasting success. St. Thomas Aquinas used the "Grand Commentary" of Averroes as his model, being, apparently, the first Scholastic to adopt that style of exposition ... he always spoke of the Arabian commentator as one who had [in his view] perverted the Peripatetic tradition, but whose words, nevertheless, should be treated with respect and consideration.[62]

Indeed, Aquinas considered Ibn Rushd to be the premiere commentator on Aristotle, but he disagreed with his religious and theological arguments.[62][63] In regards to this point, Norman Kretzmann argues that, through the use of the title "The Commentator", Aquinas was able to convey Ibn Rushd's understanding of Aristotle without having to accept or condone Ibn Rushd's personal understanding of philosophy.[63]
Legacy[edit]

Reflecting the deference that some medieval European scholars paid to him, Ibn Rushd is named by Dante in The Divine Comedy along with the thinkers and creative minds of ancient Greece and Rome whose spirits dwell in "the place that favor owes to fame" in Limbo.
Ibn Rushd appears in a short story by Jorge Luis Borges, entitled "Averroes's Search", in which he is portrayed trying to find the meanings of the words tragedy and comedy. He is briefly mentioned in the novel Ulysses by James Joyce alongside Maimonides. He appears to be waiting outside the walls of the ancient city of Cordoba in Alamgir Hashmi's poem "In Cordoba".
The claim that Ibn Rushd deserves equal respect with Maimonides got the fictional Balthazar Abrabanel banished from Amsterdam by the Amsterdam rabbinate in Eric Flint's novel 1634.
Ibn Rushd is the title of a play called The Gladius and The Rose, written by Tunisian writer Mohamed Ghozzi, and which took first prize in the theater festival in Charjah in 1999.[citation needed]
In his memoir, the British Indian novelist Salman Rushdie recalls that his father adopted the family name "Rushdie" in honour of Ibn Rushd, who also appears as a character in Rushdie's novel, "Two Years Eight Months and Twenty-Eight Nights".
The asteroid 8318 Averroes was named in his honor.[64]
The plant genus Averrhoa was named after him.
A lunar crater, ibn Rushd, was also named in his honor
The Muslim pop musician Kareem Salama composed and performed a song in 2007 titled "Aristotle and Averroes".
Ibn Rushd is the subject of the film Al Massir (Destiny) by Youssef Chahine.
The Ibn Rushd Prize for Freedom of Thought, awarded since 1999, is named after him.

See also[edit]

Islamic Golden Age
Kalam cosmological argument

References[edit]


^ Liz Sonneborn: Averroes (Ibn Rushd)): Muslim scholar, philosopher, and physician of the twelfth century, The Rosen Publishing Group, 2005 (ISBN 1404205144, ISBN 978-1-4042-0514-7) p.31 [1]
^ a b (Leaman 2002, p. 27)
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 1)
^ Charles Edwin Butterworth, Blake Andrée Kessel (eds.), The Introduction of Arabic Philosophy Into Europe, BRILL, 1994, p. 55.
^ A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014). Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy. Oneworld Publications. p. 12. ISBN 978-1780744209. Thomas Aquinas admitted relying heavily on Averroes to understand Aristotle. 
^ "H-Net Reviews". H-net.org. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ "Spinoza on Philosophy and Religion: The Averroistic Sources" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-12-03. 
^ Duignan, Brian (2010). Medieval Philosophy: From 500 to 1500 Ce. The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 102. ISBN 1615302441. Retrieved November 7, 2012. 
^ a b "Averroës (Ibn Rushd) > By Individual Philosopher > Philosophy". Philosophybasics.com. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ a b Kadri, Sadakat (2012). Heaven on Earth: A Journey Through Shari'a Law from the Deserts of Ancient Arabia .. macmillan. pp. 118–9. ISBN 9780099523277. 
^ a b For al-Ghazali's argument see The Incoherence of the Philosophers. Translated by Michael E. Marmura. 2nd ed, Provo Utah, 2000, pp.116-7.
^ a b For Ibn Rushd's response, see Khalid, Muhammad A. ed. Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings, Cambridge UK, 2005, p.162
^ Sonneborn, Liz (2006). Averroes (Ibn Rushd): Muslim Scholar, Philosopher, and Physician of the Twelfth Century. The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 89. ISBN 1404205144. Retrieved November 3, 2012. 
^ a b c Arnaldez, Roger (2012). "Ibn Rus̲h̲d". In Bearman, P.; Bianquis, T.; Bosworth, C. E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W. P. Encyclopaedia of Islam (2 ed.). Brill Publishers. Retrieved June 21, 2017 – via BrillOnline Reference Works. 
^ Rosenthal, Erwin I.J. (April 14, 2016). "Averroes". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved June 21, 2017. 
^ Renan, Ernest (1882). Averroès et l'Averroïsme: Essai Historique (in French). Calmann-Lévy. p. 6. Retrieved June 21, 2017. Le nom latin d' Averroès s'est formé d'Ibn-Roschd par l'effet de la prononciation espagnole, où Ibn devient Aben ou Aven. 
^ Robert Irwin (2006). Dangerous Knowledge: Orientalism and its Discontents. The Overlook Press. ISBN 978-1-58567-835-8.
^ Renan, Ernest (1882). Averroès et l'Averroïsme: Essai Historique (in French). Calmann-Lévy. p. 6. Retrieved June 21, 2017. Peu de noms ont subi des transcriptions aussi variées : Ibin-Rosdin, Filius Rosadis, Ibn Rusid, Ben-Raxid, Ibn Ruschod, Ben-Resched, Aben Rassad, Aben-Rois, Aben-Rasd. Aben-Rust, Avenrosd, Avenryz, Adveroys, Benroist, Avenroyth, Averroysta, etc. 
^ a b c Ahmad, Jamil (September 1994), "Averroes", Monthly Renaissance, 4 (9), retrieved 2008-10-14 
^ a b c d e H. Chad Hillier (2006). Averroes (Averroes) (1126–1198 CE), Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
^ Bynum, WF & Bynum, Helen (2006), Dictionary of Medical Biography, Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-32877-3
^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (1996), History of Islamic Philosophy, p. 314, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-13159-6.
^ a b c Abdelwahid al-Marrakushi, al-Mojib fi Talkhis Akhbar al-Maghrib [The Pleasant Book in Summarizing the History of the Maghreb], pp. 150–151 (1224), King Saud University
^ Menocal, Maria Rosa (29 November 2009). The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews, and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain. Little, Brown. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-316-09279-1. 
^ "Inventions et decouvertes au Moyen-Age", Samuel Sadaune, p.112
^ Kenny, Joseph. "Chronology of the works of Ibn-Rushd". Archived from the original on August 3, 2002. Retrieved April 18, 2014. 
^ Richard C. Taylor (2005). Richard C. Taylor; Peter Adamson, eds. The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. p. 181. ISBN 978-0521520690. 
^ Hillier, H. Chad. "Ibn Rushd (Averroes)". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved January 3, 2017. 
^ Belo, Catarina (December 1, 2016). "Averroes (d. 1198), The Decisive Treatise". doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199917389.013.37. Retrieved January 3, 2017. 
^ McGinnis, Jon, ed. (2007). Classical Arabic Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources. Hackett Pub Co Inc. p. 295. ISBN 978-0-87220-871-1. 
^ Black, Antony (2011). The History of Islamic Political Thought (2nd ed.). Edinburgh University Press. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-7486-3987-8. 
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 106)
^ Robert Pasnau (Nov–Dec 2011). "The Islamic Scholar Who Gave Us Modern Philosophy". Humanities. 32 (6). 
^ (Averroes 2005, p. xix)
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 110)
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 114)
^ "ملخص لأعمال ابن زهر وابن رشد الطبية". 
^ http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/acprof: oso/9780199567737.001.0001/acprof-9780199567737
^ IBN RUSHD: AVERROES PB - Urvoy. 1991-04-25. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ Rushdī Rāshid; Régis Morelon. Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ Abdus Salam; H. R. Dalafi; Mohamed Hassan. Renaissance of Sciences in Islamic Countries. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ Hüseyin Gazi Topdemir (2007). "Kamal Al-Din Al-Farisi's Explanation of the Rainbow" (PDF). Humanity & Social Sciences Journal. 2 (1): 75–85 [p. 77]. 
^ "Ibn Rushd [Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy]". Iep.utm.edu. 2010-01-05. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ The Legacy of Muslim Spain. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ Ibn Rushd's Metaphysics: A Translation with Introduction of Ibn Rushd's ... – Averročs. 1986-12-31. Retrieved 2012-10-13. 
^ Nyazee, The Distinguished Jurist's Primer, 2 vols. (Reading: Garnet Publishing 1994 & 1996)
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 6)
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 7)
^ Popkin, Richard H., ed. (1999). The Columbia History of Western Philosophy. MJF Books. pp. 184–185. . The works in question were the Liber de Causis and The Theology of Aristotle.
^ Hyman, Arthur, ed. (2010). Philosophy in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Islamic, and Jewish Traditions (3rd ed.). Hackett Publishing Co. p. 285. ISBN 978-1-60384-208-2. 
^ (Fakhry 2001, pp. 8–9)
^ (Leaman 2002, p. 35)
^ (Fakhry 2001, pp. 8)
^ a b Esposito, John L. (ed.). "Ibn Rushd". The Islamic World: Past and Present. Oxford University Press. Retrieved April 8, 2017 – via Oxford Islamic Studies Online. 
^ Leaman, Oliver (2002). An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-521-79757-3. 
^ Averroes. Ibn Rushd al-Qurtubi Averroes' Tahafut al-tahafut E-text Edition (The Incoherence of the Incoherence). 1. Translated by van den Bergh, Simon. Trustees of the "E. J. W. Gibb Memorial". Retrieved September 15, 2015. 
^ Sarrió, Diego R. (2015). "The Philosopher as the Heir of the Prophets: Averroes's Islamic Rationalism". Al-Qanṭara. 36 (1): 45–68. doi:10.3989/alqantara.2015.002. ISSN 1988-2955.  p.48
^ Aristotle, Physics I, 7.
^ Leaman, Oliver (1998). "Ibn Rushd, Abu'l Walid Muhammad (1126-98)". In Craig, Edward. Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Routledge. Retrieved June 21, 2017 – via Islamic Philosophy Online. 
^ (Fakhry 2001, p. 132)
^ (Leaman 2002, p. 28)
^ a b Turner, William (1907). "Averroes". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved April 8, 2017. 
^ a b Kretzmann, Norman (1993). The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas. Cambridge University Press. p. 60. ISBN 9780521437691. 
^ Ana Ruiz, Vibrant Andalusia: The Spice of Life in Southern Spain, p. 42.


Works cited[edit]

Averroes (2005), Averroes On Plato's Republic, translated by Ralph Lerner, Cornell University Press, ISBN 0-8014-8975-X 
Fakhry, Majid (2001), Averroes (Ibn Rushd) His Life, Works and Influence, Oneworld Publications, ISBN 1-85168-269-4 
Leaman, Olivier (2002), An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79757-3 

Further reading[edit]

Baffioni, Carmela (2004), Averroes and the Aristotelian Heritage, Guida Editori, ISBN 88-7188-862-6 
Campanini, Massimo (2007), Averroè, Bologna: Il Mulino 
Glasner, Ruth (2009), Averroes' Physics: A Turning Point in Medieval Natural Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press 
Kogan, Barry S. (1985), Averroes and the Metaphysics of Causation, SUNY Press, ISBN 0-88706-063-3 
Kupka, Thomas (2011), "Averroes als Rechtsgelehrter" [Averroes as a Legal Scholar] (PDF), Rechtsgeschichte (18): 214–216 
Leaman, Olivier (1998), Averroes and his philosophy, Routledge, ISBN 0-7007-0675-5 
Sorabji, Richard (1988), Matter, Space and Motion, Duckworth 
Schmidt-Biggemann, Wilhelm (2010), "Sketch of a Cosmic Theory of the Soul from Aristotle to Averroes", in Siegfried Zielinski and Eckhard Fürlus in cooperation with Daniel Irrgang and Franziska Latell, Variantology 4. On Deep Time Relations of Arts, Sciences and Technologies In the Arabic-Islamic World and Beyond, Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther König, pp. 19–42, archived from the original on 2011-07-16 CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Averroes (category)






Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Averroes





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Averroes


Works of Averroes[edit]

DARE, the Digital Averroes Research Environment, an ongoing effort to collect digital images of all Averroes manuscripts and full texts of all three language-traditions.
Averroes, Islamic Philosophy Online (links to works by and about Averroes in several languages)
The Philosophy and Theology of Averroes: Tractata translated from the Arabic, trans. Mohammad Jamil-ur-Rehman, 1921
The Incoherence of the Incoherence translation by Simon van den Bergh. [N. B. : This also contains a translation of most of the tahafut as the refutations are mostly commentary of al-Ghazali statements that were quoted verbatim.] There is also an Italian translation by Massimo Campanini, Averroè, L'incoerenza dell'incoerenza dei filosofi, Turin, Utet, 1997.
SIEPM Virtual Library, including scanned copies (PDF) of the Editio Juntina of Averroes' works in Latin (Venice 1550–1562)

Information about Averroes[edit]

Forcada, Miquel (2007). "Ibn Rushd: Abū al‐Walīd Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad ibn Rushd al‐Ḥafīd". In Thomas Hockey; et al. The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers. New York: Springer. pp. 564–5. ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0.  (PDF version)
Iskandar, Albert Z. (2008) [1970-80]. "Ibn Rushd, Abū'L-Walīd Muḥammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muḥammad". Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography. Encyclopedia.com. 
Fouad Ben Ahmed. "Ibn Rušd: Knowledge, pleasures and analogy", in: Philosophia: E-Journal of Philosophy and Culture, 4/2013. ISSN 1314-5606

Averroes on In Our Time at the BBC.
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Averroes". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Averroes". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
DARE Bibliography, a comprehensive overview of the extant bibliography
Averroes Database, including a full bibliography of his works
"Averroes", BBC Radio 4 discussion, 5 October 2006, "In Our Time" programme.





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Medieval philosophers



Islamic




Early



Al-Jahiz
Alkindus
Ibn al-Rawandi
Al-Razi (Rhazes)
Al-Farabi (Alpharabius)
Ibn Masarra
Al Amiri
Ebn Meskavayh
Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
Abu Rayhan Biruni
Brethren of Purity





High



Avicenna
Ibn Hazm
Al-Ghazali (Algazel)
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Ibn Bajjah (Avempace)
Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani
Ibn Tufail
Averroes





Late



Ibn Sab'in
Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi
Fakhr ad-Din ar-Razi
Rashid al-Din
Ibn Arabi
Zachariah Kazwin
Abd-el-latif
Athīr al-Dīn al-Abharī
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi
Ibn al-Nafis
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn Taymiyyah
Ibn Khaldun








Jewish




Medieval



Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
Saadia Gaon
Solomon ibn Gabirol
Judah Halevi
Abraham ibn Daud
Maimonides
Nachmanides
Gersonides
Hasdai Crescas
Joseph Albo








Christian




Early



Church Fathers
Augustine of Hippo
Boethius
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite
Isidore of Seville
Johannes Scotus Eriugena
Alcuin





11–12th
century



Scholasticism
Anselm of Canterbury
Peter Abelard
Anselm of Laon
Hugh of Saint Victor
Richard of Saint Victor
Roscelin
Peter Lombard
Alexander of Hales
Bernard of Chartres
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Gilbert de la Porrée
Alain de Lille





13–14th
century



Robert Grosseteste
Albertus Magnus
Bonaventure
Thomas Aquinas
Siger of Brabant
Boetius of Dacia
Henry of Ghent
Roger Bacon
John Peckham
Ramon Llull
Petrus Aureolus
Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt
Durandus
Giles of Rome
Godfrey of Fontaines
Duns Scotus
William of Ockham





Late



Jean Buridan
Nicole Oresme
Albert of Saxony
Francesc Eiximenis
Vincent Ferrer
Paul of Venice
Lambertus de Monte
John Hennon









See also Renaissance philosophy










v
t
e


Philosophy of science







Concepts



Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
A priori and a posteriori
Causality
Commensurability
Consilience
Construct
Creative synthesis
Demarcation problem
Empirical evidence
Explanatory power
Fact
Falsifiability
Feminist method
Ignoramus et ignorabimus
Inductive reasoning
Intertheoretic reduction
Inquiry
Nature
Objectivity
Observation
Paradigm
Problem of induction
Scientific law
Scientific method
Scientific revolution
Scientific theory
Testability
Theory choice
Theory-ladenness
Underdetermination
Unity of science





Metatheory
of science



Coherentism
Confirmation holism
Constructive empiricism
Constructive realism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Conventionalism
Deductive-nomological model
Hypothetico-deductive model
Inductionism
Epistemological anarchism
Evolutionism
Fallibilism
Foundationalism
Instrumentalism
Pragmatism
Model-dependent realism
Naturalism
Physicalism
Positivism / reductionism / determinism
Rationalism / empiricism
Received view / semantic view of theories
Scientific realism / anti-realism
Scientific essentialism
Scientific formalism
Scientific skepticism
Scientism
Structuralism
Uniformitarianism
Vitalism





Philosophy of



Physics

thermal and statistical
Motion


Chemistry
Biology
Environment
Geography
Social science
Technology

Engineering
Artificial intelligence
Computer science


Information
Mind
Psychiatry
Psychology
Perception
Space and time





Related topics



Alchemy
Criticism of science
Epistemology
Faith and rationality
History and philosophy of science
History of science
History of evolutionary thought
Logic
Metaphysics
Pseudoscience
Relationship between religion and science
Rhetoric of science
Sociology of scientific knowledge
Sociology of scientific ignorance













Philosophers of science by era







Ancient



Plato
Aristotle
Stoicism
Epicureans





Medieval



Averroes
Avicenna
Roger Bacon
William of Ockham
Hugh of Saint Victor
Dominicus Gundissalinus
Robert Kilwardby





Early modern



Francis Bacon
Thomas Hobbes
René Descartes
Galileo Galilei
Pierre Gassendi
Isaac Newton
David Hume





Classical modern



Immanuel Kant
Friedrich Schelling
William Whewell
Auguste Comte
John Stuart Mill
Herbert Spencer
Wilhelm Wundt
Charles Sanders Peirce
Wilhelm Windelband
Henri Poincaré
Pierre Duhem
Rudolf Steiner
Karl Pearson





Late modern



Alfred North Whitehead
Bertrand Russell
Albert Einstein
Otto Neurath
C. D. Broad
Michael Polanyi
Hans Reichenbach
Rudolf Carnap
Karl Popper
Carl Gustav Hempel
W. V. O. Quine
Thomas Kuhn
Imre Lakatos
Paul Feyerabend
Jürgen Habermas
Ian Hacking
Bas van Fraassen
Larry Laudan
Daniel Dennett














Portal
Category












v
t
e


Philosophy of language



Philosophers



Plato (Cratylus)
Gorgias
Confucius
Xunzi
Aristotle
Stoics
Pyrrhonists
Scholasticism
Ibn Rushd
Ibn Khaldun
Thomas Hobbes
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
Johann Herder
Ludwig Noiré
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Fritz Mauthner
Paul Ricœur
Ferdinand de Saussure
Gottlob Frege
Franz Boas
Paul Tillich
Edward Sapir
Leonard Bloomfield
Zhuangzi
Henri Bergson
Lev Vygotsky
Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophical Investigations
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus


Bertrand Russell
Rudolf Carnap
Jacques Derrida

Of Grammatology
Limited Inc


Benjamin Lee Whorf
Gustav Bergmann
J. L. Austin
Noam Chomsky
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Saul Kripke
A. J. Ayer
G. E. M. Anscombe
Jaakko Hintikka
Michael Dummett
Donald Davidson
Roger Gibson
Paul Grice
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Hilary Putnam
David Lewis
John Searle
Joxe Azurmendi
Scott Soames
Stephen Yablo
John Hawthorne
Stephen Neale
Paul Watzlawick





Theories



Causal theory of reference
Contrast theory of meaning
Contrastivism
Conventionalism
Cratylism
Deconstruction
Descriptivist theory of names
Direct reference theory
Dramatism
Expressivism
Linguistic determinism
Logical atomism
Logical positivism
Mediated reference theory
Nominalism
Non-cognitivism
Phallogocentrism
Quietism
Relevance theory
Semantic externalism
Semantic holism
Structuralism
Supposition theory
Symbiosism
Theological noncognitivism
Theory of descriptions
Verification theory





Concepts



Ambiguity
Linguistic relativity
Meaning
Language
Truth-bearer
Proposition
Use–mention distinction
Concept
Categories
Set
Class
Intension
Logical form
Metalanguage
Mental representation
Principle of compositionality
Property
Sign
Sense and reference
Speech act
Symbol
Entity
Sentence
Statement
more...





Related articles



Analytic philosophy
Philosophy of information
Philosophical logic
Linguistics
Pragmatics
Rhetoric
Semantics
Formal semantics
Semiotics








Category
Task Force
Discussion












v
t
e


Philosophy of religion



Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto





Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover





God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca








Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental





Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot








Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...





Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism





Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy






Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides





Enlightenment



Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder





1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir





1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W. K. Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal





1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew





1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss








Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Medicine in the medieval Islamic world



Physicians




7th century



Al-Harith ibn Kalada and his son
Abu Hafsa Yazid
Bukhtishu
Masarjawaih
Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi
Rufaida Al-Aslamia
Ibn Uthal





8th century



Bukhtishu family
Ja'far al-Sadiq





9th century



Ali al-Ridha
Albubather
Bukhtishu family
Jabril ibn Bukhtishu
Jābir ibn Hayyān
Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his son
Yahya ibn Sarafyun
Al-Kindi
Masawaiyh
Shapur ibn Sahl
Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari
Al-Ruhawi
Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu
Salmawaih ibn Bunan





10th century



Qusta ibn Luqa
Abu ul-Ala Shirazi
Abul Hasan al-Tabari
Al-Natili
Qumri
Abu Zayd al-Balkhi
Isaac Israeli ben Solomon
'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi
Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi
Muvaffak
Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi
Ibn Juljul
Al-Tamimi, the physician
Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi
Ibn al-Jazzar
Al-Kaŝkarī
Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath
Ibn al-Batriq
Ibrahim ibn Baks
Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i
Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari





11th century



Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani
Ibn al-Haytham
Al-Biruni
Ali ibn Ridwan
Avicenna
Ephraim ibn al-Za'faran
Ibn al-Wafid
Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu
Ibn Butlan
Ibn al-Kattani
Ibn Jazla
Masawaih al-Mardini
Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi
Ibn Al-Thahabi
Ibn Abi Sadiq
Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal
Ibn Hindu





12th century



Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar
Ahmad ibn Farrokh
Ibn Hubal
Zayn al-Din Gorgani
Maimonides
Serapion the Younger
Ibn Zuhr
Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili
Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali
Averroes
Ibn Tufail
Al-Ghafiqi
Ibn Abi al-Hakam
Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī
Al-Samawal al-Maghribi
Ibn al-Tilmīdh
Ibn Jumay‘





13th century



Sa'ad al-Dawla
Al-Shahrazuri
Rashidun al-Suri
Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat
Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon
Da'ud Abu al-Fadl
Al-Dakhwar
Ibn Abi Usaibia
Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta
Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi (medieval writer)
Ibn al-Nafis
Zakariya al-Qazwini
Najib ad-Din-e-Samarqandi
Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi
Ibn al-Quff





14th century



Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli
Al-Nagawri
Aqsara'i
Zayn-e-Attar
Mansur ibn Ilyas
Jaghmini
Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi
Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi
Nakhshabi
Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni
Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi
Ibn al-Khatib
Rashid-al-Din Hamadani





15th century



Abu Sa'id al-Afif
Muhammad Ali Astarabadi
Husayni Isfahani
Burhan-ud-din Kermani
Şerafeddin Sabuncuoğlu
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi
Nurbakhshi
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb





16th century



Hakim-e-Gilani
Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani
Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf
Dawud al-Antaki
Sultan Ali Khorasani








Concepts



Psychology
Ophthalmology





Works



Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah
The Canon of Medicine
Anatomy Charts of the Arabs
The Book of Healing
Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye
De Gradibus
Al-Tasrif
Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi
Adab al-Tabib
Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya
Al-Hawi





Centers



Bimaristan
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Al-'Adudi





Influences



Ancient Greek medicine





Influenced



Medical Renaissance
Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences












v
t
e


Muslim scholars of the Maliki School






by century (AH
CE)





2nd/8th



Malik ibn Anas (founder of the school)
Ibn al-Qasim
Ibn Wahb
Ibn Bashir
Ali ibn Ziyad








3rd/9th



Ashhab
Ibn Nafi'
Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
Asad ibn al-Furat
Ibn al-Majishun
Ibn Nafi' az-Zubayri
Ibn Maslama al-Makhzumi
Mutarrif
Ibn Maslama al-Qa'nabi
Yahya al-Laithi
Al-Asbagh
Ibn Habib
Sahnun
Al-'Utbi
Ibn Sahnun
Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Hakam
Ibn al-Mawwaz
Qadi Isma'il





4th/10th



Abu Imran al-Fasi
Ibn al-Jallab
Ibn Sha'ban
Ibn Shiblun
Al-Abhari
Ibn Abi Zayd
Sidi Mahrez





5th/11th



Al-Baqillani
Ibn 'Abd al-Barr
Al-Baji
Al-Lakhmi
Qadi 'Abd al-Wahhab
Al-Lamti





6th/12th



Ibn Rushd al-Jadd
At-Turtushi
Sanad ibn 'Inan
Al-Maziri
Qadi Ayyad
Averroes
Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi
Ibn Barrajan
Al-Suhayli
Al-Tamimi





7th/13th



Ibn Ata Allah
Ibn Shas
Ibn al-Hajib
Ibn Daqiq al-Eid
al-Qurtubi
al-Qarafi
Al-Azafi
Al-Qattan
Ibn Rushayd
Al-Zarwili





8th/14th



Ibn al-Haj
Ibn Farhun
Ash-Shatibi
Ibn Juzayy
Khalil ibn-Ishaq
Al-Fakihani
Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Fasi
Al-Sakkak





9th/15th



Ibn Marzuq
Al-Mawwaq
Ibn al-Azraq
Ibn 'Arafa
Ibn Khaldun
Ahmad Zarruq
Ibn Hilal Al-Sijilmasi





10th/16th



Al-Akhdari
At-Tata'i
Al-Hattab
'Abd ar-Rahman al-Ujhuri
Nasir ud-Deen al-Laqqani
Ali ibn Qasim al-Zaqqaq
Al-Wansharisi
Ibn Abi Jum'ah
Al-Miknasi
Al-Mandjur
Al-Tamgruiti





11th/17th



Al-Ujhuri
Al-Laqani
Az-Zurqani
Ibn Ashir
Mayyara
Muhammad al-Zurqani
Al-Dila'i
Al-Rahman Al-Fasi
Al-Qadir Al-Fasi





12th/18th



Al-Kharashi
Al-'Adawi
An-Nafrawi
Al-Bannani
Ad-Dardir
Al-Hajj Al-Fasi
Al-Tawudi Ibn Suda
Ibn Al-Tayyib
Al-Qasim Al-Sijilmasi





13th/19th



Ad-Desouki
Al Alawi
As-Sawi
'Illish
Al-'Adawi
Ahmed Harrak Srifi
Ahmed Skirej





14th/20th



Abdallah Bin Bayyah
Ahmed Babikir
Muhammad al-Yaqoubi
Muhammad Alawi al-Maliki
Mohamed Taher Ben Achour
Mohamed Fadhel Ben Achour
Al-Habib Bin Tahir
Hamza Yusuf
Othman Battikh
Rashid Al Marikhi
Salâh Ud Dîn At Tijânî






Scholars of other Sunni Islamic schools of jurisprudence

Hanafi
Hanbali
Shafi'i
Zahiri












v
t
e


Aristotelianism



Overview



Peripatetic school
Physics
Ethics
Term logic
Theology (unmoved mover)








Ideas and interests



Correspondence theory of truth
Hexis
Virtue ethics (golden mean)
Four causes
Telos
Phronesis
Eudaimonia
Arete
Temporal finitism
Antiperistasis
Philosophy of nature (sublunary sphere)
Potentiality and actuality
Universals (substantial form)
Aristotle's biology
Hylomorphism
Mimesis
Catharsis
Substance (hypokeimenon, ousia, transcendentals)
Essence–accident
Category of being
Minima naturalia
Magnanimity
Sensus communis
Rational animal
Genus–differentia





Corpus Aristotelicum



Physics
Organon
Nicomachean Ethics
Politics
Metaphysics
On the Soul
Rhetoric
Poetics





Followers



Plato
Alexander the Great
Theophrastus
Avicenna
Averroes
Maimonides
Thomas Aquinas
Alasdair MacIntyre
Martha Nussbaum





Related topics



Platonism
Commentaries on Aristotle
Scholasticism
Conimbricenses
Pseudo-Aristotle
Views on women






 Philosophy portal











Arab world portal
Islam portal
Morocco portal
Philosophy portal
Law portal
Medicine portal
History portal
Middle Ages portal
Biography portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 19688718
LCCN: n81027798
ISNI: 0000 0001 2122 9902
GND: 118505238
SELIBR: 175761
SUDOC: 02825886X
BNF: cb12013155x (data)
NLA: 35011154
NDL: 00511808
NKC: jn19981000169
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\083443
BNE: XX891211
CiNii: DA00627241
IATH: w6w10x29











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Averroes&oldid=818270249"					Categories: Averroes1126 births1198 deathsPeople from Córdoba, Andalusia12th-century philosophers12th-century Al-Andalus peopleSunni Muslim scholarsAristotelian philosophersArabic commentators on AristotleCommentators on PlatoMalikisAlmoravid dynastyIslamic philosophersPhysicians of medieval IslamDeaths in MoroccoMedieval physicistsPsychologistsWorld Digital Library12th-century astronomers12th-century physiciansMoorish scholarsSpanish philosophersHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles containing Arabic-language textArticles with hCardsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers