





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The five basketball positions normally employed by organized basketball teams are the point guard (PG), the shooting guard (SG), the small forward (SF), the power forward (PF), and the center (C).
Typically, the point guard is the leader of the team when on the court. This position requires substantial ball handling skills and the ability to facilitate the team during a play. The shooting guard, as the name implies, is often the best shooter and is probably capable of shooting accurately from longer distances. Generally, they also have good ball-handling skills. The small forward often has an aggressive approach to the basket when handling the ball. The power forward and the center are usually called "low post" players, who play with their back to the basket, often acting as their team's primary rebounders or shot blockers, or receiving passes to take inside shots. The center is typically the larger of the two.
Historically, only three positions were recognized (two guards, two forwards and one center) based on where they played on the court: guards generally played outside and away from the hoop, forwards played outside and near the baseline, with the center usually positioned in the key. During the 1980s, as team strategy evolved, more specialized roles developed, resulting in the five position designations used today. Team strategy and available personnel, however, still dictate the positions used by a particular team. For example, the dribble drive motion offense and the Princeton offense use four interchangeable guards and one center. Other combinations are also prevalent.
Besides the five basic positions, some teams use non-standard or hybrid positions, such as point forward, a hybrid of a small forward and a point guard; swingman (hybrid small forward-shooting guard); the big (hybrid power forward-center); and the stretch four, a power forward with the shooting range of typical shooting guards.




Basketball positions





Contents


1 Point guard
2 Shooting guard
3 Small forward
4 Power forward
5 Center
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Point guard [edit]
Main article: Point guard
The point guard (PG),[1] also known as the one, is typically the team's best ball handler and passer. Therefore, they often lead their team in assists and steals. They are often quick and are able to hit shots either outside the three-point line or "in the paint", largely depending on the player's skill level. Point guards are looked upon as the "floor general" or the "coach on the floor". They should study the game and game film to be able to recognize the weaknesses of the defense, and the strengths of their own offense. They are responsible for directing plays, making the position equivalent to that of quarterback in American football, playmaker in Association football, center in ice hockey, or setter in volleyball. Good point guards increase team efficiency and generally have a high number of assists. They are often referred to as dribblers or play-makers. In the NBA, point guards are usually the shortest players on the team and are mostly 6 feet 5 inches (1.96 m) or shorter.
Shooting guard[edit]
Main article: Shooting guard
The shooting guard (SG) is also known as the two or the off guard. Along with the small forward, a shooting guard is often referred to as a wing because of its use in common positioning tactics. As the name suggests, most shooting guards are good shooters from three-point range. Besides being able to shoot the ball, shooting guards tend to have good ball handling skills and the ability to drive the ball to the basket, often creating their own shots off the dribble. A versatile shooting guard will have good passing skills, allowing them to assume point guard responsibilities known as combo guards. In the NBA, shooting guards usually range from 6 feet 4 inches (1.93 m) to 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m).
Small forward [edit]
Main article: Small forward
The small forward (SF), also known as the three, is considered to be known as the most versatile of the main five basketball positions. Versatility is key for small forwards because of the nature of their role, which resembles that of a shooting guard more often than that of a power forward. This is why the small forward and shooting guard positions are often interchangeable and referred to as wings.
Small forwards have a variety of assets, such as quickness and strength inside. One common thread among all kinds of small forwards is an ability to "get to the line" and draw fouls by aggressively attempting (post up) plays, lay-ups, or slam dunks. As such, accurate foul shooting is a common skill for small forwards, many of whom record a large portion of their points from the foul line. Besides being able to drive to the basket, they are also good shooters from long-range. Some small forwards have good passing skills, allowing them to assume point guard responsibilities known as point forwards. Small forwards should be able to do a little bit of everything on the court, typically playing roles such as swingmen and defensive specialists. In the NBA, small forwards usually range from 6 feet 6 inches (1.98 m) to 6 feet 9 inches (2.06 m).
Power forward[edit]
Main article: Power forward (basketball)
The power forward (PF), also known as the four, often plays a role similar to that of the center, down in the "post" or "low blocks". The power forward is often the team's most versatile scorer, being able to score close to the basket while also being able to shoot mid-range jump shots from 12 to 18 feet from the basket. Some power forwards, known as stretch fours, have since extended their shooting range to three-pointers. On defense, they are required to have the strength to guard bigger players close to the basket, and to have athleticism to guard quick players away from the basket. Most power forwards tend to be more versatile than centers since they can be part of plays and are not always in the low block. In the NBA, power forwards usually range from 6 feet 8 inches (2.03 m) to 6 feet 11 inches (2.11 m).
Center[edit]
Main article: Center (basketball)
The center (C), also known as the five, nicknamed the "pivot", usually plays near the baseline, close to the basket (referred to as the "low post"). They are usually the tallest player on the floor. The center usually scores "down low, in the paint" (near the basket, in the key), but some can be good perimeter shooters. They are typically skilled at gathering rebounds, contesting shots and setting screens on plays.
The center position has been traditionally considered[by whom?] one of the most important positions, if not the most important. The range of players used in the position has transitioned from relatively slower but much taller 'back to the basket' players to players who would normally be classified as power forwards but can dominate the position with their defensive skills, or mismatch ability to shoot from the high post. This has been due to the scarcity of players possessing the combination of great skill, ideal height, and durability. This has been matched by the development of more fast-paced and athletic basketball play which calls for less traditional center play and a more up-and-down the court style. In the NBA, centers are usually 6 feet 10 inches (2.08 m) or taller.
See also[edit]

Starting line-up

References[edit]



^ ^ a b Rose, Lee H. (2016). The Basketball Handbook. Point guards pass the ball on offense and then head down the floor to set up and start the play. On defense, they guard the other point guard or one of the wings. Once they receive the ball they sprint towards the basket if it is open. If not open they stand back and wait til all of their team's players are down the floor and pass the ball. If open for a shot they will shoot to score a 2 or 3 points depending on where they standing. Human Kinetics.



External links[edit]

"Basketball players" at BBC Sport Academy
"How Basketball Works" at HowStuffWorks.com







v
t
e


 Basketball (outline)



General topics



History of basketball
James Naismith
Variations of basketball
Leagues
Statistics
Glossary of terms
Index of articles








Rules



Bonus
Jump ball
Officials
Turnover


Violation

3 seconds

Offense
Defense


5 seconds
Basket interference
Carrying
Double dribble
Goaltending
Shot clock
Traveling




Foul

Flagrant
Personal
Technical







Game play



Air ball
Alley-oop
Assist
Backboard shattering
Ball hog
Block
Buzzer beater
Cherry picking
Dribble

Crossover


Dunk
Euro step
Fadeaway
Fast break

Fly


Flop
Jump shot
Layup

Finger roll


Field goal
Four-point play
Free throw
Hook shot
Moves
Pick and roll
Positions
Posterized
Playbook
Rebound
Point
Screen

Back screen


Slashing
Steal
Three-pointer
Three-point play
Uncontested shot





Strategy




General



Sixth man





Offense



Continuity offense

Flex
Shuffle
UCLA High Post
Wheel


Dribble drive motion
Four corners
Motion
Princeton
Run and gun

Grinnell System
Nellie Ball
Small ball


Triangle





Defense



1-2-1-1
1–3–1
2–3 zone
Amoeba
Box-and-one
Double team
Full-court press
Hack-a-Shaq
Jordan Rules
Line
Man-to-man
Match-up zone
Triangle-and-two
Zone








Equipment



Backboard
Ball
Breakaway rim
Court

Half court


Key
Net
Possession arrow
Whistle





Clothing



Basketball sleeve
Finger sleeve
Air Jordan
Chuck Taylor All-Stars





Miscellaneous



100-point scorers
50–40–90 club
AAU All-Americans
AAU champions
Mikan Drill
Player tracking
Shootaround
Tip drill
Winning streaks












v
t
e


Basketball positions



Guards




1 (Floor general)



Point guard (PG)
Combo guard (PG/SG)





2 (Wing)



Shooting guard (SG)
Guard-forward / Swingman / Wing (SG/SF)











Forwards




3 (Wing)



Small forward (SF)
Point forward (PG/SF or PG/PF)





4 (Post)



Power forward (PF)
Combo forward / Cornerman / Stretch four (SF/PF)








Center




5 (Pivot)



Center (C)
Forward-center / Bigman / Big (PF/C)











Backcourt
Frontcourt
Tweener
Captain
Head coach
Referees and officials











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basketball_positions&oldid=816627398"					Categories: Basketball positionsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2017