This article is about the fictional character. For other uses, see Batman (disambiguation).


Batman



Art by Tony Daniel



Publication information


Publisher
DC Comics


First appearance
Detective Comics #27
(cover date May 1939 /
release date March 1939)


Created by



Bob Kane
Bill Finger[1]





In-story information


Alter ego
Bruce Wayne


Team affiliations



Batman Family
Justice League
Outsiders
Batmen of All Nations
Batman Incorporated





Partnerships



Robin (various)
James Gordon
Superman
Wonder Woman
Batgirl (various)
Catwoman





Notable aliases



Matches Malone[2]
Lefty Knox[3]





Abilities


Genius-level intellect
Peak human physical condition
Skilled martial artist and hand-to-hand combatant
Expert detective
Utilizes high-tech equipment and weapons




Batman is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. The character was created by artist Bob Kane and writer Bill Finger,[4][5] and first appeared in Detective Comics #27 (1939). Originally named the "Bat-Man", the character is also referred to by such epithets as the Caped Crusader, the Dark Knight, and the World's Greatest Detective.[6]
Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne, a wealthy American playboy, philanthropist, and owner of Wayne Enterprises. After witnessing the murder of his parents Dr. Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne as a child, he swore vengeance against criminals, an oath tempered by a sense of justice. Bruce Wayne trains himself physically and intellectually and crafts a bat-inspired persona to fight crime.[7]
Batman operates in the fictional Gotham City with assistance from various supporting characters, including his butler Alfred, police commissioner Gordon, and vigilante allies such as Robin. Unlike most superheroes, Batman does not possess any superpowers; rather, he relies on his genius intellect, physical prowess, martial arts abilities, detective skills, science and technology, vast wealth, intimidation, and indomitable will. A large assortment of villains make up Batman's rogues gallery, including his archenemy, the Joker.
The character became popular soon after his introduction in 1939 and gained his own comic book title, Batman, the following year. As the decades went on, differing interpretations of the character emerged. The late 1960s Batman television series used a camp aesthetic, which continued to be associated with the character for years after the show ended. Various creators worked to return the character to his dark roots, culminating in 1986 with The Dark Knight Returns by Frank Miller. The success of Warner Bros.' live-action Batman feature films have helped maintain the character's prominence in mainstream culture.[8]
An American cultural icon, Batman has garnered enormous popularity and is among the most identifiable comic book characters. Batman has been licensed and adapted into a variety of media, from radio to television and film, and appears on various merchandise sold around the world, such as toys and video games. The character has also intrigued psychiatrists, with many trying to understand his psyche. In 2015, FanSided ranked Batman as number one on their list of "50 Greatest Super Heroes In Comic Book History".[9] Kevin Conroy, Bruce Greenwood, Peter Weller, Anthony Ruivivar, Jason O'Mara, and Will Arnett, among others, have provided the character's voice for animated adaptations. Batman has been depicted in both film and television by Lewis Wilson, Robert Lowery, Adam West, Michael Keaton, Val Kilmer, George Clooney, Christian Bale, and Ben Affleck.



Contents


1 Publication history

1.1 Creation
1.2 Golden Age

1.2.1 Subsequent creation credit
1.2.2 Early years


1.3 Silver and Bronze Age

1.3.1 1950s and early 1960s
1.3.2 "New Look" Batman and camp


1.4 Modern Age

1.4.1 The Dark Knight Returns
1.4.2 "Knightfall"
1.4.3 All-Star Batman and Robin
1.4.4 The New 52
1.4.5 DC Rebirth




2 Characterization

2.1 Bruce Wayne

2.1.1 Personality


2.2 Others


3 Abilities

3.1 Skills and training
3.2 Technology


4 Supporting characters

4.1 Adversaries
4.2 Allies

4.2.1 Alfred
4.2.2 "Batman Family"
4.2.3 Civilians
4.2.4 GCPD
4.2.5 Justice League
4.2.6 Robin
4.2.7 Wayne family


4.3 Romantic interests

4.3.1 Catwoman




5 Fictional character biography

5.1 20th century

5.1.1 Origin
5.1.2 Golden Age
5.1.3 Silver Age
5.1.4 Bronze Age
5.1.5 Modern Age


5.2 21st century

5.2.1 2000s
5.2.2 2010s




6 Cultural impact

6.1 In other media

6.1.1 Television
6.1.2 Film
6.1.3 Video games


6.2 Interpretations

6.2.1 Gay interpretations
6.2.2 Psychological interpretations




7 References
8 Bibliography
9 External links



Publication history
See also: List of Batman comics
Creation




First published image of Batman, in Action Comics #12, announcing the character's debut in the forthcoming Detective Comics #27[10]


In early 1939, the success of Superman in Action Comics prompted editors at National Comics Publications (the future DC Comics) to request more superheroes for its titles. In response, Bob Kane created "the Bat-Man".[11] Collaborator Bill Finger recalled that "Kane had an idea for a character called 'Batman,' and he'd like me to see the drawings. I went over to Kane's, and he had drawn a character who looked very much like Superman with kind of ... reddish tights, I believe, with boots ... no gloves, no gauntlets ... with a small domino mask, swinging on a rope. He had two stiff wings that were sticking out, looking like bat wings. And under it was a big sign ... BATMAN".[12] The bat-wing-like cape was suggested by Bob Kane, inspired by Leonardo Da Vinci's sketch of an ornithopter flying device as a child.[13]
Finger suggested giving the character a cowl instead of a simple domino mask, a cape instead of wings, and gloves; he also recommended removing the red sections from the original costume.[14][15][16][17] Finger said he devised the name Bruce Wayne for the character's secret identity: "Bruce Wayne's first name came from Robert Bruce, the Scottish patriot. Wayne, being a playboy, was a man of gentry. I searched for a name that would suggest colonialism. I tried Adams, Hancock ... then I thought of Mad Anthony Wayne."[18] He later said his suggestions were influenced by Lee Falk's popular The Phantom, a syndicated newspaper comic-strip character with which Kane was also familiar.[19]
Kane and Finger drew upon contemporary 1930s popular culture for inspiration regarding much of the Bat-Man's look, personality, methods, and weaponry. Details find predecessors in pulp fiction, comic strips, newspaper headlines, and autobiographical details referring to Kane himself.[20] As an aristocratic hero with a double identity, Batman had predecessors in the Scarlet Pimpernel (created by Baroness Emmuska Orczy, 1903) and Zorro (created by Johnston McCulley, 1919). Like them, Batman performed his heroic deeds in secret, averted suspicion by playing aloof in public, and marked his work with a signature symbol. Kane noted the influence of the films The Mark of Zorro (1920) and The Bat Whispers (1930) in the creation of the character's iconography. Finger, drawing inspiration from pulp heroes like Doc Savage, The Shadow, Dick Tracy, and Sherlock Holmes, made the character a master sleuth.[21][22]
In his 1989 autobiography, Kane detailed Finger's contributions to Batman's creation:

One day I called Bill and said, 'I have a new character called the Bat-Man and I've made some crude, elementary sketches I'd like you to look at.' He came over and I showed him the drawings. At the time, I only had a small domino mask, like the one Robin later wore, on Batman's face. Bill said, 'Why not make him look more like a bat and put a hood on him, and take the eyeballs out and just put slits for eyes to make him look more mysterious?' At this point, the Bat-Man wore a red union suit; the wings, trunks, and mask were black. I thought that red and black would be a good combination. Bill said that the costume was too bright: 'Color it dark grey to make it look more ominous.' The cape looked like two stiff bat wings attached to his arms. As Bill and I talked, we realized that these wings would get cumbersome when Bat-Man was in action and changed them into a cape, scalloped to look like bat wings when he was fighting or swinging down on a rope. Also, he didn't have any gloves on, and we added them so that he wouldn't leave fingerprints.[19]

Golden Age
Subsequent creation credit
Kane signed away ownership in the character in exchange for, among other compensation, a mandatory byline on all Batman comics. This byline did not originally say "Batman created by Bob Kane"; his name was simply written on the title page of each story. The name disappeared from the comic book in the mid-1960s, replaced by credits for each story's actual writer and artists. In the late 1970s, when Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster began receiving a "created by" credit on the Superman titles, along with William Moulton Marston being given the byline for creating Wonder Woman, Batman stories began saying "Created by Bob Kane" in addition to the other credits.
Finger did not receive the same recognition. While he had received credit for other DC work since the 1940s, he began, in the 1960s, to receive limited acknowledgment for his Batman writing; in the letters page of Batman #169 (February 1965) for example, editor Julius Schwartz names him as the creator of the Riddler, one of Batman's recurring villains. However, Finger's contract left him only with his writing page rate and no byline. Kane wrote, "Bill was disheartened by the lack of major accomplishments in his career. He felt that he had not used his creative potential to its fullest and that success had passed him by."[18] At the time of Finger's death in 1974, DC had not officially credited Finger as Batman co-creator.
Jerry Robinson, who also worked with Finger and Kane on the strip at this time, has criticized Kane for failing to share the credit. He recalled Finger resenting his position, stating in a 2005 interview with The Comics Journal:

Bob made him more insecure, because while he slaved working on Batman, he wasn't sharing in any of the glory or the money that Bob began to make, which is why ... [he was] going to leave [Kane's employ]. ... [Kane] should have credited Bill as co-creator, because I know; I was there. ... That was one thing I would never forgive Bob for, was not to take care of Bill or recognize his vital role in the creation of Batman. As with Siegel and Shuster, it should have been the same, the same co-creator credit in the strip, writer, and artist.[23]

Although Kane initially rebutted Finger's claims at having created the character, writing in a 1965 open letter to fans that "it seemed to me that Bill Finger has given out the impression that he and not myself created the ''Batman, t'  [sic] as well as Robin and all the other leading villains and characters. This statement is fraudulent and entirely untrue." Kane himself also commented on Finger's lack of credit. "The trouble with being a 'ghost' writer or artist is that you must remain rather anonymously without 'credit'. However, if one wants the 'credit', then one has to cease being a 'ghost' or follower and become a leader or innovator."[24]
In 1989, Kane revisited Finger's situation, recalling in an interview:

In those days it was like, one artist and he had his name over it [the comic strip] — the policy of DC in the comic books was, if you can't write it, obtain other writers, but their names would never appear on the comic book in the finished version. So Bill never asked me for it [the byline] and I never volunteered — I guess my ego at that time. And I felt badly, really, when he [Finger] died.[25]

In September 2015, DC Entertainment revealed that Finger would be receiving credit for his role in Batman's creation on the 2016 superhero film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice and the second season of Gotham after a deal was worked out between the Finger family and DC.[4] Finger received credit as a creator of Batman for the first time in a comic in October 2015 with Batman and Robin Eternal #3 and Batman: Arkham Knight Genesis #3. The updated acknowledgment for the character appeared as "Batman created by Bob Kane with Bill Finger".[5]
Early years




Batman made his debut in Detective Comics #27 (May 1939). Cover art by Bob Kane.


The first Batman story, "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate", was published in Detective Comics #27 (May 1939). Finger said, "Batman was originally written in the style of the pulps",[26] and this influence was evident with Batman showing little remorse over killing or maiming criminals. Batman proved a hit character, and he received his own solo title in 1940 while continuing to star in Detective Comics. By that time, Detective Comics was the top-selling and most influential publisher in the industry; Batman and the company's other major hero, Superman, were the cornerstones of the company's success.[27] The two characters were featured side-by-side as the stars of World's Finest Comics, which was originally titled World's Best Comics when it debuted in fall 1940. Creators including Jerry Robinson and Dick Sprang also worked on the strips during this period.
Over the course of the first few Batman strips elements were added to the character and the artistic depiction of Batman evolved. Kane noted that within six issues he drew the character's jawline more pronounced, and lengthened the ears on the costume. "About a year later he was almost the full figure, my mature Batman", Kane said.[28] Batman's characteristic utility belt was introduced in Detective Comics #29 (July 1939), followed by the boomerang-like batarang and the first bat-themed vehicle, the Batplane, in #31 (Sept. 1939). The character's origin was revealed in #33 (Nov. 1939), unfolding in a two-page story that establishes the brooding persona of Batman, a character driven by the death of his parents. Written by Finger, it depicts a young Bruce Wayne witnessing his parents' murder at the hands of a mugger. Days later, at their grave, the child vows that "by the spirits of my parents [I will] avenge their deaths by spending the rest of my life warring on all criminals".[29][30][31]
The early, pulp-inflected portrayal of Batman started to soften in Detective Comics #38 (April 1940) with the introduction of Robin, Batman's junior counterpart.[32] Robin was introduced, based on Finger's suggestion, because Batman needed a "Watson" with whom Batman could talk.[33] Sales nearly doubled, despite Kane's preference for a solo Batman, and it sparked a proliferation of "kid sidekicks".[34] The first issue of the solo spin-off series Batman was notable not only for introducing two of his most persistent enemies, the Joker and Catwoman, but for a story in which Batman shoots some monstrous giants to death. That story prompted editor Whitney Ellsworth to decree that the character could no longer kill or use a gun.[35]
By 1942, the writers and artists behind the Batman comics had established most of the basic elements of the Batman mythos.[36] In the years following World War II, DC Comics "adopted a postwar editorial direction that increasingly de-emphasized social commentary in favor of lighthearted juvenile fantasy". The impact of this editorial approach was evident in Batman comics of the postwar period; removed from the "bleak and menacing world" of the strips of the early 1940s, Batman was instead portrayed as a respectable citizen and paternal figure that inhabited a "bright and colorful" environment.[37]
Silver and Bronze Age
1950s and early 1960s
Batman was one of the few superhero characters to be continuously published as interest in the genre waned during the 1950s. In the story "The Mightiest Team in the World" in Superman #76 (June 1952), Batman teams up with Superman for the first time and the pair discover each other's secret identity.[38] Following the success of this story, World's Finest Comics was revamped so it featured stories starring both heroes together, instead of the separate Batman and Superman features that had been running before.[39] The team-up of the characters was "a financial success in an era when those were few and far between";[40] this series of stories ran until the book's cancellation in 1986.
Batman comics were among those criticized when the comic book industry came under scrutiny with the publication of psychologist Fredric Wertham's book Seduction of the Innocent in 1954. Wertham's thesis was that children imitated crimes committed in comic books, and that these works corrupted the morals of the youth. Wertham criticized Batman comics for their supposed homosexual overtones and argued that Batman and Robin were portrayed as lovers.[41] Wertham's criticisms raised a public outcry during the 1950s, eventually leading to the establishment of the Comics Code Authority, a code that is no longer in use by the comic book industry. The tendency towards a "sunnier Batman" in the postwar years intensified after the introduction of the Comics Code.[42] Scholars have suggested that the characters of Batwoman (in 1956) and the pre-Barbara Gordon Bat-Girl (in 1961) were introduced in part to refute the allegation that Batman and Robin were gay, and the stories took on a campier, lighter feel.[43]
In the late 1950s, Batman stories gradually became more science fiction-oriented, an attempt at mimicking the success of other DC characters that had dabbled in the genre.[44] New characters such as Batwoman, Ace the Bat-Hound, and Bat-Mite were introduced. Batman's adventures often involved odd transformations or bizarre space aliens. In 1960, Batman debuted as a member of the Justice League of America in The Brave and the Bold #28 (Feb. 1960), and went on to appear in several Justice League comic series starting later that same year.
"New Look" Batman and camp
By 1964, sales of Batman titles had fallen drastically. Bob Kane noted that, as a result, DC was "planning to kill Batman off altogether".[45] In response to this, editor Julius Schwartz was assigned to the Batman titles. He presided over drastic changes, beginning with 1964's Detective Comics #327 (May 1964), which was cover-billed as the "New Look". Schwartz introduced changes designed to make Batman more contemporary, and to return him to more detective-oriented stories. He brought in artist Carmine Infantino to help overhaul the character. The Batmobile was redesigned, and Batman's costume was modified to incorporate a yellow ellipse behind the bat-insignia. The space aliens, time travel, and characters of the 1950s such as Batwoman, Ace, and Bat-Mite were retired. Bruce Wayne's butler Alfred was killed off (though his death was quickly reversed) while a new female relative for the Wayne family, Aunt Harriet, came to live with Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson.[46]
The debut of the Batman television series in 1966 had a profound influence on the character. The success of the series increased sales throughout the comic book industry, and Batman reached a circulation of close to 900,000 copies.[47] Elements such as the character of Batgirl and the show's campy nature were introduced into the comics; the series also initiated the return of Alfred. Although both the comics and TV show were successful for a time, the camp approach eventually wore thin and the show was canceled in 1968. In the aftermath, the Batman comics themselves lost popularity once again. As Julius Schwartz noted, "When the television show was a success, I was asked to be campy, and of course when the show faded, so did the comic books."[48]
Starting in 1969, writer Dennis O'Neil and artist Neal Adams made a deliberate effort to distance Batman from the campy portrayal of the 1960s TV series and to return the character to his roots as a "grim avenger of the night".[49] O'Neil said his idea was "simply to take it back to where it started. I went to the DC library and read some of the early stories. I tried to get a sense of what Kane and Finger were after."[50]
O'Neil and Adams first collaborated on the story "The Secret of the Waiting Graves" in Detective Comics #395 (January 1970). Few stories were true collaborations between O'Neil, Adams, Schwartz, and inker Dick Giordano, and in actuality these men were mixed and matched with various other creators during the 1970s; nevertheless the influence of their work was "tremendous".[51] Giordano said: "We went back to a grimmer, darker Batman, and I think that's why these stories did so well ..."[52] While the work of O'Neil and Adams was popular with fans, the acclaim did little to improve declining sales; the same held true with a similarly acclaimed run by writer Steve Englehart and penciler Marshall Rogers in Detective Comics #471–476 (August 1977 – April 1978), which went on to influence the 1989 movie Batman and be adapted for Batman: The Animated Series, which debuted in 1992.[53] Regardless, circulation continued to drop through the 1970s and 1980s, hitting an all-time low in 1985.[54]
Modern Age
The Dark Knight Returns
See also: Alternative versions of Batman
Frank Miller's limited series The Dark Knight Returns (February–June 1986) returned the character to his darker roots, both in atmosphere and tone. The comic book, which tells the story of a 55-year-old Batman coming out of retirement in a possible future, reinvigorated the character. The Dark Knight Returns was a financial success and has since become one of the medium's most noted touchstones.[55] The series also sparked a major resurgence in the character's popularity.[56]
That year Dennis O'Neil took over as editor of the Batman titles and set the template for the portrayal of Batman following DC's status quo-altering miniseries Crisis on Infinite Earths. O'Neil operated under the assumption that he was hired to revamp the character and as a result tried to instill a different tone in the books than had gone before.[57] One outcome of this new approach was the "Year One" storyline in Batman #404–407 (February–May 1987), in which Frank Miller and artist David Mazzucchelli redefined the character's origins. Writer Alan Moore and artist Brian Bolland continued this dark trend with 1988's 48-page one-shot Batman: The Killing Joke, in which the Joker, attempting to drive Commissioner Gordon insane, cripples Gordon's daughter Barbara, and then kidnaps and tortures the commissioner, physically and psychologically.
The Batman comics garnered major attention in 1988 when DC Comics created a 900 number for readers to call to vote on whether Jason Todd, the second Robin, lived or died. Voters decided in favor of Jason's death by a narrow margin of 28 votes (see Batman: A Death in the Family).[58]
"Knightfall"
The 1993 "Knightfall" story arc introduced a new villain, Bane, who critically injures Batman after pushing him to the limits of his endurance. Jean-Paul Valley, known as Azrael, is called upon to wear the Batsuit during Bruce Wayne's convalescence. Writers Doug Moench, Chuck Dixon, and Alan Grant worked on the Batman titles during "Knightfall", and would also contribute to other Batman crossovers throughout the 1990s. 1998's "Cataclysm" storyline served as the precursor to 1999's "No Man's Land", a year-long storyline that ran through all the Batman-related titles dealing with the effects of an earthquake-ravaged Gotham City. At the conclusion of "No Man's Land", O'Neil stepped down as editor and was replaced by Bob Schreck.[59]
Another writer who rose to prominence on the Batman comic series, was Jeph Loeb. Along with longtime collaborator Tim Sale, they wrote two miniseries ("The Long Halloween" and "Dark Victory") that pit an early in his career version of Batman against his entire rogues gallery (most notably Two-Face, whose origin was re-envisioned by Loeb) while dealing with various mysteries involving serial killers Holiday and the Hangman. In 2003, Loeb teamed with artist Jim Lee to work on another mystery arc: "Batman: Hush" for the main Batman book. The twelve–issue storyline has Batman and Catwoman teaming up against Batman's entire rogues gallery, including an apparently resurrected Jason Todd, while seeking to find the identity of the mysterious supervillain Hush.[60] While the character of Hush failed to catch on with readers, the arc was a sales success for DC. As the storyline was Jim Lee's first regular comic book work in nearly a decade, the series became #1 on the Diamond Comic Distributors sales chart for the first time since Batman #500 (October 1993) and Jason Todd's appearance laid the groundwork for writer Judd Winick's subsequent run as writer on Batman, with another multi-issue epic, "Under the Hood", which ran from Batman #637–650 (April 2005–April 2006).
All-Star Batman and Robin
See also: All Star DC Comics
In 2005, DC launched All-Star Batman and Robin, a stand-alone comic series set outside the main DC Universe continuity. Written by Frank Miller and drawn by Jim Lee, the series was a commercial success for DC Comics,[61][62] although it was widely panned by critics for its writing and strong depictions of violence.[63][64]
Starting in 2006, Grant Morrison and Paul Dini were the regular writers of Batman and Detective Comics, with Morrison reincorporating controversial elements of Batman lore. Most notably of these elements were the science fiction themed storylines of the 1950s Batman comics, which Morrison revised as hallucinations Batman suffered under the influence of various mind-bending gases and extensive sensory deprivation training. Morrison's run climaxed with "Batman R.I.P.", which brought Batman up against the villainous "Black Glove" organization, which sought to drive Batman into madness. "Batman R.I.P." segued into Final Crisis (also written by Morrison), which saw the apparent death of Batman at the hands of Darkseid. In the 2009 miniseries Batman: Battle for the Cowl, Wayne's former protégé Dick Grayson becomes the new Batman, and Wayne's son Damian becomes the new Robin.[65][66] In June 2009, Judd Winick returned to writing Batman, while Grant Morrison was given his own series, titled Batman and Robin.[67]
In 2010, the storyline Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne saw Bruce travel through history, eventually returning to the present day. Although he reclaimed the mantle of Batman, he also allowed Grayson to continue being Batman as well. Bruce decided to take his crime-fighting cause globally, which is the central focus of Batman Incorporated. DC Comics would later announce that Grayson would be the main character in Batman, Detective Comics, and Batman and Robin, while Wayne would be the main character in Batman Incorporated. Also, Bruce appeared in another ongoing series, Batman: The Dark Knight.
The New 52
See also: The New 52
In September 2011, DC Comics' entire line of superhero comic books, including its Batman franchise, were canceled and relaunched with new #1 issues as part of the New 52 reboot. Bruce Wayne is the only character to be identified as Batman and is featured in Batman, Detective Comics, Batman and Robin, and Batman: The Dark Knight. Dick Grayson returns to the mantle of Nightwing and appears in his own ongoing series. While many characters have their histories significantly altered to attract new readers, Batman's history remains mostly intact. Batman Incorporated was relaunched in 2012–2013 to complete the "Leviathan" storyline.
With the beginning of the New 52, Scott Snyder was the writer of the Batman title. His first major story arc was "Night of the Owls", where Batman confronts the Court of Owls, a secret society that has controlled Gotham for centuries. The second story arc was "Death of the Family", where the Joker returns to Gotham and simultaneously attacks each member of the Batman family. The third story arc was "Batman: Zero Year", which redefined Batman's origin in The New 52. It followed Batman #0, published in June 2012, which explored the character's early years. The final storyline before the "Convergence" (2015) storyline was "Endgame", depicting the supposed final battle between Batman and the Joker when he unleashes the deadly Endgame virus onto Gotham City. The storyline ends with Batman and the Joker's supposed deaths.
Starting with Batman vol. 2, #41, Commissioner James Gordon takes over Bruce's mantle as a new, state-sanctioned, robotic-Batman, debuting in the Free Comic Book Day special comic Divergence. However, Bruce Wayne is soon revealed to be alive, albeit now suffering almost total amnesia of his life as Batman and only remembering his life as Bruce Wayne through what he has learned from Alfred. Bruce Wayne finds happiness and proposes to his girlfriend, Julie Madison, but Mr. Bloom heavily injures Jim Gordon and takes control of Gotham City and threatens to destroy the city by energizing a particle reactor to create a "strange star" to swallow the city. Bruce Wayne discovers the truth that he was Batman and after talking to a stranger who smiles a lot (it is heavily implied that this is the amnesic Joker) he forces Alfred to implant his memories as Batman, but at the cost of his memories as the reborn Bruce Wayne. He returns and helps Jim Gordon defeat Mr. Bloom and shut down the reactor. Gordon gets his job back as the commissioner, and the government Batman project is shut down.[68]
In 2015, DC Comics released The Dark Knight III: The Master Race, the sequel to Frank Miller's The Dark Knight Returns and The Dark Knight Strikes Again.[69]
DC Rebirth
See also: DC Rebirth
In June 2016, the DC Rebirth event relaunched DC Comics' entire line of comic book titles. Batman was rebooted as starting with a one-shot issue entitled Batman: Rebirth #1 (August 2016). The series then began shipping twice-monthly as a third volume, starting with Batman vol. 3, #1 (August 2016). The third volume of Batman was written by Tom King, and artwork was provided by David Finch and Mikel Janín. The Batman series introduced two vigilantes, Gotham and Gotham Girl. Detective Comics resumed its original numbering system starting with June 2016's #934, and the New 52 series was labeled as volume 2 with issues numbering from #1-52.[70] Similarly with the Batman title, the New 52 issues were labeled as volume 2 and encompassed issues #1-52. Writer James Tynion IV and artists Eddy Barrows and Alvaro Martinez worked on Detective Comics #934, and the series initially featured a team consisting of Tim Drake, Stephanie Brown, Cassandra Cain, and Clayface, led by Batman and Batwoman.
Characterization
Bruce Wayne




DC Comics concept art of Bruce Wayne by Mikel Janín


Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne, a wealthy American industrialist. As a child, Bruce witnessed the murder of his parents, Dr. Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne, which ultimately led him to craft the Batman persona and seek justice against criminals. He resides on the outskirts of Gotham City in his personal residence, Wayne Manor. Wayne averts suspicion by acting the part of a superficial playboy idly living off his family's fortune and the profits of Wayne Enterprises, his inherited conglomerate.[71][72] He supports philanthropic causes through his nonprofit Wayne Foundation, but is more widely known as a celebrity socialite.[73] In public, he frequently appears in the company of high-status women, which encourages tabloid gossip. Although Bruce Wayne leads an active romantic life, his vigilante activities as Batman account for most of his time.[74]
Various modern stories have portrayed the extravagant, playboy image of Bruce Wayne as a facade[75] (in counterpoint to the post-Crisis Superman, whose Clark Kent persona is the true identity, while the Superman persona is the facade).[76][77] In Batman Unmasked, a television documentary about the psychology of the character, behavioral scientist Benjamin Karney notes that Batman's personality is driven by Bruce Wayne's inherent humanity; that "Batman, for all its benefits and for all of the time Bruce Wayne devotes to it, is ultimately a tool for Bruce Wayne's efforts to make the world better".
Writers of Batman and Superman stories have often compared and contrasted the two. Interpretations vary depending on the writer, the story, and the timing. Grant Morrison[78] notes that both heroes "believe in the same kind of things" despite the day/night contrast their heroic roles display. He notes an equally stark contrast in their real identities. Bruce Wayne and Clark Kent belong to different social classes: "Bruce has a butler, Clark has a boss." T. James Musler's book Unleashing the Superhero in Us All explores the extent to which Bruce Wayne's vast personal wealth is important in his life story, and the crucial role it plays in his efforts as Batman.[79]
Will Brooker notes in his book Batman Unmasked that "the confirmation of the Batman's identity lies with the young audience ... he doesn't have to be Bruce Wayne; he just needs the suit and gadgets, the abilities, and most importantly the morality, the humanity. There's just a sense about him: 'they trust him ... and they're never wrong."[80]
Personality


"I must have a disguise. Criminals are a superstitious cowardly lot. So my disguise must be able to strike terror into their hearts. I must be a creature of the night, black, terrible...a...a...a bat!"

– Bruce Wayne – Detective Comics #33 (November 1939)[81]
Batman's primary character traits can be summarized as "wealth; physical prowess; deductive abilities and obsession".[82] The details and tone of Batman comic books have varied over the years due to different creative teams. Dennis O'Neil noted that character consistency was not a major concern during early editorial regimes: "Julie Schwartz did a Batman in Batman and Detective and Murray Boltinoff did a Batman in the Brave and the Bold and apart from the costume they bore very little resemblance to each other. Julie and Murray did not want to coordinate their efforts, nor were they asked to do so. Continuity was not important in those days."[83]
The driving force behind Bruce Wayne's character is his parents' murder and their absence. Bob Kane and Bill Finger discussed Batman's background and decided that "there's nothing more traumatic than having your parents murdered before your eyes".[84] Despite his trauma, he sets his mind on studying to become a scientist[85][86] and to train his body into physical perfection[85][86] to fight crime in Gotham City as Batman, an inspired idea from Wayne's insight into the criminal mind.[85][86]
Another of Batman's characterizations is that of a vigilante; in order to stop evil that started with the death of his parents, he must sometimes break the law himself. Although manifested differently by being re-told by different artists, it is nevertheless that the details and the prime components of Batman's origin have never varied at all in the comic books, the "reiteration of the basic origin events holds together otherwise divergent expressions".[87] The origin is the source of the character's traits and attributes, which play out in many of the character's adventures.[82]
Batman is often treated as a vigilante by other characters in his stories. Frank Miller views the character as "a dionysian figure, a force for anarchy that imposes an individual order".[88] Dressed as a bat, Batman deliberately cultivates a frightening persona in order to aid him in crime-fighting,[89] a fear that originates from the criminals' own guilty conscience.[90] Miller is often credited with reintroducing anti-heroic traits into Batman's characterization,[91] such as his brooding personality, willingness to use violence and torture, and increasingly alienated behavior. Batman's original character was changed in the 1950s when the now-defunct comic book codes went into effect, and DC editor Whitney Ellsworth reinvented Batman as having a stringent moral code which never allowed him to kill.[91] Miller's Batman was closer to the original, Golden Age version, who was willing to kill criminals if necessary.[92]
Others
Main article: Alternative versions of Batman
On several occasions former Robin Dick Grayson has served as Batman; most notably in 2009 while Wayne was believed dead, and served as a second Batman even after Wayne returned in 2010.[60] As part of DC's 2011 continuity relaunch, Grayson returned to being Nightwing following the Flashpoint crossover event.
In an interview with IGN, Morrison detailed that having Dick Grayson as Batman and Damian Wayne as Robin represented a "reverse" of the normal dynamic between Batman and Robin, with, "a more light-hearted and spontaneous Batman and a scowling, badass Robin". Morrison explained his intentions for the new characterization of Batman: "Dick Grayson is kind of this consummate superhero. The guy has been Batman's partner since he was a kid, he's led the Teen Titans, and he's trained with everybody in the DC Universe. So he's a very different kind of Batman. He's a lot easier; He's a lot looser and more relaxed."[65]
Over the years, there have been numerous others to assume the name of Batman, or to officially take over for Bruce during his leaves of absence. Jean Paul Valley, also known as Azrael, assumed the cowl after the events of the Knightfall saga.[60] James Gordon, donned a mech-suit after the events of Batman: Endgame, and served as Batman in 2015 and 2016.
Additionally, members of the group Batman, Incorporated, Bruce Wayne's experiment at franchising his brand of vigilantism, have at times stood in as the official Batman in cities around the world.[60] Various others have also taken up the role of Batman in stories set in alternative universes and possible futures, including, among them, various former proteges of Bruce Wayne.
Abilities
Skills and training
Batman has no inherent superhuman powers; he relies on "his own scientific knowledge, detective skills, and athletic prowess".[32] Batman's inexhaustible wealth gives him access to advanced technologies, and as a proficient scientist, he is able to use and modify these technologies to his advantage. In the stories, Batman is regarded as one of the world's greatest detectives, if not the world's greatest crime solver.[93] Batman has been repeatedly described as having a genius-level intellect, being one of the greatest martial artists in the DC Universe, and having peak human physical conditioning.[94] As a polymath, his knowledge and expertise in countless disciplines is nearly unparalleled by any other character in the DC Universe.[95] He has traveled the world acquiring the skills needed to aid him in his endeavors as Batman. In the Superman: Doomed story arc, Superman considers Batman to be one of the most brilliant minds on the planet.[96]
Batman has trained extensively in various martial arts, mastering many different types, making him one of the best hand-to-hand fighters in the DC Universe. Superman describes Batman as "the most dangerous man on Earth", able to defeat an entire team of superpowered extraterrestrials by himself in order to rescue his imprisoned teammates in Grant Morrison's first storyline in JLA.
Batman has the ability to function under great physical pain and to withstand telepathy and mind control. He is a master of disguise, multilingual, and an expert in espionage, often gathering information under the identity of a notorious gangster named Matches Malone. Batman is highly skilled in stealth movement and escapology, which allows him to appear and disappear at will and to break free of nearly inescapable deathtraps with little to no harm.
Batman is an expert in interrogation techniques and often uses extreme methods to extract information from suspects, such as hanging a person over the edge of a building. His intimidating and frightening appearance alone is often all that is needed in getting information from suspects. Despite having the potential to harm his enemies, Batman's most defining characteristic is his strong commitment to justice and his reluctance to take a life. This unyielding moral rectitude has earned him the respect of several heroes in the DC Universe, most notably that of Superman and Wonder Woman.
Among physical and other crime fighting related training, he is also proficient at other types of skills. Some of these include being a licensed pilot (in order to operate the Batplane), as well as being able to operate other types of machinery. In some publications, he underwent some magician training.
Technology
Batman utilizes a vast arsenal of specialized, high-tech vehicles and gadgets in his war against crime, the designs of which usually share a bat motif. Batman historian Les Daniels credits Gardner Fox with creating the concept of Batman's arsenal with the introduction of the utility belt in Detective Comics #29 (July 1939) and the first bat-themed weapons the batarang and the "Batgyro" in Detective Comics #31 and #32 (September; October 1939).[28]

Personal armor

Main article: Batsuit
Batman's body armored costume incorporates the imagery of a bat in order to frighten criminals.[97] The details of the Batman costume change repeatedly through various decades, stories, media and artists' interpretations, but the most distinctive elements remain consistent: a scallop-hem cape; a cowl covering most of the face; a pair of bat-like ears; a stylized bat emblem on the chest; and the ever-present utility belt. Finger and Kane originally conceptualized Batman as having a black cape and cowl and grey suit, but conventions in coloring called for black to be highlighted with blue.[97] Hence, the costume's colors have appeared in the comics as dark blue and grey;[97] as well as black and grey. In the Tim Burton's Batman and Batman Returns films, Batman has been depicted as completely black with a bat in the middle surrounded by a yellow background. Christopher Nolan's The Dark Knight Trilogy depicted Batman wearing high-tech gear painted completely black with a black bat in the middle. Ben Affleck's Batman in the DC Extended Universe films wears a suit more faithful to the comic books versions, in which the suit is grey in color with a black cowl, cape, and bat symbol.
Batman's batsuit aids in his combat against enemies, having the properties of both Kevlar and Nomex. It protects him from gunfire and other significant impacts. His gloves typically feature three scallops that protrude from long, gauntlet-like cuffs, although in his earliest appearances he wore short, plain gloves without the scallops.[98] The overall look of the character, particularly the length of the cowl's ears and of the cape, varies greatly depending on the artist. Dennis O'Neil said, "We now say that Batman has two hundred suits hanging in the Batcave so they don't have to look the same ... Everybody loves to draw Batman, and everybody wants to put their own spin on it."[99]

Batmobile

Main article: Batmobile




The 1966 television Batmobile, built by George Barris from a Lincoln Futura concept car


Batman's primary vehicle is the Batmobile, which is usually depicted as an imposing black car, often with tailfins that suggest a bat's wings. Batman also has an aircraft called the Batplane (later called the "Batwing"), along with various other means of transportation. In proper practice, the "bat" prefix (as in Batmobile or batarang) is rarely used by Batman himself when referring to his equipment, particularly after some portrayals (primarily the 1960s Batman live-action television show and the Super Friends animated series) stretched the practice to campy proportions. For example, the 1960s television show depicted a Batboat, Bat-Sub, and Batcycle, among other bat-themed vehicles. The 1960s television series Batman has an arsenal that includes such "bat-" names as the bat-computer, bat-scanner, bat-radar, bat-cuffs, bat-pontoons, bat-drinking water dispenser, bat-camera with polarized bat-filter, bat-shark repellent bat-spray, and bat-rope. The storyline "A Death in the Family" suggests that given Batman's grim nature, he is unlikely to have adopted the "bat" prefix on his own. In The Dark Knight Returns, Batman tells Carrie Kelley that the original Robin came up with the name "Batmobile" when he was young, since that is what a kid would call Batman's vehicle. The Batmobile was redesigned in 2011 when DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic books, with the batmobile being given heavier armor and new aesthetics.

Utility belt

Main article: Batman's utility belt
Batman keeps most of his field equipment in his utility belt. Over the years it has shown to contain an assortment of crime-fighting tools, weapons, and investigative and technological instruments. Different versions of the belt have these items stored in compartments, often as pouches or hard cylinders attached evenly around it. Batman is often depicted as carrying a projectile which shoots a retractable grappling hook attached to a cable. This allows him to attach to distant objects, be propelled into the air, and thus swing from the rooftops of Gotham City. An exception to the range of Batman's equipment are guns, which he refuses to use on principle, since a gun was used in his parents' murder.

Bat-Signal

Main article: Bat-Signal
When Batman is needed, the Gotham City police activate a searchlight with a bat-shaped insignia over the lens called the Bat-Signal, which shines into the night sky, creating a bat-symbol on a passing cloud which can be seen from any point in Gotham. The origin of the signal varies, depending on the continuity and medium.
In various incarnations, most notably the 1960s Batman TV series, Commissioner Gordon also has a dedicated phone line, dubbed the Bat-Phone, connected to a bright red telephone (in the TV series) which sits on a wooden base and has a transparent top. The line connects directly to Batman's residence, Wayne Manor, specifically both to a similar phone sitting on the desk in Bruce Wayne's study and the extension phone in the Batcave.

Batcave

Main article: Batcave
The Batcave is Batman's secret headquarters, consisting of a series of subterranean caves beneath his mansion, Wayne Manor. As his command center, the Batcave serves multiple purposes, such as surveillance, and it houses the vehicles and equipment Batman uses in his campaign to fight crime. It is also a storeroom for Batman's unique memorabilia collected over the years from various cases he has worked on. In both the comic Batman: Shadow of the Bat #45 and the 2005 film Batman Begins, the cave is said to have been part of the Underground Railroad.
Supporting characters
Main article: List of Batman supporting characters
Batman's interactions with both villains and cohorts have, over time, developed a strong supporting cast of characters.[82]
Adversaries




Batman surrounded by his enemies. Art by Alex Ross.


Main article: List of Batman Family adversaries
Batman faces a variety of foes ranging from common criminals to outlandish supervillains. Many of them mirror aspects of the Batman's character and development, often having tragic origin stories that lead them to a life of crime.[100] These foes are commonly referred to as Batman's rogues gallery. Batman's "most implacable foe" is the Joker, a homicidal maniac with a clown-like appearance. The Joker is considered by critics to be his perfect adversary, since he is the antithesis of Batman in personality and appearance; the Joker has a maniacal demeanor with a colorful appearance, while Batman has a serious and resolute demeanor with a dark appearance. As a "personification of the irrational", the Joker represents "everything Batman [opposes]".[36] Other long time recurring foes that are part of Batman's rogues gallery include Catwoman (a cat burglar antiheroine who is an occasional ally and romantic interest), the Penguin, Ra's al Ghul, Two-Face, the Riddler, the Scarecrow, Mr. Freeze, Poison Ivy, Harley Quinn, Bane, Clayface, and Killer Croc among others. Many of Batman's adversaries are often psychiatric patients at Arkham Asylum.
Allies
Alfred
Main article: Alfred Pennyworth
Batman's butler, Alfred Pennyworth, first appeared in Batman #16 (1943). He serves as Bruce Wayne's loyal father figure and is one of the few persons to know his secret identity. Alfred raised Bruce after his parents' death and knows him on a very personal level. He is sometimes portrayed as a sidekick to Batman and the only other resident of Wayne Manor aside from Bruce. The character "[lends] a homely touch to Batman's environs and [is] ever ready to provide a steadying and reassuring hand" to the hero and his sidekick.[100]
"Batman Family"
The informal name "Batman family" is used for a group of characters closely allied with Batman, generally masked vigilantes who either have been trained by Batman or operate in Gotham City with his tacit approval. They include: Barbara Gordon, Commissioner Gordon's daughter, who has fought crime under the vigilante identity of Batgirl and, during a period in which she was confined to a wheelchair due to a gunshot wound inflicted by the Joker, the computer hacker Oracle; Helena Bertinelli, the sole surviving member of a mob family turned vigilante, who has worked with Batman on occasion, primarily as the Huntress and as Batgirl for a brief stint; Cassandra Cain, the daughter of professional assassins David Cain, and Lady Shiva, who succeeded Bertinelli as Batgirl.
Civilians
Lucius Fox, a technology specialist and Bruce Wayne's business manager who is well aware of his employer's clandestine vigilante activities; Dr. Leslie Thompkins, a family friend who like Alfred became a surrogate parental figure to Bruce Wayne after the deaths of his parents, and is also aware of his secret identity; Vicki Vale, an investigative journalist who often reports on Batman's activities for the Gotham Gazette; Ace the Bat-Hound, Batman's canine partner who was predominantly active in the 1950s and 1960s;[101] and Bat-Mite, an extra-dimensional imp predominately active in the 1960s who idolizes Batman.[101]
GCPD
Main article: Gotham City Police Department
As Batman's ally in the Gotham City police, Commissioner James "Jim" Gordon debuted along with Batman in Detective Comics #27 and has been a consistent presence ever since. As a crime-fighting everyman, he shares the Batman's goals while offering, much as the character of Watson does in Sherlock Holmes stories, a normal person's perspective on the work of Batman's extraordinary genius.
Justice League
Main article: Justice League
Batman is at times a member of superhero teams such as the Justice League of America and the Outsiders. Batman has often been paired in adventures with his Justice League teammate Superman, notably as the co-stars of World's Finest and Superman/Batman series. In pre-Crisis continuity, the two are depicted as close friends; however, in current continuity, they are still close friends but an uneasy relationship, with an emphasis on their differing views on crime-fighting and justice. In Superman/Batman #3 (December 2003), Superman observes, "Sometimes, I admit, I think of Bruce as a man in a costume. Then, with some gadget from his utility belt, he reminds me that he has an extraordinarily inventive mind. And how lucky I am to be able to call on him."[102]
Robin

Main article: Robin (comics)




Batman and Robin. Art by Jack Burnley.


Robin, Batman's vigilante partner, has been a widely recognized supporting character for many years.[103] Bill Finger stated that he wanted to include Robin because "Batman didn't have anyone to talk to, and it got a little tiresome always having him thinking."[104] The first Robin, Dick Grayson, was introduced in 1940. In the 1970s he finally grew up, went off to college and became the hero Nightwing. A second Robin, Jason Todd, appeared in the 1980s. In the stories he was eventually badly beaten and then killed in an explosion set by the Joker, but was later revived. He used the Joker's old persona, the Red Hood, and became an antihero vigilante with no qualms about using firearms or deadly force. Carrie Kelly, the first female Robin to appear in Batman stories, was the final Robin in the continuity of Frank Miller's graphic novels The Dark Knight Returns and The Dark Knight Strikes Again, fighting alongside an aging Batman in stories set out of the mainstream continuity.
The third Robin in mainstream comics is Tim Drake, who first appeared in 1989. He went on to star in his own comic series, and currently goes by Red Robin, a variation on the traditional Robin persona. In the first decade of the new millennium, Stephanie Brown served as the fourth in-universe Robin between stints as her self-made vigilante identity The Spoiler, and later as Batgirl.[105] After Stephanie Brown's apparent death, Drake resumed the role of Robin for a time. The role eventually passed to Damian Wayne, the ten-year-old son of Bruce Wayne and Talia al Ghul, in the late 2000s.[106] Damian's tenure as du jour Robin ended when the character was killed off in the pages of Batman Incorporated in 2013.[107] Batman's next young sidekick is Harper Row, a streetwise young woman who avoids the name Robin but followed the ornithological theme nonetheless; she debuted the codename and identity of Bluebird in 2014. Unlike the Robins, Bluebird is willing and permitted to use a gun, albeit non-lethal; her weapon of choice is a modified rifle that fires taser rounds.[108] In 2015, a new series titled We Are Robin will focus on a group of teenagers using the Robin persona to fight crime in Gotham City.
Wayne family
Helena Wayne is the biological daughter of Bruce Wayne and Selina Kyle of an alternate universe established in the early 1960s (Multiverse) where the Golden Age stories took place.
Damian Wayne is the biological son of Bruce Wayne and Talia al Ghul,[65][109][110] and thus the grandson of Ra's al Ghul.
Terry McGinnis is the biological son of Bruce Wayne in the DC animated universe, and has taken over the role as Batman when Bruce has become too elderly to do it.
Romantic interests
Writers have varied in the approach over the years to the "playboy" aspect of Bruce Wayne's persona. Some writers show his playboy reputation as a manufactured illusion to support his mission as Batman, while others have depicted Bruce Wayne as genuinely enjoying the benefits of being "Gotham's most eligible bachelor". Bruce Wayne has been portrayed as being romantically linked with many women throughout his various incarnations. The most significant relationships occurred with Selina Kyle, who is also Catwoman[111] and Talia al Ghul, as both women gave birth to his biological offsprings, Helena Wayne and Damian Wayne, respectively.
Batman's first romantic interest was Julie Madison in Detective Comics #31 (Sept. 1939), however their romance was short-lived. Some of Batman's romantic interests have been women with a respected status in society, such as Julie Madison, Vicki Vale, and Silver St. Cloud. Batman has also been romantically involved with allies, such as Kathy Kane (Batwoman), Barbara Gordon (Batgirl), Sasha Bordeaux, and Wonder Woman, and with villains, such as Selina Kyle (Catwoman), Jezebel Jet, Pamela Isley (Poison Ivy), and Talia al Ghul.
Catwoman
Main article: Catwoman




Catwoman is Batman's most enduring romance.[112] Art by Adam Hughes.


While most of Batman's romantic relationships tend to be short in duration, Catwoman has been his most enduring romance throughout the years.[112] The attraction between Batman and Catwoman, whose real name is Selina Kyle, is present in nearly every version and medium in which the characters appear. Although Catwoman is typically portrayed as a villain, Batman and Catwoman have worked together in achieving common goals and are usually depicted as having a romantic connection.
In an early 1980s storyline, Selina Kyle and Bruce Wayne develop a relationship, in which the closing panel of the final story shows her referring to Batman as "Bruce". However, a change in the editorial team brought a swift end to that storyline and, apparently, all that transpired during the story arc. Out of costume, Bruce and Selina develop a romantic relationship during The Long Halloween. The story shows Selina saving Bruce from Poison Ivy. However, the relationship ends when Bruce rejects her advances twice; once as Bruce and once as Batman. In Batman: Dark Victory, he stands her up on two holidays, causing her to leave him for good and to leave Gotham City for a while. When the two meet at an opera many years later, during the events of the twelve-issue story arc called "Hush", Bruce comments that the two no longer have a relationship as Bruce and Selina. However, "Hush" sees Batman and Catwoman allied against the entire rogues gallery and rekindling their romantic relationship. In "'Hush", Batman reveals his true identity to Catwoman.
The Earth-Two Batman, a character from a parallel world, partners with and marries the reformed Earth-Two Selina Kyle, as shown in Superman Family #211. They have a daughter named Helena Wayne, who becomes the Huntress. Along with Dick Grayson, the Earth-Two Robin, the Huntress takes the role as Gotham's protector once Bruce Wayne retires to become police commissioner, a position he occupies until he is killed during one final adventure as Batman.
Batman and Catwoman are shown having a sexual encounter on the roof of a building in Catwoman vol. 4, #1 (2011); the same issue implies that the two have an ongoing sexual relationship.[113] Following the 2016 DC Rebirth continuity reboot, the two once again have a sexual encounter on top of a building in Batman vol. 3, #14 (2017).[114]
Following the 2016 DC Rebirth continuity reboot, Batman and Catwoman work together in the third volume of Batman. The two also have a romantic relationship, in which they are shown having a sexual encounter on a rooftop and sleeping together.[114][115][116] Bruce proposes to Selina in Batman vol. 3, #24 (2017),[117] and in issue #32, Selina asks Bruce to propose to her again. When he does so, she says, "Yes." [118]
Batman Annual vol. 3, #2 (January 2018) centers on a romantic storyline between Batman and Catwoman. Towards the end, the story is flash-forwarded to the future, in which Bruce Wayne and Selina Kyle are a married couple in their golden years. Bruce receives a terminal medical diagnosis, and Selina cares for him until his death.[119]
Fictional character biography
Batman's history has undergone many retroactive continuity revisions, both minor and major. Elements of the character's history have varied greatly. Scholars William Uricchio and Roberta E. Pearson noted in the early 1990s, "Unlike some fictional characters, the Batman has no primary urtext set in a specific period, but has rather existed in a plethora of equally valid texts constantly appearing over more than five decades."[120]
20th century
Origin




Thomas and Martha Wayne are shot by Joe Chill in Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939). Art by Bob Kane.


The central fixed event in the Batman stories is the character's origin story.[82] As a young boy, Bruce Wayne was horrified and traumatized when he watched his parents, the physician Dr. Thomas Wayne and his wife Martha, murdered with a gun by a mugger named Joe Chill. Batman refuses to utilize any sort of gun on the principle that a gun was used to murder his parents. This event drove him to train his body to its peak condition and fight crime in Gotham City as Batman. Pearson and Uricchio also noted beyond the origin story and such events as the introduction of Robin, "Until recently, the fixed and accruing and hence, canonized, events have been few in number",[82] a situation altered by an increased effort by later Batman editors such as Dennis O'Neil to ensure consistency and continuity between stories.[121]
Golden Age
See also: Batman (Earth-Two)
In Batman's first appearance in Detective Comics #27, he is already operating as a crime-fighter.[122] Batman's origin is first presented in Detective Comics #33 (November 1939) and is later expanded upon in Batman #47. As these comics state, Bruce Wayne is born to Dr. Thomas Wayne and his wife Martha, two very wealthy and charitable Gotham City socialites. Bruce is brought up in Wayne Manor, and leads a happy and privileged existence until the age of eight, when his parents are killed by a small-time criminal named Joe Chill while on their way home from a movie theater. That night, Bruce Wayne swears an oath to spend his life fighting crime. He engages in intense intellectual and physical training; however, he realizes that these skills alone would not be enough. "Criminals are a superstitious cowardly lot", Wayne remarks, "so my disguise must be able to strike terror into their hearts. I must be a creature of the night, black, terrible ..." As if responding to his desires, a bat suddenly flies through the window, inspiring Bruce to craft the Batman persona.[123]
In early strips, Batman's career as a vigilante earns him the ire of the police. During this period, Bruce Wayne has a fiancée named Julie Madison.[124] In Detective Comics #38, Wayne takes in an orphaned circus acrobat, Dick Grayson, who becomes his vigilante partner, Robin. Batman also becomes a founding member of the Justice Society of America,[125] although he, like Superman, is an honorary member,[126] and thus only participates occasionally. Batman's relationship with the law thaws quickly, and he is made an honorary member of Gotham City's police department.[127] During this time, Alfred Pennyworth arrives at Wayne Manor, and after deducing the Dynamic Duo's secret identities, joins their service as their butler.[128]
Silver Age
The Silver Age of Comic Books in DC Comics is sometimes held to have begun in 1956 when the publisher introduced Barry Allen as a new, updated version of The Flash. Batman is not significantly changed by the late 1950s for the continuity which would be later referred to as Earth-One. The lighter tone Batman had taken in the period between the Golden and Silver Ages led to the stories of the late 1950s and early 1960s that often feature many science-fiction elements, and Batman is not significantly updated in the manner of other characters until Detective Comics #327 (May 1964), in which Batman reverts to his detective roots, with most science-fiction elements jettisoned from the series.
After the introduction of DC Comics' multiverse in the 1960s, DC established that stories from the Golden Age star the Earth-Two Batman, a character from a parallel world. This version of Batman partners with and marries the reformed Earth-Two Catwoman, Selina Kyle. The two have a daughter, Helena Wayne, who becomes the Huntress. She assumes the position as Gotham's protector along with Dick Grayson, the Earth-Two Robin, once Bruce Wayne retires to become police commissioner. Wayne holds the position of police commissioner until he is killed during one final adventure as Batman. Batman titles however often ignored that a distinction had been made between the pre-revamp and post-revamp Batmen (since unlike The Flash or Green Lantern, Batman comics had been published without interruption through the 1950s) and would occasionally make reference to stories from the Golden Age.[129] Nevertheless, details of Batman's history were altered or expanded upon through the decades. Additions include meetings with a future Superman during his youth, his upbringing by his uncle Philip Wayne (introduced in Batman #208, January/February 1969) after his parents' death, and appearances of his father and himself as prototypical versions of Batman and Robin, respectively.[130][131] In 1980 then-editor Paul Levitz commissioned the Untold Legend of the Batman limited series to thoroughly chronicle Batman's origin and history.
Batman meets and regularly works with other heroes during the Silver Age, most notably Superman, whom he began regularly working alongside in a series of team-ups in World's Finest Comics, starting in 1954 and continuing through the series' cancellation in 1986. Batman and Superman are usually depicted as close friends. As a founding member of the Justice League of America, Batman appears in its first story, in 1960's Brave and the Bold #28. In the 1970s and 1980s, Brave and the Bold became a Batman title, in which Batman teams up with a different DC Universe superhero each month.
Bronze Age
In 1969, Dick Grayson attends college as part of DC Comics' effort to revise the Batman comics. Additionally, Batman also moves from his mansion, Wayne Manor into a penthouse apartment atop the Wayne Foundation building in downtown Gotham City, in order to be closer to Gotham City's crime. Batman spends the 1970s and early 1980s mainly working solo, with occasional team-ups with Robin and/or Batgirl. Batman's adventures also become somewhat darker and more grim during this period, depicting increasingly violent crimes, including the first appearance (since the early Golden Age) of the Joker as a homicidal psychopath, and the arrival of Ra's al Ghul, a centuries-old terrorist who knows Batman's secret identity. In the 1980s, Dick Grayson becomes Nightwing.[7]
In the final issue of Brave and the Bold in 1983, Batman quits the Justice League and forms a new group called the Outsiders. He serves as the team's leader until Batman and the Outsiders #32 (1986) and the comic subsequently changed its title.
Modern Age
After the 12-issue limited series Crisis on Infinite Earths, DC Comics retconned the histories of some major characters in an attempt at updating them for contemporary audiences. Frank Miller retold Batman's origin in the storyline "Year One" from Batman #404–407, which emphasizes a grittier tone in the character.[132] Though the Earth-Two Batman is erased from history, many stories of Batman's Silver Age/Earth-One career (along with an amount of Golden Age ones) remain canonical in the post-Crisis universe, with his origins remaining the same in essence, despite alteration. For example, Gotham's police are mostly corrupt, setting up further need for Batman's existence. The guardian Phillip Wayne is removed leaving young Bruce to be raised by Alfred Pennyworth. Additionally, Batman is no longer a founding member of the Justice League of America, although he becomes leader for a short time of a new incarnation of the team launched in 1987. To help fill in the revised backstory for Batman following Crisis, DC launched a new Batman title called Legends of the Dark Knight in 1989 and has published various miniseries and one-shot stories since then that largely take place during the "Year One" period.
Subsequently, Batman begins exhibiting an excessive, reckless approach to his crime-fighting, a result of the pain of losing Jason Todd. Batman works solo until the decade's close, when Tim Drake becomes the new Robin.[133]
Many of the major Batman storylines since the 1990s have been inter-title crossovers that run for a number of issues. In 1993, DC published "Knightfall". During the storyline's first phase, the new villain Bane paralyzes Batman, leading Wayne to ask Azrael to take on the role. After the end of "Knightfall", the storylines split in two directions, following both the Azrael-Batman's adventures, and Bruce Wayne's quest to become Batman once more. The story arcs realign in "KnightsEnd", as Azrael becomes increasingly violent and is defeated by a healed Bruce Wayne. Wayne hands the Batman mantle to Dick Grayson (then Nightwing) for an interim period, while Wayne trains for a return to the role.[134]
The 1994 company-wide crossover storyline "Zero Hour" changes aspects of DC continuity again, including those of Batman. Noteworthy among these changes is that the general populace and the criminal element now considers Batman an urban legend rather than a known force.
Batman once again becomes a member of the Justice League during Grant Morrison's 1996 relaunch of the series, titled JLA. During this time, Gotham City faces catastrophe in the decade's closing crossover arc. In 1998's "Cataclysm" storyline, Gotham City is devastated by an earthquake and ultimately cut off from the United States. Deprived of many of his technological resources, Batman fights to reclaim the city from legions of gangs during 1999's "No Man's Land".
Meanwhile, Batman's relationship with the Gotham City Police Department changed for the worse with the events of "Batman: Officer Down" and "Batman: War Games/War Crimes"; Batman's long-time law enforcement allies Commissioner Gordon and Harvey Bullock are forced out of the police department in "Officer Down", while "War Games" and "War Crimes" saw Batman become a wanted fugitive after a contingency plan of his to neutralize Gotham City's criminal underworld is accidentally triggered, resulting in a massive gang war that ends with the sadistic Black Mask the undisputed ruler of the city's criminal gangs. Lex Luthor arranges for the murder of Batman's on-again, off-again love interest Vesper (introduced in the mid-1990s) during the "Bruce Wayne: Murderer?" and "Bruce Wayne: Fugitive" story arcs. Though Batman is able to clear his name, he loses another ally in the form of his new bodyguard Sasha, who is recruited into the organization known as "Checkmate" while stuck in prison due to her refusal to turn state's evidence against her employer. While he was unable to prove that Luthor was behind the murder of Vesper, Batman does get his revenge with help from Talia al Ghul in Superman/Batman #1–6.
21st century
2000s
DC Comics' 2005 limited series Identity Crisis reveals that JLA member Zatanna had altered Batman's memories to prevent him from stopping the Justice League from lobotomizing Dr. Light after he raped Sue Dibny. Batman later creates the Brother I satellite surveillance system to watch over and if necessary, kill the other heroes after he remembered. The revelation of Batman's creation and his tacit responsibility for Blue Beetle's death becomes a driving force in the lead-up to the Infinite Crisis miniseries, which again restructures DC continuity. Batman and a team of superheroes destroy Brother Eye and the OMACs, though at the very end Batman reaches his apparent breaking point when Alexander Luthor Jr. seriously wounds Nightwing. Picking up a gun, Batman nearly shoots Luthor in order to avenge his former sidekick, until Wonder Woman convinces him to not pull the trigger.
Following Infinite Crisis, Bruce Wayne, Dick Grayson (having recovered from his wounds), and Tim Drake retrace the steps Bruce had taken when he originally left Gotham City, to "rebuild Batman".[135] In the Face the Face storyline, Batman and Robin return to Gotham City after their year-long absence. Part of this absence is captured during Week 30 of the 52 series, which shows Batman fighting his inner demons.[136] Later on in 52, Batman is shown undergoing an intense meditation ritual in Nanda Parbat. This becomes an important part of the regular Batman title, which reveals that Batman is reborn as a more effective crime fighter while undergoing this ritual, having "hunted down and ate" the last traces of fear in his mind.[137][138] At the end of the "Face the Face" story arc, Bruce officially adopts Tim (who had lost both of his parents at various points in the character's history) as his son.[139] The follow-up story arc in Batman, Batman and Son, introduces Damian Wayne, who is Batman's son with Talia al Ghul. Although originally in Son of the Demon, Bruce's coupling with Talia was implied to be consensual, this arc ret-conned it into Talia forcing herself on Bruce.[140]
Batman, along with Superman and Wonder Woman, reforms the Justice League in the new Justice League of America series,[141] and is leading the newest incarnation of the Outsiders.[142]
Grant Morrison's 2008 storyline, "Batman R.I.P." featured Batman being physically and mentally broken by the enigmatic villain Doctor Hurt and attracted news coverage in advance of its highly promoted conclusion, which would speculated to feature the death of Bruce Wayne.[143][144] However, though Batman is shown to possibly perish at the end of the arc, the two-issue arc "Last Rites", which leads into the crossover storylines "Final Crisis", shows that Batman survives his helicopter crash into the Gotham City River and returns to the Batcave, only to be summoned to the Hall of Justice by the JLA to help investigate the New God Orion's death. The story ends with Batman retrieving the god-killing bullet used to kill Orion, setting up its use in "Final Crisis".[145] In the pages of Final Crisis Batman is reduced to a charred skeleton.[146] In Final Crisis #7 Wayne is shown witnessing the passing of the first man, Anthro.[147][148] Wayne's "death" sets up the three-issue Battle for the Cowl miniseries in which Wayne's ex-proteges compete for the "right" to assume the role of Batman, which concludes with Grayson becoming Batman,[149] while Tim Drake takes on the identity of Red Robin.[150] Dick and Damian continue as Batman and Robin, and in the crossover storyline "Blackest Night", what appears to be Bruce's corpse is reanimated as a Black Lantern zombie,[151] but is later shown that Bruce's corpse is one of Darkseid's failed Batman clones. Dick and Batman's other friends conclude that Bruce is alive.[152][153]
2010s
Bruce subsequently returns in Morrison's miniseries Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne, which depicts his travels through time from prehistory to present-day Gotham.[154][155][156] Bruce's return sets up Batman Incorporated, an ongoing series which focuses on Wayne franchising the Batman identity across the globe, allowing Dick and Damian to continue as Gotham's Dynamic Duo. Bruce publicly announces that Wayne Enterprises will aid Batman on his mission, known as "Batman, Incorporated". However, due to rebooted continuity that occurred as part of DC Comics' 2011 relaunch of all of its comic books, the New 52, Dick Grayson is restored as Nightwing with Wayne serving as the sole Batman once again. The relaunch also interrupts the publication of Batman, Incorporated, which resumed its story in 2012–2013 with changes to suit the new status quo.
Cultural impact
Batman has become a pop culture icon, recognized around the world. The character's presence has extended beyond his comic book origins; events such as the release of the 1989 Batman film and its accompanying merchandising "brought the Batman to the forefront of public consciousness".[157] In an article commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the character, The Guardian wrote, "Batman is a figure blurred by the endless reinvention that is modern mass culture. He is at once an icon and a commodity: the perfect cultural artefact for the 21st century."[158]
In other media
Main article: Batman franchise media




Adam West as Batman (right) and Burt Ward as Robin in the 1960s Batman TV series


The character of Batman has appeared in various media aside from comic books, such as newspaper syndicated comic strips, books, radio dramas, television, a stage show, and several theatrical feature films. The first adaptation of Batman was as a daily newspaper comic strip which premiered on October 25, 1943.[159] That same year the character was adapted in the 15-part serial Batman, with Lewis Wilson becoming the first actor to portray Batman on screen. While Batman never had a radio series of his own, the character made occasional guest appearances in The Adventures of Superman starting in 1945 on occasions when Superman voice actor Bud Collyer needed time off.[160] A second movie serial, Batman and Robin, followed in 1949, with Robert Lowery taking over the role of Batman. The exposure provided by these adaptations during the 1940s "helped make [Batman] a household name for millions who never bought a comic book".[160]
In the 1964 publication of Donald Barthelme's collection of short stories "Come Back, Dr. Caligari", Barthelme wrote "The Joker's Greatest Triumph". Batman is portrayed for purposes of spoof as a pretentious French-speaking rich man.[161]
Television
The Batman television series, starring Adam West, premiered in January 1966 on the ABC television network. Inflected with a camp sense of humor, the show became a pop culture phenomenon. In his memoir, Back to the Batcave, West notes his dislike for the term 'camp' as it was applied to the 1960s series, opining that the show was instead a farce or lampoon, and a deliberate one, at that. The series ran for 120 episodes; ending in 1968. In between the first and second season of the Batman television series, the cast and crew made the theatrical film Batman (1966). The Who recorded the theme song from the Batman show for their 1966 EP Ready Steady Who, and The Kinks performed the theme song on their 1967 album Live at Kelvin Hall.
The popularity of the Batman TV series also resulted in the first animated adaptation of Batman in The Batman/Superman Hour;[162] the Batman segments of the series were repackaged as The Adventures of Batman and Batman with Robin the Boy Wonder which produced thirty-three episodes between 1968 and 1977. From 1973 until 1986, Batman had a starring role in ABC's Super Friends series; which was animated by Hanna-Barbera. Olan Soule was the voice of Batman in all these shows, but was eventually replaced during Super Friends by Adam West, who also voiced the character in Filmation's 1977 series The New Adventures of Batman.




Batman as depicted in the award-winning 1990s Batman: The Animated Series


In 1992, Batman: The Animated Series premiered on the Fox television network; produced by Warner Bros. Animation and featuring Kevin Conroy as the voice of Batman. The series received considerable acclaim for its darker tone, mature writing, stylistic design, and thematic complexity compared to previous superhero cartoons,[163][164] in addition to multiple Emmy Awards.[165] The series' success led to the theatrical film Batman: Mask of the Phantasm (1993),[166] as well as various spin-off TV series; including Superman: The Animated Series, The New Batman Adventures, Justice League and Justice League Unlimited (each of which also featured Conroy as Batman's voice). The futuristic series Batman Beyond also took place in this same animated continuity and featured a newer, younger Batman voiced by Will Friedle, with the elderly Bruce Wayne (again voiced by Conroy) as a mentor.
In 2004, an unrelated animated series titled The Batman made its debut with Rino Romano voicing Batman. In 2008, this show was replaced by another animated series, Batman: The Brave and the Bold, featuring Diedrich Bader's voice as Batman. In 2013, a new CGI-animated series titled Beware the Batman made its debut, with Anthony Ruivivar voicing Batman.[167]
In 2014, the live-action TV series Gotham premiered on the Fox network, featuring David Mazouz as a 12-year-old Bruce Wayne.
To commemorate the 75th anniversary of the character, Warner Bros aired the television short film, Batman: Strange Days, that was also posted on DC's YouTube channel.
Film
Main article: Batman in film




Michael Keaton as Batman, with Kim Basinger in the 1989 Batman film


In 1989, Warner Bros. released the live-action feature film Batman; directed by Tim Burton and starring Michael Keaton as the title character. The film was a huge success; not only was it the top-grossing film of the year, but at the time was the fifth highest-grossing film in history.[168] The film also won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction.[169] The film's success spawned three sequels: Batman Returns (1992), Batman Forever (1995) and Batman & Robin (1997); the latter two of which were directed by Joel Schumacher instead of Burton, and replaced Keaton as Batman with Val Kilmer and George Clooney, respectively. The second Schumacher film failed to outgross any of its predecessors and was critically panned; causing Warner Bros. to cancel the planned fourth sequel, Batman Unchained,[170] and end the initial film series.
In 2005, Batman Begins was released by Warner Bros. as a reboot of the film series; directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale as Batman. Its sequel, The Dark Knight (2008), set the record for the highest grossing opening weekend of all time in the U.S., earning approximately $158 million,[171] and became the fastest film to reach the $400 million mark in the history of American cinema (eighteenth day of release).[172] These record-breaking attendances saw The Dark Knight end its run as the second-highest domestic grossing film (at the time) with $533 million, bested then only by Titanic.[173] The film also won two Academy Awards, including Best Supporting Actor for the late Heath Ledger.[174] It was eventually followed by The Dark Knight Rises (2012), which served as a conclusion to Nolan's film series.




Promotional poster of Ben Affleck as Batman in the DC Extended Universe


Since 2008, Batman has also starred in various direct-to-video animated films under the DC Universe Animated Original Movies banner. Kevin Conroy has reprised his voice role of Batman for several of these films, while others have featured celebrity voice actors in the role; including Jeremy Sisto, William Baldwin, Bruce Greenwood, Ben McKenzie, and Peter Weller.[175] A Lego-themed version of Batman was also featured as one of the protagonists in the animated film The Lego Movie (2014), with Will Arnett providing the voice.[176] Arnett reprised the voice role for the spin-off film The Lego Batman Movie (2017).[177]
In 2016, Ben Affleck began portraying Batman in the DC Extended Universe with the release of the film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, directed by Zack Snyder.[178] Affleck also made a cameo appearance as Batman in David Ayer's film Suicide Squad (2016).[179] Affleck reprised the role in the 2017 film Justice League[180] and will star in an upcoming Batman film,[181] also set in the DC Extended Universe.[182][183][184]
Video games
See also: List of Batman video games
Since 1986, Batman has starred in multiple video games, most of which were adaptations of the various cinematic or animated incarnations of the character. Among the most successful of these games is the Batman: Arkham series. The first installment, Batman: Arkham Asylum (2009), was released by Rocksteady Studios to critical acclaim; review aggregator Metacritic reports it as having received 92% positive reviews.[185] It was followed by the sequel Batman: Arkham City (2011), which also received widespread acclaim and holds a Metacritic ranking of 94%.[186] A prequel game titled Batman: Arkham Origins (2013) was later released by WB Games Montréal.[187] A fourth game titled Batman: Arkham Knight (2015) has also been released by Rocksteady.[188] As with most animated Batman productions, Kevin Conroy has provided the voice of the character for these games; excluding Arkham Origins, in which the younger Batman is voiced by Roger Craig Smith. In 2016, Telltale Games released Batman: The Telltale Series adventure game, which changed the Wayne Family's history as it is depicted in the Batman mythos.[189]
Interpretations
Gay interpretations
Further information: Homosexuality in the Batman franchise
Gay interpretations of the character have been part of the academic study of Batman since psychologist Fredric Wertham asserted in Seduction of the Innocent in 1954 that "Batman stories are psychologically homosexual ... The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies, of the nature of which they may be unconscious."[190] Andy Medhurst wrote in his 1991 essay "Batman, Deviance, and Camp" that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because "he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality".[191] Professor of film and cultural studies Will Brooker argues the validity of a queer reading of Batman, and that gay readers would naturally find themselves drawn to the lifestyle depicted within, whether the character of Bruce Wayne himself were explicitly gay or not. He also identifies a homophobic element to the vigor with which mainstream fandom rejects the possibility of a gay reading of the character.[192]
Creators associated with the character have expressed their own opinions. Writer Alan Grant has stated, "The Batman I wrote for 13 years isn't gay ... everybody's Batman all the way back to Bob Kane ... none of them wrote him as a gay character. Only Joel Schumacher might have had an opposing view."[193] Frank Miller views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crimefighting, concluding, "He'd be much healthier if he were gay."[194] Grant Morrison said that "Gayness is built into Batman ... Obviously as a fictional character he's intended to be heterosexual, but the basis of the whole concept is utterly gay. I think that's why people like it. All these women fancy him and they all wear fetish clothes and jump around rooftops to get to him. He doesn't care—he's more interested in hanging out with the old guy and the kid."[195]
In 2000, DC refused permission for the reprinting of four panels (from Batman #79, 92, 105, and 139) to illustrate Christopher York's paper All in the Family: Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s.[196] In 2005, painter Mark Chamberlain displayed a number of watercolors depicting both Batman and Robin in suggestive and sexually explicit poses,[197] prompting DC to threaten legal action.[198]
Psychological interpretations
Batman has been the subject of psychological study for some time, and there have been a number of interpretations into the character's psyche.
In Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight, Travis Langley argues that the concept of archetypes as described by psychologists Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell is present in the Batman mythos, such that the character represents the "shadow archetype". This archetype, according to Langley, represents a person's own dark side; it is not necessarily an evil one, but rather one that is hidden from the outside and concealed from both the world and oneself. Langley argues that Bruce Wayne confronts his own darkness early in life; he chooses to use it to instill fear in wrongdoers, with his bright and dark sides working together to fight evil. Langley uses the Jungian perspective to assert that Batman appeals to our own need to face our "shadow selves".[199][200]
References


^ Goulart, Ron, Comic Book Encyclopedia (Harper Entertainment, New York, 2004) ISBN 978-0-06-053816-3
^ Batman #242 (June 1972)
^ Detective Comics #846 (Sept. 2008)
^ a b "DC Entertainment To Give Classic Batman Writer Credit in 'Gotham' and 'Batman v Superman' (Exclusive)". Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2015. 
^ a b Sims, Chris (October 21, 2015). "Bill Finger Has A Creator Credit On This Week's Batman Comics". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2015. 
^ Fleisher, Michael L. The Encyclopedia of Comic Book Heroes Volume 1 Batman Collier Books 1976 ISBN 978-0-02-080090-3 p. 31
^ a b Beatty, Scott (2008). "Batman". In Dougall, Alastair. The DC Comics Encyclopedia. London: Dorling Kindersley. pp. 40–44. ISBN 978-0-7566-4119-1. 
^ "The Big Question: What is the history of Batman, and why does he still appeal?". The Independent. London. July 22, 2008. Archived from the original on July 29, 2008. 
^ "50 Greatest Super Heroes In Comic Book History". FanSided. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved October 1, 2016. 
^ "DIAL B for BLOG - THE WORLD'S GREATEST COMIC BLOGAZINE". Archived from the original on August 19, 2015. 
^ Daniels, Les. Batman: The Complete History. Chronicle Books, 1999. ISBN 978-0-8118-4232-7, p. 18
^ Steranko, Jim. The Steranko History of Comics 1. Reading, PA: Supergraphics, 1970. (ISBN 978-0-517-50188-7)
^ Les Daniels. Batman - The Complete History: The Life and Times of the Dark Knight. pp. 18–20. 
^ Daniels (1999), p. 21, 23
^ Havholm, Peter; Sandifer, Philip (Autumn 2003). "Corporate Authorship: A Response to Jerome Christensen". Critical Inquiry. 30 (1): 192. doi:10.1086/380810. ISSN 0093-1896. 
^ Biography by Joe Desris, in Batman Archives, Volume 3 (DC Comics, 1994), p. 223. ISBN 978-1-56389-099-4
^ Daniels, Les (1999). Batman: The Complete History. Chronicle Books. pp. 21, 23. ISBN 978-0-8118-4232-7. 
^ a b Kane, Andrae, p. 44.
^ a b Kane, Andrae, p. 41.
^ Daniels, Les. DC Comics: A Celebration of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes. New York: Billboard Books/Watson-Guptill Publications, 2003, ISBN 978-0-8230-7919-3, p. 23.
^ Boichel, Bill. "Batman: Commodity as Myth." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, pp. 6–7.
^ Les Daniels. Batman - The Complete History: The Life and Times of the Dark Knight. p. 31. 
^ Groth, Gary (October 2005). "Jerry Robinson". The Comics Journal. 1 (271): 80–81. ISSN 0194-7869. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2007. 
^ Comic Book Artist 3. Winter 1999. TwoMorrows Publishing
^ "Comic Book Interview Super Special: Batman" Fictioneer Press, 1989
^ Daniels (1999), p. 25
^ Wright, Bradford W. Comic Book Nation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 2001. ISBN 978-0-8018-7450-5, p. 19.
^ a b Daniels (1999), p. 29
^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p), Sheldon Moldoff (i). "The Batman and How He Came to Be" Detective Comics 33: 1–2 (Nov. 1939), DC Comics
^ Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939), Grand Comics Database Archived January 18, 2010, at WebCite
^ John Jefferson Darowski, "The Mythic Symbols of Batman Archived April 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine." December 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2008. Archived on March 20, 2008.
^ a b Wright, p. 17.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 38
^ Daniels (2003), p. 36[full citation needed]
^ Daniels (1999), p. 42
^ a b Boichel, p. 9.
^ Wright (2001), p. 59
^ Edmund Hamilton (w), Curt Swan (p). "The Mightiest Team In the World" Superman #76 (June 1952), DC Comics
^ Daniels (1999), p. 88
^ Daniels (1999), p. 91
^ Daniels (1999), p. 84.
^ Boichel, p. 13.
^ York, Christopher (2000). "All in the Family: Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s". The International Journal of Comic Art. 2 (2): 100–110. 
^ Daniels (1999), p. 94
^ Daniels (1999), p. 95
^ Bill Finger (w), Sheldon Moldoff (p). "Gotham Gang Line-Up!" Detective Comics 328 (June 1964), DC Comics
^ Benton, Mike. The Comic Book in America: An Illustrated History. Dallas: Taylor, 1989. ISBN 978-0-87833-659-3, p. 69.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 115
^ Wright, p. 233.
^ Pearson, Roberta E.; Uricchio, William. "Notes from the Batcave: An Interview with Dennis O'Neil." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 18.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 140.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 141.
^ "Batman Artist Rogers is Dead". SciFi Wire. March 28, 2007. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009 : "Even though their Batman run was only six issues, the three laid the foundation for later Batman comics. Their stories include the classic 'Laughing Fish' (in which the Joker's face appeared on fish); they were adapted for Batman: The Animated Series in the 1990s. Earlier drafts of the 1989 Batman movie with Michael Keaton as the Dark Knight were based heavily on their work."
^ Boichel, p. 15
^ Daniels (1999), pp. 147, 149.
^ Wright, p. 267.
^ Daniels (1999), pp. 155, 157.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 161.
^ Weldon, Glen (2016). The Caped Crusade: Batman and the Rise of Nerd Culture. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4767-5669-1. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ a b c d "2000s". DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle. Dorling Kindersley. 2010. ISBN 978-0-7566-6742-9. 
^ "Diamond's 2005 Year-End Sales Charts & Market Share". newsarama.com. 2006. Archived from the original on May 25, 2006. Retrieved October 26, 2006. 
^ "July 2005 Sales Charts: All-Star Batman & Robin Lives Up To Its Name". newsarama.com. 2005. Archived from the original on September 7, 2006. Retrieved October 26, 2006. 
^ Review by Iann Robinson, Crave Online
^ Review by William Gatevackes, PopMatters, February 10, 2006 Archived January 18, 2010, at WebCite
^ a b c Phillips, Dan (August 8, 2009). "Grant Morrison's New Batman and Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved August 8, 2009. 
^ George, Richard (March 11, 2009). "Morrison discusses Batman and Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ Wilkins, Alasdair (June 27, 2009). "Batman Is Reborn ... With A Vengeance". io9. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ Joshua Yehl (March 23, 2016). "Batman's Scott Snyder and Greg Capullo on the New Batsuit and Bloom's Identity". IGN. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. 
^ "'Dark Knight III: The Master Race' Comic Book Prompts Reflection and a Look Ahead". The New York Times. November 23, 2015. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2017. 
^ ""Action," "Detective Comics" Return To Original Numbering For "Rebirth"". ComicBookResources.com. February 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. "Action Comics'" numbering will pick up with #957 and "Detective" will be at #934. Both series will be released on a twice-monthly schedule, at a $2.99 price. 
^ Dennis O'Neil Batman: Knightfall. 1994, Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-09673-6
^ Daniels, 1999[page needed]
^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 202
^ Morrison, Grant (w). Batman Incorporated v2, 0 (September 2012), DC Comics
^ Scott Beatty, The Batman Handbook: The Ultimate Training Manual. 2005, Quirk Books, p51. ISBN 978-1-59474-023-7
^ Aichele, G. (1997). Rewriting Superman. In G. Aichele & T. Pippin (Eds.), The Monstrous and the Unspeakable: The Bible as Fantastic Literature, pp. 75–101. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press.
^ Superman vol. 2, #53
^ Boucher, Geoff (Aug 13, 2010). "Batman versus Superman as class warfare? Grant Morrison: 'Bruce has a butler, Clark has a boss'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. 
^ T. James Musler. 2006. Unleashing the Superhero in Us All.
^ Brooker, Will (2001). Batman Unmasked. NY/London: Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 368. ISBN 978-0-8264-1343-7. 
^ http://readcomiconline.to/Comic/Detective-Comics-1937/Issue-33?id=5141&readType=1
^ a b c d e Pearson; Uricchio. "'I'm Not Fooled By That Cheap Disguise.'" p. 186.
^ Pearson; Uricchio. "Notes from the Batcave: An Interview with Dennis O'Neil" p. 23.
^ Daniels (1999), p. 31.
^ a b c Detective Comics #33, November 1939, Bill Finger, Bob Kane
^ a b c Batman #1 Spring 1940, Bill Finger, Bob Kane
^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 194
^ Sharrett, Christopher. "Batman and the Twilight of the Idols: An Interview with Frank Miller". The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 44.
^ Pearson, p. 208.
^ Dennis O'Neil, Wizard Batman Special 1998
^ a b Terrence R. Wandtke. The Amazing Transforming Superhero!: Essays on the Revision of Characters on the Revision of Characters in Comic Books, Film and Television. p. 91. 
^ Alex S. Romagnoli; Gian S. Pagnucci. Enter the Superheroes: American Values, Culture, and the Canon of Superhero Literature. p. 27. 
^ Mike Conray, 500 Great Comicbook Action Heroes. 2002, Collins & Brown. ISBN 978-1-84411-004-9
^ Greenberger, Robert (2008). The Essential Batman Encyclopedia. Del Rey Books. ISBN 0-345-50106-3. 
^ Grant Morrison (w), Howard Porter (p). "War of the Worlds" JLA 3 (March 1997), DC Comics
^ Scott Lobdell (w), Ed Benes and Jack Herbert (p). "Superman: Doomed" Superman 31 (July 2014), DC Comics
^ a b c Daniels (1999)
^ Daniels (1999), p. 98.
^ Daniels (1999), pp. 159–60.
^ a b Boichel, p. 8.
^ a b Daniels (1995), p. 138.
^ Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i). "Running Wild" Superman/Batman 3 (December 2003), DC Comics
^ Boichel, p. 7.
^ Langley, Travis (2012). Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight. John Wiley & Sons. p. 179. 
^ Langley, 180–210
^ Esposito, Joey (March 5, 2013). "Why Damian Wayne is the Best Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. 
^ Saul, Josh (February 25, 2013). "DC killing off Batman's 'Boy Wonder' Damian Wayne in new comic book". The New York Post. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. 
^ Franich, Darren (February 12, 2014). "Batman has a new female sidekick: Meet Bluebird". Entertainment Weekly Popwatch. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. 
^ Batman #666 (page 2)
^ Grant Morrison. Batman #676
^ geek-news.mtv.com/2011/03/22/batman's-top-10-love-interests/[dead link]
^ a b "Batman's Top 10 Love Interests". MTV News. 2011-03-22. Archived from the original on 2016-04-10. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ Catwoman #1 (September 2011)
^ a b Batman vol. 3, #14 (March 2017)
^ Batman vol. 3, #15 (March 2017)
^ Batman vol. 3, #32 (December 2017)
^ Batman vol. 3, #24 (August 2017)
^ Batman vol. 3, #32 (December 2017)
^ Batman vol. 3, #32 (December 2017)
^ Batman Annual vol. 3, #2 (January 2018)
^ Pearson, p. 191.
^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate" Detective Comics #27 (May 1939), DC Comics
^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). "The Batman Wars Against the Dirigible of Doom" Detective Comics #33 (November 1939), DC Comics
^ She first appears in Detective Comics #31 (Sept. 1939)
^ Paul Levitz (w), Joe Staton (p). "The Untold Origin of the Justice Society" DC Special 29 (August/September 1977), DC Comics
^ Gardner Fox (w). All Star Comics 3 (Winter 1940/41), DC Comics
^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). Batman 7 (November 1941), DC Comics
^ Batman #16 (May 1943); his original last name, Beagle, is revealed in Detective Comics #96 (Feb. 1945)
^ One example is the Englehart/Rogers run of the late 1970s, which has editorial notes directing readers to issues such as Batman #1
^ Bill Finger (w), Sheldon Moldoff (p). "The First Batman" Detective Comics 235 (September 1956), DC Comics
^ Edmond Hamilton (w), Dick Sprang (p). "When Batman Was Robin" Detective Comics 226 (December 1955), DC Comics
^ Miller, Frank; David Mazzucchelli; Richmond Lewis (1987). Batman: Year One. DC Comics. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-85286-077-6. 
^ Alan Grant (w), Norm Breyfogle (p). "Master of Fear" Batman 457 (December 1990), DC Comics
^ Dixon, Chuck. et al. "Batman: Prodigal". Batman 512–514, Shadow of the Bat 32–34, Detective Comics 679–681, Robin 11–13. New York: DC Comics, 1995.
^ "Infinite Crisis" #7, p. 32
^ 52 #30
^ Batman #673
^ Batman #681
^ James Robinson (w), Don Kramer (p). "Face the Face – Conclusion" Batman 654 (August 2006), DC Comics
^ Batman issue 656 published October 2006:
Bruce: "I remember being drugged senseless and refusing to co-operate in some depraved eugenics experiment."
Talia: "Believe me, you cooperated ... magnificently."
^ Brad Meltzer (w), Ed Benes (p). "The Tornado's Path" Justice League of America (vol. 2) 1 (August 2006), DC Comics
^ Chuck Dixon (w), Julian Lopex (p). Batman and the Outsiders (vol. 2) 1 (November 2007), DC Comics
^ Rothstein, Simon. "Batman killed by his OWN dad". November 28, 2008. The Sun. Archived November 28, 2008.
^ Adams, Guy. "Holy smoke, Batman! Are you dead?" November 28, 2008, The Independent. Archived November 28, 2008.
^ Newsarama: "Batman R.I.P. – Finally?" January 15, 2009 Archived January 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Grant Morrison (w), J. G. Jones (p). "How to Murder the Earth" Final Crisis #6 (January 2009), DC Comics
^ Grant Morrison (w). Final Crisis #7 (January 2009), DC Comics
^ "Grant Morrison: Final Crisis Exit Interview, Part 2". Archived from the original on May 20, 2012. 
^ Tony Daniel (w). Battle for the Cowl #3 (May 2009), DC Comics
^ Chris Yost (w). Red Robin #1 (August 2009), DC Comics
^ Geoff Johns (w). Blackest Night 0 (June 2009), DC Comics
^ Grant Morrison (w). Batman and Robin 7 (January 2010), DC Comics
^ Grant Morrison (w). Batman and Robin 8 (February 2010), DC Comics
^ Geddes, John (December 9, 2009). "Grant Morrison on return of original Batman". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 12, 2009. Retrieved December 10, 2009. 
^ Segura, Alex (December 9, 2009). "DCU in 2010: The Return of Bruce Wayne hits in April". DC Comics. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved December 10, 2009. 
^ "Batman solicitations for May 2010 at DC's The Source". DC Comics. February 11, 2010. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ Pearson, Roberta E.; Uricchio, William. "Introduction." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 1.
^ Finkelstein, David; Macfarlane, Ross (March 15, 1999). "Batman's big birthday". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on January 14, 2008. Retrieved June 19, 2007. 
^ Daniels (1999), p. 50
^ a b Daniels (1999), p. 64.
^ Olsen, Lance. "Linguistic Pratfalls in Barthelme", South Atlantic Review 5.4 (1986), pp. 69–77. Stable URL: "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved 2009-08-13. 
^ Boichel, p. 14.
^ "The Greatest Comic Book Cartoons of All Time" Archived May 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.. IGN. January 26, 2007. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
^ Serafino, Jason (January 13, 2012). "The 25 Best Animated Comic Book TV Shows Of All Time". Complex. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved February 10, 2012. 
^ "Batman" (1992) - Awards Archived January 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.. IMDB. Retrieved May 31, 2011.
^ "Top 25 Animated Movies of All-Time". IGN. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved October 10, 2012. 
^ "Good News/Bad News Batman Fans". toonami.tumblr.com. September 22, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2014. 
^ "Batman (1989)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007. Retrieved May 27, 2007. 
^ "Batman". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Retrieved October 4, 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ "Before 'Batman Begins': Secret History of the Movies That Almost Got Made". Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. 
^ "Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved July 20, 2008. 
^ "Fastest to $400 million". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2008. 
^ "All Time Domestic Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008. 
^ "Academy Awards Database - Actor in a Supporting Role, 2008". [permanent dead link]
^ "Voice(s) of Batman". Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2017. 
^ Sneider, Jeff (June 26, 2012). "Super voices in play for WB's Lego movie". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012. 
^ Kit, Borys (October 10, 2014). "'Lego Batman' Spinoff Movie in the Works at Warner Bros". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2014. 
^ "Ben Affleck To Play Batman In Warner Bros' Batman-Superman Pic; Studio Sets July 17, 2015 Release Date". Deadline. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. 
^ "2016 brings Batman, Superman and the 'Dawn' of a new superhero universe, 2016". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. 
^ "Justice League Producers Explain Where The Movie Picks Up, 2016". Comicbook.com. 2016. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. 
^ "Ben Affleck keeps the title for his Batman movie (very) simple". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 4, 2016. 
^ "Joe Manganiello Cast As Deathstroke In Ben Affleck's Batman Movie". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. 
^ "Batman standalone movie directed by Ben Affleck confirmed, 2018 release date likely". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. 
^ "Ben Affleck Reminds Everyone 'The Batman' Doesn't Exist Until It Does, May Have A Different Title". /Film. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. 
^ Batman: Arkham Asylum at Metacritic, accessed June 12, 2012 Archived April 6, 2012, at WebCite
^ Batman: Arkham City at Metacritic, accessed June 12, 2012 Archived June 19, 2012, at WebCite
^ May Cover Revealed: Batman: Arkham Origins Archived April 9, 2013, at WebCite
^ Ramsay, Randolph. (March 6, 2014). "In Batman: Arkham Knight, the Batmobile Is More Than Just a Car, it's a Tank" Archived June 3, 2014, at WebCite GameSpot. Retrieved June 7, 2015.
^ Webster, Andrew (September 24, 2016). "Telltale's Batman game continues to put its own stamp on the Dark Knight mythology". Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2017. 
^ Wertham, Fredric. Seduction of the Innocent. Rinehart and Company, Inc., 1954. pp. 189–90.
For discussion of Wertham's impact see Brooker (2001).
^ Medhurst, Andy. "Batman, Deviance, and Camp." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 150.
^ Brooker, Will (2001) Batman Unmasked: Analyzing a Cultural Icon, Continuum. ISBN 978-1-62356-752-1, pp. 101 ff.
^ "Is Batman Gay?". Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2005. 
^ Sharrett, p. 38.
^ Playboy Grant Morrison interview, accessed May 2, 2012.
^ Beatty, Bart (2000). "Don't Ask, Don't Tell: How Do You Illustrate an Academic Essay about Batman and Homosexuality?". The Comics Journal (228): 17–18. 
^ "Mark Chamberlain (American, 1967)". Artnet. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. 
^ "Gallery told to drop 'gay' Batman". BBC News Online. August 19, 2005. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. 
^ Langley, Travis. Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight". John Wiley & Sons; 1st edition, 2012, ISBN 1-118-16765-1
^ "A Dark and Stormy Knight: Why Batman?". Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved October 5, 2016. 


Bibliography


Beatty, Scott (2005). The Batman Handbook: The Ultimate Training Manual. Quirk Books. ISBN 978-1-59474-023-7. 
Daniels, Les (1999). Batman: The Complete History. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-2470-5. 
Daniels, Les (1995). DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes. Bulfinch. ISBN 978-0-8212-2076-4. 
Jones, Gerard (1995). Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-03657-8. 
Pearson, Roberta E.; Uricchio, William (editors). (1991). The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6. 
Wright, Bradford W. (2001). Comic Book Nation: The Transformation of Youth Culture in America. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6514-5. 


External links

Find more aboutBatmanat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote



Official website
Batman Bio at the Unofficial Guide to the DC Universe

Batman on DC Database,  an external wiki, a DC Comics wiki
Batman (1940 - present) Comics Inventory
Batman at Curlie (based on DMOZ)





Articles and topics related to Batman











v
t
e


Batman




Created by Bob Kane and Bill Finger in "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate"
Other contributors



Characters



List of DC Comics characters named Batman
List of Batman supporting characters
List of Batman Family adversaries
List of Batman enemies in other media





Locations




Gotham City



Ace Chemicals
Arkham Asylum
Batcave
Blackgate Penitentiary
Gotham Academy
GothCorp
Gotham City Police Department
Haly's Circus
Iceberg Lounge
Wayne Enterprises
Wayne Manor








Blüdhaven
Lazarus Pit
Santa Prisca








Technology
and units




Equipment



Batarang
Batcomputer
Batsuit

Utility Belt




Bat-Signal
Bat phone





Vehicles



Batboat
Batcopter
Batcycle
Batmobile
Batplane
Redbird








Batman in other media



In film
In video games
In amusement parks
In children's books





Ongoing publications



Batman
Batman Beyond
Batman/Superman
Detective Comics
Mother Panic





Miscellanea



Homosexuality in the Batman franchise
Dark Knight (nickname)
The Bat Whispers
Batkid
The Essential Batman Encyclopedia
Venom








 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Batman characters



Batman family




By secret identity



Batman
Robin
Catwoman
Batwoman
Batgirl
Huntress
Nightwing
Flamebird
Oracle
Spoiler
Red Robin
Red Hood
Batwing
Black Bat
Bluebird





By public identity



Bruce Wayne
Dick Grayson
Kathy Kane
Bette Kane
Barbara Gordon
Helena Wayne
Jason Todd
Helena Bertinelli
Tim Drake
Stephanie Brown
Cassandra Cain
Kate Kane
Damian Wayne








Supporting
characters




Main supporting



Julie Madison
Martha Wayne
Thomas Wayne
Alfred Pennyworth
Vicki Vale
Knight
Squire
Dark Ranger
Ace the Bat-Hound
Leslie Thompkins
Silver St. Cloud
Lucius Fox
Orpheus
Nightrunner
Bat-Cow





GCPD contacts



James "Jim" Gordon
Harvey Bullock
Sarah Essen
Maggie Sawyer
Renee Montoya
Crispus Allen





Neutral characters



Mayors of Gotham City

Hamilton Hill


Professor Carter Nichols
Bat-Mite
Arnold John Flass
Gillian B. Loeb
Azrael
The Sacred Order of Saint Dumas





Superhero allies



Superman
Wonder Woman
Green Arrow








Adversaries




Central rogues gallery



Hugo Strange
Joker
Catwoman
Clayface
Scarecrow
Penguin
Two-Face
Mad Hatter
Riddler
Deadshot
Mr. Freeze
Poison Ivy
Man-Bat
Talia al Ghul
Ra's al Ghul
Deathstroke
Killer Croc
Black Mask
Ventriloquist
Harley Quinn
Bane
Hush





Mad scientists



Doctor Death
Crime Doctor
Professor Milo
Jeremiah Arkham
Professor Pyg
Dollmaker





Mobsters and crime lords



Joe Chill
Tony Zucco
Sal Maroni
Lew Moxon
Rupert Thorne
Carmine Falcone





Rivals and vigilantes



Anarky
Lady Shiva
Red Hood





Recurring antagonists



Monk
Tweedledum and Tweedledee
Cavalier
Solomon Grundy
Killer Moth
Firefly
Calendar Man
Clock King
Kite Man
Catman
Simon Hurt
Owlman
Blockbuster
Cluemaster
Copperhead
Joker's Daughter
Black Spider
Doctor Phosphorus
Maxie Zeus
Electrocutioner
Film Freak
KGBeast
Ratcatcher
Deacon Blackfire
Victor Zsasz
Amygdala
Prometheus
David Cain
Great White Shark
Nyssa Raatko





Hostile organizations



Terrible Trio
League of Assassins
Court of Owls








Alternative versions




Batman



Earth-Two
Batman of Zur-En-Arrh
Owlman
The Dark Knight Returns
Terry McGinnis
Batzarro





Robin



Earth-Two
Carrie Kelley








Alternative versions of Barbara Gordon
Alternative versions of Joker








Affiliated teams



Batmen of All Nations
Birds of Prey
Justice League
World's Finest Team
Outsiders





Other media




Gotham



Bruce Wayne
James Gordon
Fish Mooney
Oswald Cobblepot





Other



Batman enemies in other media

Egghead
Roland Daggett
Andrea Beaumont
Blight


Rachel Dawes















v
t
e


Batman publications and storylines



Current series



Batgirl
Batman
Batman Beyond
Batwoman
Detective Comics
Nightwing
Harley Quinn
Red Hood and the Outlaws
Batgirl and the Birds of Prey





Completed
ongoing series



Azrael
Batman: Arkham Unhinged
Batman: The Dark Knight
Batman: Gotham Knights
Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight
Batman: Shadow of the Bat
Batman: Streets of Gotham
The Batman Adventures
Batman and Robin
Batman and The Outsiders
The Batman Chronicles
Batman Confidential
Batman Family
Batman Incorporated
Batman/Superman
Batwing
Birds of Prey
The Brave and the Bold
Gotham Academy
Gotham by Midnight
Gotham Central
Gotham City Sirens
The Huntress
The Joker
Man-Bat
Red Hood/Arsenal
Red Robin
Robin
Robin: Son of Batman
Superman/Batman
We Are... Robin
World's Finest Comics





Completed
limited series



Anarky
Batgirl: Year One
Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity
Batman: Arkham City
Batman: Battle for the Cowl
Batman: Cacophony
Batman: The Cult
Bat-Mite
The Dark Knight Returns
The Dark Knight Strikes Again
The Dark Knight III: The Master Race
Batman: Dark Victory
Batman Eternal
Batman: Gates of Gotham
Batman: GCPD
Batman: Gotham County Line
Batman: The Long Halloween
Batman: Nosferatu
Batman: Orpheus Rising
Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne
Batman: Turning Points
Batman: The Widening Gyre
Batman: Year 100
Batman and the Mad Monk
Batman and the Monster Men
Batman and Robin Eternal
Batman Black and White
First Wave
Gotham Underground
Man-Bat
Robin: Year One
Section 8
Superman & Batman: Generations
Trinity
The Untold Legend of the Batman





One-shots



Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth
The 12 Cent Adventure
Castle of the Bat
Dark Knight Dynasty
Dark Night: A True Batman Story
Digital Justice
Earth One
Holy Terror
In Darkest Knight
The Killing Joke
Knight Gallery
Death of Innocents
The Man Who Laughs
Nine Lives
Noël
Son of the Demon
Two Faces
Batman/Houdini: The Devil's Workshop
The Batman Adventures: Mad Love
Batman & Dracula trilogy
Leatherwing
The Berlin Batman
Gotham by Gaslight
Joker
Batman: Thrillkiller
Batman: Gotham Noir





Storylines



"The Case of the Chemical Syndicate"
"Dark Moon Rising"
"The Man Behind the Red Hood!"
"Joker's Millions"
"Year One"
"Year Two"
"A Death in the Family"
"Year Three"
"The Man Who Falls"
"Anarky in Gotham City"
"Gothic"
"The Return of the Joker"
"Prey"
"The Last Arkham"
"Knightfall"
"Contagion"
"Legacy"
"Cataclysm"
"No Man's Land"
"Joker: Last Laugh"
"Bruce Wayne: Fugitive"
"Hush"
"Broken City"
"War Games"
"City of Crime"
"Under the Hood"
"War Crimes"
"Face the Face"
"Batman and Son"
"The Resurrection of Ra's al Ghul"
"Batman R.I.P."
"Whatever Happened to the Caped Crusader?"
"Batwoman: Elegy"
"Bruce Wayne: The Road Home"
"Night of the Owls"
"Death of the Family"
"Zero Year"
"Endgame"
"Robin War"





Inter-company
crossovers



Batman/Aliens
Batman/Hellboy/Starman
Batman/Daredevil: King of New York
Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham
Batman & Spider-Man: New Age Dawning
Batman/Tarzan: Claws of the Cat-woman
Batman/Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
Batman/The Spirit
Batman versus Predator
Daredevil/Batman: Eye for an Eye
Spawn/Batman
Batman-Spawn: War Devil
Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator
Spider-Man and Batman: Disordered Minds





Incomplete



All Star Batman & Robin, the Boy Wonder
Batman: The Dark Prince Charming





Related topics



Batman: Anarky
Batman: Child of Dreams
Batman: Haunted Knight
The Batman Chronicles
Batman Legends
Elseworlds






Publications are listed alphabetically by published titles. Storylines are listed in publication order. Compiled without respect for canon or "current" continuity.










v
t
e


Batman franchise media



Live-action television



Batman

episodes


Legends of the Superheroes
OnStar commercials
Birds of Prey
Return to the Batcave: The Misadventures of Adam and Burt
Gotham

episodes

season 3
4


characters







Live-action
serials and films



Batman (1943)
Batman and Robin
Batman (1966)




1989–97 film series



Batman (1989)
Batman Returns
Batman Forever
Batman & Robin





The Dark Knight Trilogy



Batman Begins
The Dark Knight
The Dark Knight Rises





DC Extended Universe



Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice
Justice League








Animated television




Featuring Batman



The Adventures of Batman
The Batman/Superman Hour
The Batman/Tarzan Adventure Hour
The New Adventures of Batman
Batman: The Animated Series

episodes


The New Batman Adventures
Batman Beyond

episodes


The Batman

episodes


Batman: The Brave and the Bold

episodes


Beware the Batman

episodes







With other heroes



Super Friends

episodes


Justice League

episodes


Justice League Unlimited

episodes


Young Justice

episodes


Justice League Action

episodes










Animated films




Featuring Batman



Mask of the Phantasm
SubZero
Return of the Joker
Mystery of the Batwoman
The Batman vs. Dracula
Gotham Knight
Under the Red Hood
Year One
The Dark Knight Returns
DC Super Heroes Unite
Son of Batman
Assault on Arkham
Batman vs. Robin
Bad Blood
The Killing Joke
Return of the Caped Crusaders
The Lego Batman Movie
Batman and Harley Quinn
Batman vs. Two-Face
Scooby-Doo! & Batman: The Brave and the Bold
Gotham by Gaslight
Batman Ninja





With Justice League



Justice League: The New Frontier
Superman/Batman: Public Enemies
Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths
Superman/Batman: Apocalypse
Justice League: Doom
Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox
JLA Adventures: Trapped in Time
Justice League: War
The Lego Movie
Justice League: Throne of Atlantis
Batman Unlimited: Animal Instincts
Justice League: Gods and Monsters
Batman Unlimited: Monster Mayhem
Justice League vs. Teen Titans
Batman Unlimited: Mechs vs. Mutants





With Justice League Dark



Justice League Dark








Animated shorts



Chase Me
Strange Days





Novels



Dead White
Fear Itself
Inferno
The Ultimate Evil
Enemies & Allies
Wayne of Gotham





Enemies in other media



Joker
Bane
Catwoman





Other characters in other media



Robin
Barbara Gordon





Related topics



Batman & Bill
Bruce Wayne (unproduced series)
Batkid Begins
Batman action figures

Lego Batman
Batman Total Justice


Bat phone
Bat-Manga!: The Secret History of Batman in Japan
List of Batman films cast members
List of Batman television series cast members
List of Batman video games
List of Batman children's books
Batman music












v
t
e


Batman music



Soundtracks




Films



Batman (score)
Batman (soundtrack)
Batman Returns
Batman Forever (soundtrack)
Batman Forever (score)
Batman & Robin
Batman Begins
The Dark Knight
The Dark Knight Rises
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice





Video games



Batman: Arkham City
Batman: Arkham Origins








Songs




TV series



"Batman Theme"
"Batusi"





Batman



"Batdance"
"Partyman"
"The Arms of Orion"
"Scandalous!"
"The Future"





Batman Returns



"Face to Face"





Batman Forever



"Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me"
"Kiss from a Rose"
"The Riddler"
"Where Are You Now?"





Batman & Robin



"The End Is the Beginning Is the End"
"Look into My Eyes"
"Gotham City"
"Foolish Games"
"Moaner"
"Lazy Eye"















v
t
e


Batman video games



Arkham series



Arkham Asylum
Arkham City

Lockdown


Arkham Origins

Mobile
Blackgate


Arkham Knight
Arkham VR





Lego series



Lego Batman: The Videogame
Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes
Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham





Film-based



Batman (Ocean, 1989)
Batman: The Video Game (NES, 1989)
Batman (Mega Drive/Genesis, 1990)
Batman (arcade, 1990)
Returns
Forever
Forever: The Arcade Game
Batman & Robin
Begins
The Dark Knight (cancelled)





Animation-based



The Animated Series
The Adventures of Batman & Robin
Beyond: Return of the Joker
Chaos in Gotham
Gotham City Racer
Vengeance
Rise of Sin Tzu
The Brave and the Bold – The Videogame





Other games



Batman (1986)
The Caped Crusader
Return of the Joker
Dark Tomorrow
DC Universe Online
Gotham City Impostors
Batman (2013)
The Telltale Series (2016)
The Enemy Within (2017)






 List of Batman video games  Batman franchise media










v
t
e


Batman in amusement parks






Arkham Asylum – Shock Therapy
Batman Adventure – The Ride
Batman Adventure – The Ride 2
Batman: The Dark Knight
Batman The Escape
Batman: Knight Flight
Batman: La Fuga
Batman: The Ride
Batman: The Ride (Six Flags Fiesta Texas)
Batwing Spaceshot
Batwing
Catwoman's Whip
The Dark Knight Coaster
Gotham City Gauntlet: Escape from Arkham Asylum
Harley Quinn Crazy Train
The Joker
The Joker (Six Flags Discovery Kingdom)
The Joker (Six Flags México)
The Joker Funhouse Coaster
The Joker's Jinx
Justice League: Alien Invasion 3D
Justice League: Battle for Metropolis
Mind Bender (Six Flags Over Georgia)
Mr. Freeze or Mr Freeze: Reverse Blast
The Penguin
Riddler's Revenge












v
t
e


Batman in film



1989–1997 series



Batman

Score
Soundtrack


Batman Returns

Soundtrack


Batman Forever

Score
Soundtrack


Batman & Robin

Soundtrack







The Dark Knight Trilogy



Batman Begins

Soundtrack
Video game
Rachel Dawes


The Dark Knight

Soundtrack
Cancelled video game
Joker


The Dark Knight Rises

Soundtrack







Video games



Batman home computer game
Batman: The Video Game for the NES and Game Boy
Batman: The Video Game for the Sega Genesis
Batman arcade game
Batman Returns
Batman Forever video game
Batman Forever pinball
Batman Forever: The Arcade Game
Batman and Robin





Unofficial and fan films




Features



Batman Dracula
Alyas Batman at Robin
The Wild World of Batwoman
James Batman
Batman Fights Dracula
Fight Batman Fight!
Alyas Batman en Robin





Shorts



Batman: Dead End
Grayson
World's Finest
Robin's Big Date
City of Scars
Seeds of Arkham
Batman: Death Wish








See also



Batman franchise media
Batman: Gotham Knight
Batman OnStar commercials
Catwoman












v
t
e


Batman: Arkham franchise



Games



Asylum
City

Lockdown


Origins

mobile
Blackgate


Knight
VR





Comics



City
Unhinged





Film



Assault on Arkham





Developers



Rocksteady Studios
WB Games Montréal
NetherRealm Studios
Armature Studio
Turbine





Related



Batman franchise media

video games


Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth
Injustice: Gods Among Us
Injustice 2












v
t
e


Justice League






Gardner Fox





Founding members



Superman
Batman
Wonder Woman
Green Lantern (Hal Jordan)
Flash (Barry Allen)
Aquaman
Martian Manhunter (original)
Black Canary (some retellings)
Triumph (some retellings)
Cyborg (some retellings)





Enemies




Major antagonists



Amazo
Anti-Monitor
Appellaxians
Brainiac
Darkseid
Deathstroke
Despero
Doctor Destiny
Doctor Light
Doomsday
Eclipso
Felix Faust
The General
Imperiex
Joker
Kanjar Ro
The Key
Lex Luthor
Libra
Maxwell Lord
Neron
Professor Ivo
Prometheus
Queen Bee
Queen of Fables
Ra's al Ghul
Sinestro
Sonar
Starro
T. O. Morrow
Vandal Savage
The White Martians





Organizations



Brotherhood of Evil
Demons Three
The Extremists
The Crime Syndicate
Kobra
Legion of Doom
The Secret Society of Super Villains
Injustice Gang
Injustice League
League of Assassins
Manhunters
The Royal Flush Gang








Spin-off groups



Extreme Justice
Just'a Lotta Animals
Justice Guild of America
Justice League 3000
Justice League Dark
Justice League Elite
Justice League Europe
Justice League International
Justice League Task Force
Justice League United
Justice Legion Alpha
Super Buddies
Super Jrs.
Young Justice





Bases and facilities



The Hall of Justice
Happy Harbor

Secret Sanctuary


Justice League Satellite
Justice League Watchtower





Publications




Storylines



"Breakdowns"
"JLApe: Gorilla Warfare!"
"World War III"
"Tower of Babel"
"JLA: Earth 2"
"Justice Leagues"
"Pain of the Gods"
"The Lightning Saga"
"Throne of Atlantis"
"Trinity War"





Current series



Justice League (vol 3)
Justice League of America (vol. 5)





Previous series



Justice League of America
Justice League International
Justice League Europe
Justice League Quarterly
Justice League Task Force
Extreme Justice
JLA
Justice
JLA: Classified
Justice League: Generation Lost
Justice League (The New 52)
Justice League Dark
Justice League United
Justice League 3000





Limited series



Justice Riders
Justice League Elite
JLA: The Nail series
DC Comics Two Thousand
Created Equal
Act of God
Destiny
Age of Wonder
JLA: Shogun of Steel
Cry for Justice





Crossovers



JLA/Avengers
JLA/The 99
Justice League/Power Rangers








Related articles



A.R.G.U.S.
Bizarro League
Snapper Carr
JL8
In other media
Justice Society of America
Squadron Supreme












v
t
e


Justice League International






Keith Giffen
J. M. DeMatteis





Initial members




Pre-Flashpoint



Batman
Black Canary
Blue Beetle (Ted Kord)
Booster Gold
Captain Marvel
Doctor Fate
Doctor Light (Kimiyo Hoshi)
Guy Gardner
Martian Manhunter
Mister Miracle





The New 52



August General in Iron
Booster Gold
Fire
Godiva
Green Lantern (Guy Gardner)
Ice
Rocket Red (Gavril Ivanovich)
Vixen








Supporting characters



L-Ron
Catherine Cobert
Maxwell Lord
Oberon
Superman





Antagonists



Black Hand
Cadre
Despero
Doomsday
Extremists
Injustice League
Kite Man
Lobo
Magog
Major Disaster
Manga Khan
Maxwell Lord
Neron (DC comics)
Queen Bee
Royal Flush Gang
Signal Men
Sinestro
Starbreaker
Suicide Squad
Darkseid
Weapons Master
Weather Wizard
Wizard





Locations



Bialya
The Hall of Justice





Publications and storylines



Legends
Formerly Known as the Justice League
Justice League: Generation Lost





Spinoff teams



Extreme Justice
Justice League America
Justice League Europe
Justice League Task Force












v
t
e


Superman / Batman crossover media



Comic books



World's Finest Comics
Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity
Superman/Batman
Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator





Television



The Batman/Superman Hour
The Superman/Batman Adventures
The New Batman/Superman Adventures





Books



Enemies & Allies





Film



Superman/Batman: Public Enemies
Superman/Batman: Apocalypse
Lego Batman: The Movie – DC Super Heroes Unite
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice





Video game



Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes
Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham





The Dark Knight Universe



The Dark Knight Returns

film


The Dark Knight Strikes Again
The Dark Knight III: The Master Race





Fan films and parodies



World's Finest
HISHE: Super Cafe





Miscellanea



Composite Superman
Hiro Okamura












v
t
e


Catwoman






Bob Kane
Bill Finger





Catwomen



Selina Kyle
Holly Robinson





Supporting characters



Batman
Slam Bradley
Harley Quinn
Helena
Poison Ivy
Holly Robinson
Leslie Thompkins
Wildcat
Zatanna





Antagonists



Angle Man
Black Mask
Film Freak
Hellhound
Hush
The Joker
The Riddler
The Scarecrow
She-Cat
Zeiss





Publications



Catwoman: Guardian of Gotham
Catwoman: When in Rome
Gotham City Sirens





In other media



Catwoman (film)
Chase Me
DC Showcase: Catwoman
Catwoman (video game)





Related articles



Catwoman's Whip












v
t
e


Batgirl



Creators



Bill Finger
Sheldon Moldoff (Bette Kane)
Gardner Fox
Carmine Infantino (Barbara Gordon)
Kelley Puckett
Damion Scott (Cassandra Cain)
Chuck Dixon
Tom Lyle (Stephanie Brown)





Batgirls



Bette Kane
Barbara Gordon
Helena Bertinelli
Cassandra Cain
Stephanie Brown





Supporting characters



Batman
Black Canary
James Gordon
Nightwing
Oracle
Alfred Pennyworth
Proxy
Robin
Leslie Thompkins
Alysia Yeoh





Enemies



David Cain
James Gordon Jr.
The Joker
Joker's Daughter
Killer Moth
Knightfall
Livewire
Lady Shiva





In other media



Batman (TV series)
The Batman/Superman Hour
The New Adventures of Batman
Batman: The Animated Series
Batman & Robin
The New Batman Adventures
Gotham Girls
The Batman
Young Justice





Related articles



Birds of Prey

Batgirl and the Birds of Prey


Gotham City












v
t
e


The Outsiders






Mike W. Barr
Jim Aparo





Members



Arsenal
Atomic Knight (Gardner Grayle)
Batgirl (Cassandra Cain)
Batman
Black Lightning
Captain Boomerang (Owen Mercer)
Captain Marvel Jr.
Grace Choi
The Creeper
The Eradicator
Sebastian Faust
Geo-Force
Green Arrow
Halo
Indigo
Jade
Katana
Francine Langstrom
Looker
Metamorpho
Nightwing
The Olympian
Owlman (Roy Raymond Jr.)
Red Robin
ReMAC
Starfire
Technocrat
Thunder





Locations



Batcave
Markovia
Stagg Enterprises





Supporting Characters



Checkmate
Alfred Pennyworth
Sapphire Stagg
Simon Stagg





Enemies



Bad Samaritan
Baron Bedlam
Brother Blood
Doctor Sivana
Duke of Oil
Felix Faust
Fearsome Five
Force of July
Kobra
Masters of Disaster
Sabbac (Ishmael Gregor)
SKULL












v
t
e


Birds of Prey






Creators: Chuck Dixon
Jordan B. Gorfinkel
Gail Simone





Titles



Batgirl and the Birds of Prey





Main characters



Barbara Gordon
Black Canary
Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)





Notable members



Big Barda
Black Alice
Catwoman
Gypsy
Hawk and Dove
Hawkgirl (Kendra Saunders)
Jade Canary
Judomaster (Sonia Sato)
Katana
Lady Blackhawk
Manhunter (Kate Spencer)
Misfit
Poison Ivy
Power Girl
Strix
Vixen





Supporting characters



Batman
Blue Beetle (Ted Kord)
Creote
Kurt Lance
Nightwing
Power Girl
Savant
Sin
Wildcat





Adversaries



The Calculator
Cheshire
Lady Spellbinder
Pistolera
Ra's al Ghul
The Penguin
Secret Six
The Society
Spy Smasher
Twelve Brothers in Silk and White Canary





In other media



TV series












v
t
e


Golden Age of Comic Books



All-American
Comics



The Atom (Al Pratt)
Black Canary
Doctor Mid-Nite
Doiby Dickles
The Flash (Jay Garrick)
The Gay Ghost
Green Lantern (Alan Scott)
Hawkgirl
Hawkman
Hop Harrigan
The King
Justice Society of America
Mister Terrific (Terry Sloane)
Johnny Thunder
Red Tornado (Ma Hunkel)
Sargon the Sorcerer
Ultra-Man
The Whip
Wildcat
Wonder Woman





Archie Comics



The Black Hood
Captain Flag
The Comet
The Firefly
The Fox
The Shield
The Web
The Wizard





Centaur Comics



Airman
Amazing-Man
The Arrow
The Clock
The Eye
The Fantom of the Fair
The Masked Marvel
Minimidget





National Allied



Air Wave
Aquaman
Batman
Crimson Avenger
Dan the Dyna-Mite
Doctor Fate
Doctor Occult
Genius Jones
Green Arrow
Guardian
Hourman
Johnny Quick (Johnny Chambers)
Liberty Belle
Manhunter
Merry, the Girl of 1000 Gimmicks
Mister America
Robin

Dick Grayson


Robotman
Sandman
Sandy the Golden Boy
Shining Knight
The Spectre
Speedy (Roy Harper)
Star-Spangled Kid
Starman (Ted Knight)
Stripesy
Superboy (Kal-El)
Superman
Tarantula
TNT
Vigilante
Wing
Zatara
Seven Soldiers of Victory





Fawcett Comics



Bulletgirl
Bulletman
Captain Marvel
Captain Marvel Jr.
Captain Midnight
The Golden Arrow
Ibis the Invincible
Lieutenant Marvels
Mary Marvel
Master Man
Minute-Man
Mr. Scarlet
Phantom Eagle
Pinky the Whiz Kid
Spy Smasher





Fox Comics



Black Fury
Blue Beetle (Dan Garrett)
The Bouncer
Bronze Man
Dynamo
The Flame
Green Mask
Samson
Spider Queen
Stardust the Super Wizard
U.S. Jones
V-Man
Wonder Man





Nedor Comics



American Crusader
American Eagle
Black Terror
Captain Future
Cavalier
Doc Strange
Fighting Yank
The Ghost
Grim Reaper
Judy of the Jungle
Lance Lewis, Space Detective
Liberator
The Magnet
Miss Masque
Princess Pantha
Pyroman
The Scarab
The Woman in Red





Quality Comics



#711
The Black Condor
Blackhawk
Blue Tracer
Bozo the Iron Man
Captain Triumph
The Clock
Doll Girl
Doll Man
Firebrand
The Human Bomb
The Invisible Hood
The Jester
Kid Eternity
Lady Luck
Madame Fatal
Magno
The Manhunter
Merlin the Magician
Midnight
Miss America
Mouthpiece
Neon the Unknown
Phantom Lady
Plastic Man
Quicksilver
The Ray
Red Bee
Red Torpedo
The Spider
Spider Widow
Uncle Sam
Wildfire
Wonder Boy





Timely Comics



American Ace
The Angel
Black Marvel
The Black Widow
The Blazing Skull
The Blonde Phantom
The Blue Diamond
Breeze Barton
Bucky

Bucky Barnes


Captain America
Citizen V
The Destroyer
Dynamic Man
Father Time
Ferret
Fin
Golden Girl
The Human Torch
Jack Frost
Laughing Mask
Marvel Boy
Miss America
Mercury
Namor
Namora
The Patriot
Red Raven
Sun Girl
Toro
Thin Man
Thunderer
Venus
The Vision
The Whizzer





Misc.



Bell Features

Johnny Canuck
Nelvana of the Northern Lights
The Brain


Cardal Publishing

Streamline


Columbia Comics

The Face
Skyman


Crestwood Publications

Atomic-Man
Black Owl
Green Lama


David McKay Publications

Vulcan


Dell Comics

Owl


Dynamic Publications

Dynamic Man
Yankee Girl


Eastern Color Printing

Hydroman


Frew Publications

The Phantom
Mandrake the Magician


Harvey Comics

Black Cat
Captain Freedom
Shock Gibson
Spirit of '76


Holyoke Publishing

Cat-Man and Kitten
Miss Victory


Lev Gleason Publications

Captain Battle
Crimebuster
Daredevil
Silver Streak


Maple Leaf Publishing

Iron Man
Brok Windsor


Novelty Press

Target Comics

Target and the Targeteers


Blue Bolt
Dick Cole, The Wonder Boy
Twister















United States portal
Comics portal
Fictional characters portal
Speculative fiction portal
Superhero fiction portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 40180673
LCCN: nb2015003207
GND: 119086611
SELIBR: 138653
SUDOC: 078905109
BNF: cb12514428z (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Batman&oldid=818554733"					Categories: DC Comics superheroesBatman1939 comics debutsAmerican cultureAmerican superheroesCharacters created by Bill FingerCharacters created by Bob KaneComics adapted into animated seriesComics adapted into playsComics adapted into radio seriesComics adapted into television seriesComics adapted into video gamesComics characters introduced in 1939DC Comics adapted into filmsDC Comics martial artistsDC Comics television charactersFictional American people of Scottish descentFictional aviatorsFictional business executivesFictional criminologistsFictional diaristsFictional engineersFictional escapologistsFictional foster carersFictional gentleman detectivesFictional hackersFictional inventorsFictional judokaFictional karatekaFictional orphansFictional philanthropistsFictional socialitesFictional vigilantesFilm serial charactersMale characters in comicsSuperhero film characters1939 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template webcite linksWebarchive template wayback linksArticles needing more detailed referencesWikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2016All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2016Articles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse mdy dates from October 2015Character popConverted comics character infoboxesConverted category character infoboxesOfficial website different in Wikidata and WikipediaArticles with DMOZ linksComics navigational boxes purgeWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers