

Bay of Bengal



Map of Bay of Bengal



Location
South Asia


Coordinates
15°N 88°E﻿ / ﻿15°N 88°E﻿ / 15; 88Coordinates: 15°N 88°E﻿ / ﻿15°N 88°E﻿ / 15; 88


Type
Bay


Primary inflows
Indian Ocean


Basin countries

 India
 Bangladesh
 Indonesia
 Myanmar
 Sri Lanka [1][2]





Max. length
2,090 km (1,300 mi)


Max. width
1,610 km (1,000 mi)


Surface area
2,172,000 km2 (839,000 sq mi)


Average depth
2,600 m (8,500 ft)


Max. depth
4,694 m (15,400 ft)


The Bay of Bengal (Bengali: বঙ্গোপসাগর [bɔŋgopoʃagoɾ], Hindi: बंगाल की खाड़ी [bəŋgɑːl kɪː kʰɑːɽɪː]) is the largest bay in the world, with waters flowing straight out of the Himalayas through Bengal region. Roughly triangular, it is bordered by India to the West, Northwest and East(A&N Is.), Myanmar to the East, Sri Lanka to the Southwest, Bangladesh to the North and, Indonesia to the Southeast. Countries dependent on the Bay of Bengal straddle both South Asia and Southeast Asia.
The Bay of Bengal occupies an area of 2,172,000 square kilometres (839,000 sq mi). A number of large rivers – the Ganges and three major rivers of Bangladesh the Padma, the Jamuna and Meghna, other rivers such as the Irrawaddy River, Godavari, Mahanadi, Brahmani River, Baitarani, Krishna and Kaveri flow into the Bay of Bengal. Among the important ports are Chennai, Kolkata, Paradip Port, Port Blair, Tuticorin, Visakhapatnam, Krishnapatnam Port, Chittagong, Colombo, Yangon. Among the smaller ports are the Dhamra Port, Kakinada Port, Gopalpur Port and Mongla.



Contents


1 Extent
2 Etymology
3 Rivers
4 Seaports
5 Islands
6 Beaches
7 Oceanography

7.1 Plate tectonics
7.2 Marine geology
7.3 Marine biology, flora and fauna
7.4 Chemical oceanography
7.5 Physical oceanography – climate


8 Tropical storms and cyclones
9 Historic sites
10 Religious importance
11 Economy
12 Strategic importance
13 Environmental hazards

13.1 Pollution


14 Transboundary issues affecting the marine ecosystem

14.1 Overexploitation of fisheries
14.2 Degradation of critical habitats
14.3 Pollution and water quality


15 History

15.1 British penal colony


16 Marine archaeology

16.1 Famous ships and shipwrecks


17 See also
18 References
19 Further reading
20 External links



Extent[edit]
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Bay of Bengal as follows:[3]



On the east: A line running from Cape Negrais (16°03'N) in Burma through the larger islands of the Andaman group, in such a way that all the narrow waters between the islands lie eastward of the line and are excluded from the Bay of Bengal, as far as a point in Little Andaman Island in latitude 10°48'N, longitude 92°24'E and thence along the southwest limit of the Burma Sea [A line running from Oedjong Raja (5°32′N 95°12′E﻿ / ﻿5.533°N 95.200°E﻿ / 5.533; 95.200) in Sumatra to Poeloe Bras (Breuëh) and on through the Western Islands of the Nicobar Group to Sandy Point in Little Andaman Island, in such a way that all the narrow waters appertain to the Burma Sea].






On the south: Ram Sethu (between India and Ceylon [Sri Lanka]) and from the southern extreme of Dondra Head (south point of Ceylon) to the north point of Poeloe Bras (5°44′N 95°04′E﻿ / ﻿5.733°N 95.067°E﻿ / 5.733; 95.067).



Etymology[edit]
The bay gets its name from the historical Bengal region (The Indian state of West Bengal and modern-day Bangladesh). In ancient scriptures, this water body may have been referred to as 'Mahodadhi' (Sanskrit: महोदधि, lit. great water receptacle)[4][5][better source needed] while it appears as Sinus Gangeticus or Gangeticus Sinus, meaning "Gulf of the Ganges", in ancient maps.[6]
The other Sanskrit names for Bay of Bengal are 'Vangopasagara' (Sanskrit: वङ्गोपसागर, lit. Bengal's Bay), also simply called as 'Vangasagara' (Sanskrit: वङ्गसागर, lit. Bengal Sea) and 'Purvapayodhi' (Sanskrit: पूर्वपयोधि, lit. Eastern Ocean). Even today in Bengali and Odia it is known as "Bongoposagor".
Rivers[edit]
Many major Rivers of India flow west to east before draining into the Bay of Bengal. The Ganga is the northernmost of these. Its main channel enters and flows through Bangladesh, where it is known as the Padma River, before joining the Meghna River. However, the Brahmaputra River flows from east to west in Assam before turning south and entering Bangladesh where it is called the Jamuna River. This joins the Padma where upon the Padma joins the Meghna River that finally drains into Bay of Bengal. The Sundarbans mangrove of forest of Bangladesh is a forest at the delta of the Padma, Jamuna and Meghna rivers lies partly in West Bengal and mostly in Bangladesh. The Brahmaputra at 2,948 km (1,832 mi) is the 28th longest River in the world. It originates in Tibet. The Hooghly River, another channel of the Ganga that flows through Calcutta drains into Bay of Bengal.
The Padma–Meghna-Jamuna rivers deposit nearly 1000 million tons of sediment every year. The sediment from these three rivers form the Bengal Delta and the submarine fan, a vast structure that extends from Bangladesh to south of the Equator, is up to 16.5 kilometres (10.3 mi) thick, and contains at least 1,130 trillion tonnes of sediment, which has accumulated over the last 17 million years at an average rate of 665 million tons per annum.[7] The Bay of Bengal used to be deeper than the Mariana Trench, the present deepest ocean point.[citation needed] The fan has buried organic carbon at a rate of nearly 1.1 trillion mol/yr (13.2 million t/yr) since the early Miocene period. The three rivers currently contribute nearly 8% of the total organic carbon (TOC) deposited in the world's oceans. Due to high TOC accumulation in the deep sea bed of the Bay of Bengal, the area is rich in oil and natural gas and gas hydrate reserves. Bangladesh can reclaim land substantially and economically gain from the sea area by constructing sea dikes, bunds, causeways and by trapping the sediment from its rivers.
Further southwest of Bangladesh, the Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna and Kaveri Rivers also flow from west to east in South Asia and drain into the Bay of Bengal. Many small rivers also drain directly into the Bay of Bengal; the shortest of them is the Cooum River at 64 km (40 mi).
The Irrawaddy (or Ayeyarwady) River in Myanmar flows into the Andaman Sea of the Bay of Bengal and once had thick mangrove forests of its own.
Seaports[edit]




The city of Visakhapatnam in India is a major port of the Bay of Bengal


Indian ports on the bay include Kolkata Port, Haldia Port, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Kakinada, Pondicherry, Dhamra, Gopalpur and Bangladeshi ports on the Bay are Chittagong, Mongla, Payra Port.
Islands[edit]
The islands in the bay are numerous, including the Andaman Islands, Nicobar and Mergui groups of India. The Cheduba group of islands, in the north-east, off the Burmese coast, are remarkable for a chain of mud volcanoes, which are occasionally active. Great Andaman is the main archipelago or island group of the Andaman Islands, whereas Ritchie's Archipelago consists of smaller islands. Only 37, or 6.5%, of the 572 islands and islets of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are inhabited.[8]
Beaches[edit]




The Sunderbans bordering the Bay of Bengal is the largest single block of tidal halophytic mangrove forest in the world.[9]






Cox's Bazar, the longest stretch of beach in the world.[10]




Sea Beach
Location


Marina Beach, Chennai
 India


Bakkhali Beach, West Bengal
 India


Digha Beach, West Bengal
 India


Mandarmoni Beach, West Bengal
 India


Tajpur Beach, West Bengal
 India


Shankarpur Beach, West Bengal
 India


Pir Jahania
 India


Bheemili
 India


Chandaneswar
 India


Chandipur
 India


Konarak
 India


Puri
 India


R.K.Beach
 India


Rushikonda
 India


Manginapudi, Machilipatnam
 India


Serenity Beach, Pondicherry
India


Cox's Bazar
 Bangladesh


Kuakata
 Bangladesh


St. Martin's Island
 Bangladesh


Sonadia
 Bangladesh


Inani
 Bangladesh


Teknaf
 Bangladesh


Ngapali
 Myanmar


Ngwesaung
 Myanmar


Chaungtha, Pathein
 Myanmar


Sittwe
 Myanmar


Galle Face
 Sri Lanka


Galle Face
 Sri Lanka


Oceanography[edit]
Plate tectonics[edit]
The lithosphere of the earth is broken up into what are called tectonic plates. Underneath the Bay of Bengal, which is part of the great Indo-Australian Plate and is slowly moving north east. This plate meets the Burma Microplate at the Sunda Trench. The Nicobar Islands, and the Andaman Islands are part of the Burma Microplate. The India Plate subducts beneath the Burma Plate at the Sunda Trench or Java Trench. Here, the pressure of the two plates on each other increase pressure and temperature resulting in the formation of volcanoes such as the volcanoes in Myanmar, and a volcanic arc called the Sunda Arc. The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake and Asian tsunami was a result of the pressure at this zone causing a submarine earthquake which then resulted in a destructive tsunami.[11]
Marine geology[edit]
A zone 50 m wide extending from the island of Ceylon and the Coromandel coast to the head of the bay, and thence southwards through a strip embracing the Andaman and Nicobar islands, is bounded by the 100 fathom line of sea bottom; some 50 m. beyond this lies the 500-fathom limit. Opposite the mouth of the Ganges, however, the intervals between these depths are very much extended by deltaic influence.
Swatch of No Ground is a 14 km-wide deep sea canyon of the Bay of Bengal. The deepest recorded area of this valley is about 1340 m.[12] The submarine canyon is part of the Bengal Fan, the largest submarine fan in the world.[13][14]
Marine biology, flora and fauna[edit]




A spinner dolphin in Bay of Bengal






Tachypleus gigas in Odisha


The Bay of Bengal is full of biological diversity, diverging amongst coral reefs, estuaries, fish spawning and nursery areas, and mangroves. The Bay of Bengal is one of the World's 64 largest marine ecosystems.
Kerilia jerdonii is a sea snake of the Bay of Bengal. Glory of Bengal cone (Conus bengalensis) is just one of the seashells which can be photographed along beaches of the Bay of Bengal.[15] An endangered species, the olive ridley sea turtle can survive because of the nesting grounds made available at the Gahirmatha Marine Wildlife Sanctuary, Gahirmatha Beach, Odisha, India. Marlin, barracuda, skipjack tuna, (Katsuwonus pelamis), yellowfin tuna, Indo-Pacific humpbacked dolphin (Sousa chinensis), and Bryde's whale (Balaenoptera edeni) are a few of the marine animals. Bay of Bengal hogfish (Bodianus neilli) is a type of wrass which live in turbid lagoon reefs or shallow coastal reefs. Schools of dolphins can be seen, whether they are the bottle nose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus), pantropical spotted dolphin (Stenella attenuata) or the spinner dolphin (Stenella longirostris). Tuna and dolphins usually reside in the same waters. In shallower and warmer coastal waters the Irrawaddy dolphins (Orcaella brevirostris) can be found.[16][17]
The Great Nicobar Biosphere Reserve provides sanctuary to many animals some of which include the saltwater crocodile (Crocodylus porosus), giant leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), and Malayan box turtle (Cuora amboinensis kamaroma) to name a few.
Another endangered species royal Bengal tiger is supported by Sundarbans a large estuarine delta that holds a mangrove area in the Ganges River Delta.[18][19]
Chemical oceanography[edit]
Coastal regions bordering the Bay of Bengal are rich in minerals. Sri Lanka, Serendib, or Ratna – Dweepa which means Gem Island. Amethyst, beryl, ruby, sapphire, topaz, and garnet are just some of the gems of Sri Lanka. Garnet and other precious gems are also found in abundance in the Indian states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh.[20]
Physical oceanography – climate[edit]
From January to October, the current is northward flowing, and the clockwise circulation pattern is called the "East Indian Current". The Bay of Bengal monsoon moves in a northwest direction striking the Nicobar Islands, and the Andaman Islands first end of May, then the north eastern coast of India by end of June.
The remainder of the year, the counterclockwise current is southwestward flowing, and the circulation pattern is called the East Indian Winter Jet. September and December see very active weather, season varsha (or monsoon), in the Bay of Bengal producing severe cyclones which affect eastern India. Several efforts have been initiated to cope with storm surge.[21]
Tropical storms and cyclones[edit]
Main article: Tropical cyclones in the Bay of Bengal




Cyclone Sidr at its peak near Bangladesh


A tropical storm with rotating winds blowing at speeds of 74 miles (119 kilometres) per hour is called a cyclone when they originate over the Bay of Bengal; and called a hurricane in the Atlantic.[22] Between 100,000 and 500,000 residents of Bangladesh were killed because of the 1970 Bhola cyclone.

2017, Severe Cyclonic Storm Mora
2017, Cyclone Maarutha
2016, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Vardah
2016, Cyclone Nada
2016, Cyclone Kyant
2016, Cyclone Roanu
2015, Cyclone Komen
2014, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Hudhud
2013, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Phailin
2013, Cyclone Viyaru
2012, Cyclone Nilam
2011, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Thane
2010, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Giri
2009, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Aila
2008, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Nargis
2007, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Sidr
2006, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Mala
1999, Odisha Super Cyclonic Storm 05B
1996, Konaseema Cyclone
1991, Super Cyclonic Storm 02B
1989, November Typhoon Gay
1985, May Tropical Storm One (1B)
1982, April Cyclone One (1B)
1982, May Tropical Storm Two (2B)
1982, October Tropical Storm Three (3B)
1981, December Cyclone Three (3B)
1980, October Tropical Storm One (1B)
1980, December Unknown Storm Four (4B)
1980, December Tropical Storm Five (5B)
1977, Andhra Pradesh Cyclone (6B)
1971, Cyclone Odisha
1970, November Bhola cyclone
The Calcutta cyclone of 1864: caused a storm surge of 40 feet. Barometer 28.025 inches of mercury. 50,000 direct deaths and 30,000 from disease.[23]
The Backergunge cyclone of 1876: 10 to 30 or 40 feet storm surge. 100,000 direct deaths and 100,000 indirect from disease.[23]
The False Point cyclone of 1885: 22 feet of storm surge. Barometer 27.135 inches of mercury.[23]

Historic sites[edit]




The Shore Temple, a UNESCO World Heritage Site on the shore of the Bay of Bengal



The ancient Buddhist heritage sites of Pavurallakonda, Thotlakonda and Bavikonda lie along the coast of Bay of Bengal at Visakhapatnam in India.
The remains of the Sri Vaisakheswara Swamy temple lie under the Bay of Bengal. Spokespeople from Andhra University Centre for Marine Archaeology say the temple may be opposite the Coastal Battery.[24]
The Jagannath Temple at Puri is the one of the four sacred places in Hindu pilgrimage along with Puri beach on the banks of Bay of Bengal. Mahodadhi was named after Lord Jagannath.
Seven Pagodas of Mahabalipuram is the name for Mahabalipuram. Mahabalipuram's Shore Temple, a World Heritage Site was constructed in the 8th century AD and myth has it that six other temples were built here.
One site that has been preserved is Vivekanandar Illam. It was constructed in 1842 by the American "Ice King" Frederic Tudor to store and market ice year round. In 1897, Swami Vivekananda's famous lectures were recorded here at Castle Kernan. The site is an exhibition devoted to Swami Vivekananda and his legacy.
Arikamedu is an archaeological site in Southern India, in Kakkayanthope, Ariyankuppam Commune, Puducherry. It is 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from the capital, Pondicherry of the Indian territory of Puducherry
Konark is the home of the Sun Temple or Black Pagoda. This Brahman sanctuary was built of black granite mid-1200 AD and has been declared a World Heritage Site.
Ramanathaswamy Temple is at Dhanushkodi, where the Bay of Bengal and the Laccadive sea come together.[25]

Religious importance[edit]
The Bay of Bengal in the stretch of Swargadwar, the gateway to heaven in Sanskrit, in the Indian town of Puri is considered holy by Hindus.




Samudra arati of worship of the sea by disciples of the Govardhan Matha at Puri


The Samudra arati is a daily tradition started by the present Shankaracharya of Puri 9 years ago to honour the sacred sea.[26] The daily practise includes prayer and fire offering to the sea at Swargadwar in Puri by disciples of the Govardhana matha of the Shankaracharya. On Paush Purnima of every year the Shankaracharya himself comes out to offer prayers to the sea.
Economy[edit]
One of the first trading ventures along the Bay of Bengal was The Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies more commonly referred to as the British East India Company. Gopalpur-on-Sea was one of their main trading centers. Other trading companies along the Bay of Bengal shorelines were the English East India Company and the French East India Company.[27]
BIMSTEC Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) supports free trade internationally around the Bay of Bengal between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
The Sethusamudram Shipping Canal Project is a new venture proposed which would create a channel for a shipping route to link the Gulf of Mannar with the Bay of Bengal. This would connect India from east to west without the necessity of going around Sri Lanka.
Thoni and catamaran fishing boats of fishing villages thrive along the Bay of Bengal shorelines. Fishermen can catch between 26 and 44 species of marine fish.[28] In one year, the average catch is two million tons of fish from the Bay of Bengal alone.[29] Approximately 31% of the world’s coastal fishermen live and work on the bay.[30]
Strategic importance[edit]
The Bay of Bengal is centrally located in South and Southeast Asia. It lies at the center of two huge economic blocks, the SAARC and ASEAN. It influences China's southern landlocked region in the north and major sea ports of India and Bangladesh. China, India, and Bangladesh have forged naval cooperation agreements with Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia to increase cooperation in checking terrorism in the high seas.[31]




Image of United States ships participating in the Malabar 2007 naval exercise. Aegis cruisers from the navies of Japan and Australia, and logistical support ships from Singapore and India in the Bay of Bengal took part.


Its outlying islands (the Andaman and Nicobar islands) and, most importantly, major ports such as Kolkata, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Tuticorin, Chittagong, and Mongla, along its coast with the Bay of Bengal added to its importance.[32]
China has recently made efforts to project influence into the region through tie-ups with Myanmar and Bangladesh.[33] The United States has held major exercises with Bangladesh, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and recently India[34][35][36][37] The largest ever wargame in Bay of Bengal, known as Malabar 2007, was held in 2007 and naval warships from US, Bangladesh, Thailand, Singapore, Japan and Australia took part. India was a participant.
Large deposits of natural gas in the areas within Bangladesh's sea zone incited a serious urgency by India and Myanmar into a territorial dispute.[31] Disputes over rights of some oil and gas blocks have caused brief diplomatic spats between Myanmar and India with Bangladesh.
The disputed maritime boundary between Bangladesh and Myanmar resulted in military tensions in 2008 and 2009. Bangladesh is pursuing a settlement with Myanmar and India to the boundary dispute through the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea.[38]
Environmental hazards[edit]
Pollution[edit]
The Asian brown cloud, a layer of air pollution that covers much of South Asia and the Indian Ocean every year between January and March, and possibly also during earlier and later months, hangs over the Bay ofBengal. It is considered to be a combinationof vehicle exhaust, smoke from cooking fires, and industrial discharges.[39]
Transboundary issues affecting the marine ecosystem[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A transboundary issue is defined as an environmental problem in which either the cause of the problem and/or its impact is separated by a national boundary; or the problem contributes to a global environmental problem and finding regional solutions is considered to be a global environmental benefit. The eight Bay of Bengal countries have (2012) identified three major transboundary problems (or areas of concern) affecting the health of the Bay, that they can work on together. With the support of the Bay Of Bengal Large Marine Ecosystem Project (BOBLME), the eight countries are now (2012) developing responses to these issues and their causes, for future implementation as the Strategic Action Programme.
Overexploitation of fisheries[edit]




Some small fishing boats are catching fish & sell them in local coastal markets


Fisheries production in the Bay of Bengal is six million tonnes per year, more than seven percent of the world's catch. The major transboundary issues relating to shared fisheries are: a decline in the overall availability of fish resources; changes in species composition of catches; the high proportion of juvenile fish in the catch; and changes in marine biodiversity, especially through loss of vulnerable and endangered species. The transboundary nature of these issues are: that many fish stocks are shared between BOBLME countries through the transboundary migration of fish, or larvae. Fishing overlaps national jurisdictions, both legally and illegally – overcapacity and overfishing in one location forces a migration of fishers and vessels to other locations. All countries (to a greater or lesser degree) are experiencing difficulties in implementing fisheries management, especially the ecosystem approach to fisheries. Bay of Bengal countries contribute significantly to the global problem of loss of vulnerable and endangered species.
The main causes of the issues are: open access to fishing grounds; Government emphasis on increasing fish catches; inappropriate government subsidies provided to fishers; increasing fishing effort, especially from trawlers and purse seiners; high consumer demand for fish, including for seed and fishmeal for aquaculture; ineffective fisheries management; and illegal and destructive fishing.
Degradation of critical habitats[edit]
The Bay of Bengal is an area of high biodiversity, with many endangered and vulnerable species. The major transboundary issues relating to habitats are: the loss and degradation of mangrove habitats; degradation of coral reefs; and the loss of, and damage to, seagrasses. The transboundary nature of these major issues are: that all three critical habitats occur in all BOBLME countries. Coastal development for several varying uses of the land and sea are common in all BOBLME countries. Trade in products from all the habitats is transboundary in nature. Climate change impacts are shared by all BOBLME countries. The main causes of the issues are: food security needs of the coastal poor; lack of coastal development plans; increasing trade in products from coastal habitats; coastal development and industrialization; ineffective marine protected areas and lack of enforcement; upstream development that affects water-flow; intensive upstream agricultural practices; and increasing tourism.
Pollution and water quality[edit]
The major transboundary issues relating to pollution and water quality are: sewage-borne pathogens and organic load; solid waste/marine litter; increasing nutrient inputs; oil pollution; persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and persistent toxic substances (PTSs); sedimentation; and heavy metals. The transboundary nature of these issues are: discharge of untreated/partially treated sewage being a common problem. Sewage and organic discharges from the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna River are likely to be transboundary. Plastics and derelict fishing gear can be transported long distances across national boundaries. High nutrient discharges from rivers could intensify largescale hypoxia. Atmospheric transport of nutrients is inherently transboundary. Differences between countries with regard to regulation and enforcement of shipping discharges may drive discharges across boundaries. Tar balls are transported long distances. POPs/PTSs and mercury, including organo-mercury, undergo long-range transport. Sedimentation and most heavy metal contamination tend to be localized and lack a strong transboundary dimension. The main causes of the issues are: increasing coastal population density and urbanization; higher consumption, resulting in more waste generated per person; insufficient funds allocated to waste management; migration of industry into BOBLME countries; and proliferation of small industries.
History[edit]




Ross Island, in the Andamans, was one of the main naval bases of British India during World War II


Northern Circars occupied the western coast of the Bay of Bengal and is now considered to be India's Madras state. Chola dynasty (9th century to 12th century) when ruled by Rajaraja Chola I occupied the western coastline of the Bay of Bengal circa AD 1014, The Bay of Bengal was also called the Chola Lake. The Kakatiya dynasty reached the western coastline of the Bay of Bengal between the Godavari and the Krishna rivers. Kushanas about the middle of the 1st century AD invaded northern India perhaps extending as far as the Bay of Bengal. Chandragupta Maurya extended the Maurya Dynasty across northern India to the Bay of Bengal. Hajipur was a stronghold for Portuguese Pirates. In the 16th century the Portuguese built trading posts in the north of the Bay of Bengal at Chittagong (Porto Grande) and Satgaon (Porto Pequeno).[40] Before the arrival of British to India it was also known as "Kalinga Sagar".[41]
British penal colony[edit]
Cellular Jail or "Black Waters" built in 1896 on Ross Island, a part of the Andaman Island Chain. As early as 1858 this island was used as a British penal colony for political prisoners facing life imprisonment.[42][better source needed]
Marine archaeology[edit]
Maritime archaeology or marine archaeology is the study of material remains of ancient peoples. A specialized branch, Archaeology of shipwrecks studies the salvaged artifacts of ancient ships. Stone anchors, amphorae shards, elephant tusks, hippopotamus teeth, ceramic pottery, a rare wood mast and lead ingots are examples which may survive the test of time for archaeologists to study and place the salvaged findings into a time line of history. coral reefs, tsunamis, cyclones, mangrove swamps, battles and a criss cross of sea routes in a high trading area combined with pirating have all contributed to shipwrecks in the Bay of Bengal.[43]
Famous ships and shipwrecks[edit]

1778 to 1783 The Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War or American War of Independence ranged as far as the Bay of Bengal.
c. 1816 Mornington ship burned in the Bay of Bengal.[44]
1850 American clipper brig Eagle is supposed to have sunk in the Bay of Bengal.[45]
American Baptist missionary Adoniram Judson, Jr. died 12 April 1850 and was buried at sea in the Bay of Bengal.
1855 The Bark "Incredible" struck on a sunken rock in the Bay of Bengal.[46]
1865, a gale dismasted the Euterpe while traversing the Bay of Bengal typhoon.
1875 Veleda 76 m (250 ft) long and 15 m (50 ft) wide is a part of a current salvage operation.[47]
1942 Japanese cruiser Yura of the Second Expeditionary Fleet, Malay Force, attacked merchant ships in the Bay of Bengal.
1971 December 3 – It was claimed that the Indian Navy destroyer, INS Rajput, sunk the Pakistan Navy submarine PNS Ghazi off Visakhapatnam, in the Bay of Bengal.

See also[edit]

Andhra Pradesh
Bangladesh
Myanmar
Odisha
West Bengal

References[edit]
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Bengal, Bay of". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 


^ "Map of Bay of Bengal- World Seas, Bay of Bengal Map Location – World Atlas". 
^ Chowdhury, Sifatul Quader (2012). "Bay of Bengal". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 
^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved 7 February 2010. 
^ Kuttan (2009). The Great Philosophers of India. AuthorHouse. ISBN 978-1434377807. [self-published source]
^ "Dhanushkodi". indiatourism4u.in. Retrieved 21 August 2013. 
^ 1794, Orbis Veteribus Notus by Jean Baptiste Bourguignon d'Anville
^ Wasson, Robert (2003). "A sediment budget for the Padma-Meghna-Jamuna catchment" (PDF). Current Science. 84 (8): 1041–1047. 
^ The long stretch of sand glistening like silver dust URL accessed 10 January 2015
^ Siddiqui, Neaz Ahmad (2012). "Sundarbans, The". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 
^ "World's longest beach hidden in Bangladesh". The Sydney Morning Herald. 31 January 2007. 
^ Tsunami URL access 21 January 2007
^ Morphological features in the Bay of Bengal URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ Curray, Joseph R.; Frans J. Emmel; David G. Moore (December 2002). "The Bengal Fan: morphology, geometry, stratigraphy, history and processes". Marine and Petroleum Geology. Elsevier Science Ltd. 19 (10): 1191–1223. doi:10.1016/S0264-8172(03)00035-7. 
^ France-Lanord, Christian; Volkhard Spiess; Peter Molnar; Joseph R. Curray (March 2000). "Summary on the Bengal Fan: An introduction to a drilling proposal" (PDF). Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 
^ Phillip Colla Natural History Photography URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ Haider, Mashida R. (5 January 2005). "Naturalist". New Age. Dhaka. Archived from the original on 30 November 2010. 
^ CMS: Stenella attenuata, Pantropical spotted dolphin URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ 17 Bay of Bengal URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ "Bodianus neilli (Bay of Bengal Hogfish)". Zipcode Zoo. Archived from the original on 30 May 2008. Retrieved 21 January 2007. 
^ "Promise Rings in white gold, yellow gold, rose gold, unique rings. by A Ring Thing". 
^ Glossary of Physical Oceanography Ba-Bm Archived 18 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine. URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ "Forces of Nature—Natural Disaster Fast Facts". National Geographic. Retrieved 30 August 2016. 
^ a b c Tannehill, Ivan Ray (1969) [First published 1945]. Hurricanes: Their Nature and History: Particularly Those of the West Indies and the Southern Coasts of the United States (6th ed.). Princeton University Press. pp. 38–40. 
^ Morien Institute – underwater discoveries news archive, January–June 2006, "Sri Vaisakheswara still lies underwater" URL accessed 22 January 2007
^ "Ramayana". Ramayana.com. 16 August 2005. Archived from the original on 16 August 2005. 
^ Sahu, Monideepa (6 March 2016). "The great fire". Deccan Herald. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ Nabataea: Trade on the Bay of Bengal URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ Environmental assessment of coastal water at Bakkhali
^ "LME 34 Bay of Bengal". NOAA. Retrieved 21 January 2007. [dead link]
^ "The Bay of Bengal: New bay dawning". The Economist. 27 April 2013. 
^ a b Berlin, Donald L. (25 January 2005). "The emerging Bay of Bengal". Asia Times Online. 
^ Arpi, Claude (26 December 2006). "1971 War: How the US tried to corner India". Rediff.com. 
^ "The Burma Project -Burma Debate". Archived from the original on 18 September 2009. Retrieved 10 January 2015. 
^ "India's Largest Naval War Game in Bay of Bengal". Global Politician. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. 
^ Parameswaran, Prashanth (7 May 2015). "US Eyes Expanded Military Exercises with ASEAN Navies". The Diplomat. Retrieved 11 November 2015. 
^ Miglani, Sanjeev (22 July 2015). "India, Japan, U.S. plan naval exercises in tightening of ties in Indian Ocean". Reuters. Retrieved 11 November 2015. 
^ Gady, Franz-Stefan (13 October 2015). "Confirmed: Japan Will Permanently Join US-India Naval Exercises". The Diplomat. Retrieved 11 November 2015. 
^ "The Maritime Boundary Dispute Between Bangladesh and Myanmar: Motivations, Potential Solutions, and Implications". 
^ "EO Natural Hazards: Smog over the Bay of Bengal". NASA Earth Observatory. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 21 January 2007. 
^ The Portuguese in Bengal. History of Ugolim (Hoogli), Meliapore ... Archived 3 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine. URL accessed 21 January 2007
^ Odisha Government, e-magazine. "Universal Brotherhood and the Temple of Lord Jagannath at Paradip" (PDF). Retrieved 6 February 2013. 
^ "History of Andaman Cellular Jail: Recapture of Andaman Islands to keep Political Prisoners". AndamanCellularJail.org. Archived from the original on 13 January 2007. Retrieved 6 August 2010. 
^ Marine Archaeology in India URL accessed 22 January 2007
^ Shipwrecks 1816–1818 URL accessed 10 January 2015
^ The Maritime Heritage Project: Gold Rush Ships, Passengers, Captains URL accessed 23 January 2007
^ Shipping Notes from the 1800s – P.E.I. URL accessed 23 January 2007
^ Diving-News.com » Wrecks URL accessed 23 January 2007


Further reading[edit]

The Maritime Boundary Dispute Between Bangladesh and Myanmar: Motivations, Potential Solutions, and Implications by Jared Bissinger (Asia Policy, July 2010) published by National Bureau of Asian Research

External links[edit]



Look up Bay of Bengal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bay of Bengal.



Myanmar Marine Biodiversity Atlas Online
487 V. Suryanarayan, Prospects for a Bay of Bengal Community
Arabian Sea: depth contours and undersea features – Map/Still – Britannica Concise
Bay of Bengal in Encyclopedia
Bay of Bengal Large Marine Ecosystem Project







v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category












v
t
e


Hydrography of the Indian subcontinent



Inland rivers



Beas
Betwa
Bhagirathi
Brahmaputra
Chambal
Chenab
Damodar
Godavari
Gandaki
Ganges
Ghaghara
Indus
Jhelum
Kali
Kaveri
Kosi
Krishna
Luni
Mahanadi
Mahaweli
Meghna
Narmada
Padma
Ravi
Sarasvati
Sankosh
Sharda
Son
Sutlej
Tapti
Yamuna





Inland lakes, deltas, etc.



Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Indus Delta
Dal Lake
Pookode Lake
Skeleton Lake
Chilika Lake
Lake Powai
Borith Lake
Saiful Muluk
Gosaikunda
Nizam Sagar
Red Hills Lake
Malampuzha
Kerala backwaters
Pulicat Lake





Coastal



Indian Ocean
Arabian Sea
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Mannar
Laccadive Sea
Palk Strait





Categories



Lakes of Bangladesh / India / Nepal / Pakistan
Reservoirs and dams in India
Rivers of Bangladesh / Bhutan / India / Nepal / Pakistan












v
t
e


Geography of Sri Lanka



Climate



Climate
Climatic regions

Dry Zone
Wet Zone


Natural disasters





Geology



Indian Plate
Gems
Central Highlands
Hanthana Mountain Range
Knuckles Mountain Range





Extreme points



Highest
North
South
East
West





Landforms



Beaches
Islands
Lagoons
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Valleys
Waterfalls





Bordering entities



Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Mannar
India
Indian Ocean
Palk Strait





Subdivisions



Provinces
Districts
DS Divisions
GN Divisions





Settlements



Cities
Towns





Environment



Environmental issues

Deforestation


Biogeographic classification
Biosphere Reserves
Ecoregions
Forests
National Parks
Protected Areas
Sanctuaries
Wildlife

Fauna
Flora













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bay_of_Bengal&oldid=818546523"					Categories: Bay of BengalMarginal seas of the Indian OceanBays of AsiaMaritime archaeologyBangladesh–India borderBangladesh–Myanmar borderBays of IndiaBodies of water of BangladeshBays of IndonesiaBodies of water of MyanmarBodies of water of Sri LankaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2014Use dmy dates from March 2013Coordinates on WikidataAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from August 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2014Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking reliable references from November 2016Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica