"BBC2" redirects here. For the defunct Philippine television network, see Banahaw Broadcasting Corporation.
For the BBC radio station, see BBC Radio 2.


BBC Two



BBC Two logo used from 2007



Launched
21 April 1964; 53 years ago (1964-04-21)


Owned by
BBC


Picture format
576i (SDTV) 16:9
1080i (HDTV) 16:9


Audience share
5.91% (November 2017 (2017-11), BARB)


Country
United Kingdom


Broadcast area
Nationwide and Ireland


Headquarters
Broadcasting House, London


Formerly called
BBC2 (21 April 1964 – 4 October 1997)


Sister channel(s)
BBC One
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies


Website
BBC Two



Availability



Terrestrial


Freeview
Channel 2
Channel 102 (HD)


Digitenne
(Netherlands)
Channel 20


Satellite


Freesat
Channel 102
(SD: Sco/Wal/NI; HD: England)
Channel 108
(SD: England; HD: Sco/Wal/NI)
Channels 968–971 (regional variations)


Sky (UK)
Channel 102
(SD: Sco/Wal/NI; HD: England)
Channel 115
(HD: Sco/Wal/NI)
Channel 141
(SD: England)
Channels 969–972 (regional variations)


Sky (Ireland)
Channel 142 (SD/HD)
Channel 143 (SD)


Astra 2E
10773 H 22000 5/6
10847 V 23000 2/3 (HD)


BFBS
Channel 2
Channel 12 (Delayed)


Cable


Virgin Media (UK)
Channel 102
Channel 162 (HD)


Virgin Media (Ireland)
Channel 109
Channel 140 (HD)


Ziggo (Netherlands)
Channel 62 (HD) (England)


Naxoo (Switzerland)
Channel 214


UPC Switzerland (Switzerland)
Channel 202 (HD)


WightFibre
Channel 2


Telenet (Belgium)
Channel 121


IPTV


KPN/XS4ALL/Telfort (Netherlands)
Channel 24


Belgacom TV(Belgium)
Channel 68 (Brussels)
Channel 24 (Flanders)
Channel 214 (Wallonia)


Streaming media


BBC iPlayer
Watch live (UK only)


TVPlayer
Watch live (UK only)


Virgin TV Anywhere
Watch live (Ireland only)


Ziggo GO
ZiggoGO.tv (Netherlands only)


BBC Two is the second flagship television channel of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in the United Kingdom, Isle of Man and Channel Islands. It covers a wide range of subject matter, but tending towards more "highbrow" programmes than the more mainstream and popular BBC One. Like the BBC's other domestic TV and radio channels, it is funded by the television licence, and is therefore free of commercial advertising. It is a comparatively well-funded public-service network, regularly attaining a much higher audience share than most public-service networks worldwide.
Originally styled BBC2, it was the third British television station to be launched (starting on 21 April 1964), and from 1 July 1967, Europe's first television channel to broadcast regularly in colour. It was envisaged as a home for less mainstream and more ambitious programming, and while this tendency has continued to date, most special-interest programmes of a kind previously broadcast on BBC Two, for example the BBC Proms, now tend to appear on BBC Four instead.
A high-definition version of the channel launched on 26 March 2013, replacing BBC HD.[1]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Launch
1.2 Technological advancements


2 Operation
3 Programming
4 Presentation

4.1 Regional variations


5 Availability outside the UK
6 Accessibility
7 BBC Two HD
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
Launch[edit]
British television at the time of BBC2's launch consisted of two channels: the BBC Television Service and the ITV network made up of smaller regional companies. Both channels had existed in a state of competition since ITV's launch in 1955, and both had aimed for a populist approach in response. The 1962 Pilkington Report on the future of broadcasting noticed this, and that ITV lacked any serious programming. It therefore decided that Britain's third television station should be awarded to the BBC.[2]
Prior to its launch, the new BBC2 was promoted on the BBC Television Service: the soon to be renamed BBC1. The animated adverts featured the campaign mascots "Hullabaloo", a mother kangaroo, and "Custard", her joey. Prior to, and several years after, the channel's formal launch, the channel broadcast "Trade Test Transmissions", short films made externally by companies such as Shell and BP, which served to enable engineers to test reception, but became cult viewing.
The channel was scheduled to begin at 19:20 on 20 April 1964 and show an evening of light entertainment, starting with the comedy show The Alberts, a performance from Soviet comedian Arkady Raikin, and a production of Cole Porter's Kiss Me, Kate, culminating with a fireworks display. However, at around 18:45 a huge power failure, originating from a fire at Battersea Power Station, caused Television Centre, and indeed much of west London, to lose all power. BBC1 was able to continue broadcasting via its facilities at Alexandra Palace, but all attempts to show the scheduled programmes on the new channel failed. Associated-Rediffusion, the London weekday ITV franchise-holder, offered to transmit on the BBC's behalf, but their gesture was rejected. At 22:00 programming was officially postponed until the following morning. As the BBC's news centre at Alexandra Palace was unaffected, they did in fact broadcast brief bulletins on BBC2 that evening, beginning with an announcement by the newsreader Gerald Priestland at around 19:25.[3] There was believed to be no recording made of this bulletin, but a videotape was discovered in early 2003.[4]
By 11:00 on 21 April, power had been restored to the studios and programming began, thus making Play School the first programme to be shown officially on the channel. The launch schedule, postponed from the night before, was then successfully shown that evening, albeit with minor changes. In reference to the power cut, the transmission opened with a shot of a lit candle which was then sarcastically blown out by presenter Denis Tuohy.[4]
To establish the new channel's identity and draw viewers to it, the BBC decided that a widely promoted, lavish series would be essential in its earliest days. The production chosen was The Forsyte Saga (1967), a no-expense-spared adaptation of the novels by John Galsworthy, featuring well-established actors Kenneth More and Eric Porter. Critically for the future of the fledgling channel, the BBC's gamble was hugely successful, with an average of six million viewers tuning in per episode: a feat made more prominent by the fact that only 9 million were able to receive the channel at the time.[citation needed]
Technological advancements[edit]
Unlike BBC1 and ITV, BBC2 was broadcast only on the 625 line UHF system, so was not available to viewers still using sets on the 405-line VHF system. This created a market for dual standard receivers which could switch between the two systems. The early technical problems, which included being unable to transmit US-recorded videotapes due to a lack of system conversion from the US NTSC system, were resolved by a committee headed by James Redmond.
On 1 July 1967, during the Wimbledon Championships, BBC2 became the first channel in Europe to begin regular broadcasts in colour, using the PAL system.[5] The thirteen part series Civilisation (1969) was created as a celebration of two millennia of western art and culture to showpiece the new colour technology.[6] BBC1 and ITV later joined BBC2 on 625-line UHF band, but continued to simulcast on 405-line VHF until 1985. BBC1 and ITV simultaneously introduced PAL colour on UHF on 15 November 1969, although they both had broadcast some programmes in colour "unofficially" since September 1969.
In 1979, the station adopted the first computer-generated channel identification (ident) in Britain, with its use of the double striped, orange '2' logo. The ident, created in house by BBC engineers, lasted until March 1986 and heralded the start of computer-generated logos.
As the switch to digital-only terrestrial transmission progressed, BBC Two was (in each region in turn) the first analogue TV channel to be replaced with the BBC multiplex, at first four, then two weeks ahead of the other four channels. This was required for those relay transmitters that had no current Freeview service giving viewers time to purchase the equipment, unless they had already selected a satellite or cable service. The last region for BBC Two to end on analogue terrestrial television was Northern Ireland on 10 October 2012.
It was announced on 19 February 2013 that a HD simulcast of BBC Two would commence on 26 March 2013 at 06:00. This is the single UK service without national variations.[7]
At the 2012 Guardian Edinburgh International Television Festival, BBC Two was named "Terrestrial Channel of the Year".[8]
Operation[edit]
The channel controllers have been:

1964–1965: Michael Peacock
1965–1969: David Attenborough
1969–1974: Robin Scott
1974–1978: Aubrey Singer
1978–1982: Brian Wenham
1982–1987: Graeme MacDonald
1987–1992: Alan Yentob
1992–1996: Michael Jackson
1996–1999: Mark Thompson
1999–2004: Jane Root
2004–2008: Roly Keating
2008–2014: Janice Hadlow
2014–2016: Kim Shillinglaw[9]

Adam Barker served as Acting Controller of the channel, after Janice Hadlow left the channel in March 2014 and until Kim Shillinglaw began as new permanent occupant of the post.
Since 2013, the Controller of BBC Two has been given the expanded title Controller of BBC Two and BBC Four, with ultimate oversight of the BBC Four service added to their duties (a BBC Four "Channel Editor", reporting up to this Controller, has day-to-day operational control of Four).
The channel forms part of the BBC Television executive group, and is answerable to the head of that department, and to the BBC Trust.
On 20 January 2016, Kim Shillinglaw announced that she has decided to leave the BBC as the Controller of BBC Two & BBC Four and, as a result of the reorganisation, the posts of Controller of BBC Two and Four have been closed.[10]
Programming[edit]
Main article: List of programmes broadcast by the BBC

BBC Two's remit is to be a mixed-genre channel appealing to a broad adult audience with programmes of depth and substance. It should carry the greatest amount and range of knowledge building programming of any BBC television channel, complemented by distinctive comedy, drama and arts programming.
— BBC Two remit[11]

BBC Two's remit historically was one screening programmes targeting the arts, culture, some comedy and drama, and appealing to audiences not already served by BBC One or ITV. Over its first thirty or so years the channel developed a reputation for screening highly praised and prestigious drama series, among these Boys from the Blackstuff (1982) or 1996's, critically acclaimed Our Friends in the North. The channel's "highbrow" profile is also in part attributable to a long history of demanding documentaries of all types, beginning with Civilisation and The Ascent of Man in the 1960s. Like the early Channel 4, BBC Two also established for itself a reputation as a champion of independent and international cinema, under the Screen 2 brand.
The channel has sometimes been judged, increasingly in more recent years, to have moved away from this original role and to have moved closer to the mainstream. Since the launch of the digital-only BBC Four, the BBC has been accused in particular of shifting its more highbrow output to the new channel, which, until the end of the UK's digital TV switchover in October 2012,[12] a minority (7.5% in the final quarter of 2010)[13] of viewers did not receive. BBC Four's remit is very similar to that of the earlier remit of BBC2, and contains many documentaries and arts programmes. It has been perceived by some that this strategy is to allow BBC Two to show more popular programmes and to secure higher ratings.[14] Since 2004 there have been some signs of an attempt to return closer to parts of BBC Two's earlier output with the arts strand The Culture Show. Its most popular programme at the moment is Top Gear.
Much of BBC Two's output has previously or subsequently been shown on other channels. Some of these programmes are repeats of popular or flagship programmes from BBC Four in a late night strand, originally called BBC Four on Two but now unbranded, for the benefit of audiences without access to BBC Four. Other programmes are moved to the channel as a result of their success on BBC Three or Four, so that subsequent series are well received. An example of this is the BBC Three series Torchwood that was transferred to the channel following the success of the first series. BBC Two is also used as a testing ground for programmes prior to their moving to the flagship BBC One: such examples include Have I Got News for You and popular comedies Absolutely Fabulous and Miranda, which moved to BBC One after success on Two. Also in August 2014 The Great British Bake Off moved to BBC One due to its success the previous year on BBC Two.
Another founding part of BBC Two was to provide educational and community programming on the BBC, as part of its public service remit. The educational section of this commitment saw BBC2 broadcast a large amount of programming for the Open University, who co-produced programming with the corporation, and saw the channel broadcast BBC Schools programmes from 1983 until the programmes were transferred to the BBC Learning Zone in 2010.
As a result of the channel's commitment to community broadcasting, the channel produced the symbolic Open Space series, a strand developed in the early 1970s in which members of the public would be allotted half an hour of television time, and given a level of editorial and technical training in order to produce for themselves a film on an issue most important to them. BBC2's Community Programme Unit kept this aspect of the channel's tradition alive into the 1990s in the form of Video Diaries and later Video Nation. The Community Programmes Unit was disbanded in 2004.
BBC Two originally showed children's programming in the morning, with two different blocks: CBBC and CBeebies. First, at 6 am until 7 am the CBeebies block was shown (every day), then at 7 am until 8:30 am CBBC was shown (weekdays only), then at 8:30 am to 11:30 am it was followed by BBC World News, with Daily Politics on Wednesday.[citation needed] The CBeebies block was then shown again (only on weekdays). On BBC Two Scotland between 8.30 and 9 am, they would show Gaelic children's programmes under the name CBeebies Alba. Then at 9 am they would hand over to CBeebies. On Saturdays, the CBBC block was shown from 7 am until 12 pm (at 11:40 am a repeat of MOTD Kickabout would be shown.) On Sundays, the CBBC block was shown from 7 am until 10 am (except if special events were shown). But in 2013 this was removed as the digital switchover meant that the dedicated CBBC and Cbeebies channel were widely available, and replaced by repeats and the Signzone (programmes from across the BBC with sign language, audio description etc.). At the same time a new hour-long news programme was created at 11 am called Eleven O'Clock Newshour which is made up of half an hour of BBC News and half BBC World News. Other News Channel programmes such as HARDtalk and Click were added to fill the 10:30 am slot. From 2014 the first UK airing of BBC World News's The Travel Show fills the Friday morning slot.
On weekday holidays and weekends at 11:30 am feature films are shown instead of programmes such as Ready Steady Cook, The Pink Panther Show, Meerkat Manor or BBC World News. Mainly the films are black and white.
On occasional Friday nights when charity telethons, such as Sports Relief or Comic Relief, are shown, a 40-minute section[clarification needed] is shown at 10 pm while the BBC News at Ten is being broadcast on BBC One. The National Lottery is shown around 11:30 pm.
Some BBC Two programming was simulcast or repeated in high definition on the separate channel BBC HD, until 6:00 am on 26 March 2013, when BBC HD ceased operation, being instead replaced by BBC Two HD and simulcast with its SD variant.[7]
Since January 2013, BBC Two stopped showing children's programmes and replaced the weekday morning schedule with repeats of the previous BBC One morning schedule such as Homes Under the Hammer, Don't Get Done, Get Dom, Street Patrol UK, Caught Red Handed, Cowboy Trap, Rip Off Britain and other consumer programmes, shown between 6.05 and 8.20 am. Between 8.20 and 10.35 am they show Sign Zone with sign language. On weekend mornings, they show old black-and-white movies, followed by a double bill of the nature programming of David Attenborough, and occasionally an omnibus of programmes that have been previously shown during the week, including Great Railway Journeys. They also started showing Sign Zone in the early hours after 12:20 am, which BBC One used to show before 2013.
From October 2013, BBC Two has shown classic programmes like Bergerac, Cagney and Lacey, The Rockford Files, 'Allo 'Allo!, and Are You Being Served? on weekday afternoons around 2:15 pm, with the retro logos from 1970s and 1980s, between the current programmes.
In October 2014, Russell Howard's Good News and Backchat moved to BBC Two from BBC Three.
In 2014, BBC Two commissioned Britain's first transgender sitcom, Boy Meets Girl, which follows the developing relationship between Leo, a 26-year-old man and Judy, a 40-year-old transgender woman.[15]
From 7 April 2015 the morning sign-zone was replaced by Victoria Derbyshire.
Presentation[edit]
Main article: History of BBC television idents




The "Paint" ident from the 1991-2001 set. Several idents from this set were reinstated in July 2014 with the current logo.


As well as programmes, BBC Two has also proved memorable for its numerous idents—various short sequences shown between programme junctions that serve as the channel identity. Nearly all of the identity packages used since the channel's launch in 1964 have featured a prominent numeral 2 in the design. Notable designs include the electronic double-striped 2, the white TWO ident (the only ident not to use a numeral 2), and most notably the 1991 2s.
The 1991 idents featured a sans-serif numeral 2 at the centre of an initially art-related scene; however the idents moved away from this style as the station's style changed. Although highly praised, this expansive set of idents was ended in November 2001. The BBC corporate logo was updated within the idents in October 1997, though the idents moved away from the original viridian colour scheme in these latter years. The subsequent presentation style was introduced on 19 November 2001 and kept the same figure 2, but in a yellow background and given a personality. At the time, BBC Two became the first BBC channel to feature a box logo.
In 2007, BBC Two debuted the new theme, a "Window on the World", with the 2 numeral providing that view. Introduced on 18 February 2007, the new look also had the channel adopt a teal-coloured box logo, featuring the BBC logo above the word TWO, in the font Avenir.
In 2014, some of the 1990s idents were re-introduced, with a white box at the bottom right of the screen with the 2007 logo, which rotates to reveal the words "50 Years" to its left. There was also a special anniversary ident with the same "50 Years" logo variant in the corner.
On 1 January 2015, BBC Two reintroduced and modified the selection of the 1990s idents used in 2014, implementing the teal box logo, without the "50 Years" logo. However, BBC Two Northern Ireland opted for a centralised text-only logo and, unlike the other regional variations of BBC Two, are currently airing nearly forty idents from the 1991–2001 set.
Regional variations[edit]
BBC Two also has regional variations in the nations: Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. These versions of BBC Two share the same idents, but with the nation name in the BBC Two box. BBC Two Scotland shows a lot of specifically Scottish programming on the channel, as well as its sister channel BBC One Scotland, and the schedules are often mixed around to match. BBC Two Northern Ireland and BBC Two Wales both have the option to opt out of the main network schedule, but generally stick to it, only opting out a couple of times each week. Until December 2008, BBC Wales broadcast a special, digital-only channel, BBC 2W, which contained more opt-outs than analogue-only BBC Two Wales. BBC Scotland occasionally broadcast Gaelic-language programmes under the banner BBC Two Alba.
In England, many of the BBC English regions were combined to form "super-regions", such as the entire North or Midlands. These had the option to opt out of the network programming on the analogue feed, and replace it with local programming. However this was usually only done in exceptional circumstances, as all regular regional programming has been transferred to BBC One, and the English regions are not available on digital on BBC Two. There is no specific "BBC Two England"; this role is fulfilled by the network BBC Two.
Availability outside the UK[edit]
BBC Two is widely available in the Republic of Ireland on cable and MMDS, as well as being received directly in areas bordering Northern Ireland, or in coastal areas from Wales. It is also available on cable and IPTV in the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland and Liechtenstein. On 27 March 2013, it began being carried by British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) to members of HM Forces and their families around the world, replacing the BFBS2 TV channel, which already carried a selection of BBC Two programmes.[16] It shares a channel with CBBC, which broadcasts from early morning until the early evening.[17]
Accessibility[edit]
The BBC announced in May 2008 that it had achieved its aim for all programming to have subtitles for viewers with hearing difficulties.[18][19] These are available on the BBC Red Button, and until 23 October 2012, via the Ceefax teletext service.
The BBC also offers audio description on some popular programmes[20] for visually impaired-viewers as well as sign language interpretation on some of its programmes for deaf and hard-of-hearing viewers. The percentage of the BBC's total television output with audio description available is 10%, having been increased from 8% in 2008.[21]
BBC Two HD[edit]




BBC Two HD logo


Originally, programmes from BBC Two were shown in high definition on the dedicated BBC HD channel, alongside programmes from BBC Three and BBC Four, as well as some select series from CBBC and CBeebies. However, in plans outlined by the director general Mark Thompson on 6 October 2011, BBC HD would close to be replaced by BBC Two HD, a high-definition simulcast of BBC Two that would work much the same way as BBC One HD.[22] This move allowed the corporation to save £2.1 million, used to count towards its budget deficit following the freezing of the licence fee and the additional financial responsibility of addition services.[23]
On 19 February 2013, it was announced that BBC Two HD would replace BBC HD from 6.05 am on 26 March 2013.[7] Channel numbers for the BBC's HD channels also changed on Sky, to allow BBC One HD and BBC Two HD to sit side-by-side on channels 141, and 142 respectively on the EPG.[7][24]
On 16 July 2013, the BBC indicated that it wants to launch Northern Irish, Scottish and Welsh variations of BBC Two HD; however, this would require the approval of the BBC Trust, with a proposal due to be presented within six months.[25]
On 10 December 2013, BBC Two HD was swapped with the SD channel in England on Sky's EPG for HD subscribers.[26]
See also[edit]


BBC portal







Book: BBC Channels (UK)





History of BBC television idents
List of television stations in the United Kingdom

References[edit]


^ "BBC Two HD channel goes live, replacing BBC HD". What Hi-Fi. 26 March 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. 
^ "British Television up to the end of the Sixties". Sixtiescity.com. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2007. 
^ "BBC 2 Aborted Launch Night". starfury.demon.co.uk. Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2007. 
^ a b Briggs, Caroline (20 April 2004). "The launch night that never was". BBC News. Retrieved 4 October 2011. 
^ TV Technology 8. Britain In Colour – and UHF. Screenonline, Richard G. Elen. Retrieved 26 November 2010.
^ David Attenborough extra on BBC DVD Civilisation by Kenneth Clark.
^ a b c d "BBC – Media Centre – BBC Two HD Channel to launch 26 March". BBC Online. 19 February 2013. 
^ "BBC Two wins terrestrial channel of the year". BBC News, 24 August 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2013.
^ "Kim Shillinglaw Named BBC Two & BBC Four Controller". TVWise. 
^ http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/controller-tv-and-iplayer
^ "BBC Two Service License" (PDF). BBC Trust. Retrieved 4 October 2011. 
^ End of analogue era as switchover completes, Digital UK, London, 10 October, 2012. Retrieved 9 May 2013.
^ "Digital Television Update". ofcom.org.uk. 15 September 2010. 
^ "Blogposts". the Guardian. 
^ "BBC2 commissions Britain's first transgender sitcom Boy Meets Girl". The Independent. 
^ UK Forces broadcasting contract begins, Ministry of Defence, 2 April 2013
^ BFBS TV Set For A Makeover On 27th March, BFBS
^ BBC Vision celebrates 100% subtitling BBC Press Office, 7 May 2008.
^ About the BBC – Policy on subtitles BBC
^ "Freeview Audio Description TV Schedule". TV Help. 
^ About the BBC – Audio description on TV BBC
^ "BBC set to cut 2,000 jobs by 2017". BBC News. 6 October 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2011. 
^ "BBC cuts at a glance". BBC News. 6 October 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2011. 
^ "BBC Two HD Launched". CNET. 26 March 2013. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. 
^ "BBC to launch five new subscription-free HD channels". BBC Media Center. 17 July 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2013. 
^ Pryde, Alix (9 December 2013). "CBBC HD, CBeebies HD, BBC Three HD, BBC Four HD & BBC News HD launch Tuesday 10 December 2013". BBC. Retrieved 10 December 2013. 


External links[edit]

BBC Two at BBC Online
BBC Two – Happy 40th Birthday at BBC Online







v
t
e


BBC Television




BBC



UK channels



BBC One (in Northern Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales)
BBC Two (in Northern Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales)
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





UK nations
& regions



Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
North East and Cumbria
North West
Yorkshire
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire
West
West Midlands
East Midlands
East
London
South West
South
South East





services and
programming
blocks



BBC iPlayer
BBC Learning Zone
BBC Music
BBC News
BBC Schools
BBC Sport
BBC Three (online)
BBC Weather
CBBC
CBeebies





international
channels &
joint ventures



BBC Alba
BBC America
BBC Arabic Television
BBC Brit
BBC Canada
BBC Earth
BBC Entertainment
BBC First (in Australia)
BBC HD (international)
BBC Kids
BBC Knowledge (international)
BBC Lifestyle
BBC Persian Television
BBC UKTV (Australia and New Zealand)
BBC World News
Community Channel
UKTV (UK and Ireland)





defunct
channels



BBC Choice (in Northern Ireland)
BBC Food
BBC HD (UK)
BBC Japan
BBC Knowledge (UK)
BBC Prime
BBC Select
BBC Three (television channel)
BBC TV Europe
BBC World Service Television
BBC 2W






 category










v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category












v
t
e


Freeview



TV channels



4Music
4seven

HD


5Spike
5Star
5USA
Al Jazeera Arabic
Al Jazeera English

HD


Arise News
BBC One

HD


BBC Two

HD


BBC Four

HD


BBC Alba
BBC News Channel
BBC Parliament
Blaze
CBBC

HD


CBeebies

HD


CBS Action
CBS Drama
CBS Reality
Challenge
Channel 4

+1
HD
+1 HD


Channel 5

+1
HD


Chart Show TV
CITV
Clubland TV
Community Channel
Create and Craft
Dave

ja vu


Drama
E4

+1


Film4

+1


Food Network
Fox

Fox HD
Fox +1


FreeSports
Gems TV
Home
Horror Channel
Ideal World
ITV

+1
HD


ITV2

+1


ITV3

+1


ITV4

+1


ITVBe

+1


The Jewellery Channel
More4
Movies4Men
Pick
POP

+1


Pop Max
Quest

+1


Quest Red
QVC
QVC Beauty
QVC Style
Really
Rocks & Co
RT/RT UK
RTÉ One
RTÉ2
S4C
Sky News
Sony Movie Channel

+1


Talking Pictures TV
TG4
TBN UK
The Store
Travel Channel
Tiny Pop

+1


True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
TruTV

+1


The Vault
Vintage TV
Viva
Yesterday
YourTV

+1







Radio stations



Absolute Radio
BBC Asian Network
BBC Radio 1
BBC Radio 1Xtra
BBC Radio 2
BBC Radio 3
BBC Radio 4
BBC Radio 4 Extra
BBC Radio 5 Live
BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra
BBC Radio 6 Music
BBC Radio Cymru
BBC Radio Foyle
BBC Radio nan Gàidheal
BBC Radio Scotland
BBC Radio Ulster
BBC Radio Wales
BBC World Service
Capital London
Classic FM
Heart London
Heat Radio
The Hits Radio
Insight Radio
Kerrang Radio
Kiss
KissFresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic 105.4 FM
Premier Christian Radio
RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta
Smooth Radio
Talksport
U105





Local channels



Bay TV Liverpool
Big Centre TV
Estuary TV
Latest TV
London Live
Made in Bristol
Made in Cardiff
Made in Leeds
Made in Tyne & Wear
Mustard TV
Notts TV
NVTV
Sheffield Live TV
STV Edinburgh
STV Glasgow
That's Manchester
That's Oxfordshire
That's Solent





TV platforms



Analogue
Analogue terrestrial
Cable
Digital
Digital terrestrial
High-definition
IPTV
Satellite





Miscellaneous



History of Freeview UK











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=BBC_Two&oldid=818454304"					Categories: BBC TwoBBC nations and regionsBBC television channels in the United KingdomTelevision channels and stations established in 1964Peabody Award winners1964 establishments in the United KingdomInternational Emmy Awards Current Affairs & News winnersHidden categories: EngvarB from December 2016Use dmy dates from December 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2017Use British English from July 2017