This article is about the BBC's operational division consisting of several UK radio stations. For the BBC's digital multiplex, see BBC National DAB. For the radio in the United Kingdom, see Radio in the United Kingdom.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




BBC Radio





Type

Division


Industry
Mass media


Founded
1927


Headquarters
Broadcasting House, London, United Kingdom



Area served

Worldwide



Key people

Helen Boaden (Director of Audio and Music)


Services
Radio broadcasting


Owner
BBC


Parent
British Broadcasting Corporation


Website
www.bbc.co.uk/radio


BBC Radio is an operational business division[1] and service of the British Broadcasting Corporation (which has operated in the United Kingdom under the terms of a Royal Charter since 1927). The service provides national radio stations covering the majority of musical genres, as well as local radio stations covering local news, affairs and interests. It also oversees online audio content.[2]
Of the national radio stations, BBC Radio 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Live are all available through analogue radio (5 Live on AM only) as well as on DAB Digital Radio and internet services through RealMedia, WMA and BBC iPlayer. The remaining stations, BBC Radio 1Xtra, 4 Extra, 5 Live Sports Extra and 6 Music, all broadcast on digital platforms only.
All of the BBC's national radio stations (with the exception of 5 Live and 5 Live Sports Extra which broadcast from MediaCityUK in Salford) broadcast from bases in London, usually in or near to Broadcasting House in Marylebone. However, the BBC's network production units located in Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow and Manchester also make radio programmes.[3]



Contents


1 History

1.1 First charter
1.2 Competition from overseas stations
1.3 Empire and the world
1.4 Commercial radio influence
1.5 BBC analogue networks
1.6 2002 digital radio networks


2 Stations

2.1 National (UK-wide)
2.2 National Regions
2.3 Local services
2.4 World Service


3 Broadcasting

3.1 International syndication


4 Programmes
5 Expenditure
6 Directors
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]
Further information: Timeline of the BBC, British Broadcasting Company, and BBC § History
The BBC's radio services began in 1922. The British Government licensed the BBC through its General Post Office, which had original control of the airwaves because they had been interpreted under law as an extension of the Post Office services. Today radio broadcasting still makes up a large part of the corporation's output - the title of the BBC's listings magazine, Radio Times, reflects this.
First charter[edit]




George V giving the 1934 Royal Christmas Message on BBC Radio


On 1 January 1927 the British Broadcasting Company was succeeded in monopoly control of the airwaves by the British Broadcasting Corporation, under the terms of a Royal Charter.
John Reith, who had been the founding managing director of the commercial company, became the first Director General. He expounded firm principles of centralised, all-encompassing radio broadcasting, stressing programming standards and moral tone. These he set out in his autobiography, Broadcast Over Britain (1924), influencing modern ideas of public service broadcasting in the United Kingdom. To this day, the BBC aims to follow the Reithian directive to "inform, educate and entertain".[4]
Competition from overseas stations[edit]
Although no other broadcasting organisation was licensed in the UK until 1973, commercial competition soon opened up from overseas. The English language service of Radio Luxembourg began in 1933 as one of the earliest commercial radio stations broadcasting to Britain and Ireland. With no possibility of commercial broadcasting available from inside the UK, a former British Royal Air Force captain and entrepreneur (and from 1935 Conservative Party member of parliament) named Leonard F. Plugge set up his own International Broadcasting Company in 1931.[5] The IBC began leasing time on transmitters in continental Europe and then reselling it as sponsored English-language programming aimed at audiences in Britain and Ireland. Because Plugge successfully demonstrated that State monopolies such as that of the BBC could be broken, other parties became attracted to the idea of creating a new commercial radio station specifically for this purpose. It was an important forerunner of pirate radio and modern commercial radio in the United Kingdom. The onset of World War II silenced all but one of the original IBC stations, only Radio Luxembourg continued its nightly transmissions to Britain.
Empire and the world[edit]
To provide a different service from the domestic audience the Corporation started the BBC Empire Service on short wave in 1932, originally in English but it soon provided programmes in other languages. At the start of the Second World War it was renamed The Overseas Service but is now known as the BBC World Service.[6]
Commercial radio influence[edit]
Beginning in March 1964, Radio Caroline was the first in what became an eventual fleet of 10 offshore pirate radio stations that began to ring the British coastline, mostly along the South East coast. By 1966 millions were tuning into these commercial operations, and the BBC was rapidly losing its radio listening audience.[7][8] This was largely due to the fact that even though they were fully aware of the problem, the BBC still only played a few hours of Pop music from record a week, as opposed to the pirates who broadcast chart music and new releases all day.
The British government reacted by passing the Marine Offences Act, which all but wiped out all of the stations by midnight on 14 August 1967, by banning any British citizen from working for a pirate station. Only Radio Caroline survived, and still continues today (though the last original offshore broadcast was in 1989).
One of the stations called Radio London ("Big L") was so successful that the BBC was told to copy it as best they could. This led to a complete overhaul by Frank Gillard the BBC's Director of Radio of the BBC output creating the four analogue channels that still form the basis of its broadcasting today. The creator of BBC Radio One told the press that his family had been fans of Radio London.
The BBC hired many out-of-work broadcasting staff who had come from the former offshore stations. Kenny Everett was asked for input in how to run the new Pop station due to his popularity with both listeners and fellow presenters. Tony Blackburn who presented the very first BBC Radio One morning show had previously presented the same morning show on Radio Caroline and later on Big L. He attempted to duplicate the same sound for BBC Radio One. Among the other DJs hired was the late John Peel who had presented the overnight show on "Big L", called The Perfumed Garden. Though it only ran for a few months prior to Big L's closure, The Perfumed Garden got more fan mail than the rest of the pop DJ's on Radio London put together, so much that staff wondered what to do with it all. The reason it got so much mail was that it played different music, and was the beginning of the "album rock" genre. On Everett's suggestion, Big L's PAMS jingles were commissioned to be resung in Dallas, Texas so that "Wonderful Radio London" became "Wonderful Radio One on BBC".
The BBC's more popular stations have encountered pressure from the commercial sector.[9] John Myers, who had developed commercial brands such as Century Radio and Real Radio, was asked in the first quarter of 2011 to conduct a review into the efficiencies of Radios 1, 2, 1Xtra and 6 Music. His role, according to Andrew Harrison, the chief executive of RadioCentre, was "to identify both areas of best practice and possible savings."[9]
BBC analogue networks[edit]
On 30 September 1967:

BBC Radio 1 was launched as a pop music station (part-time at first)
The BBC Light Programme (launched 29 July 1945) was renamed BBC Radio 2 and broadcast easy listening, folk, jazz and light entertainment.
The evening BBC Third Programme (launched 29 September 1946) and daytime BBC Music Programme (launched 22 March 1965) were merged under the heading of BBC Radio 3, although the Third Programme kept its separate title until 3 April 1970.
The BBC Home Service (launched 1 September 1939) became BBC Radio 4.

BBC Radio 5 was launched on 27 August 1990 as a home for sport and educational and children's programming, but was replaced by BBC Radio 5 Live, a dedicated news and sport network, on 28 March 1994.
2002 digital radio networks[edit]
With the increased rollout of Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) between 1995 and 2002, BBC Radio launched several new digital-only stations BBC 1Xtra, BBC 6 Music and BBC 7 in 2002 on 16 August, 11 March and 15 December respectively — the first for "new black British music", the second as a source of performance-based "alternative" music, the latter specialising in archive classic comedy shows, drama and children's programmes. BBC Asian Network joined the national DAB network on 28 October 2002. The stations have since been renamed to include the BBC Radio brand, to BBC Radio 1Xtra, BBC Radio 6 Music, and BBC Radio 7. In 2011, BBC Radio 7 was renamed BBC Radio 4 Extra as the service was brought more into line with BBC Radio 4.
Stations[edit]




Much of BBC radio comes from Broadcasting House, Portland Place at the head of Regent Street, London


National (UK-wide)[edit]
The BBC today runs eleven national domestic radio stations, six of which are only available in a digital format: via DAB Digital Radio, UK digital television (satellite, cable and Freeview) plus live streams and listen again on the Internet.
The "main" radio stations, available via both analogue (FM and/or AM frequencies) and Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB), are:

BBC Radio 1: youth oriented, mostly contemporary pop and rock music (including Top 40 singles), plus news, original in-house live music sessions, original live music concerts and music documentaries. Available on 97-99 FM in addition to digital platforms.

Slogan = BBC Radio 1 where the UK’s journey into new music begins, from pop to dance, from hip hop to rock and everything in between

BBC Radio 2: adult oriented entertainment, wide range of music—specially adult contemporary and middle of the road, also talk, comedy, plus news, original in-house live music sessions, original live music concerts and music documentaries. Available on 88-91 FM and on digital platforms.

Slogan = The home of great music – Pop and Rock from the sixties, seventies, eighties and beyond to blues, big band, country and jazz with the best live music and documentaries

BBC Radio 3: arts and high culture, special-interest music (classical, jazz, world music), plus news, original in-house live music sessions, original live music concerts and music documentaries. Available on 90-93 FM and digital platforms.

Slogan = Radio 3 broadcasts classical music, jazz, world music, new music, arts programmes and drama. It's the home of the Proms and broadcasts more live music than any other network

BBC Radio 4: news, current affairs, arts, history, original in-house drama, original in-house first-run comedy, science, books and religion. The service closes down and simulcasts the BBC World Service from 01:00 to 05:20 daily. Available between 92-95 and 103-105 FM, 198 LW, various medium wave frequencies and on digital platforms.

Slogan = Intelligent speech, the most insightful journalism, the wittiest comedy, the most fascinating features and the most compelling drama and readings anywhere in UK radio

BBC Radio 5 Live: news, sports and talk programmes available on 909/693 MW and digital frequencies.

Slogan = Live news and live sport. Premier League football, Champions League football, Europa League football, international football, FA Cup football, Championship Football, Football League, Scottish...'
The new digital-only (Internet Streaming/Sky/freesat/Freeview/DAB) radio stations are:

BBC Radio 1Xtra: new urban music, plus news, original in-house live music sessions, original live music concerts and music documentaries

Slogan = BBC Radio 1Xtra – Hip Hop, RnB, Grime, Dancehall, Afrobeat, Drum n Bass – championing UK and international underground diverse music

BBC Radio 4 Extra: classic comedy, drama, books, science fiction, fantasy and children's programmes. Originally named BBC Radio 7.

Slogan = Showcasing the best in comedy drama and entertainment. With quizzes, sitcoms, panel games, satire, stand up, life stories, classics from the archive, science fiction and fantasy

BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra: a companion to Radio 5 Live for additional sports events coverage

Slogan = More live sport. Pure live sport. Live cricket from the Test Match Special team, football commentary, Formula 1, rugby union, rugby league, baseball, NFL American Football, tennis...

BBC Radio 6 Music: an eclectic mix of alternative genres including rock, funk, punk and reggae (and most non-special interest genres), plus news, original in-house live music sessions, original live music concerts and music documentaries

Slogan = The place for the best Alternative Music. From Indie Pop and Iconic Rock to Trip Hop, Electronica and Dance with great Archive Music Sessions, Live Music Concerts and Documentaries

BBC Asian Network: aimed at the large South Asian community in the UK (primarily a digital radio station, but available in parts of the Midlands on medium wave)

Slogan = BBC Asian Network – Bollywood, Bhangra, Asian Urban and underground. Home of Desi music, news and documentaries
National Regions[edit]
The BBC also runs radio stations for the three national regions: Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. These stations focus on local issues to a greater extent than their UK-wide counterparts, organising live phone-in debates about these issues, as well as lighter talk shows with music from different decades of the 20th century. Compared to the majority of the UK's commercially funded radio stations, which generally broadcast little beyond contemporary popular music, the BBC's "national regional" stations offer a more diverse range of programming.

BBC Cymru Wales

BBC Radio Cymru: Welsh-language network
BBC Radio Wales: News, music, sport and talk from Wales


BBC Scotland

BBC Radio Scotland: News, music, sport and talk from Scotland
BBC Radio nan Gàidheal: Gaelic-language network
BBC Radio Orkney: News, music, sport and talk from Orkney
BBC Radio Shetland: News, music, sport and talk from Shetland


BBC Northern Ireland

BBC Radio Ulster: News, music, sport and talk from Northern Ireland
BBC Radio Foyle: News, music, sport and talk from the north-west of Northern Ireland



Local services[edit]
There are many BBC Local Radio services across England (and the Channel Islands), often catering to individual counties.
World Service[edit]
BBC World Service is the world's largest international broadcaster,[10][11] broadcasting in 27 languages to many parts of the world via analogue and digital shortwave, internet streaming and podcasting, satellite, FM and MW relays. It is politically independent (by mandate of the Agreement providing details of the topics outlined in the BBC Charter), non-profit, and commercial-free. The English language service had always had a UK listenership on LW and therefore DAB Services allowed, by this popular demand, it to be now available 24/7 for this audience in better quality reception. Slogan = The BBC's international radio station
Broadcasting[edit]
BBC Radio services are broadcast on various FM and AM frequencies, DAB digital radio and live streaming on BBC Online, which is available worldwide.
They are also available on Digital Television sets in the UK, and archived programs are available for 7 days after broadcast on the BBC website; a number of trials of MP3 downloads and podcasting for selected shows are also under way—see BBC Online#Streaming media.
International syndication[edit]
The BBC also syndicates radio and podcast content to radio stations and other broadcasting services around the globe, through its BBC Radio International business which is part of BBC Worldwide. Programmes regularly syndicated by BBC Radio International include: In Concert (live rock music recordings from BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 2, including an archive dating back to 1971); interviews, live sessions and music shows; Classical Music (including performances from The BBC Proms); Spoken Word (Music documentaries, Dramas, Readings, Features and Comedies, mainly from BBC Radio 4) and channels, including BBC Radio 1.
BBC Radio International also provides many services internationally including inflight entertainment, subscription, and satellite services. BBC Radio International is partnered with (Sirius Satellite Radio) and (British Airways) as well as many other local radio stations.
Programmes[edit]
Further information: Category:BBC Radio programmes
Throughout its history the BBC has produced many radio programmes. Particularly significant, influential, popular or long lasting programmes include:

Any Questions? (1948–present): Topical debate series.
The Archers (1950–present): Long running rural soap opera. Currently the most listened to programme on Radio 4 and on the BBC's on-line radio service.
Children's Hour (1922–1964): Long running slot for children's programmes.
Desert Island Discs (1942–present): Interview programme in which the guest chooses the eight pieces of music they would take with them to a desert island. The longest running music radio programme in British history.
Friday Night Is Music Night (1952–present): Long running live music show, covering a wide range of music tastes.
Gardeners' Question Time (1947–present): Gardening programme in which gardening experts give advice and answer listeners' questions.
The Goon Show (1951–1960): Highly influential comedy series with elements of surrealism.
Hancock's Half Hour (1954–1960): Influential comedy series which transferred to television.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (1978–1980 and 2004–2005): Comedy science fiction serial by Douglas Adams.
I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue (1972–present): Comedy series parodying the radio panel game format.
It's That Man Again (1939–1949): Comedy series popular during and after World War II.
Journey Into Space (1953–1958): Science fiction series which was the last UK radio programme to achieve a higher audience than television.
Just a Minute (1967–present): Long running panel game where the contestants must attempt to speak for one minute without repetition, hesitation or deviation.
Letter from America (1946–2004): Commentary on American news and events by Alistair Cooke. The longest-running speech radio programme in history.
The News Quiz (1977–present): Topical comedy show
The Reith Lectures (1948–present): Annual series of lectures given by leading figures of the day.
Round the Horne (1965–1968): Comedy series notable for its innuendo and use of the gay slang polari.
Sports Report (1948–present): Saturday sports round-up including the classified football results.
Test Match Special (1957–present): Live cricket coverage.
Today programme (1957–present): Early morning news and current affairs programme.
Top Gear / John Peel (1965–2004): Pioneering and influential alternative music programme. Originally fronted by Brian Matthew as a live music show, which featured unique performances by many top names such as The Beatles, The Who and Jimi Hendrix. Changed name to simply The John Peel Show in the early 1970s
Woman's Hour (1946–present): Long running magazine programme for women.
Workers' Playtime (1941–1964): Lunchtime variety show.
The World at One (1965–present): Lunchtime news show.

Expenditure[edit]
The following expenditure figures are from 2012/13 and show the expenditure of each service they are obliged to provide:[12]



Service
2012/13 Total Cost
(£million)
Comparison with
2011/12 (£million)


BBC Radio 1
54.2
+ 3.6


BBC Radio 1Xtra
11.8
+ 0.7


BBC Radio 2
62.1
+ 1.6


BBC Radio 3
54.3
+ 1.8


BBC Radio 4
122.1
+ 6.2


BBC Radio 4 Extra
7.2
- 1


BBC Radio 5 Live
76
+ 6.7


BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra
5.6
+ 0.3


BBC Radio 6 Music
11.5
- 0.2


BBC Asian Network
13
0


BBC Local Radio
152.5
+ 6


BBC Radio Scotland
32.7
+ 0.6


BBC Radio nan Gàidheal
6.3
+ 0.3


BBC Radio Wales
18.8
+ 1.1


BBC Radio Cymru
17.6
+ 1.7


BBC Radio Ulster and BBC Radio Foyle
23.8
0


Total
669.5
+ 29.4


Directors[edit]



Appointed
Director


1963
Frank Gillard


1970
Ian Trethowan


1976
Howard Newby


1978
Aubrey Singer


1982
Richard Francis


1986
Brian Wenham


1987
David Hatch


1993
Liz Forgan


1996
Matthew Bannister


1999
Jenny Abramsky


2008
Tim Davie


2013
Helen Boaden



The official title of this post has changed over the years. The most recent was in 2006 when it became "Director of Audio and Music" to reflect the BBC's online audio services.
See also[edit]


BBC portal



BBC Television, BBC domestic television services.
British Broadcasting Company
Timeline of the BBC, for an overview of BBC history.
List of BBC Radio programmes adapted for television
NPR, the American equivalent

References[edit]


^ "BBC Management Structure". 26 July 2013. BBC. Retrieved 26 July 2013. 
^ BBC Audio & Music, Retrieved 18 November 2010
^ "BBC National Radio" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009. 
^ "No need to change BBC's mission to 'inform, educate and entertain'". UK Parliament. 31 October 2016. 
^ AND THE WORLD LISTENED The Biography of Captain Leonard F. Plugge - A Pioneer of Commercial Radio. Kelly Publications 2007. Author: Keith Wallis
^ History BBC World Service
^ "The Offshore Radio Revolution in Britain 1964–2004". H2G2. 31 August 2004. Retrieved 22 July 2007. 
^ Imogen Carter (27 September 2007). "The day we woke up to pop music on Radio 1". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 30 September 2007. 
^ a b Andrews, Amanda (28 Nov 2010). "BBC enlists commercial sector help to shake up radio". The Telegraph. Retrieved 12 March 2011. 
^ "Microsoft Word - The Work of the BBC World Service 2008-09 HC 334 FINAL.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 16 February 2011. 
^ "World s largest international broadcaster visits city". Coal Valley News. Archived from the original on 21 January 2011. Retrieved 16 February 2011. 
^ "BBC Full Financial Statements 2012/13" (PDF). BBC Annual Report and Accounts 2012/13. BBC. 2013. pp. 8–9. Retrieved 17 August 2013. 


Further reading[edit]

Donovan, Paul (1991). The Radio Companion. London: HarperCollins. ISBN 0-586-09012-6. 

External links[edit]

BBC Radio at BBC Online







v
t
e


BBC Radio




BBC



UK stations




Nationwide



Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
Radio 5 Live





Digital-only



1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
Radio 5 Live Sports Extra
Radio 6 Music
Asian Network
National DAB multiplex





Nations



Scotland

Shetland
Orkney
nan Gàidheal


Wales

Cymru


Ulster / Foyle





English regions



BBC Local Radio








International stations



World Service
Albanian (Dissolved)
Arabic
Bangla
Nepali
Brasil
Hausa
Mundo
Persian
Russian
Ukrainian
Urdu






Defunct stations
and services








2LO London
5IT Birmingham
2ZY Manchester
5NO Newcastle
5WA Cardiff
5SC Glasgow
2BD Aberdeen
6BM Bournemouth
2FL Sheffield
5PY Plymouth
2BE Belfast





Relays



2EH Edinburgh
6LV Liverpool
2LS Leeds and Bradford
6KH Hull
5NG Nottingham
2DE Dundee
6ST Stoke
5SX Swansea





Services



Allied Expeditionary Forces Programme
Forces Programme
General Forces Programme
Home Service
Light Programme
National Programme
Radio 4 News FM
Radio 5
Radio 7 (rebranded)
Regional Programme
Third Programme








Related topics



Awards
Logos
BBC Music
Programmes
Radio Orchestra
School Radio
Wartime Broadcasting Service






 Category








Links to related articles











v
t
e


BBC



Services



Television (station list)
Radio (station list)
BBC Online
BBC Red Button (Ceefax)
BBC iPlayer








Management



David Clementi (Chairman of the BBC Board)
Tony Hall (Director-General)
Anne Bulford (Deputy Director-General)





Divisions



Content (Television)
Radio & Education
Design & Engineering
News
Sport
Weather
Monitoring
Archives
BBC Academy
BBC Films
BBC World Service





Nations and regions




England



East
East Midlands
London
North East and Cumbria
North West
South
South East
South West
West
West Midlands
Yorkshire
Yorkshire and Lincolnshire





Rest of UK



Northern Ireland
Scotland

Gàidhlig


Wales








Commercial subsidiaries



BBC Worldwide

BBC Store


BBC Studios
BBC Studioworks





History



Timeline
British Broadcasting Company
Logo of the BBC
Coat of Arms
Board of Governors
BBC Trust
BBC controversies
BBC Archives





Key properties
(full list)




London



Broadcasting House
White City & Media Village
Maida Vale Studios
Television Centre (Formerly)
Lime Grove (Formerly)





Birmingham



Mailbox Birmingham
Drama Village





Cardiff



Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Drama Village (Roath Lock)
BBC Wales headquarters building, Cardiff





Other locations



Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
BBC Elstree Centre
Pacific Quay, Glasgow
MediaCityUK, Salford








Finance



Television licence (history)





Projects



Dirac
The Box
backstage.bbc.co.uk
Domesday
YouView
Freesat
Redux
Playlister
BBC UK regional TV on satellite
BBC Local Radio








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=BBC_Radio&oldid=806764448"					Categories: BBC RadioRadio broadcasting companies of the United KingdomInternet radio in the United KingdomOperational Divisions BBCPeabody Award winnersRadio during World War IIRadio stations established in 1927Entertainment companies established in 19271927 establishments in EnglandBritish companies established in 1927Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2015All articles needing additional referencesUse British English from May 2012Use dmy dates from May 2012