For other uses, see Beacon (disambiguation).
A beacon is an intentionally conspicuous device designed to attract attention to a specific location.
Beacons can also be combined with semaphoric or other indicators to provide important information, such as the status of an airport, by the colour and rotational pattern of its airport beacon, or of pending weather as indicated on a weather beacon mounted at the top of a tall building or similar site. When used in such fashion, beacons can be considered a form of optical telegraphy.



Contents


1 For navigation
2 For defensive communications
3 On vehicles
4 Other uses

4.1 In fiction
4.2 In retail


5 See also
6 References



For navigation[edit]




A navigational beacon denoting the presence of Orontes Bank off Port Vincent, South Australia.


Beacons help guide navigators to their destinations. Types of navigational beacons include radar reflectors, radio beacons, sonic and visual signals. Visual beacons range from small, single-pile structures to large lighthouses or light stations and can be located on land or on water. Lighted beacons are called lights; unlighted beacons are called daybeacons.
For defensive communications[edit]




16th-century beacon hut in Culmstock, Devon, England


Classically, beacons were fires lit at well-known locations on hills or high places, used either as lighthouses for navigation at sea, or for signalling over land that enemy troops were approaching, in order to alert defenses. As signals, beacons are an ancient form of optical telegraph and were part of a relay league.
Systems of this kind have existed for centuries over much of the world. The ancient Romans used beacons and beacons figure on several occasions on the column of Trajan.
In the 10th century, during the Arab–Byzantine wars, the Byzantine Empire used a beacon system to transmit messages from the border with the Abbasid Caliphate, across Anatolia to the imperial palace in the Byzantine capital, Constantinople. It was devised by Leo the Mathematician for Emperor Theophilos, but either abolished or radically curtailed by Theophilos' son and successor, Michael III.[1] Beacons were later used in Greece as well, while the surviving parts of the beacon system in Anatolia seem to have been reactivated in the 12th century by Emperor Manuel I Komnenos.[1]
In Scandinavia many hill forts were part of beacon networks to warn against invading pillagers. In Finland, these beacons were called vainovalkeat, "persecution fires", or vartiotulet, "guard fires", and were used to warn Finn settlements of imminent raids by the Vikings.
In Wales, the Brecon Beacons were named for beacons used to warn of approaching English raiders. In England, the most famous examples are the beacons used in Elizabethan England to warn of the approaching Spanish Armada. Many hills in England were named Beacon Hill after such beacons. In the Scottish borders country, a system of beacon fires was at one time established to warn of incursions by the English. Hume and Eggerstone castles and Soltra Edge were part of this network.[2] The Great Wall of China is also a beacon network.
In Spain, the border of Granada in the territory of the Crown of Castile had a complex beacon network to warn against Moorish raiders and military campaigns.[3]
On vehicles[edit]




Beacon positions on police car


Vehicular beacons are rotating or flashing lights affixed to the top of a vehicle to attract the attention of surrounding vehicles and pedestrians. Emergency vehicles such as fire engines, ambulances, police cars, tow trucks, construction vehicles, and snow-removal vehicles carry beacon lights.
The color of the lamps varies by jurisdiction; typical colors are blue and/or red for police, fire, and medical-emergency vehicles; amber for hazards (slow-moving vehicles, wide loads, tow trucks, security personnel, construction vehicles, etc.); green for volunteer firefighters or for medical personnel, and violet for funerary vehicles. Beacons may be constructed with halogen bulbs similar to those used in vehicle headlamps, xenon flashtubes, or LEDs.[4] Incandescent and xenon light sources require the vehicle’s engine to continue running to ensure that the battery is not depleted when the lights are used for a prolonged period. The low power consumption of LEDs allows the vehicle's engine to remain turned off while the lights operate nodes.
Other uses[edit]
Beacons and bonfires are also used to mark occasions and celebrate events.
Beacons have also allegedly been abused by shipwreckers. An illicit fire at a wrong position would be used to direct a ship against shoals or beaches, so that its cargo could be looted after the ship sank or ran aground. There are, however, no historically substantiated occurrences of such intentional shipwrecking.
In wireless networks, a beacon is a type of frame which is sent by the access point (or WiFi router) to indicate that it is on.
Bluetooth based beacons periodically send out a data packet and this could be used by software to identify the beacon location. This is typically used by indoor navigation and positioning applications.[5]
Beaconing is the process that allows a network to self-repair network problems. The stations on the network notify the other stations on the ring when they are not receiving the transmissions. Beaconing is used in Token ring and FDDI networks.
In fiction[edit]
In Aeschylus' tragedy Agamemnon,[6] a chain of eight beacons manned by so-called lampadóphoroi inform Clytemnestra in Argos, within a single night's time, that Troy has just fallen under her husband king Agamemnon's control, after a famous ten years siege.
In J. R. R. Tolkien's high fantasy novel, The Lord of the Rings, a series of beacons alerts the entire realm of Gondor when the kingdom is under attack. These beacon posts were manned by messengers who would carry word of their lighting to either Rohan or Belfalas.[7] In Peter Jackson's film adaptation of the novel, the beacons serve as a connection between the two realms of Rohan and Gondor, alerting one another directly when they require military aid, as opposed to relying on messengers as in the novel.
In retail[edit]
Beacons are sometimes used in retail to send digital coupons or invites to customers passing by. [8][9] Beacons are sometimes used for End-to-End Item-Level Monitoring [1]
See also[edit]


Aerodrome beacon
Beacon mode service
Beacon School
Belisha beacon
Distress radiobeacons (ELTs, PLBs & EPIRBs)
iBeacon
Lantern
Leading lights
Lighthouse of Alexandria
Milestone/Kilometric point
Polaris
Strobe beacon
Time ball
Trail blazing
Warning light (disambiguation)
Weather beacon
Web beacon


References[edit]



^ a b Foss, Clive (1991). "Beacon". In Kazhdan, Alexander. The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium. Oxford University Press. pp. 273–274. ISBN 978-0-19-504652-6. 
^ Ritchie, Leitch (1835). Scott and Scotland. London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, Green, and Longman, p. 53
^ Els almogávers a la frontera amb el sarrains en el segle XIV. Maria Teresa Ferrer
^ Bullough, John; Nicholas P Skinner (December 2009). "Evaluation of Light-Emitting Diode Beacon Light Fixtures" (PDF). Lighting Research Center – Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-07-29. Retrieved 2010-06-05. 
^ "What is a Beacon? - Beacon Basics". Kontakt.io. 2016-09-20. Retrieved 2017-04-05. 
^ v. 281 et sqq.
^ Tolkien, J. R. R. (2004). The Lord of the Rings (50th Anniversary Edition). The Return of the King. Houghton Mifflin Company. pp. 747–748. 
^ Peter Lewis (2016-08-19). "How Beacons Can Reshape Retail Marketing – Think with Google". Thinkwithgoogle.com. Retrieved 2017-04-05. 
^ ELON JOURNAL OF UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH IN COMMUNICATIONS 2015, VOL. 6 NO. 1









v
t
e


International Morse code



Transmission methods



Electrical telegraph
On-off keying
Continuous wave
Modulated continuous wave
Heliograph
Signal lamp





Notable signals



SOS
CQD
Morse code mnemonics
Prosigns for Morse code
Morse code abbreviations
Q code
Z code





Other writing systems
in Morse code



American Morse code
Greek alphabet
Cyrillic alphabet
Hebrew alphabet
Arabic alphabet
Wabun code
Chinese telegraph code












v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beacon&oldid=809297369"					Categories: BeaconsOptical communications