"Bangla language" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Bangala language.
India


Bengali


Bangla


বাংলা



"Bangla" in Bengali script



Pronunciation
English pronunciation: /bɛŋˈɡɔːli/
Bengali pronunciation: [ˈbaŋla]


Region
Bangladesh, India


Ethnicity
Bengalis



Native speakers

268 million
In Bangladesh: 155,932,659[1]
In India: 93,369,796[2] (2011)[3]
19.2 million L2 speakers (in Bangladesh (2011 census)[4])



Language family


Indo-European

Indo-Iranian

Indo-Aryan

Magadhi Prakrit

Eastern Zone (Magadhan)

Bengali-Assamese

Bengali
















Early forms


Abahattha

Old Bengali





Dialects


see Bengali dialects





Writing system

Eastern Nagari script (Bengali alphabet)
Bengali Braille



Signed forms

Bengali signed forms[5]


Official status



Official language in

 Bangladesh
 India (in West Bengal, Tripura, Jharkhand and Assam)


Regulated by
Bangla Academy
Paschimbanga Bangla Akademi


Language codes


ISO 639-1
bn


ISO 639-2
ben


ISO 639-3
ben


Glottolog
beng1280[6]


Linguasphere
59-AAF-u



Bengali speaking region of South Asia




Bengali speakers around the world



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.





This article contains Bengali text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols.




This article is part of a series on the


বাঙালি
Bengalis





Language and Literature




Language

Dialects
Alphabet
Romanisation


Literature

Poetry
Science fiction
Novels
Folklore






Regions




Bengal
Bangladesh
West Bengal
Tripura
Barak Valley
Assam
Overseas




Subgroup




Bangal
Ghoti people
Bengali Muslims
Bengali Hindus
Bengali Buddhists
Bengali Christians




Arts and Tradition




Bangladeshi art
Music
Cinema
Theatre
Weddings
Calendar
Bengali Festivals

Bengali New Year
Bengali Spring Festival
Nobanno
Barsha Utsab


Cuisine
Architecture




Symbols




Bangamata
Bengal tiger
Bengal cat
Bungalow
Bengal fire
Bengali renaissance
Amar Sonar Bangla
National symbols of Bangladesh
Fish and rice

Ilish
Chingri malai curry
Rasgulla
Chomchom


Jamdani
Ganges
Gangaridai
Suvarnabhumi
Bay of Bengal







v
t
e







Play media


A series of picture stories narrated in Bengali


Bengali (/bɛŋˈɡɔːli/),[7] also known by its endonym Bangla (/ˈbɑːŋlɑː/; বাংলা [ˈbaŋla] ( listen)), is an Indo-Aryan language spoken in the Indian Subcontinent. It is the national and official language of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, and the official language of the states of West Bengal, Tripura, Assam (Barak Valley) and Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Republic of India, and is thus one of the two non-Hindi languages (the other being Telugu) that is the primary state official language of more than one state.[8] It is also one of the 22 scheduled languages of India. With 205 million speakers, Bengali is the seventh most spoken native language in the world by population. Dictionaries from the early 20th century attributed slightly more than half of the Bengali vocabulary to native words (i.e., naturally modified Sanskrit words, corrupted forms of Sanskrit words, and loanwords from non-Indo-European languages), about 30 percent to unmodified Sanskrit words, and the remainder to foreign words.[9] Dominant in the last group was Persian, which was also the source of some grammatical forms. More recent studies suggest that the use of native and foreign words has been increasing, mainly because of the preference of Bengali speakers for the colloquial style.[9] Today, Bengali is the primary language spoken in Bangladesh and the second most widely spoken language in India.[10][11][12]
Bengali literature, with its millennium-old history and folk heritage, has extensively developed since the Bengali renaissance and is one of the most prominent and diverse literary traditions in Asia. Both the national anthems of Bangladesh (Amar Sonar Bangla) and India (Jana Gana Mana) were composed in Bengali; furthermore, it is believed by many that the national anthem of Sri Lanka (Sri Lanka Matha) was inspired by a Bengali poem written by Rabindranath Tagore,[13][14][15][16] while some even believe the anthem was originally written in Bengali and then translated into Sinhalese.[17][18][19][20]
In 1952, the Bengali Language Movement successfully pushed for the language's official status in the Dominion of Pakistan. In 1999, UNESCO recognized 21 February as International Mother Language Day in recognition of the language movement in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). Language is an important element of Bengali identity and binds together a culturally diverse region.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Ancient language of Bengal
1.2 Emergence of Bengali
1.3 Middle Bengali
1.4 Modern Bengali


2 Geographical distribution

2.1 Official status
2.2 Dialects


3 Spoken and literary varieties
4 Phonology

4.1 Stress
4.2 Consonant clusters


5 Writing system

5.1 Orthographic depth
5.2 Uses
5.3 Romanization


6 Grammar

6.1 Word order
6.2 Nouns
6.3 Verbs


7 Vocabulary
8 Sample text
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



History[edit]




Silver coin with proto-Bengali script, Harikela Kingdom, circa 9th-13th century


Ancient language of Bengal[edit]
Sanskrit was spoken in Bengal since the first millennium BCE. During the Gupta Empire, Bengal was a hub of Sanskrit literature.[21] The Middle Indo-Aryan dialects were spoken in Bengal in the first millennium when the region was a part of the Magadha Realm. These dialects were called Magadhi Prakrit. They eventually evolved into Ardha Magadhi.[22][23] Ardha Magadhi began to give way to what are called Apabhraṃśa languages at the end of the first millennium.[24]
Emergence of Bengali[edit]
Along with other Eastern Indo-Aryan languages, Bengali evolved circa 1000–1200 AD from Sanskrit and Magadhi Prakrit.[25] The local Apabhraṃśa of the eastern subcontinent, Purbi Apabhraṃśa or Abahatta ("Meaningless Sounds"), eventually evolved into regional dialects, which in turn formed three groups of the Bengali–Assamese languages, the Bihari languages, and the Odia language. Some argue that the points of divergence occurred much earlier — going back to even 500,[26] but the language was not static: different varieties coexisted and authors often wrote in multiple dialects in this period. For example, Ardhamagadhi is believed to have evolved into Abahatta around the 6th century, which competed with the ancestor of Bengali for some time.[27] Proto-Bengali was the language of the Pala Empire and the Sena dynasty.[28][29]
Middle Bengali[edit]




Silver Taka from the Sultanate of Bengal, circa 1417


During the medieval period, Middle Bengali was characterized by the elision of word-final অ ô, the spread of compound verbs and Arabic and Persian influences. Bengali was an official court language of the Sultanate of Bengal. Muslim rulers promoted the literary development of Bengali.[30] Bengali became the most spoken vernacular language in the Sultanate.[31] This period saw borrowing of Perso-Arabic terms into Bengali vocabulary. Major texts of Middle Bengali (1400–1800) include Chandidas' Shreekrishna Kirtana.
Modern Bengali[edit]




The Central Shaheed Minar in Dhaka commemorates the Bengali Language Movement. UNESCO commemorates the movement as International Mother Language Day


The modern literary form of Bengali was developed during the 19th and early 20th centuries based on the dialect spoken in the Nadia region, a west-central Bengali dialect. Bengali presents a strong case of diglossia, with the literary and standard form differing greatly from the colloquial speech of the regions that identify with the language.[32] The modern Bengali vocabulary contains the vocabulary base from Magadhi Prakrit and Pali, also tatsamas and reborrowings from Sanskrit and other major borrowings from Persian, Arabic, Austroasiatic languages and other languages in contact with.
During this period, the চলিতভাষা Chôlitôbhasha form of Bengali using simplified inflections and other changes, was emerging from সাধুভাষা Sadhubhasha (Proper form or original form of Bengali) as the form of choice for written Bengali.[33]
In 1948 the Government of Pakistan tried to impose Urdu as the sole state language in Pakistan, starting the Bengali language movement.[34] The Bengali Language Movement was a popular ethno-linguistic movement in the former East Bengal (today Bangladesh), which was a result of the strong linguistic consciousness of the Bengalis to gain and protect spoken and written Bengali's recognition as a state language of the then Dominion of Pakistan. On the day of 21 February 1952 five students and political activists were killed during protests near the campus of the University of Dhaka. In 1956 Bengali was made a state language of Pakistan.[34] The day has since been observed as Language Movement Day in Bangladesh and was proclaimed the International Mother Language Day by UNESCO on 17 November 1999, marking Bengali language the only language in the world to be also known for its language movements and people sacrificing their life for their mother language.
A Bengali language movement in the Indian state of Assam took place in 1961, a protest against the decision of the Government of Assam to make Assamese the only official language of the state even though a significant proportion of the population were Bengali-speaking, particularly in the Barak Valley.
In 2010, the parliament of Bangladesh and the legislative assembly of West Bengal proposed that Bengali be made an official UN language.[35] Their motions came after Bangladeshi Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina suggested the idea while addressing the UN General Assembly that year.[35]
Geographical distribution[edit]
Bengali language is native to the region of Bengal, which comprises Indian states of West Bengal and the present-day nation of Bangladesh.




A Bengali sign in Brick Lane in London, which is home to a large Bengali diaspora


Besides the native region it is also spoken by the Bengalis living in Tripura, southern Assam and the Bengali population in the Indian union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Bengali is also spoken in the neighboring states of Odisha, Bihar, and Jharkhand, and sizable minorities of Bengali speakers reside in Indian cities outside Bengal, including Delhi, Mumbai, Varanasi, and Vrindavan. There are also significant Bengali-speaking communities in the Middle East[36][37][38], the United States, Singapore,[39] Malaysia, Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom and Italy.
Official status[edit]
See also: States of India by Bengali speakers
Bengali is national and official language of Bangladesh, and one of the 23 official languages in India.[40] It is the official language of the Indian states of West Bengal, Tripura and in Barak Valley of Assam.[41][42] Bengali is a second official language of the Indian state of Jharkhand since September 2011. It is also a recognized secondary language in the City of Karachi in Pakistan.[43][44][45] The Department of Bengali in the University of Karachi also offers regular programs of studies at the Bachelors and at the Masters levels for Bengali Literature.[46]
The national anthems of both Bangladesh and India were written in Bengali by the Bengali Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore.[47] In 2009, elected representatives in both Bangladesh and West Bengal called for Bengali language to be made an official language of the United Nations.[48]
Dialects[edit]
Main article: Bengali dialects
Regional variation in spoken Bengali constitutes a dialect continuum. Linguist Suniti Kumar Chattopadhyay grouped these dialects into four large clusters—Rarh, Banga, Kamarupa and Varendra;[49] but many alternative grouping schemes have also been proposed.[50] The south-western dialects (Rarh or Nadia dialect) form the basis of modern standard colloquial Bengali. In the dialects prevalent in much of eastern and south-eastern Bangladesh (Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka and Sylhet Divisions of Bangladesh), many of the stops and affricates heard in West Bengal are pronounced as fricatives. Western alveolo-palatal affricates চ [tɕɔ], ছ [tɕʰɔ], জ [dʑɔ] correspond to eastern চ [tsɔ], ছ [tsʰɔ~sɔ], জ [dzɔ~zɔ]. The influence of Tibeto-Burman languages on the phonology of Eastern Bengali is seen through the lack of nasalized vowels and an alveolar articulation of what are categorised as the "cerebral" consonants (as opposed to the postalveolar articulation of West Bengal). Some variants of Bengali, particularly Chittagonian and Chakma, have contrastive tone; differences in the pitch of the speaker's voice can distinguish words. Rangpuri, Kharia Thar and Mal Paharia are closely related to Western Bengali dialects, but are typically classified as separate languages. Similarly, Hajong is considered a separate language, although it shares similarities to Northern Bengali dialects.[51]
During the standardization of Bengali in the 19th century and early 20th century, the cultural center of Bengal was in the city of Kolkata, founded by the British. What is accepted as the standard form today in both West Bengal and Bangladesh is based on the West-Central dialect of Nadia District, located next to the border of Bangladesh.[52] There are cases where speakers of Standard Bengali in West Bengal will use a different word from a speaker of Standard Bengali in Bangladesh, even though both words are of native Bengali descent. For example, the word salt is নুন nun in the west which corresponds to লবণ lôbôn in the east.[53]
Spoken and literary varieties[edit]
Bengali exhibits diglossia, though some scholars have proposed triglossia or even n-glossia or heteroglossia between the written and spoken forms of the language.[32] Two styles of writing have emerged, involving somewhat different vocabularies and syntax:[52][54]

Shadhu-bhasha (সাধুভাষা ← সাধু shadhu "sage" + ভাষা bhasha "language") was the written language, with longer verb inflections and more of a Pali and Sanskrit-derived Tatsama vocabulary. Songs such as India's national anthem Jana Gana Mana (by Rabindranath Tagore) were composed in Shadhubhasha. However, use of Shadhubhasha in modern writing is uncommon, restricted to some official signs and documents in Bangladesh as well as for achieving particular literary effects.
Cholitobhasha (চলিতভাষা ← চলিত chôlitô "current" + ভাষা bhasha "language"), known by linguists as Standard Colloquial Bengali, is a written Bengali style exhibiting a preponderance of colloquial idiom and shortened verb forms, and is the standard for written Bengali now. This form came into vogue towards the turn of the 19th century, promoted by the writings of Peary Chand Mitra (Alaler Gharer Dulal, 1857),[55] Pramatha Chaudhuri (Sabujpatra, 1914) and in the later writings of Rabindranath Tagore. It is modeled on the dialect spoken in the Shantipur region in Nadia district, West Bengal. This form of Bengali is often referred to as the "Nadia standard", "Nadia dialect", "Southwestern/West-Central dialect" or "Shantipuri Bangla".[50]

While most writing is in Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB), spoken dialects exhibit a greater variety. People in southeastern West Bengal, including Kolkata, speak in SCB. Other dialects, with minor variations from Standard Colloquial, are used in other parts of West Bengal and western Bangladesh, such as the Midnapore dialect, characterised by some unique words and constructions. However, a majority in Bangladesh speak in dialects notably different from SCB. Some dialects, particularly those of the Chittagong region, bear only a superficial resemblance to SCB.[56] The dialect in the Chittagong region is least widely understood by the general body of Bengalis.[56] The majority of Bengalis are able to communicate in more than one variety—often, speakers are fluent in Cholitobhasha (SCB) and one or more regional dialects.[33]
Even in SCB, the vocabulary may differ according to the speaker's religion: Hindus are more likely to use words derived from Sanskrit and of Austroasiatic Deshi origin whereas Muslims are more likely to use words of Persian and Arabic origin respectively.[57] For example:[53]


Predominantly Hindu usage
Predominantly Muslim usage
translation


নমস্কার nômôshkar
আসসালামু আলাইকুম Assalamu-Alaikum
hello


নিমন্ত্রণ nimôntrôn
দাওয়াত daoat
invitation


জল jôl
পানি pani
water


স্নান snan
গোসল gusôl
bath


দিদি didi
আপু apu
sister / elder sister


দাদা dada
ভাই bha'i
brother / elder brother[58]


মাসী mashi
খালা khala
maternal aunt


কাকা kaka
চাচা chacha
paternal uncle


প্রার্থনা prarthona
দো'আ do'a / du'a
pray


প্রদীপ prodip
বাতি bati
light[59]


Phonology[edit]
Main article: Bengali phonology
The phonemic inventory of standard Bengali consists of 29 consonants and 7 vowels, as well as 7 nasalized vowels. The inventory is set out below in the International Phonetic Alphabet (upper grapheme in each box) and romanization (lower grapheme).




Vowels


Front
Central
Back


Close
ই~ঈ
i
i

উ~ঊ
u
u


Close-mid
এ
e
e

ও
ʊ~o
u/o


Near-open
এ্যা/অ্যা
æ or ɛ
ê

অ
ɔ
ô


Open

আ
a
a




Nasalized Vowels


Front
Central
Back


Close
ĩ

ũ


Close-mid
ẽ

õ


Near-open
æ̃

ɔ̃


Open

ã






Consonants


Labial
Dental/
Alveolar
Retroflex
Palatoalveolar
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
ম
mɔ
mô
ঞ ~ ণ ~ ন
nɔ
nô
 
ঙ
ŋɔ
ngô
 


Plosive
voiceless
প
pɔ
pô
ত
t̪ɔ
tô
ট
ʈɔ
ṭô
চ
tʃɔ~tsɔ
cô/sô
ক
kɔ
kô



aspirated
ফ
pʰɔ~ɸɔ
fô
থ
t̪ʰɔ
thô
ঠ
ʈʰɔ
ṭhô
ছ
tʃʰɔ~tssɔ
chô/ssô
খ
kʰɔ
khô



voiced
ব
bɔ
bô
দ
d̪ɔ
dô
ড
ɖɔ
ḍô
জ ~ য
dʒɔ~dzɔ
jô ~ zô
গ
ɡɔ
gô



aspirated
ভ
bʱɔ~βɔ
bhô
ধ
d̪ʱɔ
dhô
ঢ
ɖʱɔ
ḍhô
ঝ
dʒʱɔ
jhô
ঘ
ɡʱɔ
ghô



Fricative

স
sɔ
sô

শ ~ ষ
ʃɔ
shô

হ
hɔ
hô


Approximant

ল
lɔ
lô






Rhotic

র
rɔ
rô
ড় ~ ঢ়
ɽɔ~ɽʱɔ
rô / rhô








Bengali is known for its wide variety of diphthongs, combinations of vowels occurring within the same syllable.[60] Two of these, /oi̯/ and /ou̯/, are the only ones with representation in script, as ঐ and ঔ respectively. /e̯ i̯ o̯ u̯/ may all form the glide part of a diphthong. The total number of diphthongs is not established, with bounds at 17 and 31. An incomplete chart is given by Sarkar (1985) of the following:[61]



e̯
i̯
o̯
u̯


a
ae̯
ai̯
ao̯
au̯


æ
æe̯

æo̯



e

ei̯

eu̯


i

ii̯

iu̯


o
oe̯
oi̯
oo̯
ou̯


u

ui̯




Stress[edit]
In standard Bengali, stress is predominantly initial. Bengali words are virtually all trochaic; the primary stress falls on the initial syllable of the word, while secondary stress often falls on all odd-numbered syllables thereafter, giving strings such as in সহযোগিতা shô-hô-jo-gi-ta "cooperation", where the boldface represents primary and secondary stress.
Consonant clusters[edit]
Main article: Bengali consonant clusters
Native Bengali words do not allow initial consonant clusters;[62] the maximum syllabic structure is CVC (i.e. one vowel flanked by a consonant on each side). Many speakers of Bengali restrict their phonology to this pattern, even when using Sanskrit or English borrowings, such as গেরাম geram (CV.CVC) for গ্রাম gram (CCVC) "village" or ইস্কুল iskul (VC.CVC) for স্কুল skul (CCVC) "school".
Writing system[edit]
Main articles: Bengali alphabet and Bengali Braille




An example of handwritten Bengali. Part of a poem written in Bengali (and with its English translation below each Bengali paragraph) by Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore in 1926 in Hungary.


The Bengali script is an abugida, a script with letters for consonants, diacritics for vowels, and in which an inherent vowel (অ ô) is assumed for consonants if no vowel is marked.[63] The Bengali alphabet is used throughout Bangladesh and eastern India (Assam, West Bengal, Tripura). The Bengali alphabet is believed to have evolved from a modified Brahmic script around 1000 CE (or 10th – 11th century).[64] Note that despite Bangladesh being majority Muslim, it uses the Bengali alphabet rather than an Arabic-based one like the Shahmukhi script used in Pakistan.
The Bengali script is a cursive script with eleven graphemes or signs denoting nine vowels and two diphthongs, and thirty-nine graphemes representing consonants and other modifiers.[64] There are no distinct upper and lower case letter forms. The letters run from left to right and spaces are used to separate orthographic words. Bengali script has a distinctive horizontal line running along the tops of the graphemes that links them together called মাত্রা matra.[65]
Since the Bengali script is an abugida, its consonant graphemes usually do not represent phonetic segments, but carry an "inherent" vowel and thus are syllabic in nature. The inherent vowel is usually a back vowel, either [ɔ] as in মত [mɔt̪] "opinion" or [o], as in মন [mon] "mind", with variants like the more open [ɒ]. To emphatically represent a consonant sound without any inherent vowel attached to it, a special diacritic, called the hôsôntô (্), may be added below the basic consonant grapheme (as in ম্ [m]). This diacritic, however, is not common, and is chiefly employed as a guide to pronunciation. The abugida nature of Bengali consonant graphemes is not consistent, however. Often, syllable-final consonant graphemes, though not marked by a hôsôntô, may carry no inherent vowel sound (as in the final ন in মন [mon] or the medial ম in গামলা [ɡamla]).
A consonant sound followed by some vowel sound other than the inherent [ɔ] is orthographically realized by using a variety of vowel allographs above, below, before, after, or around the consonant sign, thus forming the ubiquitous consonant-vowel typographic ligatures. These allographs, called কার kar, are diacritical vowel forms and cannot stand on their own. For example, the graph মি [mi] represents the consonant [m] followed by the vowel [i], where [i] is represented as the diacritical allographি (called ই-কার i-kar) and is placed before the default consonant sign. Similarly, the graphs মা [ma], মী [mi], মু [mu], মূ [mu], মৃ [mri], মে [me~mæ], মৈ [moj], মো [mo] and মৌ [mow] represent the same consonant ম combined with seven other vowels and two diphthongs. It should be noted that in these consonant-vowel ligatures, the so-called "inherent" vowel [ɔ] is first expunged from the consonant before adding the vowel, but this intermediate expulsion of the inherent vowel is not indicated in any visual manner on the basic consonant sign ম [mɔ].
The vowel graphemes in Bengali can take two forms: the independent form found in the basic inventory of the script and the dependent, abridged, allograph form (as discussed above). To represent a vowel in isolation from any preceding or following consonant, the independent form of the vowel is used. For example, in মই [moj] "ladder" and in ইলিশ [iliɕ] "Hilsa fish", the independent form of the vowel ই is used (cf. the dependent formি). A vowel at the beginning of a word is always realized using its independent form.
In addition to the inherent-vowel-suppressing hôsôntô, three more diacritics are commonly used in Bengali. These are the superposed chôndrôbindu (ঁ), denoting a suprasegmental for nasalization of vowels (as in চাঁদ [tɕãd] "moon"), the postposed ônusbar (ং) indicating the velar nasal [ŋ] (as in বাংলা [baŋla] "Bengali") and the postposed bisôrgô (ঃ) indicating the voiceless glottal fricative [h] (as in উঃ! [uh] "ouch!") or the gemination of the following consonant (as in দুঃখ [dukʰːɔ] "sorrow").
The Bengali consonant clusters (যুক্তব্যঞ্জন juktôbênjôn) are usually realized as ligatures, where the consonant which comes first is put on top of or to the left of the one that immediately follows. In these ligatures, the shapes of the constituent consonant signs are often contracted and sometimes even distorted beyond recognition. In the Bengali writing system, there are nearly 285 such ligatures denoting consonant clusters. Although there exist a few visual formulas to construct some of these ligatures, many of them have to be learned by rote. Recently, in a bid to lessen this burden on young learners, efforts have been made by educational institutions in the two main Bengali-speaking regions (West Bengal and Bangladesh) to address the opaque nature of many consonant clusters, and as a result, modern Bengali textbooks are beginning to contain more and more "transparent" graphical forms of consonant clusters, in which the constituent consonants of a cluster are readily apparent from the graphical form. However, since this change is not as widespread and is not being followed as uniformly in the rest of the Bengali printed literature, today's Bengali-learning children will possibly have to learn to recognize both the new "transparent" and the old "opaque" forms, which ultimately amounts to an increase in learning burden.
Bengali punctuation marks, apart from the downstroke । daṛi – the Bengali equivalent of a full stop – have been adopted from western scripts and their usage is similar.[49]
Unlike in western scripts (Latin, Cyrillic, etc.) where the letter-forms stand on an invisible baseline, the Bengali letter-forms instead hang from a visible horizontal left-to-right headstroke called মাত্রা matra. The presence and absence of this matra can be important. For example, the letter ত tô and the numeral ৩ "3" are distinguishable only by the presence or absence of the matra, as is the case between the consonant cluster ত্র trô and the independent vowel এ e. The letter-forms also employ the concepts of letter-width and letter-height (the vertical space between the visible matra and an invisible baseline).
There is yet to be a uniform standard collating sequence (sorting order of graphemes to be used in dictionaries, indices, computer sorting programs, etc.) of Bengali graphemes. Experts in both Bangladesh and India are currently working towards a common solution for this problem.
Orthographic depth[edit]
The Bengali script in general has a comparatively shallow orthography, i.e., in most cases there is a one-to-one correspondence between the sounds (phonemes) and the letters (graphemes) of Bengali. But grapheme-phoneme inconsistencies do occur in certain cases.
One kind of inconsistency is due to the presence of several letters in the script for the same sound. In spite of some modifications in the 19th century, the Bengali spelling system continues to be based on the one used for Sanskrit,[49] and thus does not take into account some sound mergers that have occurred in the spoken language. For example, there are three letters (শ, ষ, and স) for the voiceless alveolo-palatal sibilant [ɕɔ], although the letter স retains the voiceless alveolar sibilant [sɔ] sound when used in certain consonant conjuncts as in স্খলন [skʰɔlɔn] "fall", স্পন্দন [spɔndɔn] "beat", etc. The letter ষ also retains the voiceless retroflex sibilant [ʂɔ] sound when used in certain consonant conjuncts as in কষ্ট [kɔʂʈɔ] "suffering", গোষ্ঠী [ɡoʂʈʰi] "clan", etc. Similarly, there are two letters (জ and য) for the voiced alveolo-palatal affricate [dʑɔ]. Moreover, what was once pronounced and written as a retroflex nasal ণ [ɳɔ] is now pronounced as an alveolar [nɔ] when in conversation (the difference is seen heard when reading) (unless conjoined with another retroflex consonant such as ট, ঠ, ড and ঢ), although the spelling does not reflect this change. The near-open front unrounded vowel [æ] is orthographically realized by multiple means, as seen in the following examples: এত [æt̪ɔ] "so much", এ্যাকাডেমী [ækademi] "academy", অ্যামিবা [æmiba] "amoeba", দেখা [d̪ækʰa] "to see", ব্যস্ত [bæst̪ɔ] "busy", ব্যাকরণ [bækɔrɔn] "grammar".
Another kind of inconsistency is concerned with the incomplete coverage of phonological information in the script. The inherent vowel attached to every consonant can be either [ɔ] or [o] depending on vowel harmony (স্বরসঙ্গতি) with the preceding or following vowel or on the context, but this phonological information is not captured by the script, creating ambiguity for the reader. Furthermore, the inherent vowel is often not pronounced at the end of a syllable, as in কম [kɔm] "less", but this omission is not generally reflected in the script, making it difficult for the new reader.
Many consonant clusters have different sounds than their constituent consonants. For example, the combination of the consonants ক্ [k] and ষ [ʂɔ] is graphically realized as ক্ষ and is pronounced [kkʰɔ] (as in রুক্ষ [rukkʰɔ] "rugged") or [kkʰo] (as in ক্ষতি [kkʰot̪i] "loss") or even [kkʰɔ] (as in ক্ষমতা [kkʰɔmɔt̪a] "power"), depending on the position of the cluster in a word. The Bengali writing system is, therefore, not always a true guide to pronunciation.
Uses[edit]
The script used for Bengali, Assamese and other languages is known as Bengali-Assamese or Eastern Nagari script. The script is known as the Bengali alphabet for Bengali and its dialects and the Assamese alphabet for Assamese language with some minor variations. Other related languages in the nearby region also make use of the Bengali alphabet like the Meitei language in the Indian state of Manipur, where the Meitei language has been written in the Bengali alphabet for centuries, though the Meitei script has been promoted in recent times.
Romanization[edit]
Main article: Romanization of Bengali
There are various ways of Romanization systems of Bengali created in recent years which have failed to represent the true Bengali phonetic sound. The Bengali alphabet has often been included with the group of Brahmic scripts for romanization where the true phonetic value of Bengali is never represented. Some of them are the International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration or IAST system (based on diacritics),[66] "Indian languages Transliteration" or ITRANS (uses upper case alphabets suited for ASCII keyboards),[67] and the National Library at Kolkata romanization.[68]
In the context of Bengali romanization, it is important to distinguish transliteration from transcription. Transliteration is orthographically accurate (i.e. the original spelling can be recovered), whereas transcription is phonetically accurate (the pronunciation can be reproduced).
Although it might be desirable to use a transliteration scheme where the original Bengali orthography is recoverable from the Latin text, Bengali words are currently Romanized on Wikipedia using a phonemic transcription, where the true phonetic pronunciation of Bengali is represented with no reference to how it is written.
Grammar[edit]
Main article: Bengali grammar
Bengali nouns are not assigned gender, which leads to minimal changing of adjectives (inflection). However, nouns and pronouns are moderately declined (altered depending on their function in a sentence) into four cases while verbs are heavily conjugated, and the verbs do not change form depending on the gender of the nouns.
Word order[edit]
As a head-final language, Bengali follows subject–object–verb word order, although variations to this theme are common.[69] Bengali makes use of postpositions, as opposed to the prepositions used in English and other European languages. Determiners follow the noun, while numerals, adjectives, and possessors precede the noun.[70]
Yes-no questions do not require any change to the basic word order; instead, the low (L) tone of the final syllable in the utterance is replaced with a falling (HL) tone. Additionally, optional particles (e.g. কি -ki, না -na, etc.) are often encliticized onto the first or last word of a yes-no question.
Wh-questions are formed by fronting the wh-word to focus position, which is typically the first or second word in the utterance.
Nouns[edit]
Nouns and pronouns are inflected for case, including nominative, objective, genitive (possessive), and locative.[24] The case marking pattern for each noun being inflected depends on the noun's degree of animacy. When a definite article such as -টা -ṭa (singular) or -গুলা -gula (plural) is added, as in the tables below, nouns are also inflected for number.




Singular noun inflection


Animate
Inanimate


Nominative
ছাত্রটি
chatrô-ṭa
the student
জুতাটা
juta-ṭa
the shoe


Objective
ছাত্রটিকে
chatrô-ṭa-ke
the student
জুতাটা
juta-ṭa
the shoe


Genitive
ছাত্রটির
chatrô-ṭa-r
the student's
জুতাটার
juta-ṭa-r
the shoe's


Locative
–
জুতাটায়
juta-ṭa-y
on/in the shoe





Plural noun inflection


Animate
Inanimate


Nominative
ছাত্ররা/ছাত্রগণ
chatrô-ra
the students
জুতাগুলা/জুতোগুলো
juta-gula/juto-gulo
the shoes


Objective
ছাত্রদের(কে)
chatrô-der(ke)
the students
জুতাগুলা/জুতোগুলো
juta-gula/juto-gulo
the shoes


Genitive
ছাত্রদের
chatrô-der
the students'
জুতাগুলা/জুতোগুলোর
juta-gula/juto-gulo-r
the shoes'


Locative
–
জুতাগুলা/জুতোগুলোতে
juta-gula/juto-gulo-te
on/in the shoes





When counted, nouns take one of a small set of measure words. Similar to Japanese, the nouns in Bengali cannot be counted by adding the numeral directly adjacent to the noun. The noun's measure word (MW) must be used between the numeral and the noun. Most nouns take the generic measure word -টা -ṭa, though other measure words indicate semantic classes (e.g. -জন -jôn for humans). There is also the classifier -khana, and its diminutive form -khani, which only attach to nouns which are flat, long, square, or thin. These are the least common of the classifiers. [71]

Measure words

Bengali
Bengali transliteration
Literal translation
English translation


নয়টা গরু
Nôy-ṭa goru
Nine-MW cow
Nine cows


কয়টা বালিশ
Kôy-ṭa balish
How many-MW pillow
How many pillows


অনেকজন লোক
Ônek-jôn lok
Many-MW person
Many people


চার-পাঁচজন শিক্ষক
Car-pãc-jôn shikkhôk
Four-five-MW teacher
Four or five teachers


Measuring nouns in Bengali without their corresponding measure words (e.g. আট বিড়াল aṭ biṛal instead of আটটা বিড়াল aṭ-ṭa biṛal "eight cats") would typically be considered ungrammatical. However, when the semantic class of the noun is understood from the measure word, the noun is often omitted and only the measure word is used, e.g. শুধু একজন থাকবে। Shudhu êk-jôn thakbe. (lit. "Only one-MW will remain.") would be understood to mean "Only one person will remain.", given the semantic class implicit in -জন -jôn.
In this sense, all nouns in Bengali, unlike most other Indo-European languages, are similar to mass nouns.
Verbs[edit]
There are two classes of verbs: finite and non-finite. Non-finite verbs have no inflection for tense or person, while finite verbs are fully inflected for person (first, second, third), tense (present, past, future), aspect (simple, perfect, progressive), and honor (intimate, familiar, and formal), but not for number. Conditional, imperative, and other special inflections for mood can replace the tense and aspect suffixes. The number of inflections on many verb roots can total more than 200.
Inflectional suffixes in the morphology of Bengali vary from region to region, along with minor differences in syntax.
Bengali differs from most Indo-Aryan Languages in the zero copula, where the copula or connective be is often missing in the present tense.[49] Thus, "he is a teacher" is সে শিক্ষক se shikkhôk, (literally "he teacher").[72] In this respect, Bengali is similar to Russian and Hungarian. Romani grammar is also the closest to Bengali grammar.[73]
Vocabulary[edit]




Sources of modern literary Bengali words
  60% native
  25% Sanskrit reborrowings
  16% indigenous and foreign loans



Main article: Bengali vocabulary
Bengali has as many as 100,000 separate words, of which 50,000 are considered Tadbhavas, 21,100 are Tatsamas and the remainder loanwords from Austroasiatic and other foreign languages.
However, these figures do not take into account the large proportion of archaic or highly technical words, rarely used. Furthermore, different dialects use more Persian and Arabic vocabulary especially in different areas of Bangladesh and Muslim majority areas of West Bengal also Hindus use more Sanskrit vocabulary than Muslims and while standard Bengali is based on the Nadia dialect of spoken in the Hindu majority states of West Bengal, about 90% of Bengalis in Bangladesh ( approx 148 million Muslim) and 27% of Bengalis in West Bengal and 10% in Assam (Together 36 million Muslims) are Muslim and speak a more persio-arabised version of Bengali instead of the more Sanskrit influenced Standard Nadia dialect. The productive vocabulary used in modern literary works, in fact, is made up mostly (67%) of tadbhavas, while tatsamas comprise only 25% of the total.[74][75] Loanwords from non-Indic languages comprise the remaining 8% of the vocabulary used in modern Bengali literature.
Because of centuries of contact with Europeans, Turkic peoples, and Persians, the Bengali language has absorbed numerous words from foreign languages, often totally integrating these borrowings into the core vocabulary.
The most common borrowings from foreign languages come from three different kinds of contact. After close contact with several indigenous Austroasiatic languages,[76][77][1][78] and later the Mughal invasion whose court language was Persian, numerous Chagatai, Arabic, and Persian words were absorbed into the lexicon.[34]
Later, East Asian travelers and lately European colonialism brought words from Portuguese, French, Dutch, and most significantly English during the colonial period.
Sample text[edit]
The following is a sample text in Bengali of Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:
Bengali in the Bengali alphabet

ধারা ১: সমস্ত মানুষ স্বাধীনভাবে সমান মর্যাদা এবং অধিকার নিয়ে জন্মগ্রহণ করে। তাঁদের বিবেক এবং বুদ্ধি আছে; সুতরাং সকলেরই একে অপরের প্রতি ভ্রাতৃত্বসুলভ মনোভাব নিয়ে আচরণ করা উচিৎ।

Bengali in phonetic Romanization

Dhara êk: Sômôstô manush shadhinbhabe sôman môrjada ebông ôdhikar niye jônmôgrôhôn kôre. Tãder bibek ebông buddhi achhe; sutôrang sôkôleri êke ôpôrer prôti bhratrittôsulôbh mônobhab niye achôrôn kôra uchit.

Bengali in the International Phonetic Alphabet

d̪ʱara æk | ʃɔmɔst̪ɔ manuʃ ʃad̪ʱinbʱabe ʃɔman mɔrdʒad̪a ebɔŋ ɔd̪ʱikar nie̯e dʒɔnmɔɡrɔhɔn kɔre | t̪ãd̪er bibek ebɔŋ budd̪ʱːi atʃʰe | sut̪ɔraŋ sɔkɔleri æke ɔpɔrer prɔt̪i bʱrat̪rit̪ːɔsulɔbʱ mɔnobʱab nie̯e atʃɔrɔn kɔra utʃit̪

Gloss

Clause 1: All human free-manner-in equal dignity and right taken birth-take do. Their reason and intelligence exist; therefore everyone-indeed one another's towards brotherhood-ly attitude taken conduct do should.

Translation

Article 1: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They possess conscience and reason. Therefore, everyone should act in a spirit of brotherhood towards each other.

See also[edit]


Bengali portal




Bengal portal







Book: Bengali





Bangla Academy
Bengali numerals
Bengali-language newspapers
Sylheti language
Chittagonian language
Rangpuri language
Bengali dialects
Languages of Bangladesh

Notes[edit]


^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ "Census of India - Distribution of the 22 Scheduled Languages". Censusindia.gov.in. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ Bengali at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016)
^ Bengali at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
^ https://www.scribd.com/doc/251910320/Bangla-Sign-Language-Dictionary
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Bengali". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Student’s Handbook, Edinburgh
^ "Making Telugu compulsory: Mother tongues, the last stronghold against Hindi imposition". 
^ a b "Bengali language". Retrieved 2016-09-02. 
^ "The Second Most Spoken Languages Around the World". Olivet Nazarene University. Retrieved 2015-04-20. 
^ "Languages of India". Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 2009-09-02. 
^ "Languages in Descending Order of Strength — India, States and Union Territories – 1991 Census" (PDF). Census Data Online. Office of the Registrar General, India. p. 1. Archived from the original on 2007-06-14. Retrieved 2006-11-19. 
^ "Sri Lanka". The World Factbook. 
^ "Man of the series: Nobel laureate Tagore". The Times of India. Times News Network. 3 April 2011. 
^ "Sri Lanka I-Day to have anthem in Tamil". The Hindu. 4 February 2016. 
^ "Tagore's influence on Lankan culture". Hindustan Times. 12 May 2010. 
^ Wickramasinghe, Nira (2003). Dressing the Colonised Body: Politics, Clothing, and Identity in Sri Lanka. Orient Longman. p. 26. ISBN 81-250-2479-4. 
^ Wickramasinghe, Kamanthi; Perera, Yoshitha. "Sri Lankan National Anthem: can it be used to narrow the gap?". The Daily Mirror (Sri Lanka) (30 March 2015). 
^ Haque, Junaidul (7 May 2011). "Rabindranath: He belonged to the world". The Daily Star (Bangladesh). 
^ Habib, Haroon (17 May 2011). "Celebrating Rabindranath Tagore's legacy". The Hindu. 
^ "Bangla Script - Banglapedia". En.banglapedia.org. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ Shah 1998, p. 11
^ Keith 1998, p. 187
^ a b (Bhattacharya 2000)
^ Oberlies, Thomas (2007). "Chapter Five: Aśokan Prakrit and Pāli". In Cardona, George; Jain, Danesh. The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge. p. 163. ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9.
^ (Sen 1996)
^ "Banglapedia". En.banglapedia.org. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ "Pala dynasty - Indian dynasty". Global.britannica.com. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ nimmi. "Pala Dynasty, Pala Empire, Pala empire in India, Pala School of Sculptures". Indianmirror.com. Retrieved 7 November 2017. 
^ Rabbani, AKM Golam (7 November 2017). "Politics and Literary Activities in the Bengali Language during the Independent Sultanate of Bengal". Dhaka University Journal of Linguistics. 1 (1): 151–166. Retrieved 7 November 2017 – via www.banglajol.info. 
^ Eaton, Richard M. (1993). The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760. University of California. ISBN 978-0-520-20507-9. 
^ a b "Bengali Language at Cornell". Department of Asian Studies. Cornell University. Archived from the original on 2012-11-15. 
^ a b Ray, S Kumar. "The Bengali Language and Translation". Translation Articles. Kwintessential. Retrieved 2006-11-19. 
^ a b c Thompson, Hanne-Ruth (2012). Bengali (Paperback with corrections. ed.). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub. Co. p. 3. ISBN 9789027238191. 
^ a b "Bengali 'should be UN language'". News.bbc.co.uk. 22 December 2009. Retrieved 7 November 2017 – via news.bbc.co.uk. 
^ "Kuwait restricts recruitment of male Bangladeshi workers | Dhaka Tribune". www.dhakatribune.com. Retrieved 2017-12-04. 
^ "Bahrain: Foreign population by country of citizenship, sex and migration status (worker/ family dependent) (selected countries, January 2015) - GLMM". GLMM. 2015-10-20. Retrieved 2017-12-04. 
^ "Saudi Arabia". Ethnologue. Retrieved 2017-12-04. 
^ http://blls.sg Bangla Language and Literary Society, Singapore
^ "Languages of India". Ethnologue Report. Retrieved 2006-11-04. 
^ NIC, Assam State Centre, Guwahati, Assam. "Language". Government of Assam. Archived from the original on 2006-08-26. Retrieved 2006-06-20. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Bhattacharjee, Kishalay (30 April 2008). "It's Indian language vs Indian language". ndtv.com. Archived from the original on 2013-07-23. Retrieved 2008-05-27. 
^ Syed Yasir Kazmi (16 October 2009). "Pakistani Bengalis". DEMOTIX. Archived from the original on 2015-01-02. Retrieved 2013-04-02. 
^ "کراچی کے 'بنگالی پاکستانی'(Urdu)". محمد عثمان جامعی. 17 November 2003. Retrieved 2013-04-02. 
^ Rafiqul Islam. "The Language Movement : An Outline". Archived from the original on 2012-11-19. Retrieved 12 May 2016. 
^ "Karachi Department of Bengali". Retrieved 2013-04-02. 
^ "Statement by Hon'ble Foreign Minister on Second Bangladesh-India Track II dialogue at BRAC Centre on 07 August, 2005". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 2008-04-18. Retrieved 2008-05-27. 
^ Subir Bhaumik (22 December 2009). "Bengali 'should be UN language'". BBC News. Retrieved 2010-01-25. 
^ a b c d Bangla language in Asiatic Society of Bangladesh 2003
^ a b Morshed, Abul Kalam Manjoor. "Dialect". Banglapedia. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Retrieved 2006-11-17. 
^ "Hajong". The Ethnologue Report. Retrieved 2006-11-19. 
^ a b Huq, Mohammad Daniul. "Chalita Bhasa". Banglapedia. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Retrieved 2006-11-17. 
^ a b "History of Bengali (Banglar itihash)". Bengal Telecommunication and Electric Company. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ Huq, Mohammad Daniul. "Sadhu Bhasa". Banglapedia. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Retrieved 2006-11-17. 
^ Huq, Mohammad Daniul. "Alaler Gharer Dulal". Banglapedia. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Retrieved 2006-11-17. 
^ a b Ray, Hai & Ray 1966, p. 89
^ Ray, Hai & Ray 1966, p. 80
^ "A Bilingual Dictionary of Words and Phrases (English-Bengali)". Bengali-dictionary.com. Retrieved 2016-10-25. 
^ Shabdkosh.com. "light - Meaning in Bengali - light in Bengali - Shabdkosh | অভিধান : English Bengali Dictionary and Translation". Shabdkosh.com. Retrieved 2016-10-25. 
^ (Masica 1991, pp. 116)
^ Sarkar, Pabitra (1985). Bangla diswar dhoni. Bhasa. 
^ (Masica 1991, pp. 125)
^ Escudero Pascual Alberto (23 October 2005). "Writing Systems/ Scripts" (PDF). Primer to Localization of Software. it46.se. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ a b Bangalah in Asiatic Society of Bangladesh 2003
^ "banglasemantics.net". banglasemantics.net. Archived from the original on 24 December 2010. 
^ "Learning International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration". Sanskrit 3 – Learning transliteration. Gabriel Pradiipaka & Andrés Muni. Archived from the original on 2007-02-12. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ "ITRANS — Indian Language Transliteration Package". Avinash Chopde. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ "Annex-F: Roman Script Transliteration" (PDF). Indian Standard: Indian Script Code for Information Interchange — ISCII. Bureau of Indian Standards. 1 April 1999. p. 32. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ (Bhattacharya 2000, pp. 16)
^ "Bengali". UCLA Language Materials project. University of California, Los Angeles. Retrieved 2006-11-20. 
^ Boyle David, Anne (2015). Descriptive grammar of Bangla. De Gruyter. pp. 141–142. 
^ Among Bengali speakers brought up in neighbouring linguistic regions (e.g. Hindi), the lost copula may surface in utterances such as she shikkhôk hocche. This is viewed as ungrammatical by other speakers, and speakers of this variety are sometimes (humorously) referred as "hocche-Bangali".
^ Hübschmannová, Milena (1995). "Romaňi čhib – romština: Několik základních informací o romském jazyku". Bulletin Muzea romské kultury. Brno: Muzeum romské kultury (4/1995). Zatímco romská lexika je bližší hindštině, marvárštině, pandžábštině atd., v gramatické sféře nacházíme mnoho shod s východoindickým jazykem, s bengálštinou. 
^ Tatsama in Asiatic Society of Bangladesh 2003
^ Tadbhaba in Asiatic Society of Bangladesh 2003
^ Byomkes Chakrabarti A Comparative Study of Santali and Bengali, K.P. Bagchi & Co., Kolkata, 1994, ISBN 81-7074-128-9
^ Das, Khudiram (1998). Santhali Bangla Samashabda Abhidhan. Kolkata, India: Paschim Banga Bangla Akademi. 
^ Das, Khudiram. Bangla Santali Bhasa Samporko (eBook). 


References[edit]






Alam, M (2000). "Bhasha Shourôbh: Bêkorôn O Rôchona (The Fragrance of Language: Grammar and Rhetoric)". S. N. Printers, Dhaka. 
Ali, Shaheen Sardar; Rehman, Javaid (2001). Indigenous Peoples and Ethnic Minorities of Pakistan: Constitutional and Legal Perspectives. Routledge. ISBN 0-7007-1159-7. 
Asiatic Society of Bangladesh (2003). "Banglapedia, the national encyclopedia of Bangladesh". Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, Dhaka. 
Bhattacharya, T (2000). "Bengali". In Gary, J. and Rubino. C. Encyclopedia of World's Languages: Past and Present (Facts About the World's Languages) (PDF). WW Wilson, New York. ISBN 0-8242-0970-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2006. 
Bonazzi, Eros (2008). "Bengali". Dizionario Bengali. Avallardi (Italy). ISBN 978-88-7887-168-7. 
Cardona, George; Jain, Danesh (2007). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9. 
Chakraborty, Byomkes, A Comparative Study of Santali and Bengali, K.P. Bagchi & Co., Kolkata, 1994, ISBN 81-7074-128-9.
Chatterji, SK (1921). "Bengali Phonetics". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 2: 1. doi:10.1017/S0041977X0010179X. 
Chatterji, SK (1926). "The Origin and Development of the Bengali Language". Calcutta Univ. Press. 
Chisholm, H (1910). Hugh Chisholm, ed. The Encyclopædia Britannica : A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, Literature and General Information. Cambridge, England ; New York : At the University Press. OCLC 266598. 
Ferguson, CA; Chowdhury, M (1960). "The Phonemes of Bengali". Language. 36 (1). doi:10.2307/410622. 






Haldar, Gopal (2000). Languages of India. National Book Trust, India. ISBN 81-237-2936-7. 
Hayes, B; Lahiri, A (1991). "Bengali intonational phonology". Natural Language & Linguistic Theory. Springer Science. 9: 47. doi:10.1007/BF00133326. 
Keith, Arthur Berriedale (1998). The Sanskrit Drama. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 81-208-0977-7. 
Klaiman, MH (1987). "Bengali". In Bernard Comrie. The World's Major Languages. Croon Helm, London and Sydney. ISBN 0-19-506511-5. 
Masica, C (1991). "The Indo-Aryan Languages". Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Radice, W (1994). Teach Yourself Bengali: A Complete Course for Beginners. NTC/Contemporary Publishing Company. ISBN 0-8442-3752-3. 
Ray, P; Hai, MA; Ray, L (1966). "Bengali language handbook". Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington. ASIN B000B9G89C. 
Sen, D (1996). "Bengali Language and Literature". International Centre for Bengal Studies, Calcutta. 
Shah, Natubhai (1998). Jainism: The World of Conquerors. Sussex Academic Press. ISBN 1-898723-31-1. 
Tagore, Rabindranath; Das, Sisir Kumar (1996). The English Writings of Rabindranath Tagore. Sahitya Akademi. ISBN 81-260-0094-5. 
Wilson, A. J.; Dalton, D. (1982). The States of South Asia: Problems of National Integration. Essays in Honour of W. H. Morris-Jones. University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 0-8248-1183-6. 
Bonazzi, E (2008). Grammatica Bengali. Bologna: Libreria Bonomo Editrice. ISBN 978-88-6071-017-8. 
Shaw, Rameswar Sadharan Bhasabigna O Bangal Bhasa, Pustak Bipani, Kolkata, 1997.
Haldar, Narayan Bengali Bhasa Prsanga: Banan Kathan Likhanriti, Pustak Bipani, Kolkata, 2007.






Further reading[edit]

Thompson, Hanne-Ruth (2012). Bengali. Volume 18 of London Oriental and African Language Library. John Benjamins Publishing. ISBN 9027273138.
Dasgupta, Probal (2003). Bangla. In George Cardona and Dhanesh Jain, (eds) The Indo-Aryan languages. London/New York: Routledge, 351-390.

External links[edit]



Bangla edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Find more aboutBengali languageat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata



Bengali language at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Bangla Academy
The South Asian Literary Recordings Project, The Library of Congress. Bengali Authors.







v
t
e


Bengali language 



Written Bengali



Alphabet
(Grammar
Consonant clusters
Romanization)
Numerals
Braille





Spoken Bengali



Phonology
Vocabulary
tôtsômô
Dialects





Language Institutions



Bangla Academy
PôshchimBônggô Bangla Akademi
Bônggiyô Sahityô Pôrishôd
Bishwô Sahityô Kendrô
Pôshchim Bônggô Natyô Akademi





Literature



Folk literature
Authors
Poets





Literary Awards



Bangla Academy Literary Award
Ekushey Padak
Rabindra Puraskar
Sahitya Akademi Award
Bankim Puraskar
Ananda Purashkar





Personalities



Rammohan Roy
Kazi Nazrul Islam
Rabindranath Tagore
Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
Nathaniel Brassey Halhed
John Beames
Suniti Kumar Chatterjee
Sukumar Sen
Asit Kumar Banerjee





Mega-events



Ekushey Book Fair
Kolkata Book Fair





Cinema



Cinema of Bangladesh
Cinema of West Bengal





Others



Bengali Language Movement (Bangladesh)
Language Movement Day (Bangladesh)
Shoheed Minar
International Mother Language Day
Bengali Language Movement in Assam
Bengali Language Movement (Manbhum)
Bengali Input methods in Computers
States of India by Bengali speakers












v
t
e


 Languages of Bangladesh



Official language



Bengali





Semiofficial language



English





Indo-European



Assamese
Bengali
Bihari
Bishnupriya
Chakma
Chittagonian
Rangpuri
Rohingya
Sadri
Sylheti
Hajong





Sino-Tibetan



Shö
A'Tong
Bawm
Sak
Kukish
Falam
Garo
Haka
Khumi
Koch
Kokborok
Megam
Meitei (Manipuri)
Mizo
Mru
Pangkhu
Rakhine
Marma
Riang
Tanchangya
Tippera
Usoi





Austroasiatic



Khasi
Koda
Mundari
Pnar
Santali
War-Jaintia





Dravidian



Kurukh
Sauria Paharia












v
t
e


 Languages of India



Official
languages




Union-level



Hindi
English





8th schedule to the
Constitution of India



Assamese
Bengali
Bodo
Dogri
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Kashmiri
Konkani
Maithili
Malayalam
Meitei (Manipuri)
Marathi
Nepali
Odia
Punjabi
Sanskrit
Sindhi
Santali
Tamil
Telugu
Urdu





State-level only



Garo
Gurung
Khasi
Kokborok
Lepcha
Limbu
Mangar
Mizo
Newari
Rai
Sherpa
Sikkimese
Sunwar
Tamang








Major
unofficial
languages




Over 1 million
speakers



Angika
Awadhi
Bagheli
Bagri
Bajjika
Bhili
Bhojpuri
Bundeli
Chhattisgarhi
Dhundhari
Garhwali
Gondi
Harauti
Haryanvi
Ho
Kangri
Khandeshi
Khortha
Kumaoni
Kurukh
Lambadi
Magahi
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Mundari
Nimadi
Rajasthani
Sadri
Surjapuri
Tulu
Wagdi
Varhadi





100,000 – 1 million
speakers



Adi
Angami
Ao
Dimasa
Halbi
Karbi
Kharia
Kodava
Kolami
Konyak
Korku
Koya
Kui
Kuvi
Ladakhi
Lotha
Malto
Mishing
Nishi
Phom
Rabha
Sema
Sora
Tangkhul
Thadou















v
t
e


Modern Indo-Aryan languages



Dardic



Dameli
Domaaki
Gawar-Bati
Kalami
Kalash
Kashmiri
Khowar
Kohistani
Mankiyali
Nangalami
Palula
Pashayi
Shina
Shumashti
Torwali
Ushoji





Northern




Eastern



Doteli
Jumli
Nepali
Palpa





Central



Garhwali
Kumaoni





Western



Dogri
Kangri
Mandeali








North-
western




Punjabi



Punjabi

dialects







Lahnda



Hindko
Khetrani
Pothwari
Saraiki





Sindhi



Jadgali
Kutchi
Luwati
Memoni
Sindhi








Western




Gujarati



Aer
Gujarati
Jandavra
Koli
Lisan ud-Dawat
Parkari Koli
Saurashtra
Vaghri





Bhil



Bhili
Gamit
Kalto
Vasavi





Rajasthani



Bagri
Goaria
Gujari
Jaipuri
Malvi
Marwari
Mewari
Dhatki





Others



Domari
Khandeshi
Romani








Central




Western



Braj Bhasha
Bundeli
Haryanvi
Hindustani

Hindi

Bombay Hindi


Urdu

Dakhini
Hyderabadi Urdu
Rekhta




Khari Boli
Kannauji
Sansi





Eastern



Awadhi
Bagheli
Chhattisgarhi
Fiji Hindi





Others



Danwar
Parya








Eastern




Bihari



Angika
Bhojpuri
Caribbean Hindustani
Vajjika
Magahi
Maithili
Majhi
Sadri





Bengali–
Assamese



Assamese
Bengali

dialects


Bishnupriya Manipuri
Chakma
Chittagonian
Goalpariya
Hajong
Kamrupi
Kharia Thar
Kurmukar
Rangpuri
Rohingya
Sylheti
Tanchangya





Odia



Odia
Kosli
Bodo Parja
Kupia
Reli





Halbic



Halbi
Bhatri
Kamar
Mirgan
Nahari





Others



Mal Paharia








Southern




Marathi–Konkani



Konkani
Kukna
Marathi
others..





Insular



Maldivian
Sinhalese








Pidgins/
creoles



Andaman Creole Hindi
Haflong Hindi
Nagamese
Nefamese
Vedda





See also



Old and Middle Indo-Aryan
Indo-Iranian languages
Nuristani languages
Iranian languages









Authority control



NDL: 00560592











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bengali_language&oldid=818515003"					Categories: Bengali languageBengali-language literatureEastern Indo-Aryan languagesLanguages of BangladeshOfficial languages of IndiaSubject–object–verb languagesLanguages of West BengalLanguages of TripuraLanguages of AssamHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 19Language articles citing Ethnologue 18CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterEngvarB from June 2015Use dmy dates from March 2013Articles containing Bengali-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles with DMOZ links