

Marine habitats



Photomicrograph of typical benthic animals, (from top to bottom) including amphipods, a polychaete worm, a snail, and a chironomous midge larva





Littoral zone
Intertidal zone
Estuaries
Kelp forests
Coral reefs
Ocean banks
Continental shelf
Neritic zone
Straits
Pelagic zone
Oceanic zone
Seamounts
Hydrothermal vents
Cold seeps
Demersal zone
Benthic zone







v
t
e





The benthic zone is the ecological region at the lowest level of a body of water such as an ocean or a lake, including the sediment surface and some sub-surface layers. Organisms living in this zone are called benthos, e.g. the benthic invertebrate community, including crustaceans and polychaetes.[1] The organisms generally live in close relationship with the substrate bottom and many are permanently attached to the bottom. The superficial layer of the soil lining the given body of water, the benthic boundary layer, is an integral part of the benthic zone, as it greatly influences the biological activity that takes place there. Examples of contact soil layers include sand bottoms, rocky outcrops, coral, and bay mud.



Contents


1 Description
2 Organisms
3 Nutrient flux
4 Habitats
5 Ecological research
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Description[edit]
The benthic region of the ocean begins at the shore line (intertidal or eulittoral zone) and extends downward along the surface of the continental shelf out to sea.[2][not in citation given] The continental shelf is a gently sloping benthic region that extends away from the land mass. At the continental shelf edge, usually about 200 meters deep, the gradient greatly increases and is known as the continental slope. The continental slope drops down to the deep sea floor. The deep-sea floor is called the abyssal plain and is usually about 4,000 meters deep. The ocean floor is not all flat but has submarine ridges and deep ocean trenches known as the hadal zone.
For comparison, the pelagic zone is the descriptive term for the ecological region above the benthos, including the water-column up to the surface. Depending on the water-body, the benthic zone may include areas that are only a few inches below water, such as a stream or shallow pond; at the other end of the spectrum, benthos of the deep ocean includes the bottom levels of the oceanic abyssal zone.
For information on animals that live in the deeper areas of the oceans see aphotic zone. Generally, these include life forms that tolerate cool temperatures and low oxygen levels, but this depends on the depth of the water.
Organisms[edit]
Main article: Benthos
Benthos are the organisms that live in the benthic zone, and are different from those elsewhere in the water column.[2][not in citation given] Many have adapted to live on the substrate (bottom). In their habitats they can be considered as dominant creatures, but they are often a source of prey for Carcharhinidae such as the lemon shark.[3] Many organisms adapted to deep-water pressure cannot survive in the upper parts of the water column. The pressure difference can be very significant (approximately one atmosphere for each 10 meters of water depth).
Because light does not penetrate very deep into ocean-water, the energy source for the benthic ecosystem is often organic matter from higher up in the water column that drifts down to the depths. This dead and decaying matter sustains the benthic food chain; most organisms in the benthic zone are scavengers or detritivores. Some microorganisms use chemosynthesis to produce biomass.
Benthic organisms can be divided into two categories based on whether they make their home on the ocean floor or an inch or two into the ocean floor. Those living on the surface of the ocean floor are known as epifauna.[4] Those who live burrowed into the ocean floor are known as infauna.[5] Extremophiles, including piezophiles, which thrive in high pressures, may also live there.
Nutrient flux[edit]
Sources of food for benthic communities can derive from the water column above these habitats in the form of aggregations of detritus, inorganic matter, and living organisms.[2][not in citation given] These aggregations are commonly referred to as marine snow, and are important for the deposition of organic matter, and bacterial communities.[6] The amount of material sinking to the ocean floor can average 307,000 aggregates per m2 per day.[7] This amount will vary on the depth of the benthos, and the degree of benthic-pelagic coupling. The benthos in a shallow region will have more available food than the benthos in the deep sea. Because of their reliance on it, microbes may become spatially dependent on detritus in the benthic zone. The microbes found in the benthic zone, specifically dinoflagellates and foraminifera, colonize quite rapidly on detritus matter while forming a symbiotic relationship with each other.[8][9]
Habitats[edit]
Modern seafloor mapping technologies have revealed linkages between seafloor geomorphology and benthic habitats, in which suites of benthic communities are associated with specific geomorphic settings.[10] Examples include cold-water coral communities associated with seamounts and submarine canyons, kelp forests associated with inner shelf rocky reefs and rockfish associated with rocky escarpments on continental slopes.[11] In oceanic environments, benthic habitats can also be zoned by depth. From the shallowest to the deepest are: the epipelagic (less than 200 meters), the mesopelagic (200–1,000 metres), the bathyal (1,000–4,000 meters), the abyssal (4,000–6,000 meters) and the deepest, the hadal (below 6,000 meters).
The lower zones are in deep, pressurized areas of the ocean. Human impacts have occurred at all ocean depths, but are most significant on shallow continental shelf and slope habitats.[12] Many benthic organisms have retained their historic evolutionary characteristics. Some organisms are significantly larger than their relatives living in shallower zones, largely because of higher oxygen concentration in deep water.[13]
It is not easy to map or observe these organisms and their habitats, and most modern observations are made using remotely operated underwater vehicles (ROVs), and rarely submarines.
Ecological research[edit]
Benthic macroinvertebrates have many important ecological functions, such as regulating the flow of materials and energy in river ecosystems through their food web linkages. Because of this correlation between flow of energy and nutrients, benthic macroinvertebrates have the ability to influence food resources on fish and other organisms in aquatic ecosystems. For example, the addition of a moderate amount of nutrients to a river over the course of several years resulted in increases in invertebrate richness, abundance, and biomass. These in turn resulted in increased food resources for native species of fish with insignificant alteration of the macroinvertebrate community structure and trophic pathways.[14] The presence of macroinvertebrates such as Amphipoda also affect the dominance of certain types of algae in Benthic ecosystems as well.[15] In addition, because benthic zones are influenced by the flow of dead organic material, there have been studies conducted on the relationship between stream and river water flows and the resulting effects on the benthic zone. Low flow events show a restriction in nutrient transport from benthic substrates to food webs, and caused a decrease in benthic macroinvertebrate biomass, which lead to the disappearance of food sources into the substrate.[16]
Because the benthic system regulates energy in aquatic ecosystems, studies have been made of the mechanisms of the benthic zone in order to better understand the ecosystem. Benthic diatoms have been used by the European Union's Water Framework Directive (WFD) to establish ecological quality ratios that determined the ecological status of lakes in the UK.[17] Beginning research is being made on benthic assemblages to see if they can be used as indicators of healthy aquatic ecosystems. Benthic assemblages in urbanized coastal regions are not functionally equivalent to benthic assemblages in untouched regions.[18]
Ecologists are attempting to understand the relationship between heterogeneity and maintaining biodiversity in aquatic ecosystems. Benthic algae has been used as an inherently good subject for studying short term changes and community responses to heterogeneous conditions in streams. Understanding the potential mechanisms involving benthic periphyton and the effects on heterogeneity within a stream may provide a better understanding of the structure and function of stream ecosystems.[19] Benthic gross primary production (GPP) may be important in maintaining biodiversity hotspots in littoral zones in large lake ecosystems. However, the relative contributions of benthic habitats within specific ecosystems are poorly explored and more research is needed.[20]
See also[edit]


Armor (hydrology)
Benthic fish
Benthopelagic fish
Bottom trawling
Deep sea
Intertidal zone
Lake stratification
Littoral zone
Neritic zone
Photic zone
Profundal zone
Sediment Profile Imagery
Stream bed
Tide pool


References[edit]


^ "What Are Benthos?". Baybenthos.versar.com. 2006-01-23. Retrieved 2013-11-24. 
^ a b c Angelo Mark P. Walag; Mae Oljae P. Canencia (2016). "Physico-chemical Parameters and Macrobenthic Invertebrates of the Intertidal Zone of Gusa, Cagayan de Oro City, Philippines". Advances in Environmental Sciences - International Journal of the Bioflux Society. 8 (1): 71–82. Retrieved 2015-12-08. (registration required)
^ Bright, Michael (2000). The private life of sharks: the truth behind the myth. Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania: Stackpole Books. ISBN 0-8117-2875-7. 
^ "Epifaunal - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 2012-08-31. Retrieved 2013-11-24. 
^ "Infauna - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 2012-08-31. Retrieved 2013-11-24. 
^ Alldredge, Alice; Silver, Mary W. (1988). "Characteristics, dynamics and significance of marine snow". Progress in Oceanography. 20: 41–82. doi:10.1016/0079-6611(88)90053-5. 
^ Shanks, Alan; Trent, Jonathan D. (1980). "Marine snow: sinking rates and potential role in vertical flux". Deep-Sea Research. 27A (2): 137–143. doi:10.1016/0198-0149(80)90092-8. 
^ "Foraminifera". Retrieved 7 December 2014. 
^ "foraminifera". Retrieved 7 December 2014. 
^ Harris, P. T.; Baker, E. K. 2012. "GeoHab Atlas of seafloor geomorphic features and benthic habitats – synthesis and lessons learned", in: Harris, P. T.; Baker, E. K. (eds.), Seafloor Geomorphology as Benthic Habitat: GeoHab Atlas of seafloor geomorphic features and benthic habitats. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 871-890.
^ Harris, P. T.; Baker, E. K.; 2012. Seafloor Geomorphology as Benthic Habitat: GeoHab Atlas of seafloor geomorphic features and benthic habitats. Elsevier, Amsterdam, p. 947.
^ Harris, P. T., 2012. "Anthropogenic threats to benthic habitats", in: Harris, P. T.; Baker, E. K. (eds.), Seafloor Geomorphology as Benthic Habitat: GeoHab Atlas of seafloor geomorphic features and benthic habitats. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 39-60.
^ Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, news item March 2005 Archived September 28, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Minshall, Wayne; Shafii, Bahman; Price, William J.; Holderman, Charlie; Anders, Paul J.; Lester, Gary; Barrett, Pat. "Effects of nutrient replacement on benthic macroinvertebrates in an ultraoligotrophic reach of the Kootenai River, 2003–2010". Freshwater Science. doi:10.1086/677900. JSTOR 10.1086/677900. 
^ Duffy, J. Emmett; Hay, Mark E. (2000-05-01). "Strong impacts of grazing amphipods on the organization of a benthic community". Ecological Monographs. 70 (2): 237–263. doi:10.1890/0012-9615(2000)070[0237:SIOGAO]2.0.CO;2. ISSN 0012-9615. 
^ Rolls, Robert; Leigh, Catherine; Sheldon, Fran (2012). "Mechanistic effects of low-flow hydrology on riverine ecosystems: ecological principles and consequences of alteration". Freshwater Science. 31 (4): 1163–1186. doi:10.1899/12-002.1. JSTOR 10.1899/12-002.1. 
^ Bennion, Helen; Kelly, Martyn G.; Juggins, Steve; Yallop, Marian L.; Burgess, Amy; Jamieson, Jane; Krokowski, Jan (2014). "Assessment of Ecological Status in UK lakes using benthic diatoms". Freshwater Science. 33 (2): 639–654. doi:10.1086/675447. JSTOR 10.1086/675447. 
^ Lowe, Michael; Peterson, Mark S. (2014). "Effects of Coastal Urbanization on Salt-Marsh Faunal Assemblages in the Northern Gulf of Mexico". Marine and Coastal Fisheries: Dynamics, Management, and Ecosystem Science. 6: 89–107. doi:10.1080/19425120.2014.893467. 
^ Wellnitz, Todd; Rader, Russell B. (2003). "Mechanisms influencing community composition and succession in mountain stream periphyton: interactions between scouring history, grazing, and irradiance". Journal of the North American Benthological Society. 22 (4): 528–541. doi:10.2307/1468350. JSTOR 1468350. 
^ Althouse, Bryan; Higgins, Scott; Vander Zanden, Jake M. (2014). "Benthic and Planktonic primary production along a nutrient gradient in Green Bay, Lake Michigan, USA". Freshwater Science. 33 (2): 487–498. doi:10.1086/676314. JSTOR 10.1086/676314. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Benthic zones.



Data Archive for Seabed Species and Habitats from the UK Marine Data Archive Centre







v
t
e


Physical oceanography



Waves



Airy wave theory
Ballantine scale
Benjamin–Feir instability
Boussinesq approximation
Breaking wave
Clapotis
Cnoidal wave
Cross sea
Dispersion
Edge wave
Equatorial waves
Fetch
Gravity wave
Green's law
Infragravity wave
Internal wave
Iribarren number
Kelvin wave
Kinematic wave
Longshore drift
Luke's variational principle
Mild-slope equation
Radiation stress
Rogue wave
Rossby wave
Rossby-gravity waves
Sea state
Seiche
Significant wave height
Soliton
Stokes boundary layer
Stokes drift
Stokes wave
Swell
Trochoidal wave
Tsunami

megatsunami


Undertow
Ursell number
Wave action
Wave base
Wave height
Wave power
Wave radar
Wave setup
Wave shoaling
Wave turbulence
Wave–current interaction
Waves and shallow water

one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations
shallow water equations


Wind wave

model
















Circulation



Atmospheric circulation
Baroclinity
Boundary current
Coriolis force
Coriolis–Stokes force
Craik–Leibovich vortex force
Downwelling
Eddy
Ekman layer
Ekman spiral
Ekman transport
El Niño–Southern Oscillation
General circulation model
Geostrophic current
Global Ocean Data Analysis Project
Gulf Stream
Halothermal circulation
Humboldt Current
Hydrothermal circulation
Langmuir circulation
Longshore drift
Loop Current
Modular Ocean Model
Ocean dynamics
Ocean gyre
Princeton Ocean Model
Rip current
Subsurface currents
Sverdrup balance
Thermohaline circulation

shutdown


Upwelling
Whirlpool
World Ocean Circulation Experiment





Tides



Amphidromic point
Earth tide
Head of tide
Internal tide
Lunitidal interval
Perigean spring tide
Rip tide
Rule of twelfths
Slack water
Tidal bore
Tidal force
Tidal power
Tidal race
Tidal range
Tidal resonance
Tide gauge
Tideline





Landforms



Abyssal fan
Abyssal plain
Atoll
Bathymetric chart
Coastal geography
Cold seep
Continental margin
Continental rise
Continental shelf
Contourite
Guyot
Hydrography
Oceanic basin
Oceanic plateau
Oceanic trench
Passive margin
Seabed
Seamount
Submarine canyon
Submarine volcano





Plate
tectonics



Convergent boundary
Divergent boundary
Fracture zone
Hydrothermal vent
Marine geology
Mid-ocean ridge
Mohorovičić discontinuity
Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis
Oceanic crust
Outer trench swell
Ridge push
Seafloor spreading
Slab pull
Slab suction
Slab window
Subduction
Transform fault
Volcanic arc





Ocean zones



Benthic
Deep ocean water
Deep sea
Littoral
Mesopelagic
Oceanic
Pelagic
Photic
Surf
Swash





Sea level



Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
Future sea level
Global Sea Level Observing System
North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System
Sea-level curve
Sea level rise
World Geodetic System





Acoustics



Deep scattering layer
Hydroacoustics
Ocean acoustic tomography
Sofar bomb
SOFAR channel
Underwater acoustics





Satellites



Jason-1
Jason-2 (Ocean Surface Topography Mission)
Jason-3





Related



Argo
Benthic lander
Color of water
DSV Alvin
Marginal sea
Marine energy
Marine pollution
Mooring
National Oceanographic Data Center
Ocean
Ocean exploration
Ocean observations
Ocean reanalysis
Ocean surface topography
Ocean thermal energy conversion
Oceanography
Pelagic sediment
Sea surface microlayer
Sea surface temperature
Seawater
Science On a Sphere
Thermocline
Underwater glider
Water column
World Ocean Atlas








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benthic_zone&oldid=812718393"					Categories: Aquatic biomesAquatic ecologyFisheries scienceOceanographical terminologyHidden categories: Pages with login required references or sourcesWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from April 2016