"William Clinton" redirects here. For other uses, see William Clinton (disambiguation).


Bill Clinton








42nd President of the United States


In office
January 20, 1993 – January 20, 2001


Vice President
Al Gore


Preceded by
George H. W. Bush


Succeeded by
George W. Bush


40th and 42nd Governor of Arkansas


In office
January 11, 1983 – December 12, 1992


Lieutenant



Winston Bryant
Jim Guy Tucker





Preceded by
Frank D. White


Succeeded by
Jim Guy Tucker


In office
January 9, 1979 – January 19, 1981


Lieutenant
Joe Purcell


Preceded by
Joe Purcell (Acting)


Succeeded by
Frank D. White


50th Attorney General of Arkansas


In office
January 3, 1977 – January 9, 1979


Governor



David Pryor
Joe Purcell (Acting)





Preceded by
Jim Guy Tucker


Succeeded by
Steve Clark





Personal details


Born
William Jefferson Blythe III
(1946-08-19) August 19, 1946 (age 71)
Hope, Arkansas, U.S.


Political party
Democratic


Spouse(s)
Hillary Rodham (m. 1975)


Children
Chelsea


Parents



William Jefferson Blythe Jr.
Virginia Cassidy





Education
Georgetown University (BS)
University College, Oxford
Yale University (JD)


Awards
Presidential Medal of Freedom


Signature









This article is part of
a series about
Bill Clinton







Political positions
Electoral history



Early life and career
Family
Public image



Sexual misconduct allegations



Governor of Arkansas


Governorship


42nd President of the United States

Presidency

Timeline




Policies


Economic
Gun Control
Environmental
Foreign

Clinton Doctrine


International trips


Appointments


Cabinet
Judicial Appointments



First term

Campaign for the Presidency

1992 General election
Primaries


1st inauguration


NAFTA
Health Security Act
1994 midterm elections
Economic policy
Travelgate
Whitewater
AmeriCorps
Dayton Agreement


Second term

Re-election campaign

1996 General election
Primaries


2nd inauguration


Operation Infinite Reach
Bombing of Yugoslavia
Balanced Budget


Clinton–Lewinsky scandal
Impeachment


One America Initiative
Pardon controversy


Post-Presidency

Presidential Library
My Life
Activities
Clinton Foundation
Clinton Bush Haiti Fund
One America Appeal









v
t
e







Part of a series on


New Democrats







Ideology



Centrism
Clintonism
Cultural liberalism
Economic liberalism
Radical centrism
Social liberalism
Third Way









People



Bruce Babbitt
Evan Bayh
John Carney
Tom Carper
Lawton Chiles
Bill Clinton
Hillary Clinton
Gerry Connolly
Jim Davis
Susan Davis
Cal Dooley
John Edwards
Harold Ford Jr.
Al From
Dick Gephardt
Al Gore
Bob Graham
Jim Himes
John Kerry
Ron Kind
Mary Landrieu
Rick Larsen
Joe Lieberman
Blanche Lincoln
Will Marshall
Jim Moran
Sam Nunn
Barack Obama
Jared Polis
Chuck Robb
Timothy J. Roemer
Paul Tsongas
Allyson Schwartz
Adam Smith









Organizations



Coalition for a Democratic Majority
Democratic Leadership Council
Moderate Dems Working Group
New Democrat Coalition
New Democrat Network
Progressive Policy Institute
Senate Centrist Coalition
Third Way









 Politics portal







v
t
e





William Jefferson Clinton (born William Jefferson Blythe III; August 19, 1946) is an American politician who served as the 42nd President of the United States from 1993 to 2001. Prior to the presidency, he was the Governor of Arkansas from 1979 to 1981, and again from 1983 to 1992. A member of the Democratic Party, Clinton was ideologically a New Democrat and many of his policies reflected a centrist "Third Way" political philosophy.
Clinton was born and raised in Arkansas and attended Georgetown University, the University of Oxford, and Yale Law School. He met Hillary Rodham at Yale and married her in 1975. After graduating from Yale, Clinton returned to Arkansas and won election as the Attorney General of Arkansas, serving from 1977 to 1979. As Governor of Arkansas, Clinton overhauled the state's education system and served as chairman of the National Governors Association. Clinton was elected president in 1992, defeating incumbent Republican opponent George H. W. Bush. At age 46, he became the third-youngest president and the first from the Baby Boomer generation.
Clinton presided over the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history and signed into law the North American Free Trade Agreement, but failed to pass his plan for national health care reform. In the 1994 elections, the Republican Party won unified control of the Congress for the first time in 40 years. In 1996, Clinton became the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected to a second full term. Clinton passed welfare reform and the State Children's Health Insurance Program, as well as financial deregulation measures, including the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000. In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives for perjury and obstruction of justice, relating to a sex scandal involving White House employee Monica Lewinsky. Clinton was acquitted by the Senate in 1999 and proceeded to complete his term in office. Clinton is only the second U.S. president to ever be impeached. During the last three years of Clinton's presidency, the Congressional Budget Office reported a budget surplus, the first such surplus since 1969. In foreign policy, Clinton ordered U.S. military intervention in the Bosnian and Kosovo wars, signed the Iraq Liberation Act in opposition to Saddam Hussein, participated in the 2000 Camp David Summit to advance the Israeli–Palestinian peace process, and assisted the Northern Ireland peace process.
Clinton left office with the highest end-of-office approval rating of any U.S. president since World War II, and he has continually received high ratings in public opinion polls of U.S. presidents. Since leaving office, Clinton has been involved in public speaking and humanitarian work. He created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address international causes, such as the prevention of AIDS and global warming. He has remained active in politics by campaigning for Democratic candidates, including his wife's presidential campaigns and Barack Obama's presidential campaigns. In 2004, Clinton published his autobiography, My Life. In 2009, Clinton was named the United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti and after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, he teamed with George W. Bush to form the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund.

Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Bill Clinton" dated 2012-06-04, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles




Contents


1 Early life and career
2 College and law school years

2.1 Georgetown University
2.2 Oxford
2.3 Vietnam War opposition and draft controversy
2.4 Law school


3 Early political career

3.1 Governor of Arkansas (1979–1981, 1983–1992)
3.2 1988 Democratic presidential primaries


4 Presidency (1993–2001)

4.1 1992 presidential campaign
4.2 First term (1993–1997)
4.3 1996 presidential election
4.4 Second term (1997–2001)

4.4.1 Impeachment and acquittal
4.4.2 Pardons and commutations


4.5 Military and foreign events
4.6 Judicial appointments


5 Public opinion
6 Public image
7 Sexual misconduct allegations
8 Post-presidency (2001–present)

8.1 Activities until 2008 campaign
8.2 2008 presidential election
8.3 After the 2008 election
8.4 2016 presidential election
8.5 After the 2016 election
8.6 Post-presidential health concerns
8.7 Wealth


9 Honors and recognition
10 Electoral history
11 Authored books
12 Recordings
13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading

15.1 Primary sources
15.2 Popular books
15.3 Scholarly studies


16 External links



Early life and career




Clinton's childhood home in Hope, Arkansas


Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe III on August 19, 1946, at Julia Chester Hospital in Hope, Arkansas.[1][2] He was the son of William Jefferson Blythe Jr. (1918–1946), a traveling salesman who had died in an automobile accident three months before his birth, and Virginia Dell Cassidy (later Virginia Kelley: 1923–1994).[3] His parents had married on September 4, 1943, but this union later proved to be bigamous, as Blythe was still married to his third wife.[4] Soon after Bill was born, Virginia traveled to New Orleans to study nursing. She left her son in Hope with her parents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy, who owned and ran a small grocery store.[2] At a time when the southern United States was racially segregated, Clinton's grandparents sold goods on credit to people of all races.[2] In 1950, Bill's mother returned from nursing school and married Roger Clinton Sr., who owned an automobile dealership in Hot Springs, Arkansas, with his brother and Earl T. Ricks.[2] The family moved to Hot Springs in 1950.[5]
Although he immediately assumed use of his stepfather's surname, it was not until Clinton turned 15[6] that he formally adopted the surname Clinton as a gesture toward his stepfather.[2] Clinton said that he remembered his stepfather as a gambler and an alcoholic who regularly abused his mother and half-brother, Roger Clinton Jr., to the point where he intervened multiple times with the threat of violence to protect them.[2][7]




Clinton with his saxophone at the White House in 1996. He began playing the saxophone in elementary school. At one point, Clinton considered pursuing a career in music.


In Hot Springs, Clinton attended St. John's Catholic Elementary School, Ramble Elementary School, and Hot Springs High School, where he was an active student leader, avid reader, and musician.[2] Clinton was in the chorus and played the tenor saxophone, winning first chair in the state band's saxophone section. He briefly considered dedicating his life to music, but as he noted in his autobiography My Life:
Sometime in my sixteenth year, I decided I wanted to be in public life as an elected official. I loved music and thought I could be very good, but I knew I would never be John Coltrane or Stan Getz. I was interested in medicine and thought I could be a fine doctor, but I knew I would never be Michael DeBakey. But I knew I could be great in public service.[2]
Clinton began an interest in law at Hot Springs High, when he took up the challenge to argue the defense of the ancient Roman Senator Catiline in a mock trial in his Latin class.[8] After a vigorous defense that made use of his "budding rhetorical and political skills", he told the Latin teacher Elizabeth Buck that it "made him realize that someday he would study law".[9]
Clinton has identified two influential moments in his life, both occurring in 1963, that contributed to his decision to become a public figure. One was his visit as a Boys Nation senator to the White House to meet President John F. Kennedy.[2][7] The other was watching Martin Luther King Jr.'s 1963 I Have a Dream speech on TV, which impressed him enough that he later memorized it.[10]
College and law school years
Georgetown University




Clinton ran for president of the Student Council while attending the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.


With the aid of scholarships, Clinton attended the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., receiving a Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service degree in 1968.
In 1964 and 1965, Clinton won elections for class president.[11] From 1964 to 1967, he was an intern and then a clerk in the office of Arkansas Senator J. William Fulbright.[2] While in college, he became a brother of co-ed service fraternity Alpha Phi Omega[12] and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Clinton was also a member of the Order of DeMolay,[13] a youth group affiliated with Freemasonry, but he never became a Freemason. He is a member of Kappa Kappa Psi honorary band fraternity.[14]
Oxford
Upon graduating from Georgetown in 1968, Clinton won a Rhodes Scholarship to University College in Oxford, England, where he initially read for a B.Phil. in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics but transferred to a B.Litt. in politics and, ultimately, a B.Phil. in politics.[15] Clinton did not expect the second year because of the draft and he switched programs; this type of activity was common among other Rhodes Scholars from his cohort. He had received an offer to study at Yale Law School, Yale University, but he left early to return to the United States and did not receive a degree from Oxford.[7][16][17]
During his time at Oxford, Clinton befriended fellow American Rhodes Scholar Frank Aller. In 1969, Aller received a draft letter that mandated deployment to the Vietnam War. Aller's 1971 suicide had an influential impact on Clinton.[15][18] British writer and feminist Sara Maitland said of Clinton, "I remember Bill and Frank Aller taking me to a pub in Walton Street in the summer term of 1969 and talking to me about the Vietnam War. I knew nothing about it, and when Frank began to describe the napalming of civilians I began to cry. Bill said that feeling bad wasn't good enough. That was the first time I encountered the idea that liberal sensitivities weren't enough and you had to do something about such things".[15] He also developed an interest in rugby union, which he played at Oxford.[19]
While Clinton was president in 1994, he received an honorary degree and a fellowship from the University of Oxford, specifically for being "a doughty and tireless champion of the cause of world peace", having "a powerful collaborator in his wife," and for winning "general applause for his achievement of resolving the gridlock that prevented an agreed budget".[16][20]
Vietnam War opposition and draft controversy
While at Oxford, Clinton also participated in Vietnam War protests and organized an October 1969 Moratorium to End the War in Vietnam event.[2]
During the Vietnam War, Clinton received educational draft deferments while he was in England in 1968 and 1969.[21] He was planning to attend law school in the U.S. and was aware that he might lose his draft deferment. Clinton tried unsuccessfully to obtain positions in the National Guard or Air Force, and he then made arrangements to join the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program at the University of Arkansas.[22]
He subsequently decided not to join the ROTC, saying in a letter to the officer in charge of the program that he opposed the war, but did not think it was honorable to use ROTC, National Guard, or Reserve service to avoid serving in Vietnam. He further stated that because he opposed the war, he would not volunteer to serve in uniform, but would subject himself to the draft, and would serve if selected only as a way "to maintain my political viability within the system".[23] Clinton registered for the draft and received a high number (311), meaning that those whose birthdays had been drawn as numbers 1 to 310 would have to be drafted before him, making it unlikely that he would be drafted. (In fact, the highest number drafted was 195.)[24]
Colonel Eugene Holmes, the Army officer who had been involved with Clinton's ROTC application, suspected that Clinton attempted to manipulate the situation to avoid the draft and avoid serving in uniform. He issued a notarized statement during the 1992 presidential campaign:
I was informed by the draft board that it was of interest to Senator Fulbright's office that Bill Clinton, a Rhodes Scholar, should be admitted to the ROTC program ... I believe that he purposely deceived me, using the possibility of joining the ROTC as a ploy to work with the draft board to delay his induction and get a new draft classification.[25]
During the 1992 campaign, it was revealed that Clinton's uncle had attempted to secure him a position in the Navy Reserve, which would have prevented him from being deployed to Vietnam. This effort was unsuccessful and Clinton said in 1992 that he had been unaware of it until then.[26] Although legal, Clinton's actions with respect to the draft and deciding whether to serve in the military were criticized during his first presidential campaign by conservatives and some Vietnam veterans, some of whom charged that he had used Fulbright's influence to avoid military service.[27][28] Clinton's 1992 campaign manager, James Carville, successfully argued that Clinton's letter in which he declined to join the ROTC should be made public, insisting that voters, many of whom had also opposed the Vietnam War, would understand and appreciate his position.[29]
Law school
After Oxford, Clinton attended Yale Law School and earned a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree in 1973.[2][7] In 1971, he met fellow law student Hillary Rodham in the Yale Law Library; she was a class year ahead of him.[2][30] They began dating and were soon inseparable. After only about a month, Clinton postponed his plans to be a coordinator for the George McGovern campaign for the 1972 United States presidential election in order to move in with her in California.[31]
Clinton eventually moved to Texas with Rodham in 1972 to take a job leading McGovern's effort there. He spent considerable time in Dallas, at the campaign's local headquarters on Lemmon Avenue, where he had an office. Clinton worked with future two-term mayor of Dallas Ron Kirk,[32] future governor of Texas Ann Richards,[33] and then unknown television director (and future filmmaker) Steven Spielberg.[34]
Bill married Hillary on October 11, 1975, and their only child, Chelsea, was born on February 27, 1980.[30]
Early political career
Further information: Electoral history of Bill Clinton
Governor of Arkansas (1979–1981, 1983–1992)
Further information: Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1978; Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1980; Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1982; Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1986; and Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1990
After graduating from Yale Law School, Clinton returned to Arkansas and became a law professor at the University of Arkansas. In 1974, he ran for the House of Representatives. Running in a conservative district against incumbent Republican John Paul Hammerschmidt, Clinton's campaign was bolstered by the anti-Republican and anti-incumbent mood resulting from the Watergate scandal. Hammerschmidt, who had received 77 percent of the vote in 1972, defeated Clinton by only a 52 percent to 48 percent margin. In 1976, Clinton ran for Arkansas Attorney General. With only minor opposition in the primary and no opposition at all in the general election,[35] Clinton was elected.[7]




Newly elected Governor of Arkansas Bill Clinton meets with President Jimmy Carter in 1978, fifteen years before assuming the nation's highest office.


Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978, having defeated the Republican candidate Lynn Lowe, a farmer from Texarkana. At age 32, he became the youngest governor in the country. Due to his youthful appearance, Clinton was often called the "Boy Governor".[36][37][38] He worked on educational reform and directed the maintenance of Arkansas's roads, with wife Hillary leading a successful committee on urban health care reform. However, his term included an unpopular motor vehicle tax and citizens' anger over the escape of Cuban refugees (from the Mariel boatlift) detained in Fort Chaffee in 1980. Monroe Schwarzlose of Kingsland in Cleveland County, polled 31 percent of the vote against Clinton in the Democratic gubernatorial primary of 1980. Some suggested Schwarzlose's unexpected voter turnout foreshadowed Clinton's defeat by Republican challenger Frank D. White in the general election that year. As Clinton once joked, he was the youngest ex-governor in the nation's history.[7]
Clinton joined friend Bruce Lindsey's Little Rock law firm of Wright, Lindsey and Jennings.[39] In 1982, he was elected governor a second time and kept the office for ten years. Effective with the 1986 election, Arkansas had changed its gubernatorial term of office from two to four years. During his term, he helped transform Arkansas's economy and improved the state's educational system.[40] For senior citizens, he removed the sales tax from medications and increased the home property-tax exemption.[41] He became a leading figure among the New Democrats, a group of Democrats who advocated welfare reform, smaller government, and other policies not supported by liberals. Formally organized as the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), the New Democrats argued that in light of President Ronald Reagan's landslide victory in 1984, the Democratic Party needed to adopt a more centrist political stance in order to succeed at the national level.[41][42] Clinton delivered the Democratic response to Reagan's 1985 State of the Union Address and served as chair of the National Governors Association from 1986 to 1987, bringing him to an audience beyond Arkansas.[7]
In the early 1980s, Clinton made reform of the Arkansas education system a top priority of his gubernatorial administration. The Arkansas Education Standards Committee was chaired by Clinton's wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was also an attorney as well as the chair of the Legal Services Corporation. The committee transformed Arkansas's education system. Proposed reforms included more spending for schools (supported by a sales-tax increase), better opportunities for gifted children, vocational education, higher teachers' salaries, more course variety, and compulsory teacher competency exams. The reforms passed in September 1983 after Clinton called a special legislative session—the longest in Arkansas history.[40] Many have considered this the greatest achievement of the Clinton governorship.[7][41] He defeated four Republican candidates for governor: Lowe (1978), White (1982 and 1986), Jonesboro businessmen Woody Freeman (1984), and Sheffield Nelson of Little Rock (1990).[35]




Governor and Mrs. Clinton attend the Dinner Honoring the Nation's Governors in the White House with President Ronald Reagan and first lady Nancy Reagan, 1987.


Also in the 1980s, The Clintons' personal and business affairs included transactions that became the basis of the Whitewater controversy investigation, which later dogged his presidential administration.[43] After extensive investigation over several years, no indictments were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas.[7][44]
According to some sources, Clinton was a death penalty opponent in his early years, but he eventually switched positions.[45][46] During Clinton's term, Arkansas performed its first executions since 1964 (the death penalty had been re-enacted on March 23, 1973).[47] As Governor, he oversaw four executions: one by electric chair and three by lethal injection. Later, as president, Clinton was the first president to pardon a death-row inmate since the federal death penalty was reinstated in 1988.[48]
1988 Democratic presidential primaries
In 1987, the media speculated that Clinton would enter the Presidential race after incumbent New York Governor Mario Cuomo declined to run and Democratic front-runner Gary Hart withdrew owing to revelations of marital infidelity. Clinton decided to remain as Arkansas governor (following consideration for the potential candidacy of Hillary Rodham Clinton for governor, initially favored—but ultimately vetoed—by the First Lady).[49] For the nomination, Clinton endorsed Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis. He gave the nationally televised opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, but his speech, which was 33 minutes long and twice as long as it was expected to be, was criticized for being too long[50] and poorly delivered.[51] Clinton presented himself as both a moderate and a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, and he headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991.[41][52]
Presidency (1993–2001)
Main article: Presidency of Bill Clinton




Countries visited by President Bill Clinton during his terms in office


During his presidency, Clinton advocated for a wide variety of legislation and programs, most of which were enacted into law or implemented by the executive branch. His policies, particularly the North American Free Trade Agreement and welfare reform, have been attributed to a centrist Third Way philosophy of governance.[53][54] His policy of fiscal conservatism helped to reduce deficits on budgetary matters.[55][56] Clinton presided over the longest period of peacetime economic expansion in American history.[57][58][59] The Congressional Budget Office reported budget surpluses of $69 billion in 1998, $126 billion in 1999, and $236 billion in 2000,[60] during the last three years of Clinton's presidency.[61] Over the years of the recorded surplus, the gross national debt rose each year. At the end of the fiscal year (September 30) for each of the years a surplus was recorded, The U.S. treasury reported a gross debt of $5.413 trillion in 1997, $5.526 trillion in 1998, $5.656 trillion in 1999, and $5.674 trillion in 2000.[62][63] Over the same period, the Office of Management and Budget reported an end of year (December 31) gross debt of $5.369 trillion in 1997, $5.478 trillion in 1998, $5.606 in 1999, and $5.629 trillion in 2000.[64] At the end of his presidency, the Clintons moved to Chappaqua, New York in order to satisy a residency requirement for his wife to win election as a U.S. Senator from New York.
1992 presidential campaign
Further information: Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1992; United States presidential election, 1992; and Bill Clinton presidential campaign, 1992
In the first primary contest, the Iowa Caucus, Clinton finished a distant third to Iowa Senator Tom Harkin. During the campaign for the New Hampshire primary, reports surfaced that Clinton had engaged in an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers. Clinton fell far behind former Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire polls.[7] Following Super Bowl XXVI, Clinton and his wife Hillary went on 60 Minutes to rebuff the charges. Their television appearance was a calculated risk, but Clinton regained several delegates. He finished second to Tsongas in the New Hampshire primary, but after trailing badly in the polls and coming within single digits of winning, the media viewed it as a victory. News outlets labeled him "The Comeback Kid" for earning a firm second-place finish.[65]
Winning the big prizes of Florida and Texas and many of the Southern primaries on Super Tuesday gave Clinton a sizable delegate lead. However, former California Governor Jerry Brown was scoring victories and Clinton had yet to win a significant contest outside his native South.[7][52] With no major Southern state remaining, Clinton targeted New York, which had many delegates. He scored a resounding victory in New York City, shedding his image as a regional candidate.[52] Having been transformed into the consensus candidate, he secured the Democratic Party nomination, finishing with a victory in Jerry Brown's home state of California.[7]




The Clintons in a White House Christmas portrait, 1993


During the campaign, questions of conflict of interest regarding state business and the politically powerful Rose Law Firm, at which Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner, arose. Clinton argued the questions were moot because all transactions with the state had been deducted before determining Hillary's firm pay.[2][66] Further concern arose when Bill Clinton announced that, with Hillary, voters would be getting two presidents "for the price of one".[67]
Clinton was still the Governor of Arkansas while campaigning for U.S. president, and he returned to his home state to see that Ricky Ray Rector would be executed. After killing a police officer and a civilian, Rector shot himself in the head, leading to what his lawyers said was a state where he could still talk but did not understand the idea of death. According to both Arkansas state law and Federal law, a seriously mentally impaired inmate cannot be executed. The courts disagreed with the allegation of grave mental impairment and allowed the execution. Clinton's return to Arkansas for the execution was framed in a New York Times article as a possible political move to counter "soft on crime" accusations.[45][68]
Bush's approval ratings were around 80 percent during the Gulf War, and he was described as unbeatable. When Bush compromised with Democrats to try to lower Federal deficits, he reneged on his promise not to raise taxes, which hurt his approval rating. Clinton repeatedly condemned Bush for making a promise he failed to keep.[52] By election time, the economy was souring and Bush saw his approval rating plummet to just slightly over 40 percent.[52][69] Finally, conservatives were previously united by anti-communism, but with the end of the Cold War, the party lacked a uniting issue. When Pat Buchanan and Pat Robertson addressed Christian themes at the Republican National Convention—with Bush criticizing Democrats for omitting God from their platform—many moderates were alienated.[70] Clinton then pointed to his moderate, "New Democrat" record as governor of Arkansas, though some on the more liberal side of the party remained suspicious.[71] Many Democrats who had supported Ronald Reagan and Bush in previous elections switched their support to Clinton.[72] Clinton and his running mate, Al Gore, toured the country during the final weeks of the campaign, shoring up support and pledging a "new beginning".[72]




1992 electoral vote results


Clinton won the 1992 presidential election (370 electoral votes) against Republican incumbent George H. W. Bush (168 electoral votes) and billionaire populist Ross Perot (0 electoral votes), who ran as an independent on a platform that focused on domestic issues. Bush's steep decline in public approval was a significant part of Clinton's success.[72] Clinton's victory in the election ended twelve years of Republican rule of the White House and twenty of the previous twenty-four years. The election gave Democrats full control of the United States Congress,[3] the first time one party controlled both the executive and legislative branches since Democrats held the 96th United States Congress during the presidency of Jimmy Carter.[73][74]
First term (1993–1997)









First inauguration of Bill Clinton (January 20, 1993)

Play media

Video of the First inauguration of Bill Clinton



First inauguration of Bill Clinton (January 20, 1993)





audio only version






Problems playing these files? See media help.




"Our democracy must be not only the envy of the world but the engine of our own renewal. There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America."

Inaugural address, January 20, 1993.[75]
Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd President of the United States on January 20, 1993. Less than a month after taking office, he signed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, which required large employers to allow employees to take unpaid leave for pregnancy or a serious medical condition. This action had bipartisan support,[76] and was popular with the public.[77]
Two days after taking office, on January 22, 1993—the 20th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade—Clinton reversed restrictions on domestic and international family planning programs that had been imposed by Reagan and Bush.[78] Clinton said that abortion should be kept "safe, legal, and rare"—a slogan that had been suggested by University of California, San Diego political scientist Samuel L. Popkin and first used by Clinton in December 1991, while campaigning.[79] During the eight years of the Clinton administration, the U.S. abortion rate declined by about 18.4 percent.[80]
On February 15, 1993, Clinton made his first address to the nation, announcing his plan to raise taxes to close a budget deficit.[81] Two days later, in a nationally televised address to a joint session of Congress, Clinton unveiled his economic plan. The plan focused on reducing the deficit rather than on cutting taxes for the middle class, which had been high on his campaign agenda.[82] Clinton's advisers pressured him to raise taxes, based on the theory that a smaller federal budget deficit would reduce bond interest rates.[83]
On May 19, 1993, Clinton fired seven employees of the White House Travel Office, causing the White House travel office controversy even though the travel office staff served at the pleasure of the president and could be dismissed without cause. The White House responded to the controversy by claiming that the firings were done in response to financial improprieties that had been revealed by a brief FBI investigation.[84] Critics contended that the firings had been done to allow friends of the Clintons to take over the travel business and the involvement of the FBI was unwarranted.[85]




Clinton and Vice President Al Gore on the South Lawn, August 10, 1993


In August, Clinton signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which passed Congress without a Republican vote. It cut taxes for 15 million low-income families, made tax cuts available to 90 percent of small businesses,[86] and raised taxes on the wealthiest 1.2 percent of taxpayers. Additionally, it mandated that the budget be balanced over a number of years through the implementation of spending restraints.[87]
On September 22, 1993, Clinton made a major speech to Congress regarding a health care reform plan; the program aimed at achieving universal coverage through a national health care plan. This was one of the most prominent items on Clinton's legislative agenda and resulted from a task force headed by Hillary Clinton. The plan was well received in political circles, but it was eventually doomed by well-organized lobby opposition from conservatives, the American Medical Association, and the health insurance industry. However, Clinton biographer John F. Harris stated that the program failed because of a lack of coordination within the White House.[44] Despite the Democratic majority in Congress, the effort to create a national health care system ultimately died when compromise legislation by George J. Mitchell failed to gain a majority of support in August 1994. The failure of the bill was the first major legislative defeat of the Clinton administration.[41][44]
In November 1993, David Hale—the source of criminal allegations against Bill Clinton in the Whitewater controversy—alleged that while he was governor of Arkansas, Clinton pressured him to provide an illegal $300,000 loan to Susan McDougal, the Clintons' partner in the Whitewater land deal.[88] A U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation resulted in convictions against the McDougals for their role in the Whitewater project, but the Clintons themselves were never charged, and Clinton maintains his and his wife's innocence in the affair.
On November 30, 1993, Clinton signed into law the Brady Bill, which mandated federal background checks on people who purchase firearms in the United States. The law also imposed a five-day waiting period on purchases, until the NICS system was implemented in 1998. He also expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit, a subsidy for low-income workers.[44]
In December of the same year, allegations by Arkansas state troopers Larry Patterson and Roger Perry were first reported by David Brock in The American Spectator. In the affair later known as "Troopergate", the officers alleged that they arranged sexual liaisons for Clinton back when he was governor of Arkansas. The story mentioned a woman named Paula, a reference to Paula Jones. Brock later apologized to Clinton, saying the article was politically motivated "bad journalism", and that "the troopers were greedy and had slimy motives".[89]




Clinton, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat during the Oslo Accords on September 13, 1993






Clinton, Jordan's King Hussein and Yitzhak Rabin sign the Israel–Jordan peace treaty on July 25, 1994.







Remarks on the Signing of NAFTA (December 8, 1993)

Play media

Clinton's December 8, 1993 remarks on the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement



Remarks on the Signing of NAFTA (December 8, 1993)





audio only version






Problems playing these files? See media help.


That month, Clinton implemented a Department of Defense directive known as "Don't Ask, Don't Tell", which allowed gay men and women to serve in the armed services provided they kept their sexual preferences a secret. The Act forbade the military from inquiring about an individual's sexual orientation.[90] The policy was developed as a compromise after Clinton's proposal to allow gays to serve openly in the military met staunch opposition from prominent Congressional Republicans and Democrats, including Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Sam Nunn (D-GA). According to David Mixner, Clinton's support for the compromise led to a heated dispute with Vice President Al Gore, who felt that "the President should lift the ban ... even though [his executive order] was sure to be overridden by the Congress".[91] Some gay-rights advocates criticized Clinton for not going far enough and accused him of making his campaign promise to get votes and contributions.[92] Their position was that Clinton should have integrated the military by executive order, noting that President Harry S. Truman used executive order to racially desegregate the armed forces. Clinton's defenders argued that an executive order might have prompted the Senate to write the exclusion of gays into law, potentially making it harder to integrate the military in the future.[41] Later in his presidency, in 1999, Clinton criticized the way the policy was implemented, saying he did not think any serious person could say it was not "out of whack".[93] The policy remained controversial, and was finally repealed in 2011, removing open sexual orientation as a reason for dismissal from the armed forces.[94]
On January 1, 1994, Clinton signed the North American Free Trade Agreement into law.[95] Throughout his first year in office, Clinton consistently supported ratification of the treaty by the U.S. Senate. Clinton and most of his allies in the Democratic Leadership Committee strongly supported free trade measures; there remained, however, strong disagreement within the party. Opposition came chiefly from anti-trade Republicans, protectionist Democrats and supporters of Ross Perot. The bill passed the house with 234 votes against 200 opposed (132 Republicans and 102 Democrats voting in favor; 156 Democrats, 43 Republicans, and 1 independent against). The treaty was then ratified by the Senate and signed into law by the president.[95]
The Omnibus Crime Bill, which Clinton signed into law in September 1994,[96] made many changes to U.S. crime and law enforcement legislation including the expansion of the death penalty to include crimes not resulting in death, such as running a large-scale drug enterprise. During Clinton's re-election campaign he said, "My 1994 crime bill expanded the death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers, and nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons."[97] It also included a subsection of assault weapons ban for a ten-year period.
The Clinton administration also launched the first official White House website, whitehouse.gov, on October 21, 1994.[98][99] It was followed by three more versions, resulting in the final edition launched in 2000.[100][101] The White House website was part of a wider movement of the Clinton administration toward web-based communication. According to Robert Longley, "Clinton and Gore were responsible for pressing almost all federal agencies, the U.S. court system and the U.S. military onto the Internet, thus opening up America's government to more of America's citizens than ever before. On July 17, 1996, Clinton issued Executive Order 13011 – Federal Information Technology, ordering the heads of all federal agencies to utilize information technology fully to make the information of the agency easily accessible to the public."[102]
After two years of Democratic Party control, the Democrats lost control of Congress in the mid-term elections in 1994, for the first time in forty years.[103]




Clinton's coat of arms, granted by the Chief Herald of Ireland in 1995






Clinton and Russian President Boris Yeltsin in October 1995


The White House FBI files controversy of June 1996 arose concerning improper access by the White House to FBI security-clearance documents. Craig Livingstone, head of the White House Office of Personnel Security, improperly requested, and received from the FBI, background report files without asking permission of the subject individuals; many of these were employees of former Republican administrations.[104] In March 2000, Independent Counsel Robert Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any crime. Ray's report further stated, "there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official was involved" in seeking the files.[105]
On September 21, 1996, Clinton signed into law the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), which defines marriage for federal purposes as the legal union of one man and one woman, allowing individual states to refuse to recognize gay marriages performed in other states.[106] Paul Yandura, speaking for the White House gay and lesbian liaison office, said that Clinton's signing of DOMA "was a political decision that they made at the time of a re-election". In defense of his actions, Clinton has said that DOMA was an attempt to "head off an attempt to send a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage to the states", a possibility he described as highly likely in the context of a "very reactionary Congress".[107] Administration spokesman Richard Socarides said, "the alternatives we knew were going to be far worse, and it was time to move on and get the president re-elected."[108] Clinton himself stated that DOMA was something "which the Republicans put on the ballot to try to get the base vote for Bush up, I think it's obvious that something had to be done to try to keep the Republican Congress from presenting that".[109] Others were more critical. The veteran gay rights and gay marriage activist Evan Wolfson has called these claims "historic revisionism".[108] In a July 2, 2011, editorial The New York Times opined, "The Defense of Marriage Act was enacted in 1996 as an election-year wedge issue, signed by President Bill Clinton in one of his worst policy moments."[110] Ultimately, in United States v. Windsor, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down DOMA in June 2013.[111]
Despite DOMA, Clinton was the first president to select openly gay persons for administrative positions,[112] and he is generally credited as being the first president to publicly champion gay rights.[113] During his presidency, Clinton issued two substantially controversial executive orders on behalf of gay rights, the first lifting the ban on security clearances for LGBT federal employees[114] and the second outlawing discrimination based on sexual orientation in the federal civilian workforce.[115] Under Clinton's leadership, federal funding for HIV/AIDS research, prevention and treatment more than doubled.[116] Clinton also pushed for passing hate crimes laws for gays and for the private sector Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which, buoyed by his lobbying, failed to pass the Senate by a single vote in 1996.[117] Advocacy for these issues, paired with the politically unpopular nature of the gay rights movement at the time, led to enthusiastic support for Clinton's election and reelection by the Human Rights Campaign.[113] Clinton came out for gay marriage in July 2009[118] and urged the Supreme Court to overturn DOMA in 2013.[119] He was later honored by GLAAD for his prior pro-gay stances and his reversal on DOMA.[120]


"When I took office, only high energy physicists had ever heard of what is called the Worldwide Web ... Now even my cat has its own page."

Bill Clinton's announcement of Next Generation Internet initiative, October 1996.[121]
The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged effort by the People's Republic of China (PRC) to influence the domestic policies of the United States, before and during the Clinton administration, and involved the fundraising practices of the administration itself. The Chinese government denied all accusations.[122]
As part of a 1996 initiative to curb illegal immigration, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) on September 30, 1996. Appointed by Clinton,[123] the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform recommended reducing legal immigration from about 800,000 people a year to about 550,000.[124][125]
Ken Gormley, author of The Death of American Virtue: Clinton vs. Starr, reveals in his book that Clinton narrowly escaped possible assassination in the Philippines in November 1996. During his visit to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum in Manila, while he was on his way to meet with a senior member of the Philippine government, Clinton was saved from danger minutes before his motorcade was scheduled to drive over a bridge charged with a timed improvised explosive device (IED).[126] According to officials, the IED was large enough to "blow up the entire presidential motorcade".[127] Details of the plot were revealed to Gormley by Lewis C. Merletti, former member of the presidential protection detail and Director of the Secret Service. Intelligence officers intercepted a radio transmission indicating that there was a wedding cake under a bridge.[126] This alerted Merletti and others as Clinton's motorcade was scheduled to drive over a major bridge in downtown Manila.[127] Once more, the word "wedding" was the code name used by a terrorist group for a past assassination attempt.[127] Merletti wanted to reroute the motorcade, but the alternate route would add forty-five minutes to the drive time. Clinton was very angry, as he was already late for the meeting, but following the advice of the secret service possibly saved his life. Two other bombs had been discovered in Manila earlier in the week so the threat level that day was high.[128] Security personnel at the Manila International Airport uncovered several grenades and a timing device in a travel bag.[129] Officials also discovered a bomb near a major U.S. naval base.[129] The president was scheduled to visit both of these locations later in the week. An intense investigation took place into the events in Manila and it was discovered that the group behind the bridge bomb was a Saudi terrorist group in Afghanistan known as al-Qaeda and the plot was masterminded by Osama bin Laden.[127] Until recently, this thwarted assassination attempt was never made public and remained top secret. Only top members of the U.S. intelligence community were aware of these events.[127]
1996 presidential election




1996 electoral vote results






President Bill Clinton (center), first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton (right) and their daughter Chelsea (left) wave to watchers at a parade down Pennsylvania Avenue on Inauguration Day, January 20, 1997.


In the 1996 presidential election, Clinton was re-elected, receiving 49.2 percent of the popular vote over Republican Bob Dole (40.7 percent of the popular vote) and Reform candidate Ross Perot (8.4 percent of the popular vote), becoming the first Democratic incumbent since Lyndon B. Johnson to be elected to a second term and the first Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected president more than once.[130] The Republicans lost three seats in the House and gained two in the Senate, but retained control of both houses of the 105th United States Congress. Clinton received 379, or over 70 percent of the Electoral College votes, with Dole receiving 159 electoral votes.
Second term (1997–2001)




Al Gore and Newt Gingrich applaud as Clinton waves during the State of the Union address in 1997.


In the January 1997 State of the Union address, Clinton proposed a new initiative to provide health coverage to up to five million children. Senators Ted Kennedy—a Democrat—and Orrin Hatch—a Republican—teamed up with Hillary Rodham Clinton and her staff in 1997, and succeeded in passing legislation forming the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), the largest (successful) health care reform in the years of the Clinton Presidency. That year, Hillary Clinton shepherded through Congress the Adoption and Safe Families Act and two years later she succeeded in helping pass the Foster Care Independence Act. He negotiated the passage of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 by the Republican Congress. In October 1997, he announced he was getting hearing aids, due to hearing loss attributed to his age, and his time spent as a musician in his youth.[131] In 1999 Clinton signed into law the Financial Services Modernization Act also known as the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, which repealed the part of the Glass–Steagall Act that had prohibited a bank from offering a full range of investment, commercial banking, and insurance services since its enactment in 1933.[132]
Impeachment and acquittal
Main article: Impeachment of Bill Clinton




Clinton's impeachment trial in 1999


After the 1998 elections, the House impeached Clinton, alleging perjury and obstruction of justice related to the Lewinsky scandal.[44] Clinton was only the second U.S. president to be impeached, after Andrew Johnson. Impeachment proceedings were based on allegations that Clinton had illegally lied about and covered up his relationship with 22-year-old White House (and later Department of Defense) employee Monica Lewinsky.[133] After the Starr Report was submitted to the House providing what it termed "substantial and credible information that President Clinton Committed Acts that May Constitute Grounds for an Impeachment",[134] the House began impeachment hearings against Clinton before the mid-term elections. To hold impeachment proceedings, the Republican leadership called a lame-duck session in December 1998.




Clinton shaking hands with future president Donald Trump at Trump Tower, June 2000


While the House Judiciary Committee hearings ended in a straight party-line vote, there was lively debate on the House floor. The two charges passed in the House (largely with Republican support, but with a handful of Democratic votes as well) were for perjury and obstruction of justice. The perjury charge arose from Clinton's testimony before a grand jury that had been convened to investigate perjury he may have committed in his sworn deposition during Jones v. Clinton, Paula Jones's sexual harassment lawsuit.[135] The obstruction charge was based on his actions to conceal his relationship with Lewinsky before and after that deposition.
The Senate later acquitted Clinton on both charges.[136] The Senate refused to meet to hold an impeachment trial before the end of the old term, so the trial was held over until the next Congress. Clinton was represented by Washington law firm Williams & Connolly.[137] The Senate finished a twenty-one-day trial on February 12, 1999, with the vote of 55 Not Guilty/45 Guilty on the perjury charge[136] and 50 Not Guilty/50 Guilty on the obstruction of justice charge.[138] Both votes fell short of the Constitutional two-thirds majority requirement to convict and remove an officeholder. The final vote was generally along party lines, with no Democrats voting guilty, and only a handful of Republicans voting not guilty.[136]
On January 19, 2001, Clinton's law license was suspended for five years after he acknowledged to an Arkansas circuit court that he had engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice in the Jones case.[139][140]
Pardons and commutations
Clinton controversially issued 141 pardons and 36 commutations on his last day in office on January 20, 2001.[44][141] Most of the controversy surrounded Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clinton's brother, Hugh Rodham, accepted payments in return for influencing the president's decision-making regarding the pardons.[142] Federal prosecutor Mary Jo White was appointed to investigate the pardon of Rich. She was later replaced by then-Republican James Comey, who found no wrongdoing on Clinton's part. Some of Clinton's pardons remain a point of controversy.[143]
Military and foreign events
Further information: Foreign policy of the Bill Clinton administration




Clinton and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair in Florence, Italy on November 20, 1999






Clinton speaks with Col. Paul Fletcher, USAF, before boarding Air Force One, November 4, 1999.


Many military events occurred during Clinton's presidency. The Battle of Mogadishu occurred in Somalia in 1993. During the operation, two U.S. helicopters were shot down by rocket-propelled grenade attacks to their tail rotors, trapping soldiers behind enemy lines. This resulted in an urban battle that killed 18 American soldiers, wounded 73 others, and one was taken prisoner. There were many more Somali casualties. Some of the American bodies were dragged through the streets—a spectacle broadcast on television news programs. In response, U.S. forces were withdrawn from Somalia and later conflicts were approached with fewer soldiers on the ground. In 1995, U.S. and NATO aircraft attacked Bosnian Serb targets to halt attacks on U.N. safe zones and to pressure them into a peace accord. Clinton deployed U.S. peacekeepers to Bosnia in late 1995, to uphold the subsequent Dayton Agreement.




General John P. Jumper, U.S. Air Forces in Europe commander, escorts Clinton upon his arrival to Ramstein Air Base, Germany, May 5, 1999. The president visited several European air bases to thank the troops for their support of NATO Operations Allied Force and Shining Hope.


In 1992, before his presidency, Clinton proposed sending a peace envoy to Northern Ireland, but this was dropped to avoid tensions with the UK government. In 1994 Clinton angered London by granting a visa to Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Féin, the IRA's political arm. In November 1995, Clinton became the first U.S. President to visit Northern Ireland, seeing both the divided communities of Belfast and later famously handshaking Adams, 14 months into an IRA ceasefire during the Troubles.[144] Despite unionist criticism, Clinton used this as a way to negotiate an end to the violent conflict with London, Dublin, the paramilitaries and the other groups. Clinton went on to play a key role in the peace talks, which eventually led to the Good Friday Agreement in 1998.[145]
In February 1996, the Clinton administration agreed to pay Iran US$131.8 million in settlement to discontinue a case brought by Iran in 1989 against the U.S. in the International Court of Justice after the shooting down of Iran Air Flight 655 by the U.S. Navy guided missile cruiser.[146]
Capturing Osama bin Laden had been an objective of the U.S. government during the presidency of Bill Clinton (and continued to be until bin Laden's death in 2011).[147] Despite claims by Mansoor Ijaz and Sudanese officials that the Sudanese government had offered to arrest and extradite bin Laden and that U.S. authorities rejected each offer[148] the 9/11 Commission Report stated that "we have not found any reliable evidence to support the Sudanese claim".[149]
In response to a 1996 State Department warning about bin Laden and the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in East Africa by al-Qaeda (which killed 224 people, including 12 Americans), Clinton ordered several military missions to capture or kill bin Laden, both of which were unsuccessful.[150] In August 1998, Clinton ordered cruise missile strikes on terrorist targets in Afghanistan and Sudan, targeting the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in Sudan, which was suspected of assisting bin Laden in making chemical weapons, and bin Laden's terrorist training camps in Afghanistan.[151]




Clinton greets Air Force personnel at Spangdahlem Air Base, May 5, 1999.


To stop the ethnic cleansing and genocide[152][153] of Albanians by anti-guerilla military units in the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's province of Kosovo, Clinton authorized the use of U.S. Armed Forces in a NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, named Operation Allied Force. General Wesley Clark was Supreme Allied Commander of NATO and oversaw the mission. With United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the bombing campaign ended on June 10, 1999. The resolution placed Kosovo under UN administration and authorized a peacekeeping force to be deployed to the region.[154] NATO announced that its forces had suffered zero combat deaths,[155] and two deaths from an Apache helicopter crash.[156] Opinions in the popular press criticized pre-war genocide statements by the Clinton administration as greatly exaggerated.[157][158] In 2001, the U.N.-supervised Supreme Court of Kosovo ruled that genocide did not take place, but recognized "a systematic campaign of terror, including murders, rapes, arsons and severe maltreatments".[159] The term "ethnic cleansing" was used as an alternative to "genocide" to denote not just ethnically motivated murder but also displacement, though critics charge there is no difference.[160] Slobodan Milošević, the president of Yugoslavia at the time of the atrocities, was eventually brought to trial before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in the Hague on charges of crimes against humanity, genocide, and war crimes.[161] Milošević died in 2006, before the completion of the trial.[161][162]
In Clinton's 1998 State of the Union Address, he warned Congress that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was building an arsenal of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons:

Saddam Hussein has spent the better part of this decade, and much of his nation's wealth, not on providing for the Iraqi people, but on developing nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them. The United Nations weapons inspectors have done a truly remarkable job, finding and destroying more of Iraq's arsenal than was destroyed during the entire gulf war. Now, Saddam Hussein wants to stop them from completing their mission. I know I speak for everyone in this chamber, Republicans and Democrats, when I say to Saddam Hussein, "You cannot defy the will of the world", and when I say to him, "You have used weapons of mass destruction before; we are determined to deny you the capacity to use them again.[163]



Play media


President Clinton, Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat at Camp David, July 2000


Seeking to weaken Hussein's grip on power, Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 into law on October 31, 1998, which instituted a policy of "regime change" against Iraq, though it explicitly stated it did not provide for direct intervention on the part of American military forces.[164][165] The administration then launched a four-day bombing campaign named Operation Desert Fox, lasting from December 16 to 19, 1998. At the end of this operation Clinton announced that "So long as Saddam remains in power, he will remain a threat to his people, his region, and the world. With our allies, we must pursue a strategy to contain him and to constrain his weapons of mass destruction program, while working toward the day Iraq has a government willing to live at peace with its people and with its neighbors."[166] American and British aircraft in the Iraq no-fly zones attacked hostile Iraqi air defenses 166 times in 1999 and 78 times in 2000.[167][168]
Clinton's November 2000 visit to Vietnam was the first by a U.S. president since the end of the Vietnam War.[169] On October 10, 2000, Clinton signed into law the U.S.–China Relations Act of 2000, which granted permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) trade status to People's Republic of China.[170] The president asserted that free trade would gradually open China to democratic reform.[171] Clinton also oversaw a boom of the U.S. economy. Under Clinton, the United States had a projected federal budget surplus for the first time since 1969.[172]
After initial successes such as the Oslo Accords of the early 1990s, which also led to the Israel–Jordan peace treaty in 1994 and the Wye River Memorandum in October 1998, Clinton attempted an effort to end the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. He brought Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority chairman Yasser Arafat together at Camp David for the Camp David Summit in July 2000, which lasted 14 days.[44] Following the failures of the peace talks, Clinton stated Arafat "missed the opportunity" to facilitate a "just and lasting peace". In his autobiography, Clinton blames Arafat for the collapse of the summit.[2][173] Following another attempt in December 2000 at Bolling Air Force Base, in which the president offered the Clinton Parameters, the situation broke down completely after the end of the Taba Summit and with the start of the Second Intifada.[44]
Judicial appointments
Main articles: Bill Clinton Supreme Court candidates and List of federal judges appointed by Bill Clinton




Ruth Bader Ginsburg accepting her nomination to the Supreme Court from President Clinton


Clinton appointed two justices to the Supreme Court: Ruth Bader Ginsburg in 1993[174] and Stephen Breyer in 1994.[175]
Along with his two Supreme Court appointments, Clinton appointed 66 judges to the United States courts of appeals and 305 judges to the United States district courts. His 373 judicial appointments are the second most in American history behind those of Ronald Reagan. Clinton also experienced a number of judicial appointment controversies, as 69 nominees to federal judgeships did not receive a vote in the Republican-controlled Senate Judiciary Committee. In all, 84 percent of his nominees were confirmed.[176]
Sonia Sotomayor was one of the judges who Clinton appointed to the Court of Appeals. She was nominated by Clinton in 1997 to the Second Circuit. Sotomayor was confirmed in 1998, following a delay of more than a year that was caused by Republican opposition.[177][178]
Clinton was the first president in history to appoint more women and minority judges than white male judges to the federal courts.[179] In his eight years in office, 11.6% of Clinton's court of appeals nominees and 17.4% of his district court nominees were black; 32.8% of his court of appeals nominees and 28.5% of his district court nominees were women.[180] Clinton appointed the first African American judges to the Fourth Circuit (Roger Gregory) and the Seventh Circuit (Ann Claire Williams).[180] Clinton also appointed the nation's first openly gay or lesbian federal judge when he named Deborah Batts to the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. Batts was confirmed by the Senate in a voice vote in 1994.[181]
Public opinion




Clinton's approval ratings throughout his presidential career


Throughout Clinton's first term, his job approval rating fluctuated in the 40s and 50s. In his second term, his rating consistently ranged from the high-50s to the high-60s.[182] After his impeachment proceedings in 1998 and 1999, Clinton's rating reached its highest point.[183] According to a CBS News/New York Times poll, Clinton left office with an approval rating of 68 percent, which matched those of Ronald Reagan and Franklin D. Roosevelt as the highest ratings for departing presidents in the modern era.[184] Clinton's average Gallup poll approval rating for his last quarter in office was 61%, the highest final quarter rating any president has received for fifty years.[185] Forty-seven percent of the respondents identified themselves as being Clinton supporters.[185]
As he was leaving office, a CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll revealed that 45 percent of Americans said they would miss him; 55 percent thought he "would have something worthwhile to contribute and should remain active in public life"; 68 percent thought he would be remembered more for his "involvement in personal scandal" than for "his accomplishments"; and 58 percent answered "No" to the question "Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy?"[185] The same percentage said he would be remembered as either "outstanding" or "above average" as a president, while 22 percent said he would be remembered as "below average" or "poor".[185] ABC News characterized public consensus on Clinton as, "You can't trust him, he's got weak morals and ethics – and he's done a heck of a good job."[186]
In May 2006, a CNN poll comparing Clinton's job performance with that of his successor, George W. Bush, found that a strong majority of respondents said Clinton outperformed Bush in six different areas questioned.[187] Gallup polls in 2007 and 2011 showed that Clinton was regarded by 13 percent of Americans as the greatest president in U.S. history.[188][189]
In 2014, 18 percent of respondents in a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll of American voters regarded Clinton as the best president since World War II, making him the third most popular among postwar presidents, behind John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan.[190] The same poll showed that just 3% of American voters regarded Clinton as the worst president since World War II.[190]
A 2015 poll by The Washington Post asked 162 scholars of the American Political Science Association to rank all the U.S. presidents in order of greatness. According to their findings, Clinton ranked eighth overall, with a rating of 70 percent.[191]
Public image
Main article: Public image of Bill Clinton




Clinton addressing the British parliament on November 29, 1995


As the first baby boomer president, Clinton was the first chief executive since Calvin Coolidge who was not alive during World War II.[192] Authors Martin Walker and Bob Woodward stated that Clinton's innovative use of sound bite-ready dialogue, personal charisma, and public perception-oriented campaigning were a major factor in his high public approval ratings.[193][194] When Clinton played the saxophone on The Arsenio Hall Show, he was described by some religious conservatives as "the MTV president".[195] Opponents sometimes referred to him as "Slick Willie", a nickname which was first applied to him in 1980 by Pine Bluff Commercial journalist Paul Greenberg;[196] Greenberg believed that Clinton was abandoning the progressive policies of previous Arkansas Governors such as Winthrop Rockefeller, Dale Bumpers and David Pryor.[196] The claim "Slick Willie" would last throughout his presidency.[197] Standing at a height of 6 ft 2 in (1.88 m), Clinton is tied with five others as the fourth-tallest president in the nation's history.[198][199] His folksy manner led him to be nicknamed Bubba, especially in the South.[200] Since 2000, he has frequently been referred to as "The Big Dog" or "Big Dog".[201][202] His prominent role in campaigning for President Obama during the 2012 presidential election and his widely publicized speech at the 2012 Democratic National Convention, where he officially nominated Obama and criticized Republican nominee Mitt Romney and Republican policies in detail, earned him the nickname "Explainer-in-Chief".[203][204]
Clinton drew strong support from the African American community and insisted that the improvement of race relations would be a major theme of his presidency.[205] In 1998, Nobel laureate Toni Morrison called Clinton "the first Black president", saying, "Clinton displays almost every trope of blackness: single-parent household, born poor, working-class, saxophone-playing, McDonald's-and-junk-food-loving boy from Arkansas".[206] Morrison noted that Clinton's sex life was scrutinized more than his career accomplishments, and she compared this to the stereotyping and double standards that blacks typically endure.[206] Many viewed this comparison as unfair and disparaging to both Clinton and the African-American community at large.[207] Clinton, a Baptist,[208] has been open about his faith.[209]
Shortly after Clinton took office, Richard Mellon Scaife, a conservative newspaper owner, organized a fundraising campaign to smear Clinton's image in the media.[210] Leading the Arkansas Project, Scaife and other associates sought to find sources in Clinton's home state of Arkansas who would be willing to dish out negative allegations against the president.[210]




Clinton at a Democratic "Get out the vote" rally in Los Angeles, California, on November 2, 2000


Sexual misconduct allegations
Main article: Bill Clinton sexual misconduct allegations
In 1994, Paula Jones initiated a sexual harassment lawsuit against Clinton, claiming that he made unwanted advances towards her in 1991; Clinton denied the allegations. In April 1998, the case was initially dismissed by Judge Susan Webber Wright on the grounds that it lacked legal merit.[211] Jones appealed Webber Wright's ruling, and her suit gained traction following Clinton's admission to having an affair with Monica Lewinsky in August 1998.[212] In 1998, lawyers for Paula Jones released court documents that alleged a pattern of sexual harassment by Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas. Robert S. Bennett, Clinton's main lawyer for the case, called the filing "a pack of lies" and "an organized campaign to smear the President of the United States" funded by Clinton's political enemies.[213] Clinton later agreed to an out-of-court settlement and paid Jones $850,000.[214] Bennett said that the president made the settlement only so he could end the lawsuit for good and move on with his life.[215] During the deposition for the Jones lawsuit, which was held at the White House,[216] Clinton denied having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky – a denial that became the basis for an impeachment charge of perjury.[217]
In 1992, Gennifer Flowers stated that she had a relationship with Clinton that began in 1980.[218] Flowers at first denied that she had an affair with Clinton, but later changed her story.[219][220] After Clinton at first denied having a relationship with Flowers on 60 Minutes, he later admitted that he had a sexual encounter with Flowers.[221]




Clinton speaking at the 2016 Democratic National Convention


In 1998, Kathleen Willey alleged that Clinton groped her in a hallway in 1993. An independent counsel determined Willey gave "false information" to the FBI, inconsistent with sworn testimony related to the Jones allegation.[222] On March 19, 1998, Julie Hiatt Steele, a friend of Willey, released an affidavit, accusing the former White House aide of asking her to lie to corroborate Ms. Willey's account of being sexually groped by Clinton in the Oval Office.[223] An attempt by Kenneth Starr to prosecute Steele for making false statements and obstructing justice ended in a mistrial and Starr declined to seek a retrial after Steele sought an investigation against the former Independent Counsel for prosecutorial misconduct.[224] Linda Tripp's grand jury testimony also differed from Willey's claims regarding inappropriate sexual advances.[225]
Also in 1998, Juanita Broaddrick alleged that Clinton had raped her in the spring of 1978, although she stated she did not remember the exact date.[226] In another 1998 event, Elizabeth Gracen recanted a six-year-old denial and stated she had a one-night stand with Clinton in 1982.[227] Gracen later apologized to Hillary Clinton.[228] Throughout the year, however, Gracen eluded a subpoena from Kenneth Starr to testify her claim in court.[229]
Post-presidency (2001–present)
Main article: Post-presidency of Bill Clinton




Clinton greets a Hurricane Katrina evacuee, September 5, 2005. In the background, second from the right, is then-Senator Barack Obama.


Bill Clinton continues to be active in public life, giving speeches, fundraising, and founding charitable organizations.[230] Clinton has spoken in prime time at every Democratic National Convention since 1988.[231] Robert Reich has suggested that Clinton is in a state of "permanent election", due to the impeachment proceedings during his presidency and his continuing support in the campaigns of his wife Hillary Clinton.[232]
Activities until 2008 campaign
In 2002, Clinton warned that pre-emptive military action against Iraq would have unwelcome consequences,[233][234] and later claimed to have opposed the Iraq War from the start (though some dispute this).[235] In 2005, Clinton criticized the Bush administration for its handling of emissions control, while speaking at the United Nations Climate Change conference in Montreal.[236]
The William J. Clinton Presidential Center and Park in Little Rock, Arkansas was dedicated in 2004.[237] Clinton released a best-selling autobiography, My Life, in 2004.[238] In 2007, he released Giving: How Each of Us Can Change the World, which also became a New York Times Best Seller and garnered positive reviews.[239]




Former president George H. W. Bush and Clinton in the White House Library, January 2005


In the aftermath of the 2004 Asian tsunami, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan appointed Clinton to head a relief effort.[240] After Hurricane Katrina, Clinton joined with fellow former president George H. W. Bush to establish the Bush-Clinton Tsunami Fund in January 2005, and the Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund in October of that year.[241] As part of the tsunami effort, these two ex-presidents appeared in a Super Bowl XXXIX pre-game show,[242] and traveled to the affected areas.[243] They also spoke together at the funeral of Boris Yeltsin in April 2007.[244]




The dedication of the Clinton Presidential Center, 2004


Based on his philanthropic worldview,[245] Clinton created the William J. Clinton Foundation to address issues of global importance. This foundation includes the Clinton Foundation HIV and AIDS Initiative (CHAI), which strives to combat that disease, and has worked with the Australian government toward that end. The Clinton Global Initiative (CGI), begun by the Clinton Foundation in 2005, attempts to address world problems such as global public health, poverty alleviation and religious and ethnic conflict.[246] In 2005, Clinton announced through his foundation an agreement with manufacturers to stop selling sugared drinks in schools.[247] Clinton's foundation joined with the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group in 2006 to improve cooperation among those cities, and he met with foreign leaders to promote this initiative.[248] The foundation has received donations from a number of governments all over the world, including Asia and the Middle East.[249] In 2008, Foundation director Inder Singh announced deals to reduce the price of anti-malaria drugs by 30 percent in developing nations.[250] Clinton also spoke in favor of California Proposition 87 on alternative energy, which was voted down.[251]
2008 presidential election




Clinton speaking at the 2008 Democratic National Convention


During the 2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign, Clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife, Hillary Clinton. Through speaking engagements and fundraisers, he was able to raise $10 million toward her campaign.[252] Some worried that as an ex-president, he was too active on the trail, too negative to Clinton rival Barack Obama, and alienating his supporters at home and abroad.[253] Many were especially critical of him following his remarks in the South Carolina primary, which Obama won. Later in the 2008 primaries, there was some infighting between Bill and Hillary's staffs, especially in Pennsylvania.[254] Considering Bill's remarks, many thought that he could not rally Hillary supporters behind Obama after Obama won the primary.[255] Such remarks lead to apprehension that the party would be split to the detriment of Obama's election. Fears were allayed August 27, 2008, when Clinton enthusiastically endorsed Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, saying that all his experience as president assures him that Obama is "ready to lead".[256] After Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign was over, Bill Clinton continued to raise funds to help pay off her campaign debt.[257][258]
After the 2008 election




Clinton with incumbent President Barack Obama and Senior Advisor Valerie Jarrett in July 2010


In 2009, Clinton travelled to North Korea on behalf of two American journalists imprisoned there. Euna Lee and Laura Ling had been imprisoned for illegally entering the country from China.[259] Jimmy Carter had made a similar visit in 1994.[259] After Clinton met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-il, Kim issued a pardon.[260][261]
Since then, Clinton has been assigned a number of other diplomatic missions. He was named United Nations Special Envoy to Haiti in 2009.[262] In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, U.S. President Barack Obama announced that Clinton and George W. Bush would coordinate efforts to raise funds for Haiti's recovery.[263] Clinton continues to visit Haiti to witness the inauguration of refugee villages, and to raise funds for victims of the earthquake.[264] In 2010, Clinton announced support of, and delivered the keynote address for, the inauguration of NTR, Ireland's first environmental foundation.[265][266] At the 2012 Democratic National Convention, Clinton gave a widely praised speech nominating Barack Obama.[267]
2016 presidential election




Clinton campaigning at an election rally for his wife who was running to become the President of the United States, 2016


During the 2016 Presidential Election, Clinton again encouraged voters to support Hillary Clinton, including a campaign stop in Wilmington, NC.[268] In a series of tweets, then-President-Elect Donald Trump criticized his ability to get people out to vote.[269]
After the 2016 election
On September 7, 2017, Clinton partnered with former presidents Jimmy Carter, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities.[270]
Post-presidential health concerns
In September 2004, Clinton underwent quadruple bypass surgery.[271] In March 2005, he again underwent surgery, this time for a partially collapsed lung.[272] On February 11, 2010, he was rushed to NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan after complaining of chest pains, and he had two coronary stents implanted in his heart.[271][273] After this procedure, Clinton adopted the plant-based whole foods (vegan) diet, which had been recommended by doctors Dean Ornish and Caldwell Esselstyn.[274]
Wealth




Bill Clinton speaks at Central High School in Phoenix, Arizona, 2016.


The Clintons accrued several million dollars in legal fees during his presidency; the bills were paid off four years after he left office.[275] Bill and Hillary Clinton have both received millions of dollars in book authorship fees.[276] In 2016, Forbes reported Bill and Hillary Clinton made about $240 million in the 15 years from January 2001 to December 2015 (mostly from paid speeches, business consulting and book-writing).[277] Also in 2016, CNN reported the Clintons combined to receive more than $153 million in paid speeches from 2001 until spring 2015.[278] In May 2015, The Hill reported that Bill and Hillary Clinton have made more than $25 million in speaking fees since the start of 2014, and that Hillary Clinton also made $5 million or more from her book, Hard Choices, during the same time period.[279] In July 2014, The Wall Street Journal reported that at the end of 2012, the Clintons were worth between $5 million and $25.5 million, and that in 2012 (the last year they were required to disclose the information) the Clintons made between $16 and $17 million, mostly from speaking fees earned by the former president.[280] Clinton earned more than $104 million from paid speeches between 2001 and 2012.[281] In June 2014, ABC News and The Washington Post reported that Bill Clinton has made more than $100 million giving paid speeches since leaving public office, and in 2008, the New York Times reported that the Clintons' income tax returns[282] show they have made $109 million in the 8 years from January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2007, including almost $92 million from his speaking and book-writing.[276][283][284][285]
Bill Clinton has given dozens of paid speeches each year since leaving office in 2001, mostly to corporations and philanthropic groups in North America and Europe; he often earned $100,000 to $300,000 per speech.[278][286][287][288] Hillary Clinton said that she and Bill came out of the White House financially "broke" and in debt, especially due to large legal fees incurred during their years in the White House. "We had no money when we got there, and we struggled to, you know, piece together the resources for mortgages, for houses, for Chelsea's education." She added, "Bill has worked really hard ... we had to pay off all our debts ... he had to make double the money because of, obviously, taxes; and then pay off the debts, and get us houses, and take care of family members."[284]
Honors and recognition
Main article: List of honors and awards received by Bill Clinton




Secretary of Defense Cohen presents President Clinton the DoD Medal for Distinguished Public Service.






Bill Clinton statue in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo


Various colleges and universities have awarded Clinton honorary degrees, including Doctorate of Law degrees[289][290] and Doctor of Humane Letters degrees.[291] He is an Honorary Fellow of University College, Oxford, which he attended as a Rhodes Scholar, although he did not complete his studies there.[292][293] Schools have been named for Clinton,[294][295][296] and statues have been built to pay him homage.[297][298] U.S. states where he has been honored include Missouri,[299] Arkansas,[300] Kentucky,[301] and New York.[302] He was presented with the Medal for Distinguished Public Service by Secretary of Defense William Cohen in 2001.[303] The Clinton Presidential Center was opened in Little Rock, Arkansas in his honor on December 5, 2001.[304]
He has been honored in various other ways, in countries that include the Czech Republic,[305] Papua New Guinea,[306] Germany,[307] and Kosovo.[297] The Republic of Kosovo, in gratitude for his help during the Kosovo War, renamed a major street in the capital city of Pristina as Bill Clinton Boulevard and added a monumental Clinton statue.[308][309][310]
Clinton was selected as Time's "Man of the Year" in 1992,[311] and again in 1998, along with Ken Starr.[312] From a poll conducted of the American people in December 1999, Clinton was among eighteen included in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.[313] He was honored with a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children, a J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding,[314] a TED Prize (named for the confluence of technology, entertainment and design),[315] and was named as an Honorary GLAAD Media Award recipient for his work as an advocate for the LGBT community.[316]
In 2011, President Michel Martelly of Haiti awarded Clinton with the National Order of Honour and Merit to the rank of Grand Cross "for his various initiatives in Haiti and especially his high contribution to the reconstruction of the country after the earthquake of January 12, 2010". Clinton declared at the ceremony that "in the United States of America, I really don't believe former American presidents need awards anymore, but I am very honored by this one, I love Haiti, and I believe in its promise".[317]
U.S. President Barack Obama awarded Clinton the Presidential Medal of Freedom on November 20, 2013.[318]
Electoral history


Year
Office
District
Democratic
Republican
Other


1974
Arkansas 3rd congressional district
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
48.17%
John Paul Hammerschmidt
51.83%




1976
Arkansas Attorney General
Arkansas
Bill Clinton

Unopposed





1978
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
63%
Lynn Lowe
37%




1980
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
48%
Frank White
52%




1982
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
55%
Frank White
45%




1984
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
63%
Woody Freeman
37%




1986
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
64%
Frank White
36%




1990
Governor of Arkansas
Arkansas
Bill Clinton
57%
Sheffield Nelson
42%




1992
President of the United States
United States of America
Bill Clinton
43%
George H. W. Bush
37%
Ross Perot (I)
19%


1996
President of the United States
United States of America
Bill Clinton
49%
Bob Dole
41%
Ross Perot (Reform)
8%


Authored books

Between Hope and History. New York: Times Books. 1996. ISBN 978-0-8129-2913-3. 
My Life (1st ed.). New York: Vintage Books. 2004. ISBN 978-1-4000-3003-3. 
Giving: How Each of Us Can Change the World (1st ed.). New York: Knopf. 2007. ISBN 0-307-26674-5. 
Back to Work: Why We Need Smart Government for a Strong Economy. Knopf. 2011. ISBN 978-0-307-95975-1. 
The President Is Missing. Knopf. 2018. 

Recordings
Bill Clinton is one of the narrators on a 2003 recording of Sergei Prokofiev's Peter and the Wolf, on Pentatone, together with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia Loren.
See also


Arkansas portal
Government of the United States portal
Politics portal



Clinton family
Clinton School of Public Service
Gun control policy of the Clinton Administration
Historical rankings of Presidents of the United States
List of Governors of Arkansas
List of Presidents of the United States
List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience

References


^ "Directory of Irish Genealogy: American Presidents with Irish Ancestors". Homepage.eircom.net. March 23, 2004. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Clinton, Bill (2004). My Life. Random House. ISBN 1-4000-3003-X. 
^ a b "Biography of William J. Clinton". The White House. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Andrews, Edmund (June 21, 1993). "Clinton Reported to Have A Brother He Never Met". New York Times. 
^ Ken Gormley (2010). The Death of American Virtue: Clinton vs. Starr. New York: Crown Publishers. pp. 16–17. ISBN 978-0-307-40944-7. 
^ "Oprah Talks to Bill Clinton". O, The Oprah Magazine. August 2004. Retrieved December 18, 2011. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Maraniss, David (1996). First in His Class: A Biography of Bill Clinton. Touchstone. ISBN 0-684-81890-6. 
^ Soni, Jimmy (June 25, 2013). "10 Things You Definitely Didn't Know About Bill Clinton". The Huffington Post. 
^ David Maraniss (1996). First in His Class: A Biography of Bill Clinton. Touchstone. p. 43. 
^ "It All Began in a Place Called Hope (Archived whitehouse.gov Article)". The White House. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Robert E. Levin, Bill Clinton: The Inside Story, 1992, pages xxiv–xxv.
^ "About Leadership". APO.org. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2013. 
^ DeMolay – Hall Of Fame » William Clinton[permanent dead link], quote: "Clinton was initiated into Hot Springs Chapter in Hot Springs, Arkansas, in 1961, where he served as Master Councilor. He received the Chevalier in 1964, and the Legion of Honor in 1979. Clinton was inducted into the DeMolay Hall of Fame on May 1, 1988."
^ "Prominent Members". Kappa Kappa Psi. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b c Hoffman, Matthew (October 11, 1992). "The Bill Clinton we knew at Oxford: Apart from smoking dope (and not inhaling), what else did he learn over here? College friends share their memories with Matthew Hoffman". The Independent. 
^ a b Dowd, Maureen (June 9, 1994). "Oxford Journal; Whereas, He Is an Old Boy, If a Young Chief, Honor Him". The New York Times. Retrieved July 17, 2009. 
^ Christopher Hitchens. "Chris or Christopher?". Hitch-22: A Memoir. London, England: Atlantic books. pp. 106–107. ISBN 978-1-84354-922-2. 
^ Stanley, Alessandra (November 22, 1992). "Most Likely to Succeed". The New York Times. 
^ Cain, Nick & Growden, Greg. "21: Ten Peculiar Facts about Rugby". Rugby Union for Dummies (2 ed.). Chichester, England: John Wiley and Sons. p. 297. ISBN 978-0-470-03537-5. 
^ Eyal, Jonathan (June 8, 1994). "Doctor without a thesis: Bill Clinton gets an Oxford degree today, but Jonathan Eyal's verdict on his term's work is: a disaster". The Independent. 
^ Neil Hamilton, Presidents: A Biographical Dictionary, 2005, p. 367.
^ Steven Gillon, The Pact: Bill Clinton, Newt Gingrich, and the Rivalry that Defined a Generation, 2008, p. 21.
^ New York Times, The 1992 Campaign; A Letter by Clinton on His Draft Deferment: 'A War I Opposed and Despised', February 13, 1992.
^ Lauter, David (February 13, 1992). "Clinton Releases '69 Letter on ROTC and Draft Status". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, CA. 
^ Morris, Roger (April 25, 1999). Partners in Power: The Clintons and Their America. Regnery Publishing. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-89526-302-5. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ CNN, All Politics (1997). "Clinton's Draft Deferrment". CNN. Retrieved June 19, 2014. 
^ "Bill Clinton's Draft Letter". Frontline. PBS. November 23, 1991. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Frammolino, Ralph (April 6, 1992). "ROTC Officer Unaware of Draft Notice: Clinton: The man whose action kept the future governor in school says he was not told of 1969 induction letter. Draft board insists none was sent". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 6, 2013. 
^ Public Broadcasting System, Frontline: Interview with James Carville, 2000.
^ a b "Hillary Rodham Clinton". The White House. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ Gerstein, Josh (November 26, 2007). "The Clintons' Berkeley Summer of Love". The New York Sun. Retrieved May 9, 2009. 
^ Medley, Jasmine. "William Jefferson Clinton Presidential Center and the Clinton School of Public Service". National Association of State Judicial Educators. National Association of State Judicial Educators. Retrieved November 22, 2016. 
^ Slater, Wayne (December 16, 2007). "Texas stumping in '72 helped shape Clinton's campaign" (December 16, 2007). Dallas Morning News. Dallas Morning News. Retrieved November 22, 2016. 
^ Felsenthal, Carol (May 7, 2008). "George McGovern and Bill Clinton: the State of the Friendship" (May 7, 2008). Huffington Post. Huffington Post. Retrieved November 22, 2016. 
^ a b "Bill Clinton Political Career". CNN. 1997. Archived from the original on September 20, 2002. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Adam Cohen (December 12, 2007). "Bill and Hillary Clinton's Pitch in Iowa: 'I Love the '90s'". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr. (1996). Boy Clinton: The Political Biography. Eagle Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89526-439-8. 
^ Michael Kelly (November 27, 1992). "Little Rock Hopes Clinton Presidency Will Put Its Dogpatch Image to Rest". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Jonathan W. Nicholsen. "Bill Clinton Timeline". Timeline Help. Archived from the original on October 13, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b Pendleton, Scott (July 21, 1992). "Governor Gets High Marks for Public Education Reforms". The Christian Science Monitor. 
^ a b c d e f Klein, Joe (2002). The Natural: The Misunderstood Presidency of Bill Clinton. Doubleday. ISBN 0-7679-1412-0. 
^ "Bill Clinton, New Democrat". DLC. July 25, 2004. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2010. 
^ Blumenthal, Sidney (2003). The Clinton Wars (1st ed.). Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 0-374-12502-3. 
^ a b c d e f g h Harris, John F. (2006). The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House (1st ed.). Random House Trade Paperbacks. ISBN 0-375-76084-9. 
^ a b George Stephanopoulos, All Too Human: A Political Education, 1999, ISBN 978-0-316-92919-6
^ Nguyen, Alexander (July 14, 2000). "Bill Clinton's Death Penalty Waffle—and Why It's Good News for Execution's Foes". The American Prospect. Retrieved August 30, 2010. In his early days, Clinton opposed the death penalty. And while he and his wife Hillary Rodham Clinton were both teaching at the University of Arkansas Law School, she wrote an appellate brief that helped save a mentally retarded man from execution. "Clinton was against the death penalty," says Arkansas attorney Jeff Rosenzweig, who, like Clinton, grew up in Hot Springs, Arkansas. "He told me so." 
^ "Arkansas". Death Penalty Information Center. Archived from the original on February 27, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2010. 
^ "Clemency". Death Penalty Information Center. Archived from the original on February 21, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2010. 
^ David Maraniss, First in His Class: A Biography of Bill Clinton (New York: Random House, 1996; ISBN 978-0-684-81890-0).
^ Church, George J. (January 27, 1992). "Cover: Is Bill Clinton For Real?". Time. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Kornacki, Steve (July 30, 2012). "When Bill Clinton died onstage". Salon. Retrieved August 6, 2012. 
^ a b c d e Woodward, Bob (2005). The Choice: How Bill Clinton Won. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-8514-X. 
^ Safire, William (December 6, 1993). "Essay; Looking Beyond Peace". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2008. 
^ Duffy, Michael; Barrett, Laurence I.; Blackman, Ann; Carney, James (November 29, 1993). "Secrets Of Success". Time. Retrieved October 29, 2008. 
^ Bob Woodward (September 15, 2007). "Greenspan Is Critical Of Bush in Memoir". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 9, 2014. 
^ Steve Schifferes (January 15, 2001). "Bill Clinton's economic legacy". BBC News. Retrieved January 9, 2014. 
^ Baker, Peter (February 3, 2008). "Bill Clinton's Legacy". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 13, 2010. 
^ "Bill Clinton". History.com. Retrieved July 13, 2010. 
^ Stevenson, Richard (February 8, 2000). "The Battle of the Decades; Reaganomics vs. Clintonomics Is a Central Issue in 2000". The New York Times. Retrieved March 15, 2011. 
^ "Revenues, Outlays, Deficits, Surpluses, and Debt Held by the Public, 1968 to 2007, in Billions of Dollars". Congressional Budget Office. September 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 8, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2010. 
^ "The Budget and Deficit Under Clinton". FactCheck.org. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ "Historical Debt Outstanding – Annual 1950–1999". Treasury Direct. 
^ "Historical Debt Outstanding – Annual 2000 – 2015". Treasury Direct. 
^ "Fiscal Year 2013 Historical Tables" (PDF). U.S. Government Publishing Office. 
^ Herste, Amy (January 11, 2001). "Clinton thanks New Hampshire for making him the 'Comeback Kid'". CNN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Ifill, Gwen (March 17, 1992). "Hillary Clinton Defends Her Conduct in Law Firm". The New York Times. Retrieved March 28, 2008. 
^ MacGillis, Alec; Kornblut, Anne E. (December 21, 2007). "Hillary Clinton Embraces Her Husband's Legacy". The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved March 28, 2008. 
^ Applebome, Peter (January 25, 1992). "Arkansas Execution Raises Questions on Governor's Politics". The New York Times. Retrieved March 28, 2008. 
^ "How the Presidents Stack Up: A look at U.S. presidents' job-approval ratings". The Wall Street Journal. 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2008. Retrieved October 30, 2008. 
^ Le Beau, Bryan. "The Political Mobilization of the New Christian Right". Creighton University. Archived from the original on December 6, 2006. Retrieved December 1, 2006. 
^ Walker, Martin (January 6, 1992). "Tough love child of Kennedy". The Guardian. London. Retrieved October 12, 2007. 
^ a b c "On this day (November 4) in 1992: Clinton beats Bush to the White House". BBC News. November 4, 1992. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved October 31, 2008. 
^ "Party Division in the Senate, 1789–present". United States Senate. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "House History". United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original on October 26, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Clinton, Bill (January 20, 1993). "First Inaugural Address of William J. Clinton; January 20, 1993". Yale Law School. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 103rd Congress – 1st Session". United States Senate. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "New Nationwide Poll Shows Strong Support for Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)" (PDF). Protect Family Leave. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 27, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Sharon L. Camp, The Politics of U.S. Population Assistance, in Beyond the Numbers: A Reader on Population, Consumption and the Environment (ed. Laurie Ann Mazur), p. 130.
^ Amy Sullivan, The Party Faithful: How and Why Democrats Are Closing the God Gap (Simon & Schuster: 2008), pp. 91–92.
^ Sullivan, The Party Faithful, pp. 236–37.
^ Richard L. Burke (February 15, 1993). "White House Hones All-Out Campaign to Sell Sacrifice". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "The Clinton Years: Chronology". Frontline: PBS. Archived from the original on May 2, 2010. Retrieved June 13, 2010. 
^ Woodward, Bob (2000). Maestro. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 116. 
^ Hillary Clinton (2003). Living History. Simon & Schuster. p. 172. ISBN 0-7432-2224-5. 
^ Ken Gormley (2010). The Death of American Virtue: Clinton vs. Starr. New York: Crown Publishers. pp. 70–71. ISBN 978-0-307-40944-7. 
^ Clinton, Bill (August 3, 1993). "Presidential Press Conference in Nevada". Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. 
^ Clinton, Bill (January 25, 1994). "William J. Clinton: Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union". Presidency.ucsb.edu. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ Jonathan Broder; Murray Waas (March 17, 1998). "The Road To Hale". Salon. Archived from the original on June 16, 2006. Retrieved August 25, 2007. 
^ Karl, Jonathan (March 10, 1998). "Reporter Apologizes For Clinton Sex Article". CNN. Archived from the original on June 14, 2008. 
^ Feder, Jody (2010). "Don't Ask, Don't Tell": A Legal Analysis. DIANE Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4379-2208-0. 
^ Mixner, David (November 25, 2009). Stranger Among Friends. Random House Publishing Group. pp. 495–497. ISBN 978-0-307-42958-2. Retrieved September 12, 2014. 
^ John Cloud (November 1996). "Stranger Among Friends. – book reviews". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "President seeks better implementation of 'don't ask, don't tell'". CNN. December 11, 1999. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Obama certifies end of military's gay ban". NBC News. Reuters. July 22, 2011. Archived from the original on July 29, 2011. Retrieved September 7, 2011. 
^ a b Don C. Livingston; Kenneth A. Wink (1997). "The Passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement in the U.S. House of Representatives: Presidential Leadership or Presidential Luck?". Presidential Studies Quarterly. 27. 
^ "HR 3355 – Omnibus Crime Bill". votesmart.org. Retrieved September 12, 2015. 
^ "Bill Clinton". 4to40.com. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010. Retrieved November 4, 2010. 
^ "Welcome to the White House". Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "The Clinton White House Web Site". Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Welcome to the White House". Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Longley, Robert. "The Clinton White House Web Site: Part 2: Preserving the Clinton White House Web Site". Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Longley, Robert. "The Clinton White House Web Site: Part 1: Perhaps the most important Web site in American history". About.com. Retrieved June 6, 2007. 
^ Hulsey, Byron. "The Altered Terrain of American Politics (Review of Do Elections Matter?)". Retrieved October 29, 2008. 
^ Robert Ray (March 16, 2000). "Final Report of the Independent Counsel ... of the Investigation In Re: Anthony Marceca" (PDF). United States Government Printing Office. Retrieved August 30, 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ "Independent counsel: No evidence to warrant prosecution against first lady in 'filegate'". CNN. July 28, 2000. Archived from the original on May 29, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010. 
^ "PUBLIC LAW 104 – 199 – DEFENSE OF MARRIAGE ACT". U.S. Government Printing Office. 
^ Frank Rich (February 26, 2012). "Bill Clinton's shifting justifications for signing the Defense of Marriage Act". New York. 
^ a b Chris Geidner (September 29, 2011). "Becoming Law". MetroWeekly. 
^ "Bill Clinton's Justifications for Signing DOMA – New York Magazine". New York. Retrieved March 28, 2015. 
^ "Unfinished Business: The Defense of Marriage Act". The New York Times. July 2, 2011. 
^ Richard Socarides (June 26, 2013). "How The Court Ruled on DOMA and Prop. 8". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 28, 2015. 
^ "ClintonGore Accomplishments: Gay and Lesbian Americans". Clinton2.nara.gov. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ a b Socarides, Richard. "Why Bill Clinton Signed the Defense of Marriage Act". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ Volsky, Igor. (August 5, 1995) Clinton Issued Order Letting Gays Get Security Clearances 16 Years Ago Today Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Clinton Grants Gay Workers Job Protection". The New York Times. May 29, 1998. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ "2000.12.01: (Fact Sheet) Clinton Administration Record on HIV/AIDS". Archive.hhs.gov. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ "S. 2056 (104th): Employment Nondiscrimination Act of 1996 (On Passage of the Bill)". Govtrack.us. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ "Bill Clinton Backs Same-Sex Marriage". The Nation. July 14, 2009. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ Clinton, Bill (March 7, 2013). "It's time to overturn DOMA". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 3, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ "GLAAD honours Bill Clinton". 3 News NZ. April 22, 2013. 
^ Gregory Gromov. "History of the Internet and World Wide Web". Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Bob Woodward; Brian Duffy (February 13, 1997). "Chinese Embassy Role In Contributions Probed". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Louis Freedberg (June 2, 1995). "New Limits In Works on Immigration / Powerful commission focusing on families of legal entrants". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Plummer Alston Jones (2004). Still struggling for equality: American public library services with minorities. Libraries Unlimited. p. 154. ISBN 1-59158-243-1. 
^ Robert Pear (June 8, 1995). "Clinton Embraces a Proposal To Cut Immigration by a Third". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b Discovery TV. "Clinton Assassination Attempt – Secret Service Secrets". YouTube. Retrieved March 29, 2015. 
^ a b c d e Gormley, Ken (February 1, 2011). The Death of American Virtue: Clinton vs. Starr. Crown Publishing Group. p. 800. ISBN 0-307-40945-7. 
^ N.A. "Bombs Found As Manila Readies For APEC Summit". The Seattle Times.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b N.A. "Explosives Found Near Summit Site". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Jones, Charles O. (2005). The Presidency in a Separated System. The Brookings Institution. p. 318. 
^ Shogren, Elizabeth (October 4, 1997). "Clinton to Get Hearing Aids for Both Ears". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 1, 2012. 
^ "Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999". Federal Reserve History. Retrieved September 12, 2015. 
^ "Time Line". The Washington Post. September 13, 1998. p. A32. Retrieved January 20, 2007. 
^ The Starr Report: The Findings of Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr on President Clinton and the Lewinsky Affair. 1998. ISBN 1-891620-24-X. 
^ Dan Froomkin (August 26, 1999). "Case Closed". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b c Senate LIS (February 12, 1999). "U.S. Senate Roll Call Votes 106th Congress – 1st Session: vote number 17 – Guilty or Not Guilty (Art I, Articles of Impeachment v. President W. J. Clinton)". United States Senate. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Clinton impeached". BBC News. December 19, 1998. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved October 29, 2008. 
^ "The Senate Acquits President Clinton". The Washington Post. February 13, 1999. Retrieved January 4, 2012. 
^ Neal v. Clinton, Civ. No. 2000-5677, Agreed Order of Discipline (Ark. Cir. Ct. 2001) (“Mr. Clinton admits and acknowledges ... that his discovery responses interfered with the conduct of the Jones case by causing the court and counsel for the parties to expend unnecessary time, effort, and resources”).
^ "Bill cops a plea". The Wall Street Journal. January 22, 2001. 
^ "Clinton Pardon's List". The Washington Post. Associated Press. January 20, 2001. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Clinton pardons: Cast of characters". BBC News. February 22, 2001. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Curl, Joseph (August 30, 2011). "Clintons hit over Libby criticism". The Washington Times. 
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/november/30/newsid_4459000/4459860.stm
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/1065913.stm
^ "America's Flight 17". Slate. July 23, 2014. 
^ "Bill Clinton: I got closer to killing bin Laden". CNN. September 24, 2006. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Ijaz, Mansoor (December 5, 2001). "Clinton Let Bin Laden Slip Away and Metastisize". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 13, 2010. 
^ "Staff Statement No. 5" (PDF). 9/11 Commission. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ Lichtblau, Eric (August 17, 2005). "State Dept. Says It Warned About bin Laden in 1996". The New York Times. Retrieved November 4, 2010. 
^ John Pike. "BGM-109 Tomahawk – Smart Weapons". Globalsecurity.org. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ Cohen, William (April 7, 1999). "Secretary Cohen's Press Conference at NATO Headquarters". Archived from the original on May 29, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Clinton, Bill (August 30, 2011). "Press Conference by the President". Archived from the original on June 29, 2007. 
^ "Resolution 1244 (1999)". NATO. June 10, 1999. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ Adam Roberts (April 10, 2003). "The Impact of the Laws of War in Contemporary Conflicts (PDF)" (PDF). Princeton University. Retrieved January 25, 2007. 
^ "Two die in Apache crash". BBC News. May 5, 1999. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ Pilger, John (September 4, 2000). "US and British officials told us that at least 100,000 were murdered in Kosovo. A year later, fewer than 3,000 bodies have been found". New Statesman. 
^ Daniel Pearl; Robert Block (December 31, 1999). "War in Kosovo Was Cruel, Bitter, Savage; Genocide It Wasn't". The Wall Street Journal. p. A1. 
^ "Kosovo assault 'was not genocide'". BBC News. September 7, 2001. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ George J. Andreopoulos. "Ethnic Cleansing". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ a b "The charges against Milosevic". BBC News. March 11, 2006. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ Milosevic's war crimes trial a 4-year marathon, CNN (March 11, 2006).
^ Clinton, Bill (January 27, 1998). "Text of President Clinton's 1998 State of the Union Address". The Washington Post (Press release). Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Iraq Liberation Act of 1998, H.R.4655, One Hundred Fifth Congress of United States of America at Second Session". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on February 18, 2007. Retrieved February 18, 2007. 
^ "H.R.4655 – Iraq Liberation Act of 1998". 
^ "Address to the Nation on Completion of Military Strikes in Iraq". Presidency.ucsb.edu. December 19, 1998. Retrieved July 22, 2013. 
^ John Pike. "Operation Southern Watch". Web.archive.org. Archived from the original on October 9, 2007. Retrieved July 22, 2013. 
^ John Pike. "Operation Northern Watch". Web.archive.org. Archived from the original on October 9, 2007. Retrieved July 22, 2013. 
^ "Clinton's Vietnam visit". BBC News. November 16, 2000. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Smith, Matt (October 10, 2000). "Clinton signs China trade bill". CNN. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 3, 2014. 
^ Peter B. Levy (2002). Encyclopedia of the Clinton Presidency. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 57. ISBN 0-313-31294-X. 
^ "Historical Budget Data" (PDF). Congressional Budget Office. January 26, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 1, 2007. Retrieved January 20, 2007. 
^ Shyovitz, David. "Camp David 2000". Jewish Virtual Library. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Biographies of Current Justices of the Supreme Court". Supremecourt.gov. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Appointment and swearing in of Justice Breyer, 1994". Law.onecle.com. September 30, 1994. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Biographical Directory of Federal Judges". Federal Judicial Center. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2011. 
^ Meg Greene, Sonia Sotomayor: A Biography (ABC-CLIO, 2012), pp. 121–29.
^ Sonia Sotomayor Fast Facts, CNN Library (June 22, 2015).
^ Nancy Scherer, Scoring Points: Politicians, Activists, and the Lower Federal Court Appointment Process (Stanford University Press, 2005), p. 85.
^ a b Scherer, p. 85.
^ Henry J. Reske, Appointment Breaks Barrier: First Openly Gay Federal Judge Assumes Duties, ABA Journal (December 1994), p. 27.
^ "Bill Clinton: Job Ratings". Pollingreport.com. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ "Clinton's approval rating up in wake of impeachment". CNN. December 20, 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Bootie Cosgrove-Mather (June 7, 2004). "A Look Back at the Polls". CBS News. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b c d David W. Moore, Clinton Leaves Office With Mixed Public Reaction, Gallup Organization (January 12, 2001).
^ Gary Langer (January 17, 2001). "Poll: Clinton Legacy Mixed". ABC News. Retrieved January 19, 2013. 
^ "Poll: Clinton outperformed Bush". CNN. May 15, 2006. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Lydia Saad, Lincoln Resumes Position as Americans' Top-Rated President: Reagan and Clinton lead among members of their respective parties, Gallup (February 19, 2007).
^ Frank Newport, [Americans Say Reagan Is the Greatest U.S. President: Lincoln and Clinton next on the list; Washington fifth], Gallup (February 18, 2011).
^ a b Obama Is First As Worst President Since WWII, Quinnipiac University National Poll Finds; More Voters Say Romney Would Have Been Better, Quinnipiac University (July 2, 2014).
^ New ranking of U.S. presidents puts Lincoln at No. 1, Obama at 18; Kennedy judged most overrated – The Washington Post.. Retrieved March 24, 2015.
^ Sandalow, Marc (January 14, 2001). "Clinton Era Marked by Scandal, Prosperity: 1st Baby Boomer in White House Changed Notions of Presidency". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Retrieved October 29, 2008. 
^ Martin Walker, Clinton: the President they deserve, Fourth Estate 1999
^ Bob Woodward, The choice: how Clinton won, Touchstone 1996, ISBN 0-684-81308-4
^ Bresler, Robert J. (January 2001). "The Muddled Meaning of the 2000 Election". USA Today (Society for the Advancement of Education). Archived from the original on February 6, 2008. Retrieved January 2, 2007. 
^ a b American Frontline:Stories of Bill. Retrieved May 4, 2015
^ Mérida, Kevin (December 20, 1998). "It's Come To This: A Nickname That's Proven Hard to Slip". The Washington Post. 
^ Baker, Peter (October 11, 2007). "Head and Shoulders Above the Rest". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Carnahan, Ira (May 19, 2004). "Presidential Timber Tends To Be Tall". Forbes. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Hurt, Charles; Campanile, Carl (June 27, 2007). "Rudy Bops Bubba". New York Post. Retrieved August 23, 2012. 
^ Dowd, Maureen (October 22, 2000). "Liberties; Dare Speak His Name". The New York Times. Retrieved August 23, 2012. They're going to have to let the big dog run. 
^ Rutenberg, Jim; Zernike, Kate (September 20, 2010). "Bill Clinton Stumps for Obama". The New York Times. Retrieved August 23, 2012. The Big Dog, as he is known among those in the tight world of Clinton associates ... 
^ McDuffee, Allen (September 6, 2012). "Bill Clinton's DNC speech as 'explainer in chief,' 'it takes some brass,' and more [AM Briefing]". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 25, 2013. 
^ Poniewozik, James (September 6, 2012). "The Morning After: Obama Turns to Bill Clinton, Explainer-in-Chief". Time. Retrieved January 25, 2013. 
^ "A Conversation With President Bill Clinton on Race in America Today". Center for American Progress. July 16, 2004. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ a b Morrison, Toni (October 1998). "Clinton as the first black president". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 21, 2006. Retrieved December 1, 2006. 
^ Coates, Ta-Nehisi (August 27, 2015). "It Was No Compliment to Call Bill Clinton 'The First Black President'". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 21, 2016. 
^ Sullivan, The Party Faithful, p. 101.
^ Sullivan, The Party Faithful, p. 9.
^ a b Robert G. Kaiser; Ira Chinoy (May 2, 1999). "Scaife: Funding Father of the Right". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 19, 2013. 
^ "Clinton Welcomes Jones Decision; Appeal Likely". CNN. April 2, 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ "Text of Jones's Appeal". The Washington Post. July 31, 1998. Retrieved August 25, 2010. 
^ Clines, Francis X. (March 14, 1998). "Testing of a President: The Accuser; Jones Lawyers Issue Files Alleging Clinton Pattern of Harassment of Women". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Appeals court ponders Paula Jones settlement". CNN. November 18, 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Baker, Peter (November 14, 1998). "Clinton Settles Paula Jones Lawsuit for $850,000". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 27, 2011. 
^ "Deposition of William Jefferson Clinton, January 17, 1998". CNN. March 13, 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ "Lewinsky scandal". rchive.org/web/20090618062707/http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Lewinsky_scandal.aspx The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition Check |archiveurl= value (help). Columbia University Press. 2008. Archived from the original on June 18, 2009. Retrieved February 9, 2010. 
^ "Declaration of Gennifer Flowers". The Washington Post. March 13, 1998. Retrieved March 20, 2008. 
^ "Gennifer Flowers may proceed with defamation suit". Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press. November 19, 2002. Archived from the original on December 9, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2008. At the press conference, Flowers – who initially denied allegations that she had an affair with then Arkansas governor Bill Clinton but then changed her story – played tapes of conversations she had secretly recorded between herself and Clinton 
^ "Archived copy". Retrieved May 27, 2012. [dead link]
^ Clines, Francis X. (March 14, 1998). "Testing Of A President: The Accuser; Jones Lawyers Issue Files Alleging Clinton Pattern Of Harassment Of Women". The New York Times. Retrieved March 20, 2008. In his January deposition, the president, though finally confirming a sexual encounter with Ms. Flowers, was precise in denying Ms. Willey's report that he had sought to kiss her and feel her breasts in an encounter in his private dining room off the Oval Office. 
^ "The Lives Of Kathleen Willey". CNN. March 30, 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ John M. Broder (March 19, 1998). "Friend Accuses Willey for Plea to her to Lie". The New York Times. Retrieved February 15, 2014. 
^ Peter Levy (November 30, 2001). Encyclopedia of the Clinton Presidency. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 328–329. ISBN 978-0-313-31294-6. Retrieved February 15, 2014. 
^ "Stalking the president". Salon. January 1999. Archived from the original on January 29, 2011. Retrieved February 15, 2014. 
^ "Full Transcript of NBC Dateline report on Juanita Broaddrick". February 1999. Archived from the original on February 16, 2006. 
^ "All the President's Women – Elizabeth Ward Gracen". Comedy on Tap. 
^ "Former Miss America Apologizes To First Lady". CNN. April 25, 1998. Archived from the original on June 14, 2008. Retrieved November 9, 2008. 
^ "Big Year for the Bad News Bearers". The Washington Post. December 24, 1998. 
^ Josh Gerstein (January 17, 2006). "Clinton Eligible, Once Again, To Practice Law". New York Sun. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Bill Clinton's Democratic Convention Speeches, The New York Times (September 5, 2012).
^ The Permanent Election. (August 27, 2003) The American Prospect. Retrieved February 3, 2016.
^ "House Passes Resolution Authorizing Use of Force in Iraq; New Jerssy Supreme Court Hears Argument For, Against New Democrat on Ballot". CNN. October 2, 2002. Retrieved August 30, 2010. 
^ Andrew Grice (October 3, 2002). "Clinton urges caution over Iraq as Bush is granted war powers". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on August 21, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. As a preemptive action today, however well-justified, may come back with unwelcome consequences in the future. And because I don't care – and I've done this. I've ordered these kinds of actions. I don't care how precise your bombs and your weapons are, when you set them off, innocent people will die. 
^ "Bill Clinton Says He Opposed Iraq War from Start (UPDATED)". Outsidethebeltway.com. November 28, 2007. Retrieved September 12, 2013. 
^ "Last-minute climate deals reached". BBC News. December 10, 2005. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Clinton Library open for business". BBC News. November 18, 2004. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Glaister, Dan (May 22, 2006). "Oprah Winfrey book deal tops Clinton's $12 m". The Guardian. London. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Best Sellers". The New York Times. September 23, 2007. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved September 18, 2007. 
^ "Clinton to be U.N.'s envoy on tsunami relief". MSNBC. Associated Press. February 1, 2005. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "2006 Philadelphia Liberty Medal Award". Constitutioncenter.org. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ Maske, Mark (January 27, 2005). "Senior Bush, Clinton to Appear at Super Bowl". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 26, 2010. 
^ "Bush, Clinton end tsunami visit". BBC News. February 21, 2005. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ "Former Presidents Bush, Clinton Represent U.S. at Boris Yeltsin's Funeral". Fox News Channel. April 24, 2007. 
^ Jon Meacham (December 20, 2009). "Planetary Problem Solver". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ "Clinton Global Initiative". Clinton Global Initiative. June 19, 2011. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved August 17, 2011. 
^ "William J. Clinton Foundation announces agreement to reduce junk food in schools". Comcast.net. Retrieved August 25, 2010. 
^ "Clinton Foundation and Climate Partnership, Press Release". August 1, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. 
^ Baker, Peter; Davies, Anne (November 18, 2008). "Obama team turns scrutiny on Bill Clinton". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Pohla Smith (August 20, 2008). "Young man combines expertise in economics and social issues at Clinton Foundation". Pittsburg Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Indravudh, Peach (October 15, 2006). "Clinton backs Prop. 87". Daily Bruin. UCLA. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Robert Yoon (July 30, 2008). "Bill Clinton 2007 speech haul tops $10 million". CNN. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Vaughn Ververs (January 26, 2008). "Analysis: Bill Clinton's Lost Legacy". CBS News. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Peter Baker And Jim Rutenberg (June 8, 2008). "The Long Road to a Clinton Exit". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ Jonathan Alter (August 6, 2008). "A Catharsis in Denver?". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ Lynn Sweet (August 28, 2008). "Bill Clinton vouches for Obama: now 'ready to lead'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Clinton Turns to Husband's Charity to Retire Campaign Debt". Fox News Channel. December 24, 2008. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Stephanie Condon (May 13, 2010). "Bill Clinton Raffles Himself to Pay Hillary's Campaign Debt". CBS News. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ a b "Bill Clinton meets N Korea leader". BBC News. August 4, 2009. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "North Korea pardons US reporters". BBC News. August 4, 2009. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Landler, Mark; Baker, Peter (August 5, 2009). "Bill Clinton and Journalists in Emotional Return to U.S". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2011. 
^ "Bill Clinton to be UN Haiti envoy". BBC News. May 19, 2009. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ "Presidents Clinton, Bush lead effort to raise funds for Haiti". CNN. January 16, 2010. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Jacob Kushner (August 17, 2011). "Clinton launches business loan program in Haiti". ABC News. Associated Press. Retrieved December 10, 2011. 
^ Emmet Oliver (March 5, 2010). "Clinton backs NTR's environment foundation". The Irish Independent. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "President Bill Clinton Delivers Keynote Address". NTR Foundation. March 4, 2010. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Bill Clinton brings it for Obama". CNN. September 6, 2012. 
^ WWAY News (October 26, 2016). "Bill Clinton Rallies for Hillary in Wilmington". Retrieved February 2, 2017. 
^ Rebecca Shabad (December 20, 2016). "Trump goes after Bill Clinton over post-election comments". CBS News. Retrieved February 2, 2017. 
^ Shelbourne, Mallory (September 10, 2017). "Former presidents fundraise for Irma disaster relief". The Hill. Retrieved 11 September 2017. 
^ a b "Bill Clinton 'in good spirits' after heart procedure". BBC News. February 12, 2010. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Clinton surgery called successful". MSNBC. Associated Press. March 10, 2005. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Mark Egan (February 11, 2010). "Bill Clinton in good spirits after heart procedure". Reuters. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ David S. Martin (August 18, 2011). "From omnivore to vegan: The dietary education of Bill Clinton". CNN. Retrieved September 17, 2012. 
^ "Clintons Pay Off Legal Bills". June 14, 2005. Retrieved March 28, 2015. 
^ a b McIntire, Mike (April 5, 2008). "Clintons made $109 Million in Last 8 Years". The New York Times. 
^ How Bill And Hillary Clinton Made $240 Million In The Last 15 Years (November 8, 2016), Forbes
^ a b Robert Yoon (February 6, 2016). "$153 million in Bill and Hillary Clinton speaking fees, documented". CNN. Retrieved February 7, 2016. 
^ Ben Kamisar, Clintons earned more than $25 million for speeches since 2014 (May 15, 2015), The Hill
^ The Bill and Hillary Clinton Money Machine Taps Corporate Cash, BRODY MULLINS, PETER NICHOLAS and REBECCA BALLHAUS, The Wall Street Journal, July 1, 2014
^ Epstein, Jennifer. "Clinton Family Speeches Netted as Much as $26 Million for Foundation". Bloomberg. Retrieved May 23, 2015. 
^ (linked in the NYT article)
^ How the Clintons went from 'dead broke' to rich: Bill earned $104.9 million for speeches (June 26, 2014), The Washington Post
^ a b Hillary Clinton Defends High-Dollar Speaking Fees (June 9, 2014), ABC News and Good Morning America
^ Bill's $500,000 Kuwait Lecture (November 17, 2008), The Daily Beast
^ Josh Gerstein, Clinton Eligible, Once Again, To Practice Law, New York Sun, January 17, 2006, downloaded from N.Y. Sun article.
^ Healy, Patrick (May 10, 2007). "Bill Clinton Ponders a role as 'First Gentlemen', NY Times, 2007". The New York Times. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ Bentley, Daniel (February 24, 2007). "Forty Million Dollar Bill, Independent, 2007". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2010. 
^ "Honorary Degrees". UNC-Chapel Hill Office of Faculty Governance. 1993. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "President Bill Clinton with an honorary doctorate of law". Tulane University. May 19, 2006. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Clinton to address graduates, Honorary doctorate will be bestowed". RIT News, Rochester Institute of Technology. May 18, 2007. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Matthew Hoffman. "The Bill Clinton we knew at Oxford: Apart from smoking dope (and not inhaling), what else did he learn over here? College friends share their memories with Matthew Hoffman". The Independent. Retrieved October 27, 2016. 
^ "www.univ.ox.ac.uk". University of Oxford. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. 
^ "Clinton Elementary". Compton Unified School District. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2010. 
^ "William Jefferson Clinton Middle School". Los Angeles Unified School District. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Clinton School of Public service". University of Arkansas. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ a b "Kosovo unveils Clinton's statue". BBC News. November 1, 2009. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2009. 
^ "Kosovo to honor Bill Clinton with statue". Reuters. May 23, 2007. Retrieved September 11, 2011. 
^ DeMolay International. "DeMolay Hall of Fame". Demolay.org. Archived from the original on September 5, 2010. Retrieved August 25, 2010. 
^ Purdum, Todd S. (October 17, 2002). "Campaign Season; Another First for Clinton". The New York Times. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ Kentucky Colonels, Honorable Order of. "Colonels website". Honorable Order of Kentucky Colonels. Archived from the original on June 25, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2009. 
^ Dunlap, David (November 23, 2004). "Pataki Offers Peek at 9/11 Memorial Progress". The New York Times. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen presents the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service to President Bill Clinton in a ceremonial farewell at Fort Myer, Va., on Jan. 5, 2001". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved September 1, 2011. 
^ Van Natta Jr., Don (June 28, 1999). "Dinner for a Presidential Library, Contributions Welcome". The New York Times. Retrieved December 17, 2009. 
^ "List of Individuals Awarded the Order of the White Lion". Old.hrad.cz. October 13, 2005. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ "It's now 'Chief Bill Clinton". United Press International. December 3, 2006. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "International Prize of the city of Aachen (German)". Archived from the original on February 6, 2008. 
^ Mike Nizza (May 23, 2007). "Statue Watch: Bill Clinton Edition". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2012. 
^ Dan Bilefsky (December 17, 2007). "Kosovo Struggles to Forge an Identity". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2012. 
^ Dan Bilefsky (December 9, 2007). "Kosovo: Forging an identity on eve of new era". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2012. 
^ Elizabeth P. Valk (January 4, 1993). "Bill Clinton, Man of the Year". Time. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ Nancy Gibbs (December 28, 1998). "Kenneth Starr & Bill Clinton, Men of the Year". Time. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ The Gallup Poll 1999. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources Inc. 1999. pp. 248–249. 
^ AmericaLive (October 22, 2010). "President Bill Clinton Biography". CNN. 
^ "2007 TED Prize winner Bill Clinton on TEDTalks". TED Blog. April 4, 2007. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved August 31, 2011. 
^ "24th Annual GLAAD Media Awards – Los Angeles". GLAAD. Retrieved April 7, 2013. 
^ Press, ed. (July 22, 2011). "Haiti – Social: Bill Clinton receives the National Order of Honor and Merit to the rank Grand Cross gold plated". Haiti Libre. Retrieved March 14, 2016. 
^ Jackson, David (November 20, 2013). "Obama awards Medal of Freedom to Clinton, Oprah, others". USA Today. Retrieved November 20, 2013. 


Further reading
Primary sources


Clinton, Bill. (with Al Gore). Science in the National Interest. Washington, D.C.: The White House, August 1994.
--- (with Al Gore). The Climate Change Action Plan. Washington, D.C.: The White House, October 1993.
Taylor Branch The Clinton Tapes: Wrestling History with the President. (2009) Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4165-4333-6
Official Congressional Record Impeachment Set: ... Containing the Procedures for Implementing the Articles of Impeachment and the Proceedings of the Impeachment Trial of President William Jefferson Clinton. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1999.
Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, William J. Clinton. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration: For sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O., 1994–2002.
S. Daniel Abraham Peace Is Possible, foreword by Bill Clinton


Popular books


Peter Baker The Breach: Inside the Impeachment and Trial of William Jefferson Clinton (2000) ISBN 0-684-86813-X
James Bovard Feeling Your Pain: The Explosion and Abuse of Government Power in the Clinton-Gore Years (2000) ISBN 0-312-23082-6
Joe Conason and Gene Lyons The Hunting of the President: The Ten-Year Campaign to Destroy Bill and Hillary Clinton (2003) ISBN 0-312-27319-3
Elizabeth Drew On the Edge: The Clinton Presidency (1994) ISBN 0-671-87147-1
David Gergen Eyewitness to Power: The Essence of Leadership. (2000) ISBN 0-684-82663-1
Nigel Hamilton Bill Clinton: An American Journey (2003) ISBN 0-375-50610-1
Christopher Hitchens No One Left to Lie to: The Triangulations of William Jefferson Clinton (1999) ISBN 1-85984-736-6
Michael Isikoff Uncovering Clinton: A Reporter's Story (1999) ISBN 0-609-60393-0
Mark Katz Clinton and Me: A Real-Life Political Comedy (2004) ISBN 978-0-7868-6949-7
David Maraniss The Clinton Enigma: A Four and a Half Minute Speech Reveals This President's Entire Life (1998) ISBN 0-684-86296-4
Dick Morris with Eileen McGann Because He Could (2004) ISBN 0-06-078415-6
Richard A. Posner An Affair of State: The Investigation, Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton (1999) ISBN 0-674-00080-3
Mark J. Rozell The Clinton Scandal and the Future of American Government (2000) ISBN 0-87840-777-4
Timperlake, Edward, and William C. Triplett II Year of the Rat: How Bill Clinton Compromised U.S. Security for Chinese Cash. Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing, 1998. ISBN 0-89526-333-5
Michael Waldman POTUS Speaks: Finding the Words That Defined the Clinton Presidency (2000) ISBN 0-7432-0020-9
Ivory Tower Publishing Company. Achievements of the Clinton Administration: the Complete Legislative and Executive. (1995) ISBN 0-88032-748-0


Scholarly studies


Campbell, Colin, and Bert A. Rockman, eds. The Clinton Legacy (Chatham House Pub, 2000)
Cohen; Jeffrey E. "The Polls: Change and Stability in Public Assessments of Personal Traits, Bill Clinton, 1993–99" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 31, 2001
Cronin, Thomas E. and Michael A. Genovese; "President Clinton and Character Questions" Presidential Studies Quarterly Vol. 28, 1998
Davis; John. "The Evolution of American Grand Strategy and the War on Terrorism: Clinton and Bush Perspectives" White House Studies, Vol. 3, 2003
Dumbrell, John. "Was there a Clinton doctrine? President Clinton's foreign policy reconsidered". Diplomacy and Statecraft 13.2 (2002): 43–56.
Edwards; George C. "Bill Clinton and His Crisis of Governance" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 28, 1998
Fisher; Patrick. "Clinton's Greatest Legislative Achievement? the Success of the 1993 Budget Reconciliation Bill" White House Studies, Vol. 1, 2001
Glad; Betty. "Evaluating Presidential Character" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 28, 1998
Harris, John F. The Survivor: Bill Clinton in the White House (2006).
Head, Simon. The Clinton System (January 30, 2016), The New York Review of Books
Hyland, William G. . Clinton's World: Remaking American Foreign Policy (1999) ISBN 0-275-96396-9
Jewett, Aubrey W. and Marc D. Turetzky; "Stability and Change in President Clinton's Foreign Policy Beliefs, 1993–96" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 28, 1998
Kim, Claire Jean. "Managing the Racial Breach: Clinton, Black‐White Polarization, and the Race Initiative". Political Science Quarterly 117.1 (2002): 55–79. online
Laham, Nicholas, A Lost Cause: Bill Clinton's Campaign for National Health Insurance (1996)
Lanoue, David J. and Craig F. Emmert; "Voting in the Glare of the Spotlight: Representatives' Votes on the Impeachment of President Clinton" Polity, Vol. 32, 1999
Levy, Peter B. Encyclopedia of the Clinton presidency (Greenwood, 2002)
Maurer; Paul J. "Media Feeding Frenzies: Press Behavior during Two Clinton Scandals" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 29, 1999
Nie; Martin A. "'It's the Environment, Stupid!': Clinton and the Environment" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 27, 1997 in JSTOR
O'Connor; Brendon. "Policies, Principles, and Polls: Bill Clinton's Third Way Welfare Politics 1992–1996" The Australian Journal of Politics and History, Vol. 48, 2002
Poveda; Tony G. "Clinton, Crime, and the Justice Department" Social Justice, Vol. 21, 1994
Renshon; Stanley A. The Clinton Presidency: Campaigning, Governing, and the Psychology of Leadership Westview Press, 1995
Romano, Flavio. Clinton and Blair: the political economy of the third way (Routledge, 2007)
Renshon; Stanley A. "The Polls: The Public's Response to the Clinton Scandals, Part 1: Inconsistent Theories, Contradictory Evidence" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 32, 2002
Rushefsky, Mark E. and Kant Patel. Politics, Power & Policy Making: The Case of Health Care Reform in the 1990s (1998) ISBN 1-56324-956-1
Schantz, Harvey L. Politics in an Era of Divided Government: Elections and Governance in the Second Clinton Administration (2001) ISBN 0-8153-3583-0
Troy, Gill. The Age of Clinton: America in the 1990s (2015)
Warshaw, Shirley Anne. The Clinton Years (Infobase Publishing, 2009)
Wattenberg; Martin P. "The Democrats' Decline in the House during the Clinton Presidency: An Analysis of Partisan Swings" Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 29, 1999
Wattier; Mark J. "The Clinton Factor: The Effects of Clinton's Personal Image in 2000 Presidential Primaries and in the General Election" White House Studies, Vol. 4, 2004


External links

Find more aboutBill Clintonat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource


Official

Presidential Library & Museum
White House biography

Organizations

Clinton Foundation

Interviews, speeches, and statements

Appearances on C-SPAN
Bill Clinton at TED 
Full audio of a number of Clinton speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs
Oral History Interview with Bill Clinton from Oral Histories of the American South, June 1974
"The Wanderer", a profile from The New Yorker, September 2006

Media coverage

"Bill Clinton collected news and commentary". The Guardian.  
"Bill Clinton collected news and commentary". The New York Times. 

Other

Bill Clinton at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Extensive essays on Bill Clinton and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
"Life Portrait of Bill Clinton", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, December 20, 1999
Clinton an American Experience documentary
Bill Clinton on IMDb 







v
t
e


Bill Clinton






42nd President of the United States (1993–2001)
40th and 42nd Governor of Arkansas (1979–1981, 1983–1992)





Presidency



1st inauguration
2nd inauguration
Economic policy
AmeriCorps
Health care plan
North American Free Trade Agreement
Balanced Budget
Foreign policy
International trips
Clinton Doctrine
Dayton Agreement
Oslo I Accord
Israel–Jordan peace treaty
Operation Infinite Reach
Bombing of Yugoslavia
One America Initiative
Nannygate
Clinton–Lewinsky scandal
Lincoln Bedroom for contributors controversy
Starr Report
Impeachment hearing
White House Millennium Council
Pardons

list


State of the Union addresses

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000


Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments

Supreme Court
controversies












Life and legacy



Childhood home
Presidential Library
Post-presidency
Clinton Foundation
Clinton School of Public Service
Clinton Boulevard
Clinton Bush Haiti Fund
Chairman, National Constitution Center
Honors and awards
Public image
Troopergate
Sexual misconduct allegations
Whitewater controversy





Books



Between Hope and History (1996)
My Life (2004)
Giving: How Each of Us Can Change the World (2007)
Back to Work (2011)
The President Is Missing (2018)





Popular culture



The War Room (1993 documentary)
Primary Colors (1998 film)
The Final Days (2000 short film)
Clinton (2012 film)
Saturday Night Live parodies of Bill Clinton





Elections



United States House of Representatives elections, 1974
Arkansas gubernatorial election, 1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1990
Bill Clinton presidential campaign, 1992
Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1992
1996
Democratic National Convention 1992
1996
United States presidential election, 1992

theme song


1996





Family



Hillary Rodham Clinton (wife)
Chelsea Clinton (daughter)
William Jefferson Blythe Jr. (father)
Virginia Clinton Kelley (mother)
Roger Clinton Sr. (first stepfather)
Jeff Dwire (second stepfather)
Roger Clinton Jr. (half-brother)
Socks (cat)
Buddy (dog)
Whitehaven (house)








← George H. W. Bush
George W. Bush →


 Bill Clinton
 Category










Offices and distinctions







Legal offices


Preceded by
Jim Guy Tucker
Attorney General of Arkansas
1977–1979
Succeeded by
Steve Clark


Party political offices


Preceded by
David Pryor
Democratic nominee for Governor of Arkansas
1978, 1980, 1982, 1984, 1986, 1990
Succeeded by
Jim Guy Tucker


Preceded by
Max Baucus, Joe Biden, David L. Boren, Barbara Boxer, Robert Byrd, Dante Fascell, Bill Gray, Tom Harkin, Dee Huddleston, Carl Levin, Tip O'Neill, Claiborne Pell
Response to the State of the Union address
1985
Served alongside: Bob Graham, Tip O'Neill
Succeeded by
Tom Daschle, Bill Gray, George Mitchell, Chuck Robb, Harriet Woods


Preceded by
Michael Dukakis
Chair of the Democratic Governors Association
1987–1988
Succeeded by
James Blanchard


Preceded by
Sam Nunn
Chair of the Democratic Leadership Council
1990–1991
Succeeded by
John Breaux


Preceded by
Michael Dukakis
Democratic nominee for President of the United States
1992, 1996
Succeeded by
Al Gore


Political offices


Preceded by
Joe Purcell
Acting
Governor of Arkansas
1979–1981
Succeeded by
Frank D. White


Preceded by
Frank D. White
Governor of Arkansas
1983–1992
Succeeded by
Jim Guy Tucker


Preceded by
Lamar Alexander
Chair of the National Governors Association
1986–1987
Succeeded by
John H. Sununu


Preceded by
George H. W. Bush
President of the United States
1993–2001
Succeeded by
George W. Bush


Diplomatic posts


New office
Chair of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
1993
Succeeded by
Suharto


Preceded by
Jacques Chirac
Chair of the Group of Eight
1997
Succeeded by
Tony Blair


Current U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial)


Preceded by
George H. W. Bush
as Former President
Order of Precedence of the United States
as Former President
Succeeded by
George W. Bush
as Former President











Articles related to Bill Clinton











v
t
e


Presidents of the United States (list)







George Washington (1789–1797)
John Adams (1797–1801)
Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809)
James Madison (1809–1817)
James Monroe (1817–1825)
John Quincy Adams (1825–1829)
Andrew Jackson (1829–1837)
Martin Van Buren (1837–1841)
William Henry Harrison (1841)
John Tyler (1841–1845)
James K. Polk (1845–1849)
Zachary Taylor (1849–1850)
Millard Fillmore (1850–1853)
Franklin Pierce (1853–1857)
James Buchanan (1857–1861)
Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865)
Andrew Johnson (1865–1869)
Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877)
Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881)
James A. Garfield (1881)
Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885)
Grover Cleveland (1885–1889)
Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893)
Grover Cleveland (1893–1897)
William McKinley (1897–1901)
Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909)
William H. Taft (1909–1913)
Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921)
Warren G. Harding (1921–1923)
Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929)
Herbert Hoover (1929–1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945)
Harry S. Truman (1945–1953)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961)
John F. Kennedy (1961–1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969)
Richard Nixon (1969–1974)
Gerald Ford (1974–1977)
Jimmy Carter (1977–1981)
Ronald Reagan (1981–1989)
George H. W. Bush (1989–1993)
Bill Clinton (1993–2001)
George W. Bush (2001–2009)
Barack Obama (2009–2017)
Donald Trump (2017–present)









Presidency timelines




Wilson
Harding
Coolidge
Hoover
F. D. Roosevelt

first 100 days


Truman
Eisenhower
Kennedy
L. B. Johnson
Nixon
Ford
Carter
Reagan
G. H. W. Bush
Clinton
G. W. Bush
Obama

first 100 days


Trump

first 100 days











 Book
 Category












v
t
e


United States Democratic Party



Chairpersons
of the DNC



Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez





Presidential
tickets



Jackson/Calhoun
Jackson/Van Buren
Van Buren/R. Johnson
Van Buren/None
Polk/Dallas
Cass/Butler
Pierce/King
Buchanan/Breckinridge
Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
McClellan/Pendleton
Seymour/Blair
Greeley/Brown
Tilden/Hendricks
Hancock/English
Cleveland/Hendricks
Cleveland/Thurman
Cleveland/Stevenson I
W. Bryan/Sewall
W. Bryan/Stevenson I
Parker/H. Davis
W. Bryan/Kern
Wilson/Marshall (twice)
Cox/Roosevelt
J. Davis/C. Bryan
Smith/Robinson
Roosevelt/Garner (twice)
Roosevelt/Wallace
Roosevelt/Truman
Truman/Barkley
Stevenson II/Sparkman
Stevenson II/Kefauver
Kennedy/L. Johnson
L. Johnson/Humphrey
Humphrey/Muskie
McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
Carter/Mondale (twice)
Mondale/Ferraro
Dukakis/Bentsen
B. Clinton/Gore (twice)
Gore/Lieberman
Kerry/Edwards
Obama/Biden (twice)
H. Clinton/Kaine





State/
Territorial
Parties



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Guam
Puerto Rico





Conventions

(List)



1832 (Baltimore)
1835 (Baltimore)
1840 (Baltimore)
1844 (Baltimore)
1848 (Baltimore)
1852 (Baltimore)
1856 (Cincinnati)
1860 (Baltimore)
1864 (Chicago)
1868 (New York)
1872 (Baltimore)
1876 (Saint Louis)
1880 (Cincinnati)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Saint Louis)
1892 (Chicago)
1896 (Chicago)
1900 (Kansas City)
1904 (Saint Louis)
1908 (Denver)
1912 (Baltimore)
1916 (Saint Louis)
1920 (San Francisco)
1924 (New York)
1928 (Houston)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Philadelphia)
1940 (Chicago)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (Chicago)
1960 (Los Angeles)
1964 (Atlantic City)
1968 (Chicago)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (New York)
1980 (New York)
1984 (San Francisco)
1988 (Atlanta)
1992 (New York)
1996 (Chicago)
2000 (Los Angeles)
2004 (Boston)
2008 (Denver)
2012 (Charlotte)
2016 (Philadelphia)





Affiliated
groups




Fundraising



Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors





Sectional



College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election








 Liberalism portal












v
t
e


Governors of Arkansas



Territory
(1819–1836)



J. Miller
Izard
Crittenden
Pope
Fulton








State
(since 1836)



J. Conway
Yell
Adams
Drew
Byrd
Roane
E. Conway
Rector
Fletcher
Flanagin
Murphy
Clayton
Hadley
Baxter
Brooks*
Baxter
Garland
W. Miller
Churchill
Berry
Hughes
Eagle
Fishback
Clarke
Jones
Davis
Little
Moore
Pindall
Martin
Donaghey
Robinson
Oldham
Futrell
Hays
Brough
McRae
Terral
Martineau
Parnell
Futrell
Bailey
Adkins
Laney
McMath
Cherry
Faubus
Rockefeller
Bumpers
Riley
Pryor
Purcell
Clinton
White
Clinton
Tucker
Huckabee
Beebe
Hutchinson








Italics indicates acting governor
* Disputed; see Brooks-Baxter War












v
t
e


Order of precedence in the United States of America*






The President


The Vice President
The Governor (of the state in which the event is held)
The Speaker of the House
The Chief Justice
Former President Carter
Former President GHW Bush
Former President Clinton
Former President GW Bush
Former President Obama
Ambassadors of the United States
The Secretary of State
The Associate Justices
Retired Justice Stevens
Retired Justice O'Connor
Retired Justice Souter
The President's Cabinet
The President Pro Tempore of the Senate
The Senate
The Governors of the States (by order of statehood)
Former Vice President Mondale
Former Vice President Quayle
Former Vice President Gore
Former Vice President Cheney
Former Vice President Biden
The House of Representatives






*not including acting officeholders, visiting dignitaries, auxiliary executive and military personnel and most diplomats










v
t
e


Chairs of the National Governors Association






Willson
McGovern
Walsh
Spry
Capper
Harrington
Allen
Sproul
Cox
Trinkle
Brewster
McMullen
Dern
Case
Pollard
Rolph
McNutt
Peery
Cochran
Stark
Vanderbilt
Stassen
O'Conor
Saltonstall
Maw
Martin
Caldwell
Hildreth
Hunt
Lane
Carlson
Lausche
Peterson
Shivers
Thornton
Kennon
Langlie
Stanley
Stratton
Collins
Boggs
McNichols
Powell
Rosellini
Anderson
Sawyer
Reed
Guy
Volpe
Ellington
Love
Hearnes
Moore
Mandel
Evans
Rampton
Ray
Andrus
Askew
Milliken
Carroll
Bowen
Busbee
Snelling
Matheson
J. Thompson
Carlin
Alexander
Clinton
Sununu
Baliles
Branstad
Gardner
Ashcroft
Romer
Campbell
Dean
T. Thompson
Miller
Voinovich
Carper
Leavitt
Glendening
Engler
Patton
Kempthorne
Warner
Huckabee
Napolitano
Pawlenty
Rendell
Douglas
Manchin
Gregoire
Heineman
Markell
Fallin
Hickenlooper
Herbert
McAuliffe
Sandoval












v
t
e


Hillary Clinton






67th United States Secretary of State (2009–2013)
U.S. Senator from New York (2001–2009)
First Lady of the United States (1993–2001)





Secretary of State



Tenure as Secretary
Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review
Foreign policy of the Obama administration
Hillary Doctrine
Email controversy





U.S. Senator



Senate career
Family Entertainment Protection Act
Flag Protection Act of 2005





First Lady



1993 health care reform
Hillaryland
Travel office controversy
FBI files controversy
"Vast right-wing conspiracy"
Vital Voices
Save America's Treasures
State Children's Health Insurance Program
Adoption and Safe Families Act
Foster Care Independence Act
White House Millennium Council

National Millennium Trail







Arkansas



Arkansas Advocates for Children and Families
Rose Law Firm
Legal Services Corporation
Whitewater controversy
Cattle futures controversy





Philanthropic



Clinton Foundation

State Department controversy


Onward Together





Speeches and policies



Political positions
"Women's Rights Are Human Rights" (1995)
"Basket of deplorables" (2016)





Writings



Bibliography
Senior thesis (1969)
It Takes a Village (1996)
Dear Socks, Dear Buddy (1998)
An Invitation to the White House (2000)
Living History (2003)
Hard Choices (2014)
Stronger Together (2016)
What Happened (2017)





Electoral history



New York senatorial election, 2000
2006
Democratic Party presidential primaries, 2008

campaign
endorsements
debates
convention


United States presidential election, 2016

campaign
endorsements

political
non-political


Democratic primaries

debates
convention


General election debates
Hillary Victory Fund







Legacy



Awards and honors
Books about
Cultural and political image
Saturday Night Live parodies





Family



Bill Clinton (husband
presidency)
Chelsea Clinton (daughter)
Hugh E. Rodham (father)
Dorothy Howell Rodham (mother)
Hugh Rodham (brother)
Tony Rodham (brother)
Socks (cat)
Buddy (dog)
Whitehaven (house)








 Book












v
t
e


(1988 ←) United States presidential election, 1992 (→ 1996)



Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee Bill Clinton (campaign)
VP nominee Al Gore


Candidates Larry Agran
Jerry Brown
Tom Harkin
Bob Kerrey
Lyndon LaRouche
Tom Laughlin
Eugene McCarthy
Paul Tsongas
Douglas Wilder
Charles Woods





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee George H. W. Bush
VP nominee Dan Quayle


Candidates Pat Buchanan
David Duke
Jack Fellure
Isabell Masters
Pat Paulsen
Tennie Rogers
Harold Stassen





Independent



Candidate Ross Perot (campaign)
VP candidate James Stockdale










Other independent and third party candidates



Libertarian Party

Convention





Nominee
Andre Marrou


VP nominee
Nancy Lord





Natural Law Party



Nominee
John Hagelin


VP nominee
Mike Tompkins





New Alliance Party



Nominee
Lenora Fulani


VP nominee
Maria Elizabeth Muñoz





Prohibition Party



Nominee
Earl Dodge


VP nominee
George Ormsby





Socialist Party USA



Nominee
J. Quinn Brisben


VP nominee
Barbara Garson





Socialist Workers Party



Nominee
James Warren


VP nominee
Willie Mae Reid





U.S. Taxpayers Party

Convention





Nominee
Howard Phillips


VP nominee
Albion W. Knight, Jr.





Workers World Party



Nominee
Gloria La Riva


VP nominee
Larry Holmes





Independents and other candidates



Ronald Daniels (Running mate: Asiba Tupahache)
Bo Gritz
Isabell Masters











Other 1992 elections
House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


(1992 ←) United States presidential election, 1996 (→ 2000)



Democratic Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee Bill Clinton
VP nominee Al Gore


Candidates James D. Griffin
Lyndon LaRouche campaign
Pat Paulsen





Republican Party

Convention
Primaries





Nominee Bob Dole
VP nominee Jack Kemp


Candidates
Lamar Alexander
Pat Buchanan
Charles E. Collins
Bob Dornan
Jack Fellure
Arthur Fletcher
Steve Forbes
Phil Gramm
Alan Keyes
Richard Lugar
Isabell Masters
Jimmy McMillan
Tennie Rogers
Arlen Specter
Morry Taylor
Pete Wilson





Reform Party



Nominee Ross Perot
VP nominee Pat Choate


Candidates Richard Lamm










Other Third party and independent candidates



Green Party

Convention





Nominee
Ralph Nader (campaign)


VP nominee
Winona LaDuke





Libertarian Party

Convention





Nominee
Harry Browne


VP nominee
Jo Jorgensen


Candidates
Irwin Schiff





Natural Law Party



Nominee
John Hagelin


VP nominee
Mike Tompkins





Prohibition Party



Nominee
Earl Dodge


VP nominee
Rachel Bubar Kelly





Socialist Party



Nominee
Mary Cal Hollis


VP nominee
Eric Chester





Socialist Workers Party



Nominee
James Harris





U.S. Taxpayers Party



Nominee
Howard Phillips


VP nominee
Herb Titus





Workers World Party



Nominee
Monica Moorehead


VP nominee
Gloria La Riva





Independents and other candidates



Joan Jett Blakk
Marsha Feinland
Isabell Masters
Steve Michael
Dennis Peron
Diane Beall Templin











Other 1996 elections
House
Senate
Gubernatorial












v
t
e


Recipients of the Charlemagne Prize



1950–1975



1950 Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi
1951 Hendrik Brugmans
1952 Alcide De Gasperi
1953 Jean Monnet
1954 Konrad Adenauer
1955
1956 Winston Churchill
1957 Paul-Henri Spaak
1958 Robert Schuman
1959 George Marshall
1960 Joseph Bech
1961 Walter Hallstein
1962
1963 Edward Heath
1964 Antonio Segni
1965
1966 Jens Otto Krag
1967 Joseph Luns
1968
1969 European Commission
1970 François Seydoux de Clausonne
1971
1972 Roy Jenkins
1973 Salvador de Madariaga
1974
1975





1976–2000



1976 Leo Tindemans
1977 Walter Scheel
1978 Konstantinos Karamanlis
1979 Emilio Colombo
1980
1981 Simone Veil
1982 King Juan Carlos I
1983
1984
1985
1986 People of Luxembourg
1987 Henry Kissinger
1988 François Mitterrand / Helmut Kohl
1989 Brother Roger
1990 Gyula Horn
1991 Václav Havel
1992 Jacques Delors
1993 Felipe González
1994 Gro Harlem Brundtland
1995 Franz Vranitzky
1996 Queen Beatrix
1997 Roman Herzog
1998 Bronisław Geremek
1999 Tony Blair
2000 Bill Clinton





2001–present



2001 György Konrád
2002 Euro
2003 Valéry Giscard d'Estaing
2004 Pat Cox / Pope John Paul II1
2005 Carlo Azeglio Ciampi
2006 Jean-Claude Juncker
2007 Javier Solana
2008 Angela Merkel
2009 Andrea Riccardi
2010 Donald Tusk
2011 Jean-Claude Trichet
2012 Wolfgang Schäuble
2013 Dalia Grybauskaitė
2014 Herman Van Rompuy
2015 Martin Schulz
2016 Pope Francis
2017 Timothy Garton Ash






1 Received extraordinary prize.










v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year



1927–1950



Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)





1951–1975



Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975)





1976–2000



Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wałęsa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)





2001–present



Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly / Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)






 Book










v
t
e


Cabinet of President Bill Clinton (1993–2001)








Cabinet



Secretary of State



Warren M. Christopher (1993–97)
Madeleine Albright (1997–2001)








Secretary of the Treasury



Lloyd Bentsen (1993–94)
Robert Rubin (1995–99)
Larry Summers (1999–2001)





Secretary of Defense



Les Aspin (1993–94)
William J. Perry (1994–97)
William S. Cohen (1997–2001)





Attorney General



Janet Reno (1993–2001)





Secretary of the Interior



Bruce Babbitt (1993–2001)





Secretary of Agriculture



Mike Espy (1993–94)
Dan Glickman (1995–2001)





Secretary of Commerce



Ron Brown (1993–96)
Mickey Kantor (1996–97)
William M. Daley (1997–2000)
Norman Mineta (2000–01)





Secretary of Labor



Robert Reich (1993–97)
Alexis M. Herman (1997–2001)





Secretary of Health
and Human Services



Donna Shalala (1993–2001)





Secretary of Housing
and Urban Development



Henry G. Cisneros (1993–97)
Andrew M. Cuomo (1997–2001)





Secretary of Transportation



Federico Peña (1993–97)
Rodney Slater (1997–2001)





Secretary of Energy



Hazel O'Leary (1993–97)
Federico Peña (1997–98)
Bill Richardson (1998–2001)





Secretary of Education



Richard W. Riley (1993–2001)





Secretary of Veterans Affairs



Jesse Brown (1993–97)
Togo West (1998–2000)






* Acting secretary











Cabinet-level



Vice President



Al Gore (1993–2001)





White House Chief of Staff



Mack McLarty (1993–94)
Leon Panetta (1994–97)
Erskine Bowles (1997–98)
John Podesta (1998–2001)





Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency



Carol M. Browner (1993–2001)





Ambassador to the United Nations



Madeleine Albright (1993–97)
Bill Richardson (1997–98)
Richard C. Holbrooke (1999–2001)





Director of the Office of
Management and Budget



Leon Panetta (1993–94)
Alice Rivlin (1994–96)
Franklin D. Raines (1996–98)
Jack Lew (1998–2001)





Director of National
Drug Control Policy



Lee P. Brown (1993–95)
Barry McCaffrey (1996–2001)





Trade Representative



Mickey Kantor (1993–97)
Charlene Barshefsky (1997–2001)





Director of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency



James L. Witt (1993–2001)*





Director of Central Intelligence



R. James Woolsey Jr. (1993–95)
John M. Deutch (1995–96)
George Tenet (1997–2001)





Chairperson of the
Council of Economic Advisers



Laura Tyson (1993–95)
Joseph Stiglitz (1995–97)
Janet Yellen (1997–99)
Martin Neil Baily (1999–2001)





Administrator of the
Small Business Administration



Philip Lader (1994–97)
Aída M. Álverez (1997–2001)






* took office in 1993, raised to cabinet-rank in 1996













v
t
e


Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album (2000s)






2000
LeVar Burton - The Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr.
2001
Sidney Poitier, Rick Harris, John Runnette (producers) - The Measure of a Man: A Spiritual Autobiography
2002
Quincy Jones, Jeffrey S. Thomas, Steven Strassman (engineers), Elisa Shokoff (producer) - Q: The Autobiography of Quincy Jones
2003
Maya Angelou, Charles B. Potter (producer) - A Song Flung Up to Heaven / Robin Williams, Nathaniel Kunkel (engineer/mixer), Peter Asher (producer) - Live 2002
2004
Al Franken, Paul Ruben (producer) - Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them
2005
Bill Clinton - My Life
2006
Barack Obama - Dreams from My Father
2007
Jimmy Carter - Our Endangered Values: America's Moral Crisis / Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee - With Ossie and Ruby
2008
Barack Obama, Jacob Bronstein (producer) - The Audacity of Hope
2009
Beau Bridges, Cynthia Nixon, Blair Underwood - An Inconvenient Truth by Al Gore









Complete list
(1959 & 1960s)
(1970s)
(1980s)
(1990s)
(2000s)
(2010s)















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 102338519
LCCN: n82029644
ISNI: 0000 0001 2096 7620
GND: 119063395
SELIBR: 173992
SUDOC: 031695582
BNF: cb12375168h (data)
MusicBrainz: a11bd200-7f0b-43a6-b7fe-4ea04929a42b
NLA: 36058788
NDL: 00464673
NKC: jn20000700315
ICCU: IT\ICCU\MILV\094368
BNE: XX1085266
IATH: w6251gqr











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bill_Clinton&oldid=818522509"					Categories: Clinton administration cabinet membersBill Clinton1946 births20th-century American politicians20th-century American writers20th-century Baptists21st-century American politicians21st-century American writers21st-century BaptistsAlumni of University College, OxfordAmbassadors of the United States to HaitiArkansas Attorneys GeneralAmerican autobiographersArkansas DemocratsAmerican gun control advocatesAmerican health activistsAmerican humanitariansArkansas lawyersAmerican male writersAmerican memoiristsAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Irish descentAmerican people of Scotch-Irish descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican political writersAmerican Rhodes ScholarsAmerican saxophonistsAssassination attempt survivorsBaptists from the United StatesCandidates in United States elections, 1980Clinton Foundation peopleCollars of the Order of the White LionDemocratic Party Presidents of the United StatesDemocratic Party state governors of the United StatesDemocratic Party (United States) presidential nomineesDisbarred American lawyersEdmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service alumniFamily of Bill and Hillary ClintonFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesFellows of University College, OxfordGovernors of ArkansasGrammy Award winnersGrand Companions of the Order of LogohuGrand Crosses of the National Order of Honour and MeritHot Springs High School (Arkansas) alumniImpeached Presidents of the United StatesLewinsky scandalLGBT rights activists from the United StatesLiving peoplePeople from Hope, ArkansasPeople from Hot Springs, ArkansasPhi Beta Kappa membersPolitical careers by personPoliticians from Little Rock, ArkansasPresidential Medal of Freedom recipientsPresidents of the United StatesRecipients of St. George's Order of VictoryRecipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st ClassRecipients of the Presidential Medal of Distinction of IsraelRodham familySpouses of New York (state) politiciansSpouses of United States Cabinet membersSpouses of United States SenatorsUnited Nations officialsUnited States presidential candidates, 1992United States presidential candidates, 1996United States presidential electors, 2016University of Arkansas facultyWriters from ArkansasYale Law School alumniDeMolay International Hall of Fame membersHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2017Webarchive template wayback linksPages using citations with accessdate and no URLPages with URL errorsArticles with dead external links from June 2016Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living peopleUse mdy dates from January 2017Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles with DMOZ linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiersGood articlesArticles containing video clips