"Bosnia" and "BiH" redirect here. For other uses, see Bosnia (disambiguation) and BiH (disambiguation).


Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosna i Hercegovina
Босна и Херцеговина







Flag



Coat of arms






Anthem: "Državna himna Bosne i Hercegovine"
(English: "The National Anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina")





Location of  Bosnia and Herzegovina  (green)
in Europe  (dark grey)





Capital
and largest city
Sarajevo[1]
43°52′N 18°25′E﻿ / ﻿43.867°N 18.417°E﻿ / 43.867; 18.417


Official languages
None at federal level


National languages
Bosnian
Croatian
Serbian


Demonym



Bosnian
Herzegovinian





Government
Federal parliamentary
constitutional republic[2]



• High Representative

Valentin Inzkoa



• Chairman of the Presidency

Dragan Čovićb



• Members of the Presidency

Mladen Ivanićc
Bakir Izetbegovićd



• Prime Minister

Denis Zvizdić


Legislature
Parliamentary Assembly



• Upper house

House of Peoples



• Lower house

House of Representatives


Establishment history



• Banate of Bosnia

c. 1154



• Kingdom of Bosnia

c. 1377



• Ottoman conquest

c. 1463



• Austro-Hungarian rule

1878



• Secession from Austria-Hungary

29 October 1918



• Creation of Yugoslavia

4 December 1918



• National Day

25 November 1943



• Independence from SFR Yugoslavia

1 March 1992



• Observed[3]

6 April 1992



• Current constitution

14 December 1995


Area



• Total

51,129 km2 (19,741 sq mi) (125th)



• Water (%)

0.8%


Population



• 2013 census

3,531,159[4]



• Density

68.97/km2 (178.6/sq mi)


GDP (PPP)
2016 estimate



• Total

$42.239 billion[5]



• Per capita

$16,532[5]


GDP (nominal)
2016 estimate



• Total

$14.412 billion[6]



• Per capita

$4,617.75[6]


Gini (2011)
33.8[7]
medium · 18th


HDI (2016)
 0.750[8]
high · 81st


Currency
Convertible mark (BAM)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)



• Summer (DST)

CEST (UTC+2)


Date format
dd. mm. yyyy. (CE)


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+387


ISO 3166 code
BA


Internet TLD
.ba





Not a government member; the High Representative is an international civilian overseer of the Dayton peace agreement with authority to dismiss elected and non-elected officials and enact legislation.
Chair of current presidency (Croat)
Current presidency member (Serb)
Current presidency member (Bosniak)





Bosnia and Herzegovina (/ˈbɒzniə ... ˌhɛərtsəɡoʊˈviːnə, -ˌhɜːrt-, -ɡə-/ ( listen) or /ˌhɜːrtsəˈɡɒvɪnə/;[10][11] abbreviated B&H; Bosnian and Serbian: Bosna i Hercegovina (BiH) / Боснa и Херцеговина (БиХ), Croatian: Bosna i Hercegovina (BiH) pronounced [bôsna i xěrt͡seɡoʋina]), sometimes called Bosnia-Herzegovina, and often known informally as Bosnia, is a country in Southeastern Europe located on the Balkan Peninsula. Sarajevo is the capital and largest city. Bordered by Croatia to the north, and west; Serbia to the east; Montenegro to the southeast; and the Adriatic Sea to the south, with a coastline about 20 kilometres (12 miles) long surrounding the town of Neum. In the central and eastern interior of the country the geography is mountainous, in the northwest it is moderately hilly, and the northeast is predominantly flatland. The inland is a geographically larger region and has a moderate continental climate, with hot summers and cold and snowy winters. The southern tip of the country has a Mediterranean climate and plain topography.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a region that traces permanent human settlement back to the Neolithic age, during and after which it was populated by several Illyrian and Celtic civilizations. Culturally, politically, and socially, the country has a rich history, having been first settled by the Slavic peoples that populate the area today from the 6th through to the 9th centuries. In the 12th century the Banate of Bosnia was established, which evolved into the Kingdom of Bosnia in the 14th century, after which it was annexed into the Ottoman Empire, under whose rule it remained from the mid-15th to the late 19th centuries. The Ottomans brought Islam to the region, and altered much of the cultural and social outlook of the country. This was followed by annexation into the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, which lasted up until World War I. In the interwar period, Bosnia and Herzegovina was part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and after World War II, it was granted full republic status in the newly formed Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the republic proclaimed independence in 1992, which was followed by the Bosnian War, lasting until late 1995.
Today, the country maintains high literacy, life expectancy and education levels and is one of the most frequently visited countries in the region,[12] projected to have the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.[13] Bosnia and Herzegovina is known for its natural environment and cultural heritage inherited from six historical civilizations, its cuisine, winter sports, its eclectic and unique music, architecture and its festivals, some of which are the largest and most prominent of their kind in Southeastern Europe.[14][15] The country is home to three main ethnic groups or, officially, constituent peoples, as specified in the constitution. Bosniaks are the largest group of the three, with Serbs second and Croats third. A native of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of ethnicity, is identified in English as a Bosnian. The terms Herzegovinian and Bosnian are maintained as a regional rather than ethnic distinction, and the region of Herzegovina has no precisely defined borders of its own. Moreover, the country was simply called "Bosnia" until the Austro-Hungarian occupation at the end of the 19th century.[16]
Bosnia and Herzegovina has a bicameral legislature and a three-member Presidency composed of a member of each major ethnic group. However, the central government's power is highly limited, as the country is largely decentralized and comprises two autonomous entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, with a third region, the Brčko District, governed under local government. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is itself complex and consists of 10 cantons. The country is a potential candidate for membership to the European Union and has been a candidate for North Atlantic Treaty Organisation membership since April 2010, when it received a Membership Action Plan at a summit in Tallinn.[17] Additionally, the country has been a member of the Council of Europe since April 2002 and a founding member of the Mediterranean Union upon its establishment in July 2008.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Early history
2.2 Middle Ages
2.3 Ottoman Bosnia (1463–1878)
2.4 Austro-Hungarian rule (1878–1918)
2.5 Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918–1941)
2.6 World War II (1941–45)
2.7 Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992)
2.8 Bosnian War (1992–1995)
2.9 Protests in 2014


3 Geography
4 Politics

4.1 Military
4.2 Foreign relations


5 Demographics

5.1 Ethnic groups
5.2 Religion
5.3 Languages
5.4 Cities


6 Economy

6.1 Transport
6.2 Communications
6.3 Tourism

6.3.1 Tourist attractions




7 Education
8 Culture

8.1 Architecture
8.2 Media
8.3 Literature
8.4 Art
8.5 Music
8.6 Cinema and theatre
8.7 Cuisine
8.8 Sports


9 See also
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links



Etymology
The first preserved widely acknowledged mention of Bosnia is in De Administrando Imperio, a politico-geographical handbook written by the Byzantine emperor Constantine VII in the mid-10th century (between 948 and 952) describing the "small land" (χωρίον in Greek) of "Bosona" (Βοσώνα).[18] The name is believed to have derived from the hydronym of the river Bosna coursing through the Bosnian heartland. According to philologist Anton Mayer the name Bosna could derive from Illyrian *"Bass-an-as"), which would derive from the Proto-Indo-European root "bos" or "bogh"—meaning "the running water".[19] According to English medievalist William Miller the Slavic settlers in Bosnia "adapted the Latin designation [...] Basante, to their own idiom by calling the stream Bosna and themselves Bosniaks [...]".[20]
The name Herzegovina ("herzog's [land]", from German word for "duke")[19] originates from Bosnian magnate Stephen Vukčić Kosača's title, "Herceg (Herzog) of Hum and the Coast" (1448).[21] Hum, formerly Zahumlje, was an early medieval principality that was conquered by the Bosnian Banate in the first half of the 14th century. The region was administered by the Ottomans as the Sanjak of Herzegovina (Hersek) within the Eyalet of Bosnia up until the formation of the short-lived Herzegovina Eyalet in the 1830s, which remerged in the 1850s, after which the entity became commonly known as Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On initial proclamation of independence in 1992, the country's official name was the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina but following the 1995 Dayton Agreement and the new constitution that accompanied it the name was officially changed to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
History
Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Early history




Mogorjelo, ancient Roman suburban Villa Rustica from the 4th century, near Čapljina


Main article: Early history of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia has been inhabited since at latest the Neolithic age. The earliest Neolithic population became known in the Antiquity as the Illyrians. Celtic migrations in the 4th century BC were also notable. Concrete historical evidence for this period is scarce, but overall it appears that the region was populated by a number of different people speaking distinct languages. Conflict between the Illyrians and Romans started in 229 BC, but Rome did not complete its annexation of the region until AD 9. It was precisely in modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina that Rome fought one of the most difficult battles in its history since the Punic Wars, as described by the Roman historian Suetonius.[22] This was the Roman campaign against Illyricum, known as Bellum Batonianum.[23] The conflict arose after an attempt to recruit Illyrians, and a revolt spanned for four years (6–9 AD), after which they were subdued.[24] In the Roman period, Latin-speaking settlers from the entire Roman Empire settled among the Illyrians, and Roman soldiers were encouraged to retire in the region.[19] Following the split of the Empire between 337 and 395 AD, Dalmatia and Pannonia became parts of the Western Roman Empire. Some claim that the region was conquered by the Ostrogoths in 455 AD. It subsequently changed hands between the Alans and the Huns. By the 6th century, Emperor Justinian had reconquered the area for the Byzantine Empire. Slavs overwhelmed the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries. Illyrian cultural traits were adopted by the South Slavs, as evidenced in certain customs and traditions, placenames, etc.[25] Timothy Gregory explains:


"It is now generally agreed that the people who lived in the Balkans after the Slavic "invasions" were probably for the most part the same as those who had lived there earlier, although the creation of new political groups and arrival of small numbers of immigrants caused people to look at themselves as distinct from their neighbours, including the Byzantines".

T E Gregory, A History of Byzantium. Wiley- Blackwell, 2010. Pg 169
Middle Ages
Main article: Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Middle Ages
The Early Slavs raided the Western Balkans, including Bosnia, in the 6th and early 7th century (amid the Migration Period), and were composed of small tribal units drawn from a single Slavic confederation known to the Byzantines as the Sclaveni (whilst the related Antes, roughly speaking, colonized the eastern portions of the Balkans).[26][27] Tribes recorded by the ethnonyms of "Serb" and "Croat" are described as a second, latter, migration of different people during the second quarter of the 7th century who do not seem to have been particularly numerous;[26][28] these early "Serb" and "Croat" tribes, whose exact identity is subject to scholarly debate,[29] came to predominate over the Slavs in the neighbouring regions. The bulk of Bosnia proper, however, appears to have been a territory between Serb and Croat rule and is not enumerated as one of the regions settled by those tribes.[28]
Bosnia is first mentioned as a land (horion Bosona) in Byzantine Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus' De Administrando Imperio in the mid 10th century, at the end of a chapter (Chap. 32) entitled Of the Serbs and the country in which they now dwell.[30] This has been scholarly interpreted in several ways and used especially by the Serb national ideologists to prove Bosnia as originally a "Serb" land. Other scholars have asserted the inclusion of Bosnia into Chapter 32 to merely be the result of Serbian Grand Duke Časlav's temporary rule over Bosnia at the time, while also pointing out that Porphyrogenitus does not say anywhere explicitly that Bosnia is a "Serb land".[31] In fact, the very translation of the critical sentence where the word Bosona (Bosnia) appears is subject to varying interpretation.[30]
In time, Bosnia formed a unit under its own ruler, who called himself Bosnian.[28] Bosnia, along with other territories, became part of Duklja in the 11th century, although it retained its own nobility and institutions.[32]




Bosnia in the Middle Ages spanning the Banate of Bosnia and the succeeding Kingdom of Bosnia.


In the High Middle Ages political circumstance led to the area being contested between the Kingdom of Hungary and the Byzantine Empire. Following another shift of power between the two in the early 12th century, Bosnia found itself outside the control of both and emerged as the Banate of Bosnia (under the rule of local bans).[19][33] The first Bosnian ban known by name was Ban Borić.[34] The second was Ban Kulin whose rule marked the start of a controversy involving the Bosnian Church – considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church. In response to Hungarian attempts to use church politics regarding the issue as a way to reclaim sovereignty over Bosnia, Kulin held a council of local church leaders to renounce the heresy and embraced Catholicism in 1203. Despite this, Hungarian ambitions remained unchanged long after Kulin's death in 1204, waning only after an unsuccessful invasion in 1254. During this time the population was called Dobri Bošnjani ("Good Bosnians").[35][36] The names Serb and Croat, though occasionally appearing in peripheral areas, were not used in Bosnia proper.[37]
Bosnian history from then until the early 14th century was marked by a power struggle between the Šubić and Kotromanić families. This conflict came to an end in 1322, when Stephen II Kotromanić became Ban. By the time of his death in 1353, he was successful in annexing territories to the north and west, as well as Zahumlje and parts of Dalmatia. He was succeeded by his ambitious nephew Tvrtko who, following a prolonged struggle with nobility and inter-family strife, gained full control of the country in 1367. By the year 1377, Bosnia was elevated into a kingdom with the coronation of Tvrtko as the first Bosnian King in Mile near Visoko in the Bosnian heartland.[38][39][40]
Following his death in 1391 however, Bosnia fell into a long period of decline. The Ottoman Empire had already started its conquest of Europe and posed a major threat to the Balkans throughout the first half of the 15th century. Finally, after decades of political and social instability, the Kingdom of Bosnia ceased to exist in 1463 after its conquest by the Ottoman Empire.
Ottoman Bosnia (1463–1878)
Main articles: Ottoman conquest of Bosnia and Ottoman Bosnia




Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque in Sarajevo dating from 1531


The Ottoman conquest of Bosnia marked a new era in the country's history and introduced drastic changes in the political and cultural landscape. The Ottomans allowed for the preservation of Bosnia's identity by incorporating it as an integral province of the Ottoman Empire with its historical name and territorial integrity — a unique case among subjugated states in the Balkans.[41]
Within Bosnia the Ottomans introduced a number of key changes in the territory's socio-political administration; including a new landholding system, a reorganization of administrative units, and a complex system of social differentiation by class and religious affiliation.[19]
The four centuries of Ottoman rule also had a drastic impact on Bosnia's population make-up, which changed several times as a result of the empire's conquests, frequent wars with European powers, forced and economic migrations, and epidemics. A native Slavic-speaking Muslim community emerged and eventually became the largest of the ethno-religious groups due to lack of strong Christian church organizations and continuous rivalry between the Orthodox and Catholic churches, while the indigenous Bosnian Church disappeared altogether (ostensibly by conversion of its members to Islam). The Ottomans referred to them as kristianlar while the Orthodox and Catholics were called gebir or kafir, meaning "unbeliever".[42] The Bosnian Franciscans (and the Catholic population as a whole) were protected by official imperial decrees and in accordance and full extent of Ottoman laws, however in effect, these often merely affected arbitrary rule and behavior of powerful local elite.[19]
As the Ottoman Empire continued their rule in the Balkans (Rumelia), Bosnia was somewhat relieved of the pressures of being a frontier province, and experienced a period of general welfare. A number of cities, such as Sarajevo and Mostar, were established and grew into regional centers of trade and urban culture and were then visited by Ottoman traveler Evliya Çelebi in 1648. Within these cities, various Ottoman Sultans financed the construction of many works of Bosnian architecture such as the country's first library in Sarajevo, madrassas, a school of Sufi philosophy, and a clock tower (Sahat Kula), bridges such as the Stari Most, the Tsar's Mosque and the Gazi Husrev-beg's Mosque.
Furthermore, several Bosnian Muslims played influential roles in the Ottoman Empire's cultural and political history during this time.[41] Bosnian recruits formed a large component of the Ottoman ranks in the battles of Mohács and Krbava field, while numerous other Bosnians rose through the ranks of the Ottoman military to occupy the highest positions of power in the Empire, including admirals such as Matrakçı Nasuh; generals such as Isa-Beg Isaković, Gazi Husrev-beg and Hasan Predojević and Sarı Süleyman Paşa; administrators such as Ferhat-paša Sokolović and Osman Gradaščević; and Grand Viziers such as the influential Mehmed Paša Sokolović and Damad Ibrahim Pasha. Some Bosnians emerged as Sufi mystics, scholars such as Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi Bosnevi, Ali Džabič; and poets in the Turkish, Albanian, Arabic, and Persian languages.[43]




Austro-Hungarian troops enter Sarajevo, 1878


However, by the late 17th century the Empire's military misfortunes caught up with the country, and the conclusion of the Great Turkish War with the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 once again made Bosnia the Empire's westernmost province. The following century was marked by further military failures, numerous revolts within Bosnia, and several outbursts of plague. The Porte's efforts at modernizing the Ottoman state were met with distrust growing to hostility in Bosnia, where local aristocrats stood to lose much through the proposed reforms.
This, combined with frustrations over territorial, political concessions in the north-east, and the plight of Slavic Muslim refugees arriving from the Sanjak of Smederevo into Bosnia Eyalet, culminated in a partially unsuccessful revolt by Husein Gradaščević, who endorsed a multicultural Bosnia Eyalet autonomous from the authoritarian rule of the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II, who persecuted, executed and abolished the Janissaries and reduced the role of autonomous Pashas in Rumelia. Mahmud II sent his Grand Vizier to subdue Bosnia Eyalet and succeeded only with the reluctant assistance of Ali-paša Rizvanbegović.[43] Related rebellions were extinguished by 1850, but the situation continued to deteriorate. Later agrarian unrest eventually sparked the Herzegovinian rebellion, a widespread peasant uprising, in 1875. The conflict rapidly spread and came to involve several Balkan states and Great Powers, a situation that eventually led to the Congress of Berlin and the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.[19]
Austro-Hungarian rule (1878–1918)
Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1878–1918)




Dome and towers on the Academy of Arts in Sarajevo, designed by the Czech-born architect Karel Pařík


At the Congress of Berlin in 1878, the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Andrássy obtained the occupation and administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and he also obtained the right to station garrisons in the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which remained under Ottoman administration. The Sanjak preserved the separation of Serbia and Montenegro, and the Austro-Hungarian garrisons there would open the way for a dash to Salonika that "would bring the western half of the Balkans under permanent Austrian influence."[44] "High [Austro-Hungarian] military authorities desired [an...] immediate major expedition with Salonika as its objective."[45]

On 28 September 1878, the Finance Minister, Koloman von Zell, threatened to resign if the army, backed by the Archduke Albert, were allowed to advance to Salonika. In the session of the Hungarian Parliament of 5 November 1878 the Opposition proposed that the Foreign Minister should be impeached for violating the constitution with his policy during the Near East Crisis and by the occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The motion lost 179 to 95. The gravest accusations were raised by the opposition rank and file against Andrassy.[45]

Although an Austro-Hungarian side quickly came to an agreement with Bosnians, tensions remained in certain parts of the country (particularly the south) and a mass emigration of predominantly Slavic dissidents occurred.[19] However, a state of relative stability was reached soon enough and Austro-Hungarian authorities were able to embark on a number of social and administrative reforms they intended would make Bosnia and Herzegovina into a "model" colony.




Sarajevo Tramway in 1901


With the aim of establishing the province as a stable political model that would help dissipate rising South Slav nationalism, Habsburg rule did much to codify laws, to introduce new political practices, and to provide for modernisation. The Austro-Hungarian Empire built the three Roman Catholic churches in Sarajevo.
In 1881, within three years of formal occupation of Bosnia Herzegovina, Austria-Hungary obtained German and the more important Russian approval of the annexation of these provinces at a time that suited Vienna. This mandate was formally ratified by the Dreikaiserbund (Three Emperor's Treaty) on 18 June of that year.[46] Upon the accession of Czar Nicholas II, however, the Russians reneged on the agreement, asserting in 1897 the need for special scrutiny of the Bosnian Annexation issue at an unspecified future date.[47]
External matters began to affect the Bosnian Protectorate, however, and its relationship with Austria-Hungary. A bloody coup occurred in Serbia, on 10 June 1903, which brought a radical anti-Austrian government into power in Belgrade.[48] Also, the revolt in the Ottoman Empire in 1908, raised concerns that the Istanbul government might seek the outright return of Bosnia Herzegovina. These factors caused the Austrian-Hungarian government to seek a permanent resolution of the Bosnian question sooner, rather than later.




National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina was established in 1888


On 2 July 1908, in response to the pressing of the Austrian-Hungarian claim, the Russian Imperial Foreign Minister Alexander Izvolsky offered to support the Bosnian annexation in return for Vienna's support for Russia's bid for naval access through the Dardanelles Straits into the Mediterranean.[49] With the Russians being, at least, provisionally willing to keep their word over Bosnia Herzegovina for the first time in 11 years, Austria-Hungary waited and then published the annexation proclamation on 6 October 1908. The international furor over the annexation announcement caused Izvolsky to drop the Dardanelles Straits question, altogether, in an effort to obtain a European conference over the Bosnian Annexation.[50] This conference never materialized and without British or French support, the Russians and their client state, Serbia, were compelled to accept the Austrian-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia Herzegovina in March 1909.




Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg in Sarajevo, illustrated in the Italian newspaper Domenica del Corriere, 12 July 1914 by Achille Beltrame


Political tensions culminated on 28 June 1914, when a Yugoslav nationalist youth named Gavrilo Princip, a member of the secret Serbian-supported movement, Young Bosnia, assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, in Sarajevo—an event that was the spark that set off World War I. At the end of the war, the Bosniaks had lost more men per capita than any other ethnic group in the Habsburg Empire whilst serving in the Bosnian-Herzegovinian Infantry (known as Bosniaken) of the Austro-Hungarian Army.[51] Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole managed to escape the conflict relatively unscathed.[41]
The Austro-Hungarian authorities established an auxiliary militia known as the Schutzkorps with a moot role in the empire's policy of anti-Serb repression.[52] Schutzkorps, predominantly recruited among the Muslim (Bosniak) population, were tasked with hunting down rebel Serbs (the Chetniks and Komiti)[53] and became known for their persecution of Serbs particularly in Serb populated areas of eastern Bosnia, where they partly retaliated against Serbian Chetniks who in fall 1914 had carried out attacks against the Muslim population in the area.[54][55] The proceedings of the Austro-Hungarian authorities led to around 5,500 citizens of Serb ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina being arrested, and between 700 and 2,200 died in prison while 460 were executed.[53] Around 5,200 Serb families were forcibly expelled from Bosnia and Herzegovina.[53]
Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918–1941)
Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1918–1941)
Following World War I, Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the South Slav Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (soon renamed Yugoslavia). Political life in Bosnia at this time was marked by two major trends: social and economic unrest over property redistribution, and formation of several political parties that frequently changed coalitions and alliances with parties in other Yugoslav regions.[41] The dominant ideological conflict of the Yugoslav state, between Croatian regionalism and Serbian centralization, was approached differently by Bosnia's major ethnic groups and was dependent on the overall political atmosphere.[19] The political reforms brought about in the newly established Yugoslavian kingdom saw few benefits for the Bosniaks; according to the 1910 final census of land ownership and population according to religious affiliation conducted in Austro-Hungary, Muslims (Bosniaks) owned 91.1%, Orthodox Serbians owned 6.0%, Croatian Catholics owned 2.6% and others, 0.3% of the property. Following the reforms Bosnian Muslims had a total of 1,175,305 hectares of agricultural and forest land taken away from them.[56]
Although the initial split of the country into 33 oblasts erased the presence of traditional geographic entities from the map, the efforts of Bosnian politicians such as Mehmed Spaho ensured that the six oblasts carved up from Bosnia and Herzegovina corresponded to the six sanjaks from Ottoman times and, thus, matched the country's traditional boundary as a whole.[19]
The establishment of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929, however, brought the redrawing of administrative regions into banates or banovinas that purposely avoided all historical and ethnic lines, removing any trace of a Bosnian entity.[19] Serbo-Croat tensions over the structuring of the Yugoslav state continued, with the concept of a separate Bosnian division receiving little or no consideration.
The Cvetković-Maček Agreement that created the Croatian banate in 1939 encouraged what was essentially a partition of Bosnia between Croatia and Serbia.[43] However the rising threat of Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany forced Yugoslav politicians to shift their attention. Following a period that saw attempts at appeasement, the signing of the Tripartite Treaty, and a coup d'état, Yugoslavia was finally invaded by Germany on 6 April 1941.[19]
World War II (1941–45)
Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1941–1945)




The railway bridge over the Neretva river in Jablanica, twice destroyed during the Battle of the Neretva


Once the kingdom of Yugoslavia was conquered by Nazi forces in World War II, all of Bosnia was ceded to the Nazi puppet regime, the Independent State of Croatia (NDH). The NDH leaders embarked on a campaign of extermination of Serbs, Jews, Romani, Croats who opposed the regime, communists and large numbers of Josip Broz Tito's Partisans by setting up a number of death camps.[57] An estimated 209,000 Serbs and Montenegrins were killed on the territory of Bosnia-Herzegovina during the war.[58][dubious – discuss] The Ustaše recognized both Roman Catholicism and Islam as the national religions, but held the position that Eastern Orthodoxy, as a symbol of Serbian identity, was their greatest foe.[59] Although Croats were by far the largest ethnic group to constitute the Ustaše, the Vice President of the NDH and leader of the Yugoslav Muslim Organization Džafer Kulenović was a Muslim, and Muslims (Bosniaks) in total constituted nearly 12% of the Ustaše military and civil service authority.[60]
Many Serbs themselves took up arms and joined the Chetniks, a Serb nationalist movement with the aim of establishing an ethnically homogeneous 'Greater Serbian' state.[61] The Chetniks were responsible for widespread persecution and murder of non-Serbs and communist sympathizers, with the Muslim population of Bosnia, Herzegovina and Sandžak being a primary target.[62] Once captured, Muslim villagers were systematically massacred by the Chetniks.[63] Of the 75,000 Muslims who lost their lives in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war,[58] approximately 30,000 (mostly civilians) were killed by the Chetniks.[64] Later, a number of Muslims served in Nazi Waffen-SS units.[65] Between 64,000 and 79,000 Bosnian Croats also perished from April 1941 to May 1945.[58] Of these, about 18,000 were killed by the Chetniks.[64]




Eternal flame memorial to the military and civilian World War II victims


On 12 October 1941, a group of 108 notable Muslim citizens of Sarajevo signed the Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims by which they condemned the persecution of Serbs organized by the Ustaše, made distinction between Muslims who participated in such persecutions and whole Muslim population, presented information about the persecutions of Muslims by Serbs and requested security for all citizens of the country, regardless of their identity.[66]
Starting in 1941, Yugoslav communists under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito organized their own multi-ethnic resistance group, the partisans, who fought against both Axis and Chetnik forces. On 29 November 1943 the Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia with Tito at its helm held a founding conference in Jajce where Bosnia and Herzegovina was reestablished as a republic within the Yugoslavian federation in its Habsburg borders.
Military success eventually prompted the Allies to support the Partisans, but Tito declined their offer to help and relied on his own forces instead. All the major military offensives by the antifascist movement of Yugoslavia against Nazis and their local supporters were conducted in Bosnia-Herzegovina and its peoples bore the brunt of fighting. More than 300,000 people died in Bosnia and Herzegovina in World War II.[67] At the end of the war the establishment of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with the constitution of 1946, officially made Bosnia and Herzegovina one of six constituent republics in the new state.[19]
Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992)
Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1945–1992)
See also: Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina




Bosnia and Herzegovina's flag while in the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia


Due to its central geographic position within the Yugoslavian federation, post-war Bosnia was selected as a base for the development of the military defense industry. This contributed to a large concentration of arms and military personnel in Bosnia; a significant factor in the war that followed the break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s.[19] However, Bosnia's existence within Yugoslavia, for the large part, was a peaceful and very prosperous country, with high employment, a strong industrial and export oriented economy, good education system and social and medical security for every citizen of S. R. Bosnia and Herzegovina. Several international corporations operated in Bosnia— Volkswagen (car factory in Sarajevo, from 1972), Coca-Cola (from 1975), SKF Sweden (from 1967), Marlboro, (a tobacco factory in Sarajevo), and Holiday Inn hotels. Sarajevo was the site of the 1984 Winter Olympics.
During the 1950s and 1960s Bosnia was a political backwater of the Republic of Yugoslavia. In the 1970s a strong Bosnian political elite arose, fueled in part by Tito's leadership in the Non-Aligned Movement and Bosnians serving in Yugoslavia's diplomatic corps. While working within the Socialist system, politicians such as Džemal Bijedić, Branko Mikulić and Hamdija Pozderac reinforced and protected the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.[68] Their efforts proved key during the turbulent period following Tito's death in 1980, and are today considered some of the early steps towards Bosnian independence. However, the republic did not escape the increasingly nationalistic climate of the time. With the fall of the Soviet Union and the start of the break-up of Yugoslavia, doctrine of tolerance began to lose its potency, creating an opportunity for nationalist elements in the society to spread their influence.[citation needed]
Bosnian War (1992–1995)
Main article: Bosnian War
See also: Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina




The Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina burns after being struck by tank fire during the Siege of Sarajevo, 1992






Dissolution process of SFRJ


On 18 November 1990, multi-party parliamentary elections were held throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. A second round followed on 25 November, resulting in a national assembly where communist power was replaced by a coalition of three ethnically-based parties.[69] Following Slovenia and Croatia's declarations of independence from Yugoslavia, a significant split developed among the residents of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue of whether to remain within Yugoslavia (overwhelmingly favored by Serbs) or seek independence (overwhelmingly favored by Bosniaks and Croats).[citation needed]
The Serb members of parliament, consisting mainly of the Serb Democratic Party members, abandoned the central parliament in Sarajevo, and formed the Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 24 October 1991, which marked the end of the tri-ethnic coalition that governed after the elections in 1990. This Assembly established the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992, which was renamed Republika Srpska in August 1992. On 18 November 1991, the party branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the ruling party in the Republic of Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), proclaimed the existence of the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia, with the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) as its military branch.[70] It went unrecognized by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which declared it illegal.[71][72]
A declaration of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15 October 1991 was followed by a referendum for independence on 29 February/1 March 1992, which was boycotted by the great majority of Serbs. The turnout in the independence referendum was 63.4 percent and 99.7 percent of voters voted for independence.[73] Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence on 3 March 1992 and received international recognition the following month on 6 April 1992.[74] The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was subsequently admitted as a member state of the United Nations on 22 May 1992.[75]
Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević and Croatian leader Franjo Tuđman are believed to have agreed on a partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1991, with the aim of establishing Greater Serbia and Greater Croatia.[76] Following Bosnia and Herzegovina's declaration of independence, Bosnian Serb militias mobilized in different parts of the country. Government forces were poorly equipped and unprepared for the war.[77] International recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased diplomatic pressure for the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) to withdraw from the republic's territory, which they officially did in June 1992. The Bosnian Serb members of the JNA simply changed insignia, formed the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS), and continued fighting. Armed and equipped from JNA stockpiles in Bosnia, supported by volunteers and various paramilitary forces from Serbia, and receiving extensive humanitarian, logistical and financial support from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Republika Srpska's offensives in 1992 managed to place much of the country under its control.[19] The Bosnian Serb advance was accompanied by the ethnic cleansing of Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats from VRS-controlled areas. This was accompanied by the establishment of concentration camps, in which inmates were subjected to violence and abuse, including rape.[78] The ethnic cleansing culminated in the Srebrenica massacre of more than 8,000 Bosniak men and boys in July 1995, which was ruled to have been a genocide by the ICTY.[79] Bosniak and Bosnian Croat forces also committed war crimes against civilians from different ethnic groups, though on a smaller scale.[80][81][82][83] Most of the Bosniak and Croat atrocities were committed during the Bosniak-Croat war, a sub-conflict of the Bosnian War that pitted the ARBiH against the HVO. The Bosniak-Croat conflict ended in March 1994, with the signing of the Washington Agreement, leading to the creation of a joint Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which amalgamated HVO-held territory with that held by the ARBiH.[citation needed]




Bosnia and Herzegovina after the Dayton Agreement


Following the Srebrenica massacre, NATO launched a bombing campaign against Republika Srpska in August 1995. The bombing, together with a joint HV/HVO/ARBiH ground offensive in western Bosnia, convinced the Bosnian Serb leadership to consider a negotiated settlement, which manifested itself in the Dayton Agreement of December 1995. The agreement brought an end to active combat and roughly established the basic political structure of the present-day state. A NATO-led peacekeeping force was immediately dispatched to the country to enforce the agreement. An estimated 100,000 people were killed in the war, about two-thirds of whom were Bosniak.[84] An additional 2.2 million citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina of all ethnicities were displaced.[85]
According to a number of International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) judgements, the conflict involved Bosnia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (subsequently Serbia and Montenegro)[86] as well as Croatia.[87] Dozens of Bosnian Serb officials and soldiers have been convicted for their role in war crimes and crimes against humanity during the conflict, as well as for the genocide in Srebrenica. High-ranking Croat and Bosniak officials have also been convicted or indicted for war crimes.[88] The remains of victims are still being unearthed two decades later.[89] After the war, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina brought a lawsuit against Serbia before the International Court of Justice (ICJ), accusing the country of genocide. In 2007, the ICJ exonerated Serbia of direct responsibility for the genocide committed by Bosnian Serb forces in Srebrenica, but concluded that the country had not done enough to prevent the massacre.[90]
Protests in 2014
Main article: 2014 riots in Bosnia and Herzegovina




Tuzla government building burning after anti-government clashes on 7 February 2014


On 4 February 2014, the protests against the government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the country's two entities, dubbed the Bosnian Spring, the name being taken from the Arab Spring, began in the northern town of Tuzla. Workers from several factories that had been privatised and had gone bankrupt united to demand action over jobs, and unpaid salaries and pensions.[91] Soon protests spread to the rest of the Federation, with violent clashes reported in close to 20 towns, the biggest of which were Sarajevo, Zenica, Mostar, Bihać, Brčko and Tuzla.[92] The Bosnian news media reported that hundreds of people had been injured during the protests, including dozens of police officers, with bursts of violence in Sarajevo, in the northern city of Tuzla, in Mostar in the south, and in Zenica in central Bosnia. The same level of unrest or activism did not occur in the Republika Srpska, but hundreds of people also gathered in support of protests in the town of Banja Luka against its separate government.[93][94][95]
The protests marked the largest outbreak of public anger over high unemployment and two decades of political inertia in the country since the end of the Bosnian War in 1995.[96]
Geography
Main article: Geography of Bosnia and Herzegovina
See also: List of mountains in Bosnia and Herzegovina, List of lakes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and List of rivers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia is located in the western Balkans, bordering Croatia (932 km or 579 mi) to the north and west, Serbia (302 km or 188 mi) to the east, and Montenegro (225 km or 140 mi) to the southeast. It has a coastline about 20 kilometres (12 miles) long surrounding the city of Neum.[97][98] It lies between latitudes 42° and 46° N, and longitudes 15° and 20° E.




Topographic map of Bosnia and Herzegovina



Bosna river, Ilidža



The country's name comes from the two regions Bosnia and Herzegovina, separated by a vaguely defined border. Bosnia occupies the northern areas, roughly four-fifths of the entire country—and Herzegovina occupies the rest of the southern part of the country.
The country is mostly mountainous, encompassing the central Dinaric Alps. The northeastern parts reach into the Pannonian Plain, while in the south it borders the Adriatic. The Dinaric Alps generally run in a southeast-northwest direction, and get higher towards the south. The highest point of the country is the peak of Maglić at 2,386 metres (7,828.1 feet), on the Montenegrin border. Major mountains include Kozara, Grmeč, Vlašić, Čvrsnica, Prenj, Romanija, Jahorina, Bjelašnica and Treskavica.
Overall, close to 50% of Bosnia and Herzegovina is forested. Most forest areas are in the centre, east and west parts of Bosnia. Herzegovina has drier Mediterranean climate, with dominant karst topography. Northern Bosnia (Posavina) contains very fertile agricultural land along the River Sava and the corresponding area is heavily farmed. This farmland is a part of the Pannonian Plain stretching into neighboring Croatia and Serbia. The country has only 20 kilometres (12 miles) of coastline,[97][99] around the town of Neum in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton. Although the city is surrounded by Croatian peninsulas, by international law, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a right of passage to the outer sea.
Sarajevo is the capital[1] and largest city.[2] Other major cities are Banja Luka in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Bijeljina and Tuzla in the northeast, Zenica and Doboj in the central part of Bosnia and Mostar, the largest city in Herzegovina.
There are seven major rivers in Bosnia and Herzegovina:[100]

The Sava is the largest river of the country, and forms its northern natural border with Croatia. It drains 76%[100] of the country's territory into the Danube and then the Black Sea. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR).
The Una, Sana and Vrbas are right tributaries of Sava river. They are located in the northwestern region of Bosanska Krajina.
The Bosna river gave its name to the country, and is the longest river fully contained within it. It stretches through central Bosnia, from its source near Sarajevo to Sava in the north.
The Drina flows through the eastern part of Bosnia, and for the most part it forms a natural border with Serbia.
The Neretva is the major river of Herzegovina and the only major river that flows south, into the Adriatic Sea.

Phytogeographically, Bosnia and Herzegovina belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region and Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.





View towards Neum, Bosnia and Herzegovina's 20 km (12 mi) of coastline access to the Adriatic Sea, summer 2010



Politics






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main articles: Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina




Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH); Republika Srpska (RS); and Brčko District (BD).


Bosnia and Herzegovina is a liberal democracy. It has several levels of political structuring, according to the Dayton accord. The most important of these levels is the division of the country into two entities: Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina covers 51% of Bosnia and Herzegovina's total area, while Republika Srpska covers 49%. The entities, based largely on the territories held by the two warring sides at the time, were formally established by the Dayton peace agreement in 1995 because of the tremendous changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina's ethnic structure. Since 1996, the power of the entities relative to the State government has decreased significantly. Nonetheless, entities still have numerous powers to themselves. The Brčko District in the north of the country was created in 2000, out of land from both entities. It officially belongs to both, but is governed by neither, and functions under a decentralized system of local government. For election purposes, Brčko District voters can choose to participate in either the Federation or Republika Srpska elections. The Brčko District has been praised for maintaining a multiethnic population and a level of prosperity significantly above the national average.[101]




Bosnia and Herzegovina's government building in Sarajevo



The Presidency Building in central Sarajevo



The third level of Bosnia and Herzegovina's political subdivision is manifested in cantons. They are unique to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina entity, which consists of ten of them. All of them have their own cantonal government, which is under the law of the Federation as a whole. Some cantons are ethnically mixed and have special laws implemented to ensure the equality of all constituent people.
The fourth level of political division in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the municipalities. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is divided in 74 municipalities, and Republika Srpska in 63. Municipalities also have their own local government, and are typically based on the most significant city or place in their territory. As such, many municipalities have a long tradition and history with their present boundaries. Some others, however, were only created following the recent war after traditional municipalities were split by the Inter-Entity Boundary Line. Each canton in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of several municipalities, which are divided into local communities.
Besides entities, cantons, and municipalities, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has four "official" cities. These are: Banja Luka, Mostar, Sarajevo, and East Sarajevo. The territory and government of the cities of Banja Luka and Mostar corresponds to the municipalities of the same name, while the cities of Sarajevo and East Sarajevo officially consist of several municipalities. Cities have their own city government whose power is in between that of the municipalities and cantons (or the entity, in the case of Republika Srpska).
As a result of the Dayton Accords, the civilian peace implementation is supervised by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina selected by the Peace Implementation Council. The High Representative has many governmental and legislative powers, including the dismissal of elected and non-elected officials. More recently, several central institutions have been established (such as defense ministry, security ministry, state court, indirect taxation service and so on) in the process of transferring part of the jurisdiction from the entities to the state.
The representation of the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is by elites who represent the country's three major groups, with each having a guaranteed share of power.
The Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina rotates among three members (Bosniak, Serb, Croat), each elected as the Chair for an eight-month term within their four-year term as a member. The three members of the Presidency are elected directly by the people with Federation voters voting for the Bosniak and the Croat, and the Republika Srpska voters for the Serb.
The Chair of the Council of Ministers is nominated by the Presidency and approved by the House of Representatives. He or she is then responsible for appointing a Foreign Minister, Minister of Foreign Trade, and others as appropriate.
The Parliamentary Assembly is the lawmaking body in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It consists of two houses: the House of Peoples and the House of Representatives. The House of Peoples has 15 delegates chosen by parliaments of the entities, two-thirds of which come from the Federation (5 Croat and 5 Bosniaks) and one-third from the Republika Srpska (5 Serbs). The House of Representatives is composed of 42 Members elected by the people under a form of proportional representation (PR), two-thirds elected from the Federation and one-third elected from the Republika Srpska.
The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the supreme, final arbiter of legal matters. It is composed of nine members: four members are selected by the House of Representatives of the Federation, two by the Assembly of the Republika Srpska, and three by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after consultation with the Presidency, but cannot be Bosnian citizens.
However, the highest political authority in the country is the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the chief executive officer for the international civilian presence in the country and is selected by the European Union. Since 1995, the High Representative has been able to bypass the elected parliamentary assembly, and since 1997 has been able to remove elected officials. The methods selected by the High Representative have been criticized as undemocratic.[102] International supervision is to end when the country is deemed politically and democratically stable and self-sustaining.
Military
The Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina were unified into a single entity in 2005, with the merger of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Army of Republika Srpska, which had defended their respective regions. The Ministry of Defense was founded in 2004.
The Bosnian military consists of the Bosnian Ground Forces and Air Force and Air Defense. The Ground Forces number 14,725 active and 7,000 reserve personnel. They are armed with a mix of American, Yugoslavian, Soviet, and European-made weaponry, vehicles, and military equipment. The Air Force and Air Defense Forces have 3,000 personnel and about 62 aircraft. The Air Defense Forces operate MANPAD hand-held missiles, surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries, anti-aircraft cannons, and radar. The Army has recently adopted remodeled MARPAT uniforms, used by Bosnian soldiers serving with ISAF in Afghanistan. A domestic production program is now underway to ensure that army units are equipped with the correct ammunition.
Beginning in 2007, the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina undertook the army's first ever international assistance mission, enlisting the military to serve with ISAF peace missions to Afghanistan, Iraq and the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2007. Five officers, acting as officers/advisors, served in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 45 soldiers, mostly acting as base security and medical assistants, served in Afghanistan. 85 Bosnian soldiers served as base security in Iraq, occasionally conducting infantry patrols there as well. All three deployed groups have been commended by their respective international forces as well as the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international assistance operations are still ongoing.
The Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence Brigade of Bosnia and Herzegovina was formed when elements of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska Air Force were merged in 2006. The Air Force has seen improvements in the last few years with added funds for aircraft repairs and improved cooperation with the Ground Forces as well as to the citizens of the country. The Ministry of Defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently pursuing the acquisition of new aircraft including helicopters and perhaps even fighter jets.[103]
Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina
See also: Accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union
EU integration is one of the main political objectives of Bosnia and Herzegovina; it initiated the Stabilisation and Association Process in 2007. Countries participating in the SAP have been offered the possibility to become, once they fulfill the necessary conditions, Member States of the EU. Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore a potential candidate country for EU accession.[104] The implementation of the Dayton Accords of 1995 has focused the efforts of policymakers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international community, on regional stabilization in the countries-successors of the former Yugoslavia. Within Bosnia and Herzegovina, relations with its neighbors of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro have been fairly stable since the signing of the Dayton Agreement in 1995.
On 23 April 2010, Bosnia and Herzegovina received the Membership Action Plan from NATO, which is the last step before full membership in the alliance. Full membership was expected in 2014 or 2015, depending on the progress of reforms.
They are also a member of the Group of 77.
Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Demographic history of Bosnia and Herzegovina
According to the 1991 census, Bosnia and Herzegovina had a population of 4,377,000, while the 1996 UNHCR unofficial census showed a decrease to 3,920,000.[citation needed] Large population migrations during the Yugoslav wars in the 1990s have caused demographic shifts in the country. Between 1991 and 2013, political disagreements made it impossible to organize a census. A census had been planned for 2011,[105] and then for 2012,[106] but was delayed until October 2013. The 2013 census found a total population of 3,791,622 people in 1.16 million households; 585,411 fewer people than the 1991 census.[107]
Ethnic groups
Main article: Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina




Population density in Bosnia and Herzegovina by municipalities, early data from the 2013 census


Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to three ethnic "constituent peoples", who are Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats, plus a number of smaller groups including Jews and Roma.[108] According to data from 2013 census published by the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniaks constitute 50.11% of the population, Serbs 30.78%, Croats 15.43%, and others form 2.73%, with the remaining respondents not declaring their ethnicity or not answering.[9] The census results are contested by the Republika Srpska statistical office and by Bosnian Serb politicians.[109] The dispute over the census concerns the inclusion of non-permanent Bosnian residents in the figures, which Republika Srpska officials oppose.[110] The European Union's statistics office, Eurostat, concluded in May 2016 that the census methodology used by the Bosnian statistical agency is in line with international recommendations.[111]
Religion
Main article: Religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina




A Roman Catholic church, a Serbian Orthodox church and a mosque, in Bosanska Krupa






Religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina (2013)


religion


percent



Islam

 

51%


Serbian Orthodoxy

 

31%


Catholicism

 

15%


Others/none/not stated

 

3%




According to the 2013 census, Islam is the majority faith in Bosnia and Herzegovina, making up 51% of the population. 46% of the population identify as Christian; of these, the Serbian Orthodox Church makes up the largest group, accounting for 31% of the population (of whom most identify as Serbs), and the Roman Catholic Church 15% (of whom most identify as Croats). The smallest groups are Agnosticism 0.3%, Atheism 0.8% and other 1.15%, with the remainder not declaring their religion or not answering 1.1%.[9][112] A 2012 survey found that 54% of Bosnia's Muslims are non-denominational Muslims, while 38% follow Sunnism.[113]
Languages
Bosnia's constitution does not specify any official languages.[114][115][116] However, academics Hilary Footitt and Michael Kelly note that the Dayton Agreement states that it is "done in Bosnian, Croatian, English and Serbian", and they describe this as the "de facto recognition of three official languages" at the state level. The equal status of Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian was verified by the Constitutional Court in 2000.[116] It ruled that the provisions of the Federation and Republika Srpska constitutions on language were incompatible with the state constitution, since they only recognised "Bosniak" and Croatian (in the case of the Federation) and Serbian (in the case of Republika Srpska) as official languages at the entity level. As a result, the wording of the entity constitutions was changed and all three languages were made official in both entities.[116] The three languages are mutually intelligible and were previously known collectively as Serbo-Croatian. Use of one of the three languages has become a marker of ethnic identity.[117] Michael Kelly and Catherine Baker argue: "The three official languages of today's Bosnian state...represent the symbolic assertion of national identity over the pragmatism of mutual intelligibility".[118]
According to the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the following minority languages: Albanian, Montenegrin, Czech, Italian, Hungarian, Macedonian, German, Polish, Romani, Romanian, Rysin, Slovak, Slovene, Turkish, Ukrainian and Jewish (Yiddish and Ladino).[119] The German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina are mostly remnants of Donauschwaben (Danube Swabians), who settled in the area after the Habsburg monarchy claimed the Balkans from the Ottoman Empire. Due to expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World Wars, the number of ethnic Germans in Bosnia and Herzegovina was drastically diminished.[120]
In a 2013 census, 52.86% of the population consider their mother tongue Bosnian, 30.76% Serbian, 14.6% Croatian and 1.57% another language, with 0.21% not giving an answer.[9]
Cities
Sarajevo is home to 395,133 inhabitants in its urban area which comprises the City of Sarajevo as well as municipalities of Ilidža, Vogošća, Istočna Ilidža, Istočno Novo Sarajevo and Istočni Stari Grad.[121] The metro area counts 555,210 and includes Sarajevo Canton, East Sarajevo and municipalities Breza, Kiseljak, Kreševo and Visoko.



 


v
t
e


Largest municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
2013 census final results[122]




Rank

Division
Pop.
Rank

Division
Pop.




Sarajevo

Banja Luka
1
Sarajevo
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
356,454
11
Zvornik
Republika Srpska
58,856

Tuzla

Zenica


2
Banja Luka
Republika Srpska
185,042
12
Živinice
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
57,765


3
Tuzla
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
110,979
13
Bihać
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
56,261


4
Zenica
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
110,663
14
Travnik
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
53,482


5
Bijeljina
Republika Srpska
107,715
15
Gradiška
Republika Srpska
51,727


6
Mostar
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
105,797
16
Gračanica
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
45,220


7
Prijedor
Republika Srpska
89,397
17
Lukavac
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
44,520


8
Brčko
Brčko District
83,516
18
Tešanj
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
43,063


9
Doboj
Republika Srpska
71,441
19
Sanski Most
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
41,475


10
Cazin
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
66,149
20
Velika Kladuša
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
40,419


Economy
Main article: Economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina
See also: List of companies of Bosnia and Herzegovina




Graphical depiction of Bosnia and Herzegovina's product exports in 28 color-coded categories


Bosnia faces the dual-problem of rebuilding a war-torn country and introducing transitional liberal market reforms to its formerly mixed economy. One legacy of the previous era is a strong industry; under former republic president Džemal Bijedić and SFRY President Josip Broz Tito, metal industries were promoted in the republic, resulting in the development of a large share of Yugoslavia's plants; S.R. Bosnia and Herzegovina had a very strong industrial export oriented economy in the 1970s and 1980s, with large scale exports worth millions of US$.
For most of Bosnia's history, agriculture has been conducted on privately owned farms; Fresh food has traditionally been exported from the republic.[123]
The war in the 1990s, caused a dramatic change in the Bosnian economy.[124] GDP fell by 60% and the destruction of physical infrastructure devastated the economy.[125] With much of the production capacity unrestored, the Bosnian economy still faces considerable difficulties. Figures show GDP and per capita income increased 10% from 2003 to 2004; this and Bosnia's shrinking national debt being negative trends, and high unemployment 38.7% and a large trade deficit remain cause for concern.
The national currency is the (Euro-pegged) Convertible Mark (KM), controlled by the currency board. Annual inflation is the lowest relative to other countries in the region at 1.9% in 2004.[126] The international debt was $5.1 billion (as on 31 December 2014) . Real GDP growth rate was 5% for 2004 according to the Bosnian Central Bank of BiH and Statistical Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has displayed positive progress in the previous years, which decisively moved its place from the lowest income equality rank of income equality rankings fourteen out of 193 nations.[127]
According to Eurostat data, Bosnia and Herzegovina's PPS GDP per capita stood at 29 per cent of the EU average in 2010.[128]
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a loan to Bosnia worth US$500 million to be delivered by Stand-By Arrangement. This was scheduled to be approved in September 2012.[129]
Overall value of foreign direct investment (1999–2014)[130]

1999: €166 million
2000: €159 million
2001: €133 million
2002: €282 million
2003: €338 million
2004: €534 million
2005: €421 million
2006: €556 million
2007: €1.329 billion
2008: €684 million
2009: €180 million
2010: €307 million
2011: €357 million
2012: €273 million
2013: €214 million
2014: €419 million[131]

The top investor countries (May 1994 – December 2013)

Austria (€1.329 billion)
Serbia (€1.002 billion)
Croatia (€733 million)
Slovenia (€499 million)
Russia (€343 million)
Germany (€333 million)
Switzerland (€273 million)
Netherlands (€206 million)

Foreign investments by sector for (May 1994 – December 2013)

32% manufacturing
22% banking
15% telecommunication
11% trade
5% estate
4% services
11% other

The United States Embassy in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina produces the Country Commercial Guide – an annual report that delivers a comprehensive look at Bosnia and Herzegovina's commercial and economic environment, using economic, political, and market analysis. It can be viewed on Embassy Sarajevo’s website.
Transport
Main article: Transport in Bosnia and Herzegovina




Apron overview of Sarajevo International Airport






Train trip from Sarajevo to Mostar via Neretva River scenery


Sarajevo International Airport (IATA: SJJ, ICAO: LQSA), also known as Butmir Airport, is the main international airport in Bosnia and Herzegovina, located 3.3 NM (6.1 km; 3.8 mi) southwest of the railway station[132] in the city of Sarajevo in the suburb of Butmir.
Railway operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina are successors of the Yugoslav Railways within the country boundaries following independence from the Former Yugoslavia in 1992.
Communications
Main article: Telecommunications in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The Bosnian communications market was fully liberalised in January 2006. There are three landline telephone providers, although each one predominantly serves a partile services are provided by three operators, with nationwide services. Mobile data services are also available, including high-speed EDGE and 3G services.[133]
Oslobođenje (Liberation), founded in 1943, is one of the country's longest running continuously circulating newspapers. There are many national publications, only some of which include the Dnevni Avaz (Daily Voice), founded in 1995, and Jutarnje Novine (Morning News) in circulation in Sarajevo.[134] Other local periodicals include the Croatian newspaper Hrvatska riječ and the Bosnian magazine Start, as well as the weekly newspapers Slobodna Bosna (Free Bosnia) and BH Dani (BH Days). Novi Plamen, a monthly magazine, is the most left-wing publication currently. The international news station Al Jazeera maintains a sister channel that caters to the Balkan region, Al Jazeera Balkans, broadcasting out of and based in Sarajevo.[135]
Additionally, the country is the most liberated in terms of freedom of the press in the region, ranking 43rd internationally.[136]
Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Bosnia and Herzegovina
See also: Sites of interest in Sarajevo





One of the city squares in the capital, Sarajevo, is Marijin Dvor (2010).







Mostar's Stari Most



Trebinje, on the banks of the Trebišnjica



Mehmed Paša Sokolović Bridge in Višegrad; UNESCO world heritage site since 2007.



Buna river, near the town of Blagaj, resurging as one of the biggest karst springs in Europe.



Prokoško Lake in the municipality of Fojnica.



The Shrine of Our Lady Queen of Peace in Međugorje.



According to projections by the World Tourism Organization, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.[13]
In 2012, 747,827 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 9%, and had 1,645,521 overnight hotel stays, a 9.4% increase from the previous year. 58.6% of the tourists came from foreign countries.[137]
In 2006, when ranking the best cities in the world, Lonely Planet placed Sarajevo, the national capital[citation needed] and host of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, as #43, ahead of Dubrovnik at #59, Ljubljana at #84, Bled at #90, Belgrade at #113, and Zagreb at #135.[138] Tourism in Sarajevo is chiefly focused on historical, religious, and cultural aspects. In 2010, Lonely Planet's "Best In Travel" nominated it as one of the top ten cities to visit that year.[139] Sarajevo also won travel blog Foxnomad's "Best City to Visit" competition in 2012, beating more than one hundred other cities around the entire world.[140]
Međugorje has become one of the most popular pilgrimage sites for Christians in the world and has turned into Europe's third most important religious place, where each year more than 1 million people visit.[141] It has been estimated that 30 million pilgrims have come to Međugorje since the reputed apparitions began in 1981.[142]
Bosnia has also become an increasingly popular skiing and Ecotourism destination. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains one of the last undiscovered natural regions of the southern area of the Alps, with vast tracts of wild and untouched nature attracting adventurers and nature lovers. National Geographic magazine named Bosnia and Herzegovina as the best mountain biking adventure destination for 2012.[143] The central Bosnian Dinaric Alps are favored by hikers and mountaineers, containing both Mediterranean and Alpine climates. Whitewater rafting is somewhat of a national pastime, with three rivers, including the deepest river canyon in Europe, the Tara River Canyon.[13]
Most recently, The Huffington Post named Bosnia and Herzegovina the "9th Greatest Adventure in the World for 2013", adding that the country boasts "the cleanest water and air in Europe; the greatest untouched forests; and the most wildlife. The best way to experience is the three rivers trip, which purls through the best the Balkans have to offer."[144]
Tourist attractions
Some of the tourist attractions in Bosnia and Herzegovina include:

Sarajevo, the "Olympic City" or "European Jerusalem"; the scientific, cultural, tourist and commercial center of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Vratnik old town and Bijela Tabija fortress in Sarajevo
Shrine of Our Lady of Međugorje, with Annual Youth Festival; the site of a Marian apparition and subsequent Catholic pilgrimage destination
Mostar, the "City on Neretva" or "City of Sunshine"; the location of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of Stari most and old-town Mostar
Višegrad, location of the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Mehmed Paša Sokolović Bridge
Banja Luka, the "Green City", with sights such as the Kastel fortress and Ferhadija mosque
Bihać and the waterfalls of the river Una within Una National Park
Jajce, city of the Bosnian kings and the place where the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia was founded, Pliva lakes and waterfall
Prijedor, featuring its Old City Mosque, Kozara National Park and, at Mrakovica, Bosnia's largest World War II monument
The salt-lakes of Tuzla, birthplace of Meša Selimović
The Neretva river and the Rakitnica river canyons in Upper Neretva
The Trebižat river and its waterfalls at Kravice and Kočuša
The Buna with its spring and historic town of Blagaj
The Lower Tara river canyon, the deepest canyon in Europe
Sutjeska National Park, featuring the ancient forest of Perućica (one of the last two remaining primeval forests in Europe) and the Sutjeska river canyon
Počitelj historical village
Mount Bjelašnica and Jahorina, sites used during XIV Olympic Winter Games in 1984
The coastal city of Neum
Doboj and its 13th-century fortress
Stolac, featuring the Begovina neighborhood and Radimlja tombstones
Visoko, city of the Bosnian nobility and monarchy, historical capital of the Kingdom of Bosnia and the site of the alleged Bosnian pyramids
Prokoško Lake in Fojnica
Tešanj, one of Bosnia's oldest known cities
Bijeljina, known for its agriculture and ethnic village Stanišić
Lukavac, featuring Modrac Lake, the largest artificial lake in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Travnik, the birthplace of Ivo Andrić and once the capital city of the Bosnia Eyalet
Jablanica, Museum of Battle of Neretva and Old bridge destroyed by Yugoslav army in Second World War
Ostrožac Castle, a 16th-century castle built by the Ottoman Empire and later expanded by the House of Habsburg
Gornji Vakuf
Konjic, featuring Tito's underground nuclear bunker[145]






Panoramic view of Željeznica river at Ilidža near Sarajevo.



Education
Main article: Education in Bosnia and Herzegovina




The University of Sarajevo's Faculty of Law


Higher education has a long and rich tradition in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first bespoke higher-education institution was a school of Sufi philosophy established by Gazi Husrev-beg in 1531. Numerous other religious schools then followed. In 1887, under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Sharia law school began a five-year program.[146] In the 1940s the University of Sarajevo became the city's first secular higher education institute. In the 1950s post-bachelaurate graduate degrees became available.[147] Severely damaged during the war, it was recently rebuilt in partnership with more than 40 other universities. There are various other institutions of higher education, including: University "Džemal Bijedić" of Mostar, University of Banja Luka, University of Mostar, University of East Sarajevo, University of Tuzla, American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is held in high regard as one of the most prestigious creative arts academies in the region.
Also, Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to several private and international higher education institutions, some of which are:

Sarajevo School of Science and Technology
International University of Sarajevo
American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Sarajevo Graduate School of Business
International Burch University

Primary schooling lasts for nine years. Secondary education is provided by general and technical secondary schools (typically Gymnasiums) where studies typically last for four years. All forms of secondary schooling include an element of vocational training. Pupils graduating from general secondary schools obtain the Matura and can enroll in any tertiary educational institution or academy by passing a qualification examination prescribed by the governing body or institution. Students graduating technical subjects obtain a Diploma.[148]

Culture
Main article: Culture of Bosnia and Herzegovina




The National Library in Sarajevo.


Architecture
Main article: Architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina
The architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina is largely influenced by four major periods where political and social changes influenced the creation of distinct cultural and architectural habits of the population. Each period made its influence felt and contributed to a greater diversity of cultures and architectural language in this region.
Media
Main article: Media of Bosnia and Herzegovina




The Radio and Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina headquarter in Sarajevo.


Some television, magazines, and newspapers in Bosnia and Herzegovina are state-owned, and some are for-profit corporations funded by advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina guarantees freedom of speech.
As a country in transition with a post-war legacy and a complex domestic political structure Bosnia and Herzegovina's media system is under transformation. In the early post-war period (1995–2005), media development was guided mainly by international donors and cooperation agencies, who invested to help reconstruct, diversify, democratize and professionalize media outlets.[149][150]
Post-war developments included the establishment of an independent Communication Regulatory Agency, the adoption of a Press Code, the establishment of the Press Council, the decriminalization of label and defamation, the introduction of a rather advanced Freedom of Access to Information Law, and the creation of a Public Service Broadcasting System from the formerly state-owned broadcaster. Yet, internationally backed positive developments have been often obstructed by domestic elites, and the professionalisation of media and journalists has proceeded only slowly. High levels of partisanship and linkages between the media and the political systems hinder the adherence to professional code of conducts.[150]
Literature
Main article: Literature of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina has a rich literature, including the Nobel prize winner Ivo Andrić and poets such as Croat Antun Branko Šimić, Aleksa Šantić, Jovan Dučić and Mak Dizdar, writers such as Zlatko Topčić, Meša Selimović, Semezdin Mehmedinović, Miljenko Jergović, Isak Samokovlija, Safvet beg Bašagić, Abdulah Sidran, Petar Kočić, Aleksandar Hemon, and Nedžad Ibrišimović. The National Theater was founded 1919 in Sarajevo and its first director was the dramatist Branislav Nušić. Magazines such as Novi Plamen or Sarajevske sveske are some of the more prominent publications covering cultural and literary themes.
Art
Main article: Art of Bosnia and Herzegovina




Stećci from Radimlja, near Stolac (13th century)


The art of Bosnia and Herzegovina was always evolving and ranged from the original medieval tombstones called Stećci to paintings in Kotromanić court. However, only with the arrival of Austro-Hungarians did the painting renaissance in Bosnia really begin to flourish. The first educated artists from European academies appeared with the beginning of the 20th century. Among those are: Gabrijel Jurkić, Petar Šain, Roman Petrović and Lazar Drljača.
After World War II artists like Mersad Berber and Safet Zec rose in popularity.
In 2007, Ars Aevi, a museum of contemporary art that includes works by renowned world artists was founded in Sarajevo.
Music
Main article: Music of Bosnia and Herzegovina
See also: List of Bosnia and Herzegovina patriotic songs
Typical Bosnian and Herzegovinian songs are ganga, rera, and the traditional Slavic music for the folk dances such as kolo and from Ottoman era the most popular is sevdalinka. Pop and Rock music has a tradition here as well, with the more famous musicians including Dino Zonić, Goran Bregović, Davorin Popović, Kemal Monteno, Zdravko Čolić, Elvir Laković, Edo Maajka, Hari Mata Hari and Dino Merlin. Other composers such as Đorđe Novković, Al' Dino, Haris Džinović, Kornelije Kovač, and many pop and rock bands, for example, Bijelo Dugme, Crvena Jabuka, Divlje Jagode, Indexi, Plavi Orkestar, Zabranjeno Pušenje, Ambasadori, Dubioza kolektiv, who were among the leading ones in the former Yugoslavia. Bosnia is home to the composer Dušan Šestić, the creator of the current national anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina and father of singer Marija Šestić, to the world known jazz musician, educator and Bosnian jazz ambassador Sinan Alimanović, composer Saša Lošić and pianist Saša Toperić. In the villages, especially in Herzegovina, Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats play the ancient Gusle. The gusle is used mainly to recite epic poems in a usually dramatic tone.
Probably the most distinctive and identifiably "Bosnian" of music, Sevdalinka is a kind of emotional, melancholic folk song that often describes sad subjects such as love and loss, the death of a dear person or heartbreak. Sevdalinkas were traditionally performed with a saz, a Turkish string instrument, which was later replaced by the accordion. However the more modern arrangement, to the derision of some purists, is typically a vocalist accompanied by the accordion along with snare drums, upright bass, guitars, clarinets and violins.
Cinema and theatre
Main article: List of Bosnia-Herzegovina films
Sarajevo is internationally renowned for its eclectic and diverse selection of festivals. The Sarajevo Film Festival was established in 1995, during the Bosnian War and has become the premier and largest film festival in the Balkans and South-East Europe.
Bosnia has a rich cinematic and film heritage, dating back to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia; many Bosnian filmmakers have achieved international prominence and some have won international awards ranging from the Academy Awards to multiple Palme d'Ors and Golden Bears. Some notable Bosnian filmmakers, screenwriters and cinematographers are Danis Tanović (known for the Academy Award– and Golden Globe Award–winning 2001 film No Man's Land and Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize–winning 2016 film Death in Sarajevo),[151] Dušan Vukotić (won an Oscar for best animated short film in 1961 for Surogat ("Ersatz"), being the first foreigner to do so), Emir Kusturica (won two Palme d'Or at Cannes), Jasmila Žbanić (won Golden Bear), Zlatko Topčić, Ademir Kenović, Dino Mustafić, Benjamin Filipović, Jasmin Dizdar, Pjer Žalica, Srđan Vuletić, Aida Begić etc.








Vedran Smailović, the "Cellist of Sarajevo"









Danis Tanović









Emir Kusturica





Cuisine
Main article: Bosnia and Herzegovina cuisine




Bosnian meat platter






A waitress in the Old City of Mostar wearing traditional dress.


Bosnian cuisine uses many spices, in moderate quantities. Most dishes are light, as they are cooked in lots of water; the sauces are fully natural, consisting of little more than the natural juices of the vegetables in the dish. Typical ingredients include tomatoes, potatoes, onions, garlic, peppers, cucumbers, carrots, cabbage, mushrooms, spinach, zucchini, dried beans, fresh beans, plums, milk, paprika and cream called Pavlaka. Bosnian cuisine is balanced between Western and Eastern influences. As a result of the Ottoman administration for almost 500 years, Bosnian food is closely related to Turkish, Greek, and other former Ottoman and Mediterranean cuisines. However, because of years of Austrian rule, there are many influences from Central Europe. Typical meat dishes include primarily beef and lamb. Some local specialties are ćevapi, burek, dolma, sarma, pilav, goulash, ajvar and a whole range of Eastern sweets. Ćevapi is a grilled dish of minced meat, a type of kebab, popular in former Yugoslavia and considered a national dish in Bosnia and Herzegovina[152] and Serbia.[153][154][155] Local wines come from Herzegovina where the climate is suitable for growing grapes. Herzegovinian loza (similar to Italian Grappa but less sweet) is very popular. Plum (rakija) or apple (jabukovača) alcohol beverages are produced in the north. In the south, distilleries used to produce vast quantities of brandy and supply all of ex-Yugoslav alcohol factories (brandy is the base of most alcoholic drinks).

Leisure activities

Coffeehouses, where Bosnian coffee is served in džezva with rahat lokum and sugar cubes, proliferate Sarajevo and every city in the country. Coffee drinking is a favorite Bosnian pastime and part of the culture. Bosnia and Herzegovina is the tenth country in the entire world by per capita coffee consumption.[156]
Sports
See also: Bosnia and Herzegovina at the Olympics and Football in Bosnia and Herzegovina




Edin Džeko, playing for the Bosnian national football team in the year 2015






The Asim Ferhatović Hase Stadium in Sarajevo hosted the opening ceremony to the 1984 Winter Olympics


Bosnia and Herzegovina has produced many athletes, both as a state in Yugoslavia and independently after 1992. The most important international sporting event in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina was the 14th Winter Olympics, held in Sarajevo from 7 to 19 February 1984. The Borac handball club has won seven Yugoslav Handball Championships, as well as the European Championship Cup in 1976 and the International Handball Federation Cup in 1991.
Amel Mekić, Bosnian judoka, became European champion in 2011. Track and field athlete Amel Tuka won the bronze medal in 800 metres at the 2015 World Championships and Hamza Alić won the silver medal in shot put at the 2013 European Indoor Championships.
The Bosna basketball club from Sarajevo were European Champions in 1979. The Yugoslav national basketball team, which won medals in every world championship from 1963 through 1990, included Bosnian players such as FIBA Hall of Famers Dražen Dalipagić and Mirza Delibašić. Bosnia and Herzegovina regularly qualifies for the European Championship in Basketball, with players including Mirza Teletović, Nihad Đedović and Jusuf Nurkić. Bosnia and Herzegovina national u-16 team won two gold medals in 2015, winning both 2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival as well as 2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship.
Women's basketball club Jedinstvo Aida from Tuzla won Women's European Club Championship in 1989 and Ronchetti Cup final in 1990, led by Razija Mujanović, three times best female European basketball player, and Mara Lakić.
The Bosnian chess team was Champion of Yugoslavia seven times, in addition to club ŠK Bosna winning four European Chess Club Cups. Chess grandmaster Borki Predojević has also won two European Championships. The most impressive success of Bosnian Chess was runner-up position in Chess Olympiad of 1994 in Moscow, featuring Grandmasters Predrag Nikolić, Ivan Sokolov and Bojan Kurajica.
Middle-weight boxer Marijan Beneš has won several Championships of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslav Championships and the European Championship.[157] In 1978, he won the World Title against Elisha Obed from the Bahamas.
Association football is the most popular sport in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It dates from 1903, but its popularity grew significantly after World War I. Bosnian clubs FK Sarajevo and Željezničar, won the Yugoslav Championship, while the Yugoslav national football team included Bosnian players of all ethnic backgrounds and generations, such as Safet Sušić, Zlatko Vujović, Mehmed Baždarević, Davor Jozić, Faruk Hadžibegić, Predrag Pašić, Blaž Slišković, Vahid Halilhodžić, Dušan Bajević, Ivica Osim, Josip Katalinski, Tomislav Knez, Velimir Sombolac and numerous others. The Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team played at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, its first major tournament. Notable players on the team included Edin Džeko, Asmir Begović, Emir Spahić, Miralem Pjanić, Muhamed Bešić, and Vedad Ibišević.
Former Bosnian footballers include Hasan Salihamidžić, who became only the second Bosnian to ever win a UEFA Champions League trophy, after Elvir Baljić. He made 234 appearances and scored 31 goals for German club FC Bayern Munich. Sergej Barbarez, who played for several clubs in the German Bundesliga including Borussia Dortmund, Hamburger SV and Bayer Leverkusen was joint-top scorer in the 2000–01 Bundesliga season with 22 goals. Meho Kodro spent most of his career playing in Spain most notably with Real Sociedad and FC Barcelona. Elvir Rahimić made 302 appearances for Russian club CSKA Moscow with whom he won the UEFA Cup in 2005. Milena Nikolić, member of women's national team, was 2013–14 UEFA Women's Champions League top scorer.
Bosnia and Herzegovina was the world champion of volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics and volleyball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics. Many among those on the team lost their legs in the Bosnian War.
Tennis is also gaining a lot of popularity after the recent successes of Damir Džumhur and Mirza Bašić at Grand Slam level. Other notable tennis players who represented Bosnia are, Amer Delić and Mervana Jugić-Salkić.
See also


Bosnia and Herzegovina portal



Outline of Bosnia and Herzegovina


References


^ a b "Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina" (PDF). Retrieved 6 March 2015. 
^ a b CIA.
^ Peace Implementation Council, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina#Composition of the court, European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea
^ "Bosnia releases disputed census results". Politico. 1 July 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ a b "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". 
^ a b "Bosnia and Herzegovina". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 24 September 2016. 
^ "Distribution of family income – Gini index". The World Factbook. TWB. Retrieved 29 October 2017. 
^ "Human Development Report 2017". United Nations. 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. 
^ a b c d "Census of population, households and dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013: Final results" (PDF). Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ Jones, Daniel (2003) [1917], Peter Roach, James Hartmann and Jane Setter, eds., English Pronouncing Dictionary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 3-12-539683-2 CS1 maint: Uses editors parameter (link)
^ "Bosnia". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. , "Herzegovina". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. .
^ "Lonely Planet's Bosnia and Herzegovina Tourism Profile". Lonely Planet. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ a b c Bosnia's newfound tourism Archived 24 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Reuters.
^ "About the Sarajevo Film Festival". Sarajevo Film Festival Official Website. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. 
^ "Inside Film's Guide to Film Festivals in". Inside Film. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ "The Language Situation in Post-Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina". Toronto Slavic Quarterly. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. 
^ "Membership Action Plan (MAP)". www.nato.int. NATO. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2015. In April 2010, NATO Foreign Ministers at their meeting in Tallinn, reviewed progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s reform efforts and invited the country to join the Membership Action Plan. 
^ Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus (1993). De Administrando Imperio (Moravcsik, Gyula ed.). Washington D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies. pp. 153–155. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Malcolm 2002.
^ William Miller (1921). Essays on the Latin Orient. Cambridge. p. 464. 
^ Fine 1994, p. 578.
^ Suetonius, Tiberius 16,17
^ Miller, Norma. Tacitus: Annals I, 2002, ISBN 1-85399-358-1. It had originally been joined to Illyricum, but after the great Illyrian/Pannonian revolt of AD 6 it was made a separate province with its own governor
^ Stipčević, Aleksandar, The Illyrians-History and Culture, 1974, Noyess Press
^ Ardian, Adzanela (Axhanela) (2004). Illyrian Bosnia and Herzegovina-an overview of a cultural legacy. Centre for Balkan Studies, Online Balkan Centre. 
^ a b Robert J. Donia and John VA Fine (1994). Bosnia and Hercegovina: A Tradition Betrayed. Columbia University Press. pp. 14–16. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Hupchick, Dennis P. The Balkans from Constantinople to Communism, pp. 28–30. Palgrave Macmillan (2004)
^ a b c Fine 1991, p. 53.
^ Heather, Peter (2010). Empires and Barbarians: The Fall of Rome and the Birth of Europe. Oxford University Press. , pp. 404–406
^ a b Basic 2009, p. 123.
^ Basic 2009, p. 123-28.
^ Fine 1991, p. 223.
^ Paul Mojzes. Religion and the war in Bosnia. Oxford University Press, 2000, p 22; "Medieval Bosnia was founded as an independent state (Banate) by Ban Kulin (1180–1204).". 
^ Fine 1991, p. 288.
^ Robert J. Donia, John V.A Fine (2005). Bosnia and Hercegovina: A Tradition Betrayed. C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. , p. 71; In the Middle Ages the Bosnians called themselves "Bosnians" or used even more local (county, regional) names.
^ Kolstø, Pål (2005). Myths and boundaries in south-eastern Europe. Hurst & Co. , p. 120; ..medieval Bosnia was a country of one people, of the single Bosnian people called the Bošnjani, who belonged to three confessions.
^ John V.A. Fine. "What is a Bosnian?". London Review of Books; Vol.16 No.8. 28 April 1994. pp. 9–10. 
^ "Declared as national monument". Archived from the original on 16 January 2009. 
^ Anđelić Pavao, Krunidbena i grobna crkva bosanskih vladara u Milima (Arnautovićima) kod Visokog. Glasnik Zemaljskog muzeja XXXIV/1979., Zemaljski muzej Bosne i Hercegovine, Sarajevo, 1980,183–247
^ Singleton, Frederick Bernard (1985). A Short History of the Yugoslav Peoples. Cambridge University Press. p. 496. ISBN 0-521-27485-0. 
^ a b c d Riedlmayer, Andras (1993). A Brief History of Bosnia-Herzegovina Archived 18 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine.. The Bosnian Manuscript Ingathering Project.
^ Velikonja 2003, pp. 29–30.
^ a b c Imamović, Mustafa (1996). Historija Bošnjaka. Sarajevo: BZK Preporod. ISBN 9958-815-00-1
^ Albertini 1952, p. 19.
^ a b Albertini 1952, p. 33.
^ Albertini 2005, p. 37.
^ Albertini 2005, p. 94.
^ Albertini 2005, p. 140.
^ Albertini 2005, p. 195.
^ Albertini 2005, p. 227.
^ Schachinger, Werner (1989). Die Bosniaken kommen: Elitetruppe in der k.u.k. Armee, 1879–1918. Leopold Stocker. 
^ Banac, Ivo (1988). The National Question in Yugoslavia: Origins, History, Politics. Cornell University Press. p. 367. ISBN 978-0-8014-9493-2. Retrieved 4 December 2013. The role of the Schutzkorps, auxiliary militia raised by the Austro-Hungarians, in the policy of anti-Serb repression is moot 
^ a b c Velikonja 2003, p. 141.
^ Banac, Ivo (1988). The National Question in Yugoslavia: Origins, History, Politics. Cornell University Press. p. 149. ISBN 978-0-8014-9493-2. Retrieved 4 December 2013. 
^ Tomasevich 2001, p. 485

The Bosnian wartime militia (Schutzkorps), which became known for its persecution of Serbs, was overwhelmingly Muslim.


^ Danijela Nadj, dnadj@hic.hr. "An International Symposium "Southeastern Europe 1918–1995"". Hic.hr. Retrieved 14 June 2006. 
^ "Balkan 'Auschwitz' haunts Croatia". BBC News. 25 April 2005. 
^ a b c Philip J. Cohen (1996). Serbia's Secret War: Propaganda and the Deceit of History. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. pp. 109–10. ISBN 978-0-89096-760-7. 
^ Ramet (2006), p. 118
^ Velikonja 2003, p. 179.
^ Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006). The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2005. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-253-34656-8. 
^ Tomasevich, Jozo (1975). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941–1945: The Chetniks. Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp. 256–261. ISBN 978-0-8047-0857-9. 
^ Hoare, Marko Attila (2006). Genocide and Resistance in Hitler's Bosnia: The Partisans and the Chetniks 1941–1943. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 143. ISBN 978-0-19-726380-8. 
^ a b Geiger, Vladimir. "Human Losses of the Croats in World War II and the Immediate Post-War Period Caused by the Chetniks (Yugoslav Army in the Fatherand) and the Partisans (People's Liberation Army and the Partisan Detachments of Yugoslavia/Yugoslav Army) and the Communist Authorities: Numerical Indicators". Croatian Institute of History: 85–87. 
^ Lepre, George (1997). Himmler's Bosnian Division: The Waffen-SS Handschar Division 1943–1945. Schiffer Publishing. ISBN 0-7643-0134-9. 
^ Hadžijahić, Muhamed (1973), "Muslimanske rezolucije iz 1941 godine [Muslim resolutions of 1941]", Istorija Naroda Bosne i Hercegovine (in Serbo-Croatian), Sarajevo: Institut za istoriju radničkog pokreta, p. 277 
^ Žerjavić, Vladimir. Yugoslavia manipulations with the number Second World War victims. Croatian Information Centre. ISBN 0-919817-32-7. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ Stojic, Mile (2005). Branko Mikulic – socialist emperor manqué. BH Dani
^ "The Balkans: A post-Communist History" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 14 June 2006. 
^ "ICTY: Prlić et al. (IT-04-74)". Archived from the original on 2 August 2009. 
^ "Prlic et al. Initial Indictment". United Nations. Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2010. 
^ "The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Case NO: IT-01-47-PT (Amended Indictment)" (PDF). 11 January 2002. Retrieved 1 January 2009. 
^ "The Referendum on Independence in Bosnia-Herzegovina: February 29 – March 1, 1992". Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. 1992. p. 19. Archived from the original on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2009. 
^ Bose, Sumantra (2009). Contested lands: Israel-Palestine, Kashmir, Bosnia, Cyprus, and Sri Lanka. Harvard University Press. p. 124. 
^ D. Grant, Thomas (2009). Admission to the United Nations: Charter Article 4 and the Rise of Universal Organization. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 226. 
^ Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006). The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2004. Indiana University Press. p. 379. ISBN 0-271-01629-9. 
^ "ICTY: Naletilić and Martinović verdict – A. Historical background". Archived from the original on 19 June 2009. 
^ "ICTY: The attack against the civilian population and related requirements". Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. 
^ The Geography of Genocide, Allan D. Cooper, p. 178, University Press of America, 2008, ISBN 0-7618-4097-4
^ "Judgement". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2008. Retrieved 13 January 2013. 
^ "Press Release". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2013. 
^ "Crimes in Stolac Municipality" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2009. 
^ "Indictment". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 12 February 2005. Retrieved 7 January 2013. 
^ "Research and Documentation Center: Rezultati istraživanja "Ljudski gubici '91–'95"". idc.org.ba. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010. 
^ "The humanitarian operation in Bosnia, 1992–95: the dilemmas of negotiating humanitarian access" (PDF). United Nations High Commission for Refugees. May 1999. Retrieved 24 June 2008. 
^ "ICTY: Conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia". 
^ "ICTY: Conflict between Bosnia and Croatia". 
^ ICTY cases, indictments and proceedings Archived 6 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Bosnia holds ceremony for remains of 284 found in mass grave". MSN News. Retrieved 20 July 2014. 
^ "ICJ: The genocide case: Bosnia v. Serbia" (PDF). 
^ "Bosnian protests: A Balkan Spring?". bbc.co.uk. 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ "Građanski bunt u BiH". klix.ba. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ Bilefsky, Dan (8 February 2014). "Protests Over Government and Economy Roil Bosnia". nytimes.com. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ "Bosnian Protesters Torch Government Buildings In Sarajevo, Tuzla". rferl.org. 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ "Bosnia-Hercegovina protests break out in violence". bbc.co.uk. 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ "Bosnian protesters storm government buildings". smh.com.au. 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
^ a b Field Listing – Coastline, The World Factbook, 22 August 2006
^ "Bosnia and Herzegovina: I: Introduction". Encarta. 2006. Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2009. 
^ Bosnia-and-Herzegovina Neum britannica.com, britannica.com, 9 September 2015
^ a b Izet Čengić, Azra Čabaravdić. "Watershed Management in Mountain Regions in Bosnia and Herzegovina" (PDF). FAO. p. 113. Retrieved 16 June 2011. 
^ OHR Bulletin 66 (3 February 1998). Final hearing of the Arbitration Tribunal in Vienna Archived 5 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine.. OHR.
^ "'The Contradictions of "Democracy" without Consent', East European Constitutional Review, New York University Law School, 1998". Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. 
^ "Bosnia breaks through ethnic divide by merging Serb, Muslim-Croat forces". Stars and Stripes. 11 January 2006. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ "European Commission – Enlargement – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Relations with the EU". Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2009. 
^ Ljubas, Zdravko (3 February 2011). "Hopes Fade For Census in Bosnia in 2011". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ Kurt, Senka (1 August 2011). "Bosnia Edges Closer To Population Census". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 26 March 2013. 
^ abc, Census shows dramatic decline in Bosnian population since 1990s
^ "Second Class Citizens: Discrimination against Roma, Jews, and Other National Minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina". Human Rights Watch. 4 April 2012. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ Toe, Rodolfo (30 June 2016). "Census Reveals Bosnia's Changed Demography". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ Toe, Rodolfo (30 June 2016). "Bosnia to Publish Census Without Serb Agreement". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 1 July 2016. 
^ "Bosnia-Herzegovina has lost a fifth of its pre-war population". The Guardian. 2016. 
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Bosnia and Herzegovina". 
^ "The World's Muslims: Unity and Diversity" (PDF). Pew Research Center. 2012. p. 30. Retrieved 7 April 2016. 
^ Faingold, Eduardo D. (2004). "Language rights and language justice in the constitutions of the world". Language Problems & Language Planning. 28 (1): 11–24. doi:10.1075/lplp.28.1.03fai. 
^ Sadurski, Wojciech (2005). Rights Before Courts: A Study of Constitutional Courts in Postcommunist States of Central and Eastern Europe. Springer. p. 342. ISBN 1402030061. 
^ a b c Footitt, Hilary; Kelly, Michael (2012). Languages at War: Policies and Practices of Language Contacts in Conflict. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 111–120. ISBN 0230368778. 
^ Greenberg, Robert David (2004). Language and Identity in the Balkans: Serbo-Croatian and its Disintegration. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925815-4. 
^ Kelly, Michael; Baker, Catherine (2013). Interpreting the Peace: Peace Operations, Conflict and Language in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 10. ISBN 1137029838. 
^ "Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages". Council of Europe. Council of Europe. Retrieved 25 April 2017. 
^ Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutscher Minderheiten. "Deutsche Minderheit in Bosnien-Herzegowina – German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina". fuen.org. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. 
^ "Final results" (PDF) (pdf). Popis 2013 BiH. Retrieved 19 December 2017. 
^ "2013 Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina – final results" (PDF). popis.gov.ba. Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2017. 
^ Ciric, Aleksandar. "A Divided Bosnia, January 29, 1996". Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ Daclon, Corrado Maria (1997). Bosnia. Maggioli. Italy
^ "Post-conflict Bosnia and Herzegovina – Martha Walsh – Employment Sector". ILO. Retrieved 5 May 2009. 
^ World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ "Table 15: Inequality in income or expenditure" (PDF). Human Development Report 2006. UN. 2006. p. 335. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 9 January 2007. 
^ "GDP per capita in PPS". Eurostat. Retrieved 1 October 2011. 
^ Elvira M. Jukic. "IMF To Loan Bosnia $500 Million". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 26 March 2013. 
^ "Direct foreign investments". 
^ "Direct foreign investments 2014". 
^ "EAD Basic – Error Page". eurocontrol.int. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
^ "Bosnia-Herzegovina – Telecoms Market Overview & Statistics Report Covers the Regulatory Environment, Major Players and Market Developments". Businesswire.com. 8 October 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2009. 
^ Udovicic, Radenko (3 May 2002). What is Happening with the Oldest Bosnian-Herzegovinian Daily: Oslobođenje to be sold for 4.7 Million Marks Mediaonline.ba: Southeast European Media Journal.
^ "Al Jazeera Launches Its Balkans Broadcast Centre". London: The Guardian. 11 November 2011. 
^ "Press Freedom Index". Reporters Without Borders. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Statistika Turizma" [Tourism Statistics] (PDF) (pdf). Agency for statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Retrieved 4 July 2015. 
^ "Lonely Planet: Sarajevo 43th [sic] Best City in the World". Bosnia Travel. Archived from the original on 23 February 2007. 
^ "Press Centre & Lonely Planet Reveals Its Best Destinations, Journeys & Experiences for 2010". Lonely Planet. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 6 November 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2011. 
^ Polat, Anil (27 March 2012). "The Best City To Visit Travel Tournament 2012: Championship". Foxnomad. Retrieved 30 March 2012. 
^ RomeReports: Visionaries of Medjugorje may appear before the Vatican. Archived 5 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 26 February 2011.
^ Vatican Probes Claims of Apparitions at Medugorje Reuters. Retrieved 17 March 2010.
^ [1],
^ Bangs, Richard (10 January 2013). "13 Greatest Adventures For 2013". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 11 January 2013. 
^ Caludio Agostoni, Parallelzero. "Exploring Tito's Cold War bunker". gulfnews.com. 
^ University of Sarajevo on Sarajevo official web site
^ "About University". University of Sarajevo. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. 
^ "Education System in Bosnia and Herzegovina". EuroEducation.net – The European Education Directory. 
^ Hozić, 2008; Thompson & De Luce, 2002; Kurspahić, 2003; Jusić, 2006
^ a b Tarik Jusić, "Bosnia and Herzegovina", EJC Media Landscapes
^ "Home Festival Awards & Juries: International Jury "Prizes Of The International Jury". www.berlinale.de/en. 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2016. 
^ "Bosnia and Herzegovina". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Retrieved 27 July 2009. 
^ The new Encyclopædia Britannica: A-ak – Bayes, Volume 1. 
^ Countries and Their Cultures: Saint Kitts and Nevis to Zimbabwe. p. 68. 
^ "Serbian cuisine". TravelSerbia.Info – Your travel guide for Serbia. Retrieved 9 August 2010. 
^ "Bosnian traditional coffee " World of Sevdah". Worldofsevdah.com. 8 March 2007. Retrieved 19 May 2010. 
^ "Ring zamijenio nalivperom" (in Bosnian, Croatian, and Serbian). Nezavisne novine. 12 June 2005. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. 


Bibliography

Fine, John Van Antwerp, Jr. (1991). The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-08149-3. 
Fine, John Van Antwerp, Jr. (1994). The Late Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Late Twelfth Century to the Ottoman Conquest. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 9780472082605. 
Basic, Denis (2009). "4.1.1. Early Medieval Bosnia in Porphyrogenitus' De Administrando Imperio". The Roots of the Religious, Ethnic, and National Identity of the Bosnian-Herzegovinian Muslims. University of Washington. 
Coupland, Nikolas (2010). The Handbook of Language and Globalization. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-7581-4. 
Phillips, Douglas A. Bosnia and Herzegovina (Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2004).
Robin Okey, Taming Balkan Nationalism: The Habsburg 'Civilizing' Mission in Bosnia, 1878–1914 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007)
Tomasevich, Jozo (2001). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia: 1941–1945. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7924-1. Retrieved 4 December 2013. 
Albertini, Luigi (1952). The Origins of the War of 1914: European relations from the Congress of Berlin to the eve of the Sarajevo murder. Oxford University Press. 
Albertini, Luigi (2005). Jochen Thies, ed. The Origins of the War of 1914. Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-26-1. 
Malcolm, Noel (2002). Bosnia: A Short History. Pan Books. ISBN 978-0-330-41244-5. 
Velikonja, Mitja (2003). Religious Separation and Political Intolerance in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-1-58544-226-3. 
Bataković, Dušan T. (1996). The Serbs of Bosnia & Herzegovina: History and Politics. Dialogue Association. 

External links

Find more aboutBosnia and Herzegovinaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Bosnia and Herzegovina.



CIA. "Bosnia and Herzegovina". The World Factbook. Retrieved 2016-02-12. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal
Bosnia and Herzegovina from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Bosnia and Herzegovina at Facebook
Bosnia and Herzegovina at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Relevant laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia-Hercegovina profile from the BBC News.
 Wikimedia Atlas of Bosnia and Herzegovina


Coordinates: 44°N 18°E﻿ / ﻿44°N 18°E﻿ / 44; 18




Articles related to Bosnia and Herzegovina











v
t
e


Bosnia and Herzegovina topics



History



Illyricum
Bosnian Kingdom
Ottoman Bosnia and Herzegovina
Kingdom of Yugoslavia
World War II
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnian War
Bosnia and Herzegovina








Geography



Cities
Mountains
Extreme points
Rivers
Lakes
Climate
Protected areas
Fauna





Governance



Administrative divisions

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Republika Srpska


Constitution
Parliament
Politics
Presidency

Chairman


Council of Ministers

Chairman


Elections
Political parties
Foreign relations
Government
Law enforcement
Armed Forces





Economy



Currency
Central Bank
Communications
Tourism
Transport





Society



Bosnians (Bosniaks, Croats, Serbs)
Demographics
Ethnic groups
Religion
Languages
Education
Human rights
LGBT rights

LGBT history







Culture



Architecture
National monuments
Art
Cinema
Music
Cuisine (Ćevapi)
Bosnian language
Literature
Public holidays
Radio
Television
Symbols
National Flag
Coat of arms
Anthem
Decorations and medals












v
t
e


Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina










v
t
e


Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina






Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Republika Srpska


















v
t
e


Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina







   


 Una-Sana
 Central Bosnia




 Posavina
 Herzegovina-Neretva




 Tuzla
 West Herzegovina




 Zenica-Doboj
 Sarajevo




 Bosnian Podrinje
 Canton 10


















v
t
e


Districts of Bosnia and Herzegovina






Brčko distrikt















v
t
e


Municipalities and cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina



Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina




Cities



Bihać
Mostar
Sarajevo (capital)
Široki Brijeg
Tuzla
Zenica





Municipalities



Banovići
Bosanska Krupa
Bosanski Petrovac
Bosansko Grahovo
Breza
Brčko
Bugojno
Busovača
Bužim
Čapljina
Cazin
Čelić
Čitluk
Drvar
Doboj East
Doboj South
Dobretići
Domaljevac-Šamac
Donji Vakuf
Foča-Ustikolina
Fojnica
Glamoč
Goražde
Gornji Vakuf-Uskoplje
Gračanica
Gradačac
Grude
Hadžići
Ilidža
Ilijaš
Jablanica
Jajce
Kakanj
Kalesija
Kiseljak
Kladanj
Ključ
Konjic
Kreševo
Kupres
Livno
Ljubuški
Lukavac
Maglaj
Neum
Novi Travnik
Odžak
Olovo
Orašje
Pale-Prača
Posušje
Prozor-Rama
Ravno
Sanski Most
Sapna
Sarajevo

Centar
Novi Grad
Novo Sarajevo
Stari Grad


Srebrenik
Stolac
Teočak
Tešanj
Tomislavgrad
Travnik
Trnovo
Usora
Vareš
Velika Kladuša
Visoko
Vitez
Vogošća
Zavidovići
Žepče
Živinice








Republika Srpska




Cities



Banja Luka
Bijeljina
Doboj
Istočno Sarajevo
Prijedor
Trebinje





Municipalities



Berkovići
Bileća
Brod
Bratunac
Brčko
Čajniče
Čelinac
Derventa
Donji Žabar
Foča
Gacko
Gradiška
Han Pijesak
Istočni Drvar
Istočni Mostar
Istočno Sarajevo

Istočna Ilidža
Istočno Novo Sarajevo
Istočni Stari Grad
Pale
Sokolac
Trnovo


Jezero
Kalinovik
Kneževo
Kostajnica
Kozarska Dubica
Kotor Varoš
Krupa na Uni
Kupres
Laktaši
Ljubinje
Lopare
Milići
Modriča
Mrkonjić Grad
Nevesinje
Novi Grad
Novo Goražde
Osmaci
Oštra Luka
Pelagićevo
Petrovac
Petrovo
Prnjavor
Ribnik
Rogatica
Rudo
Stanari
Šamac
Šekovići
Šipovo
Srbac
Srebrenica
Teslić
Ugljevik
Višegrad
Vlasenica
Vukosavlje
Zvornik
















Geographic locale











v
t
e


Balkan Peninsula countries



Geographically fully located



Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Kosovo1
Macedonia
Montenegro








Significantly located



Serbia
Greece
Croatia





Mostly outside of the peninsula



Romania
Slovenia
Turkey





See also



Southeast Europe
History of the Balkans
Balkan languages (Sprachbund)
Balkanization






1 Declared independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008 and is recognised by 112 United Nations member states.










v
t
e


Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland1
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria






Dependencies





Denmark



Faroe Islands1

autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark







United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia2

Sovereign Base Areas


Gibraltar

British Overseas Territory


Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey

Crown dependencies











Special areas of
internal sovereignty





Finland



Åland Islands

autonomous region subject to the Åland Convention of 1921







Norway



Svalbard

unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty







United Kingdom



Northern Ireland

country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement














1 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.
2 Some countries completely outside the conventional geographical boundaries of Europe are commonly associated with the continent due to ethnological links.













v
t
e


Countries and territories of the Mediterranean Sea



Sovereign states



Albania
Algeria
Bosnia-Herzegovina
Croatia
Cyprus
Egypt
France
Greece
Israel
Italy
Lebanon
Libya
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Morocco
Slovenia
Spain
Syria
Tunisia
Turkey





States with limited recognition



Northern Cyprus
Palestine





Dependencies and other territories



Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK)
Gibraltar (UK)















International membership











v
t
e


 Council of Europe



Institutions



Secretary General
Committee of Ministers
Parliamentary Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance








Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia1
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Observers



Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
Sovereign Military Order of Malta





Former members



Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)






1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.










v
t
e


Enlargement and partners of the European Union



Previous enlargements



1973
1981
1986
1995
2004
2007
2013
Statistics





Negotiating



 Montenegro (status)
 Serbia (status)
 Turkey (status)





Candidate status



 Albania (status)
 Macedonia (status)





Potential candidates



 Bosnia and Herzegovina (status)
 Kosovo* (under the Belgrade–Pristina agreement) (status)





Partnerships




Free trade agreements



 Iceland (accession)
 Liechtenstein (relations)
 Norway (relations)
  Switzerland (relations)





Eastern Partnership



 Armenia (relations)
 Azerbaijan (relations)
 Belarus (relations)
 Georgia (relations) (accession)
 Moldova (relations)
 Ukraine (relations)





Northern Dimension



 Russia (relations)
 Norway (relations)





Union for the Mediterranean



 Algeria
 Egypt
 Israel (relations)
 Jordan (relations)
 Lebanon (relations)
 Mauritania
 Monaco
 Morocco (relations)
 Palestine (relations)
 Syria
 Tunisia











Current membership
Criteria
Withdrawal












v
t
e


Members of the Central European Free Trade Agreement






Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Kosovo/UNMIK
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Serbia












v
t
e


Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)



Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Canada
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Holy See
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uzbekistan





Partners for
Cooperation



Afghanistan
Algeria
Australia
Egypt
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Morocco
South Korea
Thailand
Tunisia





Bodies and posts



Parliamentary Assembly
ODIHR
Commissioner on National Minorities
Representative on Freedom of the Media












v
t
e


Non-Aligned Movement



Members



List of members of Non-Aligned Movement
India and the Non-Aligned Movement
Yugoslavia and the Non-Aligned Movement
Egypt and the Non-Aligned Movement





Structure




Organizations



NAM News Network





Principles



Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence





Summits



Bandung Conference
Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Conference
16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement





People



Josip Broz Tito
Sukarno
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Houari Boumediene
Fidel Castro
Nelson Mandela
Mohamed Morsi















v
t
e


Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)



Members



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Benin
Burkina Faso
Brunei
Cameroon
Chad
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Gabon
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kuwait
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Lebanon
Libya
Maldives
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Morocco
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sudan
Suriname
Tajikistan
Turkey
Tunisia
Togo
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Uzbekistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen





Suspended



Syria





Observers





Countries
and territories




Bosnia and Herzegovina
Central African Republic
Northern Cyprus1
Russia
Thailand






Muslim
communities




Moro National Liberation Front






International
organizations




Economic Cooperation Organization
African Union
Arab League
Non-Aligned Movement
United Nations











1 As the "Turkish Cypriot State".












v
t
e


Republics and autonomous provinces of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia






Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Macedonia
Montenegro
Serbia

Vojvodina
Kosovo


Slovenia



















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 126120141
LCCN: n81035836
GND: 4088119-2
BNF: cb11709959t (data)
HDS: 32206
NDL: 00577605











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bosnia_and_Herzegovina&oldid=817229647"					Categories: Bosnia and HerzegovinaBalkan countriesBosnian-speaking countries and territoriesCroatian-speaking countries and territoriesFederal republicsMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsSerbian-speaking countries and territoriesSlavic countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1992Countries in EuropeHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses editors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh)CS1 Bosnian-language sources (bs)CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr)CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from September 2015Articles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from December 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017Articles needing additional references from February 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from April 2012Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014Articles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers