For the rock band from London, see The Boxer Rebellion (band).
"The Boxers" redirects here. For other uses, see Boxers (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with I Wor Kuen.


Boxer Rebellion
(庚子拳亂)


 
Top: Russian cannons breaking the gates of Peking
Bottom: American troops scale the walls of Peking





Date
2 November 1899 – 7 September 1901


Location
Northern China


Result
Alliance victory
Boxer Protocol signed





Belligerents


Eight-Nation Alliance:


 United Kingdom
 Russia
 France
 Japan
 Germany
 United States
 Italy
 Austria-Hungary

 Netherlands



 Numerous Qing governors
 Yìhéquán (Boxers)
 Qing Dynasty


Commanders and leaders


Legations:
 Claude Maxwell MacDonald
Seymour Expedition:
 Sir Edward Seymour
Gaselee Expedition:
 Alfred Gaselee
 Yevgeni Alekseyev
 Nikolai Linevich
 Fukushima Yasumasa
 Adna Chaffee
 Emerson H. Liscum †
Occupation Force:
 Alfred von Waldersee
Russian Occupation of Manchuria:
 Aleksey Kuropatkin
Mutual Protection of Southeast China:
 Yuan Shikai
 Prince Qing
 Li Hongzhang
 Ronglu
 Empress Dowager Cixi
 Li Bingheng
 Yuxian 
Commander in Chief:
 Ronglu
Hushenying:
 Zaiyi
Tenacious Army:
 Nie Shicheng †
Resolute Army:
 Ma Yukun (zh:馬玉崑)
 Song Qing
 Jiang Guiti
Gansu Army (Gansu Braves):
 Dong Fuxiang
 Ma Fulu †
 Ma Fuxiang
 Ma Fuxing
 Ma Haiyan †
 Ma Biao
 Yao Wang
Boxers:
 Cao Futian 
 Ni Zanqing
 Zhu Hongdeng


Strength



Allied intervention forces in Peking:
≈50,255 in total

Seymour Expedition: – 2,100–2,188[1]
Gaselee Expedition: – 18,000[1]
China Relief Expedition: – 2,500[2]

Russian troops in Manchuria: 100,000–200,000[3]

 100,000–300,000 Boxers
 100,000 Imperial troops[4]

Provincial Armies

Gansu Army (Kansu Braves) 甘軍 Gan jun – General Dong Fuxiang
Tenacious Army 武毅軍 Wuyi jun – General Nie Shicheng
Resolute Army 毅軍 Yi jun – General Song Qing (Qing dynasty), General Ma Yukun (zh:馬玉崑), General Jiang Guiti


Metropolitan Eight Banners

Centre Division of Guards Army 武衛軍 – Commander in Chief Ronglu
Hushenying 虎神營 – Prince Zaiyi
Peking Field Force – Prince Qing






Casualties and losses


2,500 foreign soldiers
2,000 Imperial troops[5]
Unknown number of Boxers


32,000 Chinese Christians and 200 missionaries killed by Boxers in Northern China[6]
Unknown number of civilians








v
t
e


Boxer Rebellion






Siege of the International Legations
Siege of Concessions in Tianjin
First intervention
Langfang
Battle of the Taku Forts
Taiyuan massacre
Tientsin
Beicang
Second intervention
Yangcun
Peking
Beitang
Shanhaiguan
Manchuria

Boxer Protocol










Boxer Rebellion


Traditional Chinese
義和團運動


Simplified Chinese
义和团运动


Literal meaning
Militia United in Righteousness Movement





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Yìhétuán Yùndòng








The Boxer Rebellion (拳亂), Boxer Uprising or Yihetuan Movement (義和團運動) was a violent anti-foreign, anti-colonial, and anti-Christian uprising that took place in China between 1899 and 1901, toward the end of the Qing dynasty. It was initiated by the Militia United in Righteousness (Yihetuan), known in English as the "Boxers", for many of their members had been practitioners of the martial arts, such as boxing. They were motivated by proto-nationalist sentiments and opposition to Western colonialism and associated Christian missionary activity.
The uprising took place against a background of severe drought and the disruption caused by the growth of foreign spheres of influence. After several months of growing violence against both the foreign and Christian presence in Shandong and the North China plain in June 1900, Boxer fighters, convinced they were invulnerable to foreign weapons, converged on Beijing with the slogan "Support the Qing government and exterminate the foreigners." Foreigners and Chinese Christians sought refuge in the Legation Quarter. In response to reports of an armed invasion to lift the siege, the initially hesitant Empress Dowager Cixi supported the Boxers and on June 21 issued an Imperial Decree declaring war on the foreign powers. Diplomats, foreign civilians and soldiers as well as Chinese Christians in the Legation Quarter were placed under siege by the Imperial Army of China and the Boxers for 55 days.
Chinese officialdom was split between those supporting the Boxers and those favoring conciliation, led by Prince Qing. The supreme commander of the Chinese forces, the Manchu General Ronglu (Junglu), later claimed that he acted to protect the besieged foreigners. The Eight-Nation Alliance, after being initially turned back, brought 20,000 armed troops to China, defeated the Imperial Army, and arrived at Peking on August 14, relieving the siege of the Legations. Uncontrolled plunder of the capital and the surrounding countryside ensued, along with the summary execution of those suspected of being Boxers.
The Boxer Protocol of 7 September 1901 provided for the execution of government officials who had supported the Boxers, provisions for foreign troops to be stationed in Beijing, and 450 million taels of silver—approximately $10 billion at 2017 silver prices and more than the government's annual tax revenue—to be paid as indemnity over the course of the next thirty-nine years to the eight nations involved. The Empress Dowager then sponsored a set of institutional and fiscal changes in an attempt to save the Dynasty by reforming it.



Contents


1 Historical background

1.1 Origins of the Boxers
1.2 Causes of conflict and unrest


2 Boxer War

2.1 Intensifying crisis
2.2 Seymour Expedition
2.3 Conflicting attitudes within the Qing imperial court
2.4 Siege of the Beijing legations
2.5 Officials and commanders at cross purposes
2.6 Gaselee Expedition
2.7 Evacuation of the Qing imperial court from Beijing to Xi'an


3 Russian invasion of Manchuria
4 Massacre of missionaries and Chinese Christians
5 Aftermath

5.1 Occupation, looting and atrocities
5.2 Reparations


6 Long-term consequences
7 Controversies and changing views of the Boxers
8 Terminology
9 Later representations
10 See also
11 References

11.1 Citations
11.2 Sources


12 Further reading

12.1 General accounts and analysis
12.2 Missionary experience and personal accounts
12.3 Allied intervention, the Boxer War, and the aftermath
12.4 Contemporary accounts and sources


13 External links



Historical background[edit]
Origins of the Boxers[edit]




Model of a Boxer, armed with a spear and sword.
Model by George S. Stuart






Boxer Rebellion and Eight-Nation Alliance, China 1900-1901


The Righteous and Harmonious Fists (Yihequan) arose in the inland sections of the northern coastal province of Shandong, long known for social unrest, religious sects, and martial societies. American Christian missionaries were probably the first to refer to the well-trained, athletic young men as "Boxers", because of the martial arts and weapons training they practiced. Their primary practice was a type of spiritual possession which involved the whirling of swords, violent prostrations, and chanting incantations to deities.[7] The opportunities to fight back Western encroachment and colonization were especially attractive to unemployed village men, many of whom were teenagers.[8] The tradition of possession and invulnerability went back several hundred years but took on special meaning against the powerful new weapons of the West.[9] The Boxers, armed with rifles and swords, claimed supernatural invulnerability towards blows of cannon, rifle shots, and knife attacks. Furthermore, the Boxer groups popularly claimed that millions of soldiers of Heaven would descend to assist them in purifying China of foreign oppression.[10] These beliefs are characteristic of millenarian movements of nativist resistance, especially the characteristic magical belief, shared by the Ghost Dancers of North America and the Kartelite Cults of Africa, that the believer could be rendered invulnerable to bullets.[11]
In 1895, in spite of ambivalence toward their heterodox practices, Yuxian, a Manchu who was then prefect of Caozhou and would later become provincial governor, used the Big Swords Society in fighting bandits. The Big Swords, emboldened by this official support, also attacked their local Catholic village rivals, who turned to the Church for protection. The Big Swords responded by attacking Catholic churches and burning them. "The line between Christians and bandits", remarks one recent historian, "became increasingly indistinct." As a result of diplomatic pressure in the capital, Yuxian executed several Big Sword leaders, but did not punish anyone else. More martial secret societies started emerging after this.[12]




A Boxer during the revolt


The early years saw a variety of village activities, not a broad movement with a united purpose. Martial folk religious societies such as the Baguadao (Eight Trigrams) prepared the way for the Boxers. Like the Red Boxing school or the Plum Flower Boxers, the Boxers of Shandong were more concerned with traditional social and moral values, such as filial piety, than with foreign influences. One leader, Zhu Hongdeng (Red Lantern Zhu), started as a wandering healer, specializing in skin ulcers, and gained wide respect by refusing payment for his treatments.[13] Zhu claimed descent from Ming dynasty emperors, since his surname was the surname of the Ming imperial family. He announced that his goal was to "Revive the Qing and destroy the foreigners" ("扶清灭洋 fu Qing mie yang").[14]
Causes of conflict and unrest[edit]
The combination of extreme weather conditions, Western attempts at colonizing China and growing anti-imperialist sentiment fueled the movement. First, a drought followed by floods in Shandong province in 1897–1898 forced farmers to flee to cities and seek food. As one observer said, "I am convinced that a few days' heavy rainfall to terminate the long-continued drought ... would do more to restore tranquility than any measures which either the Chinese government or foreign governments can take."[15]




A French political cartoon depicting China as a pie about to be carved up by Queen Victoria (Britain), Kaiser Wilhelm II (Germany), Tsar Nicholas II (Russia), Marianne (France) and a samurai (Japan), while a Chinese mandarin helplessly looks on.


A major cause of discontent in north China was missionary activity. The Treaty of Tientsin (or Tianjin) and the Convention of Peking, signed in 1860 after the Second Opium War, had granted foreign missionaries the freedom to preach anywhere in China and to buy land on which to build churches.[16] On 1 November 1897, a band of armed men who were perhaps members of the Big Swords Society stormed the residence of a German missionary from the Society of the Divine Word and killed two priests. This attack is known as the Juye Incident. When Kaiser Wilhelm II received news of these murders, he dispatched the German East Asia Squadron to occupy Jiaozhou Bay on the southern coast of the Shandong peninsula. [17] Germany's action triggered a "scramble for concessions" by which Britain, France, Russia and Japan also secured their own sphere of influence in China.[18]
In October 1898, a group of Boxers attacked the Christian community of Liyuantun village where a temple to the Jade Emperor had been converted into a Catholic church. Disputes had surrounded the church since 1869, when the temple had been granted to the Christian residents of the village. This incident marked the first time the Boxers used the slogan "Support the Qing, destroy the foreigners" ("扶清灭洋 fu Qing mie yang") that would later characterise them.[19] The "Boxers" called themselves the "Militia United in Righteousness" for the first time one year later, at the Battle of Senluo Temple (October 1899), a clash between Boxers and Qing government troops.[20] By using the word "Militia" rather than "Boxers", they distanced themselves from forbidden martial arts sects, and tried to give their movement the legitimacy of a group that defended orthodoxy.[21]
Aggression toward missionaries and Christians drew the ire of foreign (mainly European) governments.[22] In 1899, the French minister in Beijing helped the missionaries to obtain an edict granting official status to every order in the Roman Catholic hierarchy, enabling local priests to support their people in legal or family disputes and bypass the local officials. After the German government took over Shandong many Chinese feared that the foreign missionaries and quite possibly all Christian activities were imperialist attempts at "carving the melon", i.e., to divide and colonize China piece by piece.[23] A Chinese official expressed the animosity towards foreigners succinctly, "Take away your missionaries and your opium and you will be welcome."[24]
The early growth of the Boxer movement coincided with the Hundred Days' Reform (11 June – 21 September 1898). Progressive Chinese officials, with support from Protestant missionaries, persuaded the Guangxu Emperor to institute reforms which alienated many conservative officials by their sweeping nature. Such opposition from conservative officials led Empress Dowager Cixi to intervene and reverse the reforms. The failure of the reform movement disillusioned many educated Chinese and thus further weakened the Qing government. After the reforms ended, the conservative Empress Dowager Cixi seized power and placed the reformist Guangxu Emperor under house arrest.
The national crisis was widely seen as being caused by foreign aggression.[25] Foreign powers had defeated China in several wars, forced a right to promote Christianity and imposed unequal treaties under which foreigners and foreign companies in China were accorded special privileges, extraterritorial rights and immunities from Chinese law, causing resentment among the Chinese. France, Japan, Russia and Germany carved out spheres of influence, so that by 1900 it appeared that China would likely be dismembered, with foreign powers each ruling a part of the country. Thus, by 1900, the Qing dynasty, which had ruled China for more than two centuries, was crumbling and Chinese culture was under assault by powerful and unfamiliar religions and secular cultures.[26]
Boxer War[edit]
Intensifying crisis[edit]




Chinese Muslim troops from Gansu, also known as the Gansu Braves, killed a Japanese diplomat on 11 June 1900. Foreigners called them the "10,000 Islamic rabble."[27]


In January 1900, with a majority of conservatives in the imperial court, Empress Dowager Cixi changed her long standing policy of suppressing Boxers, and issued edicts in their defence, causing protests from foreign powers. In spring 1900, the Boxer movement spread rapidly north from Shandong into the countryside near Beijing. Boxers burned Christian churches, killed Chinese Christians and intimidated Chinese officials who stood in their way. American Minister Edwin H. Conger cabled Washington, "the whole country is swarming with hungry, discontented, hopeless idlers." On 30 May the diplomats, led by British Minister Claude Maxwell MacDonald, requested that foreign soldiers come to Beijing to defend the legations. The Chinese government reluctantly acquiesced, and the next day an multinational force of 435 navy troops from eight countries disembarked from warships and travelled by train from Dagu (Taku) to Beijing. They set up defensive perimeters around their respective missions.[28]
On 5 June, the railway line to Tianjin was cut by Boxers in the countryside and Beijing was isolated. On 11 June, at Yongding gate, the secretary of the Japanese legation, Sugiyama Akira, was attacked and killed by the soldiers of general Dong Fuxiang, who were guarding the southern part of the Beijing walled city.[29] Armed with Mauser rifles but wearing traditional uniforms,[30] Dong's troops had threatened the foreign Legations in the fall of 1898 soon after arriving in Beijing,[31] so much that troops from the United States Marine Corps had been called to Beijing to guard the legations.[32] The German Kaiser Wilhelm II was so alarmed by the Chinese Muslim troops that he requested the Caliph Abdul Hamid II of the Ottoman Empire to find a way to stop the Muslim troops from fighting. The Caliph agreed to the Kaiser's request and sent Enver Pasha (not the future Young Turk leader) to China in 1901, but the rebellion was over by that time.[33]
Also on 11 June, the first Boxer, dressed in his finery, was seen in the Legation Quarter. The German Minister, Clemens von Ketteler, and German soldiers captured a Boxer boy and inexplicably executed him.[34] In response, thousands of Boxers burst into the walled city of Beijing that afternoon and burned many of the Christian churches and cathedrals in the city, burning some victims alive.[35] American and British missionaries had taken refuge in the Methodist Mission and an attack there was repulsed by American Marines. The soldiers at the British Embassy and German Legations shot and killed several Boxers,[36] alienating the Chinese population of the city and nudging the Qing government toward support of the Boxers. The Muslim Gansu braves and Boxers, along with other Chinese then attacked and killed Chinese Christians around the legations in revenge for foreign attacks on Chinese.[37]
Seymour Expedition[edit]
Main article: Seymour Expedition




Japanese marines who served in the Seymour Expedition


As the situation grew more violent, a second multinational force of 2,000 sailors and marines under the command of the British Vice-Admiral Edward Seymour, the largest contingent being British, was dispatched from Dagu to Beijing on 10 June 1900. The troops were transported by train from Dagu to Tianjin with the agreement of the Chinese government, but the railway between Tianjin and Beijing had been severed. Seymour resolved to move forward and repair the railway, or progress on foot if necessary, keeping in mind that the distance between Tianjin and Beijing was only 120 km. When Seymour left Tianjin and started toward Beijing, it angered the imperial court. As a result, the pro-Boxer Manchu Prince Duan became leader of the Zongli Yamen (foreign office), replacing Prince Qing. Prince Duan was a member of the imperial Aisin Gioro clan (foreigners called him a "Blood Royal"), and Empress Dowager Cixi had named her son as next in line for the imperial throne. He became the effective leader of the Boxers, and was extremely anti-foreigner. He soon ordered the Qing imperial army to attack the foreign forces. Confused by conflicting orders from Beijing, General Nie Shicheng let Seymour's army pass by in their trains.[38]




Admiral Seymour returning to Tianjin with his wounded men on 26 June


After leaving Tianjin, the convoy quickly reached Langfang, but found the railway there to be destroyed. Seymour's engineers tried to repair the line, but the allied army found itself surrounded, as the railway both behind and in front of them had been destroyed. They were attacked from all parts by Chinese irregulars and Chinese governmental troops. Five thousand of Dong Fuxiang's "Gansu Braves" and an unknown number of "Boxers" won a costly but major victory over Seymour's troops at the Battle of Langfang on 18 June.[39][40] As the allied European army retreated from Langfang, they were constantly fired upon by cavalry, and artillery bombarded their positions. It was reported that the Chinese artillery was superior to the European artillery, since the Europeans did not bother to bring along much for the campaign, thinking they could easily sweep through Chinese resistance. The Europeans could not locate the Chinese artillery, which was raining shells upon their positions.[41] Mining, engineering, flooding and simultaneous attacks were employed by Chinese troops. The Chinese also employed pincer movements, ambushes and sniper tactics with some success against the foreigners.[42]




Italian mounted infantry near Tientsin in 1900


News arrived on 18 June regarding attacks on foreign legations. Seymour decided to continue advancing, this time along the Beihe river, toward Tongzhou, 25 kilometres (16 mi) from Beijing. By the 19th, they had to abandon their efforts due to progressively stiffening resistance and started to retreat southward along the river with over 200 wounded. Commandeering four civilian Chinese junks along the river, they loaded all their wounded and remaining supplies onto them and pulled them along with ropes from the riverbanks. By this point they were very low on food, ammunition and medical supplies. Unexpectedly they then happened upon the Great Xigu Arsenal, a hidden Qing munitions cache of which the Allied Powers had had no knowledge until then. They immediately captured and occupied it, discovering not only Krupp field guns, but rifles with millions of rounds of ammunition, along with millions of pounds of rice and ample medical supplies.
There they dug in and awaited rescue. A Chinese servant was able to infiltrate through the Boxer and Qing lines, informing the Eight Powers of the Seymour troops' predicament. Surrounded and attacked nearly around the clock by Qing troops and Boxers, they were at the point of being overrun. On 25 June, a regiment composed of 1,800 men (900 Russian troops from Port Arthur, 500 British seamen, with an ad hoc mix of other assorted Alliance troops) finally arrived on foot from Tientsin to rescue Seymour. Spiking the mounted field guns and setting fire to any munitions that they could not take (an estimated £3 million worth), Seymour, his force, and the rescue mission marched back to Tientsin, unopposed, on 26 June. Seymour's casualties during the expedition were 62 killed and 228 wounded.[43]
Conflicting attitudes within the Qing imperial court[edit]




Qing imperial soldiers during the Boxer Rebellion


Meanwhile, in Beijing, on 16 June, Empress Dowager Cixi summoned the imperial court for a mass audience and addressed the choices between using the Boxers to evict the foreigners from the city or seeking a diplomatic solution. In response to a high official who doubted the efficacy of the Boxers' magic, Cixi replied: Both sides of the debate at the imperial court realised that popular support for the Boxers in the countryside was almost universal and that suppression would be both difficult and unpopular, especially when foreign troops were on the march.[44][45]
Two factions were active during this debate. On one side were anti-foreigners who viewed foreigners as invasive and imperialistic and evoked a nativist populism. They advocated taking advantage of the Boxers to achieve the expulsion of foreign troops and foreign influences. The pro-foreigners on the other hand advanced rapprochement with foreign governments, seeing the Boxers as superstitious and ignorant.[citation needed]
The event that tilted the Qing imperial government irrevocably toward support of the Boxers and war with the foreign powers was the attack of foreign navies on the Dagu Forts near Tianjin, on 17 June 1900.[citation needed]
Siege of the Beijing legations[edit]
Main article: Siege of the International Legations




Locations of foreign diplomatic legations and front lines in Beijing during the siege


On 15 June, Qing imperial forces deployed electric mines in the River Beihe (Peiho) to prevent the Eight-Nation Alliance from sending ships to attack.[46] With a difficult military situation in Tianjin and a total breakdown of communications between Tianjin and Beijing, the allied nations took steps to reinforce their military presence significantly. On 17 June they took the Dagu Forts commanding the approaches to Tianjin, and from there brought increasing numbers of troops on shore. When Cixi received an ultimatum[when?] demanding that China surrender total control over all its military and financial affairs to foreigners,[47] she defiantly stated before the entire Grand Council, "Now they [the Powers] have started the aggression, and the extinction of our nation is imminent. If we just fold our arms and yield to them, I would have no face to see our ancestors after death. If we must perish, why don't we fight to the death?"[48] It was at this point that Cixi began to blockade the legations with the armies of the Peking Field Force, which began the siege. Cixi stated that "I have always been of the opinion, that the allied armies had been permitted to escape too easily in 1860. Only a united effort was then necessary to have given China the victory. Today, at last, the opportunity for revenge has come", and said that millions of Chinese would join the cause of fighting the foreigners since the Manchus had provided "great benefits" on China.[49] On receipt of the news of the attack on the Dagu Forts on the 19th of June, Empress Dowager Cixi immediately sent an order to the legations that the diplomats and other foreigners depart Beijing under escort of the Chinese army within 24 hours.[50]
The next morning, diplomats from the besieged legations met to discuss the Empress's offer. The majority quickly agreed that they could not trust the Chinese army. Fearing that they would be killed, they agreed to refuse the Empress's demand. The German Imperial Envoy, Baron Klemens Freiherr von Ketteler, was infuriated with the actions of the Chinese army troops and determined to take his complaints to the royal court. Against the advice of the fellow foreigners, the baron left the legations with a single aide and a team of porters to carry his sedan chair. On his way to the palace, von Ketteler was killed on the streets of Beijing by a Manchu captain.[51] His aide managed to escape the attack and carried word of the baron's death back to the diplomatic compound. At this news, the other diplomats feared they also would be murdered if they left the legation quarter and they chose to continue to defy the Chinese order to depart Beijing. The legations were hurriedly fortified. Most of the foreign civilians, which included a large number of missionaries and businessmen, took refuge in the British legation, the largest of the diplomatic compounds.[52] Chinese Christians were primarily housed in the adjacent palace (Fu) of Prince Su who was forced to abandon his property by the foreign soldiers.[53]




Representative U.S., Indian, French, Italian, British, German, Austrian and Japanese military and naval personnel forming part of the Allied forces


On the 21st of June, Empress Dowager Cixi declared war against all foreign powers. Regional governors who commanded substantial modernised armies, such as Li Hongzhang at Canton, Yuan Shikai in Shandong, Zhang Zhidong[54] at Wuhan and Liu Kunyi at Nanjing, refused to join in the imperial court's declaration of war and withheld knowledge of it from the public in the south. Yuan Shikai used his own forces to suppress Boxers in Shandong, and Zhang entered into negotiations with the foreigners in Shanghai to keep his army out of the conflict. The neutrality of these provincial and regional governors left the majority of Chinese out of the conflict.[55] They were called The Mutual Protection of Southeast China.[56]
The legations of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, the United States, Russia and Japan were located in the Beijing Legation Quarter south of the Forbidden City. The Chinese army and Boxer irregulars besieged the Legation Quarter from 20 June to 14 August 1900. A total of 473 foreign civilians, 409 soldiers, marines and sailors from eight countries, and about 3,000 Chinese Christians took refuge there.[57] Under the command of the British minister to China, Claude Maxwell MacDonald, the legation staff and military guards defended the compound with small arms, three machine guns, and one old muzzle-loaded cannon, which was nicknamed the International Gun because the barrel was British, the carriage Italian, the shells Russian and the crew American. Chinese Christians in the legations led the foreigners to the cannon and it proved important in the defence. Also under siege in Beijing was the Northern Cathedral (Beitang) of the Catholic Church. The Beitang was defended by 43 French and Italian soldiers, 33 Catholic foreign priests and nuns, and about 3,200 Chinese Catholics. The defenders suffered heavy casualties especially from lack of food and mines which the Chinese exploded in tunnels dug beneath the compound. [58]The number of Chinese soldiers and Boxers besieging the Legation Quarter and the Beitang is unknown.




1900, soldiers burned down the Temple, Shanhaiguan. The destruction of a Chinese temple on the bank of the Pei-Ho, by Amédée Forestier


On the 22nd and 23 June, Chinese soldiers and Boxers set fire to areas north and west of the British Legation, using it as a "frightening tactic" to attack the defenders. The nearby Hanlin Academy, a complex of courtyards and buildings that housed "the quintessence of Chinese scholarship ... the oldest and richest library in the world", caught fire. Each side blamed the other for the destruction of the invaluable books it contained.[59]
After the failure to burn out the foreigners, the Chinese army adopted an anaconda-like strategy. The Chinese built barricades surrounding the Legation Quarter and advanced, brick by brick, on the foreign lines, forcing the foreign legation guards to retreat a few feet at a time. This tactic was especially used in the Fu, defended by Japanese and Italian sailors and soldiers, and inhabited by most of the Chinese Christians. Fusillades of bullets, artillery and firecrackers were directed against the Legations almost every night—but did little damage. Sniper fire took its toll among the foreign defenders. Despite their numerical advantage, the Chinese did not attempt a direct assault on the Legation Quarter although in the words of one of the besieged, "it would have been easy by a strong, swift movement on the part of the numerous Chinese troops to have annihilated the whole body of foreigners ... in an hour."[60] American missionary Frank Gamewell and his crew of "fighting parsons" fortified the Legation Quarter,[61] but impressed Chinese Christians to do most of the physical labour of building defences.[62]
The Germans and the Americans occupied perhaps the most crucial of all defensive positions: the Tartar Wall. Holding the top of the 45 ft (14 m) tall and 40 ft (12 m) wide wall was vital. The German barricades faced east on top of the wall and 400 yd (370 m) west were the west-facing American positions. The Chinese advanced toward both positions by building barricades even closer. "The men all feel they are in a trap", said the American commander, Capt. John T. Myers, "and simply await the hour of execution."[63] On 30 June, the Chinese forced the Germans off the Wall, leaving the American Marines alone in its defence. At the same time, a Chinese barricade was advanced to within a few feet of the American positions and it became clear that the Americans had to abandon the wall or force the Chinese to retreat. At 2 am on 3 July, 56 British, Russian and American marines and sailors, under the command of Myers, launched an assault against the Chinese barricade on the wall. The attack caught the Chinese sleeping, killed about 20 of them, and expelled the rest of them from the barricades.[64] The Chinese did not attempt to advance their positions on the Tartar Wall for the remainder of the siege.[65]
Sir Claude MacDonald said 13 July was the "most harassing day" of the siege.[66] The Japanese and Italians in the Fu were driven back to their last defence line. The Chinese detonated a mine beneath the French Legation pushing the French and Austrians out of most of the French Legation.[66] On 16 July, the most capable British officer was killed and the journalist George Ernest Morrison was wounded.[67] But American Minister Edwin Hurd Conger established contact with the Chinese government and on 17 July, an armistice was declared by the Chinese.[68] More than 40% of the legation guards were dead or wounded. The motivation of the Chinese was probably the realization that an allied force of 20,000 men had landed in China and retribution for the siege was at hand.
Officials and commanders at cross purposes[edit]




Han Chinese General Nie Shicheng, who fought both the Boxers and the Allies[69]


The Manchu General Ronglu concluded that it was futile to fight all of the powers simultaneously, and declined to press home the siege.[70] The Manchu Zaiyi (Prince Duan), an anti-foreign friend of Dong Fuxiang, wanted artillery for Dong's troops to destroy the legations. Ronglu blocked the transfer of artillery to Zaiyi and Dong, preventing them from attacking.[71] Ronglu forced Dong Fuxiang and his troops to pull back from completing the siege and destroying the legations, thereby saving the foreigners and making diplomatic concessions.[72] Ronglu and Prince Qing sent food to the legations, and used their Manchu Bannermen to attack the Muslim Gansu Braves ("Kansu Braves" in the spelling of the time) of Dong Fuxiang and the Boxers who were besieging the foreigners. They issued edicts ordering the foreigners to be protected, but the Gansu warriors ignored it, and fought against Bannermen who tried to force them away from the legations. The Boxers also took commands from Dong Fuxiang.[73] Ronglu also deliberately hid an Imperial Decree from General Nie Shicheng. The Decree ordered him to stop fighting the Boxers because of the foreign invasion, and also because the population was suffering. Due to Ronglu's actions, General Nie continued to fight the Boxers and killed many of them even as the foreign troops were making their way into China. Ronglu also ordered Nie to protect foreigners and save the railway from the Boxers.[74] Because parts of the Railway were saved under Ronglu's orders, the foreign invasion army was able to transport itself into China quickly. General Nie committed thousands of troops against the Boxers instead of against the foreigners. Nie was already outnumbered by the Allies by 4,000 men. General Nie was blamed for attacking the Boxers, as Ronglu let Nie take all the blame. At the Battle of Tianjin (Tientsin), General Nie decided to sacrifice his life by walking into the range of Allied guns.[75]




Boxer rebels


Xu Jingcheng, who had served as the Qing Envoy to many of the same states under siege in the Legation Quarter, argued that "the evasion of extraterritorial rights and the killing of foreign diplomats are unprecedented in China and abroad."[76] Xu and five other officials urged Empress Dowager Cixi to order the repression of Boxers, the execution of their leaders, and a diplomatic settlement with foreign armies. The Empress Dowager, outraged, sentenced Xu and the five others to death for "willfully and absurdly petitioning the Imperial Court" and "building subversive thought." They were executed on July 28, 1900 and their severed heads placed on display at Caishikou Execution Grounds in Beijing.[77]




Han Chinese General Dong Fuxiang was overtly hostile to foreigners and his "Gansu Braves" relentlessly attacked the besieged legations.


Reflecting this vacillation, some Chinese soldiers were quite liberally firing at foreigners under siege from its very onset. Cixi did not personally order imperial troops to conduct a siege, and on the contrary had ordered them to protect the foreigners in the legations. Prince Duan led the Boxers to loot his enemies within the imperial court and the foreigners, although imperial authorities expelled Boxer troops after they were let into the city and went on a looting rampage against both the foreign and the Qing imperial forces. Older Boxers were sent outside Beijing to halt the approaching foreign armies, while younger men were absorbed into the Muslim Gansu army.[78]
With conflicting allegiances and priorities motivating the various forces inside Beijing, the situation in the city became increasingly confused. The foreign legations continued to be surrounded by both Qing imperial and Gansu forces. While Dong Fuxiang's Gansu army, now swollen by the addition of the Boxers, wished to press the siege, Ronglu's imperial forces seem to have largely attempted to follow Empress Dowager Cixi's decree and protect the legations. However, to satisfy the conservatives in the imperial court, Ronglu's men also fired on the legations and let off firecrackers to give the impression that they, too, were attacking the foreigners. Inside the legations and out of communication with the outside world, the foreigners simply fired on any targets that presented themselves, including messengers from the imperial court, civilians and besiegers of all persuasions.[79] Dong Fuxiang was denied artillery held by Ronglu which stopped him from leveling the legations, and when he complained to Empress Dowager Cixi on June 23, she dismissively said that "Your tail, is becoming too heavy to wag." The Alliance discovered large amounts of unused Chinese Krupp artillery and shells after the siege was lifted.[80]
The armistice, although occasionally broken, endured until 13 August when, with an allied army led by the British Alfred Gaselee approaching Beijing to relieve the siege, the Chinese launched their heaviest fusillade on the Legation Quarter. As the foreign army approached, Chinese forces melted away.
Gaselee Expedition[edit]


Forces of the Eight-Nation Alliance
Relief of the Legations

Troops of the Eight-Nation Alliance in 1900.
Left to right: Britain, United States, Australia,[81] India,
Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Japan



Countries
Warships
(units)
Marines
(men)
Army
(men)


 Empire of Japan
18
540
20,300


 Russian Empire
10
750
12,400


 United Kingdom
8
2,020
10,000


 French Third Republic
5
390
3,130


 United States
2
295
3,125


 German Empire
5
600
300


 Austria-Hungary
4
296
unknown


 Kingdom of Italy
2
80
2,500


Total
54
4,971
51,755


Main articles: Eight-Nation Alliance and Gaselee Expedition




The Boxers bombarded Tianjin in June 1900, and Dong Fuxiang's Muslim troops attacked the British Admiral Seymour and his expeditionary force.


Foreign navies started building up their presence along the northern China coast from the end of April 1900. Several international forces were sent to the capital, with varying success, and the Chinese forces were ultimately defeated by the Eight-Nation Alliance of Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States. Independent of the alliance, the Netherlands dispatched three cruisers in July to protect its citizens in Shanghai.[82]
British Lieutenant-General Alfred Gaselee acted as the commanding officer of the Eight-Nation Alliance, which eventually numbered 55,000. The main contingent was composed of Japanese (20,840), Russian (13,150), British (12,020), French (3,520), U.S. (3,420), German (900), Italian (80), Austro-Hungarian (75) and anti-Boxer Chinese troops.[83] The "First Chinese Regiment" (Weihaiwei Regiment) which was praised for its performance, consisted of Chinese collaborators serving in the British military.[84] The international force finally captured Tianjin on 14 July under the command of the Japanese Colonel Kuriya, after a day of fighting.




A Group Photograph at Quetta, Baluchistan (Chief Commissioner's Province), British India of some of the Officers of the 26th Baluchistan Regiment of Bombay Infantry of British India – before leaving India to go to China in 1900 to suppress the Boxer Rebellion (1899–1901).






The capture of the southern gate of Tianjin. British troops were positioned on the left, Japanese troops at the centre, French troops on the right.


Notable events included the seizure of the Dagu Forts commanding the approaches to Tianjin and the boarding and capture of four Chinese destroyers by British Commander Roger Keyes. Among the foreigners besieged in Tianjin was a young American mining engineer named Herbert Hoover, who would go on to become the 31st President of the United States.[85][86]
The march from Tianjin to Beijing of about 120 km included about 20,000 allied troops. On 4 August, there were approximately 70,000 Qing imperial troops and anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 Boxers along the way. The allies only encountered minor resistance, fighting battles at Beicang and Yangcun. At Yangcun, the 14th Infantry Regiment of the U.S. and British troops led the assault. The weather was a major obstacle. Conditions were extremely humid with temperatures sometimes reaching 42 °C (108 °F). These high temperatures and insects plagued the Allies. Soldiers dehydrated and horses died. Chinese villagers killed Allied troops who searched for wells.[87]
The heat killed Allied soldiers, who foamed at the mouth. The tactics along the way were gruesome on either side. Allied soldiers beheaded already dead Chinese corpses, bayoneted or beheaded live Chinese civilians, and raped Chinese girls and women.[88] Cossacks were reported to have killed Chinese civilians almost automatically and Japanese kicked a Chinese soldier to death.[89] The Chinese responded to the Alliance's atrocities with similar acts of violence and cruelty, especially towards captured Russians.[88] Lieutenant Smedley Butler saw the remains of two Japanese soldiers nailed to a wall, who had their tongues cut off and their eyes gouged.[90] Lieutenant Butler was wounded during the expedition in the leg and chest, later receiving the Brevet Medal in recognition for his actions.




Chinese troops wearing modern uniforms in 1900


The international force reached Beijing on 14 August. Following the defeat of Beiyang army in the First Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese government had invested heavily in modernizing the imperial army, which was equipped with modern Mauser repeater rifles and Krupp artillery. Three modernized divisions consisting of Manchu Bannermen protected the Beijing Metropolitan region. Two of them were under the command of the anti-Boxer Prince Qing and Ronglu, while the anti-foreign Prince Duan commanded the ten-thousand-strong Hushenying, or "Tiger Spirit Division", which had joined the Gansu Braves and Boxers in attacking the foreigners. It was a Hushenying captain who had assassinated the German diplomat Ketteler. The Tenacious Army under Nie Shicheng received western style training under German and Russian officers in addition to their modernised weapons and uniforms. They effectively resisted the Alliance at the Battle of Tientsin before retreating and astounded the Alliance forces with the accuracy of their artillery during the siege of the Tianjin concessions (the artillery shells failed to explode upon impact due to corrupt manufacturing). The Gansu Braves under Dong Fuxiang, which some sources described as "ill disciplined", were armed with modern weapons but were not trained according to western drill and wore traditional Chinese uniforms. They led the defeat of the Alliance at Langfang in the Seymour Expedition and were the most ferocious in besieging the Legations in Beijing. Some Banner forces were given modernised weapons and western training, becoming the Metropolitan Banner forces, which were decimated in the fighting. Among the Manchu dead was the father of the writer Lao She.[citation needed]




Corporal Titus scaling the walls of Peking


The British won the race among the international forces to be the first to reach the besieged Legation Quarter. The U.S. was able to play a role due to the presence of U.S. ships and troops stationed in Manila since the U.S. conquest of the Philippines during the Spanish–American War and the subsequent Philippine Insurrection. In the U.S. military, the action in the Boxer Rebellion was known as the China Relief Expedition. United States Marines scaling the walls of Beijing is an iconic image of the Boxer Rebellion.[91]
The British Army reached the legation quarter on the afternoon of 14 August and relieved the Legation Quarter. The Beitang was relieved on 16 August, first by Japanese soldiers and then, officially, by the French.[92]
Evacuation of the Qing imperial court from Beijing to Xi'an[edit]




Painting of Western and Japanese troops


In the early hours of 15 August, just as the Foreign Legations were being relieved, Empress Dowager Cixi, dressed in the padded blue cotton of a farm woman, the Guangxu Emperor, and a small retinue climbed into three wooden ox carts and escaped from the city covered with rough blankets. Legend has it that the Empress Dowager then either ordered that the Guangxu Emperor's favourite concubine, Consort Zhen, be thrown down a well in the Forbidden City or tricked her into drowning herself. The journey was made all the more arduous by the lack of preparation, but the Empress Dowager insisted this was not a retreat, rather a "tour of inspection." After weeks of travel, the party arrived in Xi'an in Shaanxi province, beyond protective mountain passes where the foreigners could not reach, deep in Chinese Muslim territory and protected by the Gansu Braves. The foreigners had no orders to pursue the Empress Dowager, so they decided to stay put.[93]
Russian invasion of Manchuria[edit]




Russian officers in Manchuria during the Boxer Rebellion


The Russian Empire and the Qing Empire had maintained a long peace, starting with the Treaty of Nerchinsk in 1689, but Tsarist forces took advantage of Chinese defeats to impose the Aigun Treaty of 1858 and the Treaty of Peking of 1860 which ceded formerly Chinese territory in Manchuria to Russia, much of which is held by Russia to the present day (Primorye). The Russians aimed for control over the Amur River for navigation, and the all-weather ports of Dairen and Port Arthur in the Liaodong peninsula. The rise of Japan as an Asian power provoked Russia's anxiety, especially in light of expanding Japanese influence in Korea. Following Japan's victory in the First Sino-Japanese War of 1895, the Triple Intervention of Russia, Germany and France forced Japan to return the territory won in Liaodong, leading to a de facto Sino-Russian alliance.
Local Chinese in Manchuria were incensed at these Russian advances and began to harass Russians and Russian institutions, such as the Chinese Eastern Railway. In June 1900, the Chinese bombarded the town of Blagoveshchensk on the Russian side of the Amur. The Czar's government used the pretext of Boxer activity to move some 200,000 troops into the area to crush the Boxers. The Chinese used arson to destroy a bridge carrying a railway and a barracks on 27 July. The Boxers destroyed railways and cut lines for telegraphs and burned the Yantai mines.[94]
By 21 September, Russian troops took Jilin and Liaodong, and by the end of the month completely occupied Manchuria, where their presence was a major factor leading to the Russo-Japanese War.
The Chinese Honghuzi bandits of Manchuria, who had fought alongside the Boxers in the war, did not stop when the Boxer rebellion was over, and continued guerilla warfare against the Russian occupation up to the Russo-Japanese war when the Russians were defeated by Japan.
Massacre of missionaries and Chinese Christians[edit]




The Holy Chinese Martyrs of the Orthodox Church as depicted in an icon commissioned in 1990


Orthodox, Protestant, and Catholic missionaries and their Chinese parishioners were massacred throughout northern China, some by Boxers and others by government troops and authorities. After the declaration of war on Western powers in June 1900, Yuxian, who had been named governor of Shanxi in March of that year, implemented a brutal anti-foreign and anti-Christian policy. On 9 July, reports circulated that he had executed forty-four foreigners (including women and children) from missionary families whom he had invited to the provincial capital Taiyuan under the promise to protect them.[95][96] Although the purported eye witness accounts have recently been questioned as improbable, this event became a notorious symbol of Chinese anger, known as the Taiyuan Massacre.[97] By the summer's end, more foreigners and as many as 2,000 Chinese Christians had been put to death in the province. Journalist and historical writer Nat Brandt has called the massacre of Christians in Shanxi "the greatest single tragedy in the history of Christian evangelicalism."[98]
During the Boxer Rebellion as a whole, a total of 136 Protestant missionaries and 53 children were killed, and 47 Catholic priests and nuns. 30,000 Chinese Catholics, 2,000 Chinese Protestants, and 200 to 400 of the 700 Russian Orthodox Christians in Beijing were estimated to have been killed. Collectively, the Protestant dead were called the China Martyrs of 1900.[99] 222 of Russian Christian Chinese Martyrs including St. Metrophanes were locally canonised as New Martyrs on 22 April 1902, after archimandrite Innocent (Fugurovsky), head of the Russian Orthodox Mission in China, solicited the Most Holy Synod to perpetuate their memory. This was the first local canonisation for more than two centuries.[100] The Boxers went on to murder Christians across 26 prefectures.[101]
Aftermath[edit]
Occupation, looting and atrocities[edit]




"The Fall of the Peking Castle" from September 1900. British and Japanese soldiers assaulting Chinese troops.






The occupation of Beijing. British sector in yellow, French in blue, US in green and ivory, German in red and Japanese in light green.


Beijing, Tianjin, and other cities in northern China were occupied for more than one year by the international expeditionary force under the command of German General Alfred Graf von Waldersee. Atrocities by foreign troops were common. French troops ravaged the countryside around Beijing on behalf of Chinese Catholics. The Americans and British paid General Yuan Shikai and his army (the Right Division) to help the Eight Nation Alliance suppress the Boxers. Yuan Shikai's forces killed tens of thousands of people in their anti Boxer campaign in Zhili Province and Shandong after the Alliance captured Beijing.[102] Yuan operated out of Baoding during the campaign, which ended in 1902.[103] Li Hongzhang commanded Chinese soldiers to kill "Boxers" to assist the foreign invaders.[104]
From the Chinese point of view, as well as reports from contemporary Western observers, German, Russian, and Japanese troops received the greatest criticism for their ruthlessness and willingness to wantonly execute Chinese of all ages and backgrounds, sometimes burning and killing entire village populations.[105]. The German force arrived too late to take part in the fighting, but undertook punitive expeditions to the countryside. Kaiser Wilhelm II on July 27 during departure ceremonies for the German relief force included an impromptu, but intemperate reference to the Hun invaders of continental Europe which would later be resurrected by British propaganda to mock Germany during the First World War and Second World War:



Should you encounter the enemy, he will be defeated! No quarter will be given! Prisoners will not be taken! Whoever falls into your hands is forfeited. Just as a thousand years ago the Huns under their King Attila made a name for themselves, one that even today makes them seem mighty in history and legend, may the name German be affirmed by you in such a way in China that no Chinese will ever again dare to look cross-eyed at a German.[106]







A Boxer is publicly executed.






Execution of a Boxer by the French, Tientsin






Boxers beheaded in front of a group of Chinese and Japanese officials


One newspaper called the aftermath of the siege a "carnival of loot", and others called it "an orgy of looting" by soldiers, civilians and missionaries. These characterisations called to mind the sacking of the Summer Palace in 1860.[107] Each nationality accused the others of being the worst looters. An American diplomat, Herbert G. Squiers, filled several railroad cars with loot. The British Legation held loot auctions every afternoon and proclaimed, "looting on the part of British troops was carried out in the most orderly manner." However, one British officer noted, "it is one of the unwritten laws of war that a city which does not surrender at the last and is taken by storm is looted." For the rest of 1900–1901, the British held loot auctions everyday except Sunday in front of the main-gate to the British Legation. Many foreigners, including Sir Claude Maxwell MacDonald and Lady Ethel MacDonald and George Ernest Morrison of The Times, were active bidders among the crowd. Many of these looted items ended up in Europe.[108] The Catholic Beitang or North Cathedral was a "salesroom for stolen property."[109] The American commander General Adna Chaffee banned looting by American soldiers, but the ban was ineffectual.[110]




Execution of Boxers after the rebellion.


Some, but by no means all Western missionaries took an active part in calling for retribution. To provide restitution to missionaries and Chinese Christian families whose property had been destroyed, William Ament, a missionary of American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, guided American troops through villages to punish those he suspected of being Boxers and confiscate their property. When Mark Twain read of this expedition, he wrote a scathing essay, "To the Person Sitting in Darkness" that attacked the "Reverend bandits of the American Board," especially targeting Ament, one of the most respected missionaries in China.[111] The controversy was front page news during much of 1901. Ament's counterpart on the distaff side was doughty British missionary Georgina Smith who presided over a neighborhood in Beijing as judge and jury.[112]




Japanese troops during the Boxer Rebellion


While one historical account reported that Japanese troops were astonished by other Alliance troops raping civilians[113], others noted that Japanese troops were 'looting and burning without mercy', and that Chinese 'women and girls by hundreds have committed suicide to escape a worse fate at the hands of Russian and Japanese brutes.'[114] Roger Keyes, who commanded the British destroyer Fame and accompanied the Gaselee Expedition, noted that the Japanese had brought their own "regimental wives" (prostitutes) to the front to keep their soldiers from raping Chinese civilians.[115] Thousands of Chinese women committed suicide; The Daily Telegraph journalist E. J. Dillon stated it was to avoid rape by Alliance forces, and he witnessed the mutilated corpses of Chinese women who were raped and killed by the Alliance troops. The French commander dismissed the rapes, attributing them to "gallantry of the French soldier." A foreign journalist, George Lynch, said "there are things that I must not write, and that may not be printed in England, which would seem to show that this Western civilization of ours is merely a veneer over savagery."[108]
Many Bannermen supported the Boxers and shared their anti-foreign sentiment.[116] The German Minister Clemens von Ketteler was assassinated by a Manchu.[117] Bannermen had been devastated in the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895 and Banner armies were destroyed while resisting the invasion. In the words of historian Pamela Crossley, their living conditions went "from desperate poverty to true misery."[118] When thousands of Manchus fled south from Aigun during the fighting in 1900, their cattle and horses were stolen by Russian Cossacks who then burned their villages and homes to ashes.[119] The clan system of the Manchus in Aigun was obliterated by the despoliation of the area at the hands of the Russian invaders.[120]




Mutual Protection of Southeast China in 1900


Under the lead of some highly ranked officials including Li Hongzhang, Yuan Shikai and Zhang Zhidong, several provinces in the southeast formed the Southeastern Mutual Protection during this period to avoid the further expansion of the chaos or the worsen of the situation between China and western powers. These provinces claimed to be neutral and refused to fight either the Boxers or the Eight Nation Alliance.
Reparations[edit]




Foreign armies assemble inside the Forbidden City after capturing Beijing, 28 November 1900


After the capture of Peking by the foreign armies, some of Empress Dowager Cixi's advisers advocated that the war be carried on, arguing that China could have defeated the foreigners as it was disloyal and traitorous people within China who allowed Beijing and Tianjin to be captured by the Allies, and that the interior of China was impenetrable. They also recommended that Dong Fuxiang continue fighting. The Empress Dowager Cixi was practical, however, and decided that the terms were generous enough for her to acquiesce when she was assured of her continued reign after the war and that China would not be forced to cede any territory.[121]
On 7 September 1901, the Qing imperial court agreed to sign the "Boxer Protocol" also known as Peace Agreement between the Eight-Nation Alliance and China. The protocol ordered the execution of 10 high-ranking officials linked to the outbreak and other officials who were found guilty for the slaughter of foreigners in China. Alfons Mumm (Freiherr von Schwarzenstein), Ernest Satow and Komura Jutaro signed on behalf of Germany, Britain and Japan respectively.
China was fined war reparations of 450,000,000 taels of fine silver (≈540,000,000 troy ounces (17,000 t) @ 1.2 ozt/tael) for the loss that it caused. The reparation was to be paid within 39 years, and would be 982,238,150 taels with interest (4 percent per year) included. To help meet the payment it was agreed to increase the existing tariff from an actual 3.18 percent to 5 percent, and to tax hitherto duty-free merchandise. The sum of reparation was estimated by the Chinese population (roughly 450 million in 1900), to let each Chinese pay one tael. Chinese custom income and salt tax were enlisted as guarantee of the reparation. China paid 668,661,220 taels of silver from 1901 to 1939, equivalent in 2010 to ≈US$61 billion on a purchasing power parity basis.[122]
A large portion of the reparations paid to the United States was diverted to pay for the education of Chinese students in U.S. universities under the Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program. To prepare the students chosen for this program an institute was established to teach the English language and to serve as a preparatory school. When the first of these students returned to China they undertook the teaching of subsequent students; from this institute was born Tsinghua University. Some of the reparation due to Britain was later earmarked for a similar program.




American troops during the Boxer Rebellion.


The China Inland Mission lost more members than any other missionary agency:[123] 58 adults and 21 children were killed. However, in 1901, when the allied nations were demanding compensation from the Chinese government, Hudson Taylor refused to accept payment for loss of property or life in order to demonstrate the meekness and gentleness of Christ to the Chinese.[124]
The French Catholic vicar apostolic, Msgr. Alfons Bermyn wanted foreign troops garrisoned in Inner Mongolia, but the Governor refused. Bermyn petitioned the Manchu Enming to send troops to Hetao where Prince Duan's Mongol troops and General Dong Fuxiang's Muslim troops allegedly threatened Catholics. It turned out that Bermyn had created the incident as a hoax.[125][126]
The Qing government did not capitulate to all the foreign demands. The Manchu governor Yuxian, was executed, but the imperial court refused to execute the Han Chinese General Dong Fuxiang, although he had also encouraged the killing of foreigners during the rebellion.[127] Empress Dowager Cixi intervened when the Alliance demanded him executed and Dong was only cashiered and sent back home.[128] Instead, Dong lived a life of luxury and power in "exile" in his home province of Gansu.[129] Upon Dong's death in 1908, all honors which had been stripped from him were restored and he was given a full military burial.[129]
Long-term consequences[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The European great powers finally ceased their ambitions of colonizing China having learned from the Boxer rebellions that the best way to deal with China was through the ruling dynasty, rather than directly with the Chinese people (a sentiment embodied in the adage: "The people are afraid of officials, the officials are afraid of foreigners, and the foreigners are afraid of the people" (老百姓怕官，官怕洋鬼子，洋鬼子怕老百姓), and even briefly assisted the Qing in their war against the Japanese to prevent a Japanese domination in the region.
Concurrently, this period marks the ceding of European great power interference in Chinese affairs, with the Japanese replacing the Europeans as the dominant power for their lopsided involvement in the war against the Boxers as well as their victory in the First Sino-Japanese War. With the toppling of the Qing that followed and the rise of the Nationalist Kuomintang, European sway within China was reduced to symbolic status. After taking Manchuria in 1905, Japan came to dominate Asian affairs both militarily and culturally with many of the Chinese scholars also educated in Japan with the most prominent example being Sun Yat-Sen who would later found the Nationalist movement of the Kuomintang in China.




French 1901 China expedition commemorative medal. Musée de la Légion d'Honneur


In October 1900, Russia occupied the provinces of Manchuria,[130] a move which threatened Anglo-American hopes of maintaining what remained of China's territorial integrity and the country's openness to commerce under the Open Door Policy.
Japan's clash with Russia over Liaodong and other provinces in eastern Manchuria, due to the Russian refusal to honour the terms of the Boxer protocol which called for their withdrawal, led to the Russo-Japanese War when two years of negotiations broke down in February 1904. The Russian Lease of the Liaodong (1898) was confirmed. Russia was ultimately defeated by an increasingly confident Japan.
Besides the compensation, Empress Dowager Cixi reluctantly started some reforms despite her previous views. Under her reforms known as the New Policies started in 1901, the imperial examination system for government service was eliminated and as a result the system of education through Chinese classics was replaced with a European liberal system that led to a university degree. Along with the formation of new military and police organisations, the reforms also simplified central bureaucracy and made a start on revamping taxation policies.[131] After the deaths of Cixi and the Guangxu Emperor in 1908, the prince regent Zaifeng (Prince Chun), the Guangxu Emperor's brother, launched further reforms.
The effect on China was a weakening of the dynasty and its national defense capabilities. The government structure was temporarily sustained by the Europeans. Behind the international conflict, it further deepened internal ideological differences between northern-Chinese anti-foreign royalists and southern-Chinese anti-Qing revolutionists. This scenario in the last years of the Qing dynasty gradually escalated into a chaotic warlord era in which the most powerful northern warlords were hostile towards the revolutionaries in the south who overthrew the Qing monarchy in 1911. The rivalry was not fully resolved until the northern warlords were defeated by the Kuomintang's 1926–28 Northern Expedition. Prior to the final defeat of the Boxer Rebellion, all anti-Qing movements in the previous century, such as the Taiping Rebellion, had been successfully suppressed by the Qing.
Historian Walter LaFeber has argued that President William McKinley's decision to send 5,000 American troops to quell the rebellion marks "the origins of modern presidential war powers":[132]



McKinley took a historic step in creating a new, 20th century presidential power. He dispatched the five thousand troops without consulting Congress, let alone obtaining a declaration of war, to fight the Boxers who were supported by the Chinese government ... Presidents had previously used such force against non-governmental groups that threatened U.S. interests and citizens. It was now used, however, against recognised governments, and without obeying the Constitution's provisions about who was to declare war.



Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. concurred, writing that:[133]



The intervention in China marked the start of a crucial shift in the presidential employment of armed force overseas. In the 19th century, military force committed without congressional authorization had been typically used against nongovernmental organizations. Now it was beginning to be used against sovereign states, and, in the case of Theodore Roosevelt, with less consultation than ever.



In the Second Sino-Japanese War, when the Japanese asked the Muslim general Ma Hongkui to defect and become head of a Muslim puppet state, he responded that his relatives had been killed during the Battle of Peking, including his uncle Ma Fulu. Since Japanese troops made up the majority of the Alliance forces there would be no cooperation with the Japanese.[134]
Controversies and changing views of the Boxers[edit]




Boxers captured by the U.S. Army near Tianjin in 1901


From the beginning, views differed as to whether the Boxers were better seen as anti-imperialist, patriotic, and proto-nationalist or as "uncivilized", irrational, and futile opponents of inevitable change. The historian Joseph Esherick comments that "confusion about the Boxer Uprising is not simply a matter of popular misconceptions", for "there is no major incident in China's modern history on which the range of professional interpretation is as great".[135]
Chinese liberals such as Hu Shi often condemned the Boxers for their irrationality and barbarity.[136] Chinese nationalists initially disdained them for their superstition and xenophobia. Dr. Sun Yat-sen, the founding father of the Republic of China and of the Nationalist Party at first believed that the Boxer Movement was stirred up by the Qing government's rumors, which "caused confusion among the populace", and delivered "scathing criticism" of the Boxers' "anti-foreignism and obscurantism". Sun praised the Boxers for their "spirit of resistance" but called them "bandits". Students shared an ambivalent attitude to the Boxers, stating that while the uprising originated from the "ignorant and stubborn people of the interior areas", their beliefs were "brave and righteous", and could "be transformed into a moving force for independence".[137] After the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, nationalist Chinese became more sympathetic to the Boxers. In 1918 Sun praised their fighting spirit and said the Boxers were courageous and fearless, fighting to the death against the Alliance armies, specifically the Battle of Yangcun.[138] The leader of the New Culture Movement, Chen Duxiu, forgave the "barbarism of the Boxer... given the crime foreigners committed in China", and contended that it was those "subservient to the foreigners" that truly "deserved our resentment".[139]




Qing forces of Chinese soldiers in 1899–1901.
Left: two infantrymen of the New Imperial Army. Front: drum major of the regular army. Seated on the trunk: field artilleryman. Right: Boxers.


In other countries, views of the Boxers were complex and contentious. Mark Twain said that "the Boxer is a patriot. He loves his country better than he does the countries of other people. I wish him success".[140] The Russian writer Leo Tolstoy also praised the Boxers. He accused Nicholas II of Russia and Wilhelm II of Germany of being chiefly responsible for the lootings, rapes, murders and the "Christian brutality" of the Russians and other western troops.[141] The Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin mocked the Russian government's claim that it was protecting Christian civilization: "Poor Imperial Government! So Christianly unselfish, and yet so unjustly maligned! Several years ago it unselfishly seized Port Arthur, and now it is unselfishly seizing Manchuria; it has unselfishly flooded the frontier provinces of China with hordes of contractors, engineers, and officers, who, by their conduct, have roused to indignation even the Chinese, known for their docility."[142] The Indian Bengali Hindu Rabindranath Tagore attacked the European colonialists.[143] A number of Indian soldiers in the British Indian Army agreed that the Boxers were right and the British stole from the Temple of Heaven a bell, which was given back to China by the Indian military in 1994.[144]
Even some American churchmen spoke out in support of the Boxers. The evangelist Rev. Dr. George F. Pentecost said that the Boxer uprising was a "patriotic movement to expel the 'foreign devils' — just that — the foreign devils". Suppose, he said, the great nations of Europe were to “put their fleets together, came over here, seize Portland, move on down to Boston, then New York, then Philadelphia, and so on down the Atlantic Coast and around the Gulf of Galveston? Suppose they took possession of these port cities, drove our people into the hinterland, built great warehouses and factories, brought in a body of dissolute agents, and calmly notified our people that henceforward they would manage the commerce of the country? Would we not have a Boxer movement to drive those foreign European Christian devils out of our country?[145]
The Russian newspaper Amurskii Krai criticized the killing of innocent civilians, charging that "restraint" "civilization" and "culture" instead of "racial hatred" and "destruction" would have been more becoming of a "civilized Christian nation". The paper asked "What shall we tell civilized people? We shall have to say to them: 'Do not consider us as brothers anymore. We are mean and terrible people; we have killed those who hid at our place, who sought our protection'".[146]
The events also left a longer impact. The historian Robert Bickers found that for the British in China the Boxer rising served as the "equivalent of the Indian 'mutiny'" and came to represent the Yellow Peril. Later events, he adds, such as the Chinese Nationalist Revolution of the 1920s and even the activities of the Red Guards of the 1960s, were perceived as being in the shadow of the Boxers.[147]
In Taiwan (Republic of China) and Hong Kong, history textbooks often present the Boxer as irrational and xenophobic. But in the People's Republic of China, government textbooks described the Boxer movement as an anti-imperialist, patriotic peasant movement whose failure was due to the lack of leadership from the modern working class, and described the international army as an invading force. In recent decades, however, large-scale projects of village interviews and explorations of archival sources have led historians in China to take a more nuanced view. Some non-Chinese scholars, such as Joseph Esherick, have seen the movement as anti-imperialist; while others hold that the concept "nationalistic" is anachronistic because the Chinese nation had not been formed and the Boxers were more concerned with regional issues. Paul Cohen's recent study includes a survey of "the Boxers as myth", showing how their memory was used in changing ways in 20th century China from the New Culture Movement to the Cultural Revolution.[148]
In recent years the Boxer question has been debated in the People's Republic of China. In 1998, the critical scholar Wang Yi argued that the Boxers had features in common with the extremism of the Cultural Revolution. Both events had the external goal of "liquidating all harmful pests" and the domestic goal of "eliminating bad elements of all descriptions" and this relation was rooted in "cultural obscurantism". Wang explained to his readers the changes in attitudes towards the Boxers from the condemnation of the May Fourth Movement to the approval expressed by Mao Zedong during the Cultural Revolution.[149] In 2006 Yuan Weishi, a professor of philosophy at Zhongshan University in Guangzhou, wrote that the Boxers by their "criminal actions brought unspeakable suffering to the nation and its people! These are all facts that everybody knows, and it is a national shame that the Chinese people cannot forget".[150] Yuan charged that history text books had been lacking in neutrality in presenting the Boxer Uprising as a "magnificent feat of patriotism", and not presenting the view that the majority of the Boxer rebels were both violent and xenophobic.[151] In response, some labeled Yuan Weishi a "traitor" (Hanjian).[152]
Terminology[edit]
The first reports coming from China in 1898 referred to the village activists as "Yihequan", (Wade–Giles: I Ho Ch'uan). The first known use of the term "Boxer" was September 1899 in a letter from missionary Grace Newton in Shandong. It appears from context that "Boxer" was a known term by that time, possibly coined by the Shandong missionaries Arthur H. Smith and Henry Porter.[153] Smith says in his book of 1902 that the name

I Ho Ch'uan... literally denotes the 'Fists' (Ch'uan) of Righteousness (or Public) (I) Harmony (Ho), in apparent allusion to the strength of united force which was to be put forth. As the Chinese phrase 'fists and feet' signifies boxing and wrestling, there appeared to be no more suitable term for the adherents of the sect than 'Boxers,' a designation first used by one or two missionary correspondents of foreign journals in China, and later universally accepted on account of the difficulty of coining a better one.[154]

On 6 June 1900 the Times of London used the term "rebellion" in quotation marks, presumably to indicate their view that the rising was in fact instigated by Empress Dowager Cixi.[155] The historian Lanxin Xiang refers to the "so called 'Boxer Rebellion,'" and explains that "while peasant rebellion was nothing new in Chinese history, a war against the world's most powerful states was."[156] The name "Boxer Rebellion", concludes Joseph Esherick, another recent historian, is truly a "misnomer", for the Boxers "never rebelled against the Manchu rulers of China and their Qing dynasty" and the "most common Boxer slogan, throughout the history of the movement, was "support the Qing, destroy the Foreign." He adds that only after the movement was suppressed by the Allied Intervention did both the foreign powers and influential Chinese officials realize that the Qing would have to remain as government of China in order to maintain order and collect taxes to pay the indemnity. Therefore, in order to save face for the Empress Dowager and the imperial court, the argument was made that the Boxers were rebels and that support from the imperial court came only from a few Manchu princes. Esherick concludes that the origin of the term "rebellion" was "purely political and opportunistic", but it has shown a remarkable staying power, particularly in popular accounts.[157]
Other recent Western works refer to the "Boxer Movement", "Boxer War" or Yihetuan Movement, while Chinese studies use 义和团运动 (Yihetuan yundong), that is, "Yihetuan Movement." In his discussion of the general and legal implications of the terminology involved, the German scholar Thoralf Klein notes that all of the terms, including the Chinese ones, are "posthumous interpretations of the conflict." He argues that each term, whether it be "uprising", "rebellion" or "movement" implies a different definition of the conflict. Even the term "Boxer War", which has become widely used by recent scholars in the West, raises questions, as war was never declared, and Allied troops behaved as a punitive expedition in colonial style, not in a declared war with legal constraints. The Allies took advantage of the fact that China had not signed "The Laws and Customs of War on Land", a key document at the 1899 Hague Peace Conference. They argued that China had violated its provisions but themselves ignored them. [158]
Later representations[edit]




U.S. Marines fight rebellious Boxers outside Beijing Legation Quarter, 1900. Copy of painting by Sergeant John Clymer.






British and Japanese forces engage Boxers in battle.


By 1900, many new forms of media had matured, including illustrated newspapers and magazines, postcards, broadsides and advertisements, all of which presented images of the Boxers and of the invading armies.[159] The rebellion was covered in the foreign illustrated press by artists and photographers. Paintings and prints were also published including Japanese wood-blocks.[160] In the following decades, the Boxers were a constant subject for comment. A sampling includes:

In the Polish play The Wedding by Stanisław Wyspiański, first published on 16 March 1901, even before the rebellion was finally crushed, the character of Czepiec asks the Journalist (Dziennikarz) one of the best-known questions in the history of Polish literature: "Cóż tam, panie, w polityce? Chińczyki trzymają się mocno!? ("How are things in politics, Mister? Are the Chinese holding out firmly!?").[161]
Liu E, Lao Can Yuji[162] sympathetically shows an honest official trying to carry out reforms and depicts the Boxers as sectarian rebels.
G. A. Henty, With the Allies to Pekin, a Tale of the Relief of the Legations (New York: Scribners, 1903; London: Blackie, 1904). Juvenile fiction by a widely read author, depicts the Boxers as "a mob of ruffians."
A false or forged diary, Diary of his Excellency Ching-Shan: Being a Chinese Account of the Boxer Troubles, including text written by Edmund Backhouse, who claimed he recovered the document from a burnt building. It is suspected that Backhouse falsified the document, as well as other stories, because he was prone to tell tales dubious in nature, including claims of nightly visits to the Empress Dowager Cixi.[163]
In Hergé's The Adventures of Tintin comic The Blue Lotus, Tintin's Chinese friend Chang Chong-Chen when they first meet, after Tintin saves the boy from drowning, the boy asks Tintin why he saved him from drowning as, according to Chang's uncle who fought in the Rebellion, all white people were wicked.
The novel Moment in Peking (1939), by Lin Yutang, opens during the Boxer Rebellion, and provides a child's-eye view of the turmoil through the eyes of the protagonist.
Tulku, a 1979 children's novel by Peter Dickinson, includes the effects of the Boxer Rebellion on a remote part of China.
The Diamond Age or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer (New York, 1996), by Neal Stephenson, includes a quasi-historical re-telling of the Boxer Rebellion as an integral component of the novel
The novel The Palace of Heavenly Pleasure (2003), by Adam Williams, describes the experiences of a small group of foreign missionaries, traders and railway engineers in a fictional town in northern China shortly before and during the Boxer Rebellion.
Illusionist William Ellsworth Robinson a.k.a. Chung Ling Soo had a bullet catch trick entitled "Condemned to Death by the Boxers", which famously resulted in his onstage death.
The 1963 film 55 Days at Peking directed by Nicholas Ray and starring Charlton Heston, Ava Gardner and David Niven.[164]
In 1975 Hong Kong's Shaw Brothers studio produced the film Boxer Rebellion (Chinese: 八國聯軍; pinyin: bāguó liánjūn; Wade–Giles: Pa kuo lien chun; literally: "Eight-Nation Allied Army") under director Chang Cheh with one of the highest budgets to tell a sweeping story of disillusionment and revenge.[165]
Hong Kong's Shaw Brothers Legendary Weapons of China (1981), director Lau Kar Leung. A comedy starring Hsiao Ho (Hsiao Hou) as a disillusioned boxer of the Magic Clan who is sent to assassinate the former leader of a powerful boxer clan who refuses to dupe his students into believing they are impervious to firearms.
There are several flashbacks to the Boxer Rebellion in the television shows Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel. During the conflict, Spike kills his first slayer to impress Drusilla, and Angel decisively splits from Darla.
The 2003 film, Shanghai Knights, starring Jackie Chan and Owen Wilson, shows that the Boxers still exist, working for Lord Rathbone, who wants to assassinate many members of the British Royal Family.
The Last Empress (Boston, 2007), by Anchee Min, describes the long reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi in which the siege of the legations is one of the climactic events in the novel.
Mo, Yan. Sandalwood Death. Viewpoint of villagers during Boxer Uprising.[166]
The pair of graphic novels by Gene Luen Yang, with colour by Lark Pien, Boxers and Saints, describes the "bands of foreign missionaries and soldiers" who "roam the countryside bullying and robbing Chinese peasants." Little Bao, "harnessing the powers of ancient Chinese gods", recruits an army of Boxers, "commoners trained in kung fu who fight to free China from 'foreign devils.'"[167]
The 2013 video game BioShock Infinite featured the Boxer Rebellion as a major historical moment for the floating city of Columbia. Columbia, in an effort to rescue American hostages during the rebellion, opened fire upon the city of Peking and burned it to the ground. These actions resulted in the United States recalling Columbia, which led to its secession from the Union.
The Boxer Rebellion is the historical backdrop for the episode titled "Kung Fu Crabtree" (Season 7, Episode 16, aired 24 March 2014) of the television series Murdoch Mysteries, when Chinese officials visit Toronto in 1900 in search of Boxers who have fled from China.

See also[edit]


Battle of Peking (1900)
Century of humiliation
China Relief Expedition
History of Beijing
Imperial Decree on events leading to the signing of Boxer Protocol
List of 1900–30 publications on the Boxer Rebellion
Opium War
Xishiku Cathedral (西什庫天主堂)
Donghak Rebellion, an anti-foreign, proto-nationalist uprising in pre-Japanese Korea
Eight-Nation Alliance
The Mutual Protection of Southeast China
Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program
Gengzi Guobian Tanci
Alfons Mumm von Schwarzenstein
Stephen Pichon
Ernest Mason Satow
Maurice Joostens
Komura Jutarō


References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ a b Harrington 2001, p. 29.
^ "China Relief Expedition (Boxer Rebellion), 1900 – 1901". Veterans Museum and Memorial Center. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 20 March 2017. 
^ Hsu, Immanuel C.Y. (1978). "Late Ch'ing Foreign Relations, 1866–1905". In John King Fairbank. The Cambridge History of China. Cambridge University Press. p. 127. ISBN 978-0-521-22029-3. 
^ Xiang 2003, p. 248.
^ Singer, Joel David, The Wages of War, 1816–1965 (1972)
^ Hammond Atlas of the 20th century (1996)
^ Thompson, Larry Clinton (2009), William Scott Ament and the Boxer Rebellion: Heroism, Hubris, and the Ideal Missionary, Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co., Inc., p. 7
^ Cohen (1997), p. 114.
^ Esherick (1987), pp. xii, 54- 59, 96, etc..
^ Lanxin Xiang (2003). The origins of the Boxer War: a multinational study. Psychology Press. p. 114. ISBN 0-7007-1563-0. 
^ Landes, Richard (17 July 2008), "Millennialism", in James R Lewis, The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Movements, OUP USA, p. 342, ISBN 978-0-19-536964-9 
^ Cohen (1997), p. 19.
^ Cohen (1997), p. 27–30.
^ Lanxin Xiang (2003). The origins of the Boxer War: a multinational study. Psychology Press. p. 115. ISBN 0-7007-1563-0. 
^ Thompson (2009), p. 9.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 77.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 123.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 129–30.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 143–144, 163.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 253.
^ Esherick (1987), p. 32.
^ Spence (1999) pp. 231–232.
^ Esherick (1987), Ch 3 "Imperialism for Christ's Sake", pp. 68–95.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 12.
^ Cohen (1997), p. 114.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 7–8.
^ Lynn E. Bodin (1979). The Boxer Rebellion. Osprey. pp. 26, 40. ISBN 0-85045-335-6. 
^ Thompson (2009), p. 42.
^ Preston (2000), p. 70.
^ Elliott (2002), p. 126.
^ Lanxin Xiang (2003). The origins of the Boxer War: a multinational study. Psychology Press. p. 207. ISBN 0-7007-1563-0. 
^ Chester M. Biggs (2003). The United States Marines in North China, 1894–1942. McFarland. p. 25. ISBN 0-7864-1488-X. 
^ Kemal H. Karpat (2001). The politicization of Islam: reconstructing identity, state, faith, and community in the late Ottoman state. Oxford University Press US. p. 237. ISBN 0-19-513618-7. 
^ Weale, B. L. (Bertram Lenox Simpson), Indiscreet Letters from Peking. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1907, pp. 50–1.
^ Robert B. Edgerton (1997). Warriors of the rising sun: a history of the Japanese military. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 70. ISBN 0-393-04085-2. 
^ Morrison, p. 270
^ Sterling Seagrave; Peggy Seagrave (1992). Dragon lady: the life and legend of the last empress of China. Knopf. p. 320. 
^ Leonhard, p. 12.
^ Leonhard, p. 18.
^ Cohen (1997), p. 49.
^ Smith, Arthur Henderson (1901). China in convulsion. 2. F. H. Revell. pp. 393, 441–448. 
^ Arthur Henderson Smith (1901). China in convulsion, Volume 2. F. H. Revell Co. p. 446. [not in citation given]
^ Preston (2000), p. 100-104.
^ Esherick (1987), pp. 289–290.
^ Victor Purcell (3 June 2010). The Boxer Uprising: A Background Study. Cambridge University Press. pp. 250–. ISBN 978-0-521-14812-2. 
^ Stephan L'H. Slocum, Carl Reichmann, Adna Romanza Chaffee, United States. Adjutant-General's Office. Military Information Division (1901). Reports on Military Operations in South Africa and China. G.P.O. p. 533. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Keith Laidler (2003). The Last Empress: The She-Dragon of China. John Wiley & Sons. p. 221. ISBN 0-470-86426-5. 
^ Chester C. Tan (1967). The Boxer catastrophe (reprint ed.). Octagon Books. p. 73. ISBN 0-374-97752-6. 
^ Richard O'Connor (1973). The Spirit Soldiers: A Historical Narrative of the Boxer Rebellion (illustrated ed.). Putnam. p. 85. 
^ Tan, p. 75
^ Robert B. Edgerton (1997). Warriors of the Rising Sun: A History of the Japanese Military. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 82. ISBN 0-393-04085-2. 
^ Diana Preston, page 87, "A Brief History of the Boxer Rebellion", ISBN 1-84119-490-5
^ Diana Preston, page 79, "A Brief History of the Boxer Rebellion", ISBN 1-84119-490-5
^ Edward J. M. Rhoads (1 December 2011). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928. University of Washington Press. pp. 74–75. ISBN 978-0-295-80412-5. 
^ Hsu, The Rise of Modern China pp. 393–398.
^ Zhitian Luo (30 January 2015). Inheritance within Rupture: Culture and Scholarship in Early Twentieth Century China. BRILL. pp. 19–. ISBN 978-90-04-28766-2. 
^ Thompson (2009), p. 84–85.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 85, 170–171.
^ "Destruction of Chinese Books in the Peking Siege of 1900. Donald G. Davis, Jr. University of Texas at Austin, USA Cheng Huanwen Zhongshan University, PRC". International Federation of Library Association. Archived from the original on 19 September 2008. Retrieved 26 October 2008. 
^ Smith, Arthur H. China in Convulsion. 2 vols. New York: Fleming H. Revell, 1901, pp. 316–317
^ Weale, Putnam. Indiscreet Letters from Peking. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1907, pp. 142–143
^ Payen, Cecile E. "Besieged in Peking." The Century Magazine, January 1901, pp 458–460
^ Myers, Captain John T. "Military Operations and Defenses of the Siege of Peking." Proceedings of the U.S. Naval Institute, September 1902, pp. 542–50.
^ Oliphant, Nigel, A Diary of the Siege of the Legations in Peking. London: Longman, Greens, 1901, pp 78–80
^ Martin, W.A.P. The Siege in Peking. New York:Fleming H. Revell, 1900, p. 83
^ a b Fleming (1959), p. 157–158.
^ Thompson, Peter and Macklin, Robert The Man who Died Twice: The Life and Adventures of Morrison of Peking. Crow's Nest, Australia: Allen & Unwin, 2005, pp 190–191
^ Conger (1909), p. 135.
^ Elliott (2002), p. 402.
^ Cohen (1997), p. 54.
^ X. L. Woo (2002). Empress dowager Cixi: China's last dynasty and the long reign of a formidable concubine: legends and lives during the declining days of the Qing dynasty. Algora Publishing. p. 216. ISBN 1-892941-88-0. 
^ Cohen (1997), p. 54.
^ Bruce A. Elleman (2001). Modern Chinese warfare, 1795–1989. Psychology Press. p. 124. ISBN 0-415-21474-2. 
^ Lanxin Xiang (2003). The origins of the Boxer War: a multinational study. Psychology Press. p. 235. ISBN 0-7007-1563-0. 
^ Elliott (2002), p. 499.
^ 趙爾巽等撰; 趙爾巽; Zhao, Erxun (1976), Qing shi gao, 新華書店北京發行所發行, Beijing, OCLC 17045858 
^ "資料連結". 
^ Grant Hayter-Menzies (2008). Imperial masquerade: the legend of Princess Der Ling. Hong Kong University Press. p. 88. ISBN 962-209-881-9. 
^ Grant Hayter-Menzies (2008). Imperial masquerade: the legend of Princess Der Ling. Hong Kong University Press. p. 89. ISBN 962-209-881-9. 
^ Fleming (1959), p. 226.
^ Example of Australian uniform of the period
^ Nordholt, J. W. Schulte; van Arkel, D., eds. (1970). Acta historiae Neerlandica: Historical studies in the Netherlands. IV. Brill Publishers. pp. 160–161, 163–164. 
^ "Russojapanesewarweb". Russojapanesewar.com. 1 July 1902. Retrieved 6 September 2012. 
^ Ralph L. Powell (8 December 2015). Rise of the Chinese Military Power. Princeton University Press. pp. 118–. ISBN 978-1-4008-7884-0. 
^ Thompson (2009), p. 96.
^ Hoover, Herbert C. (1952). The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover Years of Adventure 1874–1920. London: Hollis & Carter. p. 47-54
^ Edgerton (1997), p. 88.
^ a b Thompson 2009, p. 168.
^ Edgerton 1997, pp. 87, 89.
^ Edgerton 1997, p. 88.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 177.
^ Fleming (1959), p. 220–221.
^ Preston (2000), pp. 253–261.
^ George Alexander Lensen (1967). The Russo-Chinese War. Diplomatic Press. p. 14. 
^ Cohen (1997), p. 51.
^ Esherick (1987), pp. 190–191.
^ Roger R. Thompson, "Reporting the Taiyuan Massacre: Culture and Politics in the China War of 1900", in Robert A. Bickers and R. G. Tiedemann, ed., The Boxers, China, and the World (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007): 65–92. Thompson points out that the widely circulated accounts were by people who could not have seen the events and that these accounts closely followed (often word for word) well known earlier martyr literature.
^ Nat Brandt, Massacre in Shansi, Syracuse University Press, p. xiii.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 184.
^ Andronik (Trubachov). Канонизация святых в Русской Православной Церкви – 5. Канонизация святых в 1894–1917 гг. [Canonization of Saints by the Russian Orthodox Church – 5. Canonization of Saints from 1894 – 1917] (in Russian). Азбука веры (The Faith Alphabet). 
^ Ying Bai & Kung, James Kai-sing. Diffusing Knowledge While Spreading God's Message: Protestantism and Economic Prosperity in China, 1940–1920. The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. September 2011. Retrieved 2 November 2011. p.3
^ Edgerton, R.B. (1997). Warriors of the Rising Sun: A History of the Japanese Military. Norton. p. 94. ISBN 9780393040852. Retrieved 18 June 2017. 
^ Ch?ên, J. (1972). Yuan Shih-kʻai. Stanford University Press. p. 76. ISBN 9780804707893. Retrieved 18 June 2017. 
^ Jan Kocvarp., Germany and the Boxer Uprising in China West Bohemian Historical Review Vol. 5.2 2015, p. 159
^ Cohen, Paul A. History In Three Keys: The Boxers As Event, Experience, and Myth, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0231106505 (1997), pp. 185-185
^ "Wilhelm II: "Hun Speech" (1900) German History in Documents and Images (GHDI)". germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org. 
^ James L. Hevia, "Looting and Its Discontents: Moral Discourse and the Plunder of Beijing, 1900–1901", in Bickers and Tiedemann, ed., The Boxers, China, and the World (2007): 94.
^ a b Preston (2000), p. 284-285.
^ Chamberlin, Wilbur J. letter to his wife (11 December 1900), in Ordered to China: Letters of Wilbur J. Chamberlin: Written from China While Under Commission from the New York Sun During the Boxer Uprising of 1900 and the International Complications Which Followed, (New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1903), p. 191
^ Thompson (2009), p. 194-197.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 207-208.
^ Thompson (2009), p. 204-214.
^ Patricia Ebrey; Anne Walthall; James Palais (2008). East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History. Cengage Learning. p. 301. ISBN 0-547-00534-2. 
^ Cohen, Paul A., History In Three Keys: The Boxers As Event, Experience, and Myth, Columbia University Press (1997), ISBN 0231106505, pp. 184
^ Preston (2000), p. 90, 284–285.
^ Crossley 1990, p. 174.
^ Rhoads 2000, p. 72.
^ Hansen, M.H. (2011). Lessons in Being Chinese: Minority Education and Ethnic Identity in Southwest China. University of Washington Press. p. 80. ISBN 9780295804125. Retrieved 18 June 2017. 
^ Shirokogorov 1924, p. 4.
^ Chang 1956, p. 110.
^ Diana Preston (2000). The Boxer Rebellion: The Dramatic Story of China's War on Foreigners that Shook the World in the Summer of 1900. Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 312. ISBN 0-8027-1361-0. 
^ Hsu, 481
^ "Archive.org". Archive.org. 10 March 2001. Retrieved 6 September 2012. 
^ Broomhall (1901), several pages
^ Ann Heylen (2004). Chronique du Toumet-Ortos: Looking through the Lens of Joseph Van Oost, Missionary in Inner Mongolia (1915–1921). Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press. p. 203. ISBN 90-5867-418-5. 
^ Patrick Taveirne (2004). Han-Mongol Encounters and Missionary Endeavors: A History of Scheut in Ordos (Hetao) 1874–1911. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press. p. 539. ISBN 90-5867-365-0. 
^ Jonathan Neaman Lipman (2004). Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China. Seattle: University of Washington Press. p. 181. ISBN 0-295-97644-6. 
^ "董福祥与西北马家军阀的的故事". 
^ a b James Hastings; John Alexander Selbie; Louis Herbert Gray (1916). Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics. 8. T. & T. Clark. p. 894. 
^ Paine, S. C. M. (1996). Imperial Rivals: China, Russia, and Their Disputed Frontier. M.E. Sharpe. p. 217. ISBN 978-1-56324-724-8. 
^ Benedict, Carol Ann (1996). Bubonic Plague in Nineteenth-Century China. Stanford University Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-8047-2661-0. 
^ Woods, Thomas (7 July 2005) Presidential War Powers, LewRockwell.com
^ Schlesinger, Arthur. The Imperial Presidency (Popular Library 1974), pg. 96.
^ LEI, Wan (February 2010). "The Chinese Islamic "Goodwill Mission to the Middle East" During the Anti-Japanese War". DÎvÂn Disiplinlerarasi Çalismalar Dergisi. cilt 15 (sayı 29): 133–170. 
^ Esherick (1987), p. xiv.
^ 顾则徐：清末民初思想领袖评价义和团总览
^ Han, Xiaorong (February 2005). Chinese discourses on the peasant, 1900–1949. State University of New York Press. pp. 20, 21. ISBN 0791463192. 
^ Sun Yat-sen, A Letter to the Governor of Hong Kong", quoted in Li Weichao, "Modern Chinese Nationalism and the Boxer Movement", Douglas Kerr (2009). Critical Zone 3: A Forum of Chinese and Western Knowledge. Hong Kong University Press. pp. 149, 151. ISBN 962-209-857-6. 
^ Han, Xiaorong (February 2005). Chinese discourses on the peasant, 1900–1949. State University of New York Press. p. 59. ISBN 0791463192. 
^ Twain, Mark (7 November 2007). Mark Twain Speeches. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-4346-7879-9. 
^ William Henry Chamberlin (1960). The Russian review, Volume 19. Blackwell. p. 115. 
^ V. I. Lenin, "The War in China", Iskra, No. 1 (December 1900), in Lenin Collected Works (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1964), Volume 4, pages 372–377, online Marxists Internet Archive.
^ Robert A. Bickers (2007). The Boxers, China, and the World. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 149–. ISBN 978-0-7425-5395-8. 
^ Krishnan, Ananth (7 July 2011). "The forgotten history of Indian troops in China". The Hindu. BEIJING. 
^ "America Not A Christian Nation, Says Dr. Pentecost". The New York Times. 11 February 1912. Archived from the original on 25 March 2014. 
^ George Alexander Lensen; Fang-chih Chʻen (1982). The Russo-Chinese War:. p. 103. 
^ Robert Bickers, Britain in China: Community, Culture, and Colonialism, 1900–1949 (Manchester; New York: Manchester University Press, distributed in the US by St. Martin's Press, 1999 ISBN 0719046971), p. 34
^ Pt Three, "The Boxers As Myth", Cohen, History in Three Keys, pp. 211–288.
^ Wang Yi, "The Cultural Origins of the Boxer Movement's Obscurantism and Its Influence on the Cultural Revolution", in Douglas Kerr, ed., Critical Zone Three. (Hong Kong University Press), 155.
^ "History Textbooks in China". Eastsouthwestnorth. Retrieved 23 October 2008. 
^ Pan, Philip P. (25 January 2006). "Leading Publication Shut Down In China". Washington Post Foreign Service. Retrieved 19 October 2008. 
^ 网友评论：评中山大学袁时伟的汉奸言论和混蛋逻辑
^ Thompson (2009), p. 223.
^ China in Convulsion Vol I, pp. 154–55.
^ Jane Elliot, Some Did It for Civilisation", p. 9, 1.
^ Xiang, The Origins of the Boxer War p. vii–viii.
^ Esherick p. xiv. Esherick notes that many textbooks and secondary accounts followed Victor Purcell, The Boxer Uprising: A Background Study (1963) in seeing a shift from an early anti-dynastic movement to pro-dynastic, but that the "flood of publications" from Taiwan and the People's Republic (including both documents from the time and oral histories conducted in the 1950s) has shown this not to be the case. xv–xvi.
^ Klein (2008).
^ Peter Perdue, "Visualizing the Boxer Uprising" MIT Visualizing Cultures Illustrated Slide Lecture
^ Frederic A. Sharf and Peter Harrington. China 1900: The Artists' Perspective. London: Greenhill, 2000. ISBN 1-85367-409-5.
^ met [2007-08-26] (26 August 2007). "Chińcyki trzymają się mocno!?". Broszka.pl. Retrieved 6 September 2012. 
^ translated by Harold Shaddick as The Travels of Lao Ts'an (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1952), also available in an abridged version which omits some scenes of the Boxers: The travels of Lao Can, translated by Yang Xianyi, Gladys Yang (Beijing: Panda Books, 1983; 176p.),
^ Hugh Trevor-Roper: A Hidden Life – The Enigma of Sir Edmund Backhouse (Published in the USA as Hermit of Peking, The Hidden Life of Sir Edmund Backhouse) (1976)
^ 55 Days at Peking on IMDb
^ "HKflix". HKflix. Retrieved 6 September 2012. 
^ Sandalwood Death (Translated by Howard Goldblatt. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 2013. ISBN 9780806143392).
^ Boxers and Saints (First Second Books, 2013 ISBN 1596439246)WorldCat


Sources[edit]

Cohen, Paul A. (1997). History in three keys: the boxers as event, experience, and myth. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-10651-3. 
Elliott, Jane E. (2002). Some Did It for Civilisation, Some Did It for Their Country : A Revised View of the Boxer War. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press. ISBN 9622019730.  David D. Buck, "Review", The China Quarterly 173 (2003): 234–237. calls this a strong "revisionist" account.
Edgerton, Robert B. (1997). Warriors of the rising sun: a history of the Japanese military (illustrated ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0393040852. 
Esherick, Joseph W. (1987). The Origins of the Boxer Uprising. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-06459-3. 
Harrington, Peter (2001). Peking 1900: The Boxer Rebellion. Oxford: Osprey. ISBN 1-84176-181-8. 
Klein, Thoralf (2008). "The Boxer War-the Boxer Uprising". Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence. 
Leonhard, Robert R. "The China Relief Expedition Joint Coalition Warfare in China Summer 1900" (PDF). The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory. Retrieved 8 August 2014. 
Preston, Diana (2000). The Boxer Rebellion : The Dramatic Story of China's War on Foreigners That Shook the World in the Summer of 1900. New York: Walker. ISBN 0802713610. . Questia pay edition; British title: Besieged in Peking: The Story of the 1900 Boxer Rising (London: Constable, 1999)
Thompson, Larry Clinton (2009). William Scott Ament and the Boxer Rebellion: Heroism, Hubris, and the "Ideal Missionary". Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 0-78645-338-9. 
Xiang, Lanxin (2003). The Origins of the Boxer War: A Multinational Study. Psychology Press. ISBN 0-7007-1563-0. 

Further reading[edit]
General accounts and analysis[edit]
In addition to the books listed under References, general accounts can be found in such textbooks as Jonathan Spence, In Search of Modern China, pp. 230–235; Keith Schoppa, Revolution and Its Past, pp. 118–123; and Immanuel Hsu, Ch 16, "The Boxer Uprising", in The Rise of Modern China (1990).

Robert A. Bickers and R. G. Tiedemann, eds., The Boxers, China, and the World. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. ISBN 978-0-7425-5394-1.
Robert A. Bickers, The Scramble for China: Foreign Devils in the Qing Empire, 1800–1914 (London: Allen Lane, 2011).
David D. Buck, "Recent Studies of the Boxer Movement", Chinese Studies in History 20 (1987). Introduction to a special issue of the journal devoted to translations of recent research on the Boxers in the People's Republic.
Purcell, Victor (1963). The Boxer Uprising: A background study. online edition
David Silbey. The Boxer Rebellion and the Great Game in China. New York: Hill and Wang, 2012. 273p. ISBN 9780809094776.
"In Our Time – discussion show on The Boxer Rebellion". BBC Radio4. 

Missionary experience and personal accounts[edit]

Brandt, Nat (1994). Massacre in Shansi. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-8156-0282-0. The story of the Oberlin missionaries at Taigu, Shanxi.
Clark, Anthony E. (2015). Heaven in Conflict: Franciscans and the Boxer Uprising in Shanxi. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-99400-0
Price, Eva Jane. China Journal, 1889–1900: An American Missionary Family During the Boxer Rebellion, (1989). ISBN 0-684-18951-8. Review: Susanna Ashton, "Compound Walls: Eva Jane Price's Letters from a Chinese Mission, 1890–1900." Frontiers 1996 17(3): 80–94. ISSN 0160-9009. The journal of the events leading up to the deaths of the Price family.
Sharf, Frederic A., and Peter Harrington (2000). China 1900: The Eyewitnesses Speak. London: Greenhill. ISBN 1-85367-410-9. Excerpts from German, British, Japanese, and American soldiers, diplomats and journalists.
Sharf, Frederic A., and Peter Harrington (2000). China 1900: The Artists' Perspective. London: Greenhill. ISBN 1-85367-409-5
Bell, P, and Clements, R, (2014). Lives from a Black Tin Box ISBN 978-1-86024-931-0 The story of the Xinzhou martyrs, Shanxi Province.

Allied intervention, the Boxer War, and the aftermath[edit]

Bodin, Lynn E. and Christopher Warner. The Boxer Rebellion. London: Osprey, Men-at-Arms Series 95, 1979. ISBN 0-85045-335-6 (pbk.) Illustrated history of the military campaign.
Fleming, Peter (1959). The Siege at Peking. New York: Harper. ISBN 0-88029-462-0. 
Hevia, James L. "Leaving a Brand on China: Missionary Discourse in the Wake of the Boxer Movement", Modern China 18.3 (1992): 304–332.
Hevia, James L. "A Reign of Terror: Punishment and Retribution in Beijing and its Environs", Chapter 6, in English Lessons: The Pedagogy of Imperialism in Nineteenth Century China (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), pp. 195–240. ISBN 0-8223-3151-9
Hunt, Michael H. "The American Remission of the Boxer Indemnity: A Reappraisal", Journal of Asian Studies 31 (Spring 1972): 539–559.
Hunt, Michael H. "The Forgotten Occupation: Peking, 1900–1901", Pacific Historical Review 48.4 (November 1979): 501–529.
Langer, William. The Diplomacy of Imperialism 1890–1902 (2nd ed. 1950), pp. 677–709.

Contemporary accounts and sources[edit]

Broomhall, Marshall (1901). Martyred Missionaries of The China Inland Mission; With a Record of The Perils and Sufferings of Some Who Escaped. London: Morgan and Scott. . A contemporary account.
Conger, Sarah Pike (1909), Letters from China with Particular Reference to the Empress Dowager and the Women of China (2nd ed.), Chicago: A.C. McClurg 
E. H. Edwards, Fire and Sword in Shansi: The Story of the Martyrdom of Foreigners and Chinese Christians (New York: Revell, 1903)
Isaac Taylor Headland, Chinese Heroes; Being a Record of Persecutions Endured by Native Christians in the Boxer Uprising (New York, Cincinnati: Eaton & Mains; Jennings & Pye, 1902).
Arnold Henry Savage Landor, China and the Allies (New York: Scribner's, 1901). 01008198 Google Book: [1]
Pierre Loti, The Last Days of Pekin (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1902): tr. of Les Derniers Jours De Pékin (Paris: Lévy, 1900).
W. A. P. Martin, The Siege in Peking, China against the World (New York: F. H. Revell company, 1900).
Putnam Weale, Bertram Lenox, (1907). Indiscreet Letters from Peking: Being the Notes of an Eyewitness, Which Set Forth in Some Detail, From Day to Day, The Real Story of the Siege and Sack of a Distressed Capital in 1900– The Year of Great Tribulation. Dodd, Mead. Free ebook. Project Gutenberg.
Arthur H.Smith, China in Convulsion (New York: F. H. Revell Co., 1901). Vol. I An account of the Boxers and the siege by a missionary who had lived in a North China village.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boxer Rebellion.



Lost in the Gobi Desert: Hart retraces great-grandfather's footsteps, William & Mary News Story, 3 January 2005.
September 1900 San Francisco Newspaper
200 Photographs in Library of Congress online Collection
55 Days at Peking on IMDb
Pa kuo lien chun on IMDb
University of Washington Library's Digital Collections – Robert Henry Chandless Photographs
Proceedings of the Tenth Universal Peace Congress, 1901
Pictures from the Siege of Peking, from the Caldwell Kvaran archives
Eyewitness account: When the Allies Entered Peking, 1900, an excerpt of Pierre Loti's Les Derniers Jours de Pékin (1902).
Documents of the Boxer Rebellion (China Relief Expedition), 1900–1901 National Museum of the U.S. Navy (Selected Naval Documents).








v
t
e


Qing dynasty topics



History



Seven Grievances
First Manchu invasion of Korea
Second Manchu invasion of Korea
Qing conquest of the Ming

Battle of Shanhai Pass


Great Clearance
Revolt of the Three Feudatories
Sino-Russian border conflicts
Dzungar–Qing War
Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720)
Chinese Rites controversy
Ten Great Campaigns
Miao Rebellion (1735–36)
Lhasa riot of 1750
Sino-Burmese War (1765–69)
Battle of Ngọc Hồi-Đống Đa
Sino-Nepalese War
Miao Rebellion (1795–1806)
White Lotus Rebellion
First Opium War
Sino-Sikh War
Taiping Rebellion
Nian Rebellion
Red Turban Rebellion (1854–1856)
Miao Rebellion (1854–73)
Nepalese–Tibetan War
Panthay Rebellion
Second Opium War
Amur Acquisition
Self-Strengthening Movement
Tongzhi Restoration
Dungan Revolt (1862–77)
Mudan Incident (1871)
Tianjin Massacre
Margary Affair
Northern Chinese Famine
Qing reconquest of Xinjiang
Sino-French War
Sikkim Expedition
Jindandao Incident
First Sino-Japanese War
Gongche Shangshu movement
Dungan Revolt (1895–96)
Hundred Days' Reform
Boxer Rebellion

Red Lanterns


Eight-Nation Alliance
New Policies
British expedition to Tibet
1905 Tibetan Rebellion
1909 Provincial Assembly elections
Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910)
Railway Protection Movement
Xinhai Revolution

Wuchang Uprising
Xinhai Lhasa turmoil
Mongolian Revolution of 1911
Xinhai Revolution in Xinjiang


Manchu Restoration





Government



Emperor

List
Family tree


Amban
Cup of Solid Gold
Deliberative Council
Flag of the Qing dynasty
Grand Council
Great Qing Legal Code
Imperial Clan Court
Imperial Commissioner
Imperial Household Department
Lifan Yuan
Ministry of Posts and Communications
Nine Gates Infantry Commander
Provincial governor
Provincial military commander
Qinding Xianfa Dagang
Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty
Viceroys

Zhili
Shaan-Gan
Liangjiang
Huguang
Sichuan
Min-Zhe
Liangguang
Yun-Gui
Three Northeast Provinces


Zongli Yamen





Military



Military of the Qing dynasty
Beiyang Army
Chu Army
Eight Banners
Ever Victorious Army
Green Standard Army
Huai Army
Hushenying
Imperial Guards Brigade
New Army
Peking Field Force
Shuishiying
Wuwei Corps
Xiang Army

Manchuria under Qing rule
Mongolia under Qing rule

Administrative divisions


Qing dynasty in Inner Asia
Taiwan under Qing rule

Provincial Administration Hall


Tibet under Qing rule

Golden Urn
List of imperial residents


Xinjiang under Qing rule

General of Ili







Palaces &
mausoleums



Chengde Mountain Resort
Forbidden City
Mukden Palace
Old Summer Palace
Summer Palace
Eastern Qing tombs
Fuling Mausoleum
Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties
Western Qing tombs





Society &
culture



Booi Aha
Changzhou School of Thought
Dibao
Four Wangs
Gujin Tushu Jicheng
History of Ming
Islam during the Qing dynasty
Kangxi Dictionary
Kaozheng
Literary Inquisition
Manchu Han Imperial Feast
Peiwen Yunfu
Pentaglot Dictionary
Qing official headwear
Qing poetry
Quan Tangshi
Queue
Researches on Manchu Origins
Sacred Edict of the Kangxi Emperor
Shamanism in the Qing dynasty
Siku Quanshu

Zongmu Tiyao







Treaties



Treaty of Kyakhta (1727)
Treaty of Nerchinsk
Unequal treaty

Boxer Protocol
Burlingame Treaty
Chefoo Convention
Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet
Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory
Convention of Peking
Convention of Tientsin
Li–Lobanov Treaty
Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking
Treaty of Aigun
Treaty of the Bogue
Treaty of Canton
Treaty of Kulja
Treaty of Nanking
Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881)
Treaty of Shimonoseki
Treaty of Tarbagatai
Treaty of Tientsin
Treaty of Wanghia
Treaty of Whampoa







Other topics



Aisin Gioro
Anti-Qing sentiment
Canton System
Chuang Guandong
Draft History of Qing
Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty
Manchu people
Names of the Qing dynasty
New Qing History
Qing dynasty coinage
Qing conquest theory
Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions
Treaty ports
Willow Palisade












v
t
e


Colonial conflicts involving the English/British Empire



17th
century



Virginia (1609–46)
Swally (1612)
Ormuz (1622)
Saint Kitts (1626)
Quebec (1628)
Pequot War (1634–38)
Acadia (1654–67)
Anglo-Spanish War (1654–60)
Jamaica (1655–1739)
King Philip's War (1675–78)
King William's War (1688–97)
Ghana (1694–1700)





18th
century



Queen Anne's War (1702–13)
Tuscarora War (1711–15)
Yamasee War (1715–17)
Father Rale's War/Dummer's War (1722–25)
War of Jenkins' Ear (1740–42)
King George's War (1744–48)
Carnatic Wars (1746–63)
Nova Scotia (1749–55)
French and Indian War (1754–63)
Seven Years' War (1756–63)
Anglo–Cherokee War (1758–61)
Jamaica (1762)
Anglo-Spanish War (1762–63)
Pontiac's War (1763–66)
Lord Dunmore's War (1774)
American Revolutionary War (1775–83)
First Anglo–Maratha War (1775–82)
Second Anglo–Mysore War (1779–84)
Gold Coast (1781–82)
Sumatra (1782–84)
Australian Frontier Wars (1788–1934)
Nootka Sound (1789)
Third Anglo–Mysore War (1789–92)
Cotiote (Wayanad) War (1793–1806)
Cape Colony (1795)
Jamaica (1795–96)
Ceylon (1795)
Kandyan Wars (1796–1818)
Malta (1798–1800)
Fourth Anglo–Mysore War (1798–99)
Dwyer's Guerrilla Campaign (1799–1803)





19th
century



Newfoundland (1800)
Castle Hill convict rebellion
Second Anglo–Maratha War (1803–05)
Suriname (1804)
Guiana (1804)
Cape Colony (1806)
Río de la Plata (1806–07)
Egypt (1807)
Malta (1807)
Reunion (1809)
Seychelles (1809)
Mauritius (1810)
Java (1810–11)
Xhosa Wars (1811–79)
Martinique (1809)
Guadeloupe (1810)
USA (1812–15)
Nepal (1814–16)
Guadeloupe (1815)
Cape Colony (1815)
Third Anglo-Maratha War (1817–18)
Guiana (1823)
Anglo-Ashanti wars (1824–1901)
First Anglo-Burmese War (1824–26)
Black War (Van Diemen's Land, 1828–32)
Jamaica (1831–32)
Malacca (1831–33)
Lower Canada (1837–38)
Upper Canada (1837–38)
Egyptian–Ottoman War (1839–41)
First Anglo-Afghan War (1839–42)
First Opium War (1839–42)
New Zealand Wars (1845–72)
First Anglo–Sikh War (1845–46)
Río de la Plata (1845–50)
Ceylon (1848)
Second Anglo–Sikh War (1848–49)
Second Anglo–Burmese War (1852)
Eureka Rebellion (1852)
Anglo–Persian War (1856–57)
Second Opium War (1856–60)
Indian Rebellion (1857–59)
Ambela Campaign (1863–64)
Bhutan War (1864–65)
Fenian Rebellion in Canada (1866–71)
Abyssinia (1868)
Manitoba (1870)
Perak (1875–76)
Anglo–Zulu War (1879)
Second Anglo-Afghan War (1879–80)
Basutoland (1880–81)
First Boer War (1880–81)
Mahdist War (1881–99)
Anglo-Egyptian War (1882)
Saskatchewan (1885)
Central Africa (1886–89)
Third Anglo-Burmese War (1885)
Mashonaland (1890)
Hunza-Nagar Campaign (1891)
Anglo-Manipur War (1891)
Matabeleland (1893–94)
North Borneo (1894–1905)
Chitral Expedition (1895)
Jameson Raid South Africa (1896)
Anglo–Zanzibar War (1896)
Matabeleland (1896–97)
Benin Expedition (1897)
Siege of Malakand (1897)
First Mohmand Campaign (1897–98)
Tirah Campaign (1897–98)
Six-Day War (1899)
Boxer Rebellion (1898–1901)
Second Boer War (1899–1902)





20th
century



Somaliland (1900–20)
West Africa (1901–02)
Tibet expedition (1903–04)
Bambatha Rebellion (1906)
Nyasaland (1915)
Nigeria (1915)
Nigeria (1918)
Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
Waziristan campaign (1919–1920)
Iraq (1920)
Malabar Rebellion (1921)
Kurdistan (1922–24)
Transjordan (1923)
Pink's War (1925)
Ikhwan Revolt (1927–30)
Barzani revolt (1931–32)
Second Mohmand Campaign (1935)
Palestine (1936–39)
Waziristan campaign (1936–1939)
Ethiopia (1943)
Indochina (1945–46)
Indonesia (1945)
Sarawak (1946–50)
Malayan Emergency (1948–60)
Mau Mau Uprising Kenya (1952–60)
Oman (1954–59)
Cyprus Emergency (1955–59)
Suez Crisis (1956)
Oman (1962–76)
Brunei (1962)
Sarawak (1962–90)
Malaysia (1962–66)
Aden (1963–67)
Falklands (1982)












v
t
e


French colonial conflicts



16th–17th centuries



Brazil (1557–60)
Florida (1562–65)
Brazil (1612–15)
Morocco (1629)
Beaver Wars (1641–1701)
French colonization of Texas (1685–89)
Siam (1688)
King William's War (1689–97)





18th century



Queen Anne's War (1702–13)
Chickasaw Wars (1721–52)
Dummer's War (1721–25)
Burma–France relations (1729–56)
King George's War (1744–48)
First Carnatic War (1746–48)
Second Carnatic War (1749–54)
Nova Scotia (1749–55)
French and Indian War (1754–60)
East Indies (1757–63)
Larache expedition 1765
Vietnam (1777–1820)
North America (1778–83)
Caribbean and East Indies (1778–83)
Haitian Revolution (1791–1804)
Siege of Pondicherry (1793)
French acquisition of Santo Domingo (1795–1809)
French campaign in Egypt and Syria (1798–1801)





19th century



West Indies (1804–10)
Indian Ocean (1809–11)
Java (1811)
Algeria (1830–47)
Algeria (1835–1903)
Río de la Plata (1838–40)
Mexico (1838–39)
Argentina–Uruguay (1845–50)
Morocco (1844)
Philippines (1844–45)
Bombardment of Tourane Vietnam (1847)
Franco-Tahitian War (1844–47)
French conquest of Senegal (1854)
Cochinchina Campaign (1858–62)
Second Opium War (1860)
Intervention in Mexico (1861–67)
Japan (1863–64)
Korea (1866)
North Vietnam (1873–74)
Tunisia (1881)
Madagascar (1883)
Ivory Coast (1883–98)
Tonkin Campaign (1883–86)
Sino-French War (1884–85)
North Vietnam (1886–96)
Leewards War (1888–97)
First Franco-Dahomean War (1890)
Second Franco-Dahomean War (1892–94)
Franco-Siamese War (1893)
Second Madagascar expedition (1895)
Voulet–Chanoine Mission (1898)





20th century



Boxer Rebellion (1901)
Holy Man's Rebellion (1901-36)
Ouaddai War (1909–11)
Morocco (1911)
Zaian War (1914-1921)
Volta-Bani War (1915-1916)
Kaocen Revolt (1916-1917)
Syria (1919–21)
Cilicia (1920–21)
Rif War (1920–26)
Kongo-Wara rebellion (1928–31)
Franco-Thai War (1940–41)
Indochina (1945)
South Vietnam (1945–46)
First Indochina War (1946–54)
Malagasy Uprising (1947–48)
Tunisian independence (1952–56)
Algerian War (1954–62)
Suez Crisis (1956)
Ifni War (1957–58)
Cameroonian Independence War (1955-1960)
Bizerte crisis (1961)
Ouvéa cave hostage taking (1988)












v
t
e


 Empire of Japan



Overview



Agriculture
Censorship
Demographics
Economy
Economic history
Education
Eugenics
Foreign commerce and shipping
Industrial production
Militarism
Nationalism
Statism
Internal politics
State Shinto
Kazoku








Emperors



Meiji (Mutsuhito)
Taishō (Yoshihito)
Shōwa (Hirohito)





Symbols



Flag of Japan
Rising Sun Flag
Imperial Seal of Japan
Government Seal of Japan
State Seal of Japan
Privy Seal of Japan
Kimigayo





Government



Constitution
Charter Oath
Privy Council
Administrative structure
Imperial Diet

Peers
Representatives


Daijō-kan
Ministry of the Imperial Household
Ministry of the Treasury
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Ministry of Munitions
East Asia Development Board (Kōain)
Foreign relations
Government and military commanders of World War II
Gozen Kaigi
Ministry of Colonial Affairs
Ministry of Greater East Asia
Home Ministry
Imperial Rescript on Education
Imperial Way Faction (Kōdōha)
Kokutai
National Spiritual Mobilization Movement
Peace Preservation Law
Political parties
Supreme Court of Judicature
Taisei Yokusankai
Tokkō
Tonarigumi
Tōseiha
Greater East Asia Conference





Military



Armed Forces
Imperial General Headquarters
Imperial Japanese Army

Air Service
General Staff Office
Railways and Shipping


Imperial Japanese Navy

Air Service
General Staff
Land Forces


Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors

Senjinkun military code


Ministry of the Military
Ministry of the Army
Ministry of the Navy
Taiwanese Imperial Japan Serviceman
Imperial Guard
Nuclear weapons program
Kamikaze
War crimes
Supreme War Council
Japanese holdout





History





Meiji period




Meiji Restoration
Boshin War
Satsuma Rebellion
First Sino-Japanese War
Triple Intervention
Boxer Rebellion
Anglo-Japanese Alliance
Russo-Japanese War





Taishō period



World War I
Siberian Intervention
General Election Law
Washington Naval Treaty





Shōwa period



Shōwa financial crisis
Pacification of Manchukuo
Anti-Comintern Pact
Second Sino-Japanese War
Tripartite Pact
Soviet–Japanese Border War (1939)
Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact
Pacific War
Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Soviet–Japanese War (1945)
Surrender (Potsdam Declaration, Gyokuon-hōsō)
Occupation








Territories





Greater East Asia
Co-Prosperity Sphere




Karafuto
Korea
Kwantung
Manchukuo
South Pacific
Taiwan





Occupied territories



Borneo
Burma
Hong Kong
Dutch East Indies
Malaya
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam








Other topics



Sonnō jōi
Fukoku kyōhei
Hakkō ichiu
Internment camps
German pre–World War II industrial co-operation
Racial Equality Proposal
Shinmin no Michi
Shōwa Modan
Socialist thought
Yasukuni Shrine
International Military Tribunal for the Far East
Japanese dissidence during the Shōwa period












v
t
e


Diplomacy of the Great Powers 1871–1913



Great powers



Austria–Hungary
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States





Alliances



Triple Alliance

Dual Alliance


Triple Entente

Franco-Russian Alliance
Entente Cordiale
Anglo-Russian Entente


Anglo-Japanese Alliance





Trends



Ottoman Decline

Eastern Question


Revanchism
New Imperialism

Scramble for Africa


Pan-Slavism
The Great Game
The Great Rapprochement





Treaties and
agreements



Treaty of Frankfurt
League of the Three Emperors
Treaty of Berlin
Reinsurance Treaty
Treaty of Paris
Treaty of Björkö
Taft–Katsura Agreement
Japan–Korea Treaty of 1905
Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty
Racconigi agreement





Events



Congress of Berlin
Berlin Conference
Weltpolitik
German Naval Laws
Anglo-German naval arms race

Dreadnought


Fashoda Incident
Annexation of Hawaii
First Moroccan Crisis
Algeciras Conference
Agadir Crisis
Bosnian crisis





Wars



Russo-Turkish
First Sino-Japanese
Spanish–American
Banana Wars
Philippine–American
Boxer Rebellion
Second Boer
Russo-Japanese
Italo-Turkish
Balkan Wars












v
t
e


Armed conflicts involving Russia (incl. Imperial and Soviet times)



Internal



Razin's Rebellion
Bulavin Rebellion
Pugachev's Rebellion
Decembrist revolt
Russian Civil War
August Uprising
Coup d'état attempt (1991)
1993 Russian constitutional crisis
First Chechen War
War of Dagestan
Second Chechen War
Insurgency in the North Caucasus





Pre-17th
century



Muscovite–Volga Bulgars war (1376)
Battle on Pyana River (1377)
Battle of the Vozha River (1378)
First Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1492–94)
Russo-Swedish War (1495–97)
Second Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1500–03)
Battle of the Siritsa River (1501)
Third Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1507–08)
Fourth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1512–22)
Fifth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1534–37)
Russo-Crimean Wars
Russo-Kazan Wars
Russo-Swedish War (1554–57)
Livonian War
Russian Conquest of Siberia (1580-1747)
Russo-Swedish War (1590–95)
Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18) and the Time of Troubles
Ingrian War
Smolensk War
Russo-Persian War (1651–53)
Sino-Russian border conflicts (1652–89)
Russo-Polish War (1654–67)
Second Northern War
Russo-Turkish War (1676–81)
Russo-Turkish War (1686–1700)





18th–19th
century



Great Northern War
Russo-Turkish War (1710–11)
Russo-Persian War (1722–23)
War of the Polish Succession (1733–38)
Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–39)
War of the Austrian Succession (1740–48)
Russo-Swedish War (1741–43)
Seven Years' War
Russo-Turkish War (1768–74)
Bar Confederation
Russo-Turkish War (1787–92)
Russo-Swedish War (1788–90)
Russo-Polish War (1792)
Kościuszko Uprising
Russo-Persian War (1796)
War of the Second Coalition
War of the Third Coalition
Russo-Persian War (1804–13)
War of the Fourth Coalition
Russo-Turkish War (1806–12)
Anglo-Russian War
Finnish War
War of the Fifth Coalition
French invasion of Russia
War of the Sixth Coalition
War of the Seventh Coalition
Russian conquest of the Caucasus
Caucasian War

Russo-Circassian War
Murid War


Russo-Persian War (1826–28)
Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)
November Uprising
Russian conquest of Bukhara
Hungarian Revolution of 1848
Crimean War
January Uprising
Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)
Boxer Rebellion

Russian invasion of Manchuria







20th
century



Russo-Japanese War
Russian Invasion of Tabriz, 1911
World War I
Russian Civil War
Ukrainian–Soviet War
Finnish Civil War
Heimosodat
Soviet westward offensive of 1918–19

Estonian War of Independence
Latvian War of Independence
Lithuanian–Soviet War


Polish–Soviet War
Red Army invasion of Azerbaijan
Red Army invasion of Armenia
Red Army invasion of Georgia
Red Army intervention in Mongolia
Sino-Soviet conflict (1929)
Soviet–Japanese border conflicts
Soviet invasion of Xinjiang
Xinjiang War (1937)
World War II

Soviet invasion of Poland
Winter War
Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)
Continuation War
Eastern Front (World War II)
Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran
Soviet-Japanese War (1945)


Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Ili Rebellion
First Indochina War
Korean War
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Eritrean War of Independence
War of Attrition
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
Sino-Soviet border conflict
Vietnam War
Ethio-Somali (Ogaden) War
Soviet–Afghan War





Post-Soviet



Nagorno-Karabakh War
Transnistria War
Georgian Civil War
Tajikistani Civil War
Russo-Georgian War
Intervention in Ukraine

Annexation of Crimea
War in Donbass


Intervention in Syria








Military history of Russia
Russian Winter
Russian Revolution
Cold War
Sphere of influence












v
t
e


Armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces




listed chronologically



Domestic



Shays' Rebellion
Whiskey Rebellion
Fries's Rebellion
Mormon War
Dorr Rebellion
Bleeding Kansas
Utah War
Civil War
Indian Wars
Brooks–Baxter War
Range War
Lincoln County War
Johnson County War
Coal Creek War
Homestead Strike
Battle of Blair Mountain
Bonus Army
Battle of Athens





Foreign



Revolutionary War
Quasi-War
First Barbary War
War of 1812
Second Barbary War
First Sumatran expedition
Second Sumatran expedition
Ivory Coast Expedition
Mexican–American War
First Fiji Expedition
Second Opium War
Second Fiji Expedition
Formosa Expedition
Korean Expedition
Spanish–American War
Philippine–American War
Boxer Rebellion
Banana Wars
Border War
World War I
Russian Civil War
World War II
Korean War
Vietnam War
Invasion of the Dominican Republic
Invasion of Grenada
Lebanese Civil War
Invasion of Panama
Gulf War
Somali Civil War
Bosnian War
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Libyan Civil War
Intervention against ISIL

Iraq
Syria
Cameroon
Libya







Related articles



List of conflicts in the U.S.
List of wars involving the U.S.
Timeline of U.S. military operations
Length of U.S. participation in major wars
Overseas expansion
Military history
Covert regime-change actions
Casualties of war
Peace movement
List of anti-war organizations
Conscientious objector
War on Terror









Authority control



LCCN: sh85024100
GND: 4132498-5
NDL: 00562499











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boxer_Rebellion&oldid=817678848"					Categories: Boxer RebellionWars involving the United States1899 in China1900 in China1901 in ChinaAnti-imperialism in AsiaBattles involving the princely states of IndiaRevolutions in ChinaConflicts involving the German EmpireHistory of the Royal MarinesLootingPersecution of ChristiansRebellions in ChinaShamanismUnited States Marine Corps in the 20th centuryChinese ConfucianistsChinese nationalismChinese TaoistsPeople executed by Italy by decapitationPeople executed by Japan by decapitationPeople executed by Austria by decapitation1899 in Christianity1900 in Christianity1901 in ChristianityHidden categories: All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from December 2015CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 uses Russian-language script (ru)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Use dmy dates from October 2012Articles containing Chinese-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2015All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014Articles needing additional references from November 2010All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing traditional Chinese-language textWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers