

Political corruption


Concepts




Bribery
Cronyism
Kleptocracy
Economics of corruption
Electoral fraud
Legal plunder
Nepotism
Slush fund
Political scandal




Corruption by country





Europe




Albania
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Georgia
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kosovo
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine




Asia




Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Malaysia
Myanmar
North Korea
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen




Africa




Angola
Botswana
Cameroon
Congo
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Ghana
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Liberia
Mauritius
Morocco
Nigeria
Senegal
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe




North America




Canada
Cuba
Haiti
Mexico
Nicaragua
United States




South America




Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Paraguay
Peru
Venezuela




Oceania and the Pacific




Australia
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea




Transcontinental countries




Russia
Turkey










v
t
e





Bribery is the act of giving money, goods or other forms of recompense to a recipient in exchange for an alteration of their behavior (to the benefit/interest of the giver) that the recipient would otherwise not alter. Bribery is defined by Black's Law Dictionary as the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of any item of value to influence the actions of an official or other person in charge of a public or legal duty.[1] Alcohol money case is a real-life example of bribery.
Gifts of money or other items of value which are otherwise available to everyone on an equivalent basis, and not for dishonest purposes, is not bribery. Offering a discount or a refund to all purchasers is a legal rebate and is not bribery. For example, it is legal for an employee of a Public Utilities Commission involved in electric rate regulation to accept a rebate on electric service that reduces their cost for electricity, when the rebate is available to other residential electric customers. Giving the rebate to influence them to look favorably on the electric utility's rate increase applications, however, would be considered bribery.
The bribe is the gift bestowed to influence the recipient's conduct. It may be money, goods, rights in action, property, preferment, privilege, emolument, objects of value, advantage, or merely a promise to induce or influence the action, vote, or influence of a person in an official or public capacity.[2]
In economics, the bribe has been described as rent. Bribery in bureaucracy has been viewed as a reason for the higher cost of production of goods and services.



Contents


1 Forms
2 Government

2.1 Tax treatment


3 Medicine
4 Politics
5 Business
6 Sport corruption
7 Prevention
8 Notable instances

8.1 Rejected


9 See also
10 References
11 External links



Forms[edit]




Photo of cash found in Congressman William J. Jefferson's freezer in the August 2005 raid was shown to jurors on 8 July 2009


Many types of payments or favors can constitute bribes: tip, gift, sop, perk, skim, favor, discount, waived fee/ticket, free food, free ad, free trip, free tickets, sweetheart deal, kickback/payback, funding, inflated sale of an object or property, lucrative contract, donation, campaign contribution, fundraiser, sponsorship/backing, higher paying job, stock options, secret commission, or promotion (rise of position/rank).
One must be careful of differing social and cultural norms when examining bribery. Expectations of when a monetary transaction is appropriate can differ from place to place. Political campaign contributions in the form of cash, for example, are considered criminal acts of bribery in some countries, while in the United States, provided they adhere to election law, are legal. Tipping, for example, is considered bribery in some societies, while in others the two concepts may not be interchangeable.
In some Spanish-speaking countries, bribes are referred to as "mordida" (literally, "bite"). In Arab countries, bribes may be called baksheesh (a tip, gift, or gratuity) or "shay" (literally, "tea"). French-speaking countries often use the expressions "dessous-de-table" ("under-the-table" commissions), "pot-de-vin" (literally, "wine-pot"), or "commission occulte" ("secret commission" or "kickback"). While the last two expressions contain inherently a negative connotation, the expression "dessous-de-table" can be often understood as a commonly accepted business practice. In German, the common term is Schmiergeld ("smoothing money").
The offence may be divided into two great classes: the one, where a person invested with power is induced by payment to use it unjustly; the other, where power is obtained by purchasing the suffrages of those who can impart it. Likewise, the briber might hold a powerful role and control the transaction; or in other cases, a bribe may be effectively extracted from the person paying it, although this is better known as extortion.
The forms that bribery take are numerous. For example, a motorist might bribe a police officer not to issue a ticket for speeding, a citizen seeking paperwork or utility line connections might bribe a functionary for faster service.
Bribery may also take the form of a secret commission, a profit made by an agent, in the course of his employment, without the knowledge of his principal. Euphemisms abound for this (commission, sweetener, kick-back etc.) Bribers and recipients of bribery are likewise numerous although bribers have one common denominator and that is the financial ability to bribe.
Bribery around the world is estimated at about $1 trillion (£494bn).[3]
As indicated on the pages devoted to political corruption, efforts have been made in recent years by the international community to encourage countries to dissociate and incriminate as separate offences, active and passive bribery. From a legal point of view, active bribery can be defined for instance as the promising, offering or giving by any person, directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage [to any public official], for himself or herself or for anyone else, for him or her to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her functions. (article 2 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173) of the Council of Europe). Passive bribery can be defined as the request or receipt [by any public official], directly or indirectly, of any undue advantage, for himself or herself or for anyone else, or the acceptance of an offer or a promise of such an advantage, to act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her functions (article 3 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173)).
The reason for this dissociation is to make the early steps (offering, promising, requesting an advantage) of a corrupt deal already an offence and, thus, to give a clear signal (from a criminal policy point of view) that bribery is not acceptable. Besides, such a dissociation makes the prosecution of bribery offences easier since it can be very difficult to prove that two parties (the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker) have formally agreed upon a corrupt deal. Besides, there is often no such formal deal but only a mutual understanding, for instance when it is common knowledge in a municipality that to obtain a building permit one has to pay a "fee" to the decision maker to obtain a favourable decision.
Government[edit]




Article II, Section 4 of the United States Constitution


A grey area may exist when payments to smooth transactions are made. United States law is particularly strict in limiting the ability of businesses to pay for the awarding of contracts by foreign governments; however, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act contains an exception for "grease payments"; very basically, this allows payments to officials in order to obtain the performance of ministerial acts which they are legally required to do, but may delay in the absence of such payment. In some countries, this practice is the norm, often resulting from a developing nation not having the tax structure to pay civil servants an adequate salary. Nevertheless, most economists regard bribery as a bad thing because it encourages rent seeking behaviour. A state where bribery has become a way of life is a kleptocracy.
Recent evidence suggests that the act of bribery can have political consequences- with citizens being asked for bribes becoming less likely to identify with their country, region and/or tribal unit.[4][5]
Tax treatment[edit]
The tax status of bribes is an issue for governments since the bribery of government officials impedes the democratic process and may interfere with good government. In some countries, such bribes are considered tax-deductible payments. However, in 1996, in an effort to discourage bribery, the OECD Council recommended that member countries cease to allow the tax-deductibility of bribes to foreign officials. This was followed by the signing of the Anti-Bribery Convention. Since that time, the majority of the OECD countries which are signatories of the convention have revised their tax policies according to this recommendation and some have extended the measures to bribes paid to any official, sending the message that bribery will no longer be tolerated in the operations of the government.[6]
Medicine[edit]
Pharmaceutical corporations may seek to entice doctors to favor prescribing their drugs over others of comparable effectiveness. If the medicine is prescribed heavily, they may seek to reward the individual through gifts.[7] The American Medical Association has published ethical guidelines for gifts from industry which include the tenet that physicians should not accept gifts if they are given in relation to the physician’s prescribing practices.[8] Doubtful cases include grants for traveling to medical conventions that double as tourist trips.
Dentists often receive samples of home dental care products such as toothpaste, which are of negligible value; somewhat ironically, dentists in a television commercial will often state that they get these samples but pay to use the sponsor's product.
In countries offering state-subsidized or nationally funded healthcare where medical professionals are underpaid, patients may use bribery to solicit the standard expected level of medical care. For example, in many formerly Communist countries from what used to be the Eastern Bloc it may be customary to offer expensive gifts to doctors and nurses for the delivery of service at any level of medical care in the non-private health sector.[9][10]
Politics[edit]




Demonstration in Washington, DC


Politicians receive campaign contributions and other payoffs from powerful corporations, organizations or individuals in return for making choices in the interests of those parties, or in anticipation of favorable policy, also referred to as lobbying. This is not illegal in the United States and forms a major part of campaign finance, though it is sometimes referred to as the money loop[citation needed]. Convictions for this form of bribery are easier to obtain with hard evidence, that is a specific amount of money linked to a specific action by the bribed. Such evidence is frequently obtained using undercover agents, since evidence of a quid pro quo relation difficult to prove. See also influence peddling and political corruption. Recent evidence suggests that demands for bribes can adversely impact citizen level of trust and engagement with the political process.
Business[edit]




A campaign to prevent bribes in Zambia.


Main article: Commercial bribery
Employees, managers, or salespeople of a business may offer money or gifts to a potential client in exchange for business.
For example, in 2006, German prosecutors conducted a wide-ranging investigation of Siemens AG to determine if Siemens employees paid bribes in exchange for business.
In some cases where the system of law is not well-implemented, bribes may be a way for companies to continue their businesses. In the case, for example, custom officials may harass a certain firm or production plant, officially stating they are checking for irregularities, halting production or stalling other normal activities of a firm. The disruption may cause losses to the firm that exceed the amount of money to pay off the official. Bribing the officials is a common way to deal with this issue in countries where there exists no firm system of reporting these semi-illegal activities. A third party, known as a White Glove, may be involved to act as a clean middleman.
Specialist consultancies have been set up to help multinational companies and small and medium enterprises with a commitment to anti-corruption to trade more ethically and benefit from compliance with the law.
Contracts based on or involving the payment or transfer of bribes ("corruption money", "secret commissions", "pots-de-vin", "kickbacks") are void.[11]
In 2012, The Economist noted:

Bribery would be less of a problem if it wasn't also a solid investment. A new paper by Raghavendra Rau of Cambridge University and Yan Leung Cheung and Aris Stouraitis of the Hong Kong Baptist University examines 166 high-profile cases of bribery since 1971, covering payments made in 52 countries by firms listed on 20 different stockmarkets. Bribery offered an average return of 10 to 11 times the value of the bung paid out to win a contract, measured by the jump in stockmarket value when the contract was won. America's Department of Justice found similarly high returns in cases it has prosecuted.[12]

In addition, a survey conducted by auditing firm Ernst & Young (EY) in 2012 found that 15 percent of top financial executives are willing to pay bribes in order to keep or win business. Another 4 percent said they would be willing to misstate financial performance. This alarming indifference represents a huge risk to their business, given their responsibility.[13]
Sport corruption[edit]
Main article: Match fixing
Referees and scoring judges may be offered money, gifts, or other compensation to guarantee a specific outcome in an athletic or other sports competition. A well-known example of this manner of bribery in sport would be the 2002 Olympic Winter Games figure skating scandal, where the French judge in the pairs competition voted for the Russian skaters in order to secure an advantage for the French skaters in the ice dancing competition.
Additionally, bribes may be offered by cities in order to secure athletic franchises, or even competitions, as happened with the 2002 Winter Olympics. It is common practice for cities to "bid" against each other with stadiums, tax benefits, and licensing deals.
Prevention[edit]
International businesses are looking to implement strong local programs dedicated to the prevention of bribery[citation needed]. But programs of prevention need to be properly designed with international standards of best practice. To ensure respect for a program, whether it be on the part of employees or business partners, external verification is necessary. International best practices such as the Council for Further Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions, Annex 2;[14] the ISO 26000 norm (section 6.6.3) or TI Business Principles for Countering Bribery[15] are used in external verification processes to measure and ensure that a program of bribery prevention works and is consistent with international standards. Another reason for businesses to undergo external verification of their bribery prevention programs is that it means evidence can be provided to assert that all that was possible was done to prevent corruption. Companies are unable to guarantee corruption has never occurred; what they can do is provide evidence that they did their best to prevent it.
Notable instances[edit]

Spiro Agnew, American Vice President who resigned from office in the aftermath of discovery that he took bribes while serving as Governor of Maryland.
Duke Cunningham, United States Navy veteran and former Republican member of the United States House of Representatives from California's 50th Congressional District resigned after pleading guilty to accepting at least $2.4 million in bribes and under-reporting his income for 2004.
Gerald Garson, former New York Supreme Court Justice, convicted of accepting bribes to manipulate outcomes of divorce proceedings.
John Jenrette, Democrat, former American politician convicted of accepting a bribe in the FBI's Abscam operation
Martin Thomas Manton, former U.S. federal judge convicted of accepting bribes
Pakistan cricket spot-fixing controversy, Mohammad Asif, Mohammad Amir and Salman Butt, Pakistani cricketers found guilty of accepting bribes to bowl no balls against England at certain times.
John B. Swainson, Democrat, former Michigan governor and justice of the Michigan Supreme Court was acquitted of accepting a bribe, but was convicted for lying about it.
Dianne Wilkerson, Democrat, former Massachusetts state senator pleaded guilty to eight counts of attempted extortion.
Roh Moo-hyun, former South Korean president committed suicide after being investigated for receiving bribes.
Tangentopoli (Italian for "city of bribes") was a huge bribery scandal in early 1990s Italy, which brought down the whole system of political parties, when it was uncovered by the Mani pulite investigations. At one point roughly half of members of parliament were under investigation.

Rejected[edit]

Umoh Sunday Etim rejected a bribe of $450,000 from Charles Taylor, a Liberian politician.[16]
Larry Pressler rejected a bribe from undercover FBI agents during Abscam investigations.

See also[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Bribery





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Bribery.




Ambitus
Bid rigging
Bribe Payers Index
Charbonneau Commission
Conflict of interest
Corruption by country
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO) of the Council of Europe
Influence peddling
Jury tampering
Kickback (bribery)
Largitio
Legal plunder
Lobbying
Match fixing
Money trail - Money loop
Organized crime
Pay to Play
Payola
Point shaving
Political corruption
Price fixing
Principal–agent problem
Transparency International
UK Bribery Act 2010


References[edit]

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Bribery". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 




^ What is bribert?, Black's Law Dictionary, retrieved September 30, 2015 
^ See generally T. Markus Funk, "Don't Pay for the Misdeeds of Others: Intro to Avoiding Third-Party FCPA Liability," 6 BNA White Collar Crime Report 33 (January 14, 2011) (discussing bribery in the context of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act).
^ "BBC NEWS - Business - African corruption 'on the wane'". bbc.co.uk. 
^ Hamilton, A.; Hudson, J. (2014). "Bribery and Identity: Evidence from Sudan" (PDF). Bath Economic Research Papers, No 21/14. 
^ Hamilton, A.; Hudson, J. (2014). "The Tribes that Bind: Attitudes to the Tribe and Tribal Leader in the Sudan" (PDF). Bath Economic Research Papers 31/14. 
^ "Page not found". oecd.org. 
^ "Let the Sunshine in." The Economist Newspaper. Ecomomist.com (from Print Edition). 02 Mar. 2013. Retrieved 02 Dec. 2014.
^ "AMA Error Page". ama-assn.org. 28 April 2014. 
^ Lewis, Mauree. (2000). Who is paying for healthcare in Eastern Europe and Central Asia? World Bank Publications.
^ Bribes for basic care in Romania. The Guardian Weekly (March 26th 2008).
^ International principle of law Trans-Lex.org
^ "You get who you pay for". The Economist (2 June 2012). Retrieved 2 June 2012. 
^ Bribing and Taking Bribes Archived April 9, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. CFO Insight Magazine, May 2012
^ "Page not found". oecd.org. 
^ "TI Business Principles for Countering Bribery. Available Online. Accessed on May 23, 2012" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 2, 2013. Retrieved 2013-04-20. 
^ News - I rejected Charles Taylor's $450,000 bribe -Sacked Customs Officer. Odili.net. Retrieved on 2013-07-12.



External links[edit]



Look up bribery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Corruption.



World Bank survey of 100,000 firms
Group of States against Corruption – GRECO
TRACE
Business Principles for Countering Bribery
OECD Centre for Tax Policy and Administration: Tax Treatment of Bribes
OECD Celebrates 10th Anniversary of its Anti-Bribery Convention, Luc Leruth, IMF/FAD
"The Business of Bribes" PBS Frontline and FRONTLINE/World (February 2009)







v
t
e


English criminal law



Classes of crimes



Common law
Indictable
Either way
Summary
Regulatory
Lesser included





Elements of crimes



Actus reus
Causation
Mens rea
Intention (criminal law)
Intention in English law
Recklessness
Criminal negligence
Corporate / Vicarious / Strict liability
Omissions
Concurrence
Ignorantia juris non excusat





Inchoate offences



Encouraging or assisting crime
Conspiracy
Accessory
Attempt
Common purpose





Defences



Self-defence
Duress
Necessity
Marital coercion
Consent
Medical procedure
Prevention of crime
Participation in a sporting event
Lawful excuse
Insanity
Diminished responsibility
Intoxication
Category:Criminal defences





Offences against the person



Homicide (Murder / Manslaughter / Corporate manslaughter / Infanticide)
Manslaughter in English law
Unlawful killing
Mayhem
Concealing birth
Child destruction
Wounding or causing grievous bodily harm
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm
Common assault
Attempting to choke, &c. in order to commit any indictable offence
Assault with intent to rob
Robbery
Assault with intent to rape
Assault with intent to commit felony, or on peace officers
Assault with intent to resist lawful apprehension
Buggery
Battery
Kidnapping
Child abduction
False imprisonment
Harassment
Offences against the Person Act 1861





Sexual offences



Rape
Sexual assault
Sexual Offences Act 2003





Public order offences



Riot
Violent disorder
Affray
Unlawful assembly
Fear or provocation of violence
Intentional harassment, alarm or distress
Harassment, alarm or distress
Public Order Act 1986
Incitement to ethnic or racial hatred
Challenging to a fight
Nuisance
Causing Public nuisance
Outraging public decency
Effecting a public mischief
Keeping a Disorderly house
Preventing the lawful burial of a body
Breach of the Peace
Treason
High treason
Common scold
Nightwalker statute
Rout
Forcible entry
Accessory (legal term)
Misconduct in a public office
Malfeasance in public office
Abuse of authority
Perjury of oath
Dereliction of duty





Offences against property



Arson
Dishonesty
Cheating (law)
Burglary
Robbery
Theft
Larceny
Criminal damage
Squatting
Trespass
Taken Without Owner's Consent (TWOC)
Deception
Handling stolen goods
Misappropriation of funds
Blackmail
Extortion
Cybercrime
Theft Act 1968
Theft Act 1978
Fraud Act 2006
Fraud by abuse of position
Conspiracy to defraud
Fare evasion
Webcam blackmail





Forgery, personation and cheating



Forgery
Cheating the public revenue
Uttering





Offences against justice



Bribery
Perjury
Offences Akin to Perjury
Perverting the course of justice
Misrepresentation as to identity
Embracery
Witness intimidation
Witness tampering
Harming People who have Assisted the Police / Given Evidence / Been a Juror
Misprison of treason
Misprision of felony
Compounding a felony
Jury tampering
Assault with intent to resist lawful apprehension
Assisting an offender
Harboring a fugitive
Encouraging or assisting a crime
Escape from lawful custody
Obstructing justice
Obstruction of a police officer
Wasting police time
Refusing to assist a constable
Sedition
Espionage
Contempt of the sovereign
Contempt of court
Fabrication of false evidence
Breach of prison / breaking prison
Rescuing a prisoner





Other common law areas



Contract
Tort
Property
Wills
Trusts and estates
Evidence
Criminal procedure








History
Law of England and Wales portal
Criminal Justice portal












v
t
e


Psychological manipulation




Rewarding - pleasant
(positive reinforcement)




Attention
Bribery
Child grooming
Flattery
Gifts
Ingratiation
Love bombing
Nudging
Praise
Seduction
Smiling
Superficial charm
Superficial sympathy






Aversive - unpleasant
(positive punishment)




Anger
Character assassination
Crying
Emotional blackmail
Fearmongering
Frowning
Glaring
Guilt trip
Inattention
Intimidation
Nagging
Nit-picking criticism
Passive aggression
Relational aggression
Sadism
Shaming
Silent treatment
Social rejection
Swearing
Threats
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Yelling





Intermittent or partial
negative reinforcement



Climate of fear
Traumatic bonding





Other techniques



Bait-and-switch
Deception
Denial
Deprogramming
Disinformation
Distortion
Diversion
Divide and rule
Double bind
Entrapment
Evasion
Exaggeration
Gaslighting
Good cop/bad cop
Indoctrination
Low-balling
Lying
Minimisation
Moving the goalposts
Pride-and-ego down
Rationalization
Reid technique
Setting up to fail
Trojan horse
You're either with us, or against us





Contexts



Abuse
Abusive power and control
Advertising
Bullying
Catholic guilt
Confidence trick
Guilt culture
Interrogation
Jewish guilt
Jewish mother stereotype
Moral panic
Media manipulation
Mind control
Mind games
Mobbing
Propaganda
Salesmanship
Scapegoating
Shame culture
Smear campaign
Social engineering (blagging)
Spin
Suggestibility
Whispering campaign





Related topics



Antisocial personality disorder
Assertiveness
Blame
Borderline personality disorder
Carrot and stick
Dumbing down
Enabling
Fallacy
Femme fatale
Gaming the system
Gullibility
Histrionic personality disorder
Impression management
Machiavellianism
Narcissism
Narcissistic personality disorder
Personal boundaries
Persuasion
Popularity
Projection
Psychopathy









Authority control



GND: 4144934-4
BNF: cb12011363m (data)
NDL: 00574114











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bribery&oldid=811792690"					Categories: BriberyCorporate crimeOrganized crime activityPolitical corruptionWhite-collar criminalsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia BritannicaCommons category without a link on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers