

British English


British English


Native to
United Kingdom



Language family


Indo-European

Germanic

West Germanic

Anglo-Frisian

Anglic

English

British English
















Early forms


Old English

Middle English

Early Modern English








Writing system

Latin (English alphabet)


Language codes


ISO 639-3
–


IETF
en-GB




Comparison of
American and
British English




American English
British English




Computing




Keyboards




Orthography




Spelling




Speech




Accent
Pronunciation




Vocabulary





Glossary of American terms not widely
used in the United Kingdom


Glossary of British terms not widely
used in the United States


Lists of words having different meanings
in American and British English:


(A–L
M–Z)








Grammar


Works





Works with different titles
in the UK and US








v
t
e





British English is the English language as spoken and written in the United Kingdom.[3] Variations exist in formal, written English in the United Kingdom. For example, the adjective wee is almost exclusively used in parts of Scotland and Ireland, and occasionally Yorkshire, whereas little is predominant elsewhere. Nevertheless, there is a meaningful degree of uniformity in written English within the United Kingdom, and this could be described by the term British English. The forms of spoken English, however, vary considerably more than in most other areas of the world where English is spoken,[4] so a uniform concept of British English is more difficult to apply to the spoken language. According to Tom McArthur in the Oxford Guide to World English, British English shares "all the ambiguities and tensions in the word 'British' and as a result can be used and interpreted in two ways, more broadly or more narrowly, within a range of blurring and ambiguity".[5]
When distinguished from American English, the term "British English" is sometimes used broadly as a synonym for the various varieties of English spoken in some member states of the Commonwealth of Nations.



Contents


1 History
2 Dialects

2.1 Regional
2.2 Ethnicity


3 Features

3.1 Glottal stop
3.2 R-dropping
3.3 Diphthongisation

3.3.1 In the South
3.3.2 In the North


3.4 Loss of grammatical number in collective nouns
3.5 Negative Concord


4 Standardisation
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the English language
English is a West Germanic language that originated from the Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Britain by Germanic settlers from various parts of what is now northwest Germany and the northern Netherlands. The resident population at this time was generally speaking Common Brittonic—the insular variety of continental Celtic, which was influenced by the Roman occupation. This group of languages (Welsh, Cornish, Cumbric) cohabited alongside English into the modern period, but due to their remoteness from the Germanic languages, influence on English was notably limited. However, the degree of influence remains debated, and it has recently been argued that its grammatical influence accounts for the substantial innovations noted between English and the other West Germanic languages.[6] Initially, Old English was a diverse group of dialects, reflecting the varied origins of the Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms of England. One of these dialects, Late West Saxon, eventually came to dominate. The original Old English language was then influenced by two waves of invasion: the first was by speakers of the Scandinavian branch of the Germanic family, who conquered and colonised parts of Britain in the 8th and 9th centuries; the second was the Normans in the 11th century, who spoke Old Norman and ultimately developed an English variety of this called Anglo-Norman. These two invasions caused English to become "mixed" to some degree (though it was never a truly mixed language in the strictest sense of the word; mixed languages arise from the cohabitation of speakers of different languages, who develop a hybrid tongue for basic communication).
The more idiomatic, concrete and descriptive English is, the more it is from Anglo-Saxon origins. The more intellectual and abstract English is, the more it contains Latin and French influences e.g. swine (like the Germanic schwein) is the animal in the field bred by the occupied Anglo-Saxons and pork (like the French porc) is the animal at the table eaten by the occupying Normans.[7]
Cohabitation with the Scandinavians resulted in a significant grammatical simplification and lexical enrichment of the Anglo-Frisian core of English; the later Norman occupation led to the grafting onto that Germanic core of a more elaborate layer of words from the Romance branch of the European languages. This Norman influence entered English largely through the courts and government. Thus, English developed into a "borrowing" language of great flexibility and with a huge vocabulary.
Dialects[edit]



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.






Map showing phonological variation within England of the vowel in bath, grass, and dance.
  'a' [ä]
  'aa' [æː]
  'ah' [ɑː]
  anomalies
Those in the north generally pronounce such words with a short vowel whereas those in the south use a long vowel


Dialects and accents vary amongst the four countries of the United Kingdom, as well as within the countries themselves.
The major divisions are normally classified as English English (or English as spoken in England, which encompasses Southern English dialects, West Country dialects, East and West Midlands English dialects and Northern English dialects), Ulster English in Northern Ireland, Welsh English (not to be confused with the Welsh language), and Scottish English (not to be confused with the Scots language). The various British dialects also differ in the words that they have borrowed from other languages. Around the middle of the 15th century, there were points where within the 5 major dialects there were almost 500 ways to spell the word though.[8]
Following its last major survey of English Dialects (1949–1950), the University of Leeds has started work on a new project. In May 2007 the Arts and Humanities Research Council awarded a grant to Leeds to study British regional dialects.[9][10]
The team are[a] sifting through a large collection of examples of regional slang words and phrases turned up by the "Voices project" run by the BBC, in which they invited the public to send in examples of English still spoken throughout the country. The BBC Voices project also collected hundreds of news articles about how the British speak English from swearing through to items on language schools. This information will also be collated and analysed by Johnson's team both for content and for where it was reported. "Perhaps the most remarkable finding in the Voices study is that the English language is as diverse as ever, despite our increased mobility and constant exposure to other accents and dialects through TV and radio".[10] When discussing the award of the grant in 2007, Leeds University stated:

that they were "very pleased"—and indeed, "well chuffed"—at receiving their generous grant. He could, of course, have been "bostin" if he had come from the Black Country, or if he was a Scouser he would have been well "made up" over so many spondoolicks, because as a Geordie might say, £460,000 is a "canny load of chink".[11]

Regional[edit]
Most people in Britain speak with a regional accent or dialect. However, about 2% of Britons speak with an accent called Received Pronunciation[12] (also called as "the Queen's English", "Oxford English" and "BBC English"[13]), that is essentially region-less.[14][15] It derives from a mixture of the Midlands and Southern dialects spoken in London in the early modern period.[15] It is frequently used as a model for teaching English to foreign learners.[15]
In the South East there are significantly different accents; the Cockney accent spoken by some East Londoners is strikingly different from Received Pronunciation (RP). The Cockney rhyming slang can be (and was initially intended to be) difficult for outsiders to understand,[16] although the extent of its use is often somewhat exaggerated.
Estuary English has been gaining prominence in recent decades: it has some features of RP and some of Cockney. In London itself, the broad local accent is still changing, partly influenced by Caribbean speech. Immigrants to the UK in recent decades have brought many more languages to the country. Surveys started in 1979 by the Inner London Education Authority discovered over 100 languages being spoken domestically by the families of the inner city's schoolchildren. As a result, Londoners speak with a mixture of accents, depending on ethnicity, neighbourhood, class, age, upbringing, and sundry other factors.
Since the mass internal immigration to Northamptonshire in the 1940s and its position between several major accent regions, it has become a source of various accent developments. In Northampton the older accent has been influenced by overspill Londoners. There is an accent known locally as the Kettering accent, which is a transitional accent between the East Midlands and East Anglian. It is the last southern Midlands accent to use the broad "a" in words like bath/grass (i.e. barth/grarss). Conversely crass/plastic use a slender "a". A few miles northwest in Leicestershire the slender "a" becomes more widespread generally. In the town of Corby, five miles (8 km) north, one can find Corbyite, which unlike the Kettering accent, is largely influenced by the West Scottish accent.
In addition, most British people can to some degree temporarily "swing" their accent towards a more neutral form of English at will, to reduce difficulty where very different accents are involved, or when speaking to foreigners.
Ethnicity[edit]
Main article: Multicultural London English
Features[edit]
Phonological features characteristic of British English revolve around the pronunciation of the letter R, as well as the dental plosive T and some diphthongs specific to this dialect.
Glottal stop[edit]
In a number of forms of spoken British English, it is common for the phoneme /t/ to be realised as a glottal stop [ʔ] when it is in the intervocalic position, in a process called T-glottalisation. Once regarded as a Cockney feature, it has become much more widespread. It is still stigmatised when used in words like later, but becoming very widespread at the end of words such as not (as in no[ʔ] interested).[17] Other consonants subject to this usage in Cockney English are p, as in pa[ʔ]er and k as in ba[ʔ]er.[17]
R-dropping[edit]
In most areas of Britain outside Scotland, the consonant R is not pronounced if not followed by a vowel, lengthening the preceding vowel instead. This phenomenon is known as non-rhoticity. In these same areas, a tendency exists to insert an R between a word ending in a vowel and a next word beginning with a vowel. This is called the intrusive R. This could be understood as a merger, in that words that once ended in an R and words that did not are no longer treated differently.
Diphthongisation[edit]
British dialects differ on the extent of diphthongisation of long vowels, with southern varieties extensively turning them into diphthongs, and with northern dialects normally preserving many of them. As a comparison, North American varieties could be said to be in-between.
In the South[edit]
Long vowels /i:/ and /u:/ are diphthongised to [ɪi] and [ʊu] respectively (or, more technically, [ʏʉ], with a raised tongue), so that ee and oo in feed and food are pronounced with a movement. The diphthong [oʊ] is also pronounced with a greater movement, normally [əʊ], [əʉ] or [əɨ].
In the North[edit]
Long vowels /i:/ and /u:/ are usually preserved, and in several areas also /o:/ and /e:/, as in go and say (unlike other varieties of English, that change them to [oʊ] and [eɪ] respectively). Some areas go as far as not diphthongising medieval /i:/ and /u:/, that give rise to modern /aɪ/ and /aʊ/; that is, for example, in the traditional accent of Newcastle upon Tyne, 'out' will sound as 'oot', and in parts of Scotland, 'my' will be pronounced as 'me'.
Loss of grammatical number in collective nouns[edit]
A tendency to drop grammatical number in collective nouns, stronger in British English than in North American English,[18] exists. This is namely treating them, that were once grammatically singular, as grammatically plural, that is: the perceived natural number prevails. This applies especially to nouns of institutions and groups made of many people.
The noun 'police', for example, undergoes this treatment:

Police are investigating the theft of work tools worth £500 from a van at the Sprucefield park and ride car park in Lisburn.[19]

A football team can be treated likewise:

Arsenal have lost just one of 20 home Premier League matches against Manchester City.[20]

Negative Concord[edit]
Some dialects of British English use negative concords, also known as double negatives. Rather than changing a word or using a positive, words like nobody, not, nothing, and never would be used in the same sentence.[21] While this does not occur in Standard English, it does occur in non-standard dialects. The double negation follows the idea of two different morphemes, one that causes the double negation, and one that is used for the point or the verb.[22]
Standardisation[edit]
As with English around the world, the English language as used in the United Kingdom is governed by convention rather than formal code: there is no body equivalent to the Académie française or the Real Academia Española. Dictionaries (for example, Oxford English Dictionary, Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, Chambers Dictionary, Collins Dictionary) record usage rather than attempting to prescribe it.[23] In addition, vocabulary and usage change with time: words are freely borrowed from other languages and other strains of English, and neologisms are frequent.
For historical reasons dating back to the rise of London in the 9th century, the form of language spoken in London and the East Midlands became standard English within the Court, and ultimately became the basis for generally accepted use in the law, government, literature and education in Britain. The standardisation of British English is thought to be from both dialect leveling and a thought of social superiority. Speaking in the Standard dialect created class distinctions; those who did not speak the standard English would be considered of a lesser class or social status and often discounted or considered of a low intelligence.[23] Another contribution to the standardisation of British English was the introduction of the printing press to England in the mid-15th century. In doing so, William Caxton enabled a common language and spelling to be dispersed among the entirety of England at a much faster rate.[8]
Samuel Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) was a large step in the English-language spelling reform, where the purification of language focused on standardising both speech and spelling.[24] By the early 20th century, British authors have produced numerous books intended as guides to English grammar and usage, a few of which have achieved sufficient acclaim to have remained in print for long periods and to have been reissued in new editions after some decades. These include, most notably of all, Fowler's Modern English Usage and The Complete Plain Words by Sir Ernest Gowers.[25]
Detailed guidance on many aspects of writing British English for publication is included in style guides issued by various publishers including The Times newspaper, the Oxford University Press and the Cambridge University Press. The Oxford University Press guidelines were originally drafted as a single broadsheet page by Horace Henry Hart, and were at the time (1893) the first guide of their type in English; they were gradually expanded and eventually published, first as Hart's Rules, and in 2002 as part of The Oxford Manual of Style. Comparable in authority and stature to The Chicago Manual of Style for published American English, the Oxford Manual is a fairly exhaustive standard for published British English that writers can turn to in the absence of specific guidance from their publishing house.[26]
See also[edit]

Canadian English
Comparison of American and British English
Australian English
Commonwealth English
British Sign Language
Hiberno-English

Notes[edit]



^ In British English collective nouns may be either singular or plural, according to context. An example provided by Partridge is: " 'The committee of public safety is to consider the matter', but 'the committee of public safety quarrel regarding their next chairman' ...Thus...singular when...a unit is intended; plural when the idea of plurality is predominant". BBC television news and The Guardian style guide follow Partridge but other sources, such as BBC Online and The Times style guides, recommend a strict noun-verb agreement with the collective noun always governing the verb conjugated in the singular. BBC radio news, however, insists on the plural verb. Partridge, Eric (1947) Usage and Abusage: "Collective Nouns". Allen, John (2003) BBC News style guide, page 31.



Citations


^ "British English; Hiberno-English". Oxford English Dictionary (2 ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 1989. 
^ British English, Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary
^ The Oxford English Dictionary applies the term to English as "spoken or written in the British Isles; esp[ecially] the forms of English usual in Great Britain", reserving "Hiberno-English" for the "English language as spoken and written in Ireland".[1] Others, such as the Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary, define it as the "English language as it is spoken and written in England".[2]
^ Jeffries, Stuart (27 March 2009). "The G2 Guide to Regional English". The Guardian. section G2, p. 12. 
^ McArthur (2002), p. 45.
^ English and Welsh, 1955 J. R. R. Tolkien, also see references in Brittonicisms in English
^ http://pandora.cii.wwu.edu/vajda/ling201/test3materials/HistEngoverhead.htm
^ a b http://www.thehistoryofenglish.com/history_early_modern.html
^ Professor Sally Johnson[permanent dead link] biography on the Leeds University website
^ a b Mapping the English language—from cockney to Orkney, Leeds University website, 25 May 2007.
^ McSmith, Andy. Dialect researchers given a "canny load of chink" to sort "pikeys" from "chavs" in regional accents, The Independent, 1 June 2007. Page 20
^ "Received Pronunciation". Retrieved 20 March 2017. 
^ BBC English because this was originally the form of English used on radio and television, although a wider variety of accents can be heard these days.
^ Sweet, Henry (1908). The Sounds of English. Clarendon Press. p. 7. 
^ a b c Fowler, H.W. (1996). R.W. Birchfield, ed. "Fowler's Modern English Usage". Oxford University Press. 
^ Franklyn, Julian (1975). A dictionary of rhyming slang. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. p. 9. ISBN 0-415-04602-5. 
^ a b Trudgill, Peter (1984). Language in the British Isles. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp. 56–57. ISBN 0-521-28409-0. 
^ [1], Oxford dictionary website, 02 April 2017.
^ [2], BBC, 8 January 2017.
^ [3], BBC, 2 April 2017.
^ http://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/grammar/british-grammar/types-of-english-formal-informal-etc/double-negatives-and-usage
^ https://link-springer-com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/content/pdf/10.1007%2Fs10828-016-9079-4.pdf
^ a b https://courses.nus.edu.sg/course/elltankw/history/standardisation/c.htm
^ http://www.ruf.rice.edu/~kemmer/Histengl/spelling.html
^ https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/features/new-edition-of-the-complete-plain-words-will-delight-fans-of-no-frills-prose-but-can-breaking-the-9219926.html
^ https://www.ox.ac.uk/sites/files/oxford/media_wysiwyg/University%20of%20Oxford%20Style%20Guide.pdf


References[edit]

McArthur, Tom (2002). Oxford Guide to World English. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-866248-3 hardback, ISBN 0-19-860771-7 paperback.
Bragg, Melvyn (2004). The Adventure of English, London: Sceptre. ISBN 0-340-82993-1
Peters, Pam (2004). The Cambridge Guide to English Usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-62181-X.
Simpson, John (ed.) (1989). Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

External links[edit]

Sounds Familiar? –  Examples of regional accents and dialects across the UK on the British Library's 'Sounds Familiar' website
Accents and dialects from the British Library Sound Archive
Accents of English from Around the World Hear and compare how the same 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world – instantaneous playback online
The Septic's Companion: A British Slang Dictionary –  an online dictionary of British slang, viewable alphabetically or by category
British English Turkey







v
t
e


Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent



Europe




United Kingdom




England









Varieties by common name






Barrovian
Black Country
Brummie
Bristolian
Cheshire
Cockney

"Mockney"


Cornish
Cumbrian
East Anglian
East Midlands
Essex
Estuary
Geordie
Kentish
Lancastrian
Mackem
Mancunian
Multicultural London
Norfolk
Northern
Pitmatic
Potteries
Received Pronunciation
Scouse
Southern
Suffolk
Sussex
West Country

"Mummerset"


West Midlands
Yorkshire













Varieties by geographic location






East of England

Essex
Norfolk
Suffolk


East Midlands
North

Cheshire
Cumbria

Barrow


Lancashire
Manchester
Merseyside
Sunderland
Tyneside
Yorkshire


South

Kent
Thames Estuary; London

Multicultural London


Sussex


West Country

Bristol
Cornwall
Dorset


West Midlands

Black Country
Birmingham
Stoke-on-Trent













Northern Ireland



Mid Ulster
Ulster Scots





Scotland



Glasgow
Highlands





Wales



Cardiff
Gower
Port Talbot








Ireland



Dublin

D4


South-West

Cork


Supraregional
Ulster





Channel Islands



Alderney
Guernsey
Jersey





Elsewhere



Gibraltar
Isle of Man
Malta








North and
South
America




United States









Varieties by common name






African American
Appalachian
Boston
Cajun
California
Chicago; Detroit; Great Lakes
Chicano
Mid-Atlantic

Philadelphia; South Jersey
Baltimorese


General American
High Tider
Maine
Miami
Midland
Midwestern
New England
New Mexican
New York
Old Southern
Pacific Northwest
Pennsylvania Dutch
Pittsburghese
Rhode Island
Southern
Texan
Upper Midwestern
Western
Vermont
Yat
Yeshivish
Yooper













Varieties by geographic location






Delaware Valley; Mid-Atlantic

Pennsylvania Dutch
Philadelphia; South Jersey
Baltimore


Midland
Midwest

Great Lakes; Inland North
Upper Midwest
Upper Peninsula of Michigan


New England

Boston
Maine
Rhode Island
Vermont


New York City; Northeastern New Jersey

New York Latino


North
South

Acadiana
Appalachia
Chesapeake; Pamlico
Miami
New Orleans
Texas


West

California
New Mexico
Pacific Northwest


Western Pennsylvania











Canada



Aboriginal
Atlantic

Cape Breton
Newfoundland
Lunenburg


Standard

Ottawa Valley
Pacific Northwest
Quebec







Caribbean



Bahamas
Barbados
Dominican Republic
Jamaica
Puerto Rico
Trinidad





Elsewhere



Bermuda
Falkland Islands
Guyana








Oceania




Australia



Aboriginal
Broad; Strine
General
South Australian
Torres Strait
West Australian





Elsewhere



Fiji
New Zealand
Palau
Solomon Islands








Other
continents




Africa



Cameroon
Ghana
Kenya
Liberia
Malawi
Namibia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
South Africa

White

Cultivated
General
Broad
Cape Flats


Black
Indian


Uganda





Asia



Bangladesh
Brunei
Burma or Myanmar
Hong Kong
India
Malaysia
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka















v
t
e


English-speaking world






Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region






































































Further links







Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations
Anglosphere





Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language









 







Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority





Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha





Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands





Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands








 







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language





Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Puerto Rico





Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore





Europe



Gibraltar
Malta





Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu












Dependencies shown in italics.












United Kingdom portal
Language portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_English&oldid=817362609"					Categories: British EnglishEnglish dialectsEnglish languageLanguages of GibraltarLanguages of the United KingdomHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse British English from December 2016Articles containing explicitly cited English-language textLanguage articles with IETF language tagLanguage articles without speaker estimateLanguage articles without language codesLanguage articles missing Glottolog codeUse dmy dates from June 2011