"BOTs" redirects here. For other uses, see Bots (disambiguation).



British Overseas Territories







Flag of the United Kingdom




Location of the United Kingdom and the British Overseas Territories



Largest settlements
George Town, Gibraltar, Road Town


Official language
English


Demonym
British, Briton


Territories


14 territories

Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands





Leaders



• Monarch

Elizabeth II



• Foreign Secretary

Boris Johnson



• Minister of State

Tariq Ahmad



• Minister of State

Alan Duncan


Area



• Total

1,727,570 km2 (667,020 sq mi)


Population



• 2010 estimate

250,000


Date format
dd/mm/yyyy (AD)


The British Overseas Territories (BOT) or alternatively, United Kingdom's Overseas Territories (UKOTs), are 14 territories under the jurisdiction and sovereignty of the United Kingdom.[1][2] They are the parts of the British Empire that have not been granted independence or have voted to remain British territories. These territories do not form part of the United Kingdom and, with the exception of Gibraltar, are not part of the European Union. Most of the inhabited territories are internally self-governing, with the UK retaining responsibility for defence and foreign relations. The rest are either uninhabited or have a transitory population of military or scientific personnel. They share the British monarch (Elizabeth II) as head of state.
The term "British Overseas Territory" was introduced by the British Overseas Territories Act 2002, replacing the term British Dependent Territory, introduced by the British Nationality Act 1981. Prior to 1 January 1983, the territories were officially referred to as British Crown Colonies. With the exceptions of the British Antarctic Territory and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (which host only officials and research station staff) and the British Indian Ocean Territory (used as a military base), the Territories retain permanent civilian populations. Permanent residency for the 7,000 or so civilians living in the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia is limited to citizens of the Republic of Cyprus.
Collectively, the Territories encompass a population of about 250,000 people and a land area of about 1,727,570 square kilometres (667,020 sq mi). The vast majority of this land area, 1,700,000 square kilometres (660,000 sq mi), constitutes the almost uninhabited British Antarctic Territory, while the largest territory by population, Bermuda, accounts for almost a quarter of the total BOT population. At the other end of the scale, three territories have no civilian population; the Antarctic territory, the British Indian Ocean Territory (from which the Chagos Islanders were controversially removed) and South Georgia. Pitcairn Islands, settled by the survivors of the Mutiny on the Bounty, is the smallest settled territory with 49 inhabitants, while the smallest by land area is Gibraltar on the southern tip of the Iberian peninsula.[3][4] The United Kingdom participates in the Antarctic Treaty System[5] and, as part of a mutual agreement, the British Antarctic Territory is recognised by four of the six other sovereign nations making claims to Antarctic territory.
Although the Crown dependencies of Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man are also under the sovereignty of the British monarch, they are in a different constitutional relationship with the United Kingdom.[6][7] The British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies are themselves distinct from the Commonwealth realms, a group of 15 independent countries (and the United Kingdom) each having Elizabeth II as their reigning monarch, and from the Commonwealth of Nations, a voluntary association of 52 countries mostly with historic links to the British Empire (which also includes all Commonwealth realms).
As of August 2014[update] the Minister responsible for the Territories excluding the Falkland Islands, Gibraltar and the Sovereign Base Areas is Tariq Ahmad, Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the UN. The other three territories are the responsibility of Sir Alan Duncan MP, Minister of State for Europe and the Americas.[8]



Contents


1 Current overseas territories

1.1 Map


2 History
3 Government

3.1 Head of state
3.2 Local government
3.3 Legal system
3.4 Joint Ministerial Council


4 Relations with the United Kingdom

4.1 Foreign affairs
4.2 Citizenship
4.3 Military


5 Languages
6 Currencies
7 Symbols and insignia
8 Sports
9 Biodiversity
10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Current overseas territories[edit]
The fourteen British Overseas Territories are:[9]


Flag
Arms
Name
Location
Motto
Area
Population
Capital












Akrotiri and Dhekelia
Cyprus, Mediterranean Sea

0000255 !255 km2 (98 sq mi)[10]
07700 !7,700 (Cypriots; estimate)
8,000 non-permanent (UK military personnel and their families; estimate)
Episkopi Cantonment












Anguilla
Caribbean, North Atlantic Ocean
"Strength and Endurance"
0000091 !91 km2 (35.1 sq mi)[11]
13500 !13,500 (2006 estimate)[12]
The Valley












Bermuda
North Atlantic Ocean between Puerto Rico and Cape Sable Island, Canada
"Quo fata ferunt" (Latin; "Whither the Fates carry [us]")
0000054 !54 km2 (20.8 sq mi)[13]
64000 !64,000 (2007 estimate)[14]
Hamilton












British Antarctic Territory
Antarctica
"Research and discovery"
37645 !1,709,400 km2 (660,000 sq mi)[11]
00000 !0
50 non-permanent in winter, over 400 in summer (research personnel)[15]
Rothera (main base)












British Indian Ocean Territory
Indian Ocean
"In tutela nostra Limuria" (Latin; "Limuria is in our charge")
0000046 !46 km2 (18 sq mi)[16]
00000 !0
3,000 non-permanent (UK and US military and staff personnel; estimate)[17]
Diego Garcia (base)












British Virgin Islands
Caribbean, North Atlantic Ocean
"Vigilate" (Latin; "Be watchful")
0000153 !153 km2 (59 sq mi)[18]
27000 !27,000 (2005 estimate)[18]
Road Town








Cayman Islands
Caribbean, North Atlantic Ocean
"He hath founded it upon the seas"
0000264 !264 km2 (101.9 sq mi)[19]
56092 !56,092 (2013 estimate)[19]
George Town












Falkland Islands
South Atlantic Ocean A !South Atlantic Ocean
"Desire the right"
0012173 !12,173 km2 (4,700 sq mi)[13]
02955 !2,955 (2006 census)[20]
1,350 non-permanent (UK military personnel; 2012 estimate)
Stanley












Gibraltar
Iberian Peninsula, Continental Europe
"Nulli expugnabilis hosti" (Latin; "No enemy shall expel us")
0000006.5 !6.5 km2 (2.5 sq mi)[21]
28800 !28,800 (2005 estimate)[22]
1,250 non-permanent (UK military personnel; 2012 estimate)
Gibraltar












Montserrat
Caribbean, North Atlantic Ocean
"A people of excellence, moulded by nature, nurtured by God"
0000101 !101 km2 (39 sq mi)[23]
04655 !4,655 (2006 estimate)[23]
Plymouth (abandoned due to volcano—de facto capital is Brades)












Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie and Oeno Islands
Pacific Ocean

0000045 !47 km2 (18 sq mi)[24]
00049 !49 (2014 estimate)[25]
6 non-permanent (2014 estimate)[26]
Adamstown








Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha A !Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha,
including:
South Atlantic Ocean B !South Atlantic Ocean

0000420 !420 km2 (162 sq mi)
05530 !5,530 (total; estimate)
Jamestown












Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha B !Saint Helena
South Atlantic Ocean C !
"Loyal and Unshakeable" (Saint Helena)
0000419.9 !
05529.9 !4,255 (Saint Helena; 2008 census)[27]













Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha B !Ascension Island
South Atlantic Ocean C !

0000419.9 !
05529.9 !880 (Ascension; estimate)[28]
1,000 non-permanent (Ascension; UK military personnel; estimate)[28]













Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha B !Tristan da Cunha
South Atlantic Ocean C !
"Our faith is our strength" (Tristan da Cunha)
0000419.9 !
05529.9 !300 (Tristan da Cunha; estimate)[28]
9 non-permanent (Tristan da Cunha; weather personnel)













South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
South Atlantic Ocean D !South Atlantic Ocean
"Leo terram propriam protegat" (Latin; "Let the lion protect his own land")
0004066 !4,066 km2 (1,570 sq mi)[29]
00000 !0
99 non-permanent (officials and research personnel)[30]
King Edward Point












Turks and Caicos Islands
Lucayan Archipelago, North Atlantic Ocean
"Beautiful by nature, clean by choice"
0000430 !430 km2 (166 sq mi)[31]
32000 !32,000 (2006 census)[31]
Cockburn Town




Overall


1,727,570 km2
c. 250,000



Map[edit]





  British Overseas Territories
  United Kingdom
  Crown dependencies




History[edit]
Main articles: British Empire, Territorial evolution of the British Empire, and List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom




St. George's town, in the Islands of Bermuda, or "The Somers Isles". The colony was founded by the wrecking of the flagship of the Virginia Company in 1609. The Company's charter was extended to include Bermuda in 1612, and it has remained a British colony ever since. Since the rebellion of Virginia, it has been the oldest-remaining British colony, and the town of St. George's is the oldest continuously inhabited British settlement in the New World.[32]


Early colonies, in the sense of English subjects residing in lands hitherto outside the control of the English government, were generally known as "Plantations".
The first, unofficial, colony was Newfoundland, where English fishermen routinely set up seasonal camps in the 16th century.[33] It is now a province of Canada known as Newfoundland and Labrador. It retains strong cultural ties with Britain.
English colonisation of North America began officially in 1607 with the settlement of Jamestown, the first successful permanent colony in Virginia (a term that was then applied generally to North America). Its offshoot, Bermuda, was settled inadvertently after the wrecking of the Virginia company's flagship there in 1609, with the Virginia Company's charter extended to officially include the archipelago in 1612. St. George's town, founded in Bermuda in that year, remains the oldest continuously inhabited British settlement in the New World (with some historians stating that – its formation predating the 1619 conversion of "James Fort" into "Jamestown" – St. George's was actually the first successful town the English established in the New World). Bermuda and Bermudians have played important, sometimes pivotal, but generally underestimated or unacknowledged roles in the shaping of the English and British trans-Atlantic Empires. These include maritime commerce, settlement of the continent and of the West Indies, and the projection of naval power via the colony's privateers, among other areas.[34][35]
The growth of the British Empire in the 19th century, to its territorial peak in the 1920s, saw Britain acquire nearly one quarter of the world's land mass, including territories with large indigenous populations in Asia and Africa. From the mid-nineteenth century to the early twentieth century, the larger settler colonies – in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa – first became self-governing colonies and then achieved independence in all matters except foreign policy, defence and trade. Separate self-governing colonies federated to become Canada (in 1867), Australia (in 1901), South Africa (in 1910), and Rhodesia (in 1965). These and other large self-governing colonies had become known as Dominions by the 1920s. The Dominions achieved almost full independence with the Statute of Westminster (1931).




Many of the overseas territories are in the Caribbean, as shown on the map.


Through a process of decolonisation following the Second World War, most of the British colonies in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean gained independence. Some colonies became Commonwealth realms, retaining the British monarch as their own head of state.[36] Most former colonies and protectorates became member states of the Commonwealth of Nations, a non-political, voluntary association of equal members, comprising a population of around 2.2 billion people.[37]
After the independence of Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) in Africa in 1980 and British Honduras (now Belize) in Central America in 1981, the last major colony that remained was Hong Kong, with a population of over 5 million.[38] With 1997 approaching, the United Kingdom and China negotiated the Sino-British Joint Declaration, which led to the whole of Hong Kong becoming a "special administrative region" of China in 1997, subject to various conditions intended to guarantee the preservation of Hong Kong's capitalist economy and its way of life under British rule for at least 50 years after the handover. George Town in the Cayman Islands has consequently become the largest city in the Overseas Territories.
In 2002, the British Parliament passed the British Overseas Territories Act 2002. This reclassified the UK's dependent territories as overseas territories and, with the exception of those people solely connected with the Sovereign Base Areas of Cyprus, restored full British citizenship to their inhabitants.[39]
Government[edit]




McKeeva Bush, Premier of the Cayman Islands in 2012


Head of state[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The head of state in the overseas territories is the British monarch, Elizabeth II. The Queen's role in the territories is in her role as Queen of the United Kingdom, and not in right of each territory.[citation needed] The Queen appoints a representative in each territory to exercise her executive power. In territories with a permanent population, a Governor is appointed by the Queen on the advice of the British Government, usually a retired senior military officer,[citation needed] or a senior civil servant. In territories without a permanent population, a Commissioner is usually appointed to represent the Queen. Exceptionally, in the overseas territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, an Administrator is appointed to be the Governor's representative in each of the two distant parts of the territory, namely Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha.
The role of the Governor is to act as the de facto head of state, and they are usually responsible for appointing the head of government, and senior political positions in the territory. The Governor is also responsible for liaising with the UK Government, and carrying out any ceremonial duties. A Commissioner has the same powers as a Governor, but also acts as the head of government.[citation needed]
Local government[edit]
Main article: List of current heads of government in the United Kingdom and dependencies § Overseas Territories
See also: List of leaders of dependent territories
All the overseas territories have their own system of government, and localised laws. The structure of the government appears to be closely correlated to the size and political development of the territory.[citation needed]


Territories
Government




British Antarctic Territory
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands


There is no native or permanent population; therefore there is no elected government. The Commissioner, supported by an Administrator, run the affairs of the territory.




British Indian Ocean Territory


There is no elected government, as there is no native settled population. The Chagos Islanders – who were forcibly evicted from the territory in 1971 – won a High Court Judgement allowing them to return, but this was then overridden by an Order in Council preventing them from returning. The final appeal to the House of Lords (regarding the lawfulness of the Order in Council) was decided in the government's favour, exhausting the islanders' legal options in the United Kingdom at present.




Akrotiri and Dhekelia


There is no elected government. The Commander British Forces Cyprus acts as the territory's Administrator, with a Chief Officer responsible for day-to-day running of the civil government. As far as possible, there is convergence of laws[clarification needed] with those of the Republic of Cyprus.




Pitcairn Islands


There are an elected Mayor and Island Council, who have the power to propose and administer local legislation. However, their decisions are subject to approval by the Governor, who retains near-unlimited powers of plenary legislation on behalf of the United Kingdom Government.




Falkland Islands


The Government consists of an elected Legislative Assembly, with the Chief Executive and the Director of Corporate Resources as ex officio members.[40]




Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha


The Government consists of an elected Legislative Council. The Governor is the head of government and leads the Executive Council, consisting of appointed members made up from the Legislative Council and two ex-officio members. Governance on Ascension Island and Tristan da Cunha is led by Administrators who are advised by elected Island Councils.[41]




Anguilla
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Montserrat


These territories have a House of Assembly, Legislative Assembly (Cayman Islands), or Legislative Council (Montserrat) with political parties. The Executive Council is usually called a cabinet and is led by a Premier or a Chief Minister (in Anguilla), who is the leader of the majority party in parliament. The Governor exercises less power over local affairs and deals mostly with foreign affairs and economic issues, while the elected government controls most "domestic" concerns.[citation needed]




Gibraltar


Under the Gibraltar Constitution Order 2006 which was approved in Gibraltar by a referendum, Gibraltar now has a Parliament. The Government of Gibraltar, headed by the Chief Minister, is elected. Defence, external affairs and internal security vest in the Governor.[42]




Bermuda


Bermuda, settled in 1609, and self-governed since 1620, is the oldest and most populous of the Overseas Territories. The bicameral Parliament consists of a Senate and a House of Assembly, and most executive powers have been devolved to the head of government, known as the Premier.[citation needed]




Turks and Caicos Islands


The Turks and Caicos Islands adopted a new constitution effective 9 August 2006; their head of government now also has the title Premier, their legislature is called the House of Assembly, and their autonomy has been greatly increased.[citation needed]


Legal system[edit]


British Overseas Territories Joint Ministerial Council


Type


Type

Dialogue forum



Seats
28-30


Elections



Voting system

All members elected either as MPs in the UK cabinet or as heads of Government or Ministers in Overseas Territories.


Meeting place


Westminster, London


Website


www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/overseas-territories-joint-ministerial-council


Each overseas territory has its own legal system independent of the United Kingdom. The legal system is generally based on English common law, with some distinctions for local circumstances. Each territory has its own attorney general, and court system. For the smaller territories, the UK may appoint a UK-based lawyer or judge to work on legal cases. This is particularly important for cases involving serious crimes and where it is impossible to find a jury who will not know the defendant in a small population island.[citation needed]
Many of them, such as Isle of Man, Cayman Islands and Bermuda are used as tax havens and as flags of convenience for ships as part of the Red Ensign group.[43]
The Pitcairn sexual assault trial of 2004 is an example of how the UK may choose to provide the legal framework for particular cases where the territory cannot do so alone.
Joint Ministerial Council[edit]
A joint ministerial council of UK ministers, and the leaders of the Overseas Territories has been held annually since 2012 to provide representation between UK Government departments and Overseas Territory Governments.[44]
Relations with the United Kingdom[edit]




Leaders of the Overseas Territories with former Prime Minister David Cameron in 2012.






Tristan da Cunha on 6 February 2013, as seen from space. The population was temporarily evacuated to the UK in 1961 because of an eruption. Postal code TDCU 1ZZ






Coastline at Little Bay, the site of the new capital of Montserrat replacing Plymouth. The project is funded by the[45] UK's Department for International Development.






British Overseas Territories at the same geographic scale as the UK.


The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has the responsibility of looking after the interests of all overseas territories except the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia, which comes under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defence.[46][47] Within the FCO, the general responsibility for the territories is handled by the Overseas Territories Directorate.[48]
In 2012, the FCO published The Overseas Territories: security, success and sustainability which set out Britain's policy for the Overseas Territories, covering six main areas:[49]

Defence, security and safety of the territories and their people
Successful and resilient economies
Cherishing the environment
Making government work better
Vibrant and flourishing communities
Productive links with the wider world

Britain and the overseas territories do not have diplomatic representations, although the governments of the overseas territories with indigenous populations all retain a representative office in London. The United Kingdom Overseas Territories Association (UKOTA) also represents the interests of the territories in London. The governments in both London and territories occasionally meet to mitigate or resolve disagreements over the process of governance in the territories and levels of autonomy.[50]
Britain provides financial assistance to the overseas territories via the Department for International Development. Currently[when?] only Montserrat and Saint Helena receive budgetary aid (i.e. financial contribution to recurrent funding).[citation needed] Several specialist funds are made available by the UK, including:

The Good Government Fund which provides assistance on government administration;
The Economic Diversification Programme Budget which aim to diversify and enhance the economic bases of the territories.

The territories have no official representation in the UK Parliament, but have informal representation through the All-Party Parliamentary Group,[51] and can petition the UK Government through the Directgov e-Petitions website.[52] Only Gibraltar has representation in the European Parliament and it shares its Member with the region of South West England.
Two national parties, UKIP and the Liberal Democrats, have endorsed calls for direct representation of overseas territories in the UK Parliament, as well as backbench members of the Conservative Party and Labour Party.[53][54][55][56]
Foreign affairs[edit]
See also: Special member state territories and the European Union




Map showing the portion of Antarctica claimed by the UK as British Antarctic Territory.






Gibraltar is the only overseas territory included in the European Union


Foreign affairs of the overseas territories are handled by the FCO in London. Some territories maintain diplomatic officers in nearby countries for trade and immigration purposes. Several of the territories in the Americas maintain membership within the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States, the Caribbean Community, the Caribbean Development Bank, Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency, and the Association of Caribbean States. The territories are members of the Commonwealth of Nations through the United Kingdom. The inhabited territories compete in their own right at the Commonwealth Games, and three of the territories (Bermuda, the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands) sent teams to the 2008 Summer Olympics.
Gibraltar is the only overseas territory that is part of the European Union (EU), although it is not part of the European Customs Union, the European Tax Policy, the European Statistics Zone or the Common Agriculture Policy. Gibraltar is not a member of the European Union in its own right. The Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus are not part of the European Union, but they are the only British overseas territory to use the euro as official currency. None of the other Overseas Territories are members of the EU, the main body of EU law does not apply and, although certain slices of EU law are applied to those territories as part of the EU's Association of Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT Association), they are not commonly enforceable in local courts. The OCT Association also provides overseas territories with structural funding for regeneration projects.
Since the return of full British citizenship[57] to most 'belongers' of overseas territories (mainly since the British Overseas Territories Act 2002), the citizens of those territories hold concurrent European Union citizenship, giving them rights of free movement across all EU member states.
Several nations dispute the UK's sovereignty in the following overseas territories:

Akrotiri and Dhekelia – claimed by Cyprus
British Antarctic Territory – Territory overlaps Antarctic claims made by Chile and Argentina
British Indian Ocean Territory – claimed by Mauritius and Seychelles
Falkland Islands – claimed by Argentina
Gibraltar – claimed by Spain
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands – claimed by Argentina

Citizenship[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Main article: British Overseas Territories citizen
None of the overseas territories has its own nationality status, and all citizens are classed as British Overseas Territories citizens (BOTC). They do, however, have legislative independence over immigration, and holding the status of a BOTC does not automatically give a person a right of abode in any of the territories, as it depends on the territory's immigration laws. A territory may issue Belonger status to allow a person classed as a BOTC to reside in the territory that they have close links with. Non-BOTC citizens may acquire Belonger status to reside in a particular territory (and may subsequently become naturalised BOTC if they wish).




Thousands of Gibraltarians dress in their national colours of red and white during the 2013 Gibraltar National Day celebrations.


Historically, most inhabitants of the British Empire held the status of British subject, which was usually lost upon independence. From 1949, British subjects in the United Kingdom and the remaining colonies became citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies. However changes in British immigration and nationality law between 1962 and 1983 saw the creation of a separate British Dependent Territories citizenship (BDTC) with effect from January 1983. Citizens in most territories were stripped of full British citizenship. This was mainly to prevent a mass exodus of the citizens of Hong Kong to the UK before the agreed handover to China in 1997. Exception was made for the Falkland Islands, which had been invaded in 1982 by Argentina. Full British citizenship was soon returned to the people of Gibraltar having regard to the friction with Spain.
However, the British Overseas Territories Act 2002 replaced British Dependent Territory citizenship with British Overseas Territories citizenship (BOTC), and restored full British citizenship to all BOTCs except those from Akrotiri and Dhekelia. This restored to BOTCs the right to reside in the UK.
British citizens, however, do not have an automatic right to reside in any of the Overseas Territories. Some territories prohibit immigration, and any visitors are required to seek the permission of the territory's government to live in the territory.
Military[edit]




RAF Mount Pleasant, Falkland Islands


Defence of the Overseas Territories is the responsibility of the UK. Many of the overseas territories are used as military bases by the UK and its allies.

Ascension Island (part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha) – the Base known as RAF Ascension Island is used by both the Royal Air Force and the United States Air Force.
Bermuda – became the primary Royal Navy base in America, following US independence. The Naval establishment included an admiralty, a dockyard, and a naval squadron. A considerable military garrison was built up to protect it, and Bermuda, which the British Government came to see as a base, rather than as a colony, was known as Fortress Bermuda, and the Gibraltar of the West (Bermudians, like Gibraltarians, also dub their territory "The Rock").[58] Canada and the USA also established bases in Bermuda during the Second World War, which were maintained through the Cold War. Four air bases were located in Bermuda during the Second World War (operated by the Royal Air Force, Royal Navy, US Navy, and US Army/Army Air Force). Since 1995, the military force in Bermuda has been reduced to the local territorial battalion, the Royal Bermuda Regiment.
British Indian Ocean Territory – the island of Diego Garcia is home to a large naval base and airbase leased to the United States by the United Kingdom until 2036 (unless renewed). There are British forces in small numbers in the BIOT for administrative and immigration purposes.
Falkland Islands – the British Forces Falkland Islands includes commitments from the British Army, Royal Air Force and Royal Navy, along with the Falkland Islands Defence Force.
Gibraltar – British Forces Gibraltar includes a Royal Navy dockyard (also used by NATO), RAF Gibraltar – used by the RAF and NATO and a local garrison – the Royal Gibraltar Regiment.
The Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia in Cyprus – maintained as strategic British military bases in the eastern Mediterranean Sea.
Montserrat – the Royal Montserrat Defence Force, historically connected with the Irish Guards, is a body of twenty volunteers, whose duties are primarily ceremonial.[59]
Saint Helena – it has been speculated[60] that the new Saint Helena Airport might be used for military purposes but this has neither been confirmed nor denied.

Languages[edit]




Cliffs at Gough and Inaccessible Islands.


Most of the languages other than English spoken in the territories contain a large degree of English, either as a root language, or in codeswitching, e.g. Llanito. They include:

Llanito or Yanito and Spanish (Gibraltar)
Cayman Creole (Cayman Islands)
Portuguese (Bermuda)[61]
Turks-Caicos Creole (Turks and Caicos Islands)
Pitkern (Pitcairn Islands)

Forms of English:

Bermudian English (Bermuda)
Falkland Islands English

Currencies[edit]
Main article: List of British currencies
The many British overseas territories use a varied assortment of currencies, including the euro, pound, US dollar, NZ dollar, or their own currencies, which may be pegged to one of these.


Location
Native currency
Issuing authority




Akrotiri and Dhekelia



Euro


European Central Bank





British Antarctic Territory
Tristan da Cunha1
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands



Pound sterling


Bank of England





Falkland Islands



Falkland Islands pound (parity with pound sterling)
Pound sterling (widely circulated and accepted universally)


Government of the Falkland Islands





Gibraltar



Gibraltar pound (parity with Pound sterling)
Pound sterling (widely circulated and accepted universally)
Euro (accepted unofficially in most establishments)


Government of Gibraltar





Saint Helena and Ascension Island1



Saint Helenian pound (parity with Pound Sterling)
United States dollar (accepted unofficially on Ascension Island)


Government of Saint Helena





British Virgin Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands



United States dollar
Bahamian dollar (accepted unofficially in the Turks and Caicos Islands)


US Federal Reserve





Anguilla
Montserrat



Eastern Caribbean dollar (pegged to US dollar at 2.7ECD=1USD)


Eastern Caribbean Central Bank





Bermuda



Bermudian dollar (parity with US dollar)
United States dollar (widely circulated and accepted universally)


Bermuda Monetary Authority





Cayman Islands



Cayman Islands dollar (pegged to US dollar at 1KYD=1.2USD)


Cayman Islands Monetary Authority





Pitcairn Islands



New Zealand dollar
United States dollar (accepted unofficially)[62]
Pound sterling is also accepted.[63]
Pitcairn Islands dollar (parity with New Zealand dollar; commemorative issue only)


Reserve Bank of New Zealand





British Indian Ocean Territory



United States dollar (de facto)[64][65]
Pound sterling (de jure)[66][67]


US Federal Reserve
Bank of England



1 Part of the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha.
Symbols and insignia[edit]




Overseas Territories flags in Parliament Square in 2013


Each overseas territory has been granted its own flag and coat of arms by the British monarch. Traditionally, the flags follow the Blue Ensign design, with the Union Flag in the canton, and the territory's coat of arms in the fly. Exceptions to this are Bermuda which uses a Red Ensign; British Antarctic Territory which uses a White Ensign; British Indian Ocean Territory which uses a Blue Ensign with wavy lines to symbolise the sea; and Gibraltar which uses a banner of its coat of arms (the flag of the city of Gibraltar).
Akrotiri and Dhekelia and Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha are the only British overseas territories without their own flag. The Union Flag is used in these territories.
Sports[edit]
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman Islands are the only British Overseas Territories with recognised National Olympic Committees (NOCs); the British Olympic Association is recognised as the appropriate NOC for athletes from the other territories, and thus athletes who hold a British passport are eligible to represent Great Britain at the Olympic Games.[68]
Shara Proctor from Anguilla, Delano Williams from the Turks and Caicos Islands, Jenaya Wade-Fray from Bermuda[69] and Georgina Cassar from Gibraltar[70] strived to represent Team GB at the London 2012 Olympics. Proctor, Wade-Fray and Cassar[70] qualified for Team GB, with Williams missing the cut, however wishing to represent the UK in 2016.[71][72]
The Gibraltar national football team was accepted into UEFA in 2013 in time for the 2016 European Championships. It has also applied to be part of FIFA and hopes to be accepted in time for eligibility for the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifying.
Biodiversity[edit]









The World Heritage Sites of the UK (Overseas Territories): The natural sites of Gough and Inaccessible Islands and Henderson Island are marked green, the cultural sites of the Historic Town of St George and Related Fortifications, Kourion, and Gorham's Cave are marked red.


The British Overseas Territories have more biodiversity than the entire UK mainland.[73] There are at least 180 endemic plant species in the overseas territories as opposed to only 12 on the UK mainland. Responsibility for protection of biodiversity and meeting obligations under international environmental conventions is shared between the UK Government and the local governments of the territories.[74]
Two areas, Henderson Island in the Pitcairn Islands as well as the Gough and Inaccessible Islands of Tristan Da Cunha are listed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites, and two other territories, the Turks and Caicos Islands, and Saint Helena are on the United Kingdom's tentative list for future UNESCO World Heritage Sites.[75][76] Gibraltar's Gorham's Cave Complex is also found on the UK's tentative UNESCO World Heritage Site list.[77]
The three regions of biodiversity hotspots situated in the British Overseas Territories are the Caribbean Islands, the Mediterranean Basin and the Oceania ecozone in the Pacific.[74]
The UK created the largest continuous marine protected areas in the world, the Chagos Marine Protected Area, and announced in 2015 funding to establish a new, larger, reserve around the Pitcairn Islands.[78][79][80]
In January 2016, the UK government announced the intention to create a marine protected area around Ascension Island. The protected area would be 234,291 square kilometers, half of which would be closed to fishing.[81]







A Stoplight Parrotfish in Princess Alexandra Land and Sea National Park, Providenciales, Turks and Caicos Islands









Penguins in South Georgia, 2010.









Henderson Island in the Pitcairn Islands









Rothera Research Station.




See also[edit]

Depopulation of Chagossians from the Chagos Archipelago to enable building of a UK-US military base in the British Indian Ocean Territory
List of postcodes
List of leaders of Overseas Territories
List of British Army installations
British overseas territory citizens in the mainland United Kingdom
Colonial Department
Secretary of State for the Colonies
Colonial Office
Universities in British Overseas Territories
United Kingdom Overseas Territories Association (UKOTA)
UK Overseas Territories Conservation Forum
List of stock exchanges in the United Kingdom, the British Crown Dependencies and United Kingdom Overseas Territories

References[edit]


^ "Supporting the Overseas Territories". UK Government. Retrieved 8 November 2014. There are 14 Overseas Territories which retain a constitutional link with the UK. .... Most of the Territories are largely self-governing, each with its own constitution and its own government, which enacts local laws. Although the relationship is rooted in four centuries of shared history, the UK government's relationship with its Territories today is a modern one, based on mutual benefits and responsibilities. The foundations of this relationship are partnership, shared values and the right of the people of each territory to choose to freely choose whether to remain a British Overseas Territory or to seek an alternative future. 
^ "What is the British Constitution: The Primary Structures of the British State". The Constitution Society. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 15 November 2014. The United Kingdom also manages a number of territories which, while mostly having their own forms of government, have the Queen as their head of state, and rely on the UK for defence and security, foreign affairs and representation at the international level. They do not form part of the UK, but have an ambiguous constitutional relationship with the UK. 
^ [1] Archived 1 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "CIA – The World Factbook 2002 – South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands". Faqs.org. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "CIA – The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "States of Guernsey: About Guernsey". Gov.gg. Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Government – Isle of Man Public Services". Gov.im. Archived from the original on 18 December 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "New ministerial appointments at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office" (Press release). Foreign and Commonwealth Office. 19 July 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. 
^ "[ARCHIVED CONTENT] UK Overseas Territories Foreign & Commonwealth Office". Collections.europarchive.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "SBA Cyprus". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "British Antarctic Territory". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Commonwealth Secretariat – Anguilla". Thecommonwealth.org. Archived from the original on 17 December 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "UNdata | record view | Surface area in km2". United Nations. 4 November 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Bermuda". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Commonwealth Secretariat – British Antarctic Territory". Thecommonwealth.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "British Indian Ocean Territory". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Commonwealth Secretariat – British Indian Ocean Territory". Thecommonwealth.org. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "British Virgin Islands (BVI)". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "The World Factbook: Cayman Islands". CIA. Retrieved 7 September 2016. 
^ "Commonwealth Secretariat – Falkland Islands". Thecommonwealth.org. 14 June 1982. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Gibraltar". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Commonwealth Secretariat – Gibraltar". Thecommonwealth.org. 7 November 2002. Archived from the original on 6 March 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "Montserrat". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Pitcairn Island". Jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ Rob Solomon and Kirsty Burnett (January 2014) Pitcairn Island Economic Review. government.pn. Retrieved 7 September 2016.
^ "Pitcairn Residents". puc.edu. Retrieved 7 September 2016.
^ "UN Statistics – St Helena census 2008" (PDF). United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2014. Retrieved 4 January 2011. 
^ a b c "St Helena, Ascension, Tristan da Cunha profiles". BBC. 16 March 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2016. 
^ Vital Statistics – SOUTH GEORGIA AND THE SOUTH SANDWICH ISLANDS. 22 January 1993. CIA WORLD FACTBOOK 1992 via the Libraries of the Univ. of Missouri-St. Louis.
^ "Population of Grytviken, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands". Population.mongabay.com. 31 March 2009. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ a b "Turks and Caicos Islands". Jncc.gov.uk. 1 November 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Bermuda – History and Heritage". Smithsonian.com. 6 November 2007. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2008. 
^ "Newfoundland History – Early Colonization and Settlement of Newfoundland". Faculty.marianopolis.edu. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ Copyright 2015 The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "UNC Press - In the Eye of All Trade". 
^ "In the Eye of All Trade: Bermuda, Bermudians, and the Maritime Atlantic World, 1680-1783". Archived from the original on 9 January 2012. 
^ Statute of Westminster 1931 (UK) CHAPTER 4 22 and 23 Geo 5
^ The Commonwealth – About Us; Online September 2014
^ "Population". Census and Statistics Department. Hong Kong Statistics. Retrieved 12 July 2013. 
^ British Overseas Territories Act 2002 (text online): S. 3: "Any person who, immediately before the commencement of this section, is a British overseas territories citizen shall, on the commencement of this section, become a British citizen."
^ "Falkland Islands Legislative Assembly". Falklands.gov.fk. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ "Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Constitution Order 2009 (at OPSI)". Opsi.gov.uk. 16 July 2010. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 
^ Press Release No. 133/2007 Archived 24 February 2010 at WebCite. Government of Gibraltar Press Office.
^ Carlisle, Rodney (December 1982). Sovereignty for Sale (1st ed.). USA: naval institute Press. ISBN 0870216686. 
^ "Overseas Territories Joint Ministerial Council 2015 Communique and Progress Report - Publications - GOV.UK". Retrieved 15 September 2016. 
^ "Little Bay Development". Projects.dfid.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 April 2013. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ British Overseas Territories Law, Ian Hendry and Susan Dickson, Hart Publishing, Oxford, 2011, p. 340
^ "Sovereign Base Areas, Background". Sovereign Base Areas, Cyprus. Retrieved 7 October 2011. 
^ "UK Overseas Territories". 
^ "The Overseas Territories: security, success and sustainability" (PDF). Foreign & Commonwealth Office. 28 June 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2014. 
^ British financial officials in the region for talks with dependent territories Archived 25 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine. – By Oscar Ramjeet, CaribbeanNetNews, (Published on Saturday, 21 March 2009)
^ "MP proposes British Overseas Territories be represented in Westminster – MercoPress". En.mercopress.com. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "HM Government e-petitions". Epetitions.direct.gov.uk. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ http://www.gibraltarolivepress.com/2017/05/18/lib-dems-create-mp-gibraltar/
^ http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-04/06/c_136185390.htm
^ http://www.gibraltarpanorama.gi/15209/188427/a/spain-must-treat-gibraltar-as-an-equal-part-of-the-british-family-says-rosindell
^ https://www.gibinwestminster.com/
^ [2] Any person who, immediately before the commencement of this section, is a British overseas territories citizen shall, on the commencement of this section, become a British citizen.
^ Bermuda[permanent dead link] at avalanchepress.com
^ UK Government White Paper on Overseas Territories, June, 2012. Page 23.
^ http://www.saint.fm/the-independent/ St. Helena Independent, 24 April 2015 p8
^ "Bermuda", WorldInfoZone
^ http://www.demtullpitcairn.com/2016JanFebMarch.pdf
^ Asia and Pacific Review 2003/04 p.245 ISBN 1862170398
^ FCO country profile Archived 10 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "The World Factbook". 
^ "British Indian Ocean Territory Currency". Wwp.greenwichmeantime.com. 6 March 2013. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ Commemorative UK Pounds and Stamps issued in GBP have been issued. Source:[3], [4]
^ Overseas Territories. House of Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee.
^ Stephen Wright (28 July 2012). "Representing Britain...and Bermuda | Bermuda Olympics 2012". Royalgazette.com. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ a b London, Bianca (24 July 2012). "You've heard of Victoria Pendleton and Jessica Ennis... now meet the OTHER Olympic babes going for gold". Daily Mail. Retrieved 28 July 2012. 
^ "Williams' Olympic hopes on hold for 4 more years". Fptci.com. 29 June 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ Purnell, Gareth (27 July 2012). "At last! Phillips Idowu tracked down... in Team GB photo – Olympic News – Olympics". The Independent. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "About the Biodiversity of the UK Overseas Territories". UKOTCF. Retrieved 17 June 2016. 
^ a b "Science: UK Overseas Territories: Biodiversity". Kew. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "Turks and Caicos Islands – UNESCO World Heritage Centre". Whc.unesco.org. 27 January 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "Island of St Helena – UNESCO World Heritage Centre". Whc.unesco.org. 27 January 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2013. 
^ "Gorham's Cave Complex". UNESCO. UNESCO World Heritage Centre. 27 January 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2016. 
^ "World's Largest Single Marine Reserve Created in Pacific". National Geographic. World's Largest Single Marine Reserve Created in Pacific. 18 March 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2015. 
^ "Pitcairn Islands get huge marine reserve". BBC. 18 March 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2015. 
^ "Pitcairn Islands to get world's largest single marine reserve". The Guardian. 18 March 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2015. 
^ "Ascension Island to become marine reserve". 3 January 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2016. 


Further reading[edit]

Charles Cawley. Colonies in Conflict: The History of the British Overseas Territories (2015) 444pp
Harry Ritchie, The Last Pink Bits: Travels Through the Remnants of the British Empire (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1997)
Simon Winchester, Outposts: Journeys to the Surviving Relics of the British Empire (London & New York, 1985)
George Drower, Britain's Dependent Territories (Dartmouth, 1992)
George Drower, Overseas Territories Handbook (London: TSO, 1998)
Ian Hendry and Susan Dickson, "British Overseas Territories Law" (London: Hart Publishing, 2011)
Ben Fogle, The Teatime Islands: Adventures in Britain's Faraway Outposts (London: Michael Joseph, 2003)
Bonham C. Richardson (16 January 1992). The Caribbean in the Wider World, 1492–1992. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 8 December 2010. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to British overseas territories.



Foreign and Commonwealth Office – UK Overseas Territories
United Kingdom Overseas Territories Association
British Overseas Territories Act 2002 – Text of the Act





Articles relating to British overseas territories











v
t
e


United Kingdom articles



History




Chronology



Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
UK since 1945 (social history)





By topic



Economic
Empire
Maritime
Military








Geography








Administrative



Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies





Physical



British Isles

terminology
Great Britain


Coastline
Geology

Northern Ireland


Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes





Resources



Energy/Renewable energy

Biodiesel
Coal
Geothermal
Hydraulic frac.
Hydroelectricity
Marine
North Sea oil
Solar
Wind


Food

Agriculture
Fishing

English
Scottish


Hunting


Materials

Flora
Forestry
Mining













Politics











Constitution
Courts
Elections
Foreign relations

History


Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Legislation
Monarchy

monarchs


Nationality
Parliament

House of Commons
House of Lords


Political parties





Government



Cabinet

list


Civil service
Departments
Prime Minister

list







Military



Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction











Economy







Banks

Bank of England


Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound (currency)
Stock Exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
British Rail








Society







Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Ethnic groups
Health care
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty

Food banks


Prostitution
Public holidays
Social care
Social structure





Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Identity
Literature
Media

television


Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre

















Countries of the United Kingdom







England



History

social
timeline


Geography
Politics
Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Northern Ireland



History
Geography
Politics

Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Scotland



History

timeline


Geography
Politics

Parliament
Government
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Wales



History
Geography
Welsh Government
Politics

Assembly
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


 Countries, territories and dependencies of the United Kingdom



Constituent countries



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Overseas territories



Akrotiri and Dhekelia1
Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory2
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands





Crown dependencies



Bailiwick of Guernsey

Guernsey
Alderney
Sark


Isle of Man
Jersey





Former colonies



List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom






1 Sovereign Base Areas.   2 Partial suspension of sovereignty due to the Antarctic Treaty.










v
t
e


Governors, Civil Commissioners and Administrators of British dependencies



Overseas territories



Governor of Anguilla
Governor of Bermuda
Commissioner for the British Antarctic Territory
Commissioner for the British Indian Ocean Territory
Governor of the Virgin Islands
Governor of the Cayman Islands
Governor of the Falkland Islands
Governor of Gibraltar
Governor of Montserrat
Governor of the Pitcairn Islands

Administrator of the Pitcairn Islands


Commissioner for South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Governor of St Helena

Governor of Ascension

Administrator of Ascension


Governor of Tristan da Cunha

Administrator of Tristan da Cunha




Governor of the Turks and Caicos Islands








Crown dependencies



Lieutenant Governor of Guernsey
Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man
Lieutenant Governor of Jersey





Former (Africa)



Governor of British Mauritius
Governor of British Cameroons
Governor of Cape Colony
Governor of the Gambia
Governor of Gold Coast
Lieutenant Governor of Griqualand West
Governor of Kenya
Governor of Lagos Colony
Governor-General of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland

Governor of Northern Rhodesia
Governor of Nyasaland
Governor of Southern Rhodesia


Governor of Natal
Governor of Nigeria
Governor of Senegal
Governor of the Seychelles
Governor of Sierra Leone
Governor-General of the Union of South Africa
High Commissioner for Southern Africa
Governor of British Somaliland
Governors of Tanganyika
Governor of Uganda
Resident in Zanzibar





Former (Americas)



Governor of Barbados

Lieutenant Governor of Grenada


Lieutenant-Governor of Berbice
Governor of British Guiana
Governor of British Honduras
Governor of Cuba
Governor of Dominica
Lieutenant-Governor of Demerara-Essequibo
Governor of Grenada
Governor of Jamaica
Governor of the Leeward Islands
Governor of St. Lucia
Governor of St. Vincent
Governor of Trinidad and Tobago
Lieutenant governors of Tobago
Governor of Trinidad
Governor of Newfoundland
Governor General of Canada
Governor of British Columbia
Governor of New Brunswick
Governor of Nova Scotia
Governor of Prince Edward Island
Lieutenant Governor of Quebec
Governor of Saint Christopher, Nevis and Anguilla
Governor-in-Chief of the Windward Islands
Governor-General of the West Indies Federation
Colonial Governors of Connecticut
Colonial governors of Delaware
Colonial Governors of Florida
Colonial Governors of Georgia
Colonial Governors of Maryland
Colonial Governors of Massachusetts
Colonial Governors of New Hampshire
Colonial Governors of New Jersey
Colonial Governor of New York
Colonial Governors of North Carolina
Colonial Governors of Pennsylvania
Colonial Governors of Rhode Island
Colonial Governors of South Carolina
Colonial Governors of Virginia





Former (Asia)



Governor of Aden
Governor of Burma
Governor of Ceylon
High Commissioner for the Federated Malay States

Senior British representatives in the constituent protected states
Senior British representatives in the neighbouring Malayan protected states

General Adviser to the Government of Johore
Adviser to the Sultan of Kedah
Adviser to the Government of Kelantan
Adviser to the Government of Perlis
Adviser, Trengganu




Governor of Hong Kong
Viceroy and Governor-General of India

Heads of the provinces of British India

Governor of Aden
Governor of Bengal
Governor of Bombay
Governor of Madras
Governor of Sind


Senior British representatives in neighbouring protected states

Resident of Gwalior




High Commissioner for Iraq
Governor of Labuan
High Commissioner for Malaya
Governor of the Malayan Union
Governor of North Borneo
Resident Minister in Nepal
High Commissioners for Palestine and Transjordan
Governor of Penang
Governor of Sarawak
Governor of Singapore





Former (Australasia)



Governor-General of Australia

Government Resident of Central Australia
Governor of New South Wales
Government Resident of North Australia
Governor of Queensland
Governor of South Australia
Governor of Tasmania
Governor of Victoria
Governor of Western Australia


Lieutenant Governor of the Swan River Colony
Governor-General of New Zealand
Governor-General of Papua New Guinea
Consul in Tonga





Former (Europe)



Governor of Cyprus
Lieutenant Governor of Heligoland
High Commissioner of the Ionian Islands
Governor of the Isle of Wight
Governor of Malta
Governor of Minorca
Governor of Northern Ireland





Former (Oceania)



Governor of Fiji
Governor of the Solomon Islands
High Commissioner for the Western Pacific












v
t
e


 Dependencies of European Union states



Denmark



Faroe Islands
Greenland








France



Clipperton Island
French Polynesia
French Southern and Antarctic Lands

Adélie Land
Île Amsterdam
Crozet Islands
Îles Éparses
Kerguelen Islands
Île Saint-Paul


New Caledonia
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Wallis and Futuna





Netherlands



Aruba
Caribbean Netherlands
Curaçao
Sint Maarten





United Kingdom




Crown dependencies



Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey





Sovereign Base Areas



Akrotiri and Dhekelia





Overseas territories



Anguilla
Bermuda
British Antarctic Territory
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands















v
t
e


United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories



France



French Polynesia
New Caledonia





New Zealand



Tokelau





Spain / Morocco



Western Sahara





United Kingdom



Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
Turks and Caicos Islands





United States



American Samoa
Guam
United States Virgin Islands












v
t
e


English-speaking world






Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or region






































































Further links







Articles



English-speaking world
History of the English language
British Empire
English in the Commonwealth of Nations
Anglosphere





Lists



List of countries by English-speaking population
List of countries where English is an official language









 







Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority





Africa



Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha





Americas



Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Canada
Cayman Islands
Dominica
Falkland Islands
Grenada
Guyana
Jamaica
Montserrat
Saba
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States
United States Virgin Islands





Europe



Guernsey
Ireland
Isle of Man
Jersey
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Norfolk Island
Pitcairn Islands








 







Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language





Africa



Botswana
Cameroon
The Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Malawi
Mauritius
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somaliland
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Americas



Puerto Rico





Asia



Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
India
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore





Europe



Gibraltar
Malta





Oceania



American Samoa
Cook Islands
Fiji
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Nauru
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tuvalu
Vanuatu












Dependencies shown in italics.




















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_Overseas_Territories&oldid=814510451"					Categories: British Overseas TerritoriesBritish colonization of the AmericasDependent territoriesForeign relations of the United KingdomGovernance of the British Empire1983 establishments in the British EmpireHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template webcite linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksEngvarB from December 2015Use dmy dates from December 2015Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersArticles containing potentially dated statements from August 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles needing additional references from February 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles needing additional references from February 2015Wikipedia articles needing style editing from February 2015All articles needing style editing