This article is about the newspaper format. For other uses, see Broadsheet (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may contain indiscriminate, excessive, or irrelevant examples. Please improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions. (April 2011)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







La Nación, a broadsheet newspaper from Argentina


A broadsheet is the largest newspaper format and is characterized by long vertical pages (typically 22 inches or 56 centimetres). The term derives from types of popular prints usually just of a single sheet, sold on the streets and containing various types of material, from ballads to political satire. The first broadsheet newspaper was the Dutch Courante uyt Italien, Duytslandt, &c. published in 1618.
Other common newspaper formats include the smaller Berliner and tabloid/compact formats.



Contents


1 Description
2 History
3 Printing considerations
4 Connotations
5 United Kingdom broadsheets
6 Switch to smaller sizes

6.1 In the United Kingdom
6.2 In the United States


7 Notable broadsheets

7.1 Argentina
7.2 Australia
7.3 Bangladesh
7.4 Brazil
7.5 Canada

7.5.1 National
7.5.2 Atlantic Canada
7.5.3 Quebec
7.5.4 Ontario
7.5.5 The Prairies
7.5.6 West Coast


7.6 Chile
7.7 China
7.8 Colombia
7.9 Denmark
7.10 Dominican Republic
7.11 Ecuador
7.12 Finland
7.13 France
7.14 Germany
7.15 Greece
7.16 Hong Kong
7.17 Hungary
7.18 India
7.19 Indonesia
7.20 Ireland
7.21 Israel
7.22 Italy
7.23 Japan
7.24 Lebanon
7.25 Libya
7.26 Malaysia
7.27 Mauritius
7.28 Mexico
7.29 New Zealand
7.30 Pakistan
7.31 Panama
7.32 Peru
7.33 Philippines
7.34 Poland
7.35 Portugal
7.36 Puerto Rico
7.37 Romania
7.38 Russia
7.39 Singapore
7.40 Sri Lanka
7.41 South Africa
7.42 Spain
7.43 Sweden
7.44 Thailand
7.45 Turkey
7.46 Ukraine
7.47 United Arab Emirates
7.48 United Kingdom

7.48.1 UK wide
7.48.2 England
7.48.3 Scotland


7.49 United States
7.50 Vatican City


8 See also
9 References



Description[edit]




Comparison of some newspaper sizes with metric paper sizes. Approximate nominal dimensions are in millimetres.


Many broadsheets measure approximately 29 1⁄2 by 23 1⁄2 inches (749 by 597 mm) per full broadsheet spread, twice the size of a standard tabloid. Australian and New Zealand broadsheets always have a paper size of A1 per spread (841 by 594 mm or 33.1 by 23.4 in). South African broadsheet newspapers have a double-page spread sheet size of 820 by 578 mm or 32.3 by 22.8 in (single-page live print area of 380 x 545 mm). Others measure 22 inches or 560 millimetres vertically.
In the United States, the traditional dimensions for the front page half of a broadsheet are 15 inches (381 mm) wide by 22 3⁄4 inches (578 mm) long. However, in efforts to save newsprint costs many U.S. newspapers [1] have downsized to 12 inches (305 mm) wide by 22 3⁄4 inches (578 mm) long for a folded page.[2][3]
Many rate cards and specification cards refer to the "broadsheet size" with dimensions representing the front page "half of a broadsheet" size, rather than the full, unfolded broadsheet spread. Some quote actual page size and others quote the "printed area" size.
The two versions of the broadsheet are:

Full broadsheet – The full broadsheet typically is folded vertically in half so that it forms four pages (the front page front and back and the back page front and back). The four pages are called a spread. Inside broadsheets are nested accordingly.
Half broadsheet – The half broadsheet is usually an inside page that is not folded vertically and just includes a front and back.

In uncommon instances, an entire newspaper can be a two-page half broadsheet or four-page full broadsheet. Totally self-contained advertising circulars inserted in a newspaper in the same format are referred to as broadsheets.
Broadsheets typically are also folded horizontally in half to accommodate newsstand display space. The horizontal fold however does not affect the page numbers and the content remains vertical. The most important newspaper stories are placed "above the (horizontal) fold." This contrasts with tabloids which typically do not have a horizontal fold (although tabloids usually have the four page to a sheet spread format).
The broadsheet has since emerged as the most popular format for the dissemination of printed news. The world's most widely circulated English-language daily broadsheet is The Times of India, a leading English-language daily newspaper from India, followed closely by Wall Street Journal from the United States, according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations.
History[edit]
Historically, broadsheets developed after the British in 1712 placed a tax on newspapers based on the number of their pages. Larger formats, however, had long been signs of status in printed objects, and still are in many places, and outside Britain the broadsheet developed for other reasons, including style and authority, unrelated to the British tax structure.
The original purpose of the broadsheet, or broadside, was for the purpose of posting royal proclamations, acts, and official notices. Eventually the people began using the broadsheet as a source for political activism by reprinting speeches, ballads or narrative songs originally performed by bards. With the early mechanization of the 19th century came an increase in production of printed materials including the broadside as well as the competing penny dreadful. In this period newspapers all over Europe began to print their issues on broadsheets. However, in the United Kingdom, the main competition for the broadside was the gradual reduction of the newspaper tax, beginning in the 1830s, and eventually its dismissal in 1855.[4]
With the increased production of newspapers and literacy, the demand for visual reporting and journalists led to the blending of broadsides and newspapers, creating the modern broadsheet newspaper.
Printing considerations[edit]
Modern printing facilities most efficiently print broadsheet sections in multiples of eight pages (with four front pages and four back pages). The broadsheet is then cut in half during the process. Thus the newsprint rolls used are defined by the width necessary to print four front pages. The width of a newsprint roll is called its web. Thus the new 12-inch-wide front page broadsheet newspapers in the United States use a 48-inch web newsprint roll.
With profit margins narrowing for newspapers in the wake of competition from broadcast, cable television, and the internet, newspapers are looking to standardize the size of the newsprint roll. The Wall Street Journal with its 12-inch wide frontpage was printed on 48-inch web newsprint. Early adopters in the downsizing of broadsheets initially used a 50-inch web (​12 1⁄2-inch front pages). However the 48-inch web is now rapidly becoming the definitive standard in the U.S. The New York Times held out on the downsizing until July 2006, saying it would stick to its 54-inch web (​13 1⁄2-inch front page). However, the paper adopted the narrower format beginning Monday, 6 August 2007.
The smaller newspapers also have the advantage of being easier to handle, particularly among commuters.
Connotations[edit]
In some countries, especially Australia, Canada, the UK, and the U.S., broadsheet newspapers are commonly perceived to be more intellectual in content than their tabloid counterparts. They tend to use their greater size to publish stories exploring topics in depth, while carrying less sensationalist and celebrity-oriented material. This distinction is most obvious on the front page: whereas tabloids tend to have a single story dominated by a headline, broadsheets allow two or more stories to be displayed, of which the most important sit at the top of the page—"above the fold". In other countries, such as Spain, a small format is the universal standard for newspapers—a popular, sensational press has had difficulty taking root—and the tabloid size does not carry such impliedly pejorative connotations.
On the other hand, a few newspapers, such as the German Bild-Zeitung and others throughout central Europe are clearly tabloids in terms of content, but use the physical broadsheet format.
United Kingdom broadsheets[edit]
In the United Kingdom, two major daily broadsheets are distributed nationwide, and two on Sundays:

The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph
Financial Times
The Sunday Times

As of April 2011, the average circulation of The Daily Telegraph was around 640,000 copies daily and the Financial Times around 372,000, while the circulations of The Guardian and The Independent, both of them previously published in broadsheet format, were 264,000 and 181,000, respectively.[5]
The Herald and The Press and Journal are Scottish broadsheets, though the latter is not a true national newspaper as it is primarily distributed in North East Scotland.
Switch to smaller sizes[edit]
In the United Kingdom[edit]
In 2003, The Independent started concurrent production of both broadsheet and tabloid ("compact") editions, carrying exactly the same content. The Times did likewise, but with less apparent success, with readers vocally opposing the change. The Independent ceased to be available in broadsheet format in May 2004, and The Times followed suit from November 2004; The Scotsman is also now published only in tabloid format. The Guardian switched to the "Berliner" or "midi" format found in some other European countries (slightly larger than a traditional tabloid) on 12 September 2005.It was announced in June 2017 that the Guardian would again change format to tabloid size, starting in January 2018.
The main motivation cited for this shift is that commuters prefer papers which they can hold easily on public transport, and it is presumably hoped that other readers will also find the smaller formats more convenient.
In the United States[edit]
In the United States, The Wall Street Journal made headlines when it announced its overseas version would convert to a tabloid on 17 October 2005.[6] There was strong debate in the U.S. on whether or not the rest of the national papers will, or even should, follow the trend of the British papers and The Wall Street Journal.[7] The Wall Street Journal overseas edition switched back to a broadsheet format in 2015.[8][9]
Notable broadsheets[edit]
This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by expanding it with reliably sourced entries.
Argentina[edit]


La Nación, a national newspaper. Since 31 October 2016, only weekend editions are printed on the traditional broadsheet format.[10]
Los Andes, Mendoza's newspaper.
La Gaceta, Tucumán's newspaper.
La voz del interior, Córdoba's newspaper.


Australia[edit]


The Australian, a national newspaper


Bangladesh[edit]
Most Bangladeshi daily newspapers are broadsheets.


The Daily Star, a Bangladeshi broadsheet English-language daily.
The Bangladesh Observer, oldest continuously published English-language daily in Bangladesh.
Daily Naya Diganta, a broadsheet Bengali-language daily in Bangladesh.
The Daily Ittefaq, oldest and most circulated newspaper of Bangladesh.
New Age
The Independent


Brazil[edit]
Most Brazilian newspapers are broadsheets, including the four most important:


O Globo, Rio de Janeiro
Folha de S.Paulo, São Paulo
O Estado de S. Paulo, São Paulo
Estado de Minas, Belo Horizonte


Canada[edit]
Almost all of Canada's major daily newspapers are broadsheets.[11] Newspapers are in English, unless stated otherwise.
National[edit]


The Globe and Mail
The National Post
Le Devoir (French)


Atlantic Canada[edit]


The Telegram, St. John's
The Chronicle-Herald
The Times & Transcript, Moncton
The Telegraph Journal, Saint John, New Brunswick
The Daily Gleaner, Fredericton
The Charlottetown Guardian
Cape Breton Post, Sydney, Nova Scotia


Quebec[edit]


The Gazette, Montreal
La Presse, Montreal (French)
Le Devoir, Montreal (French)


Ontario[edit]


The Hamilton Spectator
The Kingston Whig-Standard
The London Free Press
The Ottawa Citizen
The Pembroke Daily Observer
The Peterborough Examiner
The St. Catharines Standard
The Sudbury Star
The Chronicle-Journal
The Toronto Star
The Waterloo Region Record, Kitchener-Waterloo and Cambridge
The Windsor Star


The Prairies[edit]


The Winnipeg Free Press
The Brandon Sun, Brandon, Manitoba
The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix
The Regina Leader Post
The Edmonton Journal
The Red Deer Advocate, Red Deer, Alberta
The Calgary Herald
The Lethbridge Herald


West Coast[edit]


The Vancouver Sun, Vancouver, British Columbia
The Victoria Times-Colonist, Victoria, British Columbia


Chile[edit]

El Mercurio
El Sur

China[edit]

China Daily

Colombia[edit]

El Tiempo
El Espectador (switched to tabloid in 2008[12])
El Colombiano (switched to tabloid in 2012[12])
El Pais

Denmark[edit]


Jyllands-Posten (switched to tabloid in 2008)
Politiken[13]


Dominican Republic[edit]


Listín Diario
Hoy
La Información, Santiago de los Caballeros


Ecuador[edit]
Most are broadsheets
Finland[edit]


Keskisuomalainen
Turun Sanomat
Österbottens Tidning


France[edit]


L'Équipe (formerly)


Germany[edit]


Die Zeit
Die Welt
Süddeutsche Zeitung
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
Der Tagesspiegel


Greece[edit]

Kathimerini
Estia

Hong Kong[edit]


South China Morning Post
Hong Kong Economic Journal


Hungary[edit]


Népszabadság
Magyar Nemzet


India[edit]
Almost all major newspapers in India are broadsheets. Tabloids are mostly found in small-circulation local or rural papers.


"Law Sapient"
Amar Ujala
Anandabazar Patrika
Aajkaal
Bartaman
DNA
Deccan Chronicle
Deccan Herald
Dinamalar
Dinathanthi
Dainik Jagran
Dainik Bhaskar
Ei Samay
Ekdin
Ganashakti
Hindustan
Lokmat
Pudhari
Sakshi
Sakal
Saamana
Sangbad Pratidin
State Times
Sudharma
The Financial Express
The Indian Express
The Economic Times
The Hindustan Times
The Hindu
The Hitavada
The New Indian Express
The Statesman
The Telegraph
The Times of India
Dainik Navajyoti
Malayala Manorama
Mathrubhumi
Varthabharathi
Imphal Free Press
Vijaya Karnataka
Vijaya Vani
Prajavani
Deepika


Indonesia[edit]


Jawa Pos
Kompas


Ireland[edit]


The Irish Examiner
The Irish Independent only Business, Motors, Property supplements the rest switched to tabloid in December 2012, but Sport On Saturday became broadsheet on 29 August 2015.
The Irish Times
The Sunday Business Post
The Sunday Independent


Israel[edit]

Haaretz



Makor Rishon


Italy[edit]


Avvenire
Corriere della Sera

Corriere del Mezzogiorno
Corriere del Trentino


Corriere dello Sport – Stadio
Il Foglio
Il Mattino
Il Messaggero
Il Sole 24 Ore
La Sicilia
Tuttosport


Japan[edit]


Asahi Shimbun
Chunichi Shimbun
Mainichi Shimbun
Nihon Keizai Shimbun
Nikkan Sports
Sankei Shimbun
Seikyo Shimbun
Shimbun Akahata
Tokyo Sports
Yomiuri Shimbun
The Japan Times (English)


Lebanon[edit]

An-Nahar

Libya[edit]


Libya
Al Mayadeen


Malaysia[edit]
Newspapers such as New Straits Times and Berita Harian used to be published in broadsheet, but were published in smaller size instead, from 2005 and 2008, respectively. However, almost all Chinese newspapers in the country continue to publish in broadsheet.


The Borneo Post
Utusan Borneo
Utusan Malaysia
Nanyang Siang Pau
Sin Chew Daily
Kwong Wah Yit Poh


Mauritius[edit]


L'Express
The Independent


Mexico[edit]


El Informador, Guadalajara, Jalisco
El Universal, Mexico City
El Norte, Monterrey, Nuevo León


New Zealand[edit]


The New Zealand Herald, Auckland. Only the Saturday edition is broadsheet, the weekday editions switched to tabloid in September 2012.
Waikato Times, Hamilton
The Dominion Post, Wellington
The Press, Christchurch
Otago Daily Times, Dunedin
Taranaki Daily News, New Plymouth
The Southland Times, Invercargill


Pakistan[edit]
All Pakistan regional and national newspapers are broadsheets. Pakistan Today is the first and only paper in Berliner format.


The News International
Dawn
Express Tribune
The Daily Times
Daily Express
The Nation


Panama[edit]


La Prensa

Formerly:*La Estrella de Panamá (Tabloid)

Peru[edit]


El Comercio, Lima


Philippines[edit]


Philippine Daily Inquirer
The Philippine Star
Manila Bulletin
Manila Standard
The Manila Times
The Daily Tribune
BusinessWorld
Business Mirror


Poland[edit]
All of Poland's quality national dailies (Gazeta Wyborcza, Rzeczpospolita, Nasz Dziennik, and Dziennik Polska-Europa-Świat) are now published in compact format.
Portugal[edit]

Expresso, Lisboa[14]

Puerto Rico[edit]

El Mundo

Romania[edit]


Jurnalul Național, Bucharest


Russia[edit]


Izvestia
Kommersant
Russia Beyond the Headlines
"Rossiyskaya Gazeta"


Singapore[edit]

The Straits Times

Sri Lanka[edit]

The Sunday Leader

South Africa[edit]


Beeld
Pretoria News
The Star
The Sunday Times


Spain[edit]
All newspapers in Spain are printed in compact format.
Sweden[edit]
The first major Swedish newspaper to leave the broadsheet format and start printing in tabloid format was Svenska Dagbladet, on 16 November 2000. As of August 2004, there were 26 broadsheet newspapers in total, with a combined circulation of 1,577,700 and 50 newspapers in tabloid with a combined circulation of 1,129,400. On 5 October 2004, the morning newspapers Göteborgs-Posten, Dagens Nyheter, Sydsvenskan and Östersunds-Posten all switched to tabloid, thus making it the leading format for morning newspapers in Sweden by volume of circulation. Most other broadsheet newspapers have followed since. The last daily Swedish newspaper to switch to tabloid was Jönköpings-Posten, 6 November 2013.[15]
Thailand[edit]

Thairath (Thai: ไทยรัฐ)
The Bangkok Post

Turkey[edit]
Most of the newspapers in Turkey are printed on this format. Notable ones include:


Cumhuriyet
Sabah
Hurriyet
Milliyet
Posta
Zaman


Ukraine[edit]

Dzerkalo Tyzhnia

United Arab Emirates[edit]


Khaleej Times
The National



Gulf News

United Kingdom[edit]
UK wide[edit]


The Daily Telegraph (The Sunday Telegraph)
The Financial Times (Monday to Saturday Only)
The Times (The Sunday Times only)



England[edit]

Yorkshire Post

Scotland[edit]


The Herald


United States[edit]
Almost all major papers in the United States are broadsheets.


Albuquerque Journal
The Arizona Republic
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution
The Bakersfield Californian
The Baltimore Sun
The Birmingham News
The Boston Globe
The Buffalo News
The Charlotte Observer
Chicago Tribune
The Courier Journal
The Daily Pennsylvanian
The Dallas Morning News
The Democrat and Chronicle
The Denver Post
Detroit Free Press
The Epoch Times
The Florida Times-Union
The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead
The Fresno Bee
The Grand Rapids Press
Houston Chronicle
The Indianapolis Star
The Kansas City Star
Las Vegas Review-Journal
Los Angeles Daily News
Los Angeles Times
The Miami Herald
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
New York Law Journal
The New York Sun
The New York Times
The Oklahoman
The Orange County Register
Orlando Sentinel
The Philadelphia Inquirer
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
The Plain Dealer
Portland Press Herald
Press-Telegram
The Providence Journal
The Seattle Times
The Salt Lake Tribune
San Antonio Express-News
The San Bernardino Sun
San Francisco Chronicle
Santa Fe New Mexican
Star Tribune
The Star-Ledger
The Sun
Tampa Bay Times
The Tampa Tribune
The Times-Picayune
U-T San Diego
USA Today
Vineyard Gazette
The Wall Street Journal
The Washington Post
The Washington Times
The Wichita Eagle
The Zephyrhills News


Vatican City[edit]

L'Osservatore Romano

See also[edit]


Journalism portal




Berliner
Compact
List of newspapers
Newspaper format
Paper size
Tabloid


References[edit]


^ Roy Peter (17 February 2006). "Watch Out, Broadsheet: Tabloid Power Is Gonna Get Your Mama". Poynter Institute. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ Katharine Q. Seelye (4 December 2006). "In Tough Times, a Redesigned Journal". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 March 2013. 
^ "The New York Times Plans to Consolidate New York Print Run at Newest Facility in College Point, Queens and Sublease Older Edison, New Jersey, Printing Plant in Early 2008" (Press release). The New York Times Company. 18 July 2006. Retrieved 20 March 2013. 
^ "The Word on the Street – Background". National Library of Scotland. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ "ABCs: National Daily Newspaper Circulation April 2011". The Guardian. 13 May 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ Milt Freudenheim (9 May 2005). "Abroad, The Wall Street Journal Will Be a Tabloid". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ "For American Publishers, Broadsheets Are Bright Stars. News & Tech.
^ Sweney, Mark (11 June 2015). "Wall Street Journal to revamp European and Asian editions in broadsheet format". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 19 March 2016. 
^ "Wall Street Journal Europe to print 50 per cent more content as it switches back to broadsheet". Press Gazette. Retrieved 19 March 2016. 
^ "La Nación, con un nuevo formato: la edición impresa ahora es un compacto", Diario La Nación, 30 October 2016.
^ "Every Daily Newspaper in Canada". Fishwrap.ca. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 
^ a b "El tabloide: el futuro de los periódicos impresos o la evolución de la prensa en el mundo". 
^ Tina Gudrun Jensen; Sara Jul Jacobsen; Kathrine Vitus; Kristina Weibel (March 2012). "Analysis of Danish Media setting and framing of Muslims, Islam and racism" (Working paper). Danish National Centre for Social Research. Retrieved 12 December 2014. 
^ "Newspaper Sizes". Paper Sizes. Retrieved 2 December 2014. 
^ [unreliable source?] Boström, Svenåke (10 November 2004). "Mindpark #049: Tabloidtisdagen" (in Swedish). Mindpark. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. 







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Broadsheet&oldid=818363416"					Categories: Newspaper formatsPrinting terminologyHidden categories: All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from August 2012CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)Use dmy dates from May 2017Articles needing additional references from November 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles with too many examplesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesDynamic listsArticles containing Thai-language text