
Brown University




Latin: Universitas Brunensis


Motto
In Deo Speramus (Latin)



Motto in English

In God We Hope[1]


Type
Private


Established
1764



Academic affiliations




AAU
URA
NAICU
568 Group





Endowment
$3.5 billion (2017)[2]


President
Christina Paxson


Provost
Richard M. Locke[3]



Academic staff

731 (2015–16)[4]


Students
9,380 (Fall 2017)[5]


Undergraduates
6,580 (Fall 2017)[5]


Postgraduates
2,255 (Fall 2017)[5]



Other students

545 (medical)[5]


Location
Providence, Rhode Island, U.S.
41°49′34″N 71°24′12″W﻿ / ﻿41.8262°N 71.4032°W﻿ / 41.8262; -71.4032Coordinates: 41°49′34″N 71°24′12″W﻿ / ﻿41.8262°N 71.4032°W﻿ / 41.8262; -71.4032


Campus
Urban
143 acres (579,000 m²)


Colors
Brown, White, and, Cardinal[6]
              


Nickname
Bears



Sporting affiliations

NCAA Division I – Ivy League
ECAC Hockey, EARC/EAWRC


Mascot
Bruno the Bear


Website
brown.edu





Brown University is a private Ivy League research university in Providence, Rhode Island, United States. Founded in 1764 as the College in the English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Brown is the seventh-oldest institution of higher education in the United States and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution.[7]
At its foundation, Brown was the first college in the United States to accept students regardless of their religious affiliation.[8] Its engineering program was established in 1847 and was the first in the Ivy League. It was one of the early doctoral-granting U.S. institutions in the late 19th century, adding master and doctoral studies in 1887.[9] Brown's New Curriculum is sometimes referred to in education theory as the Brown Curriculum and was adopted by faculty vote in 1969 after a period of student lobbying. The New Curriculum eliminated mandatory "general education" distribution requirements, made students "the architects of their own syllabus" and allowed them to take any course for a grade of satisfactory or unrecorded no-credit.[10] In 1971, Brown's coordinate women's institution, Pembroke College, was fully merged into the university and Pembroke Campus now includes dormitories and classrooms used by all of Brown.
Undergraduate admissions is very selective, with an acceptance rate of 8.3 percent for the class of 2021.[11] The University comprises the College, the Graduate School, Alpert Medical School, the School of Engineering, the School of Public Health and the School of Professional Studies (which includes the IE Brown Executive MBA program). Brown's international programs are organized through the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs and the university is academically affiliated with the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Rhode Island School of Design. The Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program, offered in conjunction with the Rhode Island School of Design, is a five-year course that awards degrees from both institutions.
Brown's main campus is located in the College Hill Historic District in the city of Providence, Rhode Island. The University's neighborhood is a federally listed architectural district with a dense concentration of Colonial-era buildings. Benefit Street, on the western edge of the campus, contains "one of the finest cohesive collections of restored seventeenth- and eighteenth-century architecture in the United States".[12]
Brown's faculty and alumni include eight Nobel Prize laureates, five National Humanities Medalists[13] and ten National Medal of Science laureates. Other notable alumni include eight billionaire graduates,[14] a U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice, four U.S. Secretaries of State and other Cabinet officials, 54 members of the United States Congress, 55 Rhodes Scholars, 52 Gates Cambridge Scholars[15] 49 Marshall Scholars,[16][17] 14 MacArthur Genius Fellows,[18] 19 Pulitzer Prize winners and members of royal families, as well as leaders and founders of major companies.[19]



Contents


1 History

1.1 The foundation and the charter

1.1.1 The Brown family
1.1.2 The American Revolution


1.2 The New Curriculum


2 Coat of arms
3 Campus

3.1 Main campus
3.2 Haffenreffer Museum
3.3 Pembroke campus


4 Academics

4.1 Presidents
4.2 The College
4.3 Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program
4.4 Theatre and playwriting
4.5 Writing programs
4.6 Author prizewinners
4.7 Computer science
4.8 The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World
4.9 The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs
4.10 The School of Engineering
4.11 IE Brown Executive MBA Dual Degree Program
4.12 The Pembroke Center
4.13 The Graduate School
4.14 Alpert Medical School
4.15 The Marine Biological Laboratory


5 Admissions and financial aid
6 Sustainability
7 Athletics
8 Student life

8.1 Campus Safety
8.2 Spring Weekend
8.3 Residential and Greek societies
8.4 Societies and clubs
8.5 Student organizations
8.6 Resource centers
8.7 Controversy over ADA mental health discrimination


9 Rankings
10 Notable people

10.1 In popular culture


11 See also
12 References

12.1 Bibliography


13 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of Brown University
The foundation and the charter[edit]




Brown University, R.I, c. 1840, New York Public Library






Reverend Ezra Stiles seventh president of Yale College and one of the founders of Brown University






The first president, James Manning, taught the earliest college classes at his parish house






The Ezra Stiles copy of the Brown University Charter of 1764






Seal of the university


The origin of Brown University can be dated to 1761, when three residents of Newport, Rhode Island drafted a petition to the General Assembly of the colony:[20]

Your Petitioners propose to open a literary institution or School for instructing young Gentlemen in the Languages, Mathematics, Geography & History, & such other branches of Knowledge as shall be desired. That for this End ... it will be necessary ... to erect a public Building or Buildings for the boarding of the youth & the Residence of the Professors.

The three petitioners were Ezra Stiles, pastor of Newport's Second Congregational Church and future president of Yale; William Ellery, Jr., future signer of the United States Declaration of Independence; and Josias Lyndon, future governor of the colony. Stiles and Ellery were co-authors of the Charter of the College two years later. The editor of Stiles's papers observes, "This draft of a petition connects itself with other evidence of Dr. Stiles's project for a Collegiate Institution in Rhode Island, before the charter of what became Brown University."[21]
There is further documentary evidence that Stiles was making plans for a college in 1762. On January 20, Chauncey Whittelsey, pastor of the First Church of New Haven, answered a letter from Stiles:[22]

The week before last I sent you the Copy of Yale College Charter.... Should you make any Progress in the Affair of a Colledge, I should be glad to hear of it; I heartily wish you Success therein.

The Philadelphia Association of Baptist Churches also had an eye on Rhode Island, home of the mother church of their denomination: the First Baptist Church in America, founded in Providence in 1638 by Roger Williams. The Baptists were as yet unrepresented among colonial colleges; the Congregationalists had Harvard and Yale, the Presbyterians had the College of New Jersey (later Princeton), and the Episcopalians had the College of William and Mary and King's College (later Columbia). Isaac Backus was the historian of the New England Baptists and an inaugural Trustee of Brown, writing in 1784. He described the October 1762 resolution taken at Philadelphia:[23]

The Philadelphia Association obtained such an acquaintance with our affairs, as to bring them to an apprehension that it was practicable and expedient to erect a college in the Colony of Rhode-Island, under the chief direction of the Baptists; ... Mr. James Manning, who took his first degree in New-Jersey college in September, 1762, was esteemed a suitable leader in this important work.

Manning arrived at Newport in July 1763 and was introduced to Stiles, who agreed to write the Charter for the College. Stiles's first draft was read to the General Assembly in August 1763 and rejected by Baptist members who worried that the College Board of Fellows would under-represent the Baptists. A revised Charter written by Stiles and Ellery was adopted by the Assembly on March 3, 1764.
In September 1764, the inaugural meeting of the College Corporation was held at Newport. Governor Stephen Hopkins was chosen chancellor, former and future governor Samuel Ward was vice chancellor, John Tillinghast treasurer, and Thomas Eyres secretary. The Charter stipulated that the Board of Trustees be composed of 22 Baptists, five Quakers, five Episcopalians, and four Congregationalists. Of the 12 Fellows, eight should be Baptists—including the College president—"and the rest indifferently of any or all Denominations."[24]
The Charter was not the grant of King George III, as is sometimes supposed, but rather an Act of the colonial General Assembly. In two particulars, the Charter may be said to be a uniquely progressive document. First, other colleges had curricular strictures against opposing doctrines, while Brown's Charter asserted, "Sectarian differences of opinions, shall not make any Part of the Public and Classical Instruction." Second, according to Brown University historian Walter Bronson, "the instrument governing Brown University recognized more broadly and fundamentally than any other the principle of denominational cooperation."[25] The oft-repeated statement is inaccurate that Brown's Charter alone prohibited a religious test for College membership; other college charters were also liberal in that particular.
James Manning was sworn in as the College's first president in 1765 and served until 1791. In 1770, the College moved from Warren, Rhode Island to the crest of College Hill overlooking Providence. Solomon Drowne, a freshman in the class of 1773, wrote in his diary on March 26, 1770:[26]

This day the Committee for settling the spot for the College, met at the New-Brick School House, when it was determined it should be set on ye Hill opposite Mr. John Jenkes; up the Presbyterian Lane.

Presbyterian Lane is the present College Street. The eight-acre site had been purchased in two parcels by the Corporation for £219, mainly from Moses Brown and John Brown, the parcels having "formed a part of the original home lots of their ancestor, Chad Brown, and of George Rickard, who bought them from the Indians." University Hall was known as "The College Edifice" until 1823; it was modelled on Nassau Hall at the College of New Jersey. Its construction was managed by the firm of Nicholas Brown and Company, which spent £2,844 in the first year building the College Edifice and the adjacent President's House.[27][28]




Nicholas Brown, Jr., founder of the Providence Athenaeum, co-founder of Butler Hospital, philanthropist, progressive, and abolitionist. Following his major gift in 1804, the College was renamed Brown University. Painting by Chester Harding, 1836


The Brown family[edit]
Nicholas Brown, his son Nicholas Brown, Jr. (class of 1786), John Brown, Joseph Brown, and Moses Brown were all instrumental in moving the College to Providence and securing its endowment. Joseph became a professor of natural philosophy at the College; John served as its treasurer from 1775 to 1796; and Nicholas Junior succeeded his uncle as treasurer from 1796 to 1825.
On September 8, 1803, the Corporation voted, "That the donation of $5000 Dollars, if made to this College within one Year from the late Commencement, shall entitle the donor to name the College." That appeal was answered by College treasurer Nicholas Brown Junior in a letter dated September 6, 1804, and the Corporation honored its promise. "In gratitude to Mr. Brown, the Corporation at the same meeting voted, 'That this College be called and known in all future time by the Name of Brown University'."[25] Over the years, the benefactions of Nicholas Brown, Jr. totaled nearly $160,000, an enormous sum for that period, and included the buildings Hope College (1821–22) and Manning Hall (1834-35).
It is sometimes erroneously supposed that Brown University was named after John Brown, whose commercial activity included the transportation of African slaves. In fact, Brown University was named for Nicholas Brown, Jr.—philanthropist, founder of the Providence Athenaeum, co-founder of Butler Hospital, and an abolitionist. Nicholas Brown, Jr. became a financier of the movement under the guidance of his uncle Moses Brown, one of the leading abolitionists of his day.[29][unreliable source?][30]




Brigadier general James Mitchell Varnum (class of 1769) served in the Continental Army and advocated the enlistment of African Americans, which resulted in the reformation of the 1st Rhode Island Regiment as an all-black unit. Painting by Charles Willson Peale, 1804


The American Revolution[edit]
The College library was moved out of Providence for safekeeping in the fall of 1776, with British vessels patrolling Narragansett Bay. On December 7, 1776, six thousand British and Hessian troops sailed into Newport harbor under the command of Sir Peter Parker. College president Manning said in a letter written after the war:[31]

The royal Army landed on Rhode Island & took possession of the same: This brought their Camp in plain View from the College with the naked Eye; upon which the Country flew to Arms & marched for Providence, there, unprovided with Barracks they marched into the College & dispossessed the Students, about 40 in Number.

"In the claim for damages presented by the Corporation to the United States government," says the University historian, "it is stated that the American troops used it for barracks and hospital from December 10, 1776, to April 20, 1780, and that the French troops used it for a hospital from June 26, 1780, to May 27, 1782."[32] The French troops were those of the Comte de Rochambeau.




On the College Green, Sayles Hall (left), built 1878–81, designed by Alpheus C. Morse, and Wilson Hall, built 1891, designed by Gould & Angell, both buildings in the Richardsonian Romanesque style


The New Curriculum[edit]
In 1966 the first Group Independent Study Project (GISP) at Brown was formed, involving 80 students and 15 professors. The GISP was inspired by student-initiated experimental schools, especially San Francisco State College, and sought ways to "put students at the center of their education" and "teach students how to think rather than just teaching facts."[33]
Members of the GISP, Ira Magaziner and Elliot Maxwell published a paper of their findings entitled, "Draft of a Working Paper for Education at Brown University."[34][33] The paper made proposals for the new curriculum, including interdisciplinary freshman-year courses that would introduce "modes of thought," with instruction from faculty from different disciplines as well as for an end to letter grades. The following year Magaziner began organizing the student body to press for the reforms, organizing discussions and protests.[35]
In 1969 University President Ray Heffner Special Committee on Curricular Philosophy in response to student rallies held support of curriculum reform. The committee was tasked with developing specific reforms and the resulting report was called the Maeder Report after the committee's chairman. The report was presented to the faculty, which voted the New Curriculum into existence on May 7, 1969. Its key features included:[36]

Modes of Thought courses for first-year students
The introduction of interdisciplinary courses
The abandonment of "general education" distribution requirements
The Satisfactory/No Credit grading option
The ABC/No Credit grading system, which eliminated pluses, minuses, and D's; a grade of "No Credit" would not appear on external transcripts.





On the Front Green at the top of College Hill are Hope College (left), built 1821-22, and Manning Hall, built 1834-35, designed by Russell Warren. Both buildings were the gift of Nicholas Brown, Junior


The Modes of Thought course was discontinued early on, but the other elements are still in place. In 2006, the reintroduction of plus/minus grading was broached by persons concerned about grade inflation. The idea was rejected by the College Curriculum Council after canvassing alumni, faculty, and students, including the original authors of the Magaziner-Maxwell Report.[37]
Coat of arms[edit]
Brown University's coat of arms is a white field divided into four sectors by a red cross; within each sector is an open book. Above the shield is a crest consisting of the upper half of a sun in splendor among the clouds atop a red and white torse. The sun and clouds represent "learning piercing the clouds of ignorance." The cross is believed to be a Saint George's Cross, and the open books represent learning.[38]
Campus[edit]




Robinson Hall, built 1875-78, designed by Walker and Gould, an octagonal building in the Venetian Gothic style. It is an example of the panoptic principle in library design inspired by the British Museum reading room[39]


Brown is the largest institutional landowner in Providence, with properties on College Hill and in the Jewelry District.[40] The College Hill campus was built contemporarily with the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century precincts that surround it, so that University buildings blend with the architectural fabric of the city. The only indicator of "campus" is a brick and wrought-iron fence on Prospect, George, and Waterman streets, enclosing the College Green and Front Green. The character of Brown's urban campus is then European organic rather than American landscaped.
Main campus[edit]
Further information: List of Brown University buildings
The main campus, comprising 235 buildings and 143 acres (0.58 km2), is on College Hill in Providence's East Side. It is reached from downtown principally by three extremely steep streets—College, Waterman, and Angell—which run through the Benefit Street historic district and the campus of the Rhode Island School of Design. College Street, culminating with Van Wickle Gates at the top of the hill, is especially beautiful, and is the setting for the Convocation and Commencement processions.




At Convocation, new students march through Van Wickle Gates, built 1900-01, designed by Hoppin and Ely of Providence and Hoppin and Koen of New York.[41] The gates were the gift of Augustus Stout Van Wickle, class of 1876, who also gave the FitzRandolph Gateway at Princeton, built 1905, as a memorial to his ancestor Nathaniel FitzRandolph


Van Wickle Gates
Main article: Van Wickle Gates
The Van Wickle Gates, dedicated on June 18, 1901, have a pair of smaller side gates that are open year-round, and a large central gate that is opened two days a year for Convocation and Commencement. At Convocation the gate opens inward to admit the procession of new students. At Commencement the gate opens outward for the procession of graduates.[42] A Brown superstition is that students who walk through the central gate a second time prematurely will not graduate, although walking backwards is said to cancel the hex. Members of the Brown University Band famously flout the superstition by walking through the gate three times too many, as they annually play their role in the Commencement parade.




Carrie Tower, built 1904 in English Baroque style, is a memorial to Caroline Mathilde Brown, granddaughter of Nicholas Brown, class of 1786, for whom the University is named


The core green spaces of the main campus are the Front (or "Quiet") Green, the College (or "Main") Green, and the Ruth J. Simmons Quadrangle (until 2012 called Lincoln Field). The old buildings on these three greens are the most photographed.
Adjacent to this older campus are, to the south, academic buildings and residential quadrangles, including Wriston, Keeney, and Gregorian quadrangles; to the east, Sciences Park occupying two city blocks; to the north, connected to Simmons Quadrangle by The Walk, academic and residential precincts, including the life sciences complex and the Pembroke Campus; and to the west, on the slope of College Hill, academic buildings, including List Art Center and the Hay and Rockefeller libraries. Also on the slope of College Hill, contiguous with Brown, is the campus of the Rhode Island School of Design.




The John Hay Library, built 1910, designed by Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge in the English Renaissance style, is home to rare books, special collections, and the University archives


John Hay Library
Main article: John Hay Library
The John Hay Library is the second oldest library on campus. It was opened in 1910 and named for John Hay (class of 1858, private secretary to Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State under two Presidents) at the request of his friend Andrew Carnegie, who contributed half of the $300,000 cost of the building.[43] It is now the repository of the University's archives, rare books and manuscripts, and special collections. Noteworthy among the latter are the Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection[44] (described as "the foremost American collection of material devoted to the history and iconography of soldiers and soldiering"), the Harris Collection of American Poetry and Plays (described as "the largest and most comprehensive collection of its kind in any research library"), the Lownes Collection of the History of Science (described as "one of the three most important private collections of books of science in America"), and (for popularity of requests) the papers of H.P. Lovecraft. The Hay Library is home to one of the broadest collections of incunabula (15th-century printed books) in the Americas, as well as such rarities as the manuscript of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four and a Shakespeare First Folio. There are also three books bound in human skin.[45]




The John Carter Brown Library on the College Green, built 1898-1904, designed by Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge in the Beaux-Arts style, is one of the world's leading repositories of ancient books and maps relating to the exploration and natural history of the Americas[46]


John Carter Brown Library
Main article: John Carter Brown Library
The John Carter Brown Library, founded in 1846, is administered separately from the University, but has been located on the Main Green of the campus since 1904. It is generally regarded as the world's leading collection of primary historical sources pertaining to the Americas before 1825. It houses a very large percentage of the titles published before that date about the discovery, settlement, history, and natural history of the New World. The "JCB", as it is known, published the 29-volume Bibliotheca Americana, a principal bibliography in the field. Typical of its noteworthy holdings is the best preserved of the eleven surviving copies of the Bay Psalm Book the earliest extant book printed in British North America and the most expensive printed book in the world.[47] There is also a very fine Shakespeare First Folio, added to the collection by John Carter Brown's widow (a Shakespeare enthusiast) on the grounds that it includes The Tempest, a play set in the New World. The JCB holdings comprise more than 50,000 early titles and about 16,000 modern books, as well as prints, manuscripts, maps, and other items in the library's specialty.




Manning Hall, built 1834-35 in Greek Revival style, home to the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology


Haffenreffer Museum[edit]
Main article: Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology
The exhibition galleries of the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology, Brown's teaching museum, are located in Manning Hall on the campus's main green. Its one million artifacts, available for research and educational purposes, are located at its Collections Research Center in Bristol, RI. The museum's goal is to inspire creative and critical thinking about culture by fostering interdisciplinary understanding of the material world. It provides opportunities for faculty and students to work with collections and the public, teaching through objects and programs in classrooms and exhibitions. The museum sponsors lectures and events in all areas of anthropology, and also runs an extensive program of outreach to local schools.




Brown Commencements have been held since 1776 in the First Baptist Church in America, built 1774-75, designed by Joseph Brown. This "meeting house" was built to accommodate 1,400 people and for the dual purpose of "the publick worship of Almighty God and also for holding commencement in"[48]


The "Walk" connects Pembroke Campus to the main campus. It is a succession of green spaces extending from Ruth Simmons Quadrangle (Lincoln Field) in the south to the Pembroke College monument on Meeting Street in the north. It is bordered by departmental buildings and the Granoff Center for the Creative Arts. A focal point of The Walk will be the Maya Lin-designed water-circulating topographical sculpture of Narragansett Bay, to be installed in 2014 next to the Institute for the Study of Environment and Society.




Smith-Buonanno Hall on the Pembroke Campus






Miller Hall on the Pembroke Campus


Pembroke campus[edit]
The Women's College in Brown University, known as Pembroke College, was founded in October 1891. When it merged with Brown in 1971, the Pembroke Campus was absorbed into the Brown campus. The Pembroke campus is centered on a quadrangle that fronts on Meeting Street, where a garden and monument—with scale-model of the quadrangle in bronze—compose the formal entry to the campus. The Pembroke campus is among the most pleasing spaces at Brown, with noteworthy examples of Victorian and Georgian architecture. The west side of the quadrangle comprises Pembroke Hall (1897), Smith-Buonanno Hall (1907, formerly Pembroke Gymnasium), and Metcalf Hall (1919); the east side comprises Alumnae Hall (1927) and Miller Hall (1910); the quadrangle culminates on the north with Andrews Hall (1947) and its terrace and garden. Pembroke Hall, originally a classroom building and library, now houses the Cogut Center for the Humanities.




The Orwig Music Library in the former Isaac Gifford Ladd house, built 1850, acquired in 1969 when Brown bought the buildings and grounds of Bryant University on the southeast edge of the Brown campus


East Campus, centered on Hope and Charlesfield streets, was originally the site of Bryant University. In 1969, as Bryant was preparing to move to Smithfield, Rhode Island, Brown bought their Providence campus for $5 million. This expanded the Brown campus by 10 acres (40,000 m2) and 26 buildings, included several historic houses, notably the Isaac Gifford Ladd house, built 1850 (now Brown's Orwig Music Library), and the Robert Taft House, built 1895 (now King House). The area was named East Campus in 1971.
Thayer Street runs through Brown's main campus, north to south, and is College Hill's reduced-scale counterpart to Harvard Square or Berkeley's Telegraph Avenue. Restaurants, cafes, bistros, tavernas, pubs, bookstores, second-hand shops, and the like abound. Tourists, people-watchers, buskers, and students from Providence's six colleges make the scene. Half a mile south of campus is Thayer Street's hipper cousin, Wickenden Street. More picturesque and with older architecture, it features galleries, pubs, specialty shops, artist-supply stores, and a regionally famous coffee shop that doubles as a film set (for Woody Allen and others).
Brown Stadium, built in 1925 and home to the football team, is located approximately a mile to the northeast of the main campus. Marston Boathouse, the home of the crew teams, lies on the Blackstone/Seekonk River, to the southeast of campus. Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School is situated in the historic Jewelry District of Providence, near the medical campus of Brown's teaching hospitals, Rhode Island Hospital, Women and Infants Hospital, and Hasbro Children's Hospital. Other University research facilities in the Jewelry District include the Laboratories for Molecular Medicine.
Brown's School of Public Health occupies a landmark modernist building overlooking Memorial Park on the Providence Riverwalk. Brown also owns 376-acre (1.52 km2) the Mount Hope Grant in Bristol, Rhode Island, an important Native American and King Philip's War site. Brown's Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology Collection Research Center, particularly strong in Native American items, is located in the Mount Hope Grant.
Academics[edit]
Presidents[edit]




19th Brown president Christina Hull Paxson, 2012 to present






2nd Brown president, Jonathan Maxcy, 1792–1802 was the first alum to serve as president






4th Brown president Francis Wayland, 1827-1855. His influential book Thoughts on the Present Collegiate System in the United States (1842) urged American universities to adopt a broader curriculum






18th Brown president Ruth J. Simmons, 2001–2012, was the first African-American to lead an Ivy League university


Main article: List of Presidents of Brown University
Brown's current president Christina Hull Paxson took office in 2012. She had previously been dean of the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University and a past-chair of Princeton's economics department.[49] In 2014 and 2015, Paxson presided over the year-long celebration of the 250th anniversary of Brown's founding. Her immediate predecessor as president was Ruth J. Simmons, the first African American president of an Ivy League institution. Simmons will remain at Brown as a professor of Comparative Literature and Africana Studies.[50]
The College[edit]
Main article: The College of Brown University
Founded in 1764, the College is the oldest school of Brown University. About 6,400 undergraduate students are currently enrolled in the College, and 79 concentrations (majors) are offered. Completed concentrations of undergraduates by area are social sciences 42 percent, humanities 26 percent, life sciences 17 percent, and physical sciences 14 percent.[51] The concentrations with the greatest number of students are Biology, History, and International Relations. Brown is one of the few schools in the United States with an undergraduate concentration (major) in Egyptology. Undergraduates can also design an independent concentration if the existing programs do not align with their curricular focus.
35 percent of undergraduates pursue graduate or professional study immediately, 60 percent within 5 years, and 80 percent within 10 years.[52] For the Class of 1998, 75 percent of all graduates have since enrolled in a graduate or professional degree program.[53] The degrees acquired were doctoral 22 percent, master's 35 percent, medicine 28 percent, and law 14 percent.[53]
The highest fields of employment for graduates of the College are business 36 percent, education 19 percent, health/medical 6 percent, arts 6 percent, government 6 percent, and communications/media 5 percent.[53]
The language of the College Charter has been interpreted as discouraging the establishment professional schools. Brown and Princeton are the only Ivy League colleges with neither business school nor law school.




The List Art Center, built 1969-71, designed by Philip Johnson, houses the Department of Visual Art and the David Winton Bell Gallery, and is adjacent to the campus of the Rhode Island School of Design


Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program[edit]
Brown's near neighbor on College Hill is the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), America's top-ranked art college.[54] Brown and RISD students can cross-register at the two institutions, with Brown students permitted to take as many as four courses at RISD that count towards a Brown degree. The two institutions partner to provide various student-life services and the two student bodies compose a synergy in the College Hill cultural scene.
The Brown/RISD Dual Degree Program, among the most selective in the country, offered admission to 17 of the 512 applicants for the class entering in autumn 2015, an acceptance rate of 3.3 percent.[55] It combines the complementary strengths of the two institutions, integrating studio art at RISD with the entire spectrum of Brown's departmental offerings. Students are admitted to the Dual Degree Program for a course lasting five years and culminating in both the Bachelor of Arts (A.B.) degree from Brown and the Bachelor of Fine Arts (B.F.A.) degree from RISD. Prospective students must apply to the two schools separately and be accepted by separate admissions committees. Their application must then be approved by a third Brown/RISD joint committee.
Admitted students spend the first year in residence at RISD completing its "foundation course," and the second year in residence at Brown. Another year at each school ensues, with the fifth year spent according to the student's electives. Program participants are noted for their creative and original approach to cross-disciplinary opportunities, combining, for example, industrial design with engineering, or anatomical illustration with human biology, or philosophy with sculpture, or architecture with urban studies. An annual "BRDD Exhibition" is a well-publicized and heavily attended event, drawing interest and attendees from the wider world of industry, design, the media, and the fine arts.




Lyman Hall, built 1890-92, designed by Stone, Carpenter and Willson in Richardsonian Romanesque style, houses the Department of Theatre Arts and Performance Studies


Theatre and playwriting[edit]
Brown's theatre and playwriting programs are among the best-regarded in the country. Since 2003 eight different Brown graduates have either won (four times) or been nominated for (six times) the Pulitzer Prize—including winners Lynn Nottage '86 (twice—2009, 2017), Ayad Akhtar '93, Nilo Cruz '94, and Quiara Alegría Hudes '04; and nominees Sarah Ruhl '97 (twice), Gina Gionfriddo '97 (twice), Stephen Karam '02, and Jordan Harrison '03. In American Theater magazine's 2009 ranking of the most-produced American plays, Brown graduates occupied four of the top five places—Peter Nachtrieb '97, Rachel Sheinkin '89, Sarah Ruhl '97, and Stephen Karam '02.[56]
The undergraduate concentration (major) encompasses programs in theatre history, performance theory, playwriting, dramaturgy, acting, directing, dance, speech, and technical production. Applications for doctoral and master's degree programs are made through the University Graduate School. Master's degrees in acting and directing are pursued in conjunction with the Rep MFA program, which partners with one of the country's great regional theatres, Trinity Repertory Company, home of the last longstanding resident acting company in the country.[57] Trinity Rep's present artistic director Curt Columbus succeeded Oskar Eustis in 2006, when Eustis was chosen to lead New York's Public Theater.
The many performance spaces available to Brown students include the Chace and Dowling theaters at Trinity Rep; the McCormack Family, Lee Strasberg, Rites and Reason, Ashamu Dance, Stuart, and Leeds theatres in University departments; the Upstairs Space and Downstairs Space belonging to the wholly student-run Production Workshop; and Alumnae Hall, used by Brown University Gilbert & Sullivan and by Brown Opera Productions. Production design courses utilize the John Street Studio of Eugene Lee, three-time Tony Award-winner.




Hope College, built 1821-22 in late Federal style, was named for Hope Brown Ives, sister of Nicholas Brown, Junior, and was the first purpose-built residence hall at Brown






Membership in the Brown Faculty Club is open to all faculty, staff, alumni, and Brown parents, and confers reciprocal privileges at other clubs—in North America, England, Spain, and Israel—through the Association of College and University Clubs


Writing programs[edit]
Writing at Brown—fiction, non-fiction, poetry, playwriting, screenwriting, electronic writing, mixed media, and the undergraduate writing proficiency requirement—is catered for by various centers and degree programs, and a faculty that has long included nationally and internationally known authors. The undergraduate concentration (major) in literary arts offers courses in fiction, poetry, screenwriting, literary hypermedia, and translation. Graduate programs include the fiction and poetry MFA writing programs in the literary arts department, and the MFA playwriting program in the theatre arts and performance studies department. The non-fiction writing program is offered in the English department. Screenwriting and cinema narrativity courses are offered in the departments of literary arts and modern culture and media. The undergraduate writing proficiency requirement is supported by the Writing Center.
Author prizewinners[edit]
Alumni authors take their degrees across the spectrum of degree concentrations, but a gauge of the strength of writing at Brown is the number of major national writing prizes won. To note only winners since the year 2000: Pulitzer Prize for Fiction-winners Jeffrey Eugenides '82 (2003) and Marilynne Robinson '66 (2005); British Orange Prize-winners Marilynne Robinson '66 (2009) and Madeline Miller '00 (2012); Pulitzer Prize for Drama-winners Nilo Cruz '94 (2003), Lynn Nottage '86 (twice, 2009, 2017), Quiara Alegría Hudes '04 (2012), and Ayad Akhtar '93 (2013); Pulitzer Prize for Biography-winner David Kertzer '69 (2015); Pulitzer Prize for Journalism-winners James Risen '77 (twice, 2002, 2006), Mark Maremont '80 (twice, 2003, 2007), Gareth Cook '91 (2005), Peter Kovacs '77 (2006), Stephanie Grace '86 (2006), Mary Swerczek '98 (2006), Jane B. Spencer '99 (2006), Usha Lee McFarling '89 (2007), James Bandler '89 (2007), Amy Goldstein '75 (2009), and David Rohde '90 (twice, 1996, 2009), as well as Pulitzer Prize for Poetry-winner Peter Balakian PhD '80.




The Watson Center for Information Technology, built 1988, designed by Cambridge Seven Associates. It is named for Thomas J. Watson, Jr., Brown class of 1937, who led the global rise of IBM.






The division of applied mathematics in the former Henry Pearce House, built 1898, designed by Frank W. Angell and Frank H. Swift, acquired by Brown in 1952


Computer science[edit]
Teaching of computer science began at Brown in 1956 when an IBM machine was installed and computing courses were offered through the departments of Economics and Applied Mathematics. In January 1958 an IBM650 was added, the only one of its type between Hartford and Boston. In 1960 Brown's first computer building, designed by Philip Johnson, was opened on George Street and an IBM7070 computer installed the next year. It was given full Departmental status in 1979. In 2009, IBM and Brown announced the installation of a supercomputer (by teraflops standards), the most powerful in the southeastern New England region.[58] The Hypertext Editing Systems, HES and FRESS, were invented in the 1960s at Brown by Andries van Dam, Ted Nelson, and Bob Wallace, with Nelson coining the word hypertext. Van Dam's students were instrumental in the origin of the XML, XSLT, and related Web standards. Brown alumni who have distinguished themselves in the computer sciences and industry are listed in the Notable people section, below. They include a principal architect of the Classic Mac OS, a principal architect of the Intel 80386 microprocessor line, the Microsoft Windows 95 project chief, a CEO of Apple, the current head of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, the inaugural chair of the Computing Community Consortium, and design chiefs at Pixar and Industrial Light & Magic, protegees of graphics guru Andries van Dam. The character "Andy" in the animated film Toy Story is taken to be an homage to Van Dam from his students employed at Pixar.[59] Van Dam denies this, but a copy of his book (Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice) appears on Andy's bookshelf in the film. Brown computer science graduate and Heroes actor Masi Oka '97, was an animator at Industrial Light & Magic.
The department today is home to The CAVE. This project is a virtual reality room used for everything from three-dimensional drawing classes to tours of the circulatory system for medical students. In 2000 students from Brown's Technology House converted the south face of the Sciences Library into a Tetris game, the first high-rise-building Tetris ever attempted. Code named La Bastille, the game used a personal computer running Linux, a radio-frequency video game controller, eleven circuit boards, a 12-story data network, and over 10,000 Christmas lights.[60][61]




Rhode Island Hall on the College Green, built 1839-40, designed by James Bucklin in Greek Revival style to house the Natural History department, is now home to the Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology






The Department of Egyptology and Assyriology in Wilbour Hall, the former Samuel Dorrance Mansion, built 1888. Wilbour Hall is named for Charles Edwin Wilbour, class of 1854, famed Egyptologist, whose collections and papers are held in the Wilbour Library in New York


The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World[edit]
The Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World pursues fieldwork and excavations, regional surveys, and academic study of the archaeology and art of the ancient Mediterranean, Egypt, and Western Asia from the Levant to the Caucasus. The Institute has a very active fieldwork profile, with faculty-led excavations and regional surveys presently in Petra, Jordan, in West-Central Turkey, at Abydos in Egypt, and in Sudan, Italy, Mexico, Guatemala, Montserrat in the West Indies, and Providence, Rhode Island.
The Institute's faculty includes cross-appointments from the departments of Egyptology, Assyriology, Classics, Anthropology, and History of Art and Architecture. Faculty research and publication areas include Greek and Roman art and architecture, landscape archaeology, urban and religious architecture of the Levant, Roman provincial studies, the Aegean Bronze Age, and the archaeology of the Caucasus. The Institute offers visiting teaching appointments and postdoctoral fellowships which have, in recent years, included Near Eastern Archaeology and Art, Classical Archaeology and Art, Islamic Archaeology and Art, and Archaeology and Media Studies.
Egyptology and Assyriology
Facing the Joukowsky Institute, across the Front Green, is the Department of Egyptology and Assyriology, formed in 2006 by the merger of Brown's renowned departments of Egyptology and History of Mathematics. It is one of only a handful of such departments in the United States. The curricular focus is on three principal areas: Egyptology (the study of the ancient languages, history, and culture of Egypt), Assyriology (the study of the ancient lands of present-day Iraq, Syria, and Turkey), and the history of the ancient exact sciences (astronomy, astrology, and mathematics). Many courses in the department are open to all Brown undergraduates without prerequisite, and include archaeology, languages, history, and Egyptian and Mesopotamian religions, literature, and science. Students concentrating (majoring) in the department choose a track of either Egyptology or Assyriology. Graduate level study comprises three tracks to the doctoral degree: Egyptology, Assyriology, or the History of the Exact Sciences in Antiquity.




The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs, built 2000-2002, designed by Rafael Viñoly


The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs[edit]
Main article: Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs
The Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs is a center for the study of global issues and public affairs and is one of the leading institutes of its type in the country. It occupies an architecturally distinctive building designed by Uruguayan architect Rafael Viñoly. The Institute was initially endowed by Thomas Watson, Jr., Brown class of 1937, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, and longtime president of IBM. Institute faculty includes, or formerly included, Italian prime minister and European Commission president Romano Prodi,[62] Brazilian president Fernando Henrique Cardoso,[63] Chilean president Ricardo Lagos Escobar,[64] Mexican novelist and statesman Carlos Fuentes,[65] Brazilian statesman and United Nations commission head Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro,[66] Indian foreign minister and ambassador to the United States Nirupama Rao,[67] American diplomat and Dayton Peace Accords author Richard Holbrooke (Brown '62),[68] and Sergei Khrushchev,[69] editor of the papers of his father Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union.
The Institute's curricular interest is organized into the principal themes of development, security, and governance—with further focuses on globalization, economic uncertainty, security threats, environmental degradation, and poverty. Three Brown undergraduate concentrations (majors) are hosted by the Watson Institute—Development Studies, International Relations, and Public Policy. Graduate programs offered at the Watson Institute include the Graduate Program in Development (Ph.D.) and the Public Policy Program (M.P.A). The Institute also offers Post Doctoral, professional development and global outreach programming. In support of these programs, the Institute houses various centers, including the Brazil Initiative, Brown-India Initiative, China Initiative, Middle East Studies center, The Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies (CLACS) and the Taubman Center for Public Policy. In recent years, the most internationally cited product of the Watson Institute has been its Costs of War Project, first released in 2011 and continuously updated. The Project comprises a team of economists, anthropologists, political scientists, legal experts, and physicians, and seeks to calculate the economic costs, human casualties, and impact on civil liberties of the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan since 2001.




Slater Hall, built 1879, designed by Stone and Carpenter in Ruskinian Gothic style. When its foundation was dug at the south end of the College Green, neighbors objected that the Green "upon which so many are accustomed to gaze while taking daily walks" would be blocked from view, and Slater Hall was re-sited facing the Front Green






Rogers Hall on the College Green, built 1862, designed by Alpheus Morse in the Italian Gothic style as a chemistry laboratory, was renamed in 1989 the Salomon Center for Teaching


The School of Engineering[edit]
Main article: Brown University School of Engineering
Established in 1847, Brown's engineering program is the oldest in the Ivy League and the third oldest civilian engineering program in the country, preceded only by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (1824) and Union College (1845). In 1916 the departments of electrical, mechanical, and civil engineering were merged into a Division of Engineering, and in 2010 the division was elevated to a School of Engineering.
Engineering at Brown is especially interdisciplinary. The School is organized without the traditional departments or boundaries found at most schools, and follows a model of connectivity between disciplines—including biology, medicine, physics, chemistry, computer science, the humanities and the social sciences. The School practices an innovative clustering of faculties in which engineers team with non-engineers to bring a convergence of ideas.
IE Brown Executive MBA Dual Degree Program[edit]
Since 2009 Brown has developed an Executive MBA program in conjunction with one of the leading Business Schools in Europe; IE Business School in Madrid. This relationship has since strengthened resulting in both institutions offering a dual degree program.[70] In this partnership, Brown provides its traditional coursework while IE provides most of the business-related subjects making a differentiated alternative program to other Ivy League's EMBAs.[71] The cohort typically consists of 25-30 EMBA candidates from some 20 countries.[72] Classes are held in Providence, Madrid, Cape Town and Online.
The Pembroke Center[edit]
Main article: Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women
The Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women was established at Brown in 1981 by Joan Wallach Scott as a research center on gender. It was named for Pembroke College, the former women's coordinate college at Brown, and is affiliated with Brown's Sarah Doyle Women's Center. It supports the undergraduate concentration in Gender and Sexuality Studies, post-doctoral research fellowships, the annual Pembroke Seminar, and other academic programs. The Center also manages various collections, archives, and resources, including the Elizabeth Weed Feminist Theory Papers and the Christine Dunlap Farnham Archive.
The Graduate School[edit]
Main article: Brown University Graduate School
Established in 1887, the Graduate School has around 2,000 students studying over 50 disciplines. 20 different master's degrees are offered as well as Ph.D. degrees in over 40 subjects ranging from applied mathematics to public policy. Overall, admission to the Graduate School is most competitive with an acceptance rate of about 10 percent.




The Ship Street Farmer's Market in front of the Medical Education Building on the campus of Brown's Alpert Medical School in the Jewelry District






Brown's School of Public Health on the Riverwalk in Providence occupies a building designed by Edward Larrabee Barnes


Alpert Medical School[edit]
Main article: Alpert Medical School
The University's medical program started in 1811, but the school was suspended by President Wayland in 1827 after the program's faculty declined to live on campus (a new requirement under Wayland). In 1975, the first M.D. degrees from the new Program in Medicine were awarded to a graduating class of 58 students. In 1991, the school was officially renamed the Brown University School of Medicine, then renamed once more to Brown Medical School in October 2000.[73] In January 2007, Warren Alpert donated $100 million to Brown Medical School, in recognition of which its name was changed to the Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University.
In 2014 U.S. News & World Report ranked Brown's medical school the 5th most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 2.9 percent.[74] U.S. News ranks it 31st for research and 21st in primary care.[75]
The medical school is known especially for its eight-year Program in Liberal Medical Education (PLME), inaugurated in 1984. One of the most selective and renowned programs of its type in the country, it offered admission to 90 of the 2,290 applicants for the class entering in autumn 2015, an acceptance rate of 3.9 percent.[55] Since 1976, the Early Identification Program (EIP) has encouraged Rhode Island residents to pursue careers in medicine by recruiting sophomores from Providence College, Rhode Island College, the University of Rhode Island, and Tougaloo College. In 2004, the school once again began to accept applications from premedical students at other colleges and universities via AMCAS like most other medical schools. The medical school also offers combined degree programs leading to the M.D./Ph.D., M.D./M.P.H. and M.D./M.P.P. degrees.
The Marine Biological Laboratory[edit]
Main article: Marine Biological Laboratory
The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is an independent research institution established in 1882 at Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The laboratory is linked to 54 current or past Nobel Laureates who have been research or teaching faculty. Since 2005 the MBL and Brown have collaborated in a Ph.D. program in biological and environmental sciences that combines faculty at both institutions, including the faculties of the Ecosystems Center, the Bay Paul Center, the Program in Cellular Dynamics, and the Marine Resources Center.
Admissions and financial aid[edit]

Fall Admission Statistics


2017[76]
2016[77]
2015[78]
2014[79]
2013[80]
2012[81]


Applicants
32,724
32,390
30,396
30,431
28,919
28,742


Admits
2,722
2,919
2,875
2,661
2,654
2,759


Admit rate
8.3%
9.0%
9.5%
8.7%
9.2%
9.6%


Enrolled
N/A
N/A
1,615
1,561
1,543
1,539


SAT range
N/A
N/A
2060-2340
2000-2330
2000-2310
1990-2310


ACT range
N/A
N/A
31-34
30-34
29-34
29-34


For the undergraduate class of 2021, Brown received 32,724 applications, the largest applicant pool in the University's history,[77] of whom 2,722 were accepted, for an acceptance rate of 8.3%, the lowest in university history.[82] Additionally, for the academic year 2015-16 there were 1,834 transfer applicants, of whom 8.9% were accepted, with an SAT range of 2180-2330, ACT range of 31-34, and average college GPA of 3.85.[83] In 2017 the Graduate School accepted 11 percent of 9,215 applicants.[84] In 2014, U.S. News ranked Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School the 5th most selective in the country, with an acceptance rate of 2.9 percent.[74]
Brown admission policy is stipulated need-blind for all domestic applicants. Brown's financial aid basics website, in August 2014, stated: "For families (including both parents) with a total income below $60,000, and assets less than $100,000, no parent contribution is calculated towards the Expected Family Contribution (EFC). For families with total income below $100,000, the loan component of the financial aid award is replaced with additional scholarship." In 2013-14, the program awarded need-based scholarships worth $95 million. The average need-based award for the class of 2017 was $43,427.[85]
Sustainability[edit]
Brown has committed to "minimize its energy use, reduce negative environmental impacts and promote environmental stewardship."[86] The Energy and Environmental Advisory Committee has developed a set of ambitious goals for the university to reduce its carbon emissions and eventually achieve carbon neutrality. The "Brown is Green" website collects information about Brown's progress toward greenhouse gas emissions reductions and related campus initiatives, such as student groups, courses, and research.[87] Brown's grade of A-minus was the top one issued in the 2009 report of the Sustainable Endowments Institute (no A-grade was issued).[88] Brown has a number of active environmental leadership groups on campus.[89] These groups have begun a number of campus-wide environmental initiatives—including promoting the reduction of supply and demand of bottled water and investigating a composting program.
Athletics[edit]
Main article: Brown Bears




A stereoscopic image of the Brown freshman crew in competition at Lake Quinsigamond, Mass., on July 22, 1870. Brown rowing, among the pioneer programs in the country, dates from June 1857. Its first three-school regatta was held with Harvard and Yale at Lake Quinsigamond on July 27, 1859[90]






The 1879 Brown baseball varsity, with W.E. White seated second from right. White's appearance in an 1879 major league game may have broken baseball's color line 68 years before Jackie Robinson[91][92][93][94]


Brown is a member of the Ivy League athletic conference, which is categorized as a Division I (top level) conference of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). The Brown Bears are the third largest university sports program in the United States, sponsoring 38 varsity intercollegiate teams (Harvard sponsors 42 and Princeton 39).[citation needed] Brown's athletic program is one of the U.S. News & World Report top 20—the "College Sports Honor Roll"—based on breadth of program and athletes' graduation rates. Brown's newest varsity team is women's rugby, promoted from club-sport status in 2014.
Brown women's rowing has won 7 national titles in the last 14 years.[when?] Brown men's rowing perennially finishes in the top 5 in the nation, most recently winning silver, bronze, and silver in the national championship races of 2012, 2013, and 2014. The men's and women's crews have also won championship trophies at the Henley Royal Regatta and the Henley Women's Regatta. Brown's men's soccer is consistently ranked in the top 20,[citation needed] and has won 18 Ivy League titles overall; recent[when?] soccer graduates play professionally in Major League Soccer and overseas. Brown football, under its most successful coach historically, Phil Estes, won Ivy League championships in 1999, 2005, and 2008. (Brown football's reemergence is credited to its 1976 Ivy League championship team, "The Magnificent Andersons," so named for its coach, John Anderson.) High-profile alumni of the football program include Houston Texans head coach Bill O'Brien; former Penn State football coach Joe Paterno, Heisman Trophy namesake John W. Heisman, and Pollard Award namesake Fritz Pollard. The Men's Lacrosse team also has a long and storied history. Brown women's gymnastics won the Ivy League tournament in 2013 and 2014. Brown varsity equestrian has won the Ivy League championship several times.[95] Brown also supports competitive intercollegiate club sports, including sailing and ultimate frisbee. The men's ultimate team, Brownian Motion, has twice won the national championship, in 2000 and 2005.[96]
The first intercollegiate ice hockey game in America was played between Brown and Harvard on January 19, 1898.[97] The first university rowing regatta larger than a dual-meet was held between Brown, Harvard, and Yale at Lake Quinsigamond in Massachusetts on July 26, 1859.[98][99]
Student life[edit]
Campus Safety[edit]
In 2014, Brown University tied with the University of Connecticut for the highest number of reported rapes in the nation, with its "total of reports of rape" on their main campus standing at 43.[100]
Spring Weekend[edit]
Main article: Brown University traditions § Spring weekend
The weekend includes an annual spring concert festival which has featured numerous famous artists, including Bob Dylan, Childish Gambino, Bruce Springsteen, Bhudda, Chance the Rapper, Vampire Weekend, and Fetty Wap.
Residential and Greek societies[edit]




Ladd Observatory, built 1890–1891, is on the National Register of Historic Places.


About 12 percent of Brown students are in fraternities and sororities. There are 11 residential Greek houses: six fraternities (Beta Rho Pi, Delta Phi, Delta Tau, Phi Kappa Psi, Sigma Chi, and Theta Delta Chi; three sororities (Alpha Chi Omega, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Kappa Delta), one co-ed house (Zeta Delta Xi), and one co-ed literary society (Alpha Delta Phi). Phi Sigma Kappa fraternity was present on campus from 1906 to 1939, but was unable to reactivate after World War II due to wartime losses.[101] All recognized Greek-letter organizations are located on campus in Wriston Quadrangle in university-owned housing. They are overseen by the Greek Council.
An alternative to Greek-letter organizations are the program houses organized by themes. As with Greek houses, the residents of program houses select their new members, usually at the start of the spring semester. Examples of program houses are St. Anthony Hall (located in King House), Buxton International House, the Machado French/Hispanic/Latinx House, Technology House, Harambee (African culture) House, Social Action House and Interfaith House.
Currently,[when?] there are three student cooperative houses at Brown. Two of them, Watermyn and Finlandia on Waterman Street, are owned by the Brown Association for Cooperative Housing (BACH), a non-profit corporation owned by its members. The third co-op, West House, is located in a Brown-owned house on Brown Street. The three organizations run a vegetarian co-op for the larger community.
All students not in program housing enter a lottery for general housing. Students form groups and are assigned time slots during which they can pick among the remaining housing options.




The largest surviving Hutchings-Votey organ in the world is in Sayles Hall.[102] It has 3,355 pipes and weighs 25 tons. It is pictured here for Brown's traditional Halloween midnight concert.


Societies and clubs[edit]
The earliest societies at Brown were devoted to oration and debate. The Pronouncing Society is mentioned in the diary of Solomon Drowne, class of 1773, who was voted its president in 1771. It seems to have disappeared during the American Revolutionary War. We next hear of the Misokosmian Society, founded in 1794 and renamed the Philermenian Society in 1798. This was effectively a secret society with membership limited to 45. It met fortnightly to hear speeches and debate and thrived until the Civil War; in 1821 its library held 1594 volumes. In 1799 a chapter of the Philandrian Society, also secret, was established at the College. In 1806 the United Brothers was formed as an egalitarian alternative to the Philermenian Society. "These two great rivals," says the University historian, "divided the student body between them for many years, surviving into the days of President Sears. A tincture of political controversy sharpened their rivalry, the older society inclining to the aristocratic Federals, the younger to the Republicans, the democrats of that day. ... The students continuing to increase in number, they outran the constitutional limits of both societies, and a third, the Franklin Society, was established in 1824; it never had the vitality of the other two, however, and died after ten years."[103] Other nineteenth century clubs and societies, too numerous to treat here, are described in Bronson's history of the University.[104]




The sesquicentennial poster


The Cammarian Club—founded in 1893 and taking its name from the Latin for lobster, its members' favorite dinner food—was at first a semi-secret society which "tapped" 15 seniors each year. In 1915, self-perpetuating membership gave way to popular election by the student body, and thenceforward the Club served as the de facto undergraduate student government. In 1971, unaccountably, it voted the name Cammarian Club out of existence, thereby amputating its tradition and longevity. The successor and present-day organization is the generically-named Undergraduate Council of Students.
Societas Domi Pacificae, known colloquially as "Pacifica House," is a present-day, self-described secret society, which nonetheless publishes a website and an email address. It claims a continuous line of descent from the Franklin Society of 1824, citing a supposed intermediary "Franklin Society" traceable in the nineteenth century. But the intermediary turns out to be, on closer inspection, the well-known Providence Franklin Society, a civic organization unconnected to Brown whose origins and activity are well-documented. It was founded in 1821 by merchants William Grinnell and Joseph Balch, Jr., and chartered by the General Assembly in January 1823.[105] The "Pacifica House" account of this (conflated) Franklin Society cites published mentions of it in 1859, 1876, and 1883. But the first of these (Rhees 1859, see footnote infra) is merely a sketch of the 1824 Brown organization; the second (Stockwell 1876) is a reference-book article on the Providence Franklin Society itself; and the third is the Providence Franklin Society's own publication, which the "Pacifica House" reference mis-ascribes to the "Franklin Society," dropping the word "Providence."[106]
Student organizations[edit]
See also: Category:Brown University organizations
There are over 300 registered student organizations on campus with diverse interests. The Student Activities Fair, during the orientation program, provides first-year students the opportunity to become acquainted with the wide range of organizations. A sample of organizations includes:


Brown Badmaash Dance Company
The Brown Daily Herald
Brown Debating Union
The Brown Derbies
Brown International Organization
Brown Journal of World Affairs
The Brown Jug
The Brown Noser
Brown Opera Productions
Brown Political Review
The Brown Spectator
BSR
Brown Television
Brown University Band
Brown University Orchestra
The Chattertocks of Brown University
Chinese Students and Scholars Association
College Hill Independent
Critical Review
Ivy Film Festival
Jabberwocks
Production Workshop
Starla and Sons
Students for Sensible Drug Policy
WBRU


Resource centers[edit]
Brown University has several resource centers on campus. The centers often act as sources of support as well as safe spaces for students to explore certain aspects of their identity. Additionally, the centers often provide physical spaces for students to study and have meetings. Although most centers are identity-focused, some provide academic support as well.




The Brown Center for Students of Color


The Brown Center for Students of Color (BCSC) is a space that provides support for students of color. Established in 1972 at the demand of student protests, the BCSC encourages students to engage in critical dialogue, develop leadership skills, and promote social justice.[107] The center houses various programs for students to share their knowledge and engage in discussion. Programs include the Third World Transition Program, the Minority Peer Counselor Program, the Heritage Series, and other student-led initiatives. Additionally, the BCSC hopes to foster community among the students it serves by providing spaces for students to meet and study.
The Sarah Doyle Women's Center aims to provide a space for members of the Brown community to examine and explore issues surrounding gender.[108] The center was named after one of the first women to attend Brown University, Sarah Doyle. The center emphasizes intersectionality in its conversations on gender, encouraging people to see gender as present and relevant in various aspects of life. The center hosts programs and workshops in order to facilitate dialogue and provide resources for students, faculty, and staff.[109]
Other centers include the LGBTQ+ Center, the First-Generation College and Low-Income Student (FLi) Center, and the Curricular Resource Center.
Controversy over ADA mental health discrimination[edit]
Like many colleges, Brown mandates forced medical leaves for students expressing feelings of self-harm, depression, schizophrenia, or other forms of mental illness. Controversy arises within the college as to whether Brown follows the US Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, with Brown's own newspaper, The Brown Daily Herald, criticizing the University's policy behind readmission from psychological medical leave.[110] According to a 2010 article in The Brown Daily Herald, even Dean of Student Life & Chair of the Medical Leave Readmission Committee Maria Suarez admits that, “I wish we had more resources to connect with students.” Suarez said, “The support is there, but it is student-initiated.”[111] However, Suarez has been widely criticized within and outside the University as being non-compliant with American ADA laws, often denying students readmission for little to no reason.[112] Moreover, the University leaves students with few guidelines on how to become readmitted; students report that very little communication is made with the University during a leave of absence, and that the University does not aid disabled students in their progress. One mentally disabled student alleges, after 5 semesters of mandatory leave, that: "One of the administrators [Suarez], he claims, told him: "You should consider yourself lucky because Brown's better than other schools. At least you're not getting kicked out of Brown."'[112] The psychological leave readmission process takes place once every 6 months, and requires only a student's statement and a psychiatrist's or psychologist's statement of well-being, with no interview. Many students report that the process is not thorough enough to judge one's own progress in mental health, thereby violating ADA rights; the denial letters are often short and generic, with one sentence changed at most for multiple denials.[111]
Rankings[edit]


University rankings


National


ARWU[113]
45


Forbes[114]
8


U.S. News & World Report[115]
14


Washington Monthly[116]
49


Global


ARWU[117]
100-150


QS[118]
53


Times[119]
50


U.S. News & World Report[120]
85






University Hall, built 1770–1771, designed by a committee that included Joseph Brown, is on the National Register of Historic Places





USNWR graduate school rankings[121]



Engineering
52


Medicine: Primary Care
21


Medicine: Research
31





USNWR departmental rankings[121]



Biological Sciences
34


Chemistry
60


Computer Science
20


Earth Sciences
16


Economics
19


English
13


History
16


Mathematics
14


Physics
29


Political Science
40


Psychology
26


Public Affairs
56


Sociology
24


Statistics
42


In 2014, National Science Foundation ranked Brown University 66th in the United States by research.[122] For 2017, U.S. News & World Report ranks Brown University 85th globally.[123]
The 2013 U.S. News & World Report rankings' peer assessment portion gives the school a score of 4.4, tied with University of Pennsylvania, Dartmouth, Northwestern, and University of Michigan.[124]
In 2014, Forbes magazine ranked Brown seventh (between Caltech and Princeton University) on its list of "America's Most Entrepreneurial Universities".[125] The Forbes analysis looked at the ratio of "alumni and students who have identified themselves as founders and business owners on LinkedIn" and the total number of alumni and students.
LinkedIn particularized the Forbes rankings, placing Brown third (between MIT and Princeton) among "Best Undergraduate Universities for Software Developers at Startups." LinkedIn's methodology involved a career-path examination of "millions of alumni profiles" in its membership database.[126]
Brown ranked seventh in the country (between Princeton and Columbia) in a study of high school seniors' revealed preferences for matriculation conducted by economists at Harvard, Wharton, and Boston University, and published in 2005 by the National Bureau of Economic Research.[127] The 2008 Center for College Affordability and Productivity (CCAP) ranked Brown 5th in the country among national universities."[128]
Brown ranked 5th in the country in Newsweek/The Daily Beast's "America's Brainiac Schools"—based on the number of prestigious scholarships won (adjusted for student body size), including the Rhodes Scholarship, the Truman Scholarship, the Marshall Scholarship, the Gates Scholarship (since 2001), and the Fulbright scholarship (since 1993). Also factored in are standardized test scores, admissions rates, and students in the top 10 percent of their high school class.[129]
In 2017, U.S. News ranked Brown's Warren Alpert Medical School the 7th most selective in the country, tied with the UC Davis School of Medicine and the UCLA School of Medicine, with an acceptance rate of 2.7 percent.[130]
In the 2012 evaluation of MFA writing programs by Poets & Writers Magazine, Brown was ranked 4th in the country, 3rd for selectivity, and 1st in the Ivy League.[131]
The Forbes magazine annual ranking of "America's Top Colleges 2016"—which differs from the U.S. News by putting research universities and liberal arts colleges in a single sequence—ranked Brown 8th overall.
U.S. News & World Report ranked Brown 14th in its 2018 edition.[132] The 2018 edition also ranked Brown 3rd for undergraduate teaching, tied with Rice University.[133]
As it had in 2007 and 2010, the 2011 Princeton Review email poll of college students ranked Brown 1st in the country for "Happiest Students."[134] In the 2016-17 year, Brown students received 30 Fulbright scholarships, the highest number of any institution in the United States.[135]
Notable people[edit]
Main article: List of Brown University people
Alumni in politics include U.S. Secretary of State John Hay (1852), U.S. Secretary of State and Attorney General Richard Olney (1856), Chief Justice of the United States and U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1881), Senator Maggie Hassan '80 of New Hampshire, Governor Jack Markell '82 of Delaware, Rhode Island Representative David Cicilline '83, and DNC Chair Tom Perez '83.
Prominent alumni in business and finance include philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr. (1897), Chair of the Federal Reserve Janet Yellen '67, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim '82, Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan '81, CNN founder and America's Cup yachtsman Ted Turner '60, IBM chairman and CEO Thomas Watson, Jr. '37, Apple Inc. CEO John Sculley '61, incoming Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi '91,[136][137] and magazine editor John F. Kennedy, Jr. '83.
Important figures in the history of education include the father of American public school education Horace Mann (1819), civil libertarian and Amherst College president Alexander Meiklejohn, first president of the University of South Carolina Jonathan Maxcy (1787), Bates College founder Oren B. Cheney (1836), University of Michigan president (1871–1909) James Burrill Angell (1849), University of California president (1899–1919) Benjamin Ide Wheeler (1875), and Morehouse College's first African-American president John Hope (1894).
Alumni in the computer sciences and industry include architect of Intel 386, 486, and Pentium microprocessors John H. Crawford '75, and inventor of the first silicon transistor Gordon Kidd Teal '31.
Alumni in the arts and media include actor Daveed Diggs '04,[138] actress Emma Watson '14, NPR program host Ira Glass '82, singer-composer Mary Chapin Carpenter '81, humorist and Marx Brothers screenwriter S.J. Perelman '25, novelists Nathanael West '24, Jeffrey Eugenides '83, Edwidge Danticat (MFA '93), and Marilynne Robinson '66; actress Jo Beth Williams '70, composer and synthesizer pioneer Wendy Carlos '62, and journalist James Risen '77, political pundit Mara Liasson.
Other notable alumni include "Lafayette of the Greek Revolution" and its historian Samuel Gridley Howe (1821) Governor of Wyoming Territory and Governor of Nebraska John Milton Thayer (1841), Governor of Rhode Island Augustus Bourn (1855), NASA head during first seven Apollo missions Thomas O. Paine '42, diplomat Richard Holbrooke '62, sportscaster Chris Berman '77, Houston Texans head coach Bill O'Brien '92, 2018 Miss America Cara Mund '16, Penn State football coach Joe Paterno '50, Heisman Trophy namesake John W. Heisman '91, royals and nobles such as Prince Rahim Aga Khan, Prince Faisal bin Al Hussein, Princess Leila Pahlavi of Iran '92, Prince Nikolaos of Greece and Denmark, Prince Nikita Romanov, Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark, Prince Jaime of Bourbon-Parma, Duke of San Jaime and Count of Bardi, Prince Ra'ad bin Zeid, Lady Gabriella Windsor, Prince Alexander von Fürstenberg, Countess Cosima von Bülow Pavoncelli, and her half-brother Prince Alexander-Georg von Auersperg.
Nobel Laureates Craig Mello '82 and Jerry White '87, Cooley-Tukey FFT algorithm co-originator John Wilder Tukey '36, biologist Stanley Falkow (PhD '59), and psychologist Aaron Beck '50.
Notable past or current faculty have included Nobel Laureates Michael Kosterlitz, Lars Onsager, George Stigler, Vernon L. Smith, George Snell and Leon Cooper; Fields Medal winning mathematician David Mumford, Pulitzer Prize–winning historian Gordon S. Wood, Sakurai Prize winning physicist Gerald Guralnik, computer scientist Andries van Dam, engineer Daniel C. Drucker, sociologist Lester Frank Ward, former Prime Minister of Italy and former EU chief Romano Prodi, former President of Brazil Fernando Cardoso, former President of Chile Ricardo Lagos, writers Carlos Fuentes, Chinua Achebe, and Robert Coover, philosopher Martha Nussbaum, linguist Hans Kurath, political scientist James Morone and Senior Fellow Sergei Khrushchev.







Horace Mann, class of 1819, regarded as the father of American public education









Janet Yellen, class of 1967, the first woman in history to head the Federal Reserve









John Hay, class of 1858, private secretary to Abraham Lincoln, man of letters, Ambassador to the Court of St. James's, and Secretary of State under Presidents McKinley and Roosevelt









Jim Yong Kim, class of 1982, President of the World Bank, emeritus president of Dartmouth College, and first Asian-American president of an Ivy League institution









John D. Rockefeller, Jr., class of 1897, developer and sole financier of Rockefeller Center, philanthropist who gave away half a billion dollars during his life









Thomas Watson, Jr., class of 1937, led the global rise of IBM and is one of Time's "100 most influential people of the 20th century"[139]









Charles Evans Hughes, class of 1881, Chief Justice of the United States and U.S. Secretary of State









Ted Turner, class of 1960, philanthropist, America's Cup–winning yachtsman, and founder of CNN









Samuel Gridley Howe, class of 1821, abolitionist, pioneer advocate for the blind, "Lafayette of the Greek Revolution" and its historian









Alexander Meiklejohn, class of 1893, philosopher, education reformer, president of Amherst College, his ideas are celebrated in the Meiklejohn Freedom Award of the AAUP









Emma Watson class of 2014, actress, model, activist









Dara Khosrowshahi, class of 1991, CEO of Uber Technologies









Daveed Diggs, class of 2004, Grammy and Tony Award-winning rapper and actor, known for being the Marquis de Lafayette/Thomas Jefferson on musical Hamilton









Cecile Richards, class of 1980, President of Planned Parenthood









Jeffrey Eugenides, class of 1982, Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist




In popular culture[edit]
Brown's reputation as an institution with a free-spirited, iconoclastic student body is portrayed in fiction and popular culture.[140] Family Guy character Brian Griffin is a Brown alumnus.[141] The O.C.'s main character Seth Cohen is denied acceptance to Brown while his girlfriend is accepted.[142] In Gossip Girl, New York socialite Serena vies with her friends for a spot at Brown, and The Simpsons character Lisa Simpson is told by Harvard’s president after she fails a test that she will be unable to attend Harvard, but he can “pass (her) file along to Brown.”[142] Amy Gardner from The West Wing is a Brown alumna.
See also[edit]


Renewable energy portal



List of Brown University statues
Brown University traditions
Brown University Alma Mater
Josiah S. Carberry


References[edit]


^ "Brown University Admission Facts and Figures". Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ As of October 3, 2017. "https://news.brown.edu/articles/2017/10/endowment". Brown.edu. 2017.  External link in |title= (help)
^ Nickel, Mark. "Locke named 13th provost of Brown University". News from Brown. Brown University. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Richard M. Locke ... has been appointed provost of the University ... [starting] July 1, 2015 
^ "Faculty and Employees". 
^ a b c d "Facts about Brown University". Brown University. November 2015. Retrieved February 5, 2016. 
^ Brown Visual Identity Policy
^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Bicentennial celebration". Brown University. Retrieved July 9, 2009. 
^ Bronson (1914), p. 30.
^ Bronson, Walter C., The History of Brown University. Providence: Published by the University, 1914, pages 407-408
^ "Encyclopedia Brunoniana | Curriculum". Brown University. Retrieved December 27, 2014. 
^ "From largest applicant pool in history, Brown admits 2,722 to Class of 2021". 
^ "Providence, Rhode Island - Neighborhood Services - College Hill". City of Providence. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "Awards & Honors: National Humanities Medals". Retrieved 15 December 2014. 
^ "The 20 Universities That Have Produced the Most Billionaires". Business Insider. September 7, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2015. 
^ "Colleges and Universities with U.S. Rhodes Scholarship Winners | The Rhodes Scholarships". www.rhodesscholar.org. Retrieved 2016-08-06. 
^ "Statistics". www.marshallscholarship.org. 
^ "Class of 2015 graduate awarded prestigious Marshall Scholarship". Retrieved 2017-12-05. 
^ "Brown eighth on list for producing most MacArthur Fellows". Retrieved 2016-08-06. 
^ "Prominent Brown Alumni". Brownbears.com. Retrieved 2016-06-12. 
^ Dexter (1916), pp. 24–25.
^ Dexter (1916), p. 25.
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 13–14.
^ Isaac Backus, A History of New-England, 3 vols. (Boston, 1777–96), vol. 2, quoted in Bronson (1914), p. 8.
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 502–503; the Charter and its drafts and associated documents are printed in Bronson (1914), pp. 493–507; and in Guild (1867), pp. 119–146.
^ a b Bronson (1914), pp. 29–33.
^ Quoted in Bronson (1914), pp. 54–55.
^ Guild (1867), pp. 233–236 & 299.
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 55–56.
^ Howell, Ricardo (July 2001). "Slavery, the Brown Family of Providence and Brown University". Brown University News Service. Archived from the original on April 9, 2008. 
^ The opposing attitudes to the slave trade within the Brown family—from John Brown's unapologetic participation to Moses and Nicholas Brown's activist opposition—are described in Ricardo Howell, "Slavery, the Brown Family of Providence and Brown University" (2001, published online at Brown.edu), and in Charles Rappleye, Sons of Providence: The Brown Brothers, the Slave Trade, and the American Revolution (New York, 2006).
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 66–67.
^ Bronson (1914), p. 68.
^ a b Leubsdorf, Ben (2005-03-02). "The New Curriculum Then". Brown Daily Herald. Retrieved 2017-11-09. 
^ Ira magaziner with Elliot Maxwell; et al. "Draft of a working paper for education at Brown University". Brown University Library. Retrieved December 6, 2007. 
^ Mitchell, Martha (1993). "Curriculum". Encyclopedia Brunoniana. Providence, Rhode Island: Brown University Library. OCLC 31085279. Retrieved December 6, 2007. 
^ Leubsdorf, Ben (March 2, 2005). "The New Curriculum Then". Brown Daily Herald. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009. Retrieved December 5, 2007. 
^ "Grade Inflation and the Brown Grading System: 2001–2002 Sheridan Center Research Project". The Teaching Exchange. Sheridan Center for Teaching, Brown University. Archived from the original on February 4, 2007. Retrieved December 5, 2007. ; Lutts, Chloe (March 15, 2006). "Plus/minus fails key test: Faculty could still vote to change grading system". Brown Daily Herald. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009. Retrieved December 11, 2005. 
^ "Brown University: Visual Identity and Graphic Standards". www.brown.edu. Retrieved 2015-11-24. 
^ "Robinson Hall" in SAH Archipedia Classic Buildings, Society of Architectural Historians (sah-archipedia.org)
^ "Brown Houses". Brown University. Retrieved December 21, 2007. 
^ In later sources the architects are variously given as Hoppin & Koen of New York, or Hoppin & Ely of Providence, or both. The Hoppins were brothers; in 1895 Ely had taken Francis's place in the Providence firm. The Brown Alumni Monthly (December 1900, p. 67) says both firms were the designers; The American Institute of Architects Quarterly Bulletin (vol. 4, 1903, p. 123) shows Hoppin & Ely, with Hoppin & Koen as "associated architects"
^ Mitchell, Martha. (1993). "Van Wickle Gates." Encyclopedia Brunoniana
^ "From Martha Mitchell's Encyclopedia Brunoniana: John Hay Library". Brown.edu. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ "The Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection :: Brown University Library". Dl.lib.brown.edu. Retrieved February 22, 2010. 
^ Johnson, M.L. (January 7, 2006). "Some of nation's best libraries have books bound in human skin". Associated Press. Retrieved June 6, 2012. 
^ "EBSCO Publishing and the John Carter Brown Library Join Forces to Offer Database", September 16, 2010, published online at Journals.EBSCO.com
^ BBC News, "Bay Psalm Book is most expensive printed work at $14.2m," BBC; Sothebys.com
^ Bronson (1914), p. 63; the quote is from the Baptist Society resolution dated February 11, 1774
^   (March 2, 2012). "Economist Christina Hull Paxson elected 19th president of Brown University | Brown University News and Events". Media Contact: Marisa Quinn. News.brown.edu. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ Horowitz, Alana. "Ruth Simmons Resigning". Huffington Post. Retrieved September 9, 2011. 
^ "Home" (PDF). Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ Brown University. "Brown University Office of Admission facts and figures". Brown.edu. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ a b c "Home" (PDF). Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "RISD Ranks #1 for Fine Arts Grad Programs". 15 March 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ a b "Admissions Facts and Figures - Program in Liberal Medical Education". www.brown.edu. 
^ Kathy Borchers, "Brown University turning out one exceptional playwright after another," Associated Press (Providence Journal), December 18, 2009; "Archived copy". Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved 2014-08-28. 
^ Molly Lederer, "Trinity Rep is still shining after 50 years," East Side Monthly, Oct. 2013, p. 17
^ "Brown, IBM Unveil Multimillion-Dollar Supercomputer - News from Brown". brown.edu. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ "IMDB trivia for Toy Story page". IMDb. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "La Bastille: A Tech House Art Installation". Bastilleweb.techhouse.org. April 14, 2000. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ "Play Tetris On A Building Wall...And Steve Wozniak Will Visit You". The Mac Observer. April 25, 2000. 
^ Brown.edu Archived September 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Brown.edu[dead link]
^ Brown.edu Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "The Social Fabric: Global Migration, Local Exclusions, and the New Iberoamerican Agenda". Watson Institute. April 6, 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ Brown.edu Archived September 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Meera and Vikram Gandhi Fellows". Brown University. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "Brown University community mourns loss of Richard C. Holbrooke, alumnus and career diplomat". Brown University. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "Sergei Khrushchev Recalls the Cuban Missile Crisis on BBC". Watson Institute. October 15, 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ Brown's website (October 2014). "IE Brown Executive MBA". Brown University News Service. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. 
^ Clark, Patrick (May 23, 2014). "Brown University Gets Into the MBA Game". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "IE Brown Executive MBA - Faqs - IE Brown Executive MBA". iebrown.com. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ "History of the Brown Medical School". Med.brown.edu. Retrieved June 6, 2012. 
^ a b Smith-Barrow, Delece (March 27, 2014). "10 Medical Schools With the Lowest Acceptance Rates". U.S. News and World Report LP. 
^ . Grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com U.S. News & World Report https://www.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-medical-schools/primary-care-rankings?int=af3309&int=b3b50a&int=aac509;– U.S. News & World Report Check |url= value (help). Retrieved December 15, 2017.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "From largest applicant pool in history, Brown admits 2,722 to Class of 2021". Brown University. 
^ a b "From largest applicant pool in history, Brown admits 2,919 to Class of 2020". Brown University. 
^ "Common Data Set 2015-2016, Part C" (PDF). Brown University. 
^ "Common Data Set 2014-2015, Part C" (PDF). Brown University. 
^ "Common Data Set 2013-2014, Part C" (PDF). Brown University. 
^ "Common Data Set 2012-2013, Part C" (PDF). Brown University. 
^ Wang, Sarah (March 30, 2017). "U. admits record low 8.3 percent of applicants to Class of 2021". The Brown Daily Herald. 
^ "Transfer Applicants - Undergraduate Admission". www.brown.edu. 
^ "Facts About Brown". Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "Home - Financial Aid". Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "Department of Facilities Management, Energy and Environmental Advisory Committee". Brown University. Retrieved May 28, 2008. 
^ "information on Brown's efforts to create a more sustainable environment". Brown University. Retrieved May 28, 2008. 
^ "College Sustainability Report Card 2009". Sustainable Endowments Institute. Retrieved October 28, 2008. 
^ "Brown is Green: Student Groups and Initiatives". Brown University. Archived from the original on July 4, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012. 
^ A. Joukowsky, H. Ambler, D. Philips, C. Albert, and M. Hooper, Ever True: The History of Brown Crew (Providence: Brown University Sports Foundation; Ann Arbor: Edwards Brothers, 2010)
^ Robert Siegel, "Black Baseball Pioneer William White's 1879 Game," National Public Radio, broadcast January 30, 2004 (audio at npr.org)
^ Stefan Fatsis, "Mystery of Baseball: Was William White Game's First Black?" Wall Street Journall, January 30, 2004 (online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB107541676333815810)
^ Peter Morris and Stefan Fatsis, "Baseball's Secret Pioneer: William Edward White, the first black player in major-league history," Slate, February 4, 2014; baseball-reference.com/bullpen/Bill_White_(whitebi01)
^ Rick Harris, Brown University Baseball: A Legacy of the game (Charleston: The History Press, 2012), pp. 41-3
^ U.S. News & World Report. (March 18, 2002). "College Sports: Honor Roll." U.S. News & World Report
^ "2000 College". USAultimate.org. USAultimate.org. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "Harvard 1897-98 Men's Ice Hockey Schedule". Harvard University. Retrieved August 6, 2011. 
^ Robert B. Johnson, A History of Rowing in America (1871), pp. 60-1
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 346–347.
^ Anderson, Nick (June 7, 2016). "These colleges have the most reports of rape" – via www.washingtonpost.com. 
^ Rand, Frank Prentice; Watts, Ralph; Sefton, James E. (1993). All The Phi Sigs – A History. Grand Chapter of Phi Sigma Kappa. 
^ "The sound of 3,355 pipes - Today at Brown". Brown University. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ Bronson (1914), p. 181.
^ Bronson (1914), pp. 120, 147–148, 180–182, 239–244, 348–349 & 483–484.
^ Rhode Island Historical Society, "Providence Franklin Society Records, 1826-1922," published online at [1]
^ The three cited items of "evidence" in Pacifica House publicity are William J. Rhees, Manual of Public Libraries, Institutions and Societies in the United States (Philadelphia, 1859), pp. 437-8; Thomas B. Stockwell, A History of Public Education in Rhode Island, from 1636 to 1876 (Providence, 1876), p. 246; and Providence Franklin Society, Report on the Geology of Rhode Island (Providence, 1887, commissioned 1883), for which see, e.g., Bulletin of the United States Geological Survey, no. 127 (Washington, 1896), p. 821)
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Brown Center for Students of Color. Brown University. Retrieved November 17, 2014. 
^ "Welcome to the Sarah Doyle Women's Center". Sarah Doyle Women's Center. Brown University. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ "Guiding Philosophies". Sarah Doyle Women's Center. Brown University. Retrieved November 26, 2014. 
^ Cara Newlon. "Newlon '14.5: A pattern of prejudice". Brown Daily Herald. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ a b Crystal Vance Guerra. "Psychological leave-takers miss U. contact". Brown Daily Herald. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ a b Cara Newlon, USA TODAY College (November 4, 2013). "Policies hamper students' return from mental health leave". USA TODAY. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017: USA". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "America's Top Colleges". Forbes. July 5, 2016. 
^ "Best Colleges 2017: National Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. September 12, 2016. 
^ "2016 Rankings - National Universities". Washington Monthly. Retrieved September 6, 2016. 
^ "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "QS World University Rankings® 2018". Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". THE Education Ltd. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "Best Global Universities Rankings: 2017". U.S. News & World Report LP. Retrieved October 25, 2016. 
^ a b "Brown University - U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ Ncsesdata.nsf.gov
^ "Usnews.com". 
^ Morse, Robert. "Which Universities Are Ranked Highest by College Officials? - US News". Retrieved 2015-06-07. 
^ Liyan Chen. "Startup Schools: America's Most Entrepreneurial Universities". Forbes. Retrieved July 24, 2015. 
^ "LinkedIn.com". 
^ "SSRN-A Revealed Preference Ranking of U.S. Colleges and Universities by Christopher Avery, Mark Glickman, Caroline Hoxby, Andrew Metrick". Papers.ssrn.com. SSRN 601105 .  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "How to Choose a College". Forbes. May 1, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2014. 
^ "America's Brainiac Colleges". The Daily Beast. Retrieved January 28, 2012. 
^ "10 Medical Schools With the Lowest Acceptance Rates". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved August 27, 2017. 
^ "2012 MFA Rankings: The Top 50" (PDF). Poets and Writers. Retrieved 9 March 2015. 
^ "Brown University Overall Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved August 29, 2017. 
^ "Best Undergraduate Teaching". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved August 27, 2017. 
^ "Best Colleges Press Release". Princetonreview.com. August 2, 2010. Retrieved August 8, 2010. 
^ "Brown produces most Fulbright winners in the U.S". news.brown.edu. Retrieved 7 August 2017. 
^ "Spinoff of Expedia Comes at Tough Time for Its Sector", New York Times
^ "Dara Khosrowshahi: Executive Profile & Biography", BusinessWeek
^ "Something Great". Brown Alumni Magazine. Retrieved 9 June 2017. 
^ TIME 100 Persons of the Century, June 14, 1999
^ Shapira, Ian (9 February 1998). "Vanity Fair names Brown most elite, explores stereotypes of Ivy League". Retrieved 1 March 2015. 
^ Driver, Ben (26 April 2012). "The Not-So-Far-Fetched Fictitious Alumni and Attendees of the Ivy League, Part I of II". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ a b Alvarez, Ana (19 April 2010). "Is Brown's popularity a passing trend or here to stay?". The Brown Daily Herald. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 


Bibliography[edit]


Walter C. Bronson (1914). The History of Brown University, 1764–1914. Providence. 
Franklin Bowditch Dexter (1916). Extracts from the Itineraries and Other Miscellanies of Ezra Stiles, D.D., LL.D., 1755–1794. New Haven. 
Reuben Aldridge Guild (1867). History of Brown University, with Illustrative Documents. Providence. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brown University.



Official website
Brown Athletics site
 "Brown University". The American Cyclopædia. 1879. 







v
t
e


Brown University



Schools



College
Graduate School
Alpert Medical School
School of Engineering








Research Centers



Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women
Watson Institute for International Studies
Joukowsky Institute for Archaeology and the Ancient World





Athletics



Ivy League
Brown Bears
Football
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Men's soccer
Men's ice hockey
Women's ice hockey
Brown Stadium
Meehan Auditorium
Murray Stadium
Pizzitola Sports Center
Stevenson Field





Campus



Buildings
Statues
Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology
Ladd Observatory
John D. Rockefeller Jr. Library
Sciences Library
John Carter Brown Library
John Hay Library
University Hall
Van Wickle Gates
Nightingale–Brown House
Joseph Haile House
Thomas F. Hoppin House
Corliss–Brackett House





History



History of Brown University
List of Brown University people
Alumni
Faculty
Presidents





Student Life



Traditions
Alma Mater
Brown Daily Herald
The College Hill Independent
Brown Journal of World Affairs
WBRU
Brown Student & Community Radio
Brown Television
The Brown Jug
The Brown Noser
Brown Political Review
Critical Review





Organizations



Brown Band
University Orchestra
Production Workshop
Opera Productions
The Chattertocks of Brown University
Badmaash Dance Company
Sarah Doyle Women's Center










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Presidents of Brown University






Manning
Forbes #
Howell #
Maxcy
Messer
Wayland
Sears
Caswell
Robinson
Andrews
Faunce
Barbour
Wriston
Keeney
Heffner
Hornig
Swearer
Gregorian
Gee

Blumstein #
Simmons
Paxson

Pound sign (#) denotes interim president.











v
t
e


Colleges and universities in Rhode Island



Public institutions



Community College of Rhode Island
Naval War College
Rhode Island College
University of Rhode Island





Private institutions



Brown University
Bryant University
Johnson & Wales University
New England Institute of Technology
Providence College
Rhode Island School of Design
Roger Williams University
Salve Regina University





Professional schools



Alpert Medical School
Roger Williams University School of Law












v
t
e


Colonial colleges






Brown
Columbia
Dartmouth
Harvard
Penn
Princeton
Rutgers
William & Mary
Yale












v
t
e


Ivy League






Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Harvard Crimson
Princeton Tigers
Penn Quakers
Yale Bulldogs












v
t
e


ECAC Hockey



Teams



Brown Bears

men
women


Clarkson Golden Knights

men
women


Colgate Raiders

men
women


Cornell Big Red

men
women


Dartmouth Big Green

men
women


Harvard Crimson

men
women


Princeton Tigers

men
women


Quinnipiac Bobcats

men
women


Rensselaer Engineers

men
women


St. Lawrence Saints

men
women


Union Dutchmen

men
women


Yale Bulldogs

men
women







Venues



Meehan Auditorium (Brown)
Cheel Arena (Clarkson)
Starr Arena (Colgate)
Lynah Rink (Cornell)
Thompson Arena (Dartmouth)
Bright Hockey Center (Harvard)
Hobey Baker Memorial Rink (Princeton)
TD Bank Sports Center (Quinnipiac)
Houston Field House (Rensselaer)
Appleton Arena (St. Lawrence)
Achilles Rink (Union)
Ingalls Rink (Yale)
Herb Brooks Arena (Men's tournament)





Championships
and awards



Men's champions
Women's champions
Player of the Year
Rookie of the Year
Coach of the Year
Best Defensive Defenseman
Best Defensive Forward
Ken Dryden Award
Student-Athlete of the Year
Most Outstanding Player in Tournament





Seasons



1961–62
1962–63
1963–64
1964–65
1965–66
1966–67
1967–68
1968–69
1969–70
1970–71
1971–72
1972–73
1973–74
1974–75
1975–76
1976–77
1977–78
1978–79
1979–80
1980–81
1981–82
1982–83
1983–84
1984–85
1985–86
1986–87
1987–88
1988–89
1989–90
1990–91
1991–92
1992–93
1993–94
1994–95
1995–96
1996–97
1997–98
1998–99
1999–00
2000–01
2001–02
2002–03
2003–04
2004–05
2005–06
2006–07
2007–08
2008–09
2009–10
2010–11
2011–12
2012–13
2013–14
2014–15
2015–16
2016–17












v
t
e


Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges






BU Terriers
Brown Bears
Columbia Lions
Cornell Big Red
Dartmouth Big Green
Georgetown Hoyas
Harvard Crimson
Holy Cross Crusaders
MIT Engineers
Navy Midshipmen
Northeastern Huskies
Penn Quakers
Princeton Tigers
Rutgers Scarlet Knights
Syracuse Orange
Wisconsin Badgers
Yale Bulldogs












v
t
e


Association of American Universities



Public



Arizona
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Florida
Georgia Tech
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
Kansas
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Missouri
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


North Carolina
Ohio State
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
Texas
Texas A&M
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brandeis
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Emory
Harvard
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northwestern
NYU
UPenn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
USC
Stanford
Tulane
Vanderbilt
Wash U
Yale





Canadian (public)



McGill
Toronto












v
t
e


Universities Research Association



Public



Alabama
Arizona
Arizona State
California

Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
San Diego
Santa Barbara


Colorado
Colorado State
Florida
Florida State
Houston
Illinois

Chicago
Urbana–Champaign


Indiana
Iowa
Iowa State
LSU
Maryland
Michigan
Michigan State
Minnesota
Mississippi
Nebraska
New Mexico
New Mexico State
North Carolina
North Texas
Northern Illinois
Ohio State
Oklahoma
Oregon
Penn State
Pittsburgh
Purdue
Rutgers
South Carolina
SUNY

Buffalo
Stony Brook


Tennessee
Texas

Arlington
Austin
Dallas


Texas A&M
Texas Tech
Virginia
Virginia Tech
Washington
Wayne State
William & Mary
Wisconsin





Private



Boston U
Brown
Caltech
Carnegie Mellon
Case Western Reserve
Chicago
Columbia
Cornell
Duke
Harvard
Illinois Tech
Johns Hopkins
MIT
Northeastern
Northwestern
Notre Dame
Penn
Princeton
Rice
Rochester
Rockefeller
SMU
Stanford
Syracuse
Tufts
Tulane
Vanderbilt
WUSTL
Yale





International



McGill
Toronto
Pisa
Waseda
Manchester
Liverpool
UCL












v
t
e


568 Group






Amherst College
Boston College
Claremont McKenna College
College of the Holy Cross
Columbia University
Cornell University
Dartmouth College
Davidson College
Duke University
Emory University
Georgetown University
Grinnell College
Haverford College
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Middlebury College
Northwestern University
Pomona College
St. John's College
Swarthmore College
University of Notre Dame
University of Pennsylvania
Vanderbilt University
Wellesley College
Williams College














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 144232685
LCCN: n79056113
ISNI: 0000 0004 1936 9094
GND: 1010811-7
SUDOC: 026472449
BNF: cb11871472b (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brown_University&oldid=817970165"					Categories: Brown UniversityColonial architecture in Rhode IslandColonial collegesEducational institutions established in the 1760sGeorgian architecture in Rhode IslandNon-profit organizations based in Rhode IslandRhode Island in the American RevolutionUniversities and colleges in Providence, Rhode Island1764 establishments in Rhode Island1760s in the United StatesEducational institutions established in the 1700sV-12 Navy College Training ProgramHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2016Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsPages with URL errorsPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLUse mdy dates from November 2014Articles containing Latin-language textCoordinates on WikidataInstances of Infobox university using image sizeAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from December 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2014All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from October 2014Vague or ambiguous time from May 2017Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American CyclopaediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers