For a wider corporate history and profile, see Sky plc.

Sky UK Limited




Type
Subsidiary


Country
United Kingdom


Availability

Satellite
Internet


Founded
2 November 1990; 27 years ago (1990-11-02)


Slogan
Believe in Better


Headquarters
Grant Way, Isleworth, TW7 5QD



Broadcast area

United Kingdom


Parent
Sky plc



Key people

Jeremy Darroch (CEO)



Former names

British Sky Broadcasting Limited, BSkyB and Sky



Official website

www.sky.com


Subsidiary
Now TV Limited


Sky UK (formerly British Sky Broadcasting Limited, BSkyB and Sky) is a telecommunications company which serves the United Kingdom. Sky provides television and broadband internet services, fixed line and mobile telephone services to consumers and businesses in the United Kingdom. It is the UK's largest pay-TV broadcaster with 11 million customers as of 2015.[1] It was the UK's most popular digital TV service until it was overtaken by Freeview in April 2007.[2] Its corporate headquarters are in Isleworth.[3]
Formed in November 1990 by the equal merger of Sky Television and British Satellite Broadcasting, Sky became the UK's largest digital subscription television company. Following Sky's 2014 acquisition of Sky Italia and a majority 90.04% interest in Sky Deutschland in November 2014, its holding company British Sky Broadcasting Group plc changed its name to Sky plc.[4] The UK subsidiary's name was changed from British Sky Broadcasting Limited to Sky UK Limited, and continues to trade as Sky.
Sky UK Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Sky plc, with its current company directors being Andrew Griffith and Christopher Taylor.[5] Griffith acts as the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and the Managing Director for the commercial businesses division.[6]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Origins
1.2 Premier League football
1.3 Sky Multichannels
1.4 Launch of Sky Digital
1.5 2010s


2 Services

2.1 Digital terrestrial television
2.2 Video on demand
2.3 Game consoles
2.4 Sky Broadband
2.5 Sky Mobile


3 Products

3.1 Sky Digibox
3.2 Sky+
3.3 Sky+ HD

3.3.1 Sky 3D


3.4 Sky Q

3.4.1 4K UHD




4 Television channels
5 Marketing
6 Broadcasting

6.1 Transmission
6.2 Low-noise block converter
6.3 Standard definition broadcasts
6.4 Digital satellite receivers
6.5 Electronic programme guide

6.5.1 Technology
6.5.2 Numbering system




7 Competition
8 Virgin Media dispute
9 Discovery Networks dispute
10 Litigation
11 Criticism and controversies
12 Awards and nominations
13 See also
14 References
15 External links



History[edit]
Origins[edit]
The present service can trace its heritage back to 1989, when BSkyB's predecessors Sky Television plc and British Satellite Broadcasting encrypted their respective film channels – Sky Movies and The Movie Channel which required viewers to get decoding equipment and a subscription to watch the channels. After the two companies merged, subscribers could get access to both channels, and later the sports channel Sky Sports also became encrypted.
Premier League football[edit]
Main article: Sky Sports
In the autumn of 1991, talks were held for the broadcast rights for Premier League for a five-year period, from the 1992 season.[7] ITV were the current rights holders, and fought hard to retain the new rights. ITV had increased its offer from £18m to £34m per year to keep control of the rights.[8] BSkyB joined forces with the BBC[9] to make a counter bid. The BBC was given the highlights of most of the matches, while BSkyB paying £304m for the Premier League rights, would give them a monopoly of all live matches, up to 60 per year from the 1992 season. [10] Murdoch described sport as a "battering ram" for pay-television, providing a strong customer base.[11] A few weeks after the deal, ITV went to the High Court to get an injunction as it believed their bid details had been leaked before the decision was taken. ITV also asked the Office of Fair Trading to investigate since it believed Rupert Murdoch's media empire via its newspapers had influenced the deal.[12] A few days later neither action took effect, ITV believed BSkyB was telephoned and informed of its £262m bid, and Premier League advised BSkyB to increase its counter bid.[13]
BSkyB retained the rights paying £670m 1997–2001 deal, but was challenged by On Digital[14] for the rights from 2001–2004, thus were forced to £1.1 billion which gave them 66 live games a year.[15]
Following a lengthy legal battle with the European Commission, which deemed the exclusivity of the rights to be against the interests of competition and the consumer, BSkyB's monopoly came to an end from the 2007–08 season. In May 2006, the Irish broadcaster Setanta Sports was awarded two of the six Premier League packages that the English FA offered to broadcasters. Sky picked up the remaining four for £1.3bn.[16] In February 2015, Sky bid £4.2bn for a package of 120 premier league games across the three seasons from 2016. This represented an increase of 70% on the previous contract and was said to be £1bn more than the company had expected to pay. The move has been followed by staff cuts, increased subscription prices (including 9% in Sky's family package) and the dropping of the 3D channel.
Sky Multichannels[edit]
Main article: Sky Multichannels
In September 1993, BSkyB launched Sky Multichannels which was the present digital platform's analogue predecessor. Sky Multichannels was a subscription package that gave access not only to Sky's own channels but also those of third party broadcasters.
The service started on 1 September 1993. It was based on an idea by then CEO Sam Chisholm and chairman Rupert Murdoch of converting the company business strategy to an entirely fee-based concept. The new package included four channels formerly available free-to-air, broadcasting on Astra's satellites, as well as introducing new channels.[17] The service continued until the closure of BSkyB's analogue service on 27 September 2001,[18] due to the expansion of the Sky Digital platform after its launch three years ago. Some of the channels did broadcast either in the clear or soft encrypted (whereby a Videocrypt decoder was required to decode, without a subscription card) prior to their addition to the Sky Multichannels package.[19][20] Within two months of the launch, BSkyB gained 400,000 new subscribers, with the majority taking at least one premium channel as well,[21] which helped BSkyB reach 3.5 million households by mid-1994. Michael Grade criticised the operations in front of the Select Committee on National Heritage, mainly for the lack of original programming on many of the new channels.[22]
Launch of Sky Digital[edit]
BSkyB's digital service was officially launched on 1 October 1998 under the name Sky Digital, although small-scale tests were carried out before then. At this time the use of the Sky Digital brand made an important distinction between the new service and Sky's analogue services. Key selling points were the improvement in picture and sound quality, increased number of channels and an interactive service branded Open.... now called Sky Active, BSkyB competed with the ONdigital (later ITV Digital) terrestrial offering and cable services. Within 30 days, over 100,000 digiboxes had been sold, which help bolstered BSkyB's decision to give away free digiboxes and minidishes from May 1999.
In addition to most channels from the Sky Multichannels package, Sky Digital launched with several new channels that were exclusive to the digital offer.
The switch-over from analogue to digital proceeded relatively quickly. In Q3 1998, there were 6 million 'multichannel' TV homes in the UK (i.e. homes that watch television other than the traditional analogue terrestrial), and over half of these homes watched television using BSkyB's analogue service. BSkyB's digital service surpassed the analogue service in terms of subscribers in late 1999.[23]
By June 2000 the service had 3.6 million subscribers, which gave BSkyB 8.988 million subscribers across all platforms. This substantial growth reflected BSkyB’s 34% share of viewers in multi-channel homes (up from 13.4% from 1999).[24]
BSkyB's analogue service ended in October 2001, and the digital service would eventually be marketed as just 'Sky'.
By June 2005, the number of digital subscribers increase to 7.8m, while it produced 38,375 hours of sport in 2005[25]
2010s[edit]
Sky's direct-to-home satellite service became available in 10 million homes in 2010, Europe's first pay-TV platform in to achieve that milestone. Confirming it had reached its target, the broadcaster said its reach into 36% of households in the UK represented an audience of more than 25m people. The target was first announced in August 2004, since then an additional 2.4m customers had subscribed to Sky's direct-to-home service. Media commentators had debated whether the figure could be reached as the growth in subscriber numbers elsewhere in Europe flattened.[26]
The Daily Mail newspaper reported in 2012 that the UK government's benefits agency was checking claimants' "Sky TV bills to establish if a woman in receipt of benefits as a single mother is wrongly claiming to be living alone" – as, it claimed, subscription to sports channels would betray a man's presence in the household.[27] In December, the UK’s parliament heard a claim that a subscription to Sky was ‘often damaging’, along with alcohol, tobacco and gambling. Conservative MP Alec Shelbrooke was proposing the payments of benefits and tax credits on a "Welfare Cash Card", in the style of the American Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, that could be used to buy only "essentials".[28]
Services[edit]
Digital terrestrial television[edit]
Sky initially faced competition from the ONdigital digital terrestrial television service (later renamed ITV Digital). ITV Digital failed for numerous reasons, including, but not limited to numerous administrative and technical failures, nervous investors after a large down-turn in the advertising market and the dot com crash, and Sky's aggressive marketing and domination of premium sporting rights.
While Sky had been excluded from being a part of the ONdigital consortium, thereby making them a competitor by default, Sky was able to join ITV Digital's free-to-air replacement, Freeview, in which it holds an equal stake with the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Arqiva. Prior to October 2005, three Sky channels were available on this platform: Sky News, Sky Three, and Sky Sports News. Initially, Sky provided Sky Travel to the service. However, this was replaced by Sky Three on 31 October 2005, which was itself later re-branded as 'Pick TV' in 2011.
On 8 February 2007, Sky announced its intention to replace its three free-to-air digital terrestrial channels with four subscription channels. It was proposed that these channels would offer a range of content from the Sky portfolio including sport (including English Premier League Football), films, entertainment and news.[29] The announcement came a day after Setanta Sports confirmed that it would launch in March as a subscription service on the digital terrestrial platform, and on the same day that NTL's services re-branded as Virgin Media. However, industry sources believe Sky will be forced to shelve plans to withdraw its channels from Freeview and replace them with subscription channels, due to possible lost advertising revenue.[30]
Video on demand[edit]
Main article: On Demand (Sky)
Sky initially faced increased competition from telecommunications providers to deliver pay television services over existing telephone lines using ADSL. Such providers are able to offer "triple-play" or "quad-play" packages combining landline telephone, broadband Internet, mobile telephone and pay television services.
To compete with these providers, in October 2005, Sky bought the broadband Internet Service Provider Easynet for £211 million. This acquisition allowed Sky to start offering a Sky-branded broadband service as well as a "triple play" package combining satellite television, land-line telephone and Broadband service. Sky also offers some streaming live TV channels to a computer using Microsoft's Silverlight.[31]
In early 2012, Sky released an update to its Sky Anytime service. This update offers customers the chance to buy and rent films from the Sky Store.
On 26 September 2012, Sky relaunched its "Anytime+" on-demand-via-broadband service as "On Demand" as the BBC’s iPlayer joined the line-up of channels offering catch-up TV on the company’s Sky+ HD box – linked to a router, the signal from which was recorded before viewing. The BBC was making the preceding week’s programmes available alongside ITV, Channel 4’s All 4, Channel 5 and the partly BBC Worldwide-owned UKTV, as well as Sky’s own channels.[32]
Game consoles[edit]
On 29 May 2009, it was confirmed that Sky Go would be made available on the Xbox 360.[33] In November 2011 Sony Computer Entertainment struck a deal with Sky to bring some of its shows to the PlayStation Store Video Store. Users are able buy individual TV episodes in SD or HD.[34] On 3 December 2014, Sky Go became available on the PlayStation 4, followed by the PlayStation 3 on 29 January 2015.
Sky Broadband[edit]
Main article: Sky Broadband
On 1 March 2013, it was announced that Sky would buy O2's and Be's broadband services from Telefónica for £180 million up front plus another £20 million once customers have been transferred. Telefónica said the deal would allow it to concentrate on providing better mobile services, including rolling out 4G.[35]
Sky offers superfast broadband, Sky Fibre, using ADSL2+ technology and fibre-optic, which are provided by BT Openreach.
Sky Mobile[edit]
On 21 October 2016, it was announced that public pre-registration for Sky's new mobile network, Sky Mobile, would take place from 31 October 2016. The network will operate as a Full MVNO, utilising the O2 radio access network infrastructure.[36] On 5 January 2017 Sky Mobile went live to the public across the UK. Coining itself as the Smarter Network, with tariffs mainly focused on data rather than traditional calls & text, effectively saving consumers money in wasted unused minutes and texts. 1GB data costs £10.00 per month while 3GB costs £15.00 per month with 5GB data costing £20.00 per month. With all those data tariffs, the customer can choose from two different call & text packages with the 'Pay as you use' costing 10p per minute of calls and 10p per text message sent or £10.00 per month for Unlimited Calls & Texts. With the latter being free for new or existing Sky TV customers using the Sky Mobile network.
As of 30 March 2017, Sky Mobile is offering handset deals. Products are available from manufacturers such as Samsung, Sony, LG and Apple.
Products[edit]
Sky Digibox[edit]
Sky launched with a set top box known as the Sky Digibox, using the Slogans "What do you want to watch?", "Entertainment your way" and the current slogan "Believe in Better".[37] This was followed by Sky+, a digital video recorder with an internal hard drive which allows viewers to 'pause live television' (by switching from a live feed to a paused real-time recording that can be restarted at any point) and schedule programs to record in the future.
In later years the Sky+ box and then the Sky+ HD box replaced the original Digibox. The first photos of a prototype Sky HD box began appearing in magazines in August 2005. Sky launched HDTV services in May 2006. All Sky+ HD boxes incorporate a version of Sky+ using a 300GB, 500GB, or 1TB hard drive (of which 160GB, 250GB or 500GB are available to the user) to accommodate the necessary extra data.
Sky+[edit]
Sky initially charged an additional subscription fee for using a Sky+ PVR with their service; waiving the charge for subscribers whose package included two or more premium channels. This changed as from 1 July 2007, and now customers that subscribe to any Sky package have Sky+ included at no extra charge. Customers that do not subscribe to Sky's channels can still pay a monthly fee to enable Sky+ functions.
In January 2010 Sky discontinued the Sky+ Box, limited the standard Sky Box to Multiroom upgrade only and started to issue the Sky+ HD Box as standard, thus giving all new subscribers the functions of Sky+. In February 2011 Sky discontinued the non-HD variant of its Multiroom box, offering a smaller version of the SkyHD box without Sky+ functionality.[38] In September 2007, Sky launched a new TV advertising campaign targeting Sky+ at women. As of 31 March 2008, Sky had 3,393,000 Sky+ users.[39]
Sky+ HD[edit]
Main article: Sky+ HD
Sky launched its HDTV service, Sky+ HD, on 22 May 2006. Prior to its launch, Sky claimed that 40,000 people had registered to receive the HD service. In the week before the launch, rumours started to surface that Sky was having supply issues with its set top box (STB) from manufacturer Thomson. On Thursday 18 May 2006, and continuing through the weekend before launch, people were reporting that Sky had either cancelled or rescheduled its installation. Finally, the BBC reported that 17,000 customers had yet to receive the service due to failed deliveries.[40] On 31 March 2012, Sky announced the total number of homes with Sky+ HD was 4,222,000.[41]
In early 2012, Sky released an update to its Sky Anytime service. This update offers customers the chance to buy and rent films from the Sky Store. In June 2012, Sky launched a new EPG for Sky+ HD boxes. The update included a new modernised look and improved functionality. As of 1 October 2012, Sky Anytime was rebranded as Sky On Demand which included ITV Player and Demand 5. BBC iPlayer followed in late Autumn with 4oD which changed to All 4 on 30 March 2015, launched in early 2013.[42]
Sky 3D[edit]
Main article: Sky 3D
Sky began to broadcast programmes in 3D in April 2010. This included new 3D channels, including a Sky Sports 3D and Sky Movies 3D. Sky previously experimented with 3D broadcasting by broadcasting an Arsenal vs Manchester United football game live in 3D in nine pubs situated throughout the United Kingdom.[43]
Sky Q[edit]
On 18 November 2015, Sky announced Sky Q, a range of products and services to be available in 2016.[44] The Sky Q range consists of three set top boxes (Sky Q 1TB, Sky Q 2TB and Sky Q Mini), a broadband router (Sky Q Hub) and mobile applications.
The Sky Q set top boxes introduce a new user interface, Wi-Fi hotspot functionality, Power-line and Bluetooth connectivity and a new touch-sensitive remote control.[45] The Sky Q Mini set top boxes connect to the Sky Q set top boxes with a Wi-Fi or Power-line connection rather than receive their own satellite feeds. This allows all set top boxes in a household to share recordings and other media.
Sky Q became available to order on 9 February 2016 and is currently the only range available to new customers.
4K UHD[edit]
The Sky Q 2TB set top box is capable of receiving and displaying 4K UHD broadcasts. HDR will be added at a later date when HDR broadcast standards are agreed.[citation needed]
UHD broadcasts started on 13 August 2016, with the first live Premier League football match of the 2016/17 season, Hull vs Leicester City. UHD broadcasts are available free of charge to Sky Q 2TB multiscreen customers with any other relevant subscriptions. [46]
Television channels[edit]



Entertainment

Sky One (+1 available)
Sky Two
Sky Living (+1 available)
Sky Atlantic (+1 available)
Sky Arts
Pick (+1 available)
Challenge (+1 available)
Real Lives (+1 available)
Sky Betting and Gaming
Lifetime (+1 available) (joint venture)
Comedy Central (+1 available) (joint venture)
Comedy Central Extra (+1 available) (joint venture)

News

Sky News
Sky News Arabia (joint venture)
Sky News Australia
Sky News Business Channel

Sports

Sky Sports Main Event
Sky Sports Premier League
Sky Sports Football
Sky Sports Cricket
Sky Sports Golf
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports Action
Sky Sports Arena
Sky Sports News
Sky Sports Mix
Sky Sports Box Office
At the Races (joint venture)

Movies

Sky Cinema Premiere (+1 available)
Sky Cinema Hits
Sky Cinema Greats
Sky Cinema Disney
Sky Cinema Family
Sky Cinema Action
Sky Cinema Comedy
Sky Cinema Thriller
Sky Cinema Drama & Romance
Sky Cinema Select

Documentaries

History (+1 available) (joint venture)
H2 (joint venture)
CI (+1 available) (joint venture)

Kids

Nickelodeon (+1 available) (joint venture)
Nick Jr. (+1 available) (joint venture)
Nick Jr. Too (joint venture)
Nicktoons (joint venture)

Other

A+E Networks UK a joint-venture with american company A+E Networks.





Marketing[edit]
Sky (formerly marketed as Sky Digital) is the brand name for Sky plc's United Kingdom digital satellite television and telecommunications services. Slogans that have used for marketing include "What do you want to watch?", "Entertainment your way" and the current slogan "Believe in Better".[37] Sky has also aired several advertisements featuring characters from Minions, Inside Out, Kung Fu Panda 3, The Secret Life of Pets and The Lego Batman Movie.
Broadcasting[edit]




Sky Minidish








This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Transmission[edit]
When Sky Digital was launched in 1998 the new service used the Astra 2A satellite which was located at the 28.2°E orbital position, unlike the analogue service which was broadcast from 19.2°E. This was subsequently followed by more Astra satellites as well as Eutelsat's Eurobird 1 (now Eutelsat 33C) at 28.5°E), enabled the company to launch a new all-digital service, Sky, with the potential to carry hundreds of television and radio channels.[47] The old position was shared with broadcasters from several European countries, while the new position at 28.5°E came to be used almost exclusively for channels that broadcast to the United Kingdom.
New Astra satellites joined the position in 2000 and 2001, and the number of channels available to customers increased accordingly. This trend continued with the launch of Eurobird 1 (now Eutelsat 33C) in 2001. Additionally, some channels occasionally received new numbering — However, in early 2006, the majority of channels received new numbering, with some receiving single digit changes, whilst others received new numbers entirely.
It was the country's most popular digital TV service until it was overtaken by Freeview in April 2007.[2]
Sky is currently transmitted from the Astra satellites located at 28.2° east (2A/2C/2E/2F) and Eutelsat's Eutelsat 33C satellite at 28.5°E.
Low-noise block converter[edit]
Provided is a universal Ku band LNB (9.75/10.600 GHz) which is fitted at the end of the dish and pointed at the correct satellite constellation; most digital receivers will receive the free to air channels. Some broadcasts are free-to-air and unencrypted, some are encrypted but do not require a monthly subscription (known as free-to-view), some are encrypted and require a monthly subscription, and some are pay-per-view services. To view the encrypted content a VideoGuard UK equipped receiver (all of which are dedicated to the Sky service, and cannot be used to decrypt other services) needs to be used. Unofficial CAMs are now available to view the service, although use of them breaks the user's contract with Sky and invalidates the user's rights to use the card.
Standard definition broadcasts[edit]
Sky's standard definition broadcasts are in DVB-compliant MPEG-2, with the Sky Cinema and Sky Box Office channels including optional Dolby Digital soundtracks for recent films, although these are only accessible with a Sky+ box. Sky+ HD material is broadcast using MPEG-4 and most of the HD material uses the DVB-S2 standard. Interactive services and 7-day EPG use the proprietary OpenTV system, with set-top boxes including modems for a return path. Sky News, amongst other channels, provides a pseudo-video on demand interactive service by broadcasting looping video streams.
Digital satellite receivers[edit]
Sky utilises the VideoGuard pay-TV scrambling system owned by NDS, a Cisco Systems company. There are tight controls over use of VideoGuard decoders; they are not available as stand-alone DVB CAMs (conditional-access modules). Sky has design authority over all digital satellite receivers capable of receiving their service. The receivers, though designed and built by different manufacturers, must conform to the same user interface look-and-feel as all the others. This extends to the Personal video recorder (PVR) offering (branded Sky+).
Electronic programme guide[edit]
Technology[edit]
Sky maintains an electronic programme guide (EPG) which provides information about upcoming programmes and a list of channels. Channels available on Sky are assigned a three digit logical channel number which can be entered on a remote control to access the channel and determines in what order channels are listed.
The EPG differs depending on the viewer's location due to limited regional availability of certain channels or conditions relating to their must-carry status. For example, this ensures that viewers get access to the correct BBC or ITV region or that S4C gets a prominent listing in Wales.
All channels are grouped into categories depending on their content. What section of the EPG a channel gets allocated is determined by rules set up by Sky.
Sky has no veto over the presence of channels on their EPG, with open access being an enforced part of their operating licence from Ofcom. Any channel which can get carriage on a suitable beam of a satellite at 28° East is entitled to access to Sky's EPG for a fee, ranging from £15–100,000. Third-party channels which opt for encryption receive discounts ranging from reduced price to free EPG entries, free carriage on a Sky leased transponder, or actual payment for being carried. However, even in this case, Sky does not carry any control over the channel's content or carriage issues such as picture quality.
In October 2007, Sky announced that they would not accept new applications to launch channel on their EPG, citing "very significant memory constraints" on many of its older digiboxes.[48]
In June 2012, Sky launched a new EPG for Sky+ HD boxes. The update boasts a new modernised look and improved functionality.
Numbering system[edit]
The EPG numbering is altered frequently when new channels launch or receive new numbers. A few times, the EPG has been substantially altered. For example:

In early 2006, most channels received new numbering. This shake-up intended to split up the original ten categories in sixteen. For example, several channels that had been listed under the 'Entertainment' category where split off into a new 'Lifestyle & Culture' category while the 'News & Documentaries' category was split into two. The 'Specialist' category, which had included shopping, dating, gambling, international and adult channels was split into several genres.[49]
Following the integration of Living TV Group into Sky in early 2011, several prominent slots were freed up as many channels were closed down. It was, reported Broadband TV News, the biggest reshuffle in EPG positions for over a decade, with MTV, Comedy Central, Universal Channel, Syfy, News Corporation's FX, and 40 HD channels moving to more prominent places.[50]

Competition[edit]
On 12 July 2011, former Prime Minister, Gordon Brown claimed that Sky's largest shareholder - News Corporation - attempted to affect government policy with regards to the BBC in pursuit of its own commercial interests.[51] He went further, in a speech in Parliament on 13 July 2011, stating:

"Mr James Murdoch, which included his cold assertion that profit not standards was what mattered in the media, underpinned an ever more aggressive News International and Sky agenda under his and Mrs Brooks’ leadership that was brutal in its simplicity. Their aim was to cut the BBC licence fee, to force BBC online to charge for its content, for the BBC to sell off its commercial activities, to open up more national sporting events to bids from Sky and move them away from the BBC, to open up the cable and satellite infrastructure market, and to reduce the power of their regulator, Ofcom. I rejected those policies." [52]

On 13 July 2011, MP Chris Bryant stated to the House of Commons, in the Parliamentary Debate on the Rupert Murdoch and News Corporation Bid for Sky that the company was anti-competitive:

"The company has lots of technological innovation that only a robust entrepreneur could to bring to British society, but it has also often been profoundly anti-competitive. I believe that the bundling of channels so as to increase the profit and make it impossible for others to participate in the market is anti-competitive. I believe that the way in which the application programming interface—the operating system—has been used has been anti-competitive and that Sky has deliberately set about selling set-top boxes elsewhere, outside areas where they have proper rights. If one visits a flat in Spain where a British person lives, one finds that they mysteriously manage to have a Sky box there even though it is registered to a house in the United Kingdom."[53]

Virgin Media dispute[edit]
Virgin Media (re-branded in 2007 from NTL:Telewest) started to offer a high-definition television (HDTV) capable set top box, although from 30 November 2006 until 30 July 2009 it only carried one linear HD channel, BBC HD, after the conclusion of the ITV HD trial. Virgin Media has claimed that other HD channels were "locked up" or otherwise withheld from their platform,[54] although Virgin Media did in fact have an option to carry Channel 4 HD in the future.[55][56] Nonetheless, the linear channels were not offered, Virgin Media instead concentrating on its Video On Demand service[57] to carry a modest selection of HD content.[58] Virgin Media has nevertheless made a number of statements over the years, suggesting that more linear HD channels are on the way.[54][59][60]
In 2007, Sky and Virgin Media became involved in a dispute over the carriage of Sky channels on cable TV. The failure to renew the existing carriage agreements negotiated with NTL and Telewest resulted in Virgin Media removing the basic channels from the network on 1 March 2007. Virgin Media claimed that Sky had substantially increased the asking price for the channels, a claim which Sky denied, on the basis that their new deal offered "substantially more value" by including HD channels and Video On Demand content which was not previously carried by cable.[61]
In response, Sky ran a number of TV, radio and print advertisements claiming that Virgin Media 'doubted the value' of the channels concerned, at first urging Virgin Media customers to call their cable operator to show their support for Sky, and later urging Virgin Media customers to migrate to Sky to continue receiving the channels. The broadcasting regulator Ofcom subsequently found these commercials in breach of their code.[62]
The availability (at an extra charge) of Sky's premium sport and movie services was not affected by the dispute, and Sky Sports 3 was offered as a replacement to Sky One on many Virgin Media packages. This impasse continued for twenty-one months, with both companies initiating High Court proceedings.[63] Amongst Virgin Media's claims to the court[64] (denied by Sky) were that Sky had unfairly reduced the amount which it paid to VMTV for the carriage of Virgin Media's own channels on satellite.[65]
Eventually, on 4 November 2008 it was announced that an agreement had been struck for Sky's basic channels – including Sky1, Sky2, Sky3, Sky News, Sky Sports News, Sky Arts 1, Sky Arts 2, Sky Real Lives and Sky Real Lives 2 to return to Virgin Media from 13 November 2008 until 12 June 2011. In exchange, Sky would be provided continued carriage of Virgin Media Television's channels – Living, Livingit, Bravo, Bravo +1, Trouble, Challenge and Virgin1 for the same period.[66]
The agreements include fixed annual carriage fees of £30m for the channels with both channel suppliers able to secure additional capped payments if their channels meet certain performance-related targets. Currently there is no indication as to whether the new deal includes the additional Video On Demand and High Definition content which had previously been offered by Sky. As part of the agreements, both Sky and Virgin Media agreed to terminate all High Court proceedings against each other relating to the carriage of their respective basic channels.[67]
Discovery Networks dispute[edit]
On 25 January 2017, Discovery Networks announced that they were in a dispute with Sky UK over the costs of payment fees to the broadcaster.
The broadcaster threatened to blackout their channels on the Sky platform, which includes Eurosport, Discovery Channel, TLC, Animal Planet, Investigation Discovery, DMAX, Discovery Turbo, Discovery Shed, Discovery Science, Discovery History and Home & Health, unless Sky accepted their request for fair pricing. Sky indicated that they will not bow down, and the channels will likely become unavailable from 1 February 2017.
The same day, Discovery sent out a press release on the dispute and also blocked access to its own website with the news. Discovery stated 'enough is enough' and claimed that Sky is paying less for its channels than it was ten years ago. In that time, Discovery had stated that its viewing share has grown by more than 20%. Managing Director Susanna Dinnage stated in the press release: "We believe Sky is using what we consider to be its dominant market position to further its own commercial interest over those of viewers and independent broadcasters. The vitality of independent broadcasters like Discovery and plurality in TV is under threat."
In response, Sky stated that they had been "overpaying Discovery for years." It comes after Sky had paid £4.2 billion on Premier League rights for the following three seasons.[68]
The channel 'blackout' would have also affect the Sky owned NOW TV with the removal of Discovery Channel from both the live stream and On Demand service.
On 31 January 2017 at around 21:00, Sky UK revealed that they would continue to broadcast the Discovery Networks Channels by releasing the following statement: "Great news, we can confirm that Sky will continue to carry the Discovery and Eurosport channels. This means you can still watch channels including: Animal Planet, Discovery HD, Discovery History, Discovery Home & Health, Discovery Science, Discovery Shed, Discovery Turbo, DMAX, Eurosport1, Eurosport2, Investigation Discovery, TLC and Quest." At the time of the statement release, it had not been revealed how much Sky UK had paid Discovery Networks.
Litigation[edit]
In July 2013, the English High Court of Justice found that Microsoft’s use of the term "SkyDrive" infringed on Sky’s right to the "Sky" trademark. On 31 July 2013, Sky and Microsoft announced their settlement, in which Microsoft will not appeal the ruling, and will rename its SkyDrive cloud storage service after an unspecified "reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transition to a new brand," plus "financial and other terms, the details of which are confidential".[69][70] On 27 January 2014, Microsoft announced "that SkyDrive will soon become OneDrive" and "SkyDrive Pro" becomes "OneDrive for Business".[71][72]
Hello Games was in legal negotiations with Sky over the trademark on the word "Sky" used for the title of their video game No Man's Sky for three years. The issue was ultimately settled in June 2016, allowing Hello Games to continue to use the name.[73]
Criticism and controversies[edit]
Main article: Criticisms of BSkyB
Awards and nominations[edit]


Year
Association
Category
Nominee(s)
Result


2017
Diversity in Media Awards
Broadcaster of the Year
Sky
Nominated


See also[edit]

Sky plc
Sky Deutschland
Sky Ireland
Sky Italia
Sky+
Sky+ HD
Sky Betting and Gaming
Sky Go
Sky Vision
Sky Magazine
Astra
Digibox
Now TV
Freesat from Sky
Team Sky

References[edit]


^ "Management Today". BSkyB. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 4 June 2015. 
^ a b "Freeview digital overtakes Sky". This is Money. 
^ "Our locations". 
^ "Sky creates Europe's leading entertainment company". Sky. 13 November 2014. Retrieved 13 November 2014. 
^ "Sky UK Limited | DueDil". www.duedil.com. Retrieved 1 December 2015. 
^ "Andrew Griffith". corporate.sky.com. Retrieved 1 December 2015. 
^ ITV's monopoly threatened by Premier League. Peter Ball. The Times, Tuesday, 1 October 1991
^ Premier League unity is tested by offer of £34m. Peter Ball. The Times, Saturday, 18 April 1992
^ BSkyB and BBC bid offers huge rewards. Peter Ball.The Times, Monday 18 May 1992
^ Premier League kicks off with £304m TV deal. Peter Ball. The Times, Tuesday, 19 May 1992
^ Douglas, Torin (12 March 1999). "Murdoch's rise to the top". BBC News. Retrieved 5 March 2007. 
^ ITV challenges football deal in High Court. Lin Jenkins. The Times, Saturday, 23 May 1992;
^ ITV fails to halt football deal. Lin Jenkins. The Times, Wednesday, 27 May 1992
^ 'Time to play hardball' by David Teather and Vivek Chaudhary investigate Monday 8 May 2000
^ George Trefgarne, Financial Correspondent (15 June 2000). "BSkyB leaps on soccer result". Telegraph.co.uk. 
^ "Setanta joins Premiership action". BBC News. 5 May 2006. Retrieved 5 March 2007. 
^ "British Sky Broadcasting Group plc". Funding Universe. Retrieved 10 February 2007. 
^ Wathan, Chris. "How the Sky analogue service was run down in favour of digital..." Analoguesat. Archived from the original on 10 October 2006. Retrieved 10 February 2007. 
^ Dawtrey, Adam (1 September 1993). "Sat trio in U.K. debut". Variety. Retrieved 14 June 2008. 
^ "Sky Television - Advertising". TV Ark. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2010. 
^ "Good uptake for Sky Multichannels package". 5 November 1993. 
^ Triumph of soap over experience. Reevell, Philip;Henry, Georgina. The Guardian; 25 October 1993;
^ http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/tv-research/dso3.pdf
^ "British Sky Broadcasting Group plc Annual Report 2000" (PDF). media.corporate-ir.net. 
^ "Error page" (PDF). sky.com. 
^ Clover, Julian (8 November 2010). "Sky reaches 10 million homes". Broadbandtvnews.com. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ Are we finally winning the battle against benefit cheats? Convictions soar 40% in two years after fraud investigators are given access to Sky TV bills, Matt Chorley, Mail Online, 17 October 2012. Retrieved: 24 December 2012.
^ No beer on benefits: Tory MP wants those on benefits banned from buying "unnecessary items”, Jason Beattie, Daily Mirror, London, 18 December 2012. Retrieved: 24 December 2012.
^ Oatts, Joanne (8 February 2007). "Sky to launch new DTT service". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 5 March 2007. Retrieved 5 March 2007. 
^ Quinn, Ian (5 March 2007). "Sky rethinks Freeview exit and football strategy". Brand Republic. Retrieved 5 March 2007. 
^ BSkyB buys Easynet for £211m The Guardian, 21 October 2005
^ Sky+ guide launches catch-up TV section - iPlayer, ITV Player, more, Andrew Laughlin, Digital Spy, 26 September 2012.Retrieved: 24 December 2012.
^ "Sky Player comes to Xbox Live". CNET. 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 30 May 2009. Retrieved 29 May 2009. 
^ "UK PSN Store Now Offers TV Episodes". TheSixthAxis. 24 November 2011. 
^ "BBC News - BSkyB buys O2 and BE broadband businesses from Telefonica". BBC Online. 1 March 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2013. 
^ "Sky Mobile Opens Up Pre-Registration On 31 October". TechWeekEurope UK. 20 October 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. 
^ a b Believe in Better sky.com
^ "Supertelly from Sky". digitaltvpackages.co.uk. 29 January 2010. Archived from the original on 28 April 2009. Retrieved 24 February 2010. 
^ "BSkyB's new Sky+ advert claims to show What Women Think". techdigest.tv. 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 18 October 2007. Retrieved 14 September 2007. 
^ "Sky HDTV launch runs into trouble". BBC News. 22 May 2006. 
^ "Key facts & figures". 
^ "New Sky EPG 2012 – Should you let your customers loose on your betas?". Pear Digital. Retrieved 1 January 2013. 
^ "Sky to Broadcast 3D Premier League Live Games This Weekend". TFTS. 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. 
^ "Introducing Sky Q, a whole new way of watching TV" (Press release). Sky. 18 November 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2015. 
^ "Fact Sheet Sky Q" (PDF) (Press release). Sky. 18 November 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2015. 
^ "Sky Q major software update rolling out: Here's what your Sky Q box can do now - Pocket-lint". 
^ "Eutelsat 28A at 28.5°E - LyngSat". lyngsat.com. 
^ "Sky to reject new channel applications". The Guardian. 5 October 2007. 
^ "Sky in EPG shake-up". Broadcast. 31 March 2005. 
^ "Why Sky EPG Changes Won't Shake Viewing Habits". Tvgenius.net. 21 January 2011. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Brown accuses News International of using 'known criminals,'", BBC News, Tuesday 12 July 2011
^ "Opposition Day - Rupert Murdoch and News Corporation Bid for BSkyB," Hansard: 13 July 2011 - Column 400
^ "Hansard, House of Commons Debates 13 July 2011:Rupert Murdoch and News Corporation Bid for BSkyB (Column 416-417)". Parliament.uk. 13 July 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ a b "Multiple HD channels to launch on Virgin". Digital Spy. UK. 15 December 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Virgin to show Channel 4 content in HD". Digital Spy. UK. 8 October 2007. Archived from the original on 28 June 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Virgin Media in HD content deal with Channel 4". Cableforum.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "No more Virgin HD despite Sky launches". Digital Spy. UK. 16 July 2008. Archived from the original on 15 July 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Virgin – we only need one HD channel". Digital Spy. UK. 24 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 June 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Virgin to add linear HD channels". Digital Spy. UK. 12 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Virgin Media working on HD". Digital Spy. UK. 11 March 2009. Archived from the original on 16 June 2009. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Sky statement on Virgin dispute". Digital Spy. UK. 27 February 2007. Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "Sky breached code over Virgin promotions". Digital Spy. UK. 27 October 2008. Archived from the original on 6 May 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ "BBC News". BBC News. 12 April 2007. Archived from the original on 23 March 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2011. 
^ Rapture TV
^ Rapture TV
^ "BSkyB and Virgin Media Sign New Channel Carriage Agreements". skyuser.co.uk. 1 March 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 4 November 2008. 
^ "Virgin pays Sky £30m for basic channels". Digital Spy. UK. 1 March 2007. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 6 November 2008. 
^ "Discovery UK is threatening to switch off its channels on Sky in an extraordinary disagreement". Business Insider. Retrieved 2017-01-26. 
^ Foley, Mary Jo (31 July 2013). "Microsoft to rebrand SkyDrive after losing trademark skirmish". All About Microsoft. ZDNet. Retrieved 14 February 2014. 
^ Lardinois, Frederic (31 July 2013). "Microsoft Will Rebrand SkyDrive After It Settles Trademark Case With Sky Broadcasting". TechCrunch. Retrieved 14 February 2014. 
^ Gavin, Ryan (27 January 2014). "OneDrive for Everything in Your Life". The OneDrive Blog. Microsoft. Retrieved 14 February 2014. 
^ Foley, Mary Jo (27 January 2014). "Microsoft rechristens 'SkyDrive' as 'OneDrive'". Retrieved 14 February 2014. 
^ McWhertor, Michael (17 June 2016). "No Man's Sky dev says it was caught in 'secret, stupid' legal battle over game's name". Polygon. Retrieved 17 June 2016. 


External links[edit]

sky.com
Sky Media UK
Customer Service
Sky Vision
List of Channels on Sky





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Sky plc



UK and Ireland




Channels



Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Living
Sky Cinema
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports Box Office
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News
Challenge
Pick
Real Lives





Defunct channels



PremPlus
Sky 2 (1996–97)
Sky Arts
Sky Soap
Sky Scottish
.tv
The Amp
The Comedy Channel
Sky News Ireland
Sky Real Lives
Sky Travel
The Sports Channel
The Movie Channel
The Power Station
Now
Galaxy
Channel One
Bravo
Bravo 2
Challenge Jackpot
Sky Living Loves
Sky 3D





Joint ventures



At the Races
A&E Networks UK

Blaze
Crime & Investigation
History
H2
Lifetime


Nickelodeon UK

Nickelodeon
Nick Jr.
Nick Jr. Too
Nicktoons


Paramount UK Partnership

Comedy Central
Comedy Central Extra


Sky News Arabia





Defunct Magazines



Sky Magazine
Sky Kids





Other



Amstrad
Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky Sports Active
Sky+ HD
Sky Betting & Gaming
Sky Broadband
Sky Active
Sky Go
Sky Text
Sky Vision
Sky+
Now TV
The Cloud
Sky 3D
Open....








Germany and Austria



Sky 1
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Krimi
Sky Select
Sky Sport
Sky Sport News
Sky Bundesliga
Sky 3D





Italy




Channels



Sky Atlantic
Sky Arte
Sky Cinema
Sky Meteo24
Sky Primafila
Sky Sport
Sky Sport F1
Sky Sport MotoGP
Sky Sport 24
Sky Calcio
Sky TG24
Sky Uno
Sky 3D
Sky Radio
Cielo
TV8





Defunct channels



Sky Vivo
Sky Show





Other



Sky HD
Stream TV








See also



21st Century Fox
British Satellite Broadcasting
Digibox
Granada Sky Broadcasting
Living TV Group
Minidish
Osterley Television Centre
Sky Multichannels
Sky Picnic
Sky Television plc
Timeline of Sky TV












v
t
e


 Media in the United Kingdom








UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals







Newspapers
(History)




Berliner



The Guardian
The Observer





Broadsheet



Financial Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Sunday Telegraph
The Sunday Times





Compact



i
The Times





Middle-market



Daily Express
Daily Mail
The Mail on Sunday





Tabloid



Daily Mirror
Sunday Mirror
Morning Star
The Sunday People
Daily Star
Daily Star Sunday
The Sun
Sunday Sport








Magazines &
other periodicals



List of magazines by circulation
















Radio in the UK







National
stations




BBC



Analogue / digital
Radio 1
Radio 2
Radio 3
Radio 4
5 Live
Digital only
Radio 1Xtra
Radio 4 Extra
5 Live Sports Extra
6 Music
Asian Network
World Service
BBC National DAB (multiplex)





Independent
/ commercial



Analogue / digital
Absolute Radio
Classic FM
Heart
Kiss
Talksport
Digital only
Absolute 80s
Absolute Radio Extra
BFBS Radio
Capital
Digital One (multiplex)
Heart Extra
heat
The Hits
Jazz FM
Kerrang!
Kiss Fresh
Kisstory
LBC
Magic
Planet Rock
Premier Christian Radio
Radio X
RNIB Connect Radio
Sound Digital (multiplex)
Smooth
Talkradio
UCB UK
Virgin Radio UK








Regional
& local
stations




BBC



List of BBC Local Radio stations
List of BBC Regional Radio stations





Independent
/ commercial



List of community radio stations
List of local commercial radio stations
List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations








Other
stations



List of hospital radio stations
Pirate radio
Restricted Service Licence (RSL)

List of RSL stations


List of satellite radio stations
List of student and schools radio





Other



Broadcasting House
FM broadcasting
The Studios, MediaCityUK
Radio Academy

Radio Academy Awards


Radio Independents Group
RAJAR
Most listened to programmes
















Television in the UK







Principal
channels
(List)




BBC



BBC One
BBC Two
BBC Four
BBC News
BBC Parliament
CBBC
CBeebies





ITV



ITV
ITV2
ITV3
ITV4
CITV
ITV Encore
ITVBe
ITV Box Office





Ch 4



Channel 4
E4
Film4
More4
4seven





Ch 5



Channel 5
5Prime
5Spike
5Star
5USA





Sky



Challenge
Pick
Real Lives
Sky One
Sky Two
Sky Arts
Sky Atlantic
Sky Cinema
Sky Living
Sky News
Sky Sports
Sky Sports F1
Sky Sports News





UKTV



Alibi
Dave
Drama
Eden
Gold
Good Food
Home
Really
W
Yesterday





Sony Pictures Television



Chart Show TV
Chart Show Hits
Movies4Men
Pop
Pop Max
Starz TV
Sony Channel
Sony Movie Channel
Scuzz
Tiny Pop
True Crime
True Entertainment
True Movies
truTV
The Vault








Services
&
platforms



All 4

Film4oD


analogue

analogue terrestrial (defunct)


BBC iPlayer

BBC Three


BBC Store
TalkTalk TV Store
BT TV
cable
digital

digital terrestrial
List of channels


Freesat

Freesat+


Freeview
high-definition

List of channels


ITV

ITV Hub, STV Player


local television
My5
Now TV
Real Digital
Restricted Service Licence
satellite

List of channels


Sky

Freesat from Sky
On Demand
Sky+
Sky+ HD


TalkTalk TV
Top Up TV
TVPlayer
Virgin Media

FilmFlex
TiVo
V+


YouView
Zattoo





Studios




Current



BBC Elstree Centre
BBC Pacific Quay
The Bottle Yard Studios
Broadcasting House
Broadcasting House, Belfast
Broadcasting House, Bristol
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)
Gas Street Studios
The Leeds Studios
The London Studios
The Maidstone Studios
Mailbox Birmingham
MediaCityUK
Osterley Television Centre
Roath Lock
Television Centre, London





Defunct



British and Dominions Imperial Studios
Fountain Studios
Gate Studios
Granada Studios
MGM-British Studios
Pebble Mill Studios
Teddington Studios
Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne
Television Centre, Southampton
Upper Boat Studios








Other



Defunct channels
Edinburgh International Television Festival
History

List of years


List of channels
Student television
Viewing statistics

Most-watched broadcasts


















Companies and organisations







Companies




Major
companies



Archant
Ascential
Bauer Radio
BBC
Bloomsbury Publishing
BT Group
Channel Four Television Corporation
Daily Mail and General Trust
Dentsu Aegis Network
Economist Group
EMI Music Publishing
Endemol Shine UK
Global Group
Guardian Media Group
Haymarket Media Group
Informa
ITN
ITV plc
Johnston Press
Mecom Group
News UK
Newsquest
Northern & Shell
Now TV Limited
Origin Broadband
Pearson PLC
Press Holdings
RELX Group
Reuters
Sky UK Limited
Sky plc
STV Group
Syco
TalkTalk Group
Time Inc. UK
Trinity Mirror
UBM plc
Virgin Media
Wireless Group





Other resources



Arqiva
List of largest UK book publishers








Government
& regulatory
bodies



Advertising Standards Authority
BBC Trust
British Board of Film Classification
British Film Institute
Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Independent Press Standards Organisation
Ofcom
Press Recognition Panel
S4C Authority





Industry
& trades
bodies



British Academy of Film and Television Arts
British Phonographic Industry
Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union
Clearcast
Digital TV Group
Digital UK
Equity
Federation Against Copyright Theft
National Union of Journalists
The Publishers Association
Royal Television Society
United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting





Other



BBC Academy
National Film and Television School
National Science and Media Museum
















Regional and student media







Regional media



Media in England

Birmingham
London
Manchester


Media in Scotland

Aberdeen
Dundee
Glasgow


Media in Wales

Cardiff







Student media



Student television














 Category












This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: a complete mess with the names of countries being repeated in parentheses; lists companies without Wikipedia articles; wall of text Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other speciality television providers in Europe



Cable



Alma TV
Anvia
ASTA-NET
AS Starman
ASK CATV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Nowo (Portugal)
Caiway (Netherlands)
Canal Digital (Norway)
Casema
Com Hem (Sweden)
dna Welho (Finland)
EVision (Ireland)
ELTA-KABEL (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
ER-Telecom
Get
GO (Malta)
INEA (Poland)
IPKO
Kabel Deutschland (Germany)
Kabel Noord
KATV1 (Azerbaijan)
Kazakhtelecom (Kazakhstan)
Kujtesa
Lattelecom
Madritel
Magnet Networks
Magyar Telekom
MC Cable
Melita Cable
MEO (Portugal)
MISS.NET (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MTIS (Belarus)
M&H Company
Naxoo (Switzerland)
North-West Telecom
NOS (Portugal)
Numericable-SFR (France)
SFR (Belgium)
ONO (Spain)
Orange TV (France)
Petrus (Poland)
PostTV Luxembourg
Primacom (Germany)
Promax (Poland)
Radijus Vektor
RCS & RDS (Romania)
Rostelecom (Russia)
R (Spain)
Sappa TV
Sat Film (Poland)
SATRO (Slovakia)
SEEMORE
Serbia Broadband (Serbia)
Southern Telecom
Splius (Lithuania)
Stofa (Demnark)
STV AS
Swisscom
Tango TV (Luxembourg)
Telecable (Spain)
Telekabel (Macedonia)
Tele Columbus (Germany)
Tele2
Telemach (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Slovenia)
Telenet (Belgium)
Teledünya (Turkey)
Telset (Estonia)
Terrakom
TOYA (Poland)
Turksat Kablo TV (Turkey)
Unitymedia (Germany)
Uralsvyazinform
UPC Austria
UPC Magyarország (Hungary)
UPC Polska (Poland)
UPC Romania
UPC Switzerland
VECTRA
Virgin TV (UK)
Virgin Media Ireland
Vodafone Ireland
Vodafone Spain
VolgaTelecom
Volia (Ukraine)
VOO
WightFibre
YouSee (Denmark)
Ziggo (Netherlands)





Satellite



AB Sat (France)
AKTA TV (Romania)
Antik Sat
Austriasat
Bulsatcom
Canal Digital (Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland)
CanalDigitaal (Netherlands and Flanders)
Canalsat (France)
Caspio HD
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CS Link
Cyfrowy Polsat (Poland)
Digi TV
Digit-Alb
Digiturk (Turkey)
Dolce (Romania)
D-Smart (Turkey)
Euro1080
Filbox
Focus Sat (Romania)
fransat
Freesat (UK)
Freesat from Sky (UK)
Free Sat (Romania)
GlobeCast World TV
HD+ (Germany)
MagtiCom (Georgia)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MEO (Portugal)
NC+ (Poland)
NOS (Portugal)
NOVA Cyprus
NOVA Greece
NTV Plus (Russia)
Orbita Telecom
Otau TV (Kazakhstan)
Real Digital
Saorsat
Sky UK
Sky Deutschland (Germany)
Sky Ireland
Sky Italia (Italy)
Skylink
TéléSAT Numérique (Belgium)
Tivù Sat (Italy)
TNTSAT
TotalTV
Tricolor TV (Russia)
Tring Digital TV
TV Vlaanderen Digitaal (Flanders)
UPC Direct
Viasat (Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania)
Viasat Ukraine
Vip SAT TV
Vivacom
Xtra TV (Ukraine)
ZeonBud





IPTV



A1 Telekom Austria
Altibox
Amis
Beeline
Bouygues Telecom
BT TV (UK)
Bulsatcom (Bulgaria)
Canal Digital
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CytaVision (Cyprus)
DartyBox (France)
Fastweb (Italy)
Free (France)
Freewire (UK)
HOME.TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
iNES (Romania)
Infostrada TV (Italy)
KPN (Netherlands)
Magnet Networks (Ireland)
Moja TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Moldtelecom
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
Mts TV (Serbia)
MEO (Portugal)
Neuf Cegetel
NOS (Portugal)
Open IPTV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Optimus Clix (Portugal)
Orange TV (France)
Plusnet
Portugal Telecom
PrimeTel (Cyprus)
Proximus TV (Belgium)
Sappa TV
Scarlet (Belgium)
SFR (France)
ShqipTV
Síminn (Iceland)
Smart Telecom (Ireland)
Super TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Sure TV
T-2 (Slovenia)
TalkTalk TV (UK)
Telekom Entertain (Germany)
Telenor (Norway)
Telfort (Netherlands)
Telia Digital-tv
TeliaSonera
Teo LT
TIMvision
Tivibu
YouView (UK)
Vivacom (Bulgaria)
Vodafone Greece
Vodafone Italy
Vodafone Portugal
XS4ALL (Netherlands)





Terrestrial



Antena PLUS (Serbia)
Boxer TV Access (Sweden)
Boxer TV A/S (Denmark)
Digea (Greece)
Easy TV (Ireland)
evotv (Croatia)
Freeview (UK)
KPN Digitenne (Netherlands)
Mediaset Premium (Italy)
PlusTV (Finland)
PTDT (Portugal)
RiksTV (Norway)
Saorview (Ireland)
TNT (France)
Vip TV (Macedonia)
Zala TV (Belarus)





Defunct



Alice Home TV
Boom TV (Romania)
CableTel (Bulgaria)
On Telecoms (Greece)
Romtelecom
Numericable
UPC Nederland
TDC (Denmark)












v
t
e


UK mobile network operators






EE
O2
Three
Vodafone










UK Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNOs)






AfriMobile
Age UK My Phone
Airwave Smart Mobile
Asda Mobile
BT Business Mobile
BT Mobile
Delight Mobile
Econet Mobile
Ecotalk
FreedomPop
Giffgaff
iD Mobile
KC Mobile
Lebara Mobile
Lycamobile
Natterbox
Now Mobile
Plusnet Mobile
Sky Mobile
SMARTY
TalkTalk Mobile
Talkmobile
Telecom Plus
Tesco Mobile
The People's Operator
The Co-operative Mobile
Truphone
Vectone Mobile
Virgin Mobile UK













Former MVNOs






Andrews & Arnold
Blyk
Dialog Vizz
LIFE Mobile
Easymobile
Family Mobile
Fresh Mobile
GT Mobile
Mobile by Sainsbury's
Ovivo Mobile
Post Office Mobile
RSPCA Mobile



















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sky_UK&oldid=816844585"					Categories: British brandsBritish television networksCompanies based in the London Borough of HounslowBritish companies established in 1990Digital television in the United KingdomDirect broadcast satellite servicesIsleworthMedia and communications in the London Borough of HounslowMedia companies of the United KingdomSky plcSports television in the United KingdomHidden categories: EngvarB from June 2014Use dmy dates from December 2016Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from November 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2017