





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



For other uses, see Buckinghamshire (disambiguation).


Buckinghamshire


County








Flag





Motto: Vestigia nulla retrorsum
("No turning back / We do not retreat")



Buckinghamshire in England


Coordinates: 51°50′N 0°50′W﻿ / ﻿51.833°N 0.833°W﻿ / 51.833; -0.833Coordinates: 51°50′N 0°50′W﻿ / ﻿51.833°N 0.833°W﻿ / 51.833; -0.833


Sovereign state
 United Kingdom


Country
 England


Region
South East


Established
Ancient


Ceremonial county



Lord Lieutenant
Henry Aubrey-Fletcher


High Sheriff
The Hon Mrs C R Soames (2016-17)


Area
1,874 km2 (724 sq mi)


 • Ranked
32nd of 48


Population (mid-2016 est.)
799,200


 • Ranked
30th of 48


Density
426/km2 (1,100/sq mi)


Ethnicity
91.7% White
4.3% S. Asian
1.6% Black





Non-metropolitan county



County council

Buckinghamshire County Council


Executive
Conservative


Admin HQ
Aylesbury


Area
1,565 km2 (604 sq mi)


 • Ranked
33rd of 27


Population
534,700


 • Ranked
25th of 27


Density
341/km2 (880/sq mi)


ISO 3166-2
GB-BKM


ONS code
11


GSS code
E10000002


NUTS
UKJ13


Website
www.buckscc.gov.uk









Districts of Buckinghamshire
  Unitary   County council area


Districts


South Bucks
Chiltern
Wycombe
Aylesbury Vale
Milton Keynes (unitary)







Members of Parliament
List of MPs


Police
Thames Valley Police


Time zone
Greenwich Mean Time (UTC)


 • Summer (DST)
British Summer Time (UTC+1)


Buckinghamshire (/ˈbʌkɪŋəmʃər/ or /-ʃɪər/), abbreviated Bucks,[1] is a county in South East England which borders Greater London to the south east, Berkshire to the south, Oxfordshire to the west, Northamptonshire to the north, Bedfordshire to the north east and Hertfordshire to the east.
Buckinghamshire is one of the home counties and towns such as High Wycombe, Amersham, Chesham and the Chalfonts in the east and southeast of the county are parts of the London commuter belt, forming some of the most densely-populated parts of the county. Development in this region is restricted by the Metropolitan Green Belt. Other large settlements include the county town of Aylesbury, Marlow in the south near the Thames and Princes Risborough in the west near Oxford. Some areas without direct rail links to London, such as around the old county town of Buckingham and near Olney in the northeast, are much less populous. The largest town is Milton Keynes in the northeast, which with the surrounding area is administered as a unitary authority separately to the rest of Buckinghamshire. The remainder of the county is administered by Buckinghamshire County Council as a non-metropolitan county, and four district councils. In national elections, Buckinghamshire is considered a reliable supporter of the Conservative Party.
A large part of the Chiltern Hills, an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, runs through the south of the county and attracts many walkers and cyclists from London. In this area older buildings are often made from local flint and red brick. Many parts of the county are quite affluent and like many areas around London this has led to problems with housing costs: several reports have identified the market town of Beaconsfield as having among the highest property prices outside London.[2][3] Chequers, a mansion estate owned by the government, is the country retreat of the incumbent Prime Minister. To the north of the county lies rolling countryside in the Vale of Aylesbury and around the Great Ouse. The Thames forms part of the county’s southwestern boundary. Notable service amenities in the county are Pinewood Film Studios, Dorney rowing lake and part of Silverstone race track on the Northamptonshire border. Many national companies have offices in Milton Keynes. Heavy industry and quarrying is limited, with agriculture predominating after service industries.



Contents


1 History
2 Geography

2.1 Waterways

2.1.1 Rivers
2.1.2 Canals


2.2 Landscape

2.2.1 Mineral extraction




3 Demography
4 Politics

4.1 Ceremonial
4.2 Local government
4.3 Buckinghamshire County Council

4.3.1 Coat of arms
4.3.2 Flag




5 Economy
6 Places of interest
7 Transport

7.1 Roads
7.2 Rail


8 Settlements
9 Education
10 Notable people
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References
14 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of Buckinghamshire




Map of Bucks (1904)


The name Buckinghamshire is Anglo-Saxon in origin and means The district (scire) of Bucca's home. Bucca's home refers to Buckingham in the north of the county, and is named after an Anglo-Saxon landowner. The county has been so named since about the 12th century; however, the county has existed since it was a subdivision of the kingdom of Mercia (585–919).
The history of the area predates the Anglo-Saxon period and the county has a rich history starting from the Celtic and Roman periods, though the Anglo-Saxons perhaps had the greatest impact on Buckinghamshire: the geography of the rural county is largely as it was in the Anglo-Saxon period. Later, Buckinghamshire became an important political arena, with King Henry VIII intervening in local politics in the 16th century and just a century later the English Civil War was reputedly started by John Hampden in mid-Bucks.[4]
Historically, the biggest change to the county came in the 19th century, when a combination of cholera and famine hit the rural county, forcing many to migrate to larger towns to find work. Not only did this alter the local economic situation, it meant a lot of land was going cheap at a time when the rich were more mobile and leafy Bucks became a popular rural idyll: an image it still has today. Buckinghamshire is a popular home for London commuters, leading to greater local affluence; however, some pockets of relative deprivation remain.[5]
The expansion of London and coming of the railways promoted the growth of towns in the south of the county such as Aylesbury, Amersham and High Wycombe, leaving the town Buckingham itself to the north in a relative backwater.[6] As a result, most county institutions are now based in the south of the county or Milton Keynes, rather than in Buckingham.
Geography[edit]
The county can be split into two sections geographically. The south leads from the River Thames up the gentle slopes of the Chiltern Hills to the more abrupt slopes on the northern side leading to the Vale of Aylesbury, a large flat expanse of land, which includes the path of the River Great Ouse.
Waterways[edit]
Rivers[edit]
The county includes parts of two of the four longest rivers in England. The River Thames forms the southern boundary with Berkshire, which has crept over the border at Eton and Slough so that the river is no longer the sole boundary between the two counties. The River Great Ouse rises just outside the county in Northamptonshire and flows east through Buckingham, Milton Keynes and Olney.
Canals[edit]




The River Thames at Medmenham


The main branch of the Grand Union Canal passes through the county as do its arms to Slough, Aylesbury, Wendover (disused) and Buckingham (disused). The canal has been incorporated into the landscaping of Milton Keynes.
Landscape[edit]
The southern part of the county is dominated by the Chiltern Hills. The two highest points in Buckinghamshire are Haddington Hill in Wendover Woods (a stone marks its summit) at 267 metres (876 ft) above sea level, and Coombe Hill near Wendover at 260 metres (850 ft).
Mineral extraction[edit]
Quarrying has taken place for chalk, clay for brickmaking and gravel and sand in the river valleys. Flint, also extracted from quarries, was often used to build older local buildings. Several former quarries, now flooded, have become nature reserves.[7]
Demography[edit]

Buckinghamshire Districts

District
Main Towns
Population (2011)[8]
Area
Population density (2011)
Population projection 2026


Aylesbury Vale
Aylesbury, Buckingham
174,137
902.75 km²
193/km²
213,000


Wycombe
High Wycombe, Marlow
171,644
324.57 km²
529/km²
165,000


Chiltern
Amersham, Chesham
92,635
196.35 km²
472/km²
89,000


South Bucks
Beaconsfield, Burnham
66,867
141.28 km²
474/km²
63,800


TOTAL Non-Metropolitan
N/A
505,283
1565 km²
323/km²
530,800


Borough of Milton Keynes
Milton Keynes, Newport Pagnell
248,821
308.63 km²
806/km²
323,146[9]


TOTAL Ceremonial
N/A
754,104
1874 km²
402/km²
853,946






Suburban housing, Chesham


As can be seen from the table, the Vale of Aylesbury and the Borough of Milton Keynes have been identified as growth areas, with a projected population surge of almost 40,000 in Aylesbury Vale between 2011 and 2026 and 75,000 in Milton Keynes within the same 15 years.[citation needed] The population of the Borough of Milton Keynes is expected to reach almost 350,000 by 2031,[citation needed] whilst the urban population of the county town of Aylesbury is expected to exceed 100,000.[citation needed]
Buckinghamshire is sub-divided into civil parishes.
Today Buckinghamshire is ethnically diverse, particularly in the larger towns. At the end of the 19th century some Welsh drover families settled in north Bucks and, in the last quarter of the 20th century, a large number of Londoners in Milton Keynes. Between 6 and 7% of the population of Aylesbury are of Asian or Asian British origin.[10] Likewise Chesham has a similar-sized Asian community,[11] and High Wycombe is the most ethnically diverse town in the county,[5] with large Asian and Afro-Caribbean populations.[5] During the Second World War there were many Polish settlements in Bucks, Czechs in Aston Abbotts and Wingrave, and Albanians in Frieth. Remnants of these communities remain in the county.
Politics[edit]
See also: List of Parliamentary constituencies in Buckinghamshire




Bucks County Council's County Hall






Wendover Dean


Ceremonial[edit]
Main articles: Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire, High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire, and Ceremonial counties of England
The ceremonial county of Buckinghamshire consists of the area administered by Milton Keynes Borough Council as well as that administered by Buckinghamshire County Council. The ceremonial county has a Lord Lieutenant and a High Sheriff. Currently the Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire is Sir Henry Aubrey-Fletcher and the High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire is Amanda Nicholson.[citation needed] The office of Custos rotulorum has been combined with that of Lord Lieutenant since 1702.
Local government[edit]
At present, the county has two top-level administrations: Buckinghamshire County Council, which administers about four-fifths of the county (see map above) and the Borough of Milton Keynes, a unitary authority, which administers the remaining fifth. There are four district councils that are subsidiary to the county council: Aylesbury Vale, Chiltern, South Bucks and Wycombe districts.
Buckinghamshire County Council[edit]
The county council was founded in 1889 with its base in new municipal buildings in Walton Street, Aylesbury (which are still there). In Buckinghamshire, local administration is run on a two-tier system where public services are split between the county council and a series of district councils.
In 1966 the council moved into new premises: a 15-storey tower block in the centre of Aylesbury (pictured) designed by county architect Fred Pooley. It is now a Grade II listed building.
In 1997 the northernmost[12] part of Buckinghamshire, then Milton Keynes District, was separated to form a unitary authority, the Borough of Milton Keynes; however for ceremonial and some other purposes Milton Keynes is still considered in law to be part of Buckinghamshire.[13]
Buckinghamshire County Council is a large employer in the county and provides a variety of services, including education (schools, adult education and youth services), social services, highways, libraries, County Archives and Record Office, the County Museum and the Roald Dahl Children's Gallery in Aylesbury, consumer services and some aspects of waste disposal and planning.
Coat of arms[edit]




Neolithic Barrow, Whiteleaf Hill


The coat of arms of Buckinghamshire County Council features a white swan in chains. This dates back to the Anglo-Saxon period, when swans were bred in Buckinghamshire for the king's pleasure. That the swan is in chains illustrates that the swan is bound to the monarch, an ancient law that still applies to wild swans in the UK today. The arms were first borne at the Battle of Agincourt by the Duke of Buckingham.
Above the swan is a gold band, in the centre of which is Whiteleaf Cross, representing the many ancient landmarks of the county. The shield is surmounted by a beech tree, representing the Chiltern Forest that once covered almost half the county. Either side of the shield are a buck, for Buckingham, and a swan, the county symbol.
The motto of the shield is Vestigia Nulla Retrorsum. This is Latin and means 'no stepping back' (or 'no steps backwards').[14]
Flag[edit]
The traditional flag of Buckinghamshire comprises a chained swan on a bicolour of red and black. The flag was registered with the Flag Institute on 20 May 2011.
Economy[edit]




Offices, Milton Keynes






Ercol furniture factory, Princes Risborough


Buckinghamshire has a modern service-based economy and is part of the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire NUTS-2 region, which was the seventh richest subregion in the European Union in 2002.[15] As well as the highest GDP per capita outside Inner London, Buckinghamshire has the highest quality of life, the highest life expectancy and the best education results in the country.[16] The southern part of the county is a prosperous section of the London commuter belt. The county has fertile agricultural lands, with many landed estates, especially those of the Rothschild banking family of England in the 19th century (see Rothschild properties in England). The county has several annual agricultural shows, with the Bucks County Show established in 1859. Manufacturing industries include furniture-making (traditionally centred at High Wycombe), pharmaceuticals and agricultural processing.
This is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Buckinghamshire at current basic prices published by the Office for National Statistics with figures in millions of British Pounds sterling (except GVA index).[17]


Year
Regional Gross Value Added[18]
Agriculture[19]
Industry[20]
Services[21]
GVA index per person[22]


1995
6,008
60
1,746
4,201
118


2000
8,389
45
1,863
6,481
125


2003
9,171
50
1,793
7,328
118


Places of interest[edit]
Main article: Places of interest in Buckinghamshire




Stowe Landscape Garden






The Roald Dahl Museum and Story Centre, Great Missenden


Buckinghamshire is notable for its open countryside and natural features, including the Chiltern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Stowe Landscaped Gardens near Buckingham, and the River Thames.[23] The Ridgeway Path, a long-distance footpath, passes through the county. The county also has many historic houses. Some of these are opened to the public by the National Trust, such as Waddesdon Manor, West Wycombe Park and Cliveden.[24] Other historic houses are still in use as private homes, such as the Prime Minister's country retreat Chequers.[25]
Claydon House is a National Trust property, situated near the village of Steeple Claydon. Home to the Verney family and was also home to Florence Nightingale for some time.
Buckinghamshire is the location of Bletchley Park, the site of World War II British codebreaking and Colossus, the world's first programmable electronic digital computer.
Buckinghamshire is the home of various notable people in connection with whom tourist attractions have been established: for example the author Roald Dahl who included many local features and characters in his works.[26][27]
Sports facilities in Buckinghamshire include half of the international Silverstone Circuit which straddles the Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire border, Adams Park in the south and stadium:mk in the north, and the county is also home to the world-famous Pinewood Studios. Dorney Lake, named "Eton Dorney" for the event, was used as the rowing venue for the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Transport[edit]
Main article: Transport in Buckinghamshire
Roads[edit]




The M40 in the Chilterns






Local bus, Amersham


Buckinghamshire (including Milton Keynes) is served by four motorways, although two are on its borders:

M40 motorway: cuts through the south of the county serving towns such as High Wycombe and Beaconsfield
M1 motorway: serves Milton Keynes in the north
M25 motorway: passes into Bucks but has only one junction (J16-interchange for the M40)
M4 motorway: passes through the very south of the county with only J7 in Bucks

Five important A roads also enter the county (from north to south):

A5: serves Milton Keynes
A421: serves Milton Keynes and Buckingham and links the M1 to the M40
A41: cuts through the centre of the county from Watford to Bicester, serving Aylesbury
A40: parallels M40 through south Bucks and continues to Central London
A4: serves Taplow in the very south

The county is poorly served with internal routes, with the A413 and A418 linking the south and north of the county.
Rail[edit]




Chiltern Railways service at Great Missenden






Express train, Milton Keynes


As part of the London commuter belt, Buckinghamshire is well connected to the national rail network, with both local commuter and inter-city services serving some destinations.
Chiltern Railways is a principal train operating company in Buckinghamshire, providing the majority of local commuter services from the centre and south of the county, with trains running into London Marylebone. First Great Western provides commuter services from Taplow and Iver into Paddington. London Midland provides commuter services from Milton Keynes Central into Euston whilst Southern provides services (via the West London Line) from Milton Keynes to Croydon.
For intercity services, Virgin Trains runs services from Milton Keynes Central to Euston, North West England, the West Midlands, the Scottish Central Belt, and North Wales. Meanwhile, First Great Western operates non-stop inter-city services through the south of the county between Paddington and South West England and/or South Wales.
There are four main lines running through the county:

The West Coast Main Line in the north of the county serves stations in Milton Keynes
London to Aylesbury Line serves Aylesbury and other settlements along the A413 towards London. Once part of the Metropolitan line of London Underground, which now runs to Amersham
Chiltern Main Line: serves the towns along the M40 motorway including High Wycombe and Beaconsfield
Great Western Main Line: runs through Slough. Slough is now in Berkshire, but the line enters Bucks twice, on either side of Slough, with Taplow and Iver both having stations in Buckinghamshire.

There are the following additional lines:

Princes Risborough to Aylesbury Line: a single track branch that connects the Chiltern Main Line to the London to Aylesbury Line.
Marston Vale Line: between Bletchley and Bedford
Marlow Branch Line: between Marlow, Bourne End and Maidenhead.
Metropolitan line: between Amersham and Chesham to London
Chinnor and Princes Risborough Railway, a preserved railway.

From 2017, Iver will have Crossrail services. From 2019, the East West Rail Link is to reinstate the route via Winslow between Oxford and Bletchley, enabling electrified services to Milton Keynes Central. The line between Aylesbury and Claydon Junction is also to be reinstated in the same programme, enabling services between Aylesbury and Milton Keynes. [Electrification of the Marston Vale Line is not programmed, meaning that passengers for Bedford must change at Bletchley]. Finally, the High Speed 2 line may run non-stop through the county at some future date.
Settlements[edit]

Largest Towns in Ceremonial Buckinghamshire (2011 census)

Town
Population[28]
District
Notes


Milton Keynes
229,941
Borough of Milton Keynes
Unitary Authority since 1997. At the 2011 census, the population of the Milton Keynes Urban Area, which includes Newport Pagnell and Woburn Sands was 236,700


High Wycombe
120,256
Wycombe
Includes suburbs of Downley and Hazlemere.[5] The High Wycombe Urban Area population is 133,204


Aylesbury
71,977
Aylesbury Vale
County town of Buckinghamshire. Population of Aylesbury Urban Area (including Stoke Mandeville and Bierton) is 74,748


Amersham
23,086
Chiltern
Part of Amersham/Chesham urban area with a population of 46,122.


Chesham
22,356
Chiltern
Part of Amersham/Chesham urban area with a population of 46,122.


Gerrards Cross
20,633
Chiltern/South Bucks
Includes Chalfont St Peter. The area lacks town status but is the 5th largest conurbation in the county.


Marlow
18,261
Wycombe



Beaconsfield
13,797
South Bucks



Buckingham
12,890
Aylesbury Vale
Historically the county town of Buckinghamshire


Princes Risborough
8,231
Wycombe



Wendover
7,702
Aylesbury Vale



Olney
6,477
Borough of Milton Keynes
Governed by Milton Keynes Council, not Buckinghamshire County Council


Winslow
4,407
Aylesbury Vale



For the full list of towns, villages and hamlets in Buckinghamshire, see List of places in Buckinghamshire. Throughout history, there have been a number of changes to the Buckinghamshire boundary.
Education[edit]




The Gateway Building, Buckinghamshire New University, High Wycombe.


Further information: List of schools in Buckinghamshire and List of schools in Milton Keynes
Education in Buckinghamshire is governed by two Local Education Authorities. Buckinghamshire County Council is one of the few remaining LEAs still using the tripartite system, albeit with some revisions such as the abolition of secondary technical schools. It has a completely selective education system: pupils transfer either to a grammar school or to a secondary modern school or free school depending on how they perform in the Eleven-Plus exam and on their preferences. Pupils who do not take the test can only be allocated places at secondary modern schools or free school. There are 9 independent schools and 34 maintained (state) secondary schools, not including sixth form colleges, in the county council area. There is also the Buckinghamshire University Technical College which offers secondary education from age 14. The unitary authority of Milton Keynes operates a comprehensive education system: there are 8 maintained (state) secondary schools in the borough council area.
Buckinghamshire and Milton Keynes are also home to the University of Buckingham, Buckinghamshire New University, the National Film and Television School, the Open University and the University Campus Milton Keynes.
Notable people[edit]




John Milton's cottage, Chalfont






Cliveden






Buckingham church seen from across the Ouse


Buckinghamshire is the birthplace and/or final resting place of several notable individuals. St Osyth was born in Quarrendon and was buried in Aylesbury in the 7th century[29] while at about the same time Saint Rumwold was buried in Buckingham.[30] In the medieval period Roger of Wendover was, as the name suggests, from Wendover[31] and Anne Boleyn also owned property in the same town.[32] It is said that King Henry VIII made Aylesbury the county town in preference to Buckingham because Boleyn's father owned property there and was a regular visitor himself.[33] Other medieval residents included Edward the Confessor, who had a palace at Brill,[34] and John Wycliffe who lived in Ludgershall.[35]
Buckinghamshire later became home to some notable literary characters. Edmund Waller was brought up in Beaconsfield and served as Member of Parliament for both Amersham and Wycombe. Percy Bysshe Shelley and his wife Mary lived for some time in Marlow, attracted to the town by their friend Thomas Love Peacock who also lived there.[36] John Milton lived in Chalfont St Giles and his cottage can still be visited there[37] and John Wilkes was MP for Aylesbury.[38] Later authors include Jerome K. Jerome who lived at Marlow,[39] T. S. Eliot who also lived at Marlow,[40] Roald Dahl who lived at Great Missenden,[41] Enid Blyton who lived in Beaconsfield[42] and Edgar Wallace who lived at Bourne End[43] and is buried in Little Marlow.[44] Modern-day writers from Bucks include Terry Pratchett who was born in Beaconsfield,[45] Tim Rice who is from Amersham[46] and Andy Riley who is from Aylesbury.
During the Second World War a number of European politicians and statesmen were exiled in England. Many of these settled in Bucks as it is close to London. President Edvard Beneš of Czechoslovakia lived at Aston Abbotts with his family while some of his officials were stationed at nearby Addington and Wingrave.[47] Meanwhile, Władysław Sikorski, military leader of Poland, lived at Iver[48] and King Zog of Albania lived at Frieth.[49] Much earlier, King Louis XVIII of France lived in exile at Hartwell House from 1809 to 1814.
Also on the local political stage Buckinghamshire has been home to Nancy Astor who lived in Cliveden,[50] Frederick, Prince of Wales who also lived in Cliveden,[51] Baron Carrington who lives in Bledlow,[52] Benjamin Disraeli who lived at Hughenden Manor and was made Earl of Beaconsfield,[53] John Hampden who was from Great Hampden and is revered in Aylesbury to this day[4] and Prime Minister Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery who lived at Mentmore.[54] Also worthy of note are William Penn who believed he was descended from the Penn family of Penn and so is buried nearby[55] and the current Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who has an official residence at Chequers. John Archdale, the colonial governor of North Carolina and South Carolina, was born in Buckinghamshire.[56]
Other notable natives of Buckinghamshire include:


Errol Barnett, news reporter, was born in Milton Keynes
Nick Beggs, musician, is from Winslow
Lynda Bellingham, actress, was from Aylesbury
Emily Bergl, actress, born in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, though her family moved to suburban Chicago a few years after her birth
Emmerson Boyce, Wigan Athletic footballer, was born in Aylesbury
Nick Bracegirdle aka Chicane, was born in Chalfont St Giles
Den Brotheridge, British Army Officer who died taking Pegasus Bridge in France was from Aylesbury
Charles Butler, pastor, grammarian, and pioneering beekeeper was born in the county.
Giles Cooper, entertainment producer, best known for Royal Variety Performance. Born in Amersham, brought up in High Wycombe.
James Corden, actor, grew up in Hazlemere
Lucinda Dryzek, actress, born in High Wycombe in South Bucks
Emma Ferreira English contemporary artist, sculptor, photographer, entrepreneur and philanthropist
Martin Grech, musician, is from Aylesbury
Julian Haviland, former Political Editor of both ITN and The Times newspaper, was born and brought up in Iver Heath in Iver
Howard Jones, musician, is from High Wycombe
Prince Michael of Kent, member of the British Royal Family, born in Iver in South Bucks
Arthur Lasenby Liberty, merchant, was from Chesham
Richard Lee, footballer, attended Aylesbury Grammar School
Jonathon Lewis, England test cricketer, was born in Aylesbury
Al Murray, television / radio presenter also known as The Pub Landlord originates from Stewkley
John Otway, musician, is from Aylesbury
Leigh-Anne Pinnock, singer and member of 2011 X-Factor winning girl group Little Mix, born in High Wycombe
Matt Phillips, footballer playing for Queens Park Rangers F.C., was born in Aylesbury
Dominic Raab, politician and Conservative Member of Parliament grew up in Gerrards Cross and attended Dr Challoner's Grammar School in Amersham
Steve Redgrave, five-time Olympic gold medallist rower is from Marlow Bottom
Tim Rice, lyricist and author, lives in Amersham
George Gilbert Scott, architect famous for his numerous Gothic revival buildings, born in Gawcott
Simon Standage, Baroque violinist, is from High Wycombe
Justin Sullivan, musician with New Model Army
Michael York, actor, born in Fulmer in South Bucks


Celebrities living in Bucks include:


Cilla Black, television presenter, lived in Denham[57]
Fern Britton, television presenter, lives in Holmer Green[58]
Melanie Brown, musician, lived in Little Marlow
Roy Castle, dancer, singer, comedian, actor, television presenter and musician lived in Gerrards Cross
John Craven, television presenter, lives in Princes Risborough
Tess Daly has a house in Fulmer
Iain Duncan Smith, politician, lives in Swanbourne
Ian Dury, musician, lived in Wingrave
Noel Edmonds, television presenter, once lived in Weston Turville
Andrew Fletcher, musician with Depeche Mode, has a home in Marlow
Noel Gallagher, musician with Oasis, lives in Little Chalfont
Barry Gibb, musician from Bee Gees, lives in Beaconsfield
Sir John Gielgud, actor, was living in Wotton Underwood when he died
Sir David Jason, actor, lives in Ellesborough
Peter Jones, businessman, lives in Beaconsfield
Jason "Jay" Kay, musician and frontman of Jamiroquai, lives in Horsenden
Vernon Kay has a house in Fulmer
John Laurie, actor, lived in Chalfont St Peter
Hayley Mills and Roy Boulting lived in Ibstone
John Mills, actor, lived in Denham
Mike Oldfield, musician, once lived in Little Chalfont
Nduka Onwuegbute, playwright, lives in Aylesbury
Ozzy Osbourne, musician, has a home in Jordans
Pauline Quirke, actress, lives in Penn
Joan G. Robinson, author and illustrator
Steve Rothery, musician with Marillion, lives in Whitchurch
Rothschild family, bankers, had houses in Ascott, Aston Clinton, Eythrope, Halton, Mentmore and Waddesdon
Tiny Rowland, businessman, lived in Hedsor
Chris Standring, jazz guitarist and musician
Jackie Stewart, former racing driver, lives in Ellesborough
Andrew Strauss, England cricket captain, lives in Marlow
Dave Vitty, BBC Radio 1 DJ, lives in Fulmer
Mark Webber, former Formula 1 racing driver, lives in Aston Clinton
Terry Wogan, radio and television broadcaster, lived in Taplow


See also[edit]


Buckinghamshire portal



Duke of Buckingham
Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire
High Sheriff of Buckinghamshire
Architecture of Aylesbury
Bucks County, Pennsylvania
Wendover Woods
Centre for Buckinghamshire Studies—Archives, Record Office, Local History and Family History
Safety Centre

Notes[edit]


^ EB (1878).
^ Spence, Graham. "Beaconsfield is the most expensive market town in England". Get Bucks. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ "How expensive are the houses in your street? Beaconsfield is the most pricey - Chesham the least". Get Bucks. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ a b "Biography of John Hampden". Johnhampden.org. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ a b c d "High Wycombe Local Community Area Profile" (PDF). Buckinghamshire County Council. October 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2012. 
^ "About Buckingham". University of Buckingham. Retrieved 15 December 2015. 
^ "College Lake". BBOWT. Retrieved 12 November 2015. 
^ "2011 Census: KS101EW Usual resident population, local authorities in England and Wales". 
^ "Milton Keynes intelligence Observatory". 
^ "Aylesbury Local Community Area Profile" (PDF). Buckinghamshire County Council. February 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2012. 
^ "Profile of Chesham". Chesham Town Council. January 2009. 
^ The part of Buckinghamshire north of the Varsity Line together with Bow Brickhill, Woburn Sands and parts of Bletchley and Fenny Stratford.
^ UK Parliament. Lieutenancies Act 1997 as amended (see also enacted form), from legislation.gov.uk.
^ Pine, L.G. (1983). A dictionary of mottoes (1 ed.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 249. ISBN 0-7100-9339-X. 
^ "''Regional GDP per capita in the EU25 GDP per capita in 2002 ranged from 32% of the EU25 average in Lubelskie to 315% in Inner London''". Europa (web portal). 25 January 2005. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Burridge, Nicky (29 March 2008). "Buckinghamshire is best county". The Independent. London. Retrieved 15 January 2009. 
^ Office for National Statistics Archived 25 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine. (pp.240–253)
^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding
^ includes hunting and forestry
^ includes energy and construction
^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured
^ UK average index base = 100
^ "Welcome to Buckinghamshire!". Visit Buckinghamshire. Retrieved 19 August 2010. 
^ "The National Trust". Visit Buckinghamshire. Archived from the original on 23 July 2010. Retrieved 19 August 2010. 
^ Savage, Mike (12 March 2010). "View from the new 250mph rail route". The Independent. UK. Retrieved 19 August 2010. 
^ "Roald Dahl Trail". Visit Buckinghamshire. Archived from the original on 24 July 2010. Retrieved 19 August 2010. 
^ Dale, Louise (14 August 2010). "The best family days out". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 19 August 2010. 
^ "2011 Census – Built-up areas". ONS. Retrieved 4 July 2013. 
^ Tendring District Council Conservation Area Review Archived 3 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine. (pdf)
^ "Biography of St Rumwold, University of Buckingham". Buckingham.ac.uk. 19 August 2008. Archived from the original on 18 February 2010. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Roger of Wendover". Fordham.edu. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Picture Tour at Chiltern Web Archived 14 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Aylesbury Tourist Information". Aboutbritain.com. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Genuki guide to Brill Archived 12 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Biography of John Wycliffe
^ James Mulvihill (University of Alberta) (13 January 2005). "Biography of Thomas Love Peacock". Litencyc.com. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Milton's Cottage website
^ "Review of a biography of John Wilkes". Aylesburytowncouncil.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Literary guide to Marlow". Marlowtown.co.uk. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Tourist guide to Marlow". Riverthames.co.uk. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "About Britain.com". About Britain.com. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Guide to Beaconsfield". Beaconsfield.co.uk. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Bourne End online". Bourneend.org.uk. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Biography of Edgar Wallace". Online-literature.com. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Biography of Terry Pratchett". Lspace.org. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Tim Rice on IMDb
^ "Czechs in Exile at Aston Abbotts". Czechsinexile.org. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Polish government comparison". Czechs in Exile. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ Court of King Zog Research Society Archived 14 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Guide to Cliveden". Thames-search.com. Archived from the original on 16 April 2008. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ John Darnton (4 August 1996). "Travel Supplement". New York Times. Buckinghamshire (Eng). Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^ "Bledlow". Visit Buckinghamshire. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2010. 
^  Greenwood, Frederick (1911). "Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of". In Chisholm, Hugh. Encyclopædia Britannica. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 563–571. 
^ Genuki guide to Mentmore Archived 9 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Biography of William Penn
^ Who Was Who in America, Historical Volume, 1607–1896. Chicago: Marquis Who's Who. 1963. 
^ Davies, Caroline (3 June 2006). "Cilla Black 'is a neighbour from hell'". The Daily Telegraph. 
^ Jefferies, Mark (3 September 2008). "Fern Britton: I fear my mugged son could join gang". The Mirror. 


References[edit]

 Baynes, T.S., ed. (1878), "County of Buckingham", Encyclopædia Britannica, 4 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, pp. 415–417 
 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911), "Buckinghamshire", Encyclopædia Britannica, 4 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 728–731 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Buckinghamshire.



Buckinghamshire County Council
Buckinghamshire County Museum and Roald Dahl Children's Gallery
Buckinghamshire Libraries
Buckinghamshire Tourist Guide
Bucks County and District Councils Portal
Photographic Archive of Buckinghamshire
Images of Buckinghamshire at the English Heritage Archive
Commuter Towns in Buckinghamshire





Neighbouring counties







Northamptonshire
Northamptonshire
Bedfordshire


Oxfordshire


Buckinghamshire


Bedfordshire
Hertfordshire


Oxfordshire
Berkshire
Greater London













v
t
e


 Ceremonial county of Buckinghamshire




Buckinghamshire Portal



Unitary authorities

Borough of Milton Keynes



Boroughs or districts



Aylesbury Vale
Chiltern
South Bucks
Wycombe





Major settlements



Amersham
Aylesbury
Beaconsfield
Buckingham
Chesham
Gerrards Cross
High Wycombe
Marlow
Milton Keynes

including Bletchley
Fenny Stratford
Stony Stratford
Wolverton


Newport Pagnell
Olney
Princes Risborough
Wendover
Winslow
Woburn Sands
See also: List of civil parishes in Buckinghamshire





Rivers



Chess
Colne
Frays
Gade
Great Ouse
Jubilee
Lyde
Misbourne
Ouzel
Ray
Thame
Thames
Tove
Wraysbury
Wye





Topics



Parliamentary constituencies
Boundary changes
Schools (Bucks)
Schools (Milton Keynes)
Places
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Places of interest
Country houses
Grade I listed buildings
Grade II* listed buildings
History
Lord Lieutenant
High Sheriff
Monastic houses
Museums
Railways
Transport












v
t
e


1974–1996 ←   Ceremonial counties of England   → current






Bedfordshire
Berkshire
Bristol
Buckinghamshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon
Dorset
Durham
East Riding of Yorkshire
East Sussex
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater London
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
City of London
Merseyside
Norfolk
Northamptonshire
Northumberland
North Yorkshire
Nottinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Somerset
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Tyne and Wear
Warwickshire
West Midlands
West Sussex
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire
Worcestershire











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buckinghamshire&oldid=817076205"					Categories: BuckinghamshireNon-metropolitan countiesSouth East EnglandHome countiesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles needing additional references from June 2017All articles needing additional referencesEngvarB from October 2015Use dmy dates from October 2015Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9