For the historical founder of Buddhism, see Gautama Buddha.
"Buddhas" redirects here. For other uses, see Buddha (disambiguation).




Seated Buddha, from the Seokguram, Silla.





This article contains Indic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks or boxes, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text.


In Buddhism, buddhahood (Sanskrit: buddhatva, Pali: buddhatta or buddhabhāva) is the condition or rank of a buddha "awakened one".[1]
The goal of Mahayana's bodhisattva path is Samyaksambuddhahood, so that one may benefit all sentient beings by teaching them the path of cessation of dukkha.[2] Mahayana theory contrasts this with the goal of the Hinayana path, where the goal is individual arhatship.[2]



Contents


1 Explanation of the term Buddha
2 Nature of the Buddha

2.1 Spiritual realizations
2.2 Ten characteristics of a Buddha
2.3 Buddha as a supreme human
2.4 Buddha as "just a human"
2.5 Mahāsāṃghika supramundane Buddha


3 Depictions of the Buddha in art

3.1 Markings
3.2 Hand-gestures


4 Names of the Buddha
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Explanation of the term Buddha[edit]


Part of a series on


Buddhism







History


Timeline
Gautama Buddha


Councils
Later Buddhists











Dharma
Concepts





Four Noble Truths


Five Aggregates
Impermanence


Suffering
Non-self


Dependent Origination


Middle Way
Emptiness
Karma


Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Cosmology








Buddhist texts


Buddhavacana
Tripiṭaka
Mahayana Sutras
Pāli Canon
Tibetan canon
Chinese canon








Practices


Three Jewels


Buddhist Paths to liberation


Morality
Perfections
Meditation
Philosophical reasoning


Mindfulness
Wisdom


Compassion


Aids to Enlightenment
Monasticism


Laity








Nirvāṇa


Four Stages
Arhat


Buddha
Bodhisattva








Traditions


Theravāda
Pāli
Mahāyāna


Hinayana
Chinese
Vajrayāna


Tibetan
Navayana
Newar








Buddhism by country


India
China
Thailand
Japan
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Laos
Cambodia
Korea
Taiwan
Tibet
Bhutan
Mongolia
Russia








Outline
 Buddhism portal







v
t
e





In Theravada Buddhism, Buddha refers to one who has become awakened through their own efforts and insight, without a teacher to point out the dharma (Sanskrit; Pali dhamma; "right way of living"). A samyaksambuddha teaches the dharma to others after his awakening. A pratyekabuddha also reaches Nirvana through his own efforts, but does not teach the dharma to others. An arhat needs to follow the teaching of a Buddha to attain Nirvana, but can also preach the dharma after attaining Nirvana.[3] In one instance the term buddha is also used in Theravada to refer to all who attain Nirvana, using the term Sāvakabuddha to designate an arhat, someone who depends on the teachings of a Buddha to attain Nirvana.[4] In this broader sense it is equivalent to the arhat.
Buddhahood is the state of an enlightened being, who having found the path of cessation of suffering,[5] is in the state of "No-more-Learning".[6][7][8]
There is a broad spectrum of opinion on the universality and method of attainment of Buddhahood, depending on Gautama Buddha's teachings that a school of Buddhism emphasizes. The level to which this manifestation requires ascetic practices varies from none at all to an absolute requirement, dependent on doctrine. Mahayana Buddhism emphasizes the bodhisattva ideal instead of the Arhat.
The Tathagatagarba and Buddha-nature doctrines of Mahayana Buddhism consider Buddhahood to be a universal and innate property of absolute wisdom. This wisdom is revealed in a person's current lifetime through Buddhist practice, without any specific relinquishment of pleasures or "earthly desires".
Buddhists do not consider Gautama to have been the only Buddha. The Pāli Canon refers to many previous ones (see list of the named Buddhas), while the Mahayana tradition additionally has many Buddhas of celestial origin (see Amitābha or Vairocana as examples, for lists of many thousands of Buddha names (see Taishō Tripiṭaka numbers 439–448).
Nature of the Buddha[edit]
Further information: Buddhology
The various Buddhist schools hold some varying interpretations on the nature of Buddha (see below).
Spiritual realizations[edit]




The Buddha, in Greco-Buddhist style, first-second century, Gandhara (now Pakistan). (Standing Buddha).


All Buddhist traditions hold that a Buddha is fully awakened and has completely purified his mind of the three poisons of craving, aversion and ignorance. A Buddha is no longer bound by saṃsāra, and has ended the suffering which unawakened people experience in life.
Most schools of Buddhism have also held that the Buddha was omniscient. However, the early texts contain explicit repudiations of making this claim of the Buddha.[9][10]
Ten characteristics of a Buddha[edit]
Some Buddhists meditate on (or contemplate) the Buddha as having ten characteristics (Ch./Jp. 十號). These characteristics are frequently mentioned in the Pāli Canon as well as Mahayana teachings, and are chanted daily in many Buddhist monasteries:

Thus gone, thus come (Skt: tathāgata)
Worthy one (Skt: arhat)
Perfectly self-enlightened (Skt: samyak-saṃbuddha)
Perfected in knowledge and conduct (Skt: vidyā-caraṇa-saṃpanna )
Well gone (Skt: sugata)
Knower of the world (Skt: lokavida)
Unsurpassed (Skt: anuttara)
Leader of persons to be tamed (Skt: puruṣa-damya-sārathi)
Teacher of the gods and humans (Skt: śāsta deva-manuṣyāṇaṃ)
The Blessed One or fortunate one (Skt: bhagavat)[11]

The tenth epithet is sometimes listed as "The World Honored Enlightened One" (Skt. Buddha-Lokanatha) or "The Blessed Enlightened One" (Skt. Buddha-Bhagavan).[12]
Buddha as a supreme human[edit]
In the Pāli Canon, Gautama Buddha is known as being a "teacher of the gods and humans", superior to both the gods and humans in the sense of having nirvana or the greatest bliss, whereas the devas, or gods, are still subject to anger, fear and sorrow.[citation needed]
In the Madhupindika Sutta (MN 18),[13] Buddha is described in powerful terms as the Lord of the Dhamma (Pali: Dhammasami, skt.: Dharma Swami) and the bestower of immortality (Pali: Amatassadata).
Similarly, in the Anuradha Sutta (SN 44.2)[14] Buddha is described as

the Tathagata—the supreme man, the superlative man, attainer of the superlative attainment.
[Buddha is asked about what happens to the Tathagatha after death of the physical body. Buddha replies],
"And so, Anuradha—when you can't pin down the Tathagata as a truth or reality even in the present life—is it proper for you to declare, 'Friends, the Tathagata—the supreme man, the superlative man, attainer of the superlative attainment—being described, is described otherwise than with these four positions: The Tathagata exists after death, does not exist after death, both does & does not exist after death, neither exists nor does not exist after death'?

In the Vakkali Sutta (SN 22.87) Buddha identifies himself with the Dhamma:[15]

O Vakkali, whoever sees the Dhamma, sees me [the Buddha]

Another reference from the Aggañña Sutta of the Digha Nikaya, says to his disciple Vasettha:

O Vasettha! The Word of Dhammakaya is indeed the name of the Tathagata

Shravasti Dhammika, a Theravada monk, writes:

In the centuries after his final Nibbāna it sometimes got to the stage that the legends and myths obscured the very real human being behind them and the Buddha came to be looked upon as a god. Actually, the Buddha was a human being, not a 'mere human being' as is sometimes said but a special class of human called a 'complete person' (mahāparisa). Such complete persons are born no different from others and indeed they physically remain quite ordinary.[16]

Sangharakshita also states that "The first thing we have to understand - and this is very important - is that the Buddha is a human being. But a special kind of human being, in fact the highest kind, so far as we know."[17]
Buddha as "just a human"[edit]
When asked whether he was a deva or a human, he replied that he had eliminated the deep-rooted unconscious traits that would make him either one, and should instead be called a Buddha; one who had grown up in the world but had now gone beyond it, as a lotus grows from the water but blossoms above it, unsoiled.[18]
Andrew Skilton writes that the Buddha was never historically regarded by Buddhist traditions as being merely human:[19]

It is important to stress that, despite modern Theravada teachings to the contrary (often a sop to skeptical Western pupils), he was never seen as being merely human. For instance, he is often described as having the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks or signs of a mahāpuruṣa, "superman"; the Buddha himself denied that he was either a man or a god; and in the Mahāparinibbāna Sutta he states that he could live for an aeon were he asked to do so.

However, Thích Nhất Hạnh, a Vietnamese Buddhist monk in the Zen tradition, states that "Buddha was not a god. He was a human being like you and me, and he suffered just as we do."[20]
Jack Maguire writes that Buddha is inspirational based on his humanness.

A fundamental part of Buddhism's appeal to billions of people over the past two and a half millennia is the fact that the central figure, commonly referred to by the title "Buddha", was not a god, or a special kind of spiritual being, or even a prophet or an emissary of one. On the contrary, he was a human being like the rest of us who quite simply woke up to full aliveness.[21]

Mahāsāṃghika supramundane Buddha[edit]
In the early Buddhist schools, the Mahāsāṃghika branch regarded the buddhas as being characterized primarily by their supramundane nature. The Mahāsāṃghikas advocated the transcendental and supramundane nature of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and the fallibility of arhats.[22] Of the 48 special theses attributed by the Samayabhedoparacanacakra to the Mahāsāṃghika Ekavyāvahārika, Lokottaravāda, and the Kukkuṭika, 20 points concern the supramundane nature of buddhas and bodhisattvas.[23] According to the Samayabhedoparacanacakra, these four groups held that the Buddha is able to know all dharmas in a single moment of the mind.[24] Yao Zhihua writes:[24]

In their view, the Buddha is equipped with the following supernatural qualities: transcendence (lokottara), lack of defilements, all of his utterances preaching his teaching, expounding all his teachings in a single utterance, all of his sayings being true, his physical body being limitless, his power (prabhāva) being limitless, the length of his life being limitless, never tiring of enlightening sentient beings and awakening pure faith in them, having no sleep or dreams, no pause in answering a question, and always in meditation (samādhi).

A doctrine ascribed to the Mahāsāṃghikas is, "The power of the tathāgatas is unlimited, and the life of the buddhas is unlimited."[25] According to Guang Xing, two main aspects of the Buddha can be seen in Mahāsāṃghika teachings: the true Buddha who is omniscient and omnipotent, and the manifested forms through which he liberates sentient beings through skillful means.[26] For the Mahāsaṃghikas, the historical Gautama Buddha was one of these transformation bodies (Skt. nirmāṇakāya), while the essential real Buddha is equated with the Dharmakāya.[27]
As in Mahāyāna traditions, the Mahāsāṃghikas held the doctrine of the existence of many contemporaneous buddhas throughout the ten directions.[28] In the Mahāsāṃghika Lokānuvartana Sūtra, it is stated, "The Buddha knows all the dharmas of the countless buddhas of the ten directions."[28] It is also stated, "All buddhas have one body, the body of the Dharma."[28] The concept of many bodhisattvas simultaneously working toward buddhahood is also found among the Mahāsāṃghika tradition, and further evidence of this is given in the Samayabhedoparacanacakra, which describes the doctrines of the Mahāsāṃghikas.[29]




A statue of Gautama Buddha at Tawang Monastery, India.


Depictions of the Buddha in art[edit]
Main article: Buddharupa




Buddha statues at Shwedagon Pagoda


Buddhas are frequently represented in the form of statues and paintings. Commonly seen designs include:

The Seated Buddha
The Reclining Buddha
The Standing Buddha
Hotei or Budai, the obese Laughing Buddha, usually seen in China (This figure is believed to be a representation of a medieval Chinese monk who is associated with Maitreya, the future Buddha, and is therefore technically not a Buddha image.)
the Emaciated Buddha, which shows Siddhartha Gautama during his extreme ascetic practice of starvation.

The Buddha statue shown calling for rain is a pose common in Laos.
Markings[edit]
Most depictions of Buddha contain a certain number of markings, which are considered the signs of his enlightenment. These signs vary regionally, but two are common:

a protuberance on the top of the head (denoting superb mental acuity)
long earlobes (denoting superb perception)

In the Pāli Canon, there is frequent mention of a list of thirty-two physical characteristics of the Buddha.
Hand-gestures[edit]
The poses and hand-gestures of these statues, known respectively as asanas and mudras, are significant to their overall meaning. The popularity of any particular mudra or asana tends to be region-specific, such as the Vajra (or Chi Ken-in) mudra, which is popular in Japan and Korea but rarely seen in India. Others are more common; for example, the Varada (Wish Granting) mudra is common among standing statues of the Buddha, particularly when coupled with the Abhaya (Fearlessness and Protection) mudra.
Names of the Buddha[edit]
Aśvaghoṣa in his Buddhacarita gives a long list of names for the Buddha:

Buddha, Self-existent, Lord of Law (Dharmaraja), Nayaka, Vinayaka, Caravan Leader, Jina (Victorious One), the Master-giver of Dharma, The Teacher, Master of the Dharma, the Lord of the World, the consoler, the loving-regarder [cf. Avalokiteshvara,] the Hero, the champion, the victorious one in conflict, Light of the World, Illuminator of the Knowledge of True Wisdom, The dispeller of the darkness of ignorance, Illuminator of the Great Torch, Great Physician, Great Seer, the Healer, Attainer of the Great Vehicle (Mahayana), Lord of all Dharma, the Ruler, Monarch of All Worlds, the Sovereign, Lord of all wisdom, the wise, the destroyer of the pride of all disputers, the omniscient, the Arhat, Possessor of Perfect Knowledge, the Great Buddha, Lord of Saints, The Victorious, the Perfect Buddha, Sugata, the wise one who fulfills the wishes of all beings, The ruler of the world, bearer of the world, master of the world, sovereign of the world, teacher of the world, preceptor of the world, The Fount of Nectar, the powerful luminary, Bringer of all virtue and all real wealth, possessor of perfect excellence and all good qualities, the guide on the road of wisdom who shows the way to Nirvana, Tathagata without stain, without attachment, without uncertainty.[30]

In his commentary to the Śūraṅgama Sūtra, Hsuan Hua tells the following fable:

Originally every Buddha had ten thousand names. In time these ten thousand names were reduced to one thousand because people got confused trying to remember them all. For a while every Buddha had a thousand names, but people still couldn’t remember so many, so they were again reduced to one hundred names. Every Buddha had a hundred different names and living beings had a hard time remembering them, so they were shortened again to ten.[31]

See also[edit]


Amitābha
Buddha-nature
Buddhism in Indonesia
Dona Sutta
Enlightenment in Buddhism
Eternal Buddha
Five Tathagatas
Gautama Buddha
List of Buddha claimants
List of the named Buddhas
Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra
Maitreya
Mankiala stupa
Physical characteristics of the Buddha
The unanswered questions
Vairocana


Notes[edit]

References[edit]


^ buddhatva, बुद्धत्व. Spoken Sanskrit Dictionary. (accessed: January 10, 2016)
^ a b Gethin, Rupert (1998). The foundations of Buddhism (1. publ. paperback ed.). Oxford [England]: Oxford University Press. pp. 224–234. ISBN 0-19-289223-1. 
^ Snelling, John (1987), The Buddhist handbook. A Complete Guide to Buddhist Teaching and Practice. London: Century Paperbacks. Page 81
^ Udana Commentary. Translation Peter Masefield, volume I, 1994. Pali Text Society. page 94.
^ Gethin, Rupert (1998). The foundations of Buddhism (1. publ. paperback ed.). Oxford [England]: Oxford University Press. p. 32. ISBN 0-19-289223-1. 
^ Damien Keown; Charles S. Prebish (2013). Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Routledge. p. 90. ISBN 978-1-136-98588-1. 
^ Rinpoche Karma-raṅ-byuṅ-kun-khyab-phrin-las (1986). The Dharma: That Illuminates All Beings Impartially Like the Light of the Sun and Moon. State University of New York Press. pp. 32–33. ISBN 978-0-88706-156-1. ; Quote: "There are various ways of examining the Complete Path. For example, we can speak of Five Paths constituting its different levels: the Path of Accumulation, the Path of Application, the Path of Seeing, the Path of Meditation and the Path of No More Learning, or Buddhahood."
^ Robert E. Buswell; Robert M. Gimello (1990). Paths to liberation: the Mārga and its transformations in Buddhist thought. University of Hawaii Press. p. 204. ISBN 978-0-8248-1253-9. 
^ A. K. Warder, Indian Buddhism. Third edition published by Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 2000, pages 132–133.
^ Kalupahana, David (1992). A History of Buddhist Philosophy: Continuities and Discontinuities. University of Hawaii Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-8248-1402-1. 
^ Japanese-English Buddhist Dictionary (Daitō shuppansha) 147a/163
^ [1], also see Thomas Cleary and J. C. Cleary The Blue Cliff Record, page 553.
^ Majhima Nikaya 18 Madhupindika Sutta: The Ball of Honey
^ Sutta Nikaya 44.2 Anuradha Sutta: To Anuradha
^ Sutta Nikaya 22.87 Vakkali Sutta: Vakkali
^ Dhammika, Shravasti (2005). The Buddha and His Disciples. Buddhist Publication Society. p. 16. ISBN 9789552402807. 
^ Sangharakshita (1996). A Guide to the Buddhist Path. Windhorse Publications. p. 45. ISBN 9781899579044. 
^ Peter Harvey, An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History, and Practices. Cambridge University Press, 1990, page 28
^ Skilton, Andrew. A Concise History of Buddhism. 2004. pp. 64-65
^ Nhất Hạnh, Thích (1999). The Heart of the Buddha's Teaching. Broadway Books. p. 3. ISBN 0-7679-0369-2. 
^ Maguire, Jack (2013). Essential Buddhism. Simon & Schuster. p. 2. ISBN 9781476761961. 
^ Baruah, Bibhuti. Buddhist Sects and Sectarianism. 2008. p. 48.
^ Sree Padma. Barber, Anthony W. Buddhism in the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. 2008. p. 56.
^ a b Yao, Zhihua. The Buddhist Theory of Self-Cognition. 2005. p. 11
^ Tanaka, Kenneth. The Dawn of Chinese Pure Land Buddhist Doctrine. 1990. p. 8
^ Guang Xing. The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikaya Theory. 2004. p. 53
^ Sree Padma. Barber, Anthony W. Buddhism in the Krishna River Valley of Andhra. 2008. pp. 59-60
^ a b c Guang Xing. The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikaya Theory. 2004. p. 65
^ Guang Xing. The Concept of the Buddha: Its Evolution from Early Buddhism to the Trikaya Theory. 2004. p. 66
^ E. B. Cowell; Francis A. Davis (1894). Buddhist Mahayana Texts. 49. Oxford University Press. p. 183. ISBN 0486255522. Retrieved 3 September 2015.  The Buddha-karita of Aśvaghoṣa, translated from the Sanskrit, in the Sacred Books of the East
^ From the Chapter on "The General Explanation of the Title", The Surangama Sutra, English translation by the Buddhist Text Translation Society.


Further reading[edit]

What the Buddha Taught (Grove Press, Revised edition July 1974), by Walpola Rahula
Buddha: The Compassionate Teacher (2002), by K. M. M. Swe

External links[edit]

Find more aboutBuddhaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



BuddhaNet







v
t
e


Buddhism topics






Glossary
Index
Outline





Foundations



Three Jewels

Buddha
Dharma
Sangha


Four Noble Truths
Noble Eightfold Path
Nirvana
Middle Way





The Buddha



Tathāgata
Birthday
Four sights
Physical characteristics
Footprint
Relics
Iconography in Laos and Thailand
Films
Miracles
Family

Suddhodāna (father)
Māyā (mother)
Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother)
Yasodhara (wife)
Rāhula (son)
Ānanda (cousin)
Devadatta (cousin)


Places where the Buddha stayed
Buddha in world religions





Key concepts



Avidyā (Ignorance)
Bardo
Bodhicitta
Bodhisattva
Buddha-nature
Dhamma theory
Dharma
Enlightenment
Five hindrances
Indriya
Karma
Kleshas
Mind Stream
Parinirvana
Pratītyasamutpāda
Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Saṅkhāra
Skandha
Śūnyatā
Taṇhā (Craving)
Tathātā
Ten Fetters
Three marks of existence

Impermanence
Dukkha
Anatta


Two truths doctrine





Cosmology



Ten spiritual realms
Six realms

Deva (Buddhism)
Human realm
Asura realm
Hungry Ghost realm
Animal realm
Hell


Three planes of existence





Practices



Bhavana
Bodhipakkhiyādhammā
Brahmavihara

Mettā
Karuṇā
Mudita
Upekkha


Buddhābhiseka
Dāna
Devotion
Dhyāna
Faith
Five Strengths
Iddhipada
Meditation

Mantras
Kammaṭṭhāna
Recollection
Smarana
Anapanasati
Samatha
Vipassanā (Vipassana movement)
Shikantaza
Zazen
Kōan
Mandala
Tonglen
Tantra
Tertön
Terma


Merit
Mindfulness

Satipatthana


Nekkhamma
Pāramitā
Paritta
Puja

Offerings
Prostration
Chanting


Refuge
Satya

Sacca


Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Sati
Dhamma vicaya
Pīti
Passaddhi


Śīla

Five Precepts
Bodhisattva vow
Prātimokṣa


Threefold Training

Śīla
Samadhi
Prajñā


Vīrya

Four Right Exertions







Nirvana



Bodhi
Bodhisattva
Buddhahood
Pratyekabuddha
Four stages of enlightenment

Sotāpanna
Sakadagami
Anāgāmi
Arhat







Monasticism



Bhikkhu
Bhikkhuni
Śrāmaṇera
Śrāmaṇerī
Anagarika
Ajahn
Sayadaw
Zen master
Rōshi
Lama
Rinpoche
Geshe
Tulku
Householder
Upāsaka and Upāsikā
Śrāvaka

The ten principal disciples


Shaolin Monastery





Major figures



Gautama Buddha
Kaundinya
Assaji
Sāriputta
Mahamoggallāna
Mulian
Ānanda
Mahākassapa
Anuruddha
Mahākaccana
Nanda
Subhuti
Punna
Upali
Mahapajapati Gotamī
Khema
Uppalavanna
Asita
Channa
Yasa
Buddhaghoṣa
Nagasena
Angulimala
Bodhidharma
Nagarjuna
Asanga
Vasubandhu
Atiśa
Padmasambhava
Nichiren
Songtsen Gampo
Emperor Wen of Sui
Dalai Lama
Panchen Lama
Karmapa
Shamarpa
Naropa
Xuanzang
Zhiyi





Texts



Tripiṭaka
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
Mahayana sutras
Pāli Canon
Chinese Buddhist canon
Tibetan Buddhist canon





Branches



Theravada
Mahayana

Chan Buddhism

Zen
Seon
Thiền


Pure Land
Tiantai
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Yogachara


Navayana
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Dzogchen


Early Buddhist schools
Pre-sectarian Buddhism
Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna





Countries



Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia

Kalmykia
Buryatia


Singapore
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand
Tibet
Vietnam
Middle East

Iran


Western countries

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
France
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela







History



Timeline
Ashoka
Buddhist councils
History of Buddhism in India

Decline of Buddhism in India


Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution
Greco-Buddhism
Buddhism and the Roman world
Buddhism in the West
Silk Road transmission of Buddhism
Persecution of Buddhists
Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal
Buddhist crisis
Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism
Buddhist modernism
Vipassana movement
969 Movement
Women in Buddhism





Philosophy



Abhidharma
Atomism
Buddhology
Creator
Economics
Eight Consciousnesses
Engaged Buddhism
Eschatology
Ethics
Evolution
Humanism
Logic
Reality
Secular Buddhism
Socialism
The unanswered questions





Culture



Architecture

Temple
Vihara
Wat
Stupa
Pagoda
Candi
Dzong architecture
Japanese Buddhist architecture
Korean Buddhist temples
Thai temple art and architecture
Tibetan Buddhist architecture


Art

Greco-Buddhist


Bodhi Tree
Budai
Buddharupa
Calendar
Cuisine
Funeral
Holidays

Vesak
Uposatha
Magha Puja
Asalha Puja
Vassa


Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
Kasaya
Mahabodhi Temple
Mantra

Om mani padme hum


Mudra
Music
Pilgrimage

Lumbini
Maya Devi Temple
Bodh Gaya
Sarnath
Kushinagar


Poetry
Prayer beads
Prayer wheel
Symbolism

Dharmachakra
Flag
Bhavacakra
Swastika
Thangka


Temple of the Tooth
Vegetarianism





Miscellaneous



Abhijñā
Amitābha
Avalokiteśvara

Guanyin


Brahmā
Dhammapada
Dharma talk
Hinayana
Kalpa
Koliya
Lineage
Maitreya
Māra
Ṛddhi
Sacred languages

Pali
Sanskrit


Siddhi
Sutra
Vinaya





Comparison



Bahá'í Faith
Christianity

Influences
Comparison


East Asian religions
Gnosticism
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Psychology
Science
Theosophy
Violence
Western philosophy





Lists



Bodhisattvas
Books
Buddhas

named


Buddhists
Suttas
Temples








Category
Portal









Authority control



BNF: cb15130385p (data)
NDL: 00561115











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buddhahood&oldid=804271860"					Categories: BuddhasBuddhist terminologyBuddhist philosophical conceptsHidden categories: Articles containing Sanskrit-language textArticles containing Pali-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers