See also: Buddhism in the West






It has been suggested that American Buddhist Movement be merged into this article. (Discuss) Proposed since February 2017.





Part of a series on


Western Buddhism







Main articles


Western Buddhism
Buddhist modernism
Buddhism in the United States


Historical


Greco-Buddhism
Buddhism and the Roman world








Tibetan dissemination


14th Dalai Lama


In the United States


Chögyam Trungpa


In England


Geshe Kelsang Gyatso


In Germany


Lama Anagarika Govinda








Theravada dissemination


Thai Forest Tradition
Vipassana movement


In England


Anagarika Dharmapala
Sangharakshita
Ajahn Chah


In Germany


Nyanatiloka
Nyanaponika Thera


In the United States


Thanissaro Bhikkhu
Joseph Goldstein
Jack Kornfield








Zen dissemination


Zen in the United States


Modern Chinese Chán


Hsuan Hua
Sheng-yen
Hsing Yun


Rinzai Zen


D.T. Suzuki


Soto Zen


Shunryu Suzuki


Sanbo Kyodan


Haku'un Yasutani


White Plum Asanga


Taizan Maezumi


Korean Seon


Seung Sahn


Vietnamese Thiền


Thich Nhat Hanh


Listing of Zen Buddhists








Amidist dissemination


In England


David Brazier


In Canada


Jodo Shinshu Buddhist Temples of Canada








Exchange


Buddhism and Christianity
Buddhism and Gnosticism
Buddhism and psychology
Buddhism and Western Philosophy








General Buddhism


Buddhism
Outline of Buddhism


Traditions


Hinayana
Theravada
Mahayana
Vajrayana
Navayana


Asian countries


Indian Buddhism
Tibetan Buddhism
Chinese Buddhism
Japanese Buddhism


Listing of Buddhist topics









v
t
e







Part of a series on


Buddhism







History


Timeline
Gautama Buddha


Councils
Later Buddhists











Dharma
Concepts





Four Noble Truths


Five Aggregates
Impermanence


Suffering
Non-self


Dependent Origination


Middle Way
Emptiness
Karma


Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Cosmology








Buddhist texts


Buddhavacana
Tripiṭaka
Mahayana Sutras
Pāli Canon
Tibetan canon
Chinese canon








Practices


Three Jewels


Buddhist Paths to liberation


Morality
Perfections
Meditation
Philosophical reasoning


Mindfulness
Wisdom


Compassion


Aids to Enlightenment
Monasticism


Laity








Nirvāṇa


Four Stages
Arhat


Buddha
Bodhisattva








Traditions


Theravāda
Pāli
Mahāyāna


Hinayana
Chinese
Vajrayāna


Tibetan
Navayana
Newar








Buddhism by country


India
China
Thailand
Japan
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Laos
Cambodia
Korea
Taiwan
Tibet
Bhutan
Mongolia
Russia








Outline
 Buddhism portal







v
t
e





Buddhism is one of the largest religions in the United States behind Christianity, Judaism and Islam. American Buddhists include many Asian Americans, as well as a large number of converts of other ethnicities, and now their children and even grandchildren.[1][2] In 2012, U-T San Diego estimated U.S. practitioners at 1.2 million people, of whom 40% are living in Southern California.[3] In terms of percentage, Hawaii has the most Buddhists at 8% of the population due to its large Asian American community.[4]




Covering 15 acres (61,000 m²), California's Hsi Lai Temple is one of the largest Buddhist temples in the western hemisphere.






Services at the Hompa Hongwanji Buddhist Temple, Los Angeles, around 1925.





Contents


1 Types of Buddhism in the USA
2 Export Buddhism

2.1 Nichiren: Soka Gakkai International


3 Immigrant Buddhism

3.1 Huishen
3.2 Chinese immigration
3.3 Japanese and Korean immigration


4 Contemporary Immigrant Buddhism

4.1 Japanese Buddhism

4.1.1 Buddhist Churches of America


4.2 Taiwanese Buddhism


5 Import Buddhism

5.1 Early translations
5.2 Theosophical Society
5.3 Paul Carus
5.4 Early converts
5.5 Dwight Goddard


6 Zen

6.1 Japanese Rinzai

6.1.1 Early Rinzai-teachers
6.1.2 D.T. Suzuki
6.1.3 Beat Zen
6.1.4 Contemporary Rinzai


6.2 Japanese Sōtō

6.2.1 Soyu Matsuoka
6.2.2 Shunryu Suzuki
6.2.3 White Plum Sangha


6.3 Sanbo Kyodan

6.3.1 Philip Kapleau
6.3.2 Robert Aitken


6.4 Chinese Chán

6.4.1 Hsuan Hua
6.4.2 Sheng-yen


6.5 Korean Seon
6.6 Vietnamese Thien

6.6.1 Thich Nhat Hanh




7 Tibetan Buddhism
8 Theravada

8.1 American Theravada Buddhists
8.2 S. N. Goenka


9 Other
10 Contemporary developments

10.1 Engaged Buddhism
10.2 Misconduct
10.3 Accreditation


11 Demographics of Buddhism in the United States

11.1 Numbers of Buddhists
11.2 Demographics of Import Buddhists
11.3 Ethnic divide


12 Buddhist education in the United States
13 See also
14 References
15 Sources
16 External links



Types of Buddhism in the USA[edit]
Buddhist American scholar Charles Prebish states there are three broad types of American Buddhism:

The oldest and largest of these is "immigrant" or "ethnic Buddhism", those Buddhist traditions that arrived in America along with immigrants who were already practitioners and that largely remained with those immigrants and their descendants.
The next oldest and arguably the most visible group Prebish refers to as "import Buddhists", because they came to America largely in response to interested American converts who sought them out, either by going abroad or by supporting foreign teachers; this is sometimes also called "elite Buddhism" because its practitioners, especially early ones, tended to come from social elites.
A trend in Buddhism is "export" or "evangelical Buddhist" groups based in another country who actively recruit members in the US from various backgrounds. Modern Buddhism is not just an American phenomenon.[citation needed]

Export Buddhism[edit]
Nichiren: Soka Gakkai International[edit]




Nichiren Daishōnin thought the Lotus Sutra is the purest expression of Buddhism and thirty sects developed in Japan from his branch of Mahayana.[5]


Soka Gakkai International (SGI) is perhaps the most successful of Japan's new religious movements that grew around the world after the end of World War II.[6] Soka Gakkai, which means "Value Creation Society," is one of three sects of Nichiren Buddhism that came to the United States during the 20th century.[5] The SGI expanded rapidly in the US, attracting non-Asian minority converts,[7] chiefly African Americans and Latino, as well as the support of celebrities, such as Tina Turner, Herbie Hancock, and Orlando Bloom.[8] Because of a rift with Nichiren Shōshū in 1991, the SGI has no priests of its own.[9] Its main religious practice is chanting the mantra Nam Myōhō Renge Kyō and sections of the Lotus Sutra. Unlike trends such as Zen, Vipassanā, and Tibetan Buddhism, Soka Gakkai Buddhists do not practice meditative techniques other than chanting.[citation needed] An SGI YouTube series called "Buddhist in America" has over a quarter million views in total as of 2015.[10]
Immigrant Buddhism[edit]




Chùa Huệ Quang Buddhist Temple, a Vietnamese American temple in Garden Grove






Wat Buddharangsi Buddhist Temple of Miami


Buddhism was introduced into the USA by Asian immigrants in the 19th century, when significant numbers of immigrants from East Asia began to arrive in the New World. In the United States, immigrants from China entered around 1820, but began to arrive in large numbers following the 1849 California Gold Rush.
Immigrant Buddhist congregations in North America are as diverse as the different peoples of Asian Buddhist extraction who settled there. The US is home to Chinese Buddhists, Japanese Buddhists, Korean Buddhists, Sri Lankan Buddhists, Cambodian Buddhists, Vietnamese Buddhists, Thai Buddhists, and Buddhists with family backgrounds in most Buddhist countries and regions. The Immigration Act of 1965 increased the number of immigrants arriving from China, Vietnam, and the Theravada-practicing countries of Southeast Asia.
Huishen[edit]
Fanciful accounts of a visit to North America at the end of the 5th century written by a Chinese monk named Huishen or Hushen can be found in the Wenxian Tongkao by Ma Tuan-Lin. This account is often challenged but it is "at least plausible" in the words of James Ishmael Ford.[11]
Chinese immigration[edit]
The first Buddhist temple in America was built in 1853 in San Francisco by the Sze Yap Company, a Chinese American fraternal society. Another society, the Ning Yeong Company, built a second in 1854; by 1875, there were eight temples, and by 1900 approximately 400 Chinese temples on the west coast of the United States, most of them containing some Buddhist elements. Unfortunately a casualty of racism,[11] these temples were often the subject of suspicion and ignorance by the rest of the population, and were dismissively called joss houses.
Japanese and Korean immigration[edit]
The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 curtailed growth of the Chinese American population, but large-scale immigration from Japan began in the late 1880s and from Korea around 1903. In both cases, immigration was at first primarily to Hawaii. Populations from other Asian Buddhist countries followed, and in each case, the new communities established Buddhist temples and organizations. For instance, the first Japanese temple in Hawaii was built in 1896 near Paauhau by the Honpa Hongwanji branch of Jodo Shinshu. In 1898, Japanese missionaries and immigrants established a Young Men's Buddhist Association, and the Rev. Sōryū Kagahi was dispatched from Japan to be the first Buddhist missionary in Hawaii.[12] The first Japanese Buddhist temple in the continental U.S. was built in San Francisco in 1899, and the first in Canada was built at the Ishikawa Hotel in Vancouver in 1905.[13] The first Buddhist clergy to take up residence in the continental U.S. were Shuye Sonoda and Kakuryo Nishimjima, missionaries from Japan who arrived in 1899.
Contemporary Immigrant Buddhism[edit]
Japanese Buddhism[edit]




Buddhist service at the Manzanar War Relocation Center in 1943


Buddhist Churches of America[edit]
The Buddhist Churches of America and the Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaii are immigrant Buddhist organizations in the United States. The BCA is an affiliate of Japan's Nishi Hongwanji, a sect of Jōdo Shinshū, which is in turn a form of Pure Land Buddhism. Tracing its roots to the Young Men's Buddhist Association founded in San Francisco at the end of the 19th century and the Buddhist Mission of North America founded in 1899,[14] it took its current form in 1944. All of the Buddhist Mission's leadership, along with almost the entire Japanese American population, had been interned during World War II. The name Buddhist Churches of America was adopted at Topaz War Relocation Center in Utah; the word "church" was used similar to a Christian house of worship. After internment ended, some members returned to the West Coast and revitalized churches there, while a number of others moved to the Midwest and built new churches. During the 1960s and 1970s, the BCA was in a growth phase and was very successful at fund-raising. It also published two periodicals, one in Japanese and one in English. However, since 1980, BCA membership declined. The 36 temples in the state of Hawaii of the Honpa Hongwanji Mission have a similar history.
While a majority of the Buddhist Churches of America's membership are ethnically Japanese, some members have non-Asian backgrounds. Thus, it has limited aspects of export Buddhism. As involvement by its ethnic community declined, internal discussions advocated attracting the broader public.
Taiwanese Buddhism[edit]
Another US Buddhist institution is Hsi Lai Temple in Hacienda Heights, California. Hsi Lai is the American headquarters of Fo Guang Shan, a modern Buddhist group in Taiwan. Hsi Lai was built in 1988 at a cost of $10 million and is often described as the largest Buddhist temple in the Western hemisphere. Although it caters primarily to Chinese Americans, it also has regular services and outreach programs in English. Hsi Lai was at the center of a campaign finance controversy by Vice President Al Gore.
Import Buddhism[edit]
While Asian immigrants were arriving, some American intellectuals examined Buddhism, based primarily on information from British colonies in India and East Asia.
In the last century, numbers of Asian Buddhist masters and teachers have immigrated to the U.S. in order to propagate their beliefs and practices. Most have belonged to three major Buddhist traditions or cultures: Zen, Tibetan, and Theravadan.
Early translations[edit]




Elizabeth Palmer Peabody


The Englishmen William Jones and Charles Wilkins translated Sanskrit texts into English. The American Transcendentalists and associated persons, in particular Henry David Thoreau took an interest in Hindu and Buddhist philosophy. In 1844, The Dial, a small literary publication edited by Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson, published an English version of a portion of the Lotus Sutra; it had been translated by Dial business manager Elizabeth Palmer Peabody from a French version recently completed by Eugène Burnouf. His Indian readings may have influenced his later experiments in simple living: at one point in Walden Thoreau wrote: "I realized what the Orientals meant by contemplation and the forsaking of works." The poet Walt Whitman also admitted to an influence of Indian religion on his writings.
Theosophical Society[edit]




Henry Steel Olcott cofounder of the Theosophical Society was probably the first American convert to Buddhism


An early American to publicly convert to Buddhism was Henry Steel Olcott. Olcott, a former U.S. army colonel during the Civil War, had grown interested in reports of supernatural phenomena that were popular in the late 19th century. In 1875, he, Helena Blavatsky, and William Quan Judge founded the Theosophical Society, dedicated to the study of the occult and influenced by Hindu and Buddhist scriptures. The leaders claimed to believe that they were in contact, via visions and messages, with a secret order of adepts called the "Himalayan Brotherhood" or "the Masters". In 1879, Olcott and Blavatsky travelled to India and in 1880, to Sri Lanka, where they were met enthusiastically by local Buddhists, who saw them as allies against an aggressive Christian missionary movement. On May 25, Olcott and Blavatsky took the pancasila vows of a lay Buddhist before a monk and a large crowd. Although most of the Theosophists appear to have counted themselves as Buddhists, they held idiosyncratic beliefs that separated them from known Buddhist traditions; only Olcott was enthusiastic about following mainstream Buddhism. He returned twice to Sri Lanka, where he promoted Buddhist education, and visited Japan and Burma. Olcott authored a Buddhist Catechism, stating his view of the basic tenets of the religion.
Paul Carus[edit]




Paul Carus was an editor and collaborator with D. T. Suzuki


Several publications increased knowledge of Buddhism in 19th-century America. In 1879, Edwin Arnold, an English aristocrat, published The Light of Asia,[15] an epic poem he had written about the life and teachings of the Buddha, expounded with much wealth of local color and not a little felicity of versification. The book became immensely popular in the United States, going through eighty editions and selling more than 500,000 copies. Paul Carus, a German American philosopher and theologian, was at work on a more scholarly prose treatment of the same subject. Carus was the director of Open Court Publishing Company, an academic publisher specializing in philosophy, science, and religion, and editor of The Monist, a journal with a similar focus, both based in La Salle, Illinois. In 1894, Carus published The Gospel of Buddha, compiled from a variety of Asian texts which, true to its name, presented the Buddha's story in a form resembling the Christian Gospels.
Early converts[edit]
In a brief ceremony conducted by Dharmapala, Charles T. Strauss, a New York businessman of Jewish descent, became one of the first to formally convert to Buddhism on American soil.[citation needed] A few fledgling attempts at establishing a Buddhism for Americans followed. Appearing with little fanfare in 1887: The Buddhist Ray, a Santa Cruz, California-based magazine published and edited by Phillangi Dasa, born Herman Carl (or Carl Herman) Veetering (or Vettering), a recluse about whom little is known. The Ray's tone was "ironic, light, saucy, self-assured ... one-hundred-percent American Buddhist".[16] It ceased publication in 1894. In 1900 six white San Franciscans, working with Japanese Jodo Shinshu missionaries, established the Dharma Sangha of Buddha and published a bimonthly magazine, The Light of Dharma. In Illinois, Paul Carus wrote more books about Buddhism and set portions of Buddhist scripture to Western classical music.
Dwight Goddard[edit]
One American who attempted to establish an American Buddhist movement was Dwight Goddard (1861–1939). Goddard was a Christian missionary to China when he first came in contact with Buddhism. In 1928, he spent a year living at a Zen monastery in Japan. In 1934, he founded "The Followers of Buddha, an American Brotherhood", with the goal of applying the traditional monastic structure of Buddhism more strictly than Senzaki and Sokei-an. The group was largely unsuccessful: no Americans were recruited to join as monks and attempts failed to attract a Chinese Chan (Zen) master to come to the United States. However, Goddard's efforts as an author and publisher bore considerable fruit. In 1930, he began publishing ZEN: A Buddhist Magazine. In 1932, he collaborated with D. T. Suzuki, on a translation of the Lankavatara Sutra. That same year, he published the first edition of A Buddhist Bible, an anthology of Buddhist scriptures focusing on those used in Chinese and Japanese Zen.[17]
Zen[edit]
See also: Timeline of Zen Buddhism in the United States




The 1893 World Parliament of Religions held in Chicago


In 2006 Merle Kodo Boyd, born in Texas, became the first African-American woman ever to receive Dharma transmission in Zen Buddhism.[18]
Japanese Rinzai[edit]
Zen was introduced to the United States by Japanese priests who were sent to serve local immigrant groups. A small group also came to study the American culture and way of life.
Early Rinzai-teachers[edit]
In 1893, Soyen Shaku was invited to speak at the World Parliament of Religions held in Chicago. In 1905, Shaku was invited to stay in the United States by a wealthy American couple. He lived for nine months near San Francisco, where he established a small zendo in the Alexander and Ida Russell home and gave regular zazen lessons, making him the first Zen Buddhist priest to teach in North America.[11]
Shaku was followed by Nyogen Senzaki, a young monk from Shaku's home temple in Japan. Senzaki briefly worked for the Russells and then as a hotel porter, manager and eventually, owner. In 1922 Senzaki rented a hall and gave an English talk on a paper by Shaku; his periodic talks at different locations became known as the "floating zendo". Senzaki established an itinerant sitting hall from San Francisco to Los Angeles in California, where he taught until his death in 1958.[19]
Sokatsu Shaku, one of Shaku's senior students, arrived in late 1906, founding a Zen meditation center called Ryomokyo-kai. One of his disciples, Shigetsu Sasaki, better known under his monastic name Sokei-an, came to New York to teach. In 1931, his small group incorporated as the Buddhist Society of America, later renamed the First Zen Institute of America. By the late 1930s, one of his most active supporters was Ruth Fuller Everett, an American socialite and the mother-in-law of Alan Watts. Shortly before Sokei-an's death in 1945, he and Everett would wed, at which point she took the name Ruth Fuller Sasaki.
D.T. Suzuki[edit]
Main article: D.T. Suzuki
D.T. Suzuki had a great literary impact. Through English language essays and books, such as Essays in Zen Buddhism (1927), he became a visible expositor of Zen Buddhism and its unofficial ambassador to Western readers. In 1951, Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki returned to the United States to take a visiting professorship at Columbia University, where his open lectures attracted many members of the literary, artistic, and cultural elite.
Beat Zen[edit]
In the mid-1950s, writers associated with the Beat Generation took a serious interest in Zen,[20] including Gary Snyder, Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, and Kenneth Rexroth, which increased its visibility. Prior to that, Philip Whalen had interest as early as 1946, and D. T. Suzuki began lecturing on Buddhism at Columbia in 1950.[21][22] By 1958, anticipating Kerouac's publication of The Dharma Bums by three months, Time magazine said, "Zen Buddhism is growing more chic by the minute."[22][23]
Contemporary Rinzai[edit]




The Zen Buddhist Temple in Chicago, part of the Buddhist Society for Compassionate Wisdom


Contemporary Rinzai Zen teachers in United States have included Kyozan Joshu Sasaki Roshi, Eido Tai Shimano Roshi, and Omori Sogen Roshi (d. 1994). Sasaki founded the Mount Baldy Zen Center and its branches after coming to Los Angeles from Japan in 1962. One of his students is the Canadian poet and musician Leonard Cohen. Eido Roshi founded Dai Bosatsu Zendo Kongo-ji, a training center in New York state. Omori Roshi founded Daihonzan Chozen-ji, the first Rinzai headquarters temple established outside Japan, in Honolulu; under his students Tenshin Tanouye Roshi and Dogen Hosokawa Roshi and their dharma heirs, several other training centers were established including Daiyuzenji in Chicago and Korinji in Wisconsin.
In 1998 Sherry Chayat, born in Brooklyn, became the first American woman to receive transmission in the Rinzai school of Buddhism.[24][25]
Japanese Sōtō[edit]
Main article: Sōtō
Soyu Matsuoka[edit]
Main article: Soyu Matsuoka
In the 1930s Soyu Matsuoka-roshi was sent to America by Sōtōshū, to establish the Sōtō Zen tradition in the United States. He established the Chicago Buddhist Temple in 1949. Matsuoka-roshi also served as superintendent and abbot of the Long Beach Zen Buddhist Temple and Zen Center. He relocated from Chicago to establish a temple at Long Beach in 1971 after leaving the Zen Buddhist Temple of Chicago to his dharma heir Kongo Richard Langlois, Roshi. He returned to Chicago in 1995, where he died in 1998.
Shunryu Suzuki[edit]
Main article: Shunryu Suzuki
Sōtō Zen priest Shunryu Suzuki (no relation to D.T. Suzuki), who was the son of a Sōtō priest, was sent to San Francisco in the late 1950s on a three-year temporary assignment to care for an established Japanese congregation at the Sōtō temple, Soko-ji.[26] Suzuki also taught zazen or sitting meditation which soon attracted American students and "beatniks", who formed a core of students who in 1962 would create the San Francisco Zen Center and its eventual network of highly influential Zen centers across the country, including the Tassajara Zen Mountain Center, the first Buddhist monastery in the Western world.[27] He provided innovation and creativity during San Francisco's countercultural movement of the 1960s but he died in 1971. His low-key teaching style was described in the popular book Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind, a compilation of his talks.[28]
White Plum Sangha[edit]
Main article: White Plum Sangha
Taizan Maezumi arrived as a young priest to serve at Zenshuji, the North American Sōtō sect headquarters in Los Angeles, in 1956. Maezumi received dharma transmission (shiho) from Baian Hakujun Kuroda, his father and high-ranked Sōtō priest, in 1955. By the mid-1960s he had formed a regular zazen group. In 1967, he and his supporters founded the Zen Center of Los Angeles. Further, he received teaching permission (inka) from Koryu Osaka – a Rinzai teacher – and from Yasutani Hakuun of the Sanbo Kyodan. Maezumi, in turn, had several American dharma heirs, such as Bernie Glassman, John Daido Loori, Charlotte Joko Beck, and Dennis Genpo Merzel. His successors and their network of centers became the White Plum Sangha.[29]
Sanbo Kyodan[edit]
Main article: Sanbo Kyodan
Sanbo Kyodan is a contemporary Japanese Zen lineage which had an impact in the West disproportionate to its size in Japan. It is rooted in the reformist teachings of Harada Daiun Sogaku (1871–1961) and his disciple Yasutani Hakuun (1885–1971), who argued that the existing Zen institutions of Japan (Sōtō and Rinzai sects) had become complacent and were generally unable to convey real Dharma.
Philip Kapleau[edit]
Main article: Philip Kapleau
Sanbo Kyodan's first American member was Philip Kapleau, who first traveled to Japan in 1945 as a court reporter for the war crimes trials. In 1953, he returned to Japan, where he met with Nakagawa Soen, a protégé of Nyogen Senzaki. In 1965, he published a book, The Three Pillars of Zen, which recorded a set of talks by Yasutani outlining his approach to practice, along with transcripts of dokusan interviews and some additional texts. In 1965 Kapleau returned to America and, in 1966, established the Rochester Zen Center in Rochester, New York. In 1967, Kapleau had a falling-out with Yasutani over Kapleau's moves to Americanize his temple, after which it became independent of Sanbo Kyodan. One of Kapleau's early disciples was Toni Packer, who left Rochester in 1981 to found a nonsectarian meditation center, not specifically Buddhist or Zen.
Robert Aitken[edit]
Main article: Robert Baker Aitken
Robert Aitken was introduced to Zen as a prisoner in Japan during World War II. After returning to the United States, he studied with Nyogen Senzaki in Los Angeles in the early 1950s. In 1959, while still a Zen student, he founded the Diamond Sangha, a zendo in Honolulu, Hawaii. Aitken became a dharma heir of Yamada's, authored more than ten books, and developed the Diamond Sangha into an international network with temples in the United States, Argentina, Germany, and Australia. In 1995, he and his organization split with Sanbo Kyodan in response to reorganization of the latter following Yamada's death. The Pacific Zen Institute led by John Tarrant, Aitken's first Dharma successor, continues as an independent Zen line.
Chinese Chán[edit]




Hsuan Hua in Ukiah, California


There are also Zen teachers of Chinese Chán, Korean Seon, and Vietnamese Thien.
Hsuan Hua[edit]
Main article: Hsuan Hua




The 480-acre (1.9 km2) City of Ten Thousand Buddhas founded by Hsuan Hua in Talmage, California is geographically the largest Buddhist community in the western hemisphere.


In 1962, Hsuan Hua moved to San Francisco's Chinatown, where, in addition to Zen, he taught Chinese Pure Land, Tiantai, Vinaya, and Vajrayana Buddhism. Initially, his students were mostly ethnic Chinese, but he eventually attracted a range of followers.
Sheng-yen[edit]
Main article: Sheng-yen
Sheng-yen first visited the United States in 1978 under the sponsorship of the Buddhist Association of the United States, an organization of Chinese American Buddhists. In 1980, he founded the Chán Meditation Society in Queens, New York. In 1985, he founded the Chung-hwa Institute of Buddhist Studies in Taiwan, which sponsors Chinese Zen activities in the United States.[30]
Korean Seon[edit]




Seung Sahn in 2002


Seung Sahn was a temple abbot in Seoul. After living in Hong Kong and Japan, he moved to the US in 1972, not speaking any English. to establish the Kwan Um School of Zen. Shortly after arriving in Providence, he attracted students and founded the Providence Zen Center. The Kwan Um School has more than 100 Zen centers on six continents.
Another Korean Zen teacher, Samu Sunim, founded Toronto's Zen Buddhist Temple in 1971. He is head of the Buddhist Society for Compassionate Wisdom, which has temples in Ann Arbor, Chicago, Mexico City, and New York City.
Hye Am[31] (1884–1985) brought lineage Dharma to the United States. Hye Am's Dharma successor, Myo Vong[32] founded the Western Son Academy (1976), and his Korean disciple, Pohwa Sunim, founded World Zen Fellowship (1994) which includes various Zen centers in the United States, such as the Potomac Zen Sangha, the Patriarchal Zen Society and the Baltimore Zen Center.[33]
Recently, many Korean buddhist monk come to the United States for the propagation. They are establishing temple and zen (Korean, 'Seon') center all around the Unites States: For example, Hyeonho was established Goryosah Temple in Los Angeles, 1979, Muil Woohak was founded Budzencenter in New York, 2010, and etc.
Vietnamese Thien[edit]




Thich Nhat Hanh in 2006


Vietnamese Zen (Thiền) teachers in America include Thich Thien-An and Thich Nhat Hanh. Thich Thien-An came to America in 1966 as a visiting professor at UCLA and taught traditional Thien meditation.
Thich Nhat Hanh[edit]
Thich Nhat Hanh was a monk in Vietnam during the Vietnam War. In 1966, he left Vietnam in exile for Plum Village, a monastery in France. In his books and talks, Thich Nhat Hanh emphasizes mindfulness (sati) as the most important practice in daily life. His monastic students live and practice at three centers in the United States: Deer Park Monastery in Escondido, California,[34] Blue Cliff Monastery in Pine Bush, New York,[35] and Magnolia Grove Monastery in Batesville, Mississippi.[36]
Tibetan Buddhism[edit]




The Dalai Lama with US President Barack Obama at the White House


Perhaps the most widely visible Buddhist leader in the world is Tenzin Gyatso, the current Dalai Lama, who first visited the United States in 1979. As the exiled political leader of Tibet, he has become a popular cause célèbre, attracting celebrity religious followers such as Richard Gere and Adam Yauch. His early life was depicted in Hollywood films such as Kundun and Seven Years in Tibet. The first Western-born Tibetan Buddhist monk was Robert A. F. Thurman, now an academic supporter of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama maintains a North American headquarters in Ithaca, New York.
The Dalai Lama's family has strong ties to America. His brother Thubten Norbu fled China after being asked to assassinate his brother. He was himself a Lama, the Takster Rinpoche, and an abbot of the Kumbum Monastery in Tibet's Amdo region. He settled in Bloomington, Indiana, where he later founded the Tibetan Mongolian Buddhist Cultural Center and Kumbum Chamtse Ling Temple. Since the death of the Takster Rinpoche it has served as a Kumbum of the West, with the current Arija Rinpochere serving as its leader.
Dilowa Gegen (Diluu Khudagt) was the first lama to immigrate to the United States in 1949 as a political refugee and joined Owen Lattimore's Mongolia Project. He was born in Tudevtei, Zavkhan, Mongolia and was one of the leading figures in declaration of independence of Mongolia. He was exiled from Mongolia, the reason remains unrevealed until today. After arriving in the US, he joined Johns Hopkins University and founded a monastery in New Jersey.




The ashes of Chögyam Trungpa are in The Great Stupa of Dharmakaya


The first Tibetan Buddhist lama to have American students was Geshe Ngawang Wangyal, a Kalmyk-Mongolian of the Gelug lineage, who came to the United States in 1955 and founded the "Lamaist Buddhist Monastery of America" in New Jersey in 1958. Among his students were the future western scholars Robert Thurman, Jeffrey Hopkins, Alexander Berzin and Anne C. Klein. Other early arrivals included Dezhung Rinpoche, a Sakya lama who settled in Seattle, in 1960, and Tarthang Tulku Rinpoche, the first Nyingma teacher in America, who arrived in the US in 1968 and established the "Tibetan Nyingma Meditation Center" in Berkeley, California in 1969.
The best-known Tibetan Buddhist lama to live in the United States was Chögyam Trungpa. Trungpa, part of the Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism, moved to England in 1963, founded a temple in Scotland, and then relocated to Barnet, Vermont, and then Boulder, Colorado by 1970. He established what he named Dharmadhatu meditation centers, eventually organized under a national umbrella group called Vajradhatu (later to become Shambhala International). He developed a series of secular techniques he called Shambhala Training. Following Trungpa's death, his followers at the Shambhala Mountain Center built the Great Stupa of Dharmakaya, a traditional reliquary monument, near Red Feather Lakes, Colorado consecrated in 2001.[37]




Karma Triyana Dharmachakra monastery in Woodstock, New York


There are four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism: the Gelug, the Kagyu, the Nyingma, and the Sakya. Of these, the greatest impact in the West was made by the Gelug, led by the Dalai Lama, and the Kagyu, specifically its Karma Kagyu branch, led by the Karmapa. As of the early 1990s, there were several significant strands of Kagyu practice in the United States: Chögyam Trungpa's Shambhala movement; Karma Triyana Dharmachakra, a network of centers affiliated directly with the Karmapa's North American seat in Woodstock, New York; a network of centers founded by Kalu Rinpoche. The Drikung Kagyu lineage also has an established presence in the United States. Khenchen Konchog Gyaltsen arrived in the US in 1982 and planted the seeds for many Drikung centers across the country. He also paved the way for the arrival of His Eminence Garchen Rinpoche, who established the Garchen Buddhist Institute in Chino Valley, Arizona. Diamond Way Buddhism founded by Ole Nydahl and representing Karmapa is also active in the US.
In the 21st century, the Nyingma lineage is increasingly represented in the West by both Western and Tibetan teachers. Lama Surya Das is a Western-born teacher carrying on the "great rimé", a non-sectarian form of Tibetan Buddhism. The late Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche founded centers in Seattle and Brazil. Gochen Tulku Sangak (sometimes spelled "Sang-Ngag") Rinpoche[38] is the founder and spiritual director of the first Ewam International Center located in the US. He is also the spiritual director of the Namchak Foundation in Montana and a primary lineage holder of the Namchak lineage.[39] Khandro Rinpoche is a female Tibetan teacher who has a presence in America. Jetsunma Ahkon Lhamo is the first Western woman to be enthroned as a Tulku, and established Nyingma Kunzang Palyul Choling centers in Sedona, Arizona and Poolesville, Maryland.
The Gelug tradition is represented in America by the Foundation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT), founded by Lama Thubten Yeshe and Lama Zopa. Gelugpa teacher Geshe Michael Roach, the first American to be awarded a Geshe degree, established centers in New York and at Diamond Mountain University in Arizona.
Sravasti Abbey is the first Tibetan Buddhist monastery for Western monks and nuns in the U.S., established in Washington State by Bhikshuni Thubten Chodron in 2003. It is situated on 300 acres of forest and meadows, 11 miles (18 km) outside of Newport, Washington, near the Idaho state line. It is open to visitors who want to learn about community life in a Tibetan Buddhist monastic setting.[40] The name Sravasti Abbey was chosen by the Dalai Lama. Bhikshuni Thubten Chodron had suggested the name, as Sravasti was the place in India where the Buddha spent 25 rains retreats (varsa in Sanskrit and yarne in Tibetan), and communities of both nuns and monks had resided there. This seemed auspicious to ensure the Buddha’s teachings would be abundantly available to both male and female monastics at the monastery.[41]
Sravasti Abbey is notable because it is home to a growing group of fully ordained bhikshunis (Buddhist nuns) practicing in the Tibetan tradition. This is special because the tradition of full ordination for women was not transmitted from India to Tibet. Ordained women practicing in the Tibetan tradition usually hold a novice ordination. Venerable Thubten Chodron, while faithfully following the teachings of her Tibetan teachers, has arranged for her students to seek full ordination as bhikshunis in Taiwan.[42]
In January 2014, the Abbey, which then had seven bhikshunis and three novices, formally began its first winter varsa (three-month monastic retreat), which lasted until April 13, 2014. As far as the Abbey knows, this was the first time a Western bhikshuni sangha practicing in the Tibetan tradition had done this ritual in the United States and in English. On April 19, 2014 the Abbey held its first kathina ceremony to mark the end of the varsa. Also in 2014 the Abbey held its first Pavarana rite at the end of the varsa.[43]  In October 2015 the Annual Western Buddhist Monastic Gathering was held at the Abbey for the first time; it was the 21st such gathering.[44]
In 2010 the first Tibetan Buddhist nunnery in North America was established in Vermont,[45] called Vajra Dakini Nunnery, offering novice ordination.[45] The abbot of this nunnery is an American woman named Khenmo Drolma who is the first "bhikkhunni," a fully ordained Buddhist nun, in the Drikung Kagyu tradition of Buddhism, having been ordained in Taiwan in 2002.[45] She is also the first westerner, male or female, to be installed as a Buddhist abbot, having been installed as abbot of Vajra Dakini Nunnery in 2004.[46]
Theravada[edit]




Insight Meditation Society, Massachusetts.


Theravada is best known for Vipassana, roughly translated as "insight meditation", is an ancient meditative practice described in the Pali Canon of the Theravada school of Buddhism and similar scriptures. Vipassana also refers to a distinct movement which was begun in the 20th century by reformers such as Mahāsi Sayādaw, a Burmese monk.[47][48][49] Mahāsi Sayādaw was a Theravada bhikkhu and Vipassana is rooted in the Theravada teachings, but its goal is to simplify ritual and other peripheral activities in order to make meditative practice more effective and available both to monks and to laypeople.
American Theravada Buddhists[edit]




Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery, Asalha Puja 2014


In 1965, monks from Sri Lanka established the Washington Buddhist Vihara in Washington, DC, the first Theravada monastic community in the United States. The Vihara was accessible to English-speakers with Vipassana meditation part of its activities. However, the direct influence of the Vipassana movement would not reach the U.S. until a group of Americans returned there in the early 1970s after studying with Vipassana masters in Asia.
Joseph Goldstein, after journeying to Southeast Asia with the Peace Corps, lived in Bodhgaya as a student of Anagarika Munindra, the head monk of Mahabodhi Temple and himself a student of Māhāsai Sayādaw. Jack Kornfield also worked for the Peace Corps in Southeast Asia, and then studied and ordained in the Thai Forest Tradition under Ajahn Chah, a major figure in 20th-century Thai Buddhism. Sharon Salzberg went to India in 1971 and studied with Dipa Ma, a former Calcutta housewife trained in vipassana by Māhāsai Sayādaw.[50] The Thai Forest Tradition also has a number of branch monasteries in the United States, including Abhayagiri Buddhist Monastery (Ajahn Pasanno, Abbot), Metta Forest Monastery (with Thanissaro Bhikkhu as Abbot) and Jetavana Temple Forest Monastery.
Goldstein and Kornfield met in 1974 while teaching at the Naropa Institute in Colorado. The next year, Goldstein, Kornfield, and Salzberg, who had very recently returned from Calcutta, along with Jacqueline Schwarz, founded the Insight Meditation Society on an 80-acre (324,000 m²) property near Barre, Massachusetts. IMS hosted visits by Māhāsi Sayādaw, Munindra, Ajahn Chah, and Dipa Ma. In 1981, Kornfield moved to California, where he founded another Vipassana center, Spirit Rock Meditation Center, in Marin County. In 1985, Larry Rosenberg founded the Cambridge Insight Meditation Center in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Another Vipassana center is the Vipassana Metta Foundation, located on Maui.
In 1989, the Insight Meditation Center established the Barre Center for Buddhist Studies near the IMS headquarters, to promote scholarly investigation of Buddhism. Its director is Mu Soeng, a former Korean Zen monk.[51]
In 1997 Dhamma Cetiya Vihara in Boston[52] was founded by Ven. Gotami of Thailand, then a 10 precept nun. Ven. Gotami received full ordination in 2000, at which time her dwelling became America's first Theravada Buddhist bhikkhuni vihara. "Vihara" translates as monastery or nunnery, and may be both dwelling and community center where one or more bhikkhus or bhikkhunis offer teachings on Buddhist scriptures, conduct traditional ceremonies, teach meditation, offer counseling and other community services, receive alms, and reside. More recently established Theravada bhikkhuni viharas include: Mahapajapati Monastery[53] where several nuns (bhikkhunis and novices) live together in the desert of southern California near Joshua Tree, founded by Ven. Gunasari Bhikkhuni of Burma in 2008; Aranya Bodhi Hermitage[54] founded by Ven. Tathaaloka Bhikkhuni in the forest near Jenner, CA, with Ven. Sobhana Bhikkhuni as Prioress, which opened officially in July 2010, where several bhikkhunis reside together along with trainees and lay supporters; and Sati Saraniya[55] in Ontario, founded by Ven. Medhanandi in appx 2009, where two bhikkhunis reside. (There are also quiet residences of individual bhikkhunis where they may receive visitors and give teachings, such as the residence of Ven. Amma Thanasanti Bhikkhuni[56] in 2009-2010 in Colorado Springs; and the Los Angeles residence of Ven. Susila Bhikkhuni; and the residence of Ven. Wimala Bhikkhuni in the mid-west.)
In 2010, in Northern California, 4 novice nuns were given the full bhikkhuni ordination in the Thai Theravada tradition, which included the double ordination ceremony. Bhante Gunaratana and other monks and nuns were in attendance. It was the first such ordination ever in the Western hemisphere.[57]
Bhante Gunaratana is currently the abbot of the Bhavana Society, a monastery and meditation retreat center that he founded in High View, West Virginia.[58][59]
S. N. Goenka[edit]
S. N. Goenka is a Burmese-born meditation teacher of the Vipassana movement. His teacher, Sayagyi U Ba Khin of Burma, was a contemporary of Māhāsi Sayādaw's, and taught a style of Buddhism with similar emphasis on simplicity and accessibility to laypeople. Goenka established a method of instruction popular in Asia and throughout the world. In 1981, he established the Vipassana Research Institute in Igatpuri, India and his students built several centers in North America.[60]
Other[edit]
In 2006, for the first time in American history, a Buddhist ordination was held where an American woman (Sister Khanti-Khema) took the Samaneri (novice) vows with an American monk (Bhante Vimalaramsi) presiding. This was done for the Buddhist American Forest Tradition at the Dhamma Sukha Meditation Center in Missouri.[61]
Contemporary developments[edit]
Engaged Buddhism[edit]
Socially engaged Buddhism has developed in Buddhism in the West. While some critics[who?] assert the term is redundant, as it is mistaken to believe that Buddhism in the past has not affected and been affected by the surrounding society, others have suggested that Buddhism is sometimes seen as too passive toward public life. This is particularly true in the West, where almost all converts to Buddhism come to it outside of an existing family or community tradition. Engaged Buddhism is an attempt to apply Buddhist values to larger social problems, including war and environmental concerns. The term was coined by Thich Nhat Hanh, during his years as a peace activist in Vietnam. The Buddhist Peace Fellowship was founded in 1978 by Robert Aitken, Anne Aitken, Nelson Foster, and others and received early assistance from Gary Snyder, Jack Kornfield, and Joanna Macy.[62] Another engaged Buddhist group is the Zen Peacemaker Order, founded in 1996 by Bernie Glassman and Sandra Jishu Holmes.[63] In 2007, the American Buddhist scholar-monk, Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi, was invited to write an editorial essay for the Buddhist magazine Buddhadharma. In his essay, he called attention to the narrowly inward focus of American Buddhism, which has been pursued to the neglect of the active dimension of Buddhist compassion expressed through programs of social engagement. Several of Ven. Bodhi’s students who read the essay felt a desire to follow up on his suggestions. After a few rounds of discussions, they resolved to form a Buddhist relief organization dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the poor and disadvantaged in the developing world. At the initial meetings, seeking a point of focus, they decided to direct their relief efforts at the problem of global hunger, especially by supporting local efforts by those in developing countries to achieve self-sufficiency through improved food productivity. Contacts were made with leaders and members of other Buddhist communities in the greater New York area, and before long Buddhist Global Relief emerged as an inter-denominational organization comprising people of different Buddhist groups who share the vision of a Buddhism actively committed to the task of alleviating social and economic suffering.[64]
Misconduct[edit]
See also: Charismatic authority
A number of groups and individuals have been implicated in scandals.[65] Sandra Bell has analysed the scandals at Vajradhatu and the San Francisco Zen Center and concluded that these kinds of scandals are most likely to occur in organisations that are in transition between the pure forms of charismatic authority that brought them into being and more rational, corporate forms of organization".[66]}}
Ford states that no one can express the "hurt and dismay" these events brought to each center, and that the centers have in many cases emerged stronger because they no longer depend on a "single charismatic leader".[67]
Robert Sharf also mentions charisma from which institutional power is derived, and the need to balance charismatic authority with institutional authority.[68] Elaborate analyses of these scandals are made by Stuart Lachs, who mentions the uncritical acceptance of religious narratives, such as lineages and dharma transmission, which aid in giving uncritical charismatic powers to teachers and leaders.[69][70][71][72][73]
Following is a partial list from reliable sources, limited to the United States and by no means all-inclusive.

In 1983, the San Francisco Zen Center experienced a sex scandal resulting in the resignation of abbot Richard Baker.[74]
Taizan Maezumi slept with several of his students at the Zen Center of Los Angeles and he died of his alcoholism.[67][75]
In 1988, Seung Sahn had sexual affairs with several of his students in the Kwan Um School of Zen.[67]
Tibetan Buddhist teacher Chögyam Trungpa openly had sexual relationships with numbers of female members of his sangha, and died of health complications from his quite public alcoholism.[76]
Trungpa's Dharma heir Ösel Tendzin contracted and later died from complications of the AIDS virus. Knowing himself to be infected, Tendzin had unprotected sex with at least two of his male students. One of them later died of AIDS.[77]
According to Natalie Goldberg, after he died Dainin Katagiri who founded the Minnesota Zen Center was identified in scandals with some of his female students.[78]
In 2010, Shasta Abbey abbot and successor to Houn Jiyu-Kennett Eko Little resigned and subsequently disrobed after admitting to forming a sexual relationship with one of the members of the lay congregation.[79]
In 2010, Eido Tai Shimano retired from the Zen Studies Society after admitting to sexual liaisons.[76]
In 2011 because of sexual misconduct, Dennis Merzel said he would disrobe as a Buddhist priest and resign as an elder of the White Plum Asanga.[80]
Several women have accused Joshu Sasaki of making sexual advances over the course of decades,[81] and scandal struck the Cimarron Zen Center in Los Angeles.[82][83]

Accreditation[edit]
See also: Dharma transmission and Zen ranks and hierarchy




This section needs expansion with: more schools of Buddhism. You can help by adding to it. (May 2012)



Definitions and policies may differ greatly between different schools or sects: for example, "many, perhaps most" Soto priests "see no distinction between ordination and Dharma transmission". Disagreement and misunderstanding exist on this point, among lay practitioners and Zen teachers alike.[84]
James Ford writes,

[S]urprising numbers of people use the titles Zen teacher, master, roshi and sensei without any obvious connections to Zen [...] Often they obfuscate their Zen connections, raising the very real question whether they have any authentic relationship to the Zen world at all. In my studies I've run across literally dozens of such cases.[85]

James Ford claims that about eighty percent of authentic teachers in the United States belong to the American Zen Teachers Association or the Soto Zen Buddhist Association and are listed on their websites. This can help a prospective student sort out who is a "normative stream" teacher from someone who is perhaps not, but of course twenty percent do not participate.[85]
Demographics of Buddhism in the United States[edit]
Numbers of Buddhists[edit]
Accurate counts of Buddhists in the United States are difficult. Self-description has pitfalls. Because Buddhism is a cultural concept, individuals who self-describe as Buddhists may have little knowledge or commitment to Buddhism as a religion or practice; on the other hand, others may be deeply involved in meditation and committed to the Dharma, but may refuse the label "Buddhist". In the 1990s, Robert A. F. Thurman estimated there were 5 to 6 million Buddhists in America.
In a 2007 Pew Research Center survey, at 0.7% Buddhism was the third largest religion in the US after Christianity (78.4%), no religion (10.3%) and Judaism (1.7%).[86] In 2012 on the occasion of a visit from the Dalai Lama, U-T San Diego said there are 1.2 million Buddhist practitioners in the U.S., and of them 40% live in Southern California.[87]
In 2008, the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life Religious Landscape survey and the American Religious Identification Survey estimated Buddhists at 0.7 percent and 0.5 percent of the American population, respectively. ARIS estimated that the number of adherents rose by 170 percent between 1990 and 2000, reaching 1.2 million followers in 2008.[88] According to William Wilson Quinn "by all indications that remarkable rate of growth continues unabated."[89] But according to Robert Thurman,

Scholars are unsure whether the reports are accurate, as Americans who might dabble in various forms of Buddhism may not identify themselves as Buddhist on a survey. That makes it difficult to quantify the number of Buddhists in the United States.[88]

Demographics of Import Buddhists[edit]
A sociological survey conducted in 1999 found that relative to the US population as a whole, import Buddhists (i.e., those who are not Buddhist by birth) are proportionately more likely to be white, upper middle class, highly educated, and left-leaning in their political views. In terms of race, only 10% of survey respondents indicated they were a race other than white, a matter that has been cause of some concern among Buddhist leaders. Nearly a third of the respondents were college graduates, and more than half held advanced degrees. Politically, 60% identified themselves as Democrats, and Green Party affiliations outnumbered Republicans by 3 to 1. Import Buddhists were also proportionately more likely to have come from Catholic, and especially Jewish backgrounds. More than half of these adherents came to Buddhism through reading books on the topic, with the rest coming by way of martial arts and friends or acquaintances. The average age of the respondents was 46. Daily meditation was their most commonly cited Buddhist practice, with most meditating 30 minutes a day or more.[90]
Ethnic divide[edit]
Discussion about Buddhism in America has sometimes focused on the issue of the visible ethnic divide separating ethnic Buddhist congregations from import Buddhist groups.[91] Although many Zen and Tibetan Buddhist temples were founded by Asians, they now attract fewer Asian-Americans. With the exception of Sōka Gakkai,[7] almost all active Buddhist groups in America are either ethnic or import Buddhism based on the demographics of their membership. There is often limited contact between Buddhists of different ethnic groups.
However, the cultural divide should not necessarily be seen as pernicious. It is often argued that the differences between Buddhist groups arise benignly from the differing needs and interests of those involved. Convert Buddhists tend to be interested in meditation and philosophy, in some cases eschewing the trappings of religiosity altogether. On the other hand, for immigrants and their descendants, preserving tradition and maintaining a social framework assume a much greater relative importance, making their approach to religion naturally more conservative. Further, based on a survey of Asian-American Buddhists in San Francisco, "many Asian-American Buddhists view non-Asian Buddhism as still in a formative, experimental stage" and yet they believe that it "could eventually mature into a religious expression of exceptional quality".[1]
Additional questions come from the demographics within import Buddhism. The majority of American converts practicing at Buddhist centers are white, often from Christian or Jewish backgrounds. Only Sōka Gakkai has attracted significant numbers of African-American or Latino members. A variety of ideas have been broached regarding the nature, causes, and significance of this racial uniformity. Journalist Clark Strand noted

…that it has tried to recruit [African-Americans] at all makes Sōka Gakkai International utterly unique in American Buddhism.[92]

Strand, writing for Tricycle (an American Buddhist journal) in 2004, notes that SGI has specifically targeted African-Americans, Latinos and Asians, and other writers have noted that this approach has begun to spread, with Vipassana and Theravada retreats aimed at non-white practitioners led by a handful of specific teachers.[93]
A question is the degree of importance ascribed to discrimination, which is suggested to be mostly unconscious, on the part of white converts toward potential minority converts.[94] To some extent, the racial divide indicates a class divide, because convert Buddhists tend to be more educated.[95] Among African American Buddhists who commented on the dynamics of the racial divide in convert Buddhism are Jan Willis and Charles R. Johnson.[96]
A Pew study shows that Americans tend to be less biased towards Buddhists when compared to other religions, such as Christianity, to which 18% of people were biased, when only 14% were biased towards Buddhists. American Buddhists are often not raised as Buddhists, with 32% of American Buddhists being raised Protestant, and 22% being raised Catholic, which means that over half of the American Buddhists were converted at some point in time. Also, Buddhism has had to adapt to America in order to garner more followers so that the concept would not seem so foreign, so they adopted "Catholic" words such as "worship" and "churches."[97]
Buddhist education in the United States[edit]
Chögyam Trungpa founded Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado, a four-year Buddhist college in the US (now Naropa University) in 1974.[98] Allen Ginsberg was an initial faculty member, christening the Institute's poetry department the "Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics". Now Naropa University, the school offers accredited degrees in a number of subjects, many not directly related to Buddhism.
The University of the West is affiliated with Hsi Lai Temple and was previously Hsi Lai University. Soka University of America, in Aliso Viejo California, was founded by the Sōka Gakkai as a secular school committed to philosophic Buddhism. The City of Ten Thousand Buddhas is the site of Dharma Realm Buddhist University, a four-year college teaching courses primarily related to Buddhism but including some general-interest subjects. The Institute of Buddhist Studies in Berkeley, California, in addition to offering a master's degree in Buddhist Studies acts as the ministerial training arm of the Buddhist Churches of America and is affiliated with the Graduate Theological Union. The school moved into the Jodo Shinshu Center in Berkeley.
The first Buddhist high school in the United States, Developing Virtue Secondary School, was founded in 1981 by the Dharma Realm Buddhist Association at their branch monastery in the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas in Ukiah, California. In 1997, the Purple Lotus Buddhist School offered elementary-level classes in Union City, California, affiliated with the True Buddha School; it added a middle school in 1999 and a high school in 2001.[99] Another Buddhist high school, Tinicum Art and Science now The Lotus School of Liberal Arts |url=http://Lotusla.org, which combines Zen practice and traditional liberal arts, opened in Ottsville, Pennsylvania in 1998. It is associated informally with the World Shim Gum Do Association in Boston. The Pacific Buddhist Academy opened in Honolulu, Hawaii in 2003. It shares a campus with the Hongwanji Mission School, an elementary and middle school; both schools affiliated with the Honpa Hongwanji Jodo Shinshu mission.[100]
Juniper Foundation, founded in 2003, holds that Buddhist methods must become integrated into modern culture just as they were in other cultures.[101] Juniper Foundation calls its approach "Buddhist training for modern life"[102] and it emphasizes meditation, balancing emotions, cultivating compassion and developing insight as four building blocks of Buddhist training.[103]
See also[edit]

Western Buddhism
Buddhism in Canada
Religion in the United States
United States religious history
List of religious topics
Soka Gakkai

References[edit]


^ a b Kenneth K. Tanaka (January 2001). "American Buddhism's Racial Divide: Buddhists in the United States are split into two camps: Asian Americans and 'New Buddhists.' Can they be brought together?". Beliefnet.com. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Racial Diversity and Buddhism in the U.S. (2006)". The Pluralism Project. Harvard University. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ Rowe, Peter (16 April 2012). "Dalai Lama facts and figures". U-T San Diego. Retrieved 15 January 2015. 
^ http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/state/hawaii/
^ a b Prebish 1999, p. 23.
^ McFarland, H. Neill (1967). The Rush Hour of the Gods, p.5. The Macmillilan Company, New York. ISBN 978-0-02-583200-8
^ a b David W. Chappell, (2000). Engaged Buddhism in the West, p.192. Wisdom Publications, Boston. ISBN 978-0-86171-159-8
^ "What do Courtney Love, Orlando Bloom, Orlando Cepeda, Tina Turner and Herbie Hancock share? Powerful Mystical Buddhist chant". Xomba blog. April 17, 2008. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ Prebish 1999, p. 25.
^ "Buddhist in America Video Series". SGI-USA Media. May 13, 2010. Retrieved 2015-10-21. 
^ a b c Ford, pp. 59–62.
^ Prebish 1999, p. 4.
^ "A journalist's Guide to Buddhism" (PDF). Canada: Centre for Faith and the Media. September 20, 2004. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ Richard Hughes Seager (1999). Buddhism in America. Columbia University Press. pp. 51–69. ISBN 0-231-10868-0. 
^ Edwin Arnold (1891). The Light of Asia. Theosophical University Press, from Roberts Brothers, Boston. ISBN 1-55700-154-5. 
^ Rick Fields (1992) [1981]. How the Swans Came to the Lake: A Narrative History of Buddhism in America. London: Shambhala Publications. ISBN 0-87773-583-2. 
^ Dwight Goddard (2009) [1932]. A Buddhist Bible. BiblioBazaar, LLC. ISBN 978-0-559-10995-9. 
^ James Ishmael Ford (2006). Zen Master Who?: A Guide to the People and Stories of Zen. Wisdom Publications. pp. 166–. ISBN 978-0-86171-509-1. Retrieved 15 October 2013. 
^ Ford, pp. 71–72.
^ Andre van de Braak, ZEN SPIRITUALITY IN A SECULAR AGE. Charles Taylor and Zen Buddhism in the West
^ While not serious, Whalen's interest began in 1946, in: Suiter, John (2002). Poets on the Peaks: Gary Snyder, Philip Whalen & Jack Kerouac in the Cascades. Counterpoint, via Amazon Look Inside. p. 68. ISBN 978-1-58243-148-2. 
^ a b Introduction by Douglas, Ann; in Kerouac, Jack (2006) [1958]. The Dharma Bums. Viking (Penguin). p. xix. ISBN 978-0-670-01993-9. 
^ "Religion: Zen: Beat & Square". Time. July 21, 1958. Retrieved January 21, 2013. 
^ Encyclopedia of women and religion in North America, Volume 2 By Rosemary Skinner Keller, Rosemary Radford Ruether, Marie Cantlon (pg. 642)
^ HarperSanFrancisco (2006). "The Lost Lineage". Thebuddhadharma.com. Retrieved 2010-11-19. 
^ Seager, p. 99.
^ Seager, pp. 98–99.
^ Seager, p. 97.
^ "Hakuyu Taizan Maezumi". Asia Pacific Research Online. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Who Is Master Sheng-yen". Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Hye-Am". Retrieved 2010-10-10. 
^ Myo Vong (2008). Cookies of Zen. EunHaeng NaMu Seoul, South Korea. ISBN 978-89-5660-257-8
^ "World Zen Fellowship". Retrieved 2010-10-10. 
^ "A Practice Center in the Tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh - Deer Park Monastery". web site. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Blue Cliff Monastery". web site. Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Magnolia Grove Monastery". Retrieved 2011-01-12. 
^ "The Great Stupa of Dharmakaya". Shambhala Mountain Center web site. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "Namchak Teachers | Namchak". www.namchak.org. Retrieved 2016-01-12. 
^ "Namchak Teachers | Namchak". www.namchak.org. Retrieved 2015-12-01. 
^ "Home - Sravasti Abbey - A Buddhist Monastery". Sravasti Abbey. Retrieved 2017-07-28. 
^ Sravasti Abbey (07-28-17). "Dalai Lama Endorsement". Sravasti Abbey.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ "Living in Vinaya - Sravasti Abbey - A Buddhist Monastery". Sravasti Abbey. Retrieved 2017-07-28. 
^ "Living in Vinaya - Sravasti Abbey - A Buddhist Monastery". Sravasti Abbey. Retrieved 2017-07-28. 
^ ""Joys and Challenges" Are the Focus for 21st Western Buddhist Monastic Gathering - Sravasti Abbey - A Buddhist Monastery". Sravasti Abbey. 2015-12-04. Retrieved 2017-07-28. 
^ a b c Vajra Dakini Nunnery
^ Women Making History Archived 2010-06-01 at the Wayback Machine.
^ King 1992, p. 132-137.
^ Nyanaponika 1998, p. 107-109.
^ Koster 2009, p. 9-10.
^ Trish Deitch Rohrer (January 2003). "To Love Abundantly". Retrieved 2010-04-20. 
^ "Tricycle Interview: Dharma for Sale". Tricycle Magazine web site. Retrieved 2012-01-12. 
^ Dhamma Cetiya Vihara in Boston
^ Mahapajapati Monastery
^ Aranya Bodhi Hermitage
^ Sati Saraniya
^ Ven. Thanasanti Bhikkhuni
^ Boorstein, Sylvia (2011-05-25). "Ordination of Bhikkhunis in the Theravada Tradition". Huffington Post. 
^ Luo, Michael (29 April 2006). "Calming the Mind Among Bodies Laid Bare". The New York Times. Retrieved 23 September 2010. 
^ Prebish, Charles S. (1999). "North American Buddhist Communities". Luminous passage: The practice and study of Buddhism in America. University of California Press. p. 151. ISBN 978-0-520-21697-6. Ven. Henepola Gunartana founded a monastic center in West Virginia known as the Bhavana Society. 
^ "Mr. S.N. Goenka". Vipassana Meditation web site. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "Background story for Sister Khema". Dhammasukha.org. Archived from the original on 2013-11-12. Retrieved 2013-11-12. 
^ "About us: History". Buddhist Peace Fellowship web site. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "Zen Peacemaker Order". web site. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ http://www.buddhistglobalrelief.org/active/ourHistory.html
^ Ford, pp. 60–61.
^ Bell, Sandra (2002). "Scandals in Emerging Western Buddhism". In Charles S Prebish & Martin Baumann. Westward Dharma: Buddhism Beyond Asia (PDF). University of California Press. pp. 230–242. ISBN 0-520-22625-9. 
^ a b c Ford, p. 101
^ Sharf, Robert H. (1995-C), "Sanbokyodan. Zen and the Way of the New Religions" (PDF), Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 1995 22/3-4  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ Lachs, Stuart (1999), Means of Authorization: Establishing Hierarchy in Ch'an /Zen Buddhism in America 
^ Lachs, Stuart (n.d.), Reply to Vladimir K. 
^ Lachs, Stuart (2002), Richard Baker and the Myth of the Zen Roshi 
^ Lachs, Stuart (2006), The Zen Master in America: Dressing the Donkey with Bells and Scarves 
^ Lachs, Stuart (2011), When the Saints Go Marching In: Modern Day Zen Hagiography (PDF) 
^ Crews, Frederick C. (March 28, 2002). "Zen & the Art of Success". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved May 23, 2012. 
^ Ford, p. 163.
^ a b Oppenheimer, Mark (August 20, 2010). "Sex Scandal Has American Buddhists Looking Within". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 August 2010. 
^ "Stuart Lachs: Interview With Non-Duality magazine". Non-Duality. August 26, 2010. Retrieved June 2, 2012. 
^ Göpfert, Caryl (Spring 2005). "Beyond Betrayal". Tricycle. The Tricycle Foundation. Retrieved September 14, 2012. 
^ [1]
^ Ryan, Philip (February 7, 2011). "Genpo Merzel Disrobes". Tricycle: The Buddhist Review. Tricycle Foundation. Retrieved May 18, 2012. 
^ Oppenheimer, Mark & Lovett, Ian (February 11, 2013). "Zen Groups Distressed by Accusations Against Teacher". The New York Times. Retrieved February 12, 2013. 
^ Ford, pp. 111–112.
^ Lachs, Stuart (1994). "Coming Down from the Zen Clouds: A Critique of the Current State of American Zen". The Zen Site via the Zen Buddhism WWW Virtual Library. Retrieved May 18, 2012. 
^ Ford, p. 55.
^ a b Ford, p. 79.
^ "Religious Composition of the U.S" (PDF). U.S. Religious Landscape Survey. Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. 2007. Retrieved 2009-05-09. 
^ Rowe, Peter (April 16, 2012). "Dalai Lama facts and figures". U-T San Diego. Retrieved April 16, 2012. 
^ a b Sarah Pulliam Bailey, "American Zenophilia". In: HUMANITIES, March/April 2010, Volume 31, Number 2
^ [2], Washington Post, What's an American Buddhist, retrieved on November 19, 2012.
^ Coleman, James William. “The New Buddhism: Some Empirical Findings” in American Buddhism: Methods and Findings in Recent Scholarship. Eds. Dunken Ryuken Williams and Christopher S. Queen. Curzon Press, 1999
^ "Tensions in American Buddhism". Religion & Ethics Newsweekly, Episode number 445. Public Broadcasting Service. July 6, 2001. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ Strand, Tricycle, Spring 2004, p. 9
^ Gina Sharpe, Tricycle, Fall 2004, p. 26-27
^ Charles R. Johnson, as quoted in Clark Strand (Winter 2003). "Born in the USA: Racial Diversity in Soka Gakkai International". Tricycle. p. 55. 
^ James Shaheen, Tricycle, Winter 2003, p. 7
^ Pintak, Lawrence (September 1, 2001). "'Something Has to Change': Blacks in American Buddhism". Lion's Roar. Retrieved March 24, 2016. 
^ [3], National Endowment for Humanities website "American Zenophilia", retrieved on October 24, 2012.
^ "History: The 20th Century". Naropa University web site. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "About BLBS: Our History". Purple Lotus Buddhist School web site. Archived from the original on April 9, 2010. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "Pacific Buddhist Academy History". Pacific Buddhist Academy web site. Archived from the original on October 17, 2009. Retrieved 2010-04-21. 
^ "Heirs to Insight: Assimilating Buddhist methods into Modern Culture" Juniper Foundation (2009). p. 2
^ "The Juniper Story" Archived 2011-03-17 at the Wayback Machine. Juniper Foundation. Retrieved 2011-03-03.
^ "Awakening the Mind: An Introduction to Buddhist Training". Juniper Foundation (2009). p. 10.


Sources[edit]


Ford, James Ishmael (2006). Zen Master Who?. Wisdom Publications. ISBN 0-86171-509-8. 
King, Winston L. (1992), Theravada Meditation. The Buddhist Transformation of Yoga, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 
Koster, Frits (2009), Basisprincipes Vipassana-meditatie. Mindfulness als weg naar bevrijdend inzicht, Asoka 
Nyanaponika (1998), Het hart van boeddhistische meditatie (The heart of Buddhist Meditation), Asoka 
Prebish, Charles S. (1999). Luminous Passage: The Practice and Study of Buddhism and America. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-21697-0. 
Seager, Richard Hughes (1999). Buddhism in America. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-10868-0. 



Prebish, Charles (2003). Buddhism — the American Experience. Journal of Buddhist Ethics Online Books, Inc. ISBN 0-9747055-0-0.

External links[edit]

American Buddhist Net: Buddhist News & Forums
"Surveying the Buddhist Landscape", article by Charles Prebish, from Lion's Roar
"Global Buddhism: Developmental Periods, Regional Histories, and a New Analytical Perspective", article by Martin Baumann
"Buddhism Comes to Main Street", article by Jan Nattier on UrbanDharma.org
"Buddhist Studies and its Impact on Buddhism in Western Societies", article by Max Deeg
"Shin Buddhism in the American Context", article by Dr. Alfred Bloom
Chronology of the lives of important persons in the history of Zen in America, from Terebess Online







v
t
e


Buddhism topics






Glossary
Index
Outline





Foundations



Three Jewels

Buddha
Dharma
Sangha


Four Noble Truths
Noble Eightfold Path
Nirvana
Middle Way





The Buddha



Tathāgata
Birthday
Four sights
Physical characteristics
Footprint
Relics
Iconography in Laos and Thailand
Films
Miracles
Family

Suddhodāna (father)
Māyā (mother)
Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother)
Yasodhara (wife)
Rāhula (son)
Ānanda (cousin)
Devadatta (cousin)


Places where the Buddha stayed
Buddha in world religions





Key concepts



Avidyā (Ignorance)
Bardo
Bodhicitta
Bodhisattva
Buddha-nature
Dhamma theory
Dharma
Enlightenment
Five hindrances
Indriya
Karma
Kleshas
Mind Stream
Parinirvana
Pratītyasamutpāda
Rebirth
Saṃsāra
Saṅkhāra
Skandha
Śūnyatā
Taṇhā (Craving)
Tathātā
Ten Fetters
Three marks of existence

Impermanence
Dukkha
Anatta


Two truths doctrine





Cosmology



Ten spiritual realms
Six realms

Deva (Buddhism)
Human realm
Asura realm
Hungry Ghost realm
Animal realm
Hell


Three planes of existence





Practices



Bhavana
Bodhipakkhiyādhammā
Brahmavihara

Mettā
Karuṇā
Mudita
Upekkha


Buddhābhiseka
Dāna
Devotion
Dhyāna
Faith
Five Strengths
Iddhipada
Meditation

Mantras
Kammaṭṭhāna
Recollection
Smarana
Anapanasati
Samatha
Vipassanā (Vipassana movement)
Shikantaza
Zazen
Kōan
Mandala
Tonglen
Tantra
Tertön
Terma


Merit
Mindfulness

Satipatthana


Nekkhamma
Pāramitā
Paritta
Puja

Offerings
Prostration
Chanting


Refuge
Satya

Sacca


Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Sati
Dhamma vicaya
Pīti
Passaddhi


Śīla

Five Precepts
Bodhisattva vow
Prātimokṣa


Threefold Training

Śīla
Samadhi
Prajñā


Vīrya

Four Right Exertions







Nirvana



Bodhi
Bodhisattva
Buddhahood
Pratyekabuddha
Four stages of enlightenment

Sotāpanna
Sakadagami
Anāgāmi
Arhat







Monasticism



Bhikkhu
Bhikkhuni
Śrāmaṇera
Śrāmaṇerī
Anagarika
Ajahn
Sayadaw
Zen master
Rōshi
Lama
Rinpoche
Geshe
Tulku
Householder
Upāsaka and Upāsikā
Śrāvaka

The ten principal disciples


Shaolin Monastery





Major figures



Gautama Buddha
Kaundinya
Assaji
Sāriputta
Mahamoggallāna
Mulian
Ānanda
Mahākassapa
Anuruddha
Mahākaccana
Nanda
Subhuti
Punna
Upali
Mahapajapati Gotamī
Khema
Uppalavanna
Asita
Channa
Yasa
Buddhaghoṣa
Nagasena
Angulimala
Bodhidharma
Nagarjuna
Asanga
Vasubandhu
Atiśa
Padmasambhava
Nichiren
Songtsen Gampo
Emperor Wen of Sui
Dalai Lama
Panchen Lama
Karmapa
Shamarpa
Naropa
Xuanzang
Zhiyi





Texts



Tripiṭaka
Madhyamakālaṃkāra
Mahayana sutras
Pāli Canon
Chinese Buddhist canon
Tibetan Buddhist canon





Branches



Theravada
Mahayana

Chan Buddhism

Zen
Seon
Thiền


Pure Land
Tiantai
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Yogachara


Navayana
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Dzogchen


Early Buddhist schools
Pre-sectarian Buddhism
Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna





Countries



Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Russia

Kalmykia
Buryatia


Singapore
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand
Tibet
Vietnam
Middle East

Iran


Western countries

Argentina
Australia
Brazil
France
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela







History



Timeline
Ashoka
Buddhist councils
History of Buddhism in India

Decline of Buddhism in India


Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution
Greco-Buddhism
Buddhism and the Roman world
Buddhism in the West
Silk Road transmission of Buddhism
Persecution of Buddhists
Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal
Buddhist crisis
Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism
Buddhist modernism
Vipassana movement
969 Movement
Women in Buddhism





Philosophy



Abhidharma
Atomism
Buddhology
Creator
Economics
Eight Consciousnesses
Engaged Buddhism
Eschatology
Ethics
Evolution
Humanism
Logic
Reality
Secular Buddhism
Socialism
The unanswered questions





Culture



Architecture

Temple
Vihara
Wat
Stupa
Pagoda
Candi
Dzong architecture
Japanese Buddhist architecture
Korean Buddhist temples
Thai temple art and architecture
Tibetan Buddhist architecture


Art

Greco-Buddhist


Bodhi Tree
Budai
Buddharupa
Calendar
Cuisine
Funeral
Holidays

Vesak
Uposatha
Magha Puja
Asalha Puja
Vassa


Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi
Kasaya
Mahabodhi Temple
Mantra

Om mani padme hum


Mudra
Music
Pilgrimage

Lumbini
Maya Devi Temple
Bodh Gaya
Sarnath
Kushinagar


Poetry
Prayer beads
Prayer wheel
Symbolism

Dharmachakra
Flag
Bhavacakra
Swastika
Thangka


Temple of the Tooth
Vegetarianism





Miscellaneous



Abhijñā
Amitābha
Avalokiteśvara

Guanyin


Brahmā
Dhammapada
Dharma talk
Hinayana
Kalpa
Koliya
Lineage
Maitreya
Māra
Ṛddhi
Sacred languages

Pali
Sanskrit


Siddhi
Sutra
Vinaya





Comparison



Bahá'í Faith
Christianity

Influences
Comparison


East Asian religions
Gnosticism
Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Psychology
Science
Theosophy
Violence
Western philosophy





Lists



Bodhisattvas
Books
Buddhas

named


Buddhists
Suttas
Temples








Category
Portal












v
t
e


Buddhism in the West






Buddhism in Europe
Buddhism in North America





Main articles



Western Buddhism
Buddhist modernism
Buddhism in the United States





Theravada



Theravada
Thai Forest Tradition
Vipassana movement
Burma
Ajahn Chah
England
Anagarika Dharmapala
Sangharakshita
Germany
Nyanatiloka
Nyanaponika Thera
USA
Thanissaro Bhikkhu
Joseph Goldstein
Jack Kornfield





USA Zen



Shunryu Suzuki-lineage
Shunryu Suzuki
Zentatsu Richard Baker
Mel Weitsman
San Francisco Zen Center
Tassajara Zen Mountain Center
Kodo Sawaki-lineage
Kodo Sawaki
Antai-ji
Shohaku Okumura
Brad Warner
Yasutani-lineage
Hakuun Yasutani
Sanbo Kyodan
Robert Baker Aitken
John Tarrant
Taizan Maezumi
Zen Center of Los Angeles
White Plum Asanga
Tetsugen Bernard Glassman
Zen Peacemakers
Joko Beck
Dennis Merzel
Kanzeon Zen Center
Philip Kapleau-lineage
Philip Kapleau
Rochester Zen Center
Toni Packer
Other Soto-lineages
Soyu Matsuoka
Dainin Katagiri
Kobun Chino Otogawa
Gyokuko Carlson
Soen Nakagawa-lineage
Soen Nakagawa
Eido Tai Shimano
Zen Studies Society
Dai Bosatsu Zendo Kongo-ji
Other Rinzai-lineages
Kyozan Joshu Sasaki
Omori Sogen
Shodo Harada
Keido Fukushima
Pan-lineage
Soto Zen Buddhist Association
Sanbo Kyodan
Sanbo Kyodan
Hakuun Yasutani
Hugo Enomiya-Lassalle
Robert Aitken
Philip Kapleau
White Plum Asanga
Taizan Maezumi
Dennis Merzel
Germany Zen
Karlfried Graf Dürckheim
Muho Noelke
Korean Seon
Jinul
Seung Sahn
Vietnamese Thiền
Thích Nhất Hạnh





European Zen



Sanbo Kyodan
Hugo Enomiya-Lassalle
Kodo Sawaki-lineage
Taisen Deshimaru
Other Soto-lineages
Houn Jiyu-Kennett





Pure Land



Pure Land Buddhism
USA
David Brazier
Canada
Jodo Shinshu Buddhist Temples of Canada





Tibetan Buddhism



Tibetan Buddhism
14th Dalai Lama
USA
Chögyam Trungpa
England
Kelsang Gyatso
Germany
Anagarika Govinda





Exchange



Buddhism and Christianity
Buddhism and psychology












v
t
e


Buddhism in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands












v
t
e


Demographics of the United States




Demographic history



By economic
and social



Affluence
Educational attainment
Emigration
Home-ownership
Household income
Immigration
Income inequality
Language
LGBT
Middle classes
Personal income
Poverty
Social class
Unemployment by state
Wealth





By religion



Buddhists
Christians

Catholics
Coptics
Protestants


Hindus
Jains
Jews
Muslims

Ahmadiyyas


Neopagans
Non-religious
Rastafaris
Scientologists
Sikhs





By continent
and ethnicity




Africa



African diaspora in the Americas

Afro-Caribbean / West Indian Americans

Bahamian Americans
Belizean Americans
Guyanese Americans
Haitian Americans
Jamaican Americans
Trinidadian and Tobagonian Americans


Black Hispanic and Latino Americans




African immigrants to the United States

Central Africans in the United States
Horn Africans in the United States
North Africans in the United States
Southeast Africans in the United States
Southern Africans in the United States
West Africans in the United States







Asia



Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans


East Asia

Chinese Americans

Hong Kong Americans
Tibetan Americans


Japanese Americans
Korean Americans
Mongolian Americans
Taiwanese Americans




South Asia

Bangladeshi Americans
Bhutanese Americans
Indian Americans
Nepalese Americans
Pakistani Americans
Romani Americans
Sri Lankan Americans




Southeast Asia

Burmese Americans
Cambodian Americans
Filipino Americans
Hmong Americans
Indonesian Americans
Laotian Americans
Malaysian Americans
Singaporean Americans
Thai Americans
Vietnamese Americans




West Asia

Arab Americans
Assyrian Americans
Iranian Americans
Israeli Americans
Jewish Americans







Europe



White Americans

English Americans
French Americans
German Americans
Irish Americans
Italian Americans
Scandinavian Americans
Slavic Americans
Spanish Americans


Non-Hispanic whites
White Hispanic and Latino Americans





Oceania



Pacific Islands Americans

Chamorro Americans
Native Hawaiians
Samoan Americans
Tongan Americans


Euro Oceanic Americans

Australian Americans
New Zealand Americans







North America



Native Americans and Alaska Natives
Canadian Americans
Cuban Americans
Mexican Americans
Puerto Ricans (Stateside)





South America



Hispanic and Latino Americans
Brazilian Americans
Colombian Americans
Ecuadorian Americans





Multiethnic



Melungeon








People of the United States / Americans
American ancestry
Maps of American ancestries
2010 Census
Race and ethnicity in the Census
Race and ethnicity in the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Racism














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Buddhism_in_the_United_States&oldid=811255751"					Categories: Buddhism in the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesWebarchive template wayback linksArticles to be merged from February 2017All articles to be mergedAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2010Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2010Articles to be expanded from May 2012All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxes