"Burgermeister" redirects here. For the "Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town" character, see Burgermeister Meisterburger.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Burgomaster's Family, possibly painted by Gerard Donck c. 1640


Burgomaster (alternatively spelled burgermeister, literally master of the town, master of the borough, master of the fortress, or master of the citizens) is the English form of various terms in or derived from Germanic languages for the chief magistrate or chairman of the executive council, usually of a sub-national level of administration such as a city or a similar entity. The name in English was derived from the Dutch burgemeester. In some cases, Burgomaster was the title of the head of state and head of government of a sovereign (or partially or de facto sovereign) city-state, sometimes combined with other titles (as in Hamburg's First Mayor and President of the Senate). Contemporary titles are commonly translated into English as mayor.



Contents


1 Municipal government
2 City state government
3 Compound title at supra-municipal level
4 References
5 External links



Municipal government[edit]




Arnold von Brauweiler, a German burgomaster, known in German as Bürgermeister



Bürgermeister (literally: 'master of the citizens'), in German: in Germany, Austria, and formerly in Switzerland. In Switzerland, the title was abolished mid-19th century; various current titles for roughly equivalent offices include Gemeindepräsident, Stadtpräsident, Gemeindeamtmann, and Stadtamtmann.

Oberbürgermeister ('Supreme Burgomaster') is the most common version for a mayor in a big city in Germany (it is not in use in Austria). The Ober- (lit. upper) prefix is used in many ranking systems for the next level up including military designations. The mayors of cities, which simultaneously comprise one of Germany's 112 urban districts usually bear this title. Urban districts are comparable to independent cities in the English-speaking world. However, also the mayors of some cities, which do not comprise an urban district, but often used to comprise one until the territorial reforms in the 1970s, bear the title Oberbürgermeister.


Borgmester (Danish)
Borgarstjóri (Faroese)
Borgermester (Norwegian (Bokmål))
Börgermester (Low German)
Burgomaestre (Spanish)
Purkmistr (Czech)
Burgumaisu (Basque)
Borgomastro or Sindaco-Borgomastro (Italian): in few communes of Lombardy
Burgemeester in Dutch: in Belgium a party-political post, though formally nominated by the regional government and answerable to it, the federal state and even the province. Mayor. In the Netherlands nominated by the municipal council but appointed by the crown. In theory above the parties, in practice a high-profile party-political post.
Bourgmestre (French) in Belgium, Luxembourg and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Bürgermeister (Estonian)
Burmistras (Lithuanian), derived from German.
Buergermeeschter (Luxembourgish)
Polgármester (Hungarian), derived from German.
Burmistrz (Polish), a mayoral title, derived from German. The German form Oberbürgermeister ('Supreme Burgomaster') is often translated as Nadburmistrz. The German-derived terminology reflects the involvement of German settlers in the early history of many Polish towns.
Borgmästare, kommunalborgmästare (Swedish); the title is not used in Sweden in present times, the closest equivalent being kommunalråd (often translated to English as Municipal commissioner) or borgarråd (only in Stockholm City).
Boargemaster (West Frisian)
Pormestari (Finnish)

City state government[edit]

In history (sometimes until the beginning of the 19th century) in many free imperial cities (such as Bremen, Hamburg, Lübeck etc.) the function of burgomaster was usually held simultaneously by three persons, serving as an executive college. One of the three being burgomaster in chief for a year (called in some cases in German: präsidierender Bürgermeister; in presiding burgomaster), the second being the prior burgomaster in chief, the third being the upcoming one. Präsidierender Bürgermeister is now an obsolete formulation sometimes found in historic texts.
In an important city, especially in a city state (Stadtstaat), where one of the Bürgermeister has a rank equivalent to that of a minister-president (governor), there can be several posts called Bürgermeister in the city's executive college, justifying the use of a compound title for the actual highest magistrate (also rendered as lord mayor), such as:

Regierender Bürgermeister (literally 'governing burgomaster', commonly translated as governing mayor) in West Berlin and reunited Berlin,[1] while in Berlin the term Bürgermeister without attribute – English Mayor – refers to his deputies,[2] and while the heads of the 12 boroughs of Berlin are called Bezirksbürgermeister, English borough mayor.[3]
Erster Bürgermeister (literally First Burgomaster) in Hamburg
Bürgermeister und Präsident des Senats ('Burgomaster and President of the Senate') in Bremen



Compound title at supra-municipal level[edit]

Amtsbürgermeister (German; roughly translated: 'District Burgomaster') can be used for the chief magistrate of a Swiss constitutive canton, as in Aargau 1815–1831 (next styled Landamman)

References[edit]



^ "Curriculum Vitae Klaus Wowereit". Land Berlin, Der Regierende Bürgermeister, Senatskanzlei. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 7 April 2010. 
^ cf. Article 56 sec. 2 of the "Constitution of the State of Berlin (part 4)". Land Berlin, Der Regierende Bürgermeister, Senatskanzlei. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 2010-04-07. 
^ cf. Article 74 sec. 2 of the "Constitution of the State of Berlin (part 6)". Land Berlin, Der Regierende Bürgermeister, Senatskanzlei. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 7 April 2010. 



External links[edit]



Look up burgomaster, burgomeister, or burghermaster in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



WorldStatesmen- here Switzerland, see also other present countries






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burgomaster&oldid=818102826"					Categories: Heads of local governmentHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2015All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from September 2011Articles containing German-language text