For the reddish color, see Burgundy (color). For other uses, see Burgundy (disambiguation) or Bourgogne (disambiguation).







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The lead section of this article may need to be rewritten. The reason given is: it does not summarise the article, and the content that does appear is almost entirely without sources in the main body of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. Use the lead layout guide to ensure the section follows Wikipedia's norms and to be inclusive of all essential details. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article includes inline citations, but they are not properly formatted. Please improve this article by correcting them. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Burgundy
Bourgogne


Region of France






Flag








Country
 France


Prefecture
Dijon


Departments


4

Côte-d'Or
Saône-et-Loire
Yonne
Nièvre





Government


 • President
François Patriat (PS)


Area


 • Total
31,582 km2 (12,194 sq mi)


Population (2008-01-01)


 • Total
1,631,000


 • Density
52/km2 (130/sq mi)


Time zone
CET (UTC+1)


 • Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)


ISO 3166 code
FR-D


GDP (2012)[citation needed]
Ranked 16th


Total
€42.7 billion (US$55.0 bn)


Per capita
€25,996 (US$33,436)


NUTS Region
FR2


Website
cr-bourgogne.fr


Burgundy (French: Bourgogne, IPA: [buʁɡɔɲ] ( listen)) is a historical territory and a former administrative region of France. It takes its name from the Burgundians, an East Germanic people who moved westwards beyond the Rhine during the late Roman period.[1] Historically, "Burgundy" has referred to numerous political entities, including kingdoms and duchies spanning territory from the Mediterranean to the Low Countries.[not verified in body] Beginning 1 January 2016, the name Burgundy refers to a specific French political entity that is part of the new administrative region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, an entity comprising four departments, Côte-d'Or, Saône-et-Loire, Yonne, and Nièvre.[not verified in body]



Contents


1 History
2 Geography

2.1 Major communities


3 Climate
4 Politics
5 Culture and livelihoods
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



History[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Vix Krater, a Greek wine-mixing vessel found in the Vix Grave






Coat of arms of the second Duchy of Burgundy and later of the province


Main article: History of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté
The first recorded inhabitants of the area that became Burgundy were Celts, who were eventually incorporated in the Roman Empire as Gallo-Romans.
During the 4th century, the Burgundians, a Germanic people, who may have originated in Bornholm (on the Baltic Sea), settled in the western Alps. They founded the Kingdom of the Burgundians, which was conquered in the 6th century by another Germanic tribe, the Franks.




Map of France showing Burgundy and provincial boundaries in 1789


Under Frankish dominion, the Kingdom of Burgundy continued for several centuries.
Later, the region was divided between the Duchy of Burgundy (to the west) and the Free County of Burgundy (to the east). The Duchy of Burgundy is the better-known of the two, later becoming the French province of Burgundy, while the County of Burgundy became the French province of Franche-Comté, literally meaning free county.
Burgundy's modern existence is rooted in the dissolution of the Frankish Empire. In the 880s, there were four Burgundies, which were the Kingdom of Upper and Lower Burgundy, the duchy and the county.
During the Middle Ages, Burgundy was the seat of some of the most important Western churches and monasteries, among them Cluny, Cîteaux, and Vézelay.
During the Hundred Years' War, King John II of France gave the duchy to his youngest son, Philip the Bold. The duchy soon became a major rival to the crown. The court in Dijon outshone the French court both economically and culturally. In 1477, at the battle of Nancy during the Burgundian Wars, the last duke Charles the Bold was killed in battle, and the Duchy itself was annexed by France and became a province. However the northern part of the empire was taken by the Austrian Habsburgs.
With the French Revolution in the end of the 18th century, the administrative units of the provinces disappeared, but were reconstituted as regions during the Fifth Republic in the 1970s. The modern-day administrative region comprises most of the former duchy.
Geography[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Map of Burgundy






Arboretum de Pézanin


The region of Burgundy is both larger than the old Duchy of Burgundy and smaller than the area ruled by the Dukes of Burgundy, from the modern Netherlands to the border of Auvergne. Today, Burgundy is made up of the old provinces:

Burgundy: Côte-d'Or, Saône-et-Loire, and southern half of Yonne. This corresponds to the old duchy of Burgundy (later called province of Burgundy). However, the old county of Burgundy (later called province of Franche-Comté) is not included inside the Burgundy region, but it makes up the Franche-Comté region. Also, a small part of the duchy of Burgundy (province of Burgundy) is now inside the Champagne-Ardenne region.
Nivernais: now the department of Nièvre.
the northern half of Yonne is a territory that was not part of Burgundy (at least not since the 11th century), and was a frontier between Champagne, Île-de-France, and Orléanais, being part of each of these provinces at different times in history.

Major communities[edit]




Dijon, Place du Bareuzai






Le Creusot




Autun
Auxerre
Beaune
Chalon-sur-Saône
Dijon
Le Creusot
Mâcon
Montceau-les-Mines
Nevers
Prémery
Sens


Climate[edit]
The climate of this region is essentially oceanic (Cfb in Köppen classification), with a continental influence (sometimes called a "half-continental climate").[citation needed]
Politics[edit]




Seat of the regional council of Burgundy in Dijon


The regional council of Burgundy is the legislative assembly.[citation needed] The council has been chaired by the Socialist François Patriat since 2004.[citation needed] The council's seat is in the capital city Dijon, at 17 boulevard de la Trémouille.[citation needed]

Culture and livelihoods[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Chardonnay vineyards in the south of the Côte de Beaune surrounding the town of Meursault.


See also: Burgundy wine
Burgundy is one of France's main wine producing areas. It is well known for both its red and white wines, mostly made from Pinot noir and Chardonnay grapes, respectively, although other grape varieties can be found, including Gamay, Aligote, Pinot blanc, and Sauvignon blanc. The region is divided into the Côte-d'Or, where the most expensive and prized Burgundies are found, and Beaujolais, Chablis, the Côte Chalonnaise and Mâcon. The reputation and quality of the top wines, together with the fact that they are often produced in small quantities, has led to high demand and high prices, with some Burgundies ranking among the most expensive wines in the world.
With regard to cuisine, the region is famous for the Burgundian dishes coq au vin, beef bourguignon, and époisses de Bourgogne cheese.
Tourist sites of Burgundy include the Rock of Solutré, the Tournus cathedral, Cluny, Brancion, the castles of Cormatin and Couches, the palace of the dukes of Burgundy in Dijon, the Pézanin Arboretum (in Dompierre-les-Ormes), and Vézelay Abbey.
Earlier, the southeastern part of Burgundy was heavily industrial, with coal mines near Montceau-les-Mines and iron foundries and crystal works in Le Creusot. These industries declined in the second half of the twentieth century, and Le Creusot has tried to reinvent itself as a tourist town.
References[edit]


^ Poupardin, René,  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Burgundy". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 


Further reading[edit]

Lecomte, Bernard; Thouart, Jean-Louis (2004). Burgundy, What a Story! (de Bourogne ed.). ISBN 978-2-902650-02-6. 
Davies, Norman (2011). "Ch.3 : Burgundia: Five, Six or Seven Kingdoms (c. 411-1795)". Vanished Kingdoms: The History of Half-Forgotten Europe. London: Allan Lane. ISBN 978-0-141-04886-4. 
Loi n° 2015-29 du 16 janvier 2015 relative à la délimitation des régions, aux élections régionales et départementales et modifiant le calendrier électoral (in French)
INSEE. "Produits intérieurs bruts régionaux et valeurs ajoutées régionales de 1990 à 2012". Retrieved 2014-03-04. 

External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Burgundy.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Burgundy.





Look up burgundy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Burgundy.



(in English) Burgundy : history in the open air—Official French website
(in French) Burgundy statistics on INSEE website
(in French) Regional Council website
(in English) Short guide to Burgundy with main tourist attractions


(in English) Burgundy at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Burgundy in the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia at BibleWiki
Burgundy in the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia at NewAdvent.org







v
t
e


Administrative regions of France








Current administrative regions (since 2016)



Metropolitan regions



Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes
Bourgogne-Franche-Comté
Brittany
Centre-Val de Loire
Corsica
Grand Est
Hauts-de-France
Île-de-France
Normandy
Nouvelle-Aquitaine
Occitanie
Pays de la Loire
Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur





Overseas regions



French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Mayotte
Réunion













Former administrative regions (1982–2015)



Metropolitan regions



Alsace
Aquitaine
Auvergne
Burgundy
Brittany
Centre-Val de Loire
Champagne-Ardenne
Corsica
Franche-Comté
Île-de-France
Languedoc-Roussillon
Limousin
Lorraine
Midi-Pyrénées
Nord-Pas-de-Calais
Lower Normandy
Upper Normandy
Pays de la Loire
Picardy
Poitou-Charentes
Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur
Rhône-Alpes





Overseas regions



French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Mayotte
Réunion















v
t
e


 Historical provinces of France






Alsace
Angoumois
Anjou
Artois
Aunis
Auvergne
Basse-Navarre
Béarn
Beaujolais
Berry
Bourbonnais
Brittany
Burgundy
Champagne
Corsica
Dauphiné
Flanders and Hainaut
Foix
Forez
Franche-Comté
Gascony
Guyenne
Île-de-France
Languedoc
Limousin
Lorraine
Lyonnais
Maine
Marche
Montbéliard
Mulhouse
Nice
Nivernais
Normandy
Orléanais
Perche
Picardy
Poitou
Provence
Roussillon
Saintonge
Savoy
Touraine
Trois-Évêchés
Venaissin









Coordinates: 47°00′N 4°30′E﻿ / ﻿47.000°N 4.500°E﻿ / 47.000; 4.500



Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 149443835
LCCN: n79091183
GND: 4129468-3
SUDOC: 027259978
BNF: cb118625014 (data)
HDS: 7281
NDL: 00660449











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burgundy&oldid=817721709"					Categories: BurgundyFormer regions of FranceNUTS 2 statistical regions of the European UnionHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceUse dmy dates from July 2013Articles needing additional references from August 2016All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles needing footnote reformattingArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Articles containing French-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles needing additional references from February 2017Articles with French-language external linksArticles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers