"Businessman" redirects here. For other uses, see Businessman (disambiguation).
A business person is a person involved in business – in particular someone undertaking activities (commercial or industrial) for the purpose of generating cash flow, sales, and revenue utilizing a combination of human, financial, intellectual and physical capital with a view to fuelling economic development and growth. An entrepreneur is an example of a businessperson. The term "businessperson" may refer to founder, owner, or majority shareholder of a business or it can also be used to describe a high-level executive who does the everyday running and management of a business even though the executive is not the owner.[1] The term may sometimes mean someone who is involved in an upper-level management role in a corporation, company, enterprise, firm, organization, or agency.[2] This can especially apply to the founder, an owner, a manager, an executive, or an administrator in charge of total management of a corporation, company, organization, or agency.[3]


Part of a series on


Capitalism







Concepts


Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Capitalist mode of production
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Wage slavery








Economic systems


Anglo-Saxon
Free market
Laissez-faire
Mercantile
Mixed
Nordic
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social market
State
Welfare
East Asian








Economic theories


American
Austrian
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Marxian
Modern Monetary
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Supply-side








Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production








Development


Advanced
Consumer
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Rentier
State monopoly
Techno








People


Adam Smith
John Stuart Mill
David Ricardo
Thomas Malthus
Jean-Baptiste Say
Milton Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
John Maynard Keynes
Alfred Marshall
Ludwig von Mises
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Schumpeter
Thorstein Veblen
Max Weber
Ronald Coase








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Black capitalism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Corporatism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Exploitation
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy








Ideologies


Anarcho-capitalism
Democratic capitalism
Dirigisme
Eco-capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Inclusive capitalism
Liberalism (economic)
Libertarianism
Neo-Capitalism
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Social democracy








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal







v
t
e








Contents


1 History

1.1 Prehistoric period: Traders
1.2 Medieval period: Rise of the merchant class
1.3 Renaissance to Enlightenment: Rise of the capitalist
1.4 Modern period: Rise of the manager


2 Salary
3 Business guru
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]
Prehistoric period: Traders[edit]
Since a "businessman" can mean anyone in industry or commerce,[4] businessmen have existed as long as industry and commerce have existed. "Commerce" can simply mean "trade," and trade has existed through all of recorded history. The first businessmen in human history were traders or merchants.
Medieval period: Rise of the merchant class[edit]
Merchants emerged as a "class" in medieval Italy. Between 1300 and 1500, modern accounting, the bill of exchange, and limited liability were invented, and thus the world saw "the first true bankers," who are certainly businessmen.[5]
Around the same time, Europe saw the "emergence of rich merchants."[6] This "rise of the merchant class" came as Europe "needed a middleman" for the first time, and these "burghers" or "bourgeois" were the people who played this role.[7]
Renaissance to Enlightenment: Rise of the capitalist[edit]
Europe became the dominant global commercial power in the 16th century, and as Europeans developed new tools for business, new types of business people began to use those tools. In this period, Europe developed and used paper money, cheques, and joint-stock companies (and their shares of stock).[8] Developments in actuarial science led to insurance.[9] Together, these new tools were used by a new kind of businessman, the capitalist. These people owned or financed businesses as bankers, but they were not merchants of goods. These capitalists were a major force in the Industrial Revolution...
Modern period: Rise of the manager[edit]
The newest kind of businessperson is the manager. One of the first true managers was Robert Owen (1771–1858), an industrialist in Scotland.[10] He studied the "problems of productivity and motivation," and was followed by Frederick Winslow Taylor, who was the first person who studied work.[11] After World War I, management became popular due to the example of Herbert Hoover and the Harvard Business School, which offered degrees in business administration (management).[12]
Salary[edit]
Salaries for businesspeople vary.[13][14] The salaries of the top CEOs can be millions of dollars per year. For example, Discovery Communications' head, David M. Zaslav, made $156 million in 2014.[15] The high salary which executives earn has often been a source of criticism with many believing that they are paid excessively.[16]
Business guru[edit]
Some leading business theorists believe that managing a business is like a science. These people look to leaders in academic research on business or to successful business leaders for guidance. Collectively, these people are called "business gurus."
See also[edit]


Business portal



Business magnate
Entrepreneur
Financier
Investor
White-collar worker

References[edit]



^ Compare: "BUSINESSMAN". Audioenglish. Retrieved 2016-08-27. The noun BUSINESSMAN has 1 sense: 1. a person engaged in commercial or industrial business (especially an owner or executive) 
^ Sam Ashe-Edmunds,. "Entrepreneur Vs. Executive". Globalpost. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ "Entrepreneur vs. CEO: Understanding the Difference Can Save Your Business". Huffington Post. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ "BUSINESSMAN". Audioenglish. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Roberts, J.M. (2013). The Penguin History of the World, Sixth Edition. New York: Penguin. p. 506. 
^ Roberts, J.M. (2013). The Penguin History of the World, Sixth Edition. New York: Penguin. p. 509. 
^ Roberts, J.M. (2013). The Penguin History of the World, Sixth Edition. New York: Penguin. p. 510. 
^ Roberts, J.M. (2013). The Penguin History of the World, Sixth Edition. New York: Penguin. p. 558. 
^ Roberts, J.M. (2013). The Penguin History of the World, Sixth Edition. New York: Penguin. p. 559. 
^ Drucker, Peter (2008). Management, Revised Edition. New York: Collins Business. p. 13. 
^ Drucker, Peter (2008). Management, Revised Edition. New York: Collins Business. p. 14. 
^ Drucker, Peter (2008). Management, Revised Edition. New York: Collins Business. pp. 15–16. 
^ "Business and Financial Occupations". Bureau of Labor and Statistics. U.S. Department of Labor. Retrieved 2015-09-18. 
^ "Management Occupations". Bureau of Labor and Statistics. U.S. Department of Labor. Retrieved 2015-09-18. 
^ "100 Highest Paid CEOs". AFL-CIO. AFL-CIO. Retrieved 2015-09-18. 
^ Gretchen Gavett. "CEOs Get Paid Too Much". Harvard Business Review. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved 2015-09-18. 



External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of businessperson at Wiktionary
 The dictionary definition of businesswoman at Wiktionary
 The dictionary definition of businessman at Wiktionary




Authority control



NDL: 00574890











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Businessperson&oldid=817925509"					Categories: Business occupationsBusinesspeopleEntrepreneurship