





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





This article is part of a series on the


Politics of the
United States of America







Federal Government


Constitution of the United States


Law
Taxation








Legislature


United States Congress

 



House of Representatives


Speaker Paul Ryan (R)


Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R)


Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D)


Congressional districts




United States Senate


President Mike Pence (R)


President Pro Tempore Orrin Hatch (R)


President Pro Tempore Emeritus Patrick Leahy (D)


Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R)


Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D)








Executive


President of the United States


Donald Trump (R)



Vice President of the United States


Mike Pence (R)



Cabinet
Federal agencies
Executive Office








Judiciary


Supreme Court of the United States


Chief Justice John Roberts


Kennedy
Thomas
Ginsburg
Breyer
Alito
Sotomayor
Kagan
Gorsuch



Courts of Appeals
District Courts (list)


Other tribunals








Elections


Presidential elections
Midterm elections


Off-year elections








Political parties


Democratic
Republican



Third parties








Federalism


State Government



Governors


Legislatures (List)


State courts




Local government











Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The Cabinet of the United States is part of the executive branch of the U.S. government that normally acts as an advisory body to the President of the United States. It is composed of the most senior appointed officers of the executive branch of the U.S. government serving under the President. Among those are the Vice President and the heads of the federal executive departments, all of whom are by federal law (3 U.S.C. § 19) in the line of succession to the Presidency and have duties under the 25th Amendment to the Constitution. Members of the Cabinet (except for the Vice President) serve at the pleasure of the President, who can dismiss them at will for no cause. All federal public officials, including Cabinet members, are also subject to impeachment by the House of Representatives and trial in the Senate for "treason, bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors".
The President can also unilaterally designate senior White House staffers, heads of other federal agencies and the Ambassador to the United Nations as members of the Cabinet, although this is a symbolic status marker and does not, apart from attending Cabinet meetings, confer any additional powers.



Contents


1 History
2 Background

2.1 In the Constitution and federal law
2.2 Confirmation process
2.3 Salary


3 Current Cabinet and Cabinet-rank officials

3.1 Vice President and the heads of the executive departments
3.2 Cabinet-level officials


4 Former executive and Cabinet-level departments
5 Renamed heads of the executive departments
6 Other positions no longer of Cabinet rank
7 Proposed Cabinet departments
8 Gallery
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



History[edit]
There is no explicit reference to a "Cabinet" in the United States Constitution, the United States Code, or the Code of Federal Regulations. In the Constitution, the President is authorized (but not compelled) to "require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices." The Constitution does not provide for an explicit forum where the principal officers' opinions can be obtained less formally, without writing, such as a formal Cabinet.
George Washington, the first U.S. President, organized his principal officers into a Cabinet, and it has been part of the executive branch structure ever since. Washington's Cabinet consisted of six members: himself, the Vice President John Adams, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of War Henry Knox and Attorney General Edmund Randolph.
Presidents have used Cabinet meetings of selected principal officers but to widely differing extents and for different purposes. Secretary of State William H. Seward and then Professor Woodrow Wilson advocated use of a parliamentary-style Cabinet government. But President Abraham Lincoln rebuffed Seward, and Woodrow Wilson would have none of it in his administration. In recent administrations, Cabinets have grown to include key White House staff in addition to department and various agency heads. President Ronald Reagan formed seven subcabinet councils to review many policy issues, and subsequent Presidents have followed that practice.[1]
Background[edit]
In the Constitution and federal law[edit]
The term "principal Officer in each of the executive Departments" is mentioned in the Opinion Clause (Article II, Section 2, Clause 1) and the term "Heads of Departments" is mentioned in Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the Constitution. The term "principal officers of the executive departments" is also mentioned in the Twenty-fifth Amendment, Section 4, the executive departments being listed in 5 U.S.C. § 101. Although there are occasional references to "Cabinet-level officers," which when viewed in their context do refer to these "principal officers" and "heads of departments," the terms "principal officers" and "heads of departments" are not necessarily synonymous with "Cabinet" members.
In 3 U.S.C. § 302 with regard to delegation of authority by the President, it is provided that "nothing herein shall be deemed to require express authorization in any case in which such an official would be presumed in law to have acted by authority or direction of the President." This pertains directly to the heads of the executive departments as each of their offices is created and specified by statutory law (hence the presumption) and thus gives them the authority to act for the President within their areas of responsibility without any specific delegation.
Under the 1967 Federal Anti-Nepotism statute, federal officials are prohibited from appointing their immediate family members to certain governmental positions, including those in the Cabinet.[2]
Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, an incoming administration may appoint acting heads of department from employees of the relevant department. These may be existing high-level career employees, from political appointees of the outgoing administration, or sometimes lower-level appointees of the incoming administration.[3]
Confirmation process[edit]
The heads of the executive departments and all other federal agency heads are nominated by the President and then presented to the Senate for confirmation or rejection by a simple majority (although before the use of the "nuclear option" during the 113th US Congress, they could have been blocked by filibuster, requiring cloture to be invoked by ​3⁄5 supermajority to further consideration). If approved, they receive their commission scroll, are sworn in and then begin their duties.
An elected Vice President does not require Senate confirmation, nor does the White House Chief of Staff, which is an appointed staff position of the Executive Office of the President.


Office
Senate Confirmation Review Committee


Secretary of State
Foreign Relations Committee


Secretary of the Treasury
Finance Committee


Secretary of Defense
Armed Services Committee


Attorney General
Judiciary Committee


Secretary of the Interior
Energy and Natural Resources Committee


Secretary of Agriculture
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Committee


Secretary of Commerce
Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee


Secretary of Labor
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee


Secretary of Health and Human Services
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee (consult)
Finance Committee (official)


Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee


Secretary of Transportation
Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee


Secretary of Energy
Energy and Natural Resources Committee


Secretary of Education
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee


Secretary of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Affairs Committee


Secretary of Homeland Security
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee


Trade Representative
Finance Committee


Director of National Intelligence
Select Committee on Intelligence


Ambassador to the United Nations
Foreign Relations Committee


Office of Management and Budget
Budget Committee
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee


Director of the Central Intelligence Agency
Select Committee on Intelligence


Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
Environment and Public Works Committee


Administrator of the Small Business Administration
Small Business and Entrepreneurship Committee


Salary[edit]
Main article: Executive Schedule
The heads of the executive departments and most other senior federal officers at cabinet or sub-cabinet level receive their salary under a fixed five level pay plan known as the Executive Schedule, which is codified in Title 5 of the United States Code. 21 positions, including the heads of the executive departments and others, receiving Level I pay are listed in 5 U.S.C. § 5312, and those 46 positions on Level II pay (including the number two positions of the executive departments) are listed in 5 U.S.C. § 5313. As of January 2016, the Level I annual pay was set at $205,700.[4]
The annual salary of the Vice President is $235,300.[4] The salary level was set by the Government Salary Reform Act of 1989, which also provides an automatic cost of living adjustment for federal employees. The Vice President does not automatically receive a pension based on that office, but instead receives the same pension as other members of Congress based on his ex officio position as President of the Senate.[5]
Current Cabinet and Cabinet-rank officials[edit]
See also: Cabinet of Donald Trump
The individuals listed below were nominated by President Donald Trump to form his Cabinet and were confirmed by the United States Senate on the date noted, or are serving as acting department heads by his request pending the confirmation of his nominees. For a full list of people nominated for Cabinet positions, see Formation of Donald Trump's Cabinet.

Vice President and the heads of the executive departments[edit]
The Cabinet includes the Vice President and the heads of 15 executive departments, listed here according to their order of succession to the Presidency. These 15 positions are the core "cabinet member" seats, as distinct from other Cabinet-level seats for other various top level White House staffers and heads of other government agencies, none of whom are in the presidential line of succession and not all of whom are Officers of the United States.[6] Note that the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate follow the Vice President and precede the Secretary of State in the order of succession, but both are in the legislative branch and are not part of the Cabinet.


Cabinet


Office
(statutory basis)
Incumbent
Term began



Vice President
(Constitution, Art. II, Sec. I)

Mike Pence

January 20, 2017



Secretary of State
(22 U.S.C. § 2651a)

Rex Tillerson

February 1, 2017



Secretary of the Treasury
(31 U.S.C. § 301)

Steve Mnuchin

February 13, 2017



Secretary of Defense
(10 U.S.C. § 113)

James Mattis

January 20, 2017



Attorney General
(28 U.S.C. § 503)

Jeff Sessions

February 9, 2017



Secretary of the Interior
(43 U.S.C. § 1451)

Ryan Zinke

March 1, 2017



Secretary of Agriculture
(7 U.S.C. § 2202)

Sonny Perdue

April 25, 2017



Secretary of Commerce
(15 U.S.C. § 1501)

Wilbur Ross

February 28, 2017



Secretary of Labor
(29 U.S.C. § 551)

Alex Acosta

April 28, 2017



Secretary of Health and Human Services
(Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953,
67 Stat. 631 and 42 U.S.C. § 3501)

Eric Hargan

October 10, 2017
Acting



Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
(42 U.S.C. § 3532)

Ben Carson

March 2, 2017



Secretary of Transportation
(49 U.S.C. § 102)

Elaine Chao

January 31, 2017



Secretary of Energy
(42 U.S.C. § 7131)

Rick Perry

March 2, 2017



Secretary of Education
(20 U.S.C. § 3411)

Betsy DeVos

February 7, 2017



Secretary of Veterans Affairs
(38 U.S.C. § 303)

David Shulkin

February 14, 2017



Secretary of Homeland Security
(6 U.S.C. § 112)

Kirstjen Nielsen

December 6, 2017


Cabinet-level officials[edit]
The following officials hold positions that are considered to be Cabinet-level positions. Cabinet-level officials attend Cabinet meetings, but are not official Cabinet Members:


Cabinet-level Officials


Office
Incumbent
Term began



White House Chief of Staff
(Pub.L. 76–19, 53 Stat. 561, enacted April 3, 1939,
Executive Order 8248, Executive Order 10452,
Executive Order 12608)

John F. Kelly

July 31, 2017



Trade Representative
(19 U.S.C. § 2171)

Robert Lighthizer

May 15, 2017



Director of National Intelligence[7][8]
(50 U.S.C. § 3023)

Dan Coats

March 16, 2017



Ambassador to the United Nations
(22 U.S.C. § 287, Executive Order 9844, Executive Order 10108)

Nikki Haley

January 27, 2017



Director of the Office of Management and Budget
(31 U.S.C. § 502, Executive Order 11541,
Executive Order 11609, Executive Order 11717)

Mick Mulvaney

February 16, 2017



Director of the Central Intelligence Agency[7]
(50 U.S.C. § 3036)

Mike Pompeo

January 23, 2017



Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
(5 U.S.C. § 906, Executive Order 11735)

Scott Pruitt

February 17, 2017



Administrator of the Small Business Administration
(15 U.S.C. § 633)

Linda McMahon

February 14, 2017


Former executive and Cabinet-level departments[edit]

Department of War (1789–1947), headed by the Secretary of War: renamed Department of the Army by the National Security Act of 1947.
Department of the Navy (1798–1949), headed by the Secretary of the Navy: became a military department within the Department of Defense.
Post Office Department (1829–1971), headed by the Postmaster General: reorganized as the United States Postal Service, a government corporation.
National Military Establishment (1947-1949), headed by the Secretary of Defense: created by the National Security Act of 1947 and recreated as the Department of Defense in 1949.
Department of the Army (1947–1949), headed by the Secretary of the Army: became a military department within the Department of Defense.
Department of the Air Force (1947–1949), headed by the Secretary of the Air Force: became a military department within the Department of Defense.

Renamed heads of the executive departments[edit]

Secretary of Foreign Affairs: created in July 1781 and renamed Secretary of State in September 1789.[9]
Secretary of War: created in 1789 and was renamed as Secretary of the Army by the National Security Act of 1947. The 1949 Amendments to the National Security Act of 1947 made the Secretary of the Army a subordinate to the Secretary of Defense.
Secretary of Commerce and Labor: created in 1903 and renamed Secretary of Commerce in 1913 when its labor functions were transferred to the new Secretary of Labor.
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: created in 1953 and renamed Secretary of Health and Human Services in 1979 when its education functions were transferred to the new Secretary of Education.

Other positions no longer of Cabinet rank[edit]

Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (1996–2001): created as an independent agency in 1979, raised to Cabinet rank in 1996,[10] and dropped from Cabinet rank in 2001.[11]
Director of Central Intelligence (1995–2001)[12][13][14]
Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (1993–2009)[15][16]
Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers (2009–2017)[17][18]

Proposed Cabinet departments[edit]

"Department of Commerce" or "Department of Industry and Commerce", proposed by Secretary of the Treasury William Windom in a speech given at a Chamber of Commerce dinner in May 1881.[19]
"Department of Natural Resources", proposed by the Eisenhower administration,[20] President Richard Nixon,[21] the 1976 GOP national platform,[22] and by Bill Daley (as a consolidation of the Departments of the Interior and Energy, and the Environmental Protection Agency).[23]
"Department of Peace", proposed by Senator Matthew Neely in the 1930s, Congressman Dennis Kucinich, and other members of the U.S. Congress.[24][25]
"Department of Social Welfare", proposed by President Franklin Roosevelt in January 1937.[26]
"Department of Public Works", proposed by President Franklin Roosevelt in January 1937.[26]
"Department of Conservation" (renamed Department of Interior) proposed by President Franklin Roosevelt in January 1937.[26]
"Department of Urban Affairs and Housing", proposed by President John F. Kennedy.[27]
"Department of Business and Labor", proposed by President Lyndon Johnson.[28]
"Department of Community Development", proposed by President Richard Nixon; to be chiefly concerned with rural infrastructure development.[21][29]
"Department of Human Resources" proposed by President Richard Nixon; essentially a revised Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.[21]
"Department of Economic Affairs" proposed by President Richard Nixon; essentially a consolidation of the Departments of Commerce, Labor and Agriculture.[30]
"Department of Environmental Protection", proposed by Senator Arlen Specter and others.[31]
"Department of Intelligence", proposed by former Director of National Intelligence Mike McConnell.[32]
"Department of Global Development", proposed by the Center for Global Development.[33]
"Department of Arts", proposed by Quincy Jones.[34]
"Department of Business", proposed by President Barack Obama as a consolidation of the U.S. Department of Commerce’s core business and trade functions, the Small Business Administration, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the Export-Import Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency.[35][36]

Gallery[edit]







James K. Polk and his Cabinet in 1846. The first Cabinet to be photographed.









President Buchanan and his Cabinet









Abraham Lincoln met with his Cabinet for the first reading of the Emancipation Proclamation draft (July 26, 1862).









President Theodore Roosevelt's Cabinet









President William H. Taft's second cabinet, 1912
(photographed by Harris & Ewing photo studio)









The Nixon Cabinet, 1969









President Gerald R. Ford meeting with his Cabinet (June 25, 1976)









President Jimmy Carter's Cabinet meeting (February 13, 1978)









President Reagan and his Cabinet (September 11, 1986)









President George H. W. Bush and his Cabinet in the Cabinet Room (September 5, 1989).









The Clinton Cabinet, in 1993.









The Bush Cabinet (February 2008).









The first Obama Cabinet (September 2009).









The Trump Cabinet (March 13, 2017)




See also[edit]

Black Cabinet
Brain trust
Cabinet of the Confederate States of America
Kitchen Cabinet
List of African-American United States Cabinet Secretaries
List of female United States Cabinet Secretaries
List of foreign-born United States Cabinet Secretaries
List of living former members of the United States Cabinet
List of people who have held multiple United States Cabinet-level positions
List of United States Cabinet members who have served more than eight years
List of United States political appointments that crossed party lines
St. Wapniacl (historical mnemonic acronym)
Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States

References[edit]


^ Gaziano, Todd. "Essays on Article II: Opinion Clause". The Heritage Foundation. 
^ Wulwick, Richard P.; Macchiarola, Frank J. (1995). "Congressional Interference With The President's Power To Appoint" (PDF). Stetson Law Review. XXIV: 625–652. 
^ Pierce, Olga (2009-01-22). "Who Runs Departments Before Heads Are Confirmed?". ProPublica. Retrieved 2017-01-20. 
^ a b Obama, Barack (2014-12-19). "ADJUSTMENTS OF CERTAIN RATES OF PAY" (PDF). EXECUTIVE ORDER 13686. The White House. Retrieved 2015-09-18. 
^ Purcell, Patrick J. (2005-01-21). "Retirement Benefits for Members of Congress" (PDF). CRS Report for Congress. Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 2017-02-19. 
^ The White House. "The Cabinet". Retrieved June 20, 2015. 
^ a b "President Donald J. Trump Announces His Cabinet". White House. February 8, 2017. Retrieved February 20, 2017. 
^ Demirjian, Karoun (March 15, 2017). "Coats confirmed as nation's new spy chief". Washington Post. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ The office of Secretary of Foreign Affairs existed under the Articles of Confederation from October 20, 1781 to March 3, 1789, the day before the Constitution came into force.
^ "President Clinton Raises FEMA Director to Cabinet Status" (Press release). Federal Emergency Management Agency. February 26, 1996. Archived from the original on January 16, 1997. Retrieved May 22, 2009. 
^ Fowler, Daniel (November 19, 2008). "Emergency Managers Make It Official: They Want FEMA Out of DHS". CQ Politics. Archived from the original on November 29, 2008. Retrieved March 3, 2010. During the Clinton administration, FEMA Administrator James Lee Witt met with the Cabinet. His successor in the Bush administration, Joe M. Allbaugh, did not.  (Archived March 3, 2010, by WebCite at https://www.webcitation.org/5ny13zsIv?url=http://www.cqpolitics.com/wmspage.cfm?docID%3Dhsnews-000002988269%26cpage%3D1
^ Tenet, George (2007). At the Center of the Storm. London: HarperCollins. p. 136. ISBN 0-06-114778-8. Under President Clinton, I was a Cabinet member—a legacy of John Deutch's requirement when he took the job as DCI—but my contacts with the president, while always interesting, were sporadic. I could see him as often as I wanted but was not on a regular schedule. Under President Bush, the DCI lost its Cabinet-level status. 
^ Schoenfeld, Gabriel (July–August 2007). "The CIA Follies (Cont'd.)". Commentary. Retrieved May 22, 2009. Though he was to lose the Cabinet rank he had enjoyed under Clinton, he came to enjoy "extraordinary access" to the new President, who made it plain that he wanted to be briefed every day. 
^ Sciolino, Elaine (September 29, 1996). "C.I.A. Chief Charts His Own Course". New York Times. Retrieved May 22, 2009. It is no secret that Mr. Deutch initially turned down the intelligence position, and was rewarded for taking it by getting Cabinet rank. 
^ Clinton, Bill (July 1, 1993). "Remarks by the President and Lee Brown, Director of Office of National Drug Control Policy". White House. Retrieved May 22, 2009. We are here today to install a uniquely qualified person to lead our nation's effort in the fight against illegal drugs and what they do to our children, to our streets, and to our communities. And to do it for the first time from a position sitting in the President's Cabinet. 
^ Cook, Dave (March 11, 2009). "New drug czar gets lower rank, promise of higher visibility". Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved March 16, 2009. For one thing, in the Obama administration the Drug Czar will not have Cabinet status, as the job did during George W. Bush's administration. 
^ "President Donald J. Trump Announces His Cabinet". whitehouse.gov. 2017-02-08. Retrieved 2017-02-09. 
^ "President Trump announces his full Cabinet roster". Retrieved 2017-02-09. 
^ "A Department of Commerce". The New York Times. 1881-05-13. 
^ Company, DIANE Publishing (April 1, 1998). "Improving Management and Organization in Federal Natural Resources and Environmental Functions: Hearing Before the Committee on Governmental Affairs, U. S. Senate". DIANE Publishing. Retrieved February 20, 2017 – via Google Books. Chairman STEVENS. Thank you very much. I think both of you are really pointing in the same direction as this Committee. I do hope we can keep it on a bipartisan basis. Mr. Dean, when I was at the Interior Department, I drafted Eisenhower's Department of Natural Resources proposal, and we have had a series of them that have been presented. 
^ a b c "116 - Special Message to the Congress on Executive Branch Reorganization". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. The administration is today transmitting to the Congress four bills which, if enacted, would replace seven of the present executive departments and several other agencies with four new departments: the Department of Natural Resources, the Department of Community Development, the Department of Human Resources and the Department of Economic Affairs. 
^ "Republican Party Platform of 1976". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. August 18, 1976. 
^ Thrush, Glenn (November 8, 2013). "Locked in the Cabinet". Politico. Retrieved November 18, 2013. 
^ Schuman, Frederick L. (1969). Why a Department of Peace. Beverly Hills: Another Mother for Peace. p. 56. OCLC 339785. 
^ "History of Legislation to Create a Dept. of Peace". Archived from the original on 2006-07-20. 
^ a b c "10 - Summary of the Report of the Committee on Administrative Management". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. Overhaul the more than 100 separate departments, boards, commissions, administrations, authorities, corporations, committees, agencies and activities which are now parts of the Executive Branch, and theoretically under the President, and consolidate them within twelve regular departments, which would include the existing ten departments and two new departments, a Department of Social Welfare, and a Department of Public Works. Change the name of the Department of Interior to Department of Conservation. 
^ "23 - Special Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 1 of 1962". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. 
^ "121 - Special Message to the Congress: The Quality of American Government". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. In my State of the Union Address, and later in my Budget and Economic Messages to the Congress, I proposed the creation of a new Department of Business and Labor. 
^ "33 - Special Message to the Congress on Rural Development". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. 
^ "116 - Special Message to the Congress on Executive Branch Reorganization". The University of California, Santa Barbara - The American Presidency Project. The new Department of Economic Affairs would include many of the offices that are now within the Departments of Commerce, Labor and Agriculture. A large part of the Department of Transportation would also be relocated here, including the United States Coast Guard, the Federal Railroad Administration, the St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, the National Transportation Safety Board, the Transportation Systems Center, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Motor Carrier Safety Bureau and most of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The Small Business Administration, the Science Information Exchange program from the Smithsonian Institution, the National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety from the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare and the Office of Technology Utilization from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration would also be included in the new Department. 
^ "Public Notes on 02-RMSP3". Retrieved February 20, 2017. 
^ J. Stapelton Roy (June 29, 2007). "A Conversation with Michael McConnell". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2013. 
^ "Time for a Cabinet-Level U.S. Department of Global Development". The Center for Global Development. 
^ Clarke, Jr., John (January 16, 2009). "Quincy Jones Lobbies Obama for Secretary of Culture Post". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 19, 2010. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "President Obama Announces proposal to reform, reorganize and consolidate Government". Barack Obama White House. 
^ "Obama Suggests 'Secretary of Business' in a 2nd Term - Washington Wire - WSJ". The Wall Street Journal. 


Further reading[edit]

Bennett, Anthony. The American President's Cabinet. Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan, 1996. ISBN 0-333-60691-4. A study of the U.S. Cabinet from Kennedy to Clinton.
Grossman, Mark. Encyclopedia of the United States Cabinet (Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO; three volumes, 2000; reprint, New York: Greyhouse Publishing; two volumes, 2010). A history of the United States and Confederate States Cabinets, their secretaries, and their departments.
Rudalevige, Andrew. "The President and the Cabinet", in Michael Nelson, ed., The Presidency and the Political System, 8th ed. (Washington, D.C.: CQ Press, 2006).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Cabinet.



Official site of the President's Cabinet
U.S. Senate's list of Cabinet members who did not attend the State of the Union Address (since 1984)







v
t
e


Current members of the Cabinet of the United States






Trump
Pence











Acosta
Carson
Chao
Coatsc
DeVos
Haleyc
Hargana
Kellyc
Lighthizerc
Mattis
McMahonc
Mnuchin
Mulvaneyc
Nielsen
Perdue
Perry
Pompeoc
Pruittc
Ross
Sessions
Shulkin
Tillerson
Zinke






a acting; c cabinet-level










v
t
e


Federal executive departments of the United States of America



Executive
Departments



Agriculture
Commerce
Defense
Education
Energy
Health and Human Services
Homeland Security
Housing and Urban Development
Interior
Justice
Labor
State
Transportation
Treasury
Veterans Affairs





Former



Air Force
Army
Commerce and Labor
Health, Education, and Welfare
Navy
Post Office
War












v
t
e


Order of precedence in the United States of America*






The President


The Vice President
The Governor (of the state in which the event is held)
The Speaker of the House
The Chief Justice
Former President Carter
Former President GHW Bush
Former President Clinton
Former President GW Bush
Former President Obama
Ambassadors of the United States
The Secretary of State
The Associate Justices
Retired Justice Stevens
Retired Justice O'Connor
Retired Justice Souter
The President's Cabinet
The President Pro Tempore of the Senate
The Senate
The Governors of the States (by order of statehood)
Former Vice President Mondale
Former Vice President Quayle
Former Vice President Gore
Former Vice President Cheney
Former Vice President Biden
The House of Representatives






*not including acting officeholders, visiting dignitaries, auxiliary executive and military personnel and most diplomats










v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


National Cabinets of North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cabinet_of_the_United_States&oldid=816229153"					Categories: Cabinet of the United StatesNational cabinetsHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from July 2013All articles needing additional referencesUse mdy dates from October 2016