





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A coaxial cable used to carry cable television onto subscribers' premises






The bottom product is a set-top box, an electronic device which cable subscribers use to connect the cable signal to their television set.


Cable television is a system of delivering television programming to paying subscribers via radio frequency (RF) signals transmitted through coaxial cables, or in more recent systems, light pulses through fiber-optic cables. This contrasts with broadcast television, in which the television signal is transmitted over the air by radio waves and received by a television antenna attached to the television; or satellite television, in which the television signal is transmitted by a communications satellite orbiting the Earth and received by a satellite dish on the roof. FM radio programming, high-speed Internet, telephone services, and similar non-television services may also be provided through these cables. Analog television was standard in the 20th century, but since the 2000s, cable systems have been upgraded to digital cable operation.
A "cable channel" (sometimes known as a "cable network") is a television network available via cable television. When available through satellite television, including direct broadcast satellite providers such as DirecTV, Dish Network and BSkyB, as well as via IPTV providers such as Verizon FIOS and AT&T U-verse is referred to as a "satellite channel". Alternative terms include "non-broadcast channel" or "programming service", the latter being mainly used in legal contexts. Examples of cable/satellite channels/cable networks available in many countries are HBO, MTV, Cartoon Network, E!, Eurosport and CNN International.
The abbreviation CATV is often used for cable television. It originally stood for Community Access Television or Community Antenna Television, from cable television's origins in 1948. In areas where over-the-air TV reception was limited by distance from transmitters or mountainous terrain, large "community antennas" were constructed, and cable was run from them to individual homes. The origins of cable broadcasting for radio are even older as radio programming was distributed by cable in some European cities as far back as 1924.[citation needed]



Contents


1 History in the USA and Canada
2 Distribution
3 Principle of operation

3.1 Hybrid fiber-coaxial


4 Deployments by continent
5 Other cable-based services
6 Cognitive effects
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History in the USA and Canada[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Cable television in the United States.
Cable television began in the United States as a commercial business in 1950, although there were small-scale systems by hobbyists in the 1940s.
The early systems simply received weak (broadcast) channels, amplified them, and sent them over unshielded wires to the subscribers, limited to a community or to adjacent communities. The receiving antenna would be higher than any individual subscriber could afford, thus bringing in stronger signals; in hilly or mountainous terrain it would be placed at a high elevation.
At the outset, cable systems only served smaller communities without television stations of their own, and which could not easily receive signals from stations in cities because of distance or hilly terrain. In Canada, however, communities with their own signals were fertile cable markets, as viewers wanted to receive American signals. Rarely, as in the college town of Alfred, New York, U.S. cable systems retransmitted Canadian channels.
Although early (VHF) television receivers could receive 12 channels (2-13), the maximum number of channels that could be broadcast in one city was 7: channels 2, 4, either 5 or 6, 7, 9, 11 and 13, as receivers at the time were unable to receive strong (local) signals on adjacent channels without distortion. (There were frequency gaps between 4 and 5, and between 6 and 7, which allowed both to be used in the same city.)
As equipment improved, all twelve channels could be utilized, except where a local VHF television station broadcast. Local broadcast channels were not usable for signals deemed to be priority, but technology allowed low-priority signals to be placed on such channels by synchronizing their blanking intervals. Similarly, a local VHF station could not be carried on its broadcast channel as the signals would arrive at the TV set slightly separated in time, causing "ghosting"[citation needed]
The bandwidth of the amplifiers also was limited, meaning frequencies over 250 MHz were difficult to transmit to distant portions of the coaxial network, and UHF channels could not be used at all. To expand beyond 12 channels, non-standard "midband" channels had to be used, located between the FM band and Channel 7, or "superband" beyond Channel 13 up to about 300 MHz; these channels initially were only accessible using separate tuner boxes that sent the chosen channel into the TV set on Channel 2, 3 or 4.[citation needed]
Before being added to the cable box itself, these midband channels were used for early incarnations of Pay TV, e.g. The Z Channel (Los Angeles) and HBO but transmitted in the clear i.e. not scrambled as standard TV sets of the period could not pick up the signal nor could the average consumer `de-tune' the normal stations to be able to receive it.
Once tuners that could receive select mid-band and super-band channels began to be incorporated into standard television sets, broadcasters were forced to either install scrambling circuitry or move these signals further out of the range of reception for early cable-ready TVs and VCRs. However, once all 181 allocated cable channels[which?] had been incorporated, premium broadcasters were left with no choice but to scramble.
Unfortunately for pay-TV operators, the descrambling circuitry was often published in electronics hobby magazines such as Popular Science and Popular Electronics allowing anybody with anything more than a rudimentary knowledge of broadcast electronics to be able to build their own and receive the programming without cost.
Later, the cable operators began to carry FM radio stations, and encouraged subscribers to connect their FM stereo sets to cable. Before stereo and bilingual TV sound became common, Pay-TV channel sound was added to the FM stereo cable line-ups. About this time, operators expanded beyond the 12-channel dial to use the "midband" and "superband" VHF channels adjacent to the "high band" 7-13 of North American television frequencies. Some operators as in Cornwall, Ontario, used a dual distribution network with Channels 2-13 on each of the two cables.
During the 1980s, United States regulations not unlike public, educational, and government access (PEG) created the beginning of cable-originated live television programming. As cable penetration increased, numerous cable-only TV stations were launched, many with their own news bureaus that could provide more immediate and more localized content than that provided by the nearest network newscast.
Such stations may use similar on-air branding as that used by the nearby broadcast network affiliate, but the fact that these stations do not broadcast over the air and are not regulated by the FCC, their call signs are meaningless. These stations evolved partially into today's over-the-air digital subchannels, where a main broadcast TV station e.g. NBS 37* would – in the case of no local CNB or ABS station being available – rebroadcast the programming from a nearby affiliate but fill in with its own news and other community programming to suit its own locale. Many live local programs with local interests were subsequently created all over the United States in most major television markets in the early 1980s.

indicates that - just as there are no national or regional networks known by NBS, CNB or ABS, there is also no Channel 37 either allowed in analog broadcast TV due to the frequency being reserved for science and astronomy.

This evolved into today's many cable-only broadcasts of diverse programming, including cable-only produced television movies and miniseries. Cable specialty channels, starting with channels oriented to show movies and large sporting or performance events, diversified further, and "narrowcasting" became common. By the late 1980s, cable-only signals outnumbered broadcast signals on cable systems, some of which by this time had expanded beyond 35 channels. By the mid-1980s in Canada, cable operators were allowed by the regulator to enter into distribution contracts with cable networks on their own.
By the 1990s, tiers became common, with customers able to subscribe to different tiers to obtain different selections of additional channels above the basic selection. By subscribing to additional tiers, customers could get specialty channels, movie channels, and foreign channels. Large cable companies used addressable descramblers to limit access to premium channels for customers not subscribing to higher tiers, however the above magazines often published workarounds for that technology as well.
During the 1990s, the pressure to accommodate the growing array of offerings resulted in digital transmission that made more efficient use of the VHF signal capacity; fibre optics was common to carry signals into areas near the home, where coax could carry higher frequencies over the short remaining distance. Although for a time in the 1980s and 1990s, television receivers and VCRs were equipped to receive the mid-band and super-band channels. Due to the fact that the descrambling circuitry was for a time present in these tuners, depriving the cable operator of much of their revenue, such cable-ready tuners are rarely used now - requiring a return to the set-top boxes used from the 1970s onward.
The conversion to digital broadcasting has put all signals - broadcast and cable - into digital form, rendering analog cable television service mostly obsolete, functional in an ever-dwindling supply of select markets. Analog television sets are still[when?] accommodated, but their tuners are mostly obsolete, oftentimes dependent entirely on the set-top box.
Distribution[edit]




A cable television distribution box (left) in the basement of a building in Germany, with a splitter (right) which supplies the signal to separate cables which go to different rooms


To receive cable television at a given location, cable distribution lines must be available on the local utility poles or underground utility lines. Coaxial cable brings the signal to the customer's building through a service drop, an overhead or underground cable. If the subscriber's building does not have a cable service drop, the cable company will install one. The standard cable used in the U.S. is RG-6, which has a 75 ohm impedance, and connects with a type F connector. The cable company's portion of the wiring usually ends at a distribution box on the building exterior, and built-in cable wiring in the walls usually distributes the signal to jacks in different rooms to which televisions are connected. Multiple cables to different rooms are split off the incoming cable with a small device called a splitter. There are two standards for cable television; older analog cable, and newer digital cable which can carry data signals used by digital television receivers such as HDTV equipment. All cable companies in the United States have switched to or are in the course of switching to digital cable television since it was first introduced in the late 1990s.
Most cable companies require a set-top box to view their cable channels, even on newer televisions with digital cable QAM tuners, because most digital cable channels are now encrypted, or "scrambled", to reduce cable service theft. A cable from the jack in the wall is attached to the input of the box, and an output cable from the box is attached to the television, usually the RF-IN or composite input on older TVs. Since the set-top box only decodes the single channel that is being watched, each television in the house requires a separate box. Some unencrypted channels, usually traditional over-the-air broadcast networks, can be displayed without a receiver box.[1] The cable company will provide set top boxes based on the level of service a customer purchases, from basic set top boxes with a standard definition picture connected through the standard coaxial connection on the TV, to high-definition wireless DVR receivers connected via HDMI or component. Older analog television sets are "cable ready" and can receive the old analog cable without a set-top box. To receive digital cable channels on an analog television set, even unencrypted ones, requires a different type of box, a digital television adapter supplied by the cable company. A new distribution method that takes advantage of the low cost high quality DVB distribution to residential areas, uses TV gateways to convert the DVB-C, DVB-C2 stream to IP for distribution of TV over IP network in the home.
Principle of operation[edit]




Diagram of a modern hybrid fiber-coaxial cable television system. At the regional headend, the TV channels are sent multiplexed on a light beam which travels through optical fiber trunklines, which fan out from distribution hubs to optical nodes in local communities. Here the light signal from the fiber is translated to a radio frequency electrical signal, which is distributed through coaxial cable to individual subscriber homes.


In the most common system, multiple television channels (as many as 500, although this varies depending on the provider's available channel capacity) are distributed to subscriber residences through a coaxial cable, which comes from a trunkline supported on utility poles originating at the cable company's local distribution facility, called the "headend". Many channels can be transmitted through one coaxial cable by a technique called frequency division multiplexing. At the headend, each television channel is translated to a different frequency. By giving each channel a different frequency "slot" on the cable, the separate television signals do not interfere with each other. At an outdoor cable box on the subscriber's residence the company's service drop cable is connected to cables distributing the signal to different rooms in the building. At each television, the subscriber's television or a set-top box provided by the cable company translates the desired channel back to its original frequency (baseband), and it is displayed onscreen. Due to widespread cable theft in earlier analog systems, the signals are typically encrypted on modern digital cable systems, and the set-top box must be activated by an activation code sent by the cable company before it will function, which is only sent after the subscriber signs up. If the subscriber fails to pay his bill, the cable company can send a signal to deactivate the subscriber's box, preventing reception.
There are also usually "upstream" channels on the cable to send data from the customer box to the cable headend, for advanced features such as requesting pay-per-view shows or movies, cable internet access, and cable telephone service. The "downstream" channels occupy a band of frequencies from approximately 50 MHz to 1 GHz, while the "upstream" channels occupy frequencies of 5 to 42 MHz. Subscribers pay with a monthly fee. Subscribers can choose from several levels of service, with "premium" packages including more channels but costing a higher rate. At the local headend, the feed signals from the individual television channels are received by dish antennas from communication satellites. Additional local channels, such as local broadcast television stations, educational channels from local colleges, and community access channels devoted to local governments (PEG channels) are usually included on the cable service. Commercial advertisements for local business are also inserted in the programming at the headend (the individual channels, which are distributed nationally, also have their own nationally oriented commercials).
Hybrid fiber-coaxial[edit]
Main article: Hybrid fibre-coaxial
Modern cable systems are large, with a single network and headend often serving an entire metropolitan area. Most systems use hybrid fiber-coaxial (HFC) distribution; this means the trunklines that carry the signal from the headend to local neighborhoods are optical fiber to provide greater bandwidth and also extra capacity for future expansion. At the headend, the radio frequency electrical signal carrying all the channels is modulated on a light beam and sent through the fiber. The fiber trunkline goes to several distribution hubs, from which multiple fibers fan out to carry the signal to boxes called optical nodes in local communities. At the optical node, the light beam from the fiber is translated back to an electrical signal and carried by coaxial cable distribution lines on utility poles, from which cables branch out to a series of signal amplifiers and line extenders. These devices carry the signal to customers via passive RF devices called taps.
Deployments by continent[edit]
Main article: Cable television by region
Cable television is mostly available in North America, Europe, Australia and East Asia, and less so in South America and the Middle East. Cable television has had little success in Africa, as it is not cost-effective to lay cables in sparsely populated areas. So-called "wireless cable" or microwave-based systems are used instead.
Other cable-based services[edit]
Coaxial cables are capable of bi-directional carriage of signals as well as the transmission of large amounts of data. Cable television signals use only a portion of the bandwidth available over coaxial lines. This leaves plenty of space available for other digital services such as cable internet, cable telephony and wireless services, using both unlicensed and licensed spectrum. Broadband internet access is achieved over coaxial cable by using cable modems to convert the network data into a type of digital signal that can be transferred over coaxial cable. One problem with some cable systems is the older amplifiers placed along the cable routes are unidirectional thus in order to allow for uploading of data the customer would need to use an analog telephone modem to provide for the upstream connection. This limited the upstream speed to 31.2k and prevented the always-on convenience broadband internet typically provides. Many large cable systems have upgraded or are upgrading their equipment to allow for bi-directional signals, thus allowing for greater upload speed and always-on convenience, though these upgrades are expensive.
In North America, Australia and Europe, many cable operators have already introduced cable telephone service, which operates just like existing fixed line operators. This service involves installing a special telephone interface at the customer's premises that converts the analog signals from the customer's in-home wiring into a digital signal, which is then sent on the local loop (replacing the analog last mile, or plain old telephone service (POTS)) to the company's switching center, where it is connected to the public switched telephone network (PSTN). The biggest obstacle to cable telephone service is the need for nearly 100% reliable service for emergency calls. One of the standards available for digital cable telephony, PacketCable, seems to be the most promising and able to work with the quality of service (QOS) demands of traditional analog plain old telephone service (POTS) service. The biggest advantage to digital cable telephone service is similar to the advantage of digital cable, namely that data can be compressed, resulting in much less bandwidth used than a dedicated analog circuit-switched service. Other advantages include better voice quality and integration to a Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) network providing cheap or unlimited nationwide and international calling. In many cases, digital cable telephone service is separate from cable modem service being offered by many cable companies and does not rely on Internet Protocol (IP) traffic or the Internet.
Traditional cable television providers and traditional telecommunication companies increasingly compete in providing voice, video and data services to residences. The combination of television, telephone and Internet access is commonly called "triple play", regardless of whether CATV or telcos offer it.
Cognitive effects[edit]
A 2017 study in The Journal of Human Resources found that exposure to cable television reduced cognitive ability and high school graduation rates for boys. This effect was stronger for boys from more educated families. The article suggests a mechanism where light television entertainment crowds out more cognitively stimulating activities.[2]
See also[edit]


AllVid
CableCARD
DOCSIS
DVB-C
European cable television frequencies
Multichannel video programming distributor
North American television frequencies
Private cable operator
QAM (television)
Satellite television
Switched video
Tru2way


References[edit]


^ "ClearQAM – What It Is And Why It Matters". Retrieved 19 June 2015. 
^ Hernæs, Ø., Markussen, S., Røed, K. 2017. Television, Cognitive Ability, and High School Completion. J. Human Resources. doi: 10.3368/jhr.54.2.0316.7819R1. http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/early/2017/10/02/jhr.54.2.0316.7819R1.abstract


Further reading[edit]

The history of Rediffusion by Gerald K Clode
Eisenmann, Thomas R., "Cable TV: From Community Antennas to Wired Cities", Harvard Business School Weekly Newsletter, July 10, 2000
Moss, Mitchell L.; Payne, Frances, "Can Cable Keep Its Promise?", New York Affairs, Volume 6, Number 4. New York University. 1981
Smith, Ralph Lee, "The Wired Nation", The Nation magazine, May 18, 1970
Smith, Ralph Lee, The Wired Nation; Cable TV: the electronic communications highway. New York, Harper & Row, 1972. ISBN 0-06-090243-4
Herrick, Dennis F. (2012). Media Management in the Age of Giants: Business Dynamics of Journalism. UNM Press. ISBN 978-0-8263-5163-0. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cable television.



Cable Television at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Broadcasting



Medium



Radio (Radio program
Cable
Satellite)
Telephone
Teletext
Television (Television program
Cable
Satellite)
Internet television and radio (Webcast
Streaming media
Web television
Peer-to-peer television
BitTorrent television and movies)





Broadcasting
niche



Campus radio
Commercial broadcasting
Community radio
News broadcasting
Pirate radio / Pirate television
Public broadcasting
Religious broadcasting
Talk radio





Specialty
channels



Adult television channels
Children's interest channel / Children's television series
Documentary channel
Men's interest channel
Movie television channels
Music radio / Music television
Quiz channel
Shopping channel
News broadcasting

Business channels
Public affairs
Sports television channels


Women's interest channel





Production
and funding



Broadcast designer
Broadcast license
Broadcast network
Broadcast-safe
Broadcast television systems
Digital on-screen graphic
Lower third
Network affiliate
News ticker
Score bug
Television news screen layout
Television licence
Television studio
Press box
Press pool
on-screen display












v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers










v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Oceania



Cable



Cable TV Hong Kong
Cablevision (Lebanon)
Cablelink
Destiny Cable
Docomo Pacific
eonet (Japan)
First Media
Foxtel
GMM Z
Hathway
Hot
InCablenet
Itscom (Japan)
JCTV (Japan)
Kbro
Lanka Broadband Networks (Sri Lanka)
Montage Cable TV (Nigeria)
NayaTel
OkeVision
Optus Television
Ooredoo (Qatar)
PPCTV
Rostelecom
Siti Cable
Sky Cable
Sonatel
TBC (Taiwan)
Tokai Cable
Top TV (Indonesia)
TransACT
Tata Sky
TrueVisions
United Communication Service
Vodafone New Zealand
WorldCall





Satellite



Airtel digital TV
Aora
Astro (Malaysia)
beIN (Middle East and North Africa)
BiG TV (Indonesia)
CanalSat Afrique
CanalSat Calédonie
Cignal
Consat (Nigeria)
DD Free Dish
DDishTV
Dialog TV (Sri Lanka)
Dish TV
Dish TV Sri Lanka
Dish Home
Dream Satellite TV
DStv (Sub-Saharan Africa)
Foxtel (Australia)
GMM Z
G Sat
HiTV
Indosat
K+ (Vietnam)
K-Vision
Kristal-Astro
KT SkyLife
MediaNet
Metro Digital
MBC
MNC Vision
MRTV-4
myHD
NJOI
NTV Plus
OrangeTV
OSN (Middle East and North Africa)
Pacific Broadcasting Services Fiji
Pearl Digital TV
Pra International Green Group India
Real VU
Reliance Digital TV
Sky Direct
Sky Pacific
SKY PerfecTV!
Sky Television (New Zealand)
Sky Net
STAR (Greater China)
Star India
StarSat, South Africa
Star Select
StarTimes
STAR TV
Sun Direct
Tata Sky
Telone (Zimbabwe)
Transvision (Indonesia)
TrendTV
TrueVisions
Videocon d2h
Viva+
WOWOW
Yes (Israel)
ZAP
Zuku





Fiber/IPTV



Sky on demand
BTV
BesTV
DU
Fetch TV
Fine TV
GTA Teleguam
Hikari TV
HyppTV (Malaysia)
LG Uplus
Maroc Telecom
My.T
NET TV (Nepal)
now TV
Olleh TV
Omantel
PEO TV (Sri Lanka)
Rostelecom
Saudi Telecom Company
Singtel TV
Skytel (Mongolia)
StarHub TV
USeeTV





Terrestrial



ABS-CBN TV Plus (Philippines)
Freeview (Australia)
Freeview (New Zealand)
Igloo (New Zealand)
Mediacorp (Singapore)
MYTV (Malaysia)
StarTimes





Defunct



Austar
CTH (Thailand)
DishHD
Galaxy (Australia)
Mega TV (Malaysia)
Neighbourhood Cable (Australia)
SelecTV (Australia)
U Television (Malaysia)
UBI World TV (Australia)








Africa, Asia, Middle East and Oceania
Europe
Americas
Canada
United States
Central and South America















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Canada




Terrestrial and satellite



Satellite



Bell TV
Shaw Direct
Telus Satellite TV





Cable




Major1



Bell (Cablevision for Val-d'Or, QC, MTS for Manitoba)
Cogeco (Ontario, Quebec)
EastLink (Atlantic, Northern Ontario, Western Canada)
Look Communications
Rogers Cable (Ontario, New Brunswick, Newfoundland)
Source (Hamilton, ON)
Shaw (Western Canada, Northwestern Ontario)
Vidéotron (Quebec)





Minor



Access (Saskatchewan)
Cable Axion (Magog, QC)
CityWest (Prince Rupert, BC)
DERYtelecom (Saguenay, QC)
Novus Cable (select areas of BC Lower Mainland)
Omineca Cablevision (Prince George, BC)
Westman (Brandon, MB)





See also



Defunct cable and DBS companies of Canada








IPTV



Bell

Fibe (Aliant)
Fibe TV (ON/QC)
MTS TV (MB)


SaskTel MaxTV
Telus Optik TV
Tbaytel Digital TV
Vmedia
Zazeen





MMDS



Craig Wireless








Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Europe

1More than 400,000 television service subscribers.















This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: a complete mess with the names of countries being repeated in parentheses; lists companies without Wikipedia articles; wall of text Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other speciality television providers in Europe



Cable



Alma TV
Anvia
ASTA-NET
AS Starman
ASK CATV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Nowo (Portugal)
Caiway (Netherlands)
Canal Digital (Norway)
Casema
Com Hem (Sweden)
dna Welho (Finland)
EVision (Ireland)
ELTA-KABEL (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
ER-Telecom
Get
GO (Malta)
INEA (Poland)
IPKO
Kabel Deutschland (Germany)
Kabel Noord
KATV1 (Azerbaijan)
Kazakhtelecom (Kazakhstan)
Kujtesa
Lattelecom
Madritel
Magnet Networks
Magyar Telekom
MC Cable
Melita Cable
MEO (Portugal)
MISS.NET (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MTIS (Belarus)
M&H Company
Naxoo (Switzerland)
North-West Telecom
NOS (Portugal)
Numericable-SFR (France)
SFR (Belgium)
ONO (Spain)
Orange TV (France)
Petrus (Poland)
PostTV Luxembourg
Primacom (Germany)
Promax (Poland)
Radijus Vektor
RCS & RDS (Romania)
Rostelecom (Russia)
R (Spain)
Sappa TV
Sat Film (Poland)
SATRO (Slovakia)
SEEMORE
Serbia Broadband (Serbia)
Southern Telecom
Splius (Lithuania)
Stofa (Demnark)
STV AS
Swisscom
Tango TV (Luxembourg)
Telecable (Spain)
Telekabel (Macedonia)
Tele Columbus (Germany)
Tele2
Telemach (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Slovenia)
Telenet (Belgium)
Teledünya (Turkey)
Telset (Estonia)
Terrakom
TOYA (Poland)
Turksat Kablo TV (Turkey)
Unitymedia (Germany)
Uralsvyazinform
UPC Austria
UPC Magyarország (Hungary)
UPC Polska (Poland)
UPC Romania
UPC Switzerland
VECTRA
Virgin TV (UK)
Virgin Media Ireland
Vodafone Ireland
Vodafone Spain
VolgaTelecom
Volia (Ukraine)
VOO
WightFibre
YouSee (Denmark)
Ziggo (Netherlands)





Satellite



AB Sat (France)
AKTA TV (Romania)
Antik Sat
Austriasat
Bulsatcom
Canal Digital (Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland)
CanalDigitaal (Netherlands and Flanders)
Canalsat (France)
Caspio HD
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CS Link
Cyfrowy Polsat (Poland)
Digi TV
Digit-Alb
Digiturk (Turkey)
Dolce (Romania)
D-Smart (Turkey)
Euro1080
Filbox
Focus Sat (Romania)
fransat
Freesat (UK)
Freesat from Sky (UK)
Free Sat (Romania)
GlobeCast World TV
HD+ (Germany)
MagtiCom (Georgia)
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
MEO (Portugal)
NC+ (Poland)
NOS (Portugal)
NOVA Cyprus
NOVA Greece
NTV Plus (Russia)
Orbita Telecom
Otau TV (Kazakhstan)
Real Digital
Saorsat
Sky UK
Sky Deutschland (Germany)
Sky Ireland
Sky Italia (Italy)
Skylink
TéléSAT Numérique (Belgium)
Tivù Sat (Italy)
TNTSAT
TotalTV
Tricolor TV (Russia)
Tring Digital TV
TV Vlaanderen Digitaal (Flanders)
UPC Direct
Viasat (Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania)
Viasat Ukraine
Vip SAT TV
Vivacom
Xtra TV (Ukraine)
ZeonBud





IPTV



A1 Telekom Austria
Altibox
Amis
Beeline
Bouygues Telecom
BT TV (UK)
Bulsatcom (Bulgaria)
Canal Digital
Cosmote TV (Greece)
CytaVision (Cyprus)
DartyBox (France)
Fastweb (Italy)
Free (France)
Freewire (UK)
HOME.TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
iNES (Romania)
Infostrada TV (Italy)
KPN (Netherlands)
Magnet Networks (Ireland)
Moja TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Moldtelecom
Movistar+ (Spain)
Mtel (Bulgaria)
Mts TV (Serbia)
MEO (Portugal)
Neuf Cegetel
NOS (Portugal)
Open IPTV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Optimus Clix (Portugal)
Orange TV (France)
Plusnet
Portugal Telecom
PrimeTel (Cyprus)
Proximus TV (Belgium)
Sappa TV
Scarlet (Belgium)
SFR (France)
ShqipTV
Síminn (Iceland)
Smart Telecom (Ireland)
Super TV (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Sure TV
T-2 (Slovenia)
TalkTalk TV (UK)
Telekom Entertain (Germany)
Telenor (Norway)
Telfort (Netherlands)
Telia Digital-tv
TeliaSonera
Teo LT
TIMvision
Tivibu
YouView (UK)
Vivacom (Bulgaria)
Vodafone Greece
Vodafone Italy
Vodafone Portugal
XS4ALL (Netherlands)





Terrestrial



Antena PLUS (Serbia)
Boxer TV Access (Sweden)
Boxer TV A/S (Denmark)
Digea (Greece)
Easy TV (Ireland)
evotv (Croatia)
Freeview (UK)
KPN Digitenne (Netherlands)
Mediaset Premium (Italy)
PlusTV (Finland)
PTDT (Portugal)
RiksTV (Norway)
Saorview (Ireland)
TNT (France)
Vip TV (Macedonia)
Zala TV (Belarus)





Defunct



Alice Home TV
Boom TV (Romania)
CableTel (Bulgaria)
On Telecoms (Greece)
Romtelecom
Numericable
UPC Nederland
TDC (Denmark)















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in Latin America and the Caribbean



Cable



Axtel TV (Mexico)
Airlink Communications (Trinidad and Tobago)
Cablecom (Mexico)
Cablemás (Mexico)
Cable Onda
Cablevisión (Argentina)
CaboTelecom
Claro Colombia
Digicel Play (Caribbean)
Columbus/FLOW (Caribbean)
Independent Cable Network of Trinidad and Tobago (ICNTT)
Izzi Telecom (Mexico)
Massy Communications (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mayaro Cable TV (Trinidad and Tobago)
Megacable (Mexico)
Movistar TV (Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela)
Mundo Pacifico (Chile)
NET (Brazil)
Oi TV (Brazil)
Red Intercable (Argentina)
RVR International (Trinidad and Tobago)
Tricom (Dominican Republic)
TRICO Industries Limited (Trinidad and Tobago)
Une (Colombia)
VTR (Chile)





Satellite



CanalSat Caraïbes (Caribbean)
CANTV (Venezuela)
Claro TV
DirecTV (South America & Caribbean)
Dish México
Entel (Chile)
Green Dot (Caribbean)
Inter Satélital
Movistar TV (Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela)
Oi TV (Brazil)
SKY Brasil
SKY México, Dominican Republic & Central America
Vivo TV (Brazil)





Fiber/IPTV



bmobile (Trinidad and Tobago)
Claro República Dominicana
Vivo TV (Brazil)





Terrestrial microwave



Multi-Choice TV (Barbados)





Defunct satellite



DirecTV Brazil
DirecTV Mexico
GVT TV (Brazil)
Sky Argentina
Sky Chile
Sky Colombia
Sky Ecuador
Sky Peru
Sky Venezuela





Defunct cable



Vivo TV Plus (Brazil)








Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Canada
Europe
United States















v
t
e


Cable, satellite, and other specialty television providers in the United States



Cable MVPD



Adams Cable
Altice USA

Optimum
Suddenlink Communications


Armstrong
Atlantic Broadband
Blue Ridge Communications
Blue Stream
Broadstripe
Buckeye Broadband
Cable One
Charter Spectrum
Comcast Xfinity
Consolidated Communications

FairPoint Communications


Cox Communications
Docomo Pacific
Emery Telcom
Full Channel
GCI
Hargray
Mediacom
Midco
Northland Communications
Liberty Puerto Rico
Satview Broadband
Service Electric
SRT Communications
TDS Telecom
TPG

Grande Communications
RCN Corporation
Wave Broadband


TruVista Communications
WOW!





Satellite MVPD



Claro
Dish Network
DirecTV
Glorystar
Headend in the Sky
Home2US





Fiber MVPD / IPTV



AT&T U-verse
CenturyLink Prism TV
Cincinnati Bell FiOptics
Claro
Consolidated Communications

FairPoint Communications


EPB
Frontier FiOS
Google Fiber
GTA Teleguam
Hawaiian Telcom
Midco
NEP Datastream TV
TDS Telecom
Verizon FiOS
Windstream Kinetic





Virtual MVPD



DirecTV Now
FuboTV
Hulu with Live TV
Philo
PlayStation Vue
Sling TV
Spectrum TV Stream
Xfinity Instant TV
YouTube TV





Over-the-top



Amazon Video
Anime Network
Apple TV (iTunes Store)
CBS All Access
Crackle
Crunchyroll
CW Seed
CuriosityStream
DramaFever
Fandor
Feeln
FunimationNow
go90
HBO Now
History Vault
Hulu
iON (IPTV)
Lifetime Movie Club
Netflix
Noggin
Pluto TV
Roku
Seeso
Showtime
StarzPlay
Tribeca Shortlist
Tubi TV
Univision NOW
Yupptv
WWE Network





Defunct cable



Adelphia Communications Corporation
Alameda Power and Telecom1
Astound Broadband
AT&T Broadband

MediaOne / Continental Cablevision
Tele-Communications Inc.


Baja Broadband

US Cable


Bresnan Communications
Bright House Networks
Cablevision
Champion Broadband
Cobridge Communications
Community Home Entertainment
Graceba Total Communications
Insight Communications
Jones Intercable
King Videocable
Knology
Marcus Cable
NPG Cable
Paragon Cable
Rapid Communications
TelePrompTer / Group W Cable
Time Warner Cable
UA-Columbia Cablevision
Windjammer Communications

1 – Still in operation, but no longer offers cable or Internet as part of its services




Defunct satellite



AlphaStar
GlobeCast World TV
PrimeStar
United States Satellite Broadcasting
Voom HD Networks





Defunct IPTV



Sky Angel
Virtual Digital Cable





Defunct terrestrial



Aereo
USDTV
MovieBeam












v
t
e


Additional resources on North American television



North America



List of local television stations in North America
DTV transition
North American TV mini-template





Canada



Canadian networks
List of Canadian television networks
List of Canadian television channels
List of Canadian specialty channels
Local Canadian TV stations
List of United States stations available in Canada
2001 Vancouver TV realignment
2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment





Mexico



Mexican networks
Local Mexican TV stations





United States



American networks
List of American cable and satellite networks
List of American over-the-air networks
Local American TV stations (W)
Local American TV stations (K)
Spanish-language TV networks
1994 United States broadcast TV realignment
2006 United States broadcast TV realignment
List of Canadian television stations available in the United States
Insular Areas TV











Africa, Asia, and Oceania
Americas
Europe















v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4029109-1
NDL: 00574508











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cable_television&oldid=817107507"					Categories: Cable televisionHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with limited geographic scope from March 2015USA-centricAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from November 2017Articles with DMOZ linksArticles needing cleanup from November 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers