



Cadastral map of the village of Pielnia, 1852, Austrian Empire


A cadastre (also spelled cadaster), using a cadastral survey or cadastral map, is a comprehensive register of the real estate or real property's metes-and-bounds of a country.[1]
In most countries, legal systems have developed around the original administrative systems and use the cadastre to define the dimensions and location of land parcels described in legal documentation. The cadastre is a fundamental source of data in disputes and lawsuits between landowners.
In the United States, Cadastral Survey within the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) maintains records of all public lands. Such surveys often require detailed investigation of the history of land use, legal accounts, and other documents.



Contents


1 Definition
2 Etymology
3 History
4 Cadastral surveys
5 Cadastral map
6 Cadastral documentation
7 Cadastre Management
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Definition[edit]
A cadastre commonly includes details of the ownership, the tenure, the precise location (therefore GNSS coordinates are not used due to errors such as multipath),[2] the dimensions (and area), the cultivations if rural, and the value of individual parcels of land. Cadastres are used by many nations around the world, some in conjunction with other records, such as a title register.[1]
The International Federation of Surveyors defines cadastre as follows:[3]

A Cadastre is normally a parcel based, and up-to-date land information system containing a record of interests in land (e.g. rights, restrictions and responsibilities). It usually includes a geometric description of land parcels linked to other records describing the nature of the interests, the ownership or control of those interests, and often the value of the parcel and its improvements.

Etymology[edit]
The word cadastre came into English through French from Late Latin capitastrum, a register of the poll tax, and the Greek katástikhon (κατάστιχον), a list or register, from katà stíkhon (κατὰ στίχον)—literally, "down the line", in the sense of "line by line" along the directions and distances between the corners mentioned and marked by monuments in the metes and bounds.
The word forms the adjective cadastral, used in public administration, primarily for ownership and taxation purposes. The terminology for cadastral divisions may include counties, parishes, ridings, hundreds, sections, lots, blocks and city blocks.
Other languages have kept the original t sound in the second syllable (examples: Italian catasto, German Kataster, Slovak kataster, Czech katastr, Spanish catastro). In modern Greek, though, it has been replaced by ktimatologio (κτηματολόγιο).
History[edit]
See also: Surveying § History, Cartography § History, and Topographic mapping § History
Some of the earliest cadasters were ordered by Roman Emperors to recover state owned lands that had been appropriated by private individuals, and thereby recover income from such holdings. One such cadaster was done in 77 AD in Campania, a surviving stone marker of the survey reads "The Emperor Vespasian, in the eighth year of his tribunician power, so as to restore the state lands which the Emperor Augustus had given to the soldiers of Legion II Gallica, but which for some years had been occupied by private individuals, ordered a survey map to be set up with a record on each 'century' of the annual rental".[4] In this way Vespasian was able to reimpose taxation formerly uncollected on these lands.[4]
With the fall of Rome the use of cadastral maps effectively discontinued. Medieval practice used written descriptions of the extent of land rather than using more precise surveys. Only in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries did the use of cadastral maps resume, beginning in the Netherlands. With the emergence of capitalism in Renaissance Europe the need for cadastral maps reemerged as a tool to determine and express control of land as a means of production. This took place first privately in land disputes and later spread to governmental practice as a means of more precise tax assessment.[4]
Cadastral surveys[edit]
Main article: Cadastral surveying




BLM cadastral survey marker from 1992 in San Xavier, Arizona


Cadastral surveys document the boundaries of land ownership, by the production of documents, diagrams, sketches, plans (plats in USA), charts, and maps. They were originally used to ensure reliable facts for land valuation and taxation. An example from early England is the Domesday Book in 1086. Napoleon established a comprehensive cadastral system for France that is regarded as the forerunner of most modern versions.
The Public Lands Survey System is a cadastral survey of the United States originating in legislation from 1785, after international recognition of the United States. The Dominion Land Survey is a similar cadastral survey conducted in Western Canada begun in 1871 after the creation of the Dominion of Canada in 1867. Both cadastral surveys are made relative to principal meridian and baselines. These cadastral surveys divided the surveyed areas into townships, square land areas of approximately 36 square miles (six miles by six miles; some very early surveys in Ohio created 25 square mile townships when the design of the system was being explored). These townships are divided into sections, each approximately one-mile square. Unlike in Europe this cadastral survey largely preceded settlement and as a result greatly influenced settlement patterns. Properties are generally rectangular, boundary lines often run on cardinal bearings, and parcel dimensions are often in fractions or multiples of chains. Land descriptions in Western North America are principally based on these land surveys.
Cadastral survey information is often a base element in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) or Land Information Systems (LIS) used to assess and manage land and built infrastructure. Such systems are also employed on a variety of other tasks, for example, to track long-term changes over time for geological or ecological studies, where land tenure is a significant part of the scenario.
Cadastral map[edit]
A cadastral map is a map that shows the boundaries and ownership of land parcels. Some cadastral maps show additional details, such as survey district names, unique identifying numbers for parcels, certificate of title numbers, positions of existing structures, section or lot numbers and their respective areas, adjoining and adjacent street names, selected boundary dimensions and references to prior maps.
The U.S. NOAA Coastal Services Center (CSC) has released a cadastre web tool to illustrate offshore wind power suitability of Eastern seaboard areas.[5]
Cadastral documentation[edit]
Cadastral documentation comprises the documentary materials submitted to cadastre or land administration offices for renewal of cadastral recordings. Cadastral documentation is kept in paper and/or electronic form.[6] Jurisdiction statutes and further provisions specify the content and form of the documentation,[7] as well as the person(s) authorized to prepare and sign the documentation, including concerned parties (owner, etc.), licensed surveyors and legal advisors. The office concerned reviews the submitted information; if the documentation does not comply with stated provisions, the office may set a deadline for the applicant to submit complete documentation.[8][9]
Despite the age of Cadastre, the notion of Cadastral documentation emerged late in the English language, as the institution of cadaster developed outside English-speaking countries. In a Danish textbook, one out of 15 chapters regards the Form and content of documents concerning subdivision, etc.[10] Early textbooks of international scope focused on recordings in terms of land registration and technical aspects of cadastral survey, yet note that 'cadastral surveying has been carried out within a tight framework of legislation' (p. 28).[11][12] With the view of assessing transaction costs, a European project: Modelling real property transactions (2001-2005) charted procedures for the transfer of ownership and other rights in land and buildings.[13] Cadastral documentation is described, e.g. for Finland as follows '8. Surveyor draws up cadastral map and cadastral documents .. 10. Surveyor sends cadastral documents to cadastral authority.' [14] In Australia, similar activities are referred to as 'lodgement of plans of subdivision at land titles offices' [15]
Cadastre Management[edit]
is a term used at least since 2005 by the software industry[16][17]. It mainly refers to the use of technology for management of cadastre and land information in terms like Geographic Information Systems, Spatial data infrastructures and Software architecture, rather that to general management issues of cadastral and other land information agencies [11].
See also[edit]


Assessor's parcel number
Boundary (real estate)
Cadastral community
Cadastral divisions of Australia
Defter (Ottoman Empire)
Estate (house)
Geographic information system (GIS)
Land administration
Land (economics)
Land grant
Land tenure and registration
Real property
Recorder of deeds
Surveying


Notes[edit]



^ a b "Cadastral Template - Field Data C4" (lists nations), CadastralTemplate.org, January 2008, webpage: CT-C4: also has term "cadastral survey" and other land records.
^ Wormley, Samuel J. "Sam Wormley's GPS Errors & Estimating Your Receiver's Accuracy". 
^ FIG (1995) "The FIG Statement on the Cadastre", FIG Policy Statement, The International Federation of Surveyors (FIG), FIG PUBLICATION No 11, 1995,OCLC 38375638 fig.net
^ a b c Roger J. P. Kain and Elizabeth Baigent (1992). The Cadastral Map in the Service of the State: A History of Property Mapping. The University of Chicago Press. 
^ Offshore Wind Development - Site Suitability Prototype Archived 2012-06-12 at the Wayback Machine. National Ocean Service. Accessed: 4 February 2011.
^ Slovak Geoportal, retrieved 2016-08-02
^ "ČÚZK - Registration into the Cadastre of Real Estate". 
^ Shala, X., Meha, M. and Ahmedi, S. (2015) Case Study of the Reforms on Laws for the Cadaster in the Republic of Kosovo. FIG Working Week 2015, Sofia, Bulgaria, 17-21 May 2015; retrieved 2016-08-04
^ Roşu D. C., Ciolac Valeria, Colţan O. N. (2016) Some aspects of cadastral documentation necessary registration agricultural land in land book Journal of Horticulture, Forestry and Biotechnology 20 (2) 231-233
^ Pedersen, V. E. (1951) Matrikelvæsen. København, Den kgl. Veterinær- og Landbohøjskole (Cadastral Service. Copenhagen. Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University)
^ a b Dale. P. F. & McLaughlin, J. D. (1988) Land Information Management. - An introduction with special reference to cadastral problems in Third World countries. Oxford University Press
^ Dale & McLaughlin (1999) Land Administration. Oxford University Press.
^ "COST G9: Modelling Real Property Transactions". 
^ Vitikainen, A. (2007) Transaction costs concerning real property - The case of Finland. Pp 101 - 118 in Zevenbergen, J., Frank, A., Stubkjær, E. (Eds) Real property transactions: procedures, transaction costs and models. Amsterdam, IOS Press. Page 109
^ "Australia - CSDILA icon". Archived from the original on 2016-08-27. 
^ GIS for Cadastre Management, ESRI® GIS Technology in Europe
^ Streamline Cadastral Data Management, Thomson Reuters, Aumentum Cadastre



References[edit]

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Cadastre". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 

External links[edit]



Look up cadastre or cadastral in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Cadastral Template Project, linking to descriptions of national cadastres
EuroGeographics, representing National Mapping and Cadastral Agencies
Permanent Committee on Cadastre in the European Union
http://www.icisociety.ca/
Surveyor General Branch http://sgb.nrcan.gc.ca/
Cadastre in Romania







v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cadastre&oldid=812015784"					Categories: Map typesReal estateSurveyingHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Slovak-language textArticles containing Czech-language textArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing Greek-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica