"Caliph" redirects here. For the ship, see USS Caliph (SP-272). For the butterflies, see Enispe (butterfly). For a list, see List of Caliphs.


Caliphate
خِلافة




Main caliphates


Rashidun Caliphate
Umayyad Caliphate
Abbasid Caliphate
Ottoman Caliphate








Parallel caliphates


Fatimid Caliphate
Caliphate of Córdoba
Almohad Caliphate
Sokoto Caliphate






 Islam portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Islam







Beliefs


Oneness of God


Prophets
Revealed books


Angels
Predestination


Day of Resurrection








Practices


Profession of faith
Prayer


Fasting
Alms-giving
Pilgrimage








Texts and laws


Quran
Sunnah
Hadith


Sharia (law)
Fiqh (jurisprudence)


Kalam (dialectic)








History


Timeline
Muhammad


Ahl al-Bayt
Sahabah
Rashidun


Imamate
Caliphate
Spread of Islam








Culture and society


Calendar
Festivals
Academics
Art
Moral teachings
Children
Denominations
Feminism
Women
Madrasa
Mosque
Philosophy
Politics
Proselytizing
Animals
LGBT
Science
Demographics
Economics
Finance
Social welfare








Related topics


Criticism of Islam
Islam and other religions


Islamism
Islamophobia


Glossary








 Islam portal







v
t
e







Part of the Politics series


Basic forms of government


Power structure





Separation




Associated state
Dominion
Chiefdom




Federalism




Federation
Confederation
Devolution




Integration




Empire
Hegemony
Unitary state




Administrative division





Power source





Democracy
power of many




Direct
Representative
Liberal
Social
Demarchy
others




Oligarchy
power of few




Aristocracy
Plutocracy
Kraterocracy
Stratocracy
Timocracy
Meritocracy
Technocracy
Geniocracy
Noocracy
Kritarchy
Particracy
Ergatocracy
Netocracy




Autocracy
power of one




Despotism
Dictatorship
Military dictatorship




Others




Anocracy
Anarchy
Theocracy







Power ideology





Monarchy vs. Republic
socio-political ideologies




Absolute
Legalist
Constitutional
Parliamentary
Directorial
Semi-presidential
Presidential




Authoritarian vs. Libertarian
socio-economic ideologies




Tribalism
Despotism
Feudalism
Colonialism
Minarchism
Distributism
Anarchism
Socialism
Communism
Totalitarianism




Global vs. Local
geo-cultural ideologies




Commune
City-state
National government
Intergovernmental organisation
World government







Politics portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on Islam


Usul al-fiqh


Fiqh




Ijazah
Ijma
Ijtihad
Ikhtilaf
Istihlal
Istihsan
Istishab
Madhhab
Madrasah
Maslaha
Qiyas
Taqlid
Urf




Ahkam




Batil
Bid‘ah
Fard
Fasiq
Fitna
Gunah
Halal
Haram
Istishhad
Jihad
Makruh
Moharebeh
Mubah
Mustahabb
Taghut
Taqiya
Thawab




Theological titles




Caliph
Shaykh al-Islām
Sayyid
Sharif
Ashraf
Ulama
Faqīh
Grand Imam of al-Azhar
Allamah
Mufti
Grand Mufti
Hujjat al-Islam
Da'i al-Mutlaq
Mujtahid
Ayatollah
Marja' (Grand Ayatollah)
Hafiz
Hujja
Hakim
Imam
Mullah
Khatib
Khawaja
Mawlānā
Mawlawi
Mawla
Mufassir
Murshid
Pir
Akhoond
Muhaddith
Mujaddid
Qadi
Sheikh
Marabout
Ustad
Muezzin
Murid
Mujahideen
Ghazi
Shahid
Hajji
Ansar
Salaf
Sahabah
Tabi‘un
Tabi‘ al-Tabi‘in







v
t
e





A caliphate (Arabic: خِلافة‎ khilāfah) is a state under the leadership of an Islamic steward known as a caliph (/ˈkælɪf, ˈkeɪ-/, Arabic: خَليفة‎ khalīfah,  pronunciation (help·info)), a person considered a religious successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad (Muhammad ibn ʿAbdullāh) and a leader of the entire Muslim community.[1] Historically, the caliphates were polities based in Islam which developed into multi-ethnic trans-national empires.[2] During the medieval period, three major caliphates existed: the Rashidun Caliphate (632–661), the Umayyad Caliphate (661–750) and the Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258). The fourth major caliphate, the Ottoman Caliphate, established by the Ottoman Empire in 1517, was a manifestation whereby the Ottoman rulers claimed caliphal authority. During the history of Islam, a few other Muslim states, almost all of them hereditary monarchies, have claimed to be caliphates.[1]
Prior to the rise of Muhammad and the unification of the Arab tribes of the Arabian Peninsula under Islam, the tribes of Arabia followed a pre-Islamic Arab polytheism, lived as self-governing sedentary and nomadic communities and often raided their neighbouring tribes.[3][4] Following the conquests under Muhammad of the Arabian Peninsula, the region became unified and most of the tribes adopted Islam.[4]
The first caliphate, the Rashidun Caliphate, was established immediately after Muhammad's death in 632.[5] The four Rashidun caliphs, who directly succeeded Muhammad as leaders of the Muslim community, were chosen through shura, a process of community consultation that some consider to be an early form of Islamic democracy.[6] The fourth caliph, Ali, who, unlike the prior three, was from the same clan as Muhammad (Banu Hashim), is considered by Shia Muslims to be the first rightful caliph and Imam after Muhammad.[7] Ali reigned during the First Fitna (656–661), a civil war between supporters of Ali and supporters of the assassinated previous caliph, Uthman, from Banu Umayya, as well as rebels in Egypt; the war led to the establishment of the Umayyad Caliphate under Muawiyah I in 661.
The second caliphate, the Umayyad Caliphate was ruled by Banu Umayya, a Meccan clan with descent from Muhammad's great-great-grandfather. The caliphate continued the Arab conquests, incorporating the Caucasus, Transoxiana, Sindh, the Maghreb and the Iberian Peninsula (Al-Andalus) into the Muslim world. The caliphate had considerable acceptance of the Christians within its territory, necessitated by their large numbers, especially in the region of Syria.[8][9][10] Following the Abbasid Revolution from 746–750, which primarily arose from non-Arab Muslim disenfranchisement, the Abbasid Caliphate was established in 750.
The third caliphate, the Abbasid Caliphate was ruled by the Abbasids, a dynasty of Meccan origin which descended from Hashim, a great-grandfather of Muhammad, making them part of Banu Hashim, via Abbas, an uncle of Muhammad, hence the name. Caliph al-Mansur founded its second capital of Baghdad in 762 which became a major scientific, cultural and art centre, as did the territory as a whole during a period known as the Islamic Golden Age. From the 10th century, Abbasid rule became confined to an area around Baghdad. From 945 to 1157, the Abbasid Caliphate came under Buyid and then Seljuq military control. In 1250, a non-Arab army created by the Abbasids called the Mamluks came to power in Egypt. In 1258, the Mongol Empire sacked Baghdad, ending the Abbasid Caliphate, and in 1261 the Mamluks in Egypt re-established the Abbasid Caliphate in Cairo. Though lacking in political power, the Abbasid dynasty continued to claim authority in religious matters until the Ottoman conquest of Mamluk Egypt in 1517.[11]
The fourth major caliphate, the Ottoman Caliphate, was established after their conquest of Mamluk Egypt in 1517. The conquest gave the Ottomans control over the holy cities of Mecca and Medina, previously controlled by the Mamluks. The Ottomans gradually came to be viewed as the de facto leaders and representatives of the Islamic world.[12] Following their defeat in World War I, their empire was partitioned by Britain and France, and on 3 March 1924, the first President of the Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, as part of his reforms, constitutionally abolished the institution of the caliphate.[13] A few other states that existed through history have called themselves caliphates, including the Ismaili Shia Fatimid Caliphate in Northeast Africa (909–1171), the Umayyad Caliphate of Córdoba in Iberia (929–1031), the Berber Almohad Caliphate in Morocco (1121–1269) and the Fula Sokoto Caliphate in present-day northern Nigeria (1804–1903).
The Sunni branch of Islam stipulates that, as a head of state, a caliph should be elected by Muslims or their representatives.[14] Followers of Shia Islam, however, believe a caliph should be an Imam chosen by God from the Ahl al-Bayt (the "Family of the House", Muhammad's direct descendants). In simpler terms, the Sunni favour election while the Shia favour bloodline.[7]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Rashidun Caliphate (632–661)

2.1 Succession to Muhammad
2.2 Rashidun Caliphs
2.3 Ali's caliphate and the rise of the Umayyad dynasty


3 Umayyad Caliphate (661–750)
4 Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258, 1261–1517)

4.1 Abbasid Caliphs at Baghdad
4.2 Under the Mamluk Sultanate of Cairo (1261–1517)


5 Parallel caliphates to the Abbasids

5.1 Fatimid Caliphate (909–1171)
5.2 Umayyad Caliphate of Córdoba (929–1031)
5.3 Almohad Caliphate (1147–1269)


6 Ottoman Caliphate (1517–1924)

6.1 Abolition of the Caliphate (1924)


7 Sokoto Caliphate (1804–1903)
8 Khilafat Movement (1919–24)
9 Sharifian Caliphate (1924–25)
10 Non-political caliphates

10.1 Sufi caliphates
10.2 Ahmadiyya Caliphate (1908-present)


11 Religious basis

11.1 Qur'an
11.2 Hadith
11.3 Prophesied Caliphate of the Mahdî
11.4 The Sahaba of Muhammad
11.5 Sayings of Islamic theologians


12 Period of dormancy

12.1 Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (2014–present)
12.2 Ahmadiyya view
12.3 Islamic call
12.4 Al-Qaeda's Caliphate goals
12.5 Opposition


13 Government

13.1 Electing or appointing a Caliph
13.2 Sunni belief
13.3 Shi'a belief
13.4 Majlis al-Shura
13.5 Accountability of rulers
13.6 Rule of law
13.7 Economy


14 Notable caliphs
15 See also
16 References

16.1 Citations
16.2 Sources


17 Further reading
18 External links



Etymology[edit]
Before the advent of Islam, Arabian monarchs traditionally used the title malik (King, ruler), or another from the same root.[1]
The term caliph (/ˈkeɪlɪf, ˈkælɪf/),[15] derives from the Arabic word khalīfah (خَليفة,  pronunciation (help·info)), which means "successor", "steward", or "deputy" and has traditionally been considered a shortening of Khalifat Rasul Allah ("successor of the messenger of God"). However, studies of pre-Islamic texts suggest that the original meaning of the phrase was "successor selected by God".[1]
Rashidun Caliphate (632–661)[edit]
Succession to Muhammad[edit]
Main articles: Succession to Muhammad and Rashidun Caliphate
In his book The Early Islamic Conquests (1981), Fred Donner argues that the standard Arabian practice at the time was for the prominent men of a kinship group, or tribe, to gather after a leader's death and elect a leader from amongst themselves.[citation needed] There was no specified procedure for this shura or consultation. Candidates were usually, but not necessarily, from the same lineage as the deceased leader. Capable men who would lead well were preferred over an ineffectual heir.
Sunni Muslims believe that Abu Bakr was chosen by the community and that this was the proper procedure. Sunnis further argue that a caliph should ideally be chosen by election or community consensus.
The Shia believe that Ali, the son-in-law and cousin of Muhammad, was chosen by Muhammad as his spiritual and temporal successor as the Mawla (the Imam and the Caliph) of all Muslims in the event of Ghadir Khumm. Here Mohammad called upon the around 100,000 gathered returning pilgrims to give their bay'ah (oath of allegiance) to Ali in his very presence and thenceforth to proclaim the good news of Ali's succession to his (Muhammad's) leadership to all Muslims they should come across.
The caliph was often known as Amir al-Mu'minin (Arabic: أمير المؤمنين‎ "Commander of the Believers"). Muhammad established his capital in Medina; after he died, it remained the capital during the Rashidun Caliphate, before Kufa was reportedly made the capital by Caliph Ali. At times there have been rival claimant caliphs in different parts of the Islamic world, and divisions between the Shi'i and Sunni communities.
According to Sunni Muslims, the first caliph to be called Amir al-Mu'minin was Abu Bakr, followed by Umar, the second of the Rashidun. Uthman and Ali also were called by the same title, while the Shi'a consider Ali to have been the only truly legitimate caliph, of these four men.[16]
After the first four caliphs, the Caliphate was claimed by the Umayyad Caliphate, the Abbasid Caliphate, and the Ottoman Empire, and for relatively short periods by other, competing dynasties in al-Andalus, North Africa, and Egypt. After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk officially abolished the system of Caliphate in Islam (the Ottoman Empire) as part of his secular reforms and founded the Republic of Turkey in 1923. The Kings of Morocco still label themselves with the title Amir al-Mu'minin for the Moroccans, but lay no claim to the Caliphate.
Some Muslim countries, including Somalia, Indonesia and Malaysia, were never subject to the authority of a Caliphate[citation needed], with the exception of Aceh, which briefly acknowledged Ottoman suzerainty.[17] Consequently, these countries had their own, local sultans or rulers who did not fully accept the authority of the Caliph.
Rashidun Caliphs[edit]
Main articles: Rashidun and Rashidun Caliphate
See also: early Muslim conquests and Succession to Muhammad




Rashidun Caliphate at its greatest extent, under Caliph Uthman's rule


Abu Bakr, the first successor of Muhammad, nominated Umar as his successor on his deathbed. Umar, the second caliph, was killed by a Persian named Piruz Nahavandi. His successor, Uthman, was elected by a council of electors (majlis). Uthman was killed by members of a disaffected group. Ali then took control but was not universally accepted as caliph by the governors of Egypt, and later by some of his own guard. He faced two major rebellions and was assassinated by Abd-al-Rahman ibn Muljam, a Khawarij. Ali's tumultuous rule lasted only five years. This period is known as the Fitna, or the first Islamic civil war. The followers of Ali later became the Shi'a ("shiaat Ali", partisans of Ali.[18]) minority sect of Islam and reject the legitimacy of the first 3 caliphs. The followers of all four Rashidun Caliphs (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali) became the majority Sunni sect.
Under the Rashidun each region (Sultanate, Wilayah, or Emirate) of the Caliphate had its own governor (Sultan, Wāli or Emir). Muawiyah, a relative of Uthman and governor (Wali) of Syria, succeeded Ali as Caliph. Muawiyah transformed the caliphate into a hereditary office, thus founding the Umayyad dynasty.
In areas which were previously under Sasanian Empire or Byzantine rule, the Caliphs lowered taxes, provided greater local autonomy (to their delegated governors), greater religious freedom for Jews, and some indigenous Christians, and brought peace to peoples demoralized and disaffected by the casualties and heavy taxation that resulted from the decades of Byzantine-Persian warfare.[19]
Ali's caliphate and the rise of the Umayyad dynasty[edit]
Ali's reign was plagued by great turmoil and internal strife. The primary one came from a misunderstanding on the part of Mu'awiyah, the governor of Damascus. The Persians, taking advantage of this, infiltrated the two armies and attacked the other army causing chaos and internal hatred between the companions at the Battle of Siffin. The battle lasted several months, resulting in a stalemate. In order to avoid further bloodshed, Ali agreed to negotiate with Mu'awiyah. This caused a faction of approximately 4,000 people that would be known as the Kharijites, to abandon the fight. After defeating the Kharijites at the Battle of Nahrawan, Ali was later assassinated by the Kharijite Ibn Muljam. Ali's son Hasan was elected as the next caliph, but handed his title to Mu'awiyah a few months later. Mu'awiyah became the fifth (or second by Shia reckoning) caliph, establishing the Umayyad Dynasty,[20] named after the great-grandfather of Uthman and Mu'awiyah, Umayya ibn Abd Shams.[21]
Umayyad Caliphate (661–750)[edit]
Main article: Umayyad Caliphate




The Caliphate, 622–750
  Expansion under Muhammad, 622–632
  Expansion during the Rashidun Caliphs, 632–661
  Expansion during the Umayyad Caliphate, 661–750



Beginning with the Umayyads, the title of the caliph became hereditary.[22] Under the Umayyads, the Caliphate grew rapidly in territory, incorporating the Caucasus, Transoxiana, Sindh, the Maghreb and most of the Iberian Peninsula (Al-Andalus) into the Muslim world. At its greatest extent, the Umayyad Caliphate covered 5.17 million square miles (13,400,000 km2), making it the largest empire the world had yet seen, and the sixth-largest ever to exist in history.[23]
Geographically, the empire was divided into several provinces, the borders of which changed numerous times during the Umayyad reign. Each province had a governor appointed by the caliph. However, for a variety of reasons, including that they were not elected by Shura and suggestions of impious behaviour, the Umayyad dynasty was not universally supported within the Muslim community. Some supported prominent early Muslims like Al-Zubayr; others felt that only members of Muhammad's clan, the Banu Hashim, or his own lineage, the descendants of Ali, should rule.
There were numerous rebellions against the Umayyads, as well as splits within the Umayyad ranks (notably, the rivalry between Yaman and Qays). Allegedly, Shimr Ibn Thil-Jawshan killed Ali's son Hussein and his family at the Battle of Karbala in 680, solidifying the Shia-Sunni split.[18] Eventually, supporters of the Banu Hashim and the supporters of the lineage of Ali united to bring down the Umayyads in 750. However, the Shi‘at ‘Alī, "the Party of Ali", were again disappointed when the Abbasid dynasty took power, as the Abbasids were descended from Muhammad's uncle, ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and not from Ali.
Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258, 1261–1517)[edit]
Main article: Abbasid Caliphate
Abbasid Caliphs at Baghdad[edit]




Al-Mustansiriya University in Baghdad


In 750, the Umayyad dynasty was overthrown by another family of Meccan origin, the Abbasids. Their time was marked by scientific, cultural and religious prosperity. Islamic art and music also flourished significantly during their reign. Their major city and capital Baghdad began to flourish as a center of knowledge, culture and trade. This period of cultural fruition ended in 1258 with the sack of Baghdad by the Mongols under Hulagu Khan. The Abbasid Caliphate had however lost its effective power outside Iraq already by c. 920.[24] By 945, the loss of power became official when the Buyids conquered Baghdad and all of Iraq. The empire fell apart and its parts were ruled for the next century by local dynasties.[25]
In the 9th century, the Abbasids created an army loyal only to their caliphate, composed predominantly of Turkic Cuman, Circassian, and Georgian slave origin known as Mamluks. By 1250 the Mamluks came to power in Egypt. The Mamluk army, though often viewed negatively, both helped and hurt the caliphate. Early on, it provided the government with a stable force to address domestic and foreign problems. However, creation of this foreign army and al-Mu'tasim's transfer of the capital from Baghdad to Samarra created a division between the caliphate and the peoples they claimed to rule. In addition, the power of the Mamluks steadily grew until Ar-Radi (934–41) was constrained to hand over most of the royal functions to Muhammad ibn Ra'iq.
Under the Mamluk Sultanate of Cairo (1261–1517)[edit]
Main article: Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)
In 1261, following the devastation of Baghdad at the hands of the Mongols, the Mamluk rulers of Egypt tried to gain legitimacy for their rule by declaring the re-establishment of the Abbasid caliphate in Cairo. The Abbasid caliphs in Egypt had little to no political power; they continued to maintain the symbols of authority, but their sway was confined to religious matters. The first Abbasid caliph of Cairo was Al-Mustansir (r. June–November 1261). The Abbasid caliphate of Cairo lasted until the time of Al-Mutawakkil III, who ruled as caliph from 1508 to 1516, then he was deposed briefly in 1516 by his predecessor Al-Mustamsik, but was restored again to the caliphate in 1517.
The Ottoman Great Sultan Selim I defeated the Mamluk Sultanate, and made Egypt part of the Ottoman Empire in 1517. Al-Mutawakkil III was captured together with his family and transported to Constantinople as a prisoner where he had a ceremonial role. He died in 1543, following his return to Cairo.[26]
Parallel caliphates to the Abbasids[edit]
The Abbasid dynasty lost effective power over much of the Muslim realm by the first half of the tenth century.
The Shiʻa Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi Billah of the Fatimid dynasty, which claimed descent from Muhammad through his daughter, claimed the title of Caliph in 909, creating a separate line of caliphs in North Africa. Initially controlling Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, the Fatimid caliphs extended their rule for the next 150 years, taking Egypt and Palestine, before the Abbasid dynasty was able to turn the tide, limiting Fatimid rule to Egypt. The Fatimid dynasty finally ended in 1171.
The Umayyad dynasty, which had survived and come to rule over Al-Andalus, reclaimed the title of Caliph in 929, lasting until it was overthrown in 1031.
Fatimid Caliphate (909–1171)[edit]
Main article: Fatimid Caliphate




Map of the Fatimid Caliphate at its largest extent in the early 11th century


The Fatimid Caliphate was an Isma'ili Shi'i caliphate that spanned a vast area of the Arab world. Originally based in Tunisia, the Fatimid dynasty extended their rule across the Mediterranean coast of Africa, and ultimately made Egypt the centre of their caliphate. At its height, in addition to Egypt, the caliphate included varying areas of the Maghreb, Sicily, the Levant and the Hejaz.
The Fatimids established the Tunisian city of Mahdia and made it their capital city, before conquering Egypt, and building the city of Cairo there in 969. Thereafter, Cairo became the capital of the caliphate, with Egypt becoming the political, cultural and religious centre of the state. Islam scholar Louis Massignon dubbed the 4th century AH /10th century CE as the "Ismaili century in the history of Islam".[27]
The term Fatimite is sometimes used to refer to the citizens of this caliphate. The ruling elite of the state belonged to the Ismaili branch of Shi'ism. The leaders of the dynasty were Ismaili Imams and had a religious significance to Ismaili Muslims. They are also part of the chain of holders of the office of the Caliphate, as recognized by some Muslims. Therefore, this constitutes a rare period in history in which the descendants of Ali (hence the name Fatimid, referring to Ali's wife Fatima) and the Caliphate were united to any degree, excepting the final period of the Rashidun Caliphate under Ali himself.
The caliphate was reputed to exercise a degree of religious tolerance towards non-Ismaili sects of Islam as well as towards Jews, Maltese Christians and Copts.[28]
Umayyad Caliphate of Córdoba (929–1031)[edit]




Map of the Caliphate of Cordoba c. 1000


Main articles: Emirate of Córdoba, Caliphate of Córdoba, and Al-Andalus
During the Umayyad dynasty, the Iberian Peninsula was an integral province of the Umayyad Caliphate ruling from Damascus. The Umayyads lost the position of Caliph in Damascus in 750, and Abd al-Rahman I became Emir of Córdoba in 756 after six years in exile. Intent on regaining power, he defeated the existing Islamic rulers of the area who defied Umayyad rule and united various local fiefdoms into an emirate.
Rulers of the emirate used the title "emir" or "sultan" until the 10th century, when Abd al-Rahman III was faced with the threat of invasion by the Fatimid Caliphate. To aid his fight against the invading Fatimids, who claimed the caliphate in opposition to the generally recognized Abbasid Caliph of Baghdad, Al-Mu'tadid, Abd al-Rahman III claimed the title of caliph himself. This helped Abd al-Rahman III gain prestige with his subjects, and the title was retained after the Fatimids were repulsed. The rule of the Caliphate is considered as the heyday of Muslim presence in the Iberian peninsula, before it fragmented into various taifas in the 11th century. This period was characterized by a remarkable flourishing in technology, trade and culture; many of the masterpieces of al-Andalus were constructed in this period.
Almohad Caliphate (1147–1269)[edit]




The Almohad empire at its greatest extent, c. 1180–1212


Main article: Almohad Caliphate
The Almohad Caliphate (Berber: Imweḥḥden, from Arabic الموحدون al-Muwaḥḥidun, "the Monotheists" or "the Unifiers") was a Moroccan[29][30] Berber Muslim movement founded in the 12th century.[31]
The Almohad movement was started by Ibn Tumart among the Masmuda tribes of southern Morocco. The Almohads first established a Berber state in Tinmel in the Atlas Mountains in roughly 1120.[31] The Almohads succeeded in overthrowing the Almoravid dynasty in governing Morocco by 1147, when Abd al-Mu'min (r. 1130-1163) conquered Marrakech and declared himself Caliph. They then extended their power over all of the Maghreb by 1159. Al-Andalus followed the fate of Africa and all Islamic Iberia was under Almohad rule by 1172.[32]
The Almohad dominance of Iberia continued until 1212, when Muhammad al-Nasir (1199–1214) was defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in the Sierra Morena by an alliance of the Christian princes of Castile, Aragon, Navarre and Portugal. Nearly all of the Moorish dominions in Iberia were lost soon after, with the great Moorish cities of Córdoba and Seville falling to the Christians in 1236 and 1248, respectively.
The Almohads continued to rule in northern Africa until the piecemeal loss of territory through the revolt of tribes and districts enabled the rise of their most effective enemies, the Marinid dynasty, in 1215. The last representative of the line, Idris al-Wathiq, was reduced to the possession of Marrakesh, where he was murdered by a slave in 1269; the Marinids seized Marrakesh, ending the Almohad domination of the Western Maghreb.
Ottoman Caliphate (1517–1924)[edit]
Main articles: Ottoman Empire and Ottoman Caliphate




The Ottoman Empire at its greatest extent in 1683, under Sultan Mehmed IV


The caliphate was claimed by the sultans of the Ottoman Empire beginning with Murad I (reigned 1362 to 1389),[33] while recognizing no authority on the part of the Abbasid caliphs of the Mamluk-ruled Cairo. Hence the seat of the caliphate moved to the Ottoman capital of Edirne. In 1453, after Mehmed the Conqueror's conquest of Constantinople, the seat of the Ottomans moved to Constantinople, present-day Istanbul. In 1517, the Ottoman sultan Selim I defeated and annexed the Mamluk Sultanate of Cairo into his empire.[13][12] Through conquering and unifying Muslim lands, Selim I became the defender of the Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina, which further strengthened the Ottoman claim to the caliphate in the Muslim world. Ottomans gradually came to be viewed as the de facto leaders and representatives of the Islamic world. However, the earlier Ottoman caliphs did not officially bear the title of caliph in their documents of state, inscriptions, or coinage.[12] It was only in the late eighteenth century that the claim to the caliphate was discovered by the sultans to have a practical use, since it allowed them to counter Russian claims to protect Ottoman Christians with their own claim to protect Muslims under Russian rule.[34][35]
According to Barthold, the first time the title of "caliph" was used as a political instead of symbolic religious title by the Ottomans was the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca with the Russian Empire in 1774, when the Empire retained moral authority on territory whose sovereignty was ceded to the Russian Empire.
The British supported and propagated the view that the Ottomans were Caliphs of Islam among Muslims in British India and the Ottoman Sultans helped the British by issuing pronouncements to the Muslims of India telling them to support British rule from Sultan Ali III and Sultan Abdülmecid I.[36]
The outcome of the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–74 was disastrous for the Ottomans. Large territories, including those with large Muslim populations, such as Crimea, were lost to the Russian Empire. However, the Ottomans under Abdul Hamid I claimed a diplomatic victory by being allowed to remain the religious leaders of Muslims in the now-independent Crimea as part of the peace treaty; in return Russia became the official protector of Christians in Ottoman territory.
Around 1880 Sultan Abdul Hamid II reasserted the title as a way of countering Russian expansion into Muslim lands. His claim was most fervently accepted by the Muslims of British India. By the eve of World War I, the Ottoman state, despite its weakness relative to Europe, represented the largest and most powerful independent Islamic political entity. The sultan also enjoyed some authority beyond the borders of his shrinking empire as caliph of Muslims in Egypt, India, and Central Asia.
In 1899 John Hay, U.S. Secretary of State, asked the American ambassador to Ottoman Turkey, Oscar Straus, to approach Sultan Abdul Hamid II to use his position as caliph to order the Tausūg people of the Sultanate of Sulu in the Philippines to submit to American suzerainty and American military rule; the Sultan obliged them and wrote the letter which was sent to Sulu via Mecca. As a result, the "Sulu Mohammedans ... refused to join the insurrectionists and had placed themselves under the control of our army, thereby recognizing American sovereignty."[37][37][38]
Abolition of the Caliphate (1924)[edit]
Further information: Atatürk's Reforms






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Abdülmecid II was the last Caliph of Islam from the Ottoman dynasty.


After the Armistice of Mudros of October 1918 with the military occupation of Constantinople and Treaty of Versailles (1919), the position of the Ottomans was uncertain. The movement to protect or restore the Ottomans gained force after the Treaty of Sèvres (August 1920) which imposed the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire and gave Greece a powerful position in Anatolia, to the distress of the Turks. They called for help and the movement was the result. The movement had collapsed by late 1922.


Part of a series on:
Islamism







Fundamentals


Islam
History
Culture
Economics
Politics
Secularism








Ideology


Islamism
Qutbism
Salafism
Shia Islamism

Islamic fundamentalism






Concepts


Caliphate
Islamic democracy
Islamic socialism
Islamic state

Islamic monarchy
Islamic republic


Islamization (of knowledge)
Jihad
Pan-Islamism
Post-Islamism
Sharia
Shura
Slavery
Two-nation theory
Ummah








Influences


Anti-imperialism
Anti-Zionism
Islamic Golden Age
Islamic revival








Movements
Scholastic

Ahl-i Hadith
Deobandi
Madkhalism
Sahwa movement
Wahhabism

Political

Hizb ut-Tahrir
Iranian Revolution
Jamaat-e-Islami
Millî Görüş
Muslim Brotherhood
List of Islamic political parties

Militia

Militant Islamism based in

MENA region
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa










Key texts



Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam
(Iqbal 1930s)


Principles of State and Government
(Asad 1961)


Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones")
(Qutb 1965)


Islamic Government:
Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih")
(Khomeini 1970)









Heads of state


Ali Khamenei
Omar al-Bashir
Muammar Gaddafi
Ruhollah Khomeini
Mohamed Morsi
Mohammad Omar
House of Saud
House of Thani
Zia-ul-Haq








Key ideologues


Muhammad Abduh
Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī
Qazi Hussain Ahmad
Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani
Muhammad Asad
Hassan al-Banna
Necmettin Erbakan
Rached Ghannouchi
Safwat Hegazi
Muhammad Iqbal
Ali Khamenei
Ruhollah Khomeini
Abul A'la Maududi
Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani
Yusuf al-Qaradawi
Sayyid Qutb
Tariq Ramadan
Ata Abu Rashta
Rashid Rida
Navvab Safavi
Ali Shariati
Haji Shariatullah
Hassan Al-Turabi
Ahmed Yassin








Related topics


Criticism of Islamism
Islam and other religions
Islamophobia
Reform movements
Modernity (Modernism)







 Islam portal
 Politics portal





v
t
e





On 3 March 1924, the first President of the Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, as part of Atatürk's Reforms, constitutionally abolished the institution of the caliphate.[13] Its powers within Turkey were transferred to the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, the parliament of the newly formed Turkish Republic. The title was then claimed by Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca of Hejaz, leader of the Arab Revolt, but his kingdom was defeated and annexed by ibn Saud in 1925.
A summit was convened at Cairo in 1926 to discuss the revival of the Caliphate, but most Muslim countries did not participate and no action was taken to implement the summit's resolutions.
Though the title Ameer al-Mumineen was adopted by the King of Morocco and by Mohammed Omar, former head of the Taliban of Afghanistan, neither claimed any legal standing or authority over Muslims outside the borders of their respective countries.
Since the end of the Ottoman Empire, occasional demonstrations have been held calling for the reestablishment of the Caliphate. Organisations which call for the re-establishment of the Caliphate include Hizb ut-Tahrir and the Muslim Brotherhood.[39]
Sokoto Caliphate (1804–1903)[edit]
Main article: Sokoto Caliphate
The Sokoto Caliphate was an Islamic state in what is now Nigeria led by Usman dan Fodio. Founded during the Fulani War in the early 19th century, it controlled one of the most powerful empires in sub-Saharan Africa prior to European conquest and colonization. The caliphate remained extant through the colonial period and afterwards, though with reduced power.[citation needed] The current head of the Sokoto Caliphate is Sa'adu Abubakar.
Khilafat Movement (1919–24)[edit]
Main article: Khilafat Movement
See also: Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire
The Khilafat Movement was launched by Muslims in British India in 1920 to defend the Ottoman Caliphate at the end of the First World War and it spread throughout the British colonial territories. It was strong in British India where it formed a rallying point for some Indian Muslims as one of many anti-British Indian political movements. Its leaders included Mohammad Ali Jouhar, his brother Shawkat Ali, and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, Hakim Ajmal Khan and Barrister Muhammad Jan Abbasi. For a time it was supported by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who was a member of the Central Khilafat Committee.[40][41] However, the movement lost its momentum after the arrest or flight of its leaders, and a series of offshoots splintered off from the main organization.
Sharifian Caliphate (1924–25)[edit]
Main article: Sharifian Caliphate
The Sharifian Caliphate (Arabic: خلافة شريفية‎) was an Arab caliphate proclaimed by the Sharifian rulers of Hejaz in 1924, in lieu of the Ottoman Caliphate. The idea of the Sharifian Caliphate had been floating around since at least the 15th century.[42] Toward the end of the 19th century, it started to gain importance due to the decline of the Ottoman Empire, which was heavily defeated in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78. There is little evidence, however, that the idea of a Sharifian Caliphate ever gained wide grassroots support in the Middle East or anywhere else for that matter.[43]
Non-political caliphates[edit]
Though non-political, some Sufi orders and the Ahmadiyya movement[44] define themselves as caliphates. Their leaders are thus commonly referred to as khalifas (caliphs).
Sufi caliphates[edit]
In Sufism, tariqas (orders) are led by spiritual leaders (khilafah ruhaniyyah), the main khalifas, who nominate local khalifas to organize zaouias.[45]
Sufi caliphates are not necessarily hereditary. Khalifas are aimed to serve the silsilah in relation to spiritual responsibilities and to propagate the teachings of the tariqa.
Ahmadiyya Caliphate (1908-present)[edit]




The Ahmadiyya flag, first designed in 1939, during the leadership of the Second Caliph.


Main article: Ahmadiyya Caliphate
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community is an Islamic revivalist movement founded in 1889 by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad of Qadian, India, who claimed to be the promised Messiah and Mahdi, awaited by Muslims. He also claimed to be a follower-prophet subordinate to Muhammad the prophet of Islam. After his death in 1908, his first successor, Hakeem Noor-ud-Din became the caliph of the community and assumed the title of Khalifatul Masih (Successor or Caliph of the Messiah).
Ahmadi Muslims believe that the Ahmadiyya Caliphate established after the passing of the community's founder is the re-establishment of the Rashidun Caliphate.[46] The Ahmadiyya caliphate has spanned over a century, seen five caliphs and continues to operate under this structure, with the caliph having overall authority for all religious and organizational matters. According to Ahmadiyya thought, it is not essential for a caliph to be the head of a state, rather the religious and organisational significance of the caliphate is emphasised. It is above all a religious office, with the purpose to uphold, strengthen and spread Islam and maintain the high moral standards within the Muslim community established by Muhammad, who was not merely a political leader but primarily a religious leader. The caliphate is understood as a system dealing with the organisation of believers and relating to the administration (nizām) of the Muslim community whether or not it involves a governmental role.[47] Being based on the 'precepts of Prophethood', the institution of caliphate can therefore, like prophethood, exist and flourish without a state.[48] If a caliph does happen to bear governmental authority as a head of state, it is incidental and subsidiary in relation to his overall function as caliph which is applicable to believers transnationally and not limited to one particular state or political entity. The system of caliphate in Islam, thus understood, transcends national sovereignty and ethnic divide, forming a universal supra-national entity.[47][48] According to Ahmadi Muslims, the caliphate seeks to establish God's authority on earth and the caliph strives to uphold that authority within the community of followers. It is required that the caliph carry out his duties through consultation and taking into consideration the views of the members of the Majlis-ash-Shura (consultative body). However, it is not incumbent upon him to always accept the views and recommendations of the members. The caliph has overall authority for all religious and organisational matters and is bound to decide and act in accordance with the Qur'an and sunnah.
After Hakeem Noor-ud-Din, the first caliph, the title of the Ahmadiyya caliph continued under Mirza Mahmud Ahmad, who led the community for over 50 years. Following him were Mirza Nasir Ahmad and then Mirza Tahir Ahmad who were the third and fourth caliphs respectively. The current caliph is Mirza Masroor Ahmad, who lives in London[49] with a following of 10 to 20 million in over 200 countries and territories of the world.[50]
Religious basis[edit]
Further information: Political aspects of Islam and Divisions of the world in Islam
Qur'an[edit]
The Quran uses the term khalifa twice. First, in al-Baqara, 30, it refers to God creating humanity as his khalifa on Earth. Second, in Sad, 26, it addresses King David as God's khalifa and reminds him of his obligation to rule with justice.[51]


Quran







Text


Chapter

List
Meccan
Medinan




Verse
Section
Muqatta'at








Content


Animals
Eschatology
Female figures
God
Legends
Miracles
Parables

Prophets
Science








Reading


Elocution
Memorized
Reciter

School
Speed








Translations


List
English translations
by Ahmadis








History


Samarkand Kufic Quran
Sana'a manuscript
Topkapi manuscript
Birmingham manuscript








Exegesis


Abrogation
Biblical narratives
Esoteric interpretation
Hermeneutics

Persons related to verses

mentioned by name




Revelation








Related


Createdness
Criticism
Inimitability
Quran and tradition
Quranism
Shi’a view








Category
Islam portal
Wikipedia book







v
t
e





In addition, the following excerpt from the Quran, known as the 'Istikhlaf Verse', is used by some to argue for a Quranic basis for Caliphate:

God has promised those of you who have attained to faith and do righteous deeds that, of a certainty, He will make them Khulifa on earth, even as He caused [some of] those who lived before them to become Khulifa; and that, of a certainty, He will firmly establish for them the religion which He has been pleased to bestow on them; and that, of a certainty, He will cause their erstwhile state of fear to be replaced by a sense of security [seeing that] they worship Me [alone], not ascribing divine powers to aught beside Me. But all who, after [having understood] this, choose to deny the truth – it is they, they who are truly iniquitous!" (An-Nur, 55)

In the above verse, the word Khulifa (the plural of Khalifa) has been variously translated as "successors" and "ones who accede to power".
Small subsections of Sunni Islamism argue that to govern a state by Sharia is, by definition, to rule via the Caliphate, and use the following verses to sustain their claim.

So govern between the people by that which God has revealed (Islam), and follow not their vain desires, beware of them in case they seduce you from just some part of that which God has revealed to you
— [Quran 005:049]


O you who believe! Obey God, and obey the messenger and then those among you who are in authority; and if you have a dispute concerning any matter, refer it to God and the messenger's rulings, if you are (in truth) believers in God and the Last Day. That is better and more seemly in the end.
— [Quran 004:059]

Hadith[edit]
The following hadith from Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal can be understood to prophesy two eras of Caliphate (both on the lines/precepts of prophethood).

Hadhrat Huzaifa narrated that the Messenger of Allah said: Prophethood will remain among you as long as Allah wills. Then Caliphate (Khilafah) on the lines of Prophethood shall commence, and remain as long as Allah wills. Then corrupt/erosive monarchy would take place, and it will remain as long as Allah wills. After that, despotic kingship would emerge, and it will remain as long as Allah wills. Then, the Caliphate (Khilafah) shall come once again based on the precept of Prophethood.[52][page needed]

In the above, the first era of Caliphate is commonly accepted by Muslims to be that of the Rashidun Caliphate.
Nafi'a reported saying:

It has been reported on the authority of Nafi, that 'Abdullah b. Umar paid a visit to Abdullah b. Muti' in the days (when atrocities were perpetrated on the People Of Medina) at Harra in the time of Yazid b. Mu'awiya. Ibn Muti' said: Place a pillow for Abu 'Abd al-Rahman (family name of 'Abdullah b. 'Umar). But the latter said: I have not come to sit with you. I have come to you to tell you a tradition I heard from the Messenger of Allah. I heard him say: One who withdraws his band from obedience (to the Amir) will find no argument (in his defence) when he stands before Allah on the Day of Judgment, and one who dies without having bound himself by an oath of allegiance (to an Amir) will die the death of one belonging to the days of Jahiliyyah. – Sahih Muslim, Book 020, Hadith 4562.

Hisham ibn Urwah reported on the authority of Abu Saleh on the authority of Abu Hurairah that Muhammad said:

Leaders will take charge of you after me, where the pious (one) will lead you with his piety and the impious (one) with his impiety, so only listen to them and obey them in everything which conforms with the truth (Islam). If they act rightly it is for your credit, and if they acted wrongly it is counted for you and against them.

Muslim narrated on the authority of al-A'araj, on the authority of Abu Hurairah, that Muhammad said:

Behold, the Imam (Caliph) is but a shield from behind whom the people fight and by whom they defend themselves.

Muslim reported on the authority of Abdel Aziz al-Muqrin, who said:

I accompanied Abu Hurairah for five years and heard him talking of Muhammd's saying: The Prophets ruled over the children of Israel, whenever a Prophet died another Prophet succeeded him, but there will be no Prophet after me. There will be Khalifahs and they will number many. They asked: What then do you order us? He said: Fulfil the bay'ah(transaction/sale) to them one after the other and give them their due. Surely God will ask them about what He entrusted them with.

Prophesied Caliphate of the Mahdî[edit]
For information about Caliph the Mahdî, see "Mahdi", "Islamic eschatology" (Section Islamic eschatology#Major figures), and "Second Coming" (Section Second Coming#Islam).
The Sahaba of Muhammad[edit]
Al-Habbab Ibn ul-Munthir said, when the Sahaba met in the wake of the death of Muhammad, (at the thaqifa hall) of Bani Sa’ida:

Let there be one Amir from us and one Amir from you (meaning one from the Ansar and one from the Mohajireen).

Upon this Abu Bakr replied:

It is forbidden for Muslims to have two Amirs (rulers)...

Then he got up and addressed the Muslims.[53][54][55][56][57][58][page needed]
It has additionally been reported[59] that Abu Bakr went on to say on the day of Al-Saqifa:

It is forbidden for Muslims to have two Amirs for this would cause differences in their affairs and concepts, their unity would be divided and disputes would break out amongst them. The Sunnah would then be abandoned, the bida’a (innovations) would spread and Fitna would grow, and that is in no one’s interests.

The Sahaba agreed to this and selected Abu Bakr as their first Khaleef. Habbab ibn Mundhir who suggested the idea of two Ameers corrected himself and was the first to give Abu Bakr the Bay'ah. This indicates an Ijma as-Sahaba of all of the Sahaba. Ali ibni abi Talib, who was attending the body of Muhammad at the time, also consented to this.
Imam Ali whom the Shia revere said:[60]

People must have an Amir...where the believer works under his Imara (rule) and under which the unbeliever would also benefit, until his rule ended by the end of his life (ajal), the booty (fay’i) would be gathered, the enemy would be fought, the routes would be made safe, the strong one will return what he took from the weak till the tyrant would be contained, and not bother anyone.

Sayings of Islamic theologians[edit]
Al-Mawardi says:[61]

It is forbidden for the Ummah (Muslim world) to have two leaders at the same time.

Al-Nawawi says:[62]

It is forbidden to give an oath to two leaders or more, even in different parts of the world and even if they are far apart.

Ahmad al-Qalqashandi says:[63]

It is forbidden to appoint two leaders at the same time.

Ibn Hazm says:[64]

It is permitted to have only one leader (of the Muslims) in the whole of the world.

Al-sha’rani says:[65]

It is forbidden for Muslims to have in the whole world and at the same time two leaders whether in agreement or discord.

Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad (a Mu’tazela scholar), says:[66]

It is forbidden to give the oath to more than one.

Al-Joziri says:[67]

The Imams (scholars of the four schools of thought)- may Allah have mercy on them- agree that the Caliphate is an obligation, and that the Muslims must appoint a leader who would implement the injunctions of the religion, and give the oppressed justice against the oppressors. It is forbidden for Muslims to have two leaders in the world whether in agreement or discord.

The Shia schools of thought and others expressed the same opinion about this.[68][69][70][71] However, the Shia school of thought believe that the leader (Imam) must not be appointed by the Islamic ummah, but must be appointed by God.
Al-Qurtubi said in his Tafsir[72] of the verse, "Indeed, man is made upon this earth a Caliph"[73] that:

This Ayah is a source in the selection of an Imaam, and a Khaleef, he is listened to and he is obeyed, for the word is united through him, and the Ahkam (laws) of the Caliph are implemented through him, and there is no difference regarding the obligation of that between the Ummah, nor between the Imams except what is narrated about al-Asam, the Mu'tazzili ...

Al-Qurtubi also said:

The Khilafah is the pillar upon which other pillars rest

An-Nawawi said:[74]

(The scholars) consented that it is an obligation upon the Muslims to select a Khalif

Al-Ghazali when writing of the potential consequences of losing the Caliphate said:[75]

The judges will be suspended, the Wilayaat (provinces) will be nullified, ... the decrees of those in authority will not be executed and all the people will be on the verge of Haraam

Ibn Taymiyyah said[76][page needed]:

It is obligatory to know that the office in charge of commanding over the people (ie: the post of the Khaleefah) is one of the greatest obligations of the Deen. In fact, there is no establishment of the Deen except by it....this is the opinion of the salaf, such as Al-Fuḍayl ibn ‘Iyāḍ, Ahmad ibn Hanbal and others

Period of dormancy[edit]
Main article: Pan-Islamism
Further information: Islamism and Islamic revival
Once the subject of intense conflict and rivalry amongst Muslim rulers, the caliphate laid dormant and largely unclaimed since the 1920s. For the vast majority of Muslims the caliph as leader of the ummah, "is cherished both as memory and ideal"[77] as a time when Muslims "enjoyed scientific and military superiority globally".[78] The Islamic prophet Muhammad is reported to have prophesied:

Prophethood will remain with you for as long as Allah wills it to remain, then Allah will raise it up whenever he wills to raise it up. Afterwards, there will be a Caliphate that follows the guidance of Prophethood remaining with you for as long as Allah wills it to remain. Then, He will raise it up whenever He wills to raise it up. Afterwards, there will be a reign of violently oppressive rule and it will remain with you for as long as Allah wills it to remain. Then, there will be a reign of tyrannical rule and it will remain for as long as Allah wills it to remain. Then, Allah will raise it up whenever He wills to raise it up. Then, there will be a Caliphate that follows the guidance of Prophethood.
— As-Silsilah As-Sahihah, vol. 1, no. 5

Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (2014–present)[edit]
Main article: Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant









ISIL's controlled areas at its extent in May 2015 (left), and current[when?] situation, with ISIL's area of control in grey (right)


The group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn formed as an affiliate of Al-Qaeda network of Islamist militants during the Iraq War. The group eventually expanded into Syria and rose to prominence as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) during the Syrian Civil War. In the summer of 2014, the group launched the Northern Iraq offensive, seizing the city of Mosul.[79][80] The group declared itself a caliphate under Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi on 29 June 2014 and renamed itself as the "Islamic State".[81][82][83] ISIL's claim to be the highest authority of Muslims has been widely rejected.[84] No prominent Muslim scholar has supported its declaration of caliphate; even Salafi-jihadist preachers accused the group of engaging in political showmanship and bringing disrepute to the notion of Islamic state.[85]
ISIL has been at war with armed forces including the Iraqi Army, the Syrian Army, the Free Syrian Army, Al-Nusra Front, Syrian Democratic Forces, and Iraqi Kurdistan's Peshmerga and People's Protection Units (YPG) along with a 60 nation coalition in its efforts to establish a de facto state on Iraqi and Syrian territory.[86]
Ahmadiyya view[edit]
Further information: Khalifatul Masih
The members of the Ahmadiyya community believe that the Ahmadiyya Caliphate (Arabic: Khilāfah) is the continuation of the Islamic Caliphate, first being the Rāshidūn (rightly guided) Caliphate (of Righteous Caliphs). This is believed to have been suspended with Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammad and re-established with the appearance of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835-1908, the founder of the movement) whom Ahmadis identify as the Promised Messiah and Mahdi.
Ahmadis maintain that in accordance with Quranic verses (such as [Quran 24:55]) and numerous ahadith on the issue, Khilāfah can only be established by God Himself and is a divine blessing given to those who believe and work righteousness and uphold the unity of God, therefore any movement to establish the Khilāfah centered on human endeavours alone is bound to fail, particularly when the condition of the people diverges from the ‘precepts of prophethood’ and they are as a result disunited, their inability to establish a Khilāfah caused fundamentally by the lack of righteousness in them. Although the khalifa is elected it is believed that God himself directs the hearts of believers towards an individual. Thus the khalifa is designated neither necessarily by right (i.e. the rightful or competent one in the eyes of the people at that time) nor merely by election but primarily by God.[87]
According to Ahmadiyya thought, a khalifa need not be the head of a state; rather the Ahmadiyya community emphasises the spiritual and organisational significance of the Khilāfah. It is primarily a religious/spiritual office, with the purpose of upholding, strengthening and spreading Islam and of maintaining the high spiritual and moral standards within the global community established by Muhammad - who was not merely a political leader but primarily a religious leader. If a khalifa does happen to bear governmental authority as a head of state, it is incidental and subsidiary in relation to his overall function as khalifa which is applicable to believers transnationally and not limited to one particular state.[88][89]
Ahmadi Muslims believe that God has assured them that this Caliphate will endure to the end of time, depending on their righteousness and faith in God. The Khalifa provides unity, security, moral direction and progress for the community. It is required that the Khalifa carry out his duties through consultation and taking into consideration the views of the members of the Shura (consultative body). However, it is not incumbent upon him to always accept the views and recommendations of the members. The Khalifatul Masih has overall authority for all religious and organisational matters and is bound to decide and act in accordance with the Qur'an and sunnah.
Islamic call[edit]
A number of Islamist political parties and mujahideen called for the restoration of the caliphate by uniting Muslim nations, either through political action (e.g., Hizb ut-Tahrir), or through force (e.g., al-Qaeda).[90] Various Islamist movements gained momentum in recent years with the ultimate aim of establishing a Caliphate. In 2014, ISIL/ISIS made a claim to re-establishing the Caliphate. Those advocating the re-establishment of a Caliphate differed in their methodology and approach. Some[who?] were locally oriented, mainstream political parties that had no apparent transnational objectives.[citation needed]
Abul A'la Maududi believed the caliph was not just an individual ruler who had to be restored, but was man's representation of God's authority on Earth:

Khilafa means representative. Man, according to Islam is the representative of "people", His (God's) viceregent; that is to say, by virtue of the powers delegated to him, and within the limits prescribed by the Qu'ran and the teaching of the prophet, the caliph is required to exercise Divine authority.[91]

The Muslim Brotherhood advocates pan-Islamic unity and the implementation of Islamic law. Founder Hassan al-Banna wrote about the restoration of the Caliphate.[92]
One transnational group whose ideology was based specifically on restoring the caliphate as a pan-Islamic state is Hizb ut-Tahrir (literally, "Party of Liberation"). It is particularly strong in Central Asia and Europe and is growing in strength in the Arab world. It is based on the claim that Muslims can prove that God exists[93] and that the Qur'an is the word of God.[94][95] Hizb ut-Tahrir's stated strategy is a non-violent political and intellectual struggle.
In Southeast Asia, groups such as Jemaah Islamiyah aimed to establish a Caliphate across Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei and parts of Thailand, the Philippines and Cambodia.
Al-Qaeda's Caliphate goals[edit]
Main article: al-Qaeda
Al-Qaeda has as one of its clearly stated goals the re-establishment of a caliphate.[96] Its former leader, Osama bin Laden, called for Muslims to "establish the righteous caliphate of our umma".[97] Al-Qaeda chiefs released a statement in 2005, under which, in what they call "phase five" there will be "an Islamic state, or caliphate".[98] Al-Qaeda has named its Internet newscast from Iraq "The Voice of the Caliphate".[99] According to author and Egyptian native Lawrence Wright, Ayman al-Zawahiri, bin Laden's mentor and al-Qaeda's second-in-command until 2011, once "sought to restore the caliphate... which had formally ended in 1924 following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire but which had not exercised real power since the thirteenth century." Zawahiri believes that once the caliphate is re-established, Egypt would become a rallying point for the rest of the Islamic world, leading the jihad against the West. "Then history would make a new turn, God willing", Zawahiri later wrote, "in the opposite direction against the empire of the United States and the world's Jewish government".[100]
Opposition[edit]
Scholar Olivier Roy writes that "early on, Islamists replace the concept of the caliphate ... with that of the emir." There were a number of reasons including "that according to the classical authors, a caliph must be a member of the tribe of the Prophet (the Quraysh) ... moreover, caliphs ruled societies that the Islamists do not consider to have been Islamic (the Ottoman Empire)."[101] This is not the view of the majority of Islamist groups, as both the Muslim Brotherhood and Hizb ut-Tahrir view the Ottoman state as a caliphate.[102][103]
Government[edit]
Electing or appointing a Caliph[edit]
In his book The Early Islamic Conquests (1981), Fred Donner argues that the standard Arabian practice during the early Caliphates was for the prominent men of a kinship group, or tribe, to gather after a leader's death and elect a leader from amongst themselves, although there was no specified procedure for this shura, or consultative assembly. Candidates were usually from the same lineage as the deceased leader, but they were not necessarily his sons. Capable men who would lead well were preferred over an ineffectual direct heir, as there was no basis in the majority Sunni view that the head of state or governor should be chosen based on lineage alone.
Traditionally, Sunni Muslim madhhabs all agreed that a Caliph must be a descendant of the Quraysh.[104] Al-Baqillani has said that the leader of the Muslims simply should be from the majority.
Sunni belief[edit]
Following the death of Muhammad, a meeting took place at Saqifah. At that meeting, Abu Bakr was elected caliph by the Muslim community. Sunni Muslims developed the belief that the caliph is a temporal political ruler, appointed to rule within the bounds of Islamic law (Sharia). The job of adjudicating orthodoxy and Islamic law was left to mujtahids, legal specialists collectively called the Ulama. Many Muslims call the first four caliphs the Rashidun, meaning the Rightly-Guided, because they are believed to have followed the Qur'an and the sunnah (example) of Muhammad.[citation needed]
Shi'a belief[edit]
Main articles: Succession to Muhammad, Shia Islam, and Imamah (Shia doctrine)
The Shia believe in the Imamate, a principle by which rulers are Imams who are divinely chosen, infallible, and sinless and must come from the Ahl al-Bayt regardless of majority opinion, shura or election. They claim that before his death, Muhammad had given many indications, in the hadith of the pond of Khumm in particular, that he considered Ali, his cousin and son-in-law, as his successor. For the Twelvers, Ali and his eleven descendants, the twelve Imams, are believed to have been considered, even before their birth, as the only valid Islamic rulers appointed and decreed by God. Shia Muslims believe that all the muslim caliphs following Muhammad's death to be illegitimate due to their unjust rule and that muslims have no obligation to follow them, as the only guidance that was left behind, as ordained in the hadith of the two weighty things, was the Islamic holy book, the Quran and Muhammad's family and offspring, who are believed to be infallible, therefore able to lead society and the muslim community with complete justice and equity.[105] [106][107] [108] The Prophet's own grandson, and third Shia Imam, Hussain ibn Ali led an uprising against injustice and the oppressive rule of the Muslim caliph at the time at the Battle of Karbala. Shia Muslims emphasise that values of social justice, and speaking out against oppression and tyranny are not merely moral values, but values essential to a persons religiosity.[109][110][111] [106][112]
Main article: Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist
After these Twelve Imams, the potential Caliphs, had passed, and in the absence of the possibility of a government headed by their Imams, some Twelvers believe it was necessary that a system of Shi'i Islamic government based on the Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist be developed, due to the need for some form of government, where an Islamic jurist or faqih rules Muslims, suffices. However this idea, developed by the marja' Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and established in Iran, is not universally accepted among the Shia.
Ismailis believe in the Imamate principle mentioned above, but they need not be secular rulers as well.

The Nizari continue to have a living Imam; the current Imam is the Aga Khan.
The Taiyabi Ismaili have, since the year 1130, followed the Imam's chief officer, the Dai al-Mutlaq, as they believe the Imams are in a state of hiding.

Majlis al-Shura[edit]
See also: Majlis-ash-Shura, Shura, and Majlis
The Majlis al-Shura (literally "consultative assembly") was a representation of the idea of consultative governance. The importance of this is premised by the following verses of the Qur'an:

"...those who answer the call of their Lord and establish the prayer; and who conduct their affairs by Shura [are loved by God]."[42:38]
"...consult them (the people) in their affairs. Then when you have taken a decision (from them), put your trust in Allah"[3:159]

The majlis is also the means to elect a new caliph.[113] Al-Mawardi has written that members of the majlis should satisfy three conditions: they must be just, have enough knowledge to distinguish a good caliph from a bad one, and have sufficient wisdom and judgment to select the best caliph. Al-Mawardi also said that in emergencies when there is no caliphate and no majlis, the people themselves should create a majlis and select a list of candidates for caliph; then the majlis should select a caliph from the list of candidates.[113]
Some Islamist interpretations of the role of the Majlis al-Shura are the following: In an analysis of the shura chapter of the Qur'an, Islamist author Sayyid Qutb argues that Islam only requires the ruler to consult with some of the representatives of the ruled and govern within the context of the Sharia. Taqiuddin al-Nabhani, the founder of a transnational political movement devoted to the revival of the Caliphate, writes that although the Shura is an important part of "the ruling structure" of the Islamic caliphate, "(it is) not one of its pillars", meaning that its neglect would not make a Caliph's rule un-Islamic such as to justify a rebellion. However, the Muslim Brotherhood, the largest Islamic movement in Egypt, has toned down these Islamist views by accepting in principle that in the modern age the Majlis al-Shura is democracy but during its governance of Egypt in 2013, the Muslim Brotherhood did not put that principle into practice.
Accountability of rulers[edit]
Al-Mawardi said that if the rulers meet their Islamic responsibilities to the public the people must obey their laws, but a Caliph or ruler who becomes either unjust or severely ineffective must be impeached via the Majlis al-Shura. Al-Juwayni argued that Islam is the goal of the ummah, so any ruler who deviates from this goal must be impeached. Al-Ghazali believed that oppression by a caliph is sufficient grounds for impeachment. Rather than just relying on impeachment, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani stated that the people have an obligation to rebel if the caliph begins to act with no regard for Islamic law. Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani said that to ignore such a situation is haraam and those who cannot revolt from inside the caliphate should launch a struggle from outside. Al-Asqalani used two ayahs from the Qur'an to justify this:

"...And they (the sinners on qiyama) will say, 'Our Lord! We obeyed our leaders and our chiefs, and they misled us from the right path. Our Lord! Give them (the leaders) double the punishment you give us and curse them with a very great curse'..."[33:67–68][non-primary source needed]

Islamic lawyers commented that when the rulers refuse to step down after being impeached through the Majlis, becoming dictators through the support of a corrupt army, if the majority is in agreement they have the option to launch a revolution. Many noted that this option is to be exercised only after factoring in the potential cost of life.[113]
Rule of law[edit]
See also: Sharia and Islamic ethics
The following hadith establishes the principle of rule of law in relation to nepotism and accountability[114][non-primary source needed]

Narrated ‘Aisha: The people of Quraish worried about the lady from Bani Makhzum who had committed theft. They asked, "Who will intercede for her with Allah's Apostle?" Some said, "No one dare to do so except Usama bin Zaid the beloved one to Allah's Apostle." When Usama spoke about that to Allah's Apostle; Allah's Apostle said: "Do you try to intercede for somebody in a case connected with Allah’s Prescribed Punishments?" Then he got up and delivered a sermon saying, "What destroyed the nations preceding you, was that if a noble amongst them stole, they would forgive him, and if a poor person amongst them stole, they would inflict Allah's Legal punishment on him. By Allah, if Fatima, the daughter of Muhammad (my daughter) stole, I would cut off her hand."

Various Islamic lawyers, however, place multiple conditions and stipulations on the execution of such a law, making it difficult to implement. For example, the poor cannot be penalised for stealing out of poverty, and during a time of drought in the Rashidun caliphate, capital punishment was suspended until the effects of the drought passed.[115]
Islamic jurists later formulated the concept that all classes were subject to the law of the land, and no person is above the law; officials and private citizens alike have a duty to obey the same law. Furthermore, a Qadi (Islamic judge) was not allowed to discriminate on the grounds of religion, race, colour, kinship or prejudice. In a number of cases, Caliphs had to appear before judges as they prepared to render their verdict.[116]
According to Noah Feldman, a law professor at Harvard University, the system of legal scholars and jurists responsible for the rule of law was replaced by the codification of Sharia by the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century:[117]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Islamic economics in the world
See also: Islamic capitalism and Bayt al-mal
During the Muslim Agricultural Revolution, the Caliphate understood that real incentives were needed to increase productivity and wealth and thus enhance tax revenues. A social transformation took place as a result of changing land ownership[118] giving individuals of any gender,[119] ethnic or religious background the right to buy, sell, mortgage, and inherit land for farming or any other purpose. Signatures were required on contracts for every major financial transaction concerning agriculture, industry, commerce and employment. Copies of the contract were usually kept by both parties involved.[118]
There are similarities between Islamic economics and leftist or socialist economic policies. Islamic jurists have argued that privatization of the origin of oil, gas, and other fire-producing fuels, agricultural land, and water is forbidden. The principle of public or joint ownership has been drawn by Muslim jurists from the following hadith of Muhammad:
Ibn Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah said: "All Muslims are partners in three things- in water, herbage and fire." (Narrated in Abu Daud, & Ibn Majah)[120] Anas added to the above hadith, "Its price is Haram (forbidden)."[citation needed]
Aside from similarities to socialism, early forms of proto-capitalism and free markets were present in the Caliphate,[121] since an early market economy and early form of merchant capitalism developed between the 8th and 12th centuries, which some refer to as "Islamic capitalism".[122] A vigorous monetary economy developed based on the circulation of a stable high-value currency (the dinar) and the integration of previously independent monetary areas. Business techniques and forms of business organization employed during this time included early contracts, bills of exchange, long-distance international trade, early forms of partnership (mufawada) such as limited partnerships (mudaraba), and early forms of credit, debt, profit, loss, capital (al-mal), capital accumulation (nama al-mal),[123] circulating capital, capital expenditure, revenue, cheques, promissory notes,[124] trusts (waqf), startup companies,[125] savings accounts, transactional accounts, pawning, loaning, exchange rates, bankers, money changers, ledgers, deposits, assignments, the double-entry bookkeeping system,[126] and lawsuits.[127] Organizational enterprises similar to corporations independent from the state also existed in the medieval Islamic world.[128][129] Many of these concepts were adopted and further advanced in medieval Europe from the 13th century onwards.[123]
Early Islamic law included Zakat (charity), one of the Five Pillars of Islam, since the time of the Rashidun caliph Umar in the 7th century. The taxes (including Zakat and Jizya) collected in the treasury (Bayt al-mal) of an Islamic government were used to provide income for the needy, including the poor, elderly, orphans, widows, and the disabled.
The demographics of medieval Islamic society varied in some significant aspects from other agricultural societies, including a decline in birth rates as well as a change in life expectancy. Other traditional agrarian societies are estimated to have had an average life expectancy of 20 to 25 years,[130] while ancient Rome and medieval Europe are estimated at 20 to 30 years.[131] The life expectancy of Islamic society diverged from that of other traditional agrarian societies, with several studies on the lifespans of Islamic scholars concluding that members of this occupational group enjoyed a life expectancy between 69 and 75 years.[132] Such studies have given the following estimates for the average lifespans of religious scholars at various times and places: 72.8 years in the Middle East, 69–75 years in 11th century Islamic Spain,[133] 75 years in 12th century Persia,[134] and 59–72 years in 13th century Persia.[135] However, Maya Shatzmiller considers these religious scholars to be a misleading sample who are not representative of the general population.[136] Conrad I. Lawrence estimates the average lifespan in the early Islamic Caliphate to be above 35 years for the general population.[137]
The early Islamic Empire also had the highest literacy rates among pre-modern societies, alongside the city of classical Athens in the 4th century BC,[138] and later, China after the introduction of printing from the 10th century.[139] One factor for the relatively high literacy rates in the early Islamic Empire was its parent-driven educational marketplace, as the state did not systematically subsidize educational services until the introduction of state funding under Nizam al-Mulk in the 11th century.[140] Another factor was the diffusion of paper from China,[141] which led to an efflorescence of books and written culture in Islamic society; thus papermaking technology transformed Islamic society (and later, the rest of Afro-Eurasia) from an oral to scribal culture, comparable to the later shifts from scribal to typographic culture, and from typographic culture to the Internet.[142] Other factors include the widespread use of paper books in Islamic society (more so than any other previously existing society), the study and memorization of the Qur'an, flourishing commercial activity, and the emergence of the Maktab and Madrasah educational institutions.[143]
Notable caliphs[edit]
For a more comprehensive list, see List of Caliphs.

Rashidun ("Righteously Guided")

Abu Bakr, first Rashidun Caliph. Subdued rebel tribes in the Ridda wars.
Umar (Umar ibn al-Khattab), second Rashidun Caliph. During his reign, the Islamic empire expanded to include Egypt, Jerusalem and Persia.
Uthman Ibn Affan, third Rashidun Caliph. The various written copies of the Qur'an were standardized under his direction. Killed by rebels.
Ali (Ali ibn Abu Talib), fourth Rashidun Caliph. Considered by Shi'a Muslims however to be the first Imam. His reign was fraught with internal conflict, with Muawiyah ibn Abi Sufyan (Muawiyah I) and Amr ibn al-As controlling the Levant and Egypt regions independently of Ali.


Hasan ibn Ali, fifth Caliph. Considered as "rightly guided" by several historians. He abdicated his right to the caliphate in favour of Muawiyah I in order to end the potential for ruinous civil war.
Muawiyah I, first caliph of the Umayyad dynasty. Muawiyah instituted dynastic rule by appointing his son Yazid I as his successor, a trend that would continue through subsequent caliphates.
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz (Umar II), Umayyad caliph who is considered one of the finest rulers in Muslim history. He is also considered by some (mainly Sunnis) to be among the "rightly guided" caliphs.
Harun al-Rashid, Abbasid caliph during whose reign Baghdad became the world's prominent centre of trade, learning, and culture. Harun is the subject of many stories in the famous One Thousand and One Nights.
Al-Ma'mun, a great Abbasid patron of Islamic philosophy and science.
Mehmed II, an Ottoman caliph who brought an end to the Byzantine Empire.
Suleiman the Magnificent, an Ottoman caliph during whose reign the Ottoman Empire reached its zenith.
Abdul Hamid II, last Ottoman caliph to rule with independent, absolute power.
Abdülmecid II, last caliph of the Ottoman dynasty. Nominally the 37th Head of the Ottoman dynasty.

See also[edit]

Al-Muhajiroun
Emirate
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
Khanate
Shah
Shaykh al-Islām
List of transcontinental countries
Worldwide caliphate

References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ a b c d Kadi, Wadad; Shahin, Aram A. (2013). "Caliph, caliphate". The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought: 81–86. 
^ Al-Rasheed, Madawi; Kersten, Carool; Shterin, Marat (2012-12-11). Demystifying the Caliphate: Historical Memory and Contemporary Contexts. Oxford University Press. p. 3. ISBN 9780199327959. 
^ Rubin, Barry (2015-03-17). The Middle East: A Guide to Politics, Economics, Society and Culture. Routledge. p. 478. ISBN 9781317455783. 
^ a b Incorporated, Facts On File (2008). United Arab Emirates. Infobase Publishing. p. 11. ISBN 9781438105840. 
^ Nigosian, Solomon A. (2004-01-29). Islam: Its History, Teaching, and Practices. Indiana University Press. p. 18. ISBN 0253110742. 
^ "The Roots of Democracy in Islam". Irfi.org. 2002-12-16. Retrieved 2014-06-30. 
^ a b Triana, María (2017-03-31). Managing Diversity in Organizations: A Global Perspective. Taylor & Francis. p. 159. ISBN 9781317423683. 
^ "Umayyad dynasty | Islamic history". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-03-26. 
^ Cavendish, Marshall (1 September 2006). "World and Its Peoples". Marshall Cavendish – via Google Books. 
^ Haag, Michael (1 November 2012). "The Tragedy of the Templars: The Rise and Fall of the Crusader States". Profile Books – via Google Books. 
^ Holt 1984.
^ a b c Dominique Sourdel, "The history of the institution of the caliphate" (1978) [1]
^ a b c "caliph - Islamic title". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Googelberg, compiled form Wikipedia entries and published by Dr. Islam. Lulu.com. p. 258. ISBN 9781291215212. 
^ "calif". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
^ Tore Kjeilen. "Lexic Orient.com". Lexic Orient.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ New world hegemony in the Malay world, By Geoffrey C. Gunn, pg. 96
^ a b "What is the difference between Sunni and Shia Muslims?". The Economist. 2013-05-28. 
^ John Esposito (1992)
^ The Concise Encyclopedia of Islam. Cyril Glasse. pp. 39-41,318-319, 353-354
^ Uthman was the son of `Affan, the son of Abu-l`As, the son of Umayya ibn Abd Shams. Mu'awiyah was the son of Abu Sufyan, the son of Harb, the son of Umayya ibn Abd Shams.
^ Cavendish, Marshall (2010). "6". Islamic Beliefs, Practices, and Cultures. p. 129. ISBN 9780761479260. 
^ Blankinship, Khalid Yahya (1994), The End of the Jihad State, the Reign of Hisham Ibn 'Abd-al Malik and the collapse of the Umayyads, State University of New York Press, p. 37, ISBN 0-7914-1827-8 
^ "Islamic arts". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ "Abbasid Dynasty". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Kennedy, Hugh N. (2001). The Historiography of Islamic Egypt: (c. 950 – 1800). BRILL. ISBN 9789004117945. 
^ In his “Mutanabbi devant le siècle ismaëlien de l’Islam”, in Mém. de l’Inst. Français de Damas, 1935, p.
^ Wintle, Justin (May 2003). History of Islam. London: Rough Guides Ltd. pp. 136–7. ISBN 1-84353-018-X. 
^ B. Lugan, Histoire du Maroc, ISBN 2-262-01644-5
^ Concise Encyclopaedia of World History, by Carlos Ramirez-Faria, pp.23&676 [2]
^ a b "Almohads". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Buresi, Pascal; El Aallaoui, Hicham (2012). Governing the Empire: Provincial Administration in the Almohad Caliphate (1224-1269) : Critical Edition, Translation, and Study of Manuscript 4752 of the Hasaniyya Library in Rabat Containing 77 Taqādīm ("appointments"). BRILL. ISBN 90-04-23333-4. 
^ Lambton, Ann; Lewis, Bernard (1995). The Cambridge History of Islam: The Indian sub-continent, South-East Asia, Africa and the Muslim west. 2. Cambridge University Press. p. 320. ISBN 9780521223102. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ Karpat, Kemal H. (1974). The Ottoman State and Its Place in World History: Introduction. BRILL. p. 21. ISBN 9004039457. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ Finkel, Caroline (2005). Osman's Dream: The Story of the Ottoman Empire, 1300-1923. New York: Basic Books. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-465-02396-7. 
^ M. Naeem Qureshi (1999). Pan-Islam in British Indian Politics: A Study of the Khilafat Movement, 1918-1924. BRILL. pp. 18–19. ISBN 90-04-11371-1. 
^ a b Kemal H. Karpat (2001). The Politicization of Islam: Reconstructing Identity, State, Faith, and Community in the Late Ottoman State. Oxford University Press. pp. 235–. ISBN 978-0-19-513618-0. 
^ Moshe Yegar (1 January 2002). Between Integration and Secession: The Muslim Communities of the Southern Philippines, Southern Thailand, and Western Burma/Myanmar. Lexington Books. pp. 397–. ISBN 978-0-7391-0356-2. 
^ Jay Tolson, "Caliph Wanted: Why An Old Islamic Institution Resonates With Many Muslims Today", U.S News & World Report 144.1 (January 14, 2008): 38-40.
^ "The Khilafat Movement". Indhistory.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ The Statesman Archived April 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Teitelbaum 2001 p. 42[verification needed]
^ Teitelbaum 2001 pp. 43–44[verification needed]
^ "Islamic Caliph condemns ISIS' act of 'Un-Islamic terror'". The London Economic. July 10, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2014. 
^ P. A. Desplat & D. E. Schulz, Prayer in the City: The Making of Muslim Sacred Places and Urban Life (Verlag, 2014), p.82
^ Ahmad, Rafi. "The Islamic Khilafat – Its Rise, Fall, and Re-emergence". Retrieved March 8, 2011. 
^ a b http://www.alislam.org/library/books/Khilafat-e-Rashida.pdf Khilafat-e-Rashidah
^ a b http://www.alislam.org/egazette/updates/the-islamic-khilafat-its-rise-fall-and-re-emergence/ The Islamic Khilafat – Its Rise, Fall, and Re-emergence
^ "Hadhrat Mirza Masroor Ahmad, Khalifatul Masih V". The Review of Religions. Retrieved March 9, 2011. 
^ "The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community celebrates its new cultural outpost in Kenner". NOLA.com. 
^ Sonn, Tamara (2010). Islam: A Brief History (2nd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. p. 38. ISBN 978-1-4051-8094-8. 
^ Masnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Mishkat, Chapter Al-Anzar Wal Tahzir
^ "As-Sirah" of Ibn Kathir
^ "Tarikh ut-Tabari" by at-Tabari
^ "Siratu Ibn Hisham" by Ibn Hisham
^ "As-Sunan ul-Kubra" of Bayhaqi
^ "Al-fasil-fil Milal" by Ibnu Hazim
^ "Al-A’kd Al-Farid" of Al-Waqidi
^ "as-Sirah" of Ibnu Ishaq
^ Nahj-ul-Balagha (part 1 page 91)
^ Al-Ahkam Al-Sultaniyah page 9
^ Mughni Al-Muhtaj, volume 4, page 132
^ Subul Al-Asha, volume 9, page 277
^ Al-Muhalla, volume 9, page 360
^ Al-Mizan, volume 2, page 157
^ Al-Mughni fi abwab Al-Tawheed, volume 20, page 243
^ Al-Fiqh Alal-Mathahib Al- Arba’a (the fiqh of the four schools of thought), volume 5, page 416
^ Al-Fasl Fil-Milal, volume 4, page 62
^ Matalib Ulil-Amr
^ Maqalat Al-Islamyin, volume 2, page 134
^ Al-Moghni Fi Abuab Al-Tawhid, volume 20, pages 58–145
^ Tafseer ul-Qurtubi 264/1
^ [Quran 002:030]
^ Sharhu Sahih Muslim page 205 vol 12
^ al Iqtisaad fil Itiqaad page 240
^ Siyaasah Shariyyah – chapter: 'The obligation of adherence to the leadership'
^ Washington Post, "Reunified Islam: Unlikely but Not Entirely Radical, Restoration of Caliphate resonates With Mainstream Muslims".
^ Andrew Hammond, Middle East Online.
^ "Caliphate won't last but its legacy may". The Australian. 8 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ "Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: Islamic State's driving force". BBC News. 30 July 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Kareem Shaheen. "Isis 'controls 50% of Syria' after seizing historic city of Palmyra". the Guardian. 
^ "Palmyra: Isis captures archaeological treasure as 50% of Syria now controlled by jihadists". International Business Times UK. 
^ "Isis rebels declare 'Islamic state' in Iraq and Syria". BBC. 30 June 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2014. 
^ "Islamic State-controlled parts of Syria, Iraq largely out of reach: Red Cross". Reuters. 
^ Gerges, Fawaz A. ISIS: A History. Princeton University Press (Kindle Edition). pp. 283–284. 
^ "Blamed for Rise of ISIS, Syrian Leader Is Pushed to Escalate Fight". The New York Times. 22 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ "The Holy Quran". Alislam.org. Retrieved 2014-06-30. 
^ "Khilafat-e-Rashidah" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-06-30. 
^ "The Islamic Khilafat – Its Rise, Fall, and Re-emergence". Alislam.org. Retrieved 2014-06-30. 
^ View all comments that have been posted about this article. (2006-01-13). "Reunified Islam". Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Abul A'al Mawdudi, Human Rights in Islam, The Islamic Foundation, 1976, p.9
^ Roy, Olivier, Failure of Islamism, Harvard University Press, (1994) p. 42
^ William Lane Craig, Professor Mackie and the Kalam Cosmological Argument.
^ "harunyaya.com". harunyaya.com. Retrieved 2014-06-30. 
^ "Quran translation index". Retrieved April 10, 2008. [dead link]
^ "Ladin". fas.org. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Interview (Oct 21, 2001) from bin Laden, Message to the World, Verso, 2005, p.121
^ "Al-Qaeda chiefs reveal world domination design". Melbourne: Theage.com.au. 2005-08-24. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Vick, Karl (2006-01-14). "Washington Post". Washingtonpost.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Wright, 46.
^ Roy, Olivier, Failure of Islamism, Harvard University Press, (1994) p.42-3
^ "The Muslim Brotherhood And Copts, Historical Perspective". Ikhwanweb.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Bieliauskas, Hana (2007-04-17). "Campus Radicals – Hizb-ut Tahrir". Newstatesman.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Jan A. Wensinck, Concordance de la Tradition Musulmane vol. 2, p. 70. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 1936-1988.
^ "An Introduction to Shi'i Islam: The History and Doctrines of Twelver Shi'ism". p. Chapter 7: Imamate pg. 147+. 
^ a b 1942-, Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein, (1981). Islamic messianism : the idea of Mahdi in twelver Shīʻism. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 9780873954426. OCLC 6420933. 
^ Ḥusayn., Ṭabāṭabāʼī, Muḥammad (1975). Shiʻite Islam, ([1st ed.] ed.). Albany,: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0873952723. OCLC 901099. 
^ Rafia'a & Derayati 2003: Al-Hashiyah ala al-Usul al-Kafi (in Arabic). pp. 590–599. 
^ 1942-, Sachedina, Abdulaziz Abdulhussein, (1988). The just ruler (al-sultān al-adil) in Shīite Islam : the comprehensive authority of the jurist in Imamite jurisprudence. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195119150. OCLC 45842548. 
^ Red Shi'ism vs. Black Shi'ism: Social Justice and Salvation for the Masses. 
^ The Thirtieth Greater Sin: Not Helping the Oppressed. Ayatullah Sayyid Abdul Husayn Dastghaib Shirazi Greater Sins. 
^ "The Legacy of the third Shia Imam: Hussain ibn Ali". 
^ a b c "Gharm Allah Al-Ghamdy". 2muslims.com. Retrieved 2011-06-05. 
^ Sahih Bukhari, Volume 4, Book 56, Number 681
^ Geaves, Ron (2010-07-01). Islam Today: An Introduction. A&C Black. p. 61. ISBN 9781847064783. 
^ (Weeramantry 1997, pp. 132 & 135)
^ Noah Feldman (March 16, 2008). "Why Shariah?". New York Times. Retrieved 2008-10-05. 
^ a b Zohor Idrisi (2005), The Muslim Agricultural Revolution and its influence on Europe, FSTC.
^ Maya Shatzmiller, p. 263.
^ Chaudhry, Muhammad Sharif (2003). "Fundamentals of Islamic Economic System: Public Ownership". MuslimTents.com. Retrieved 9 December 2010. 
^ The Cambridge economic history of Europe, p. 437. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-08709-0.
^ Subhi Y. Labib (1969), "Capitalism in Medieval Islam", The Journal of Economic History 29 (1), p. 79-96 [81, 83, 85, 90, 93, 96].
^ a b Banaji, Jairus (2007). "Islam, the Mediterranean and the rise of capitalism". Historical Materialism. Brill Publishers. 15 (1): 47–74. doi:10.1163/156920607x171591. 
^ Robert Sabatino Lopez, Irving Woodworth Raymond, Olivia Remie Constable (2001), Medieval Trade in the Mediterranean World: Illustrative Documents, Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-12357-4.
^ Kuran, Timur (Fall 2005). "The Absence of the Corporation in Islamic Law: Origins and Persistence". The American Journal of Comparative Law. 53 (4): 785–834. JSTOR 30038724. 
^ Labib, Subhi Y. (March 1969). "Capitalism in Medieval Islam". The Journal of Economic History. 29 (1): 79–96. doi:10.1017/S0022050700097837. JSTOR 2115499. 
^ Spier, Ray (August 2002). "The history of the peer-review process". Trends in Biotechnology. 20 (8): 357–8. doi:10.1016/S0167-7799(02)01985-6. PMID 12127284. 
^ Arjomand, Said Amir (April 1999). "The Law, Agency, and Policy in Medieval Islamic Society: Development of the Institutions of Learning from the Tenth to the Fifteenth Century". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 41 (2): 263–93. doi:10.1017/s001041759900208x. JSTOR 179447. 
^ Amin, Samir (June 1978). "The Arab Nation: Some Conclusions and Problems". MERIP Reports. 68: 3–14. JSTOR 3011226. 
^ Shatzmiller, Maya (1994), Labour in the Medieval Islamic World, Brill Publishers, pp. 63–4 & 66, ISBN 90-04-09896-8, At the same time, the “demographic behaviour” of the Islamic society as an agricultural society varied in some significant aspects from other agricultural societies, particularly in ways which could explain a decline in birth rate. It is agreed that all agricultural societies conform to a given demographic pattern of behaviour, which includes a high birth-rate and a slightly lower death-rate, significant enough to allow a slow population increase of 0.5 to 1.0 per cent per year. Other demographic characteristics of this society are high infant mortality, with 200–500 deaths per 1000 within the first year of birth, a lower average life expectancy, of twenty to twenty-five years, and a broadly based population pyramid, where the number of young people at the bottom of the pyramid is very high in relationship to the rest of the population, and that children are set to work at an early stage. Islamic society diverged from this demographic profile in some significant points, although not always consistently. Studies have shown that during certain periods, such factors as attitudes to marriage and sex, birth control, birth and death rates, age of marriage and patterns of marriage, family size and migration pattems, varied from the traditional agricultural model. [...] Life expectancy was another area where Islamic society diverged from the suggested model for agricultural society. 
^ "Life expectancy (sociology)", Encyclopædia Britannica, retrieved 2010-04-17, In ancient Rome and medieval Europe the average life span is estimated to have been between 20 and 30 years. 
^ Shatzmiller, Maya (1994), Labour in the Medieval Islamic World, Brill Publishers, p. 66, ISBN 90-04-09896-8, Life expectancy was another area where Islamic society diverged from the suggested model for agricultural society. No less than three separate studies about the life expectancy of religious scholars, two from 11th century Muslim Spain, and one from the Middle East, concluded that members of this occupational group enjoyed a life expectancy of 69, 75, and 72.8 years respectively! 
^ Shatzmiller, Maya (1994), Labour in the Medieval Islamic World, Brill Publishers, p. 66, ISBN 90-04-09896-8 
^ Bulliet, Richard W. (April 1970), "A Quantitative Approach to Medieval Muslim Biographical Dictionaries", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient, Brill Publishers, 13 (2): 195–211 [200] 
^ Ahmad, Ahmad Atif (2007), "Authority, Conflict, and the Transmission of Diversity in Medieval Islamic Law by R. Kevin Jaques", Journal of Islamic Studies, 18 (2): 246–248 [246], doi:10.1093/jis/etm005 
^ Shatzmiller, Maya (1994), Labour in the Medieval Islamic World, Brill Publishers, p. 66, ISBN 90-04-09896-8, This rate is uncommonly high, not only under the conditions in medieval cities, where these ‘ulama’ lived, but also in terms of the average life expectancy for contemporary males. [...] In other words, the social group studied through the biographies is, a priori, a misleading sample, since it was composed exclusively of individuals who enjoyed exceptional longevity. 
^ Conrad, Lawrence I. (2006), The Western Medical Tradition, Cambridge University Press, p. 137, ISBN 0-521-47564-3 
^ Andrew J. Coulson, Delivering Education (PDF), Hoover Institution, p. 117, retrieved 2008-11-22, Reaching further back through the centuries, the civilizations regarded as having the highest literacy rates of their ages were parent-driven educational marketplaces. The ability to read and write was far more widely enjoyed in the early medieval Islamic empire and in fourth-century-B.C.E. Athens than in any other cultures of their times. 
^ Edmund Burke (June 2009), "Islam at the Center: Technological Complexes and the Roots of Modernity", Journal of World History, University of Hawaii Press, 20 (2): 165–186 [177–8], doi:10.1353/jwh.0.0045, The spread of written knowledge was at least the equal of what it was in China after printing became common there in the tenth century. (We should note that Chinese books were printed in small editions of a hundred or so copies.) 
^ Andrew J. Coulson, Delivering Education (PDF), Hoover Institution, p. 117, retrieved 2008-11-22, In neither case did the state supply or even systematically subsidize educational services. The Muslim world’s eventual introduction of state funding under Nizam al-Mulk in the eleventh century was quickly followed by partisan religious squabbling over education and the gradual fall of Islam from its place of cultural and scientific preeminence. 
^ Edmund Burke (June 2009), "Islam at the Center: Technological Complexes and the Roots of Modernity", Journal of World History, University of Hawaii Press, 20 (2): 165–186 [177], doi:10.1353/jwh.0.0045, According to legend, paper came to the Islamic world as a result of the capture of Chinese paper makers at the 751 C.E. battle of Talas River. 
^ Edmund Burke (June 2009), "Islam at the Center: Technological Complexes and the Roots of Modernity", Journal of World History, University of Hawaii Press, 20 (2): 165–186 [177], doi:10.1353/jwh.0.0045, Whatever the source, the diffusion of paper-making technology via the lands of Islam produced a shift from oral to scribal culture across the rest of Afroeurasia that was rivaled only by the move from scribal to typographic culture. (Perhaps it will prove to have been even more important than the recent move from typographic culture to the Internet.) The result was remarkable. As historian Jonathan Bloom informs us, paper encouraged "an efflorescence of books and written culture incomparably more brilliant than was known anywhere in Europe until the invention of printing with movable type in the fifteenth century. 
^ Edmund Burke (June 2009), "Islam at the Center: Technological Complexes and the Roots of Modernity", Journal of World History, University of Hawaii Press, 20 (2): 165–186 [178], doi:10.1353/jwh.0.0045, More so than any previously existing society, Islamic society of the period 1000–1500 was profoundly a culture of books. [...] The emergence of a culture of books is closely tied to cultural dispositions toward literacy in Islamic societies. Muslim young men were encouraged to memorize the Qur'an as part of their transition to adulthood, and while most presumably did not (though little is known about literacy levels in pre-Mongol Muslim societies), others did. Types of literacy in any event varied, as Nelly Hanna has recently suggested, and are best studied as part of the complex social dynamics and contexts of individual Muslim societies. The need to conform commercial contracts and business arrangements to Islamic law provided a further impetus for literacy, especially likely in commercial centers. Scholars often engaged in commercial activity and craftsmen or tradesmen often spent time studying in madrasas. The connection between what Brian Street has called "maktab literacy" and commercial literacy was real and exerted a steady pressure on individuals to upgrade their reading skills. 


Sources[edit]

Arnold, T. W. (1993). "Khalīfa". In Houtsma, M. Th. E.J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913–1936. Volume IV. Leiden: BRILL. pp. 881–885. ISBN 978-90-04-09790-2. Retrieved 2010-07-23. 
Crone, Patricia; Hinds, Martin (1986), God's Caliph: Religious Authority in the First Centuries of Islam, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-32185-3 
Donner, Fred McGraw (1981), The Early Islamic Conquests, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-05327-1 
 Goeje, Michael Jan de (1911). "Caliphate". In Chisholm, Hugh. Encyclopædia Britannica. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
Wright, Lawrence (2007) [2006], The Looming Tower: Al Qaeda and the Road to 9/11, London: Vintage, ISBN 978-1-4000-3084-2 
Holt, Peter M. (1984). "Some Observations on the 'Abbāsid Caliphate of Cairo". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. University of London. 47 (3): 501–507. doi:10.1017/s0041977x00113710. 

Further reading[edit]

The theory of government in Islam, by The Internet Islamic University
The History of Al-Khilafah Ar-Rashidah (The Rightly Guided Caliphates) School Textbook, By Dr. 'Abdullah al-Ahsan, `Abdullah Ahsan
The Crisis of the Early Caliphate By Richard Stephen Humphreys, Stephen (EDT) Humphreys from The History of al-Tabari
The Reunification of the Abbasid Caliphate By Clifford Edmund (TRN) Bosworth, from The History of al-Tabari
Return of the Caliphate to Baghdad By Franz Rosenthal from The History of al-Tabari
Pan-Islamism: Indian Muslims, the Ottomans and Britain (1877–1924) By Azmi Özcan
Baghdad during the Abbasid Caliphate from Contemporary Arabic and Persian Sources By Guy Le Strange
The Fall of the Caliphate of Cordoba: Berbers and Andalusis in conflict By Peter C. Scales
Khilafat and Caliphate, By Mubasher Ahmad
The abolition of the Caliphate, From The Economist Mar 8th 1924
The Clash of the Caliphates: Understanding the real war of ideas, By Tony Corn, Small Wars Journal, March 2011

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Caliphates.



The Caliph - a three-part documentary by Al Jazeera English
The return of the caliphate, The Guardian.
Islamists urge caliphate revival, BBC News.





Links to related articles









Caliphal Dynasties











v
t
e


Rashidun Caliphs






Abu Bakr
Umar
Uthman ibn Affan
Ali












v
t
e


Umayyad Caliphs






Family tree
Media





Caliphs of Damascus
(661–750)



Muawiyah I
Yazid I
Muawiya II
Marwan I
Abd al-Malik
Al-Walid I
Sulayman
Umar II
Yazid II
Hisham
Al-Walid II
Yazid III
Ibrahim
Marwan II








Emirs of Córdoba
(756–929)



Abd al-Rahman I
Hisham I
Al-Hakam I
Abd ar-Rahman II
Muhammad I
Al-Mundhir
Abdullah
Abd-ar-Rahman III





Caliphs of Córdoba
(929–1031)



Abd-ar-Rahman III
Al-Hakam II
Hisham II
Muhammad II
Sulayman
Hisham II
Sulayman
Abd ar-Rahman IV
Ali ibn Hammud al-Nasir[H]
Al-Qasim al-Ma'mun ibn Hammud[H]
Yahya ibn Ali al-Mu'tali[H]
Al-Qasim al-Ma'mun ibn Hammud[H]
Abd ar-Rahman V
Muhammad III
Yahya ibn Ali al-Mu'tali[H]
Hisham III






[H] indicates Hammudid usurpers










v
t
e


Abbasid Caliphs



Caliphs of Baghdad
(749–1258)



as-Saffah
al-Mansur
al-Mahdi
al-Hadi
Harun al-Rashid
al-Amin
Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi[B]
al-Ma'mun
al-Mu'tasim
al-Wathiq
al-Mutawakkil
al-Muntasir
al-Musta'in
al-Mu'tazz
al-Muhtadi
al-Mu'tamid
al-Mu'tadid
al-Muktafi
al-Muqtadir
Abdallah ibn al-Mu'tazz[B]
al-Qahir
ar-Radi
al-Muttaqi
al-Mustakfi
al-Muti
at-Ta'i
al-Qadir
al-Qa'im
al-Muqtadi
al-Mustazhir
al-Mustarshid
ar-Rashid
al-Muqtafi
al-Mustanjid
al-Mustadi
al-Nasir
az-Zahir
al-Mustansir
al-Musta'sim
(Mongol conquest)





Caliphs of Cairo
(1261–1517)



al-Mustansir
al-Hakim I
al-Mustakfi I
al-Wathiq I
al-Hakim II
al-Mu'tadid I
al-Mutawakkil I
al-Musta'sim
al-Mutawakkil I
al-Wathiq II
al-Musta'sim
al-Mutawakkil I
al-Musta'in
al-Mu'tadid II
al-Mustakfi II
al-Qa'im
al-Mustanjid
al-Mutawakkil II
al-Mustamsik
al-Mutawakkil III
al-Mustamsik
al-Mutawakkil III
(Ottoman conquest)






[B] indicates ephemeral caliphs recognized in the city of Baghdad only










v
t
e


Fatimid caliphs






al-Mahdi
al-Qa'im
al-Mansur
al-Mu'izz
al-Aziz
al-Hakim
az-Zahir
al-Mustansir
al-Musta'li
al-Amir
al-Hafiz
az-Zafir
al-Fa'iz
al-Adid












v
t
e


Ottoman Sultans / Caliphs






Dynasty
Family tree (detailed)
Family tree (simplified)
Line of succession








Osman I
Orhan
Murad I
Bayezid I
Interregnum
Mehmed I
Murad II
Mehmed II
Murad II
Mehmed II
Bayezid II
Selim I
Suleiman I
Selim II
Murad III
Mehmed III
Ahmed I
Mustafa I
Osman II
Mustafa I
Murad IV
Ibrahim
Mehmed IV
Suleiman II
Ahmed II
Mustafa II
Ahmed III
Mahmud I
Osman III
Mustafa III
Abdul Hamid I
Selim III
Mustafa IV
Mahmud II
Abdulmejid I
Abdülaziz
Murad V
Abdul Hamid II
Mehmed V
Mehmed VI
Abdulmejid II (Caliph only)






§ First Ottoman caliph

 Book
 Category


Related templates: Claimants
Valide Sultans

















v
t
e


Islam topics




Outline of Islam







Beliefs



God in Islam
Tawhid
Muhammad

In Islam


Prophets of Islam





Five Pillars



Shahada
Salah
Sawm
Zakat
Hajj








History
Leaders






Timeline of Muslim history
Conquests
Golden Age
Historiography
Sahaba
Ahl al-Bayt
Shi'a Imams
Caliphates

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Córdoba
Fatimid
Almohad
Sokoto
Ottoman







Religious texts



Quran
Sunnah
Hadith
Tafsir
Seerah





Denominations



Sunni
Shia
Ibadi
Black Muslims
Ahmadiyya
Quranism
Non-denominational








Life
Culture






Animals
Art
Calendar
Children
Clothing
Holidays
Mosques
Madrasas
Moral teachings
Music
Philosophy
Political aspects
Qurbani
Science

medieval


Social welfare
Women
LGBT
Islam by country
















Law
Jurisprudence










Economics



Banking
Economic history
Sukuk
Takaful
Murabaha
Riba





Hygiene



Ghusl
Miswak
Najis
Tayammum
Toilet
Wudu








Marriage
Sex






Marriage contract
Mahr
Mahram
Masturbation
Nikah
Nikah Mut‘ah
Zina





Other aspects



Cleanliness
Criminal
Dhabiĥa
Dhimmi
Divorce
Diet
Ethics
Etiquette
Gambling
Gender segregation
Honorifics
Hudud
Inheritance
Jizya
Leadership
Ma malakat aymanukum
Military

POWs


Slavery
Sources of law
Theological

baligh
kalam


















 Islamic studies







Arts



Arabesque
Architecture
Calligraphy
Carpets
Gardens
Geometric patterns
Music
Pottery





Medieval science



Alchemy and chemistry
Astronomy
Cosmology
Geography and cartography
Mathematics
Medicine
Ophthalmology
Physics





Philosophy



Early
Contemporary
Eschatology
Theological





Other areas



Astrology
Creationism (evolution)
Feminism
Inventions
Liberalism and progressivism
Literature

poetry


Psychology
Shu'ubiyya
Conversion to mosques


















Other religions



Christianity

Mormonism
Protestantism


Hinduism
Jainism
Judaism
Sikhism





Related topics



Apostasy
Criticism of Islam
Cultural Muslim
Islamism

Criticism
Post-Islamism
Qutbism
Salafi movement


Islamophobia

Incidents


Islamic terrorism
Islamic view of miracles
Domestic violence
Nursing
Persecution of Muslims
Quran and miracles
Symbolism








 Islam portal
 Category















v
t
e


Empires



Ancient



Akkadian
Egyptian
Assyrian
Babylonian
Carthaginian
Chinese

Qin
Han
Jin
Northern Wei


Hellenistic

Macedonian
Seleucid


Hittite
Indian

Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha


Iranian

Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian


Kushan
Mongol

Xianbei
Xiongnu


Roman

Western
Eastern


Teotihuacan





Post-classical



Arab

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Córdoba


Aragonese
Angevin
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian

First
Second


Byzantine

Nicaea
Trebizond


Carolingian
Chinese

Sui
Tang
Song
Yuan


Ethiopian

Zagwe
Solomonic


Georgian
Hunnic
Inca
Indian

Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Delhi
Vijayanagara


Iranian

Tahirid
Samanid
Buyid
Sallarid
Ziyarid


Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mongol

Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate


Moroccan

Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid


North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Serbian
Somali

Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Warsangali


Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Turko-Persian

Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid


Vietnamese

Ly
Tran
Le


Wagadou





Modern



Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Central African
Chinese

Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo


Ethiopian
French

First
Second


German

First/Old Reich
Second Reich
Third Reich


Haitian

First
Second


Indian

Maratha
Sikh
Mughal
British Raj


Iranian

Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi


Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mexican

First
Second


Moroccan

Saadi
Alaouite


Russian
USSR
Somali

Gobroon
Majeerteen
Hobyo
Dervish


Swedish
Tongan
Turkish

Ottoman
Karaman
Ramazan


Vietnamese

Tay Son
Nguyen
Vietnam







Colonial



American
Belgian
British

English


Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Norwegian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish





Lists



Empires

largest


ancient great powers
medieval great powers
modern great powers














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 257263881
LCCN: sh85018926
GND: 7722009-2
NDL: 00564276











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caliphate&oldid=816907476"					Categories: CaliphatesIslamic states by typePan-IslamismReligious leadership rolesIslamic terminologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2015All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2016Use dmy dates from June 2017Articles containing Arabic-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles containing Berber-language textArticles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from June 2012Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2010All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from August 2017All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2017Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers