






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Camille Papin Tissot


Camille Papin Tissot (15 October 1868 in Brest, France – 2 October 1917 in Arcachon), was a French naval officer and pioneer of wireless telegraphy who established the first French operational radio connections at sea.



Contents


1 Life
2 Work
3 Publications
4 See also
5 References
6 External links
7 Further reading



Life[edit]
Camille Papin Tissot was the second child of Pierre Tissot and Adeline Alexandrine Gérardin, born on 15 October 1868. Their third child, Esther Adèle Tissot, was born on 1 April 1872. The two surviving children, Camille and Esther, were primarily raised by their mother, as their father was often at sea.
Recommended by his father, Camille Tissot entered the naval college at Brest in 1884 when he was 16 years old. He studied navigation on the school ship Le Borda until 1886, and was then posted to the port of Brest. In the first years of his career in the navy, he was successively posted to various school ships and warships, finally to the cruiser "Coetlogon". He then turned to shore duty as of 23 January 1891. He agreed to temporarily occupy one of the teaching positions in physics and chemistry of the naval school. He stayed on for 21 years as professor in École Navale.[1] The passion of sciences having been transmitted to him by his father, he obtained the degree of Bachelor of the Physical sciences. It was as professor in École Navale that he became devoted to the study of the electric oscillations and their application in the maritime field.
Tissot acquired ranks during his various assignments:

1 August 1886: Aspirant of second class,
5 October 1887: Aspirant of first class,
5 October 1889: Enseigne de vaisseau,
22 August 1896: Lieutenant de vaisseau,
19 April 1912: Capitaine de frégate,

This last promotion was exceptional for a sailor who practically never sailed, and it was due to the importance of the work undertaken by Tissot for the Navy.
In 1894 Camille Tissot met and married Jeanne Emma Stapfer, a 20-year-old woman of an Alsacienne family who moved to Brest in 1870. He nominally converted to the Catholic religion at the request of his father-in-law, although his own beliefs were socialist and atheist. Among the guests at his wedding were Albert Turpain and Marcel Cachin, very committed member of Parliament and future founder of French Communist Party in 1920. They had one daughter (Camille).
Work[edit]




In 1902 Tissot used a coherer receiver of this type at the lighhouse at Ushant, communicating over a range of 80 kilometers.






Article by Camille Tissot, published in the n° 57 of July 1906 of the bulletin of the "Company of the Electricians" (Société des électriciens).


In 1896, when the work of Lodge and of Marconi concerning wireless telegraphy was still little known, Tissot undertook parallel and independent research. He built apparatus for radio experiments with the assistance of E. Branly and of the manufacturer Eugene Ducretet for whom later he will develop apparatus.
On 3 August 1898, Tissot demonstrates the first French operational radio connection at sea, covering 800 meters between "BORDERED" and an on-shore semaphore station. Convinced, the Minister of Marine on 6 August agrees to finance purchase of material to allow him to continue his tests. With this apparatus Camille Tissot in 1899 organized a large trial run and demonstrates communications by radio, initially between various points of the roads of Brest and the Saint Martin church, then to the islands Vierge (Plouguerneau) and Stiff (Ushant).
In 1898 he also established radio contact to the island of Ouessant. This station will become Ushant radio station, with call sign FFU ( French Fixe of Ushant), which is active there until 1943.
In 1899, Tissot published a report describing his work and experiments through the roads of Brest. In 1900, Tissot equipped the French Navy with its first radio apparatus.[2]
In 1902, the station Ushant TSF is established with a radio operator, receiver with coherer, and an arc transmitter. This station had a radio telegraphy range of 80 kilometers with a fleet of 14 ships at sea and with Brest.
In 1904 the Ouessant radio station with call sign FFU carried out radiotelegraphic connections on 600 meters with a fleet of passenger ships.
From 1905, Tissot made very thorough studies on the detection of radio signals. Following these tests, Tissot showed the possibility of using radio to transmit a time signal and to regulate the chronometers of the ships at sea. The Bureau des Longitudes started daily time signal service starting in May 1910.
In 1907, Tissot conceived, with F Pellin, a Crystal radio without tiresome adjustment to receive signals aboard ships.
In 1911, his technical expertise was required by a committee of French industrialists carried out by E Girardeau, during the series of lawsuits between the Marconi Company and French radio companies. With the occasion of these lawsuits, Tissot and Férrié in particular sought to show certain faults of patent 77777 of Marconi, but also the priority of experiments of certain French scientists, like Eugene Ducretet. Marconi won the lawsuit, but the decision of the court, which gave the Marconi the right to replace the French material by material made by Marconi, will never be applied in France.
During the First World War, Tissot made several stays at Bizerte, to equip ships with radio and to work on detection of underwater sound.
Commander Tissot died in October 1917, of disease. He was buried at the cemetery of Arcachon. He was an Officer of the Legion of Honor, and Officer of the State education.
Publications[edit]




Résonance of the antenna


He wrote three detailed works:

(in French) Mémoire de thèse de Doctorat sur la résonance des antennes (1905). Memory of thesis of Doctorate on the resonance of the antennas.
(in French) Traité sur les oscillations électriques (1906) Treaty on the electric oscillations.
(in French) Manuel de TSF théorique et pratique (1912), Handbook of theoretical and practical TSF (1912), republished until 1932 (6th edition).
(in French) books written by Camille Tissot.

He was also the author of many articles of popularization of radio in international scientific reviews, and gave very many conferences on the subject. Although not a member, he intervened regularly in front of the Academy of the sciences.[3] He received several prizes and rewards of the Academy.
See also[edit]

Crystal radio
500 kHz
Coherer
Édouard Branly
Cat's whisker detector
Electrolytic detector
Foster-Seeley discriminator
Grid-leak detector
Hot wire barretter
Magnetic detector
Plate detector
Wunderlich detector

References[edit]


^ Officiers et anciens élèves
^ Donald Monroe McNicol , Radio's conquest of space: the experimental rise in radio communication Taylor & Francis, 1946 pages 46 and 113
^ ' ' On the use of sensitive detectors of electric oscillations based on the phenomena thermo-électriques' ', presented in front of the Academy of Science the 6juillet 1908


External links[edit]

(in French) Books written by Camille Tissot.
(in French) Files concerning Camille Papin Tissot
(in French) Camille Tissot on Wiki Brest
(in French) Radio Ouessant

Further reading[edit]

Commandant Camille Tissot , Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers Feb. 1918, Vol. 6, Issue 1, Pg. 4 ISSN 0731-5996, doi:10.1109/JRPROC.1918.217352







v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission
media



Coaxial cable
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Optical fiber
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology
and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 29895058
LCCN: n87120227
ISNI: 0000 0000 8109 3886
GND: 1020246170
SUDOC: 119821648
BNF: cb13077607s (data)
Léonore: LH/2610/37











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Camille_Tissot&oldid=754876489"					Categories: 1868 births1917 deathsPeople from Brest, FranceFrench physicistsÉcole Navale alumniMembers of the French Academy of SciencesFrench telecommunications engineersExperimental physicistsOfficiers of the Légion d'honneurIEEE Medal of Honor recipientsFrench engineersFrench inventorsRadio pioneersEuropean amateur radio operatorsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2009All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing cleanup from November 2009All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles without a reason field from November 2009Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2009Articles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles with French-language external linksUse dmy dates from November 2010Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers