"Radio-Canada" redirects here. For the CBC's main French-language television network, see Ici Radio-Canada Télé.

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
Société Radio-Canada


The current logo of CBC/Radio-Canada.




Type

Crown Corporation


Industry
Mass media
Public broadcasting
Radio network
Television network
Online


Predecessor
Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission


Founded
November 2, 1936 (radio)
September 6, 1952 (television)


Headquarters
CBC Ottawa Broadcast Centre
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada



Area served

National; available on terrestrial and cable systems in American border communities; available internationally via Internet and Sirius Satellite Radio



Key people

Hubert Lacroix (CEO)
Heather Conway (EVP English Networks)
Louis Lalande (EVP French Networks)


Products



Broadcasting
Radio
Web portals





Services



CBC Television
Ici Radio-Canada Télé
CBC Radio
CBC News
CBC.ca
Radio-Canada.ca





Revenue
$ 556.92 million (Fiscal Year 2016) [1]



Operating income

 - $68.41 million (Fiscal Year 2016) [1]



Net income

 - $ 70.77 million (Fiscal Year 2016) [1]


Owner
Government of Canada



Number of employees

7,555 (March 2017) [2]


Website
www.cbc.radio-canada.ca


The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (French: Société Radio-Canada), branded as CBC/Radio-Canada, is a Canadian federal Crown corporation that serves as the national public radio and television broadcaster.[3] The English- and French-language service units of the corporation are commonly known as CBC and Radio-Canada respectively, and both short-form names are also commonly used in the applicable language to refer to the corporation as a whole.
Although some local stations in Canada predate CBC's founding, CBC is the oldest existing broadcasting network in Canada, first established in its present form on November 2, 1936.[4] Radio services include CBC Radio One, CBC Radio 2, Ici Radio-Canada Première, Ici Musique and the international radio service Radio Canada International. Television operations include CBC Television, Ici Radio-Canada Télé, CBC News Network, Ici RDI, Ici Explora, Documentary Channel (part ownership), and Ici ARTV. The CBC operates services for the Canadian Arctic under the names CBC North and Radio-Canada Nord. The CBC also operates digital services including CBC.ca/Ici.Radio-Canada.ca, CBC Radio 3, CBC Music/ICI.mu and Ici.TOU.TV, and owns 20.2% of satellite radio broadcaster Sirius XM Canada, which carries several CBC-produced audio channels.
CBC/Radio-Canada offers programming in English, French and eight aboriginal languages on its domestic radio service, and in five languages on its web-based international radio service, Radio Canada International (RCI).[5] However, budget cuts in the early 2010s have contributed to the corporation reducing its service via the airwaves, discontinuing RCI's shortwave broadcasts as well as terrestrial television broadcasts in all communities served by network-owned rebroadcast transmitters, including communities not subject to Canada's over-the-air digital television transition.
The financial structure and the nature of the CBC differs from other national broadcasters, such as the British broadcaster BBC, as the CBC employs commercial advertising to supplement its federal funding on its television broadcasts. The radio service employed commercials from its inception to 1974. Since then, its primary radio networks, like the BBC, were commercial-free. However, in the late 2013, CBC's secondary radio networks, Radio 2 and Ici Musique, introduced limited advertising of up to four minutes an hour.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Frontier Coverage Package
1.2 CBC Television slogans
1.3 Logos
1.4 Nicknames


2 Corporation

2.1 Mandate
2.2 Management

2.2.1 Board of directors
2.2.2 Presidents
2.2.3 Ombudsmen


2.3 Financing


3 Services

3.1 News
3.2 Radio
3.3 Long-range radio plan
3.4 Other CBC Radio services
3.5 Television
3.6 Children's programming
3.7 Online
3.8 Merchandising
3.9 Interactive television
3.10 Commercial services
3.11 Miscellaneous


4 Unions

4.1 Labour issues


5 Cultural significance
6 International broadcasts

6.1 Newsworld International and Trio
6.2 U.S. border audiences
6.3 Carriage of CBC News
6.4 CBC Radio
6.5 Caribbean and Bermuda
6.6 Availability of CBC channels and programming


7 Controversies

7.1 Closed captioning
7.2 Beyond the Red Wall
7.3 Radio-Canada rebranding
7.4 Employee harassment policy
7.5 Allegations of bias


8 Over-the-air digital television transition
9 Personalities
10 See also
11 Notes and references
12 Further reading

12.1 Primary sources
12.2 In French


13 External links



History[edit]




CBC's headquarters, in Ottawa






CBC's English-language master control point, the Canadian Broadcasting Centre, in Toronto


Main articles: History of broadcasting in Canada and Timeline of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
In 1929, the Aird Commission on public broadcasting recommended the creation of a national radio broadcast network. A major concern was the growing influence of American radio broadcasting as U.S.-based networks began to expand into Canada. Meanwhile, Canadian National Railways was making a radio network to keep its passengers entertained and give it an advantage over its rival, CP. This, the CNR Radio, is the forerunner of the CBC. Graham Spry and Alan Plaunt lobbied intensely for the project on behalf of the Canadian Radio League. In 1932 the government of R. B. Bennett established the CBC's predecessor, the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (CRBC).
The CRBC took over a network of radio stations formerly set up by a federal Crown corporation, the Canadian National Railway. The network was used to broadcast programming to riders aboard its passenger trains, with coverage primarily in central and eastern Canada. On November 2, 1936, the CRBC was reorganised under its present name. While the CRBC was a state-owned company, the CBC was a Crown corporation on the model of the BBC. Leonard Brockington was the CBC's first chairman.
For the next few decades, the CBC was responsible for all broadcasting innovation in Canada. This was in part because, until 1958, it was not only a broadcaster, but the chief regulator of Canadian broadcasting. It used this dual role to snap up most of the clear-channel licences in Canada. It began a separate French-language radio network in 1937. It introduced FM radio to Canada in 1946, though a distinct FM service wasn't launched until 1960.
Television broadcasts from the CBC began on September 6, 1952, with the opening of a station in Montreal, Quebec (CBFT), and a station in Toronto, Ontario (CBLT) opening two days later. The CBC's first privately owned affiliate television station, CKSO in Sudbury, Ontario, launched in October 1953. (At the time, all private stations were expected to affiliate with the CBC, a condition that relaxed in 1960–61 with the launch of CTV.)
From 1944 to 1962, the CBC split its English-language radio network into two services known as the Trans-Canada Network and the Dominion Network. The latter, carrying lighter programs including American radio shows, was dissolved in 1962, while the former became known as CBC Radio. (In the late 1990s, CBC Radio was rebranded as CBC Radio One and CBC Stereo as CBC Radio Two. The latter was re-branded slightly in 2007 as CBC Radio 2.)
On July 1, 1958, CBC's television signal was extended from coast to coast. The first Canadian television show shot in colour was the CBC's own The Forest Rangers in 1963. Colour television broadcasts began on July 1, 1966, and full-colour service began in 1974. In 1978, CBC became the first broadcaster in the world to use an orbiting satellite for television service, linking Canada "from east to west to north".
Frontier Coverage Package[edit]
Starting in 1967 and continuing until the mid-1970s, the CBC provided limited television service to remote and northern communities. Transmitters were built in a few locations and carried a four-hour selection of black-and-white videotaped programs each day. The tapes were flown into communities to be shown, then transported to other communities, often by the "bicycle" method used in television syndication. Transportation delays ranged from one week for larger centres to almost a month for small communities.
The first FCP station was started in Yellowknife in May 1967, the second in Whitehorse in November 1968. Additional stations were added from 1969 to 1972.
Most of the FCP stations were fitted for the Anik satellite signal during 1973, carrying 12 hours of colour programming. Those serving the largest centers signed on with colour broadcasts on 5 February 1973, and most of the others were added before spring. Broadcasts were geared to either the Atlantic time zone (UTC−4 or −3) or the Pacific time zone (UTC−8 or −7) even though the audience resided in communities in time zones varying from UTC−5 to UTC−8; the reason for this was that the CBC originated its programs for the Atlantic time zone, and a key station in each time zone would record the broadcast for the appropriate delay of one, two or three hours; the programs were originated again for the Pacific zone. The northern stations simply picked up one of these two feeds, with the western NWT stations picking up the Pacific feed. Some in northern areas of the provinces were connected by microwave to their own provincial broadcast centre.
Some of these stations used non-CBC callsigns such as CFWH-TV in Whitehorse, CFYK in Yellowknife, CFFB in Frobisher Bay and CHAK in Inuvik, while some others used the standard CB_T call-sign but with five letters (e.g. CBDHT).
Television programs originating in the north without the help of the south began with one half-hour per week in the 1980s with Focus North and graduating to a daily half-hour newscast, Northbeat, in the late 1990s.
CBC Television slogans[edit]

1966: "Television is CBC"
c. 1970: "When you watch, watch the best"
1977: "Bringing Canadians Together"
1980: "We Are the CBC"
1984: "Look to us for good things" (general) / "Good to Know" (news and public affairs)
1986–1989: "The Best on the Box"
1989–1992: "CBC and You"
1992–1994: "Go Public" / "CBC: Public Broadcasting" (to emphasize that CBC is a public broadcaster)
1995–2001: "Television to Call Our Own" and "Radio to Call Our Own"
2001–2007: "Canada’s Own"
2007–2014: "Canada Lives Here"
2009–present: "Mon monde est à Radio-Canada, SRC" (English translation: My world is on Radio-Canada)
2011 and 2016: "Yours to Celebrate" (French: "Un monde à célébrer") (for the CBC's 75th and 80th anniversaries)
2014–present: "Love CBC" / "Fall for CBC"

Logos[edit]







1940–1958









1958–1974









1966–1974









1974–1986









1986–1992









1992–present




The original logo of the CBC, designed by École des Beaux Arts student Hortense Binette[6] and used between 1940 and 1958, featured a map of Canada (and from 1940 to 1949, the Newfoundland) and a thunderbolt design used to symbolise broadcasting.
In 1958, the CBC adopted a new logo for use at the end of network programs. Designed by scale model artist Jean-Paul Boileau, it consisted of the legends "CBC" and "Radio-Canada" overlaid on a map of Canada. For French programming, the "Radio-Canada" was placed on top.
The "Butterfly" logo was designed for the CBC by Hubert Tison in 1966 to mark the network's progressing transition from black-and-white to colour television, much in the manner of the NBC peacock logo. It was used at the beginning of programs broadcast in colour, and was used until all CBC television programs had switched to colour. A sketch on the CBC Television program Wayne & Shuster once referred to this as the logo of the "Cosmic Butterfly Corporation."[7]
The fourth logo, known internally as "the gem", was designed for the CBC by graphic artist Burton Kramer in December 1974, and it is the most widely recognised symbol of the corporation. The main on-air identification featured the logo kaleidoscopically morphing into its form while radiating outward from the centre of the screen on a blue background. This animated version, which went to air in December 1974, is also known colloquially as "The Exploding Pizza". The appearance of this logo marked the arrival of full-colour network television service. The large shape in the middle is the letter C, which stands for Canada, and the radiating parts of the C symbolise broadcasting. The original theme music for the 1974 CBC ident was a three-note woodwind orchestral fanfare accompanied by the voiceover "This is CBC" or "Ici Radio-Canada".[8] This was later replaced by the more familiar 11-note synthesised jingle, which was used until December 31, 1985.[9][10] The logo is also referred to as the "CBC Pizza".
The updated one-colour version of the gem/pizza logo, created by Hubert Tison and Robert Innes,[6] was introduced on January 1, 1986, and with it was introduced a new series of computer graphic-generated television idents for CBC and Radio-Canada. These idents consisted of different background colours corresponding to the time of day behind a translucent CBC gem logo, accompanied by different arrangements of the CBC's new, orchestrated five-note jingle. The logo was changed to one colour, generally dark blue on white, or white on dark blue, in 1986. Print ads and most television promos, however, have always used a single-colour version of this logo since 1974.
In 1992, CBC updated its logo design to make it simpler and more red (or white on a red background). The new logo design, created by Swiss-Canadian design firm Gottschalk + Ash,[6] reduces the number of geometric sections in the logo to 13 instead of the previous logo's 25, and the "C" in the centre of the logo became a simple red circle. According to graphic designer Todd Falkowsky, the logo's red colour also represents Canada in a symbolic way. With the launch of the current design, new television idents were introduced in November that year, also using CGI. Since the early 2000s, it has also appeared in white (sometimes red) on a textured or coloured background. It is now CBC/Radio-Canada's longest-used logo, surpassing the original incarnation of the Gem logo and the CBC's 1940 logo.
Nicknames[edit]
As the oldest operating Canadian broadcaster, and the largest in terms of national availability of its various networks, the nickname "Mother Corp" and variants thereof are sometimes used in reference to the CBC.[11]
A popular satirical nickname for the CBC, commonly used in the pages of Frank, is "the Corpse."
There is an urban legend that a CBC announcer once referred to the network on the air as the "Canadian Broadcorping Castration", which also sometimes remains in use as a satirical nickname used by the Conservative Party. Quotations of the supposed spoonerism are wildly variable in detail on what was said, when it was said or even who the announcer was, but there is no evidence to confirm the truth of the story. The only known recording of this phrase being spoken was created by American radio producer Kermit Schaefer for one of his best-selling Pardon My Blooper record albums in the 1950s, and is not in fact a real recording of a CBC broadcast.
The Conservative Party referred to it as the "Communist Broadcasting Corporation" for the supposed left-wing bias in its news coverage.[12]
The CBC has also been mistakenly referred to as the Canadian Broadcasting Company;[13] the CBC has been a crown corporation since its foundation.
Corporation[edit]
Main article: List of assets owned by Canadian Broadcasting Corporation




The CBC Ottawa Broadcast Centre in Ottawa, seen from Sparks Street.


Mandate[edit]
The 1991 Broadcasting Act[14] states that...

...the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, as the national public broadcaster, should provide radio and television services incorporating a wide range of programming that informs, enlightens and entertains;
...the programming provided by the Corporation should:

be predominantly and distinctively Canadian,
reflect Canada and its regions to national and regional audiences, while serving the special needs of those regions,
actively contribute to the flow and exchange of cultural expression,
be in English and in French, reflecting the different needs and circumstances of each official language community, including the particular needs and circumstances of English and French linguistic minorities,
strive to be of equivalent quality in English and French,
contribute to shared national consciousness and identity,
be made available throughout Canada by the most appropriate and efficient means and as resources become available for the purpose, and
reflect the multicultural and multiracial nature of Canada.


Management[edit]
As a crown corporation, the CBC operates at arm's length (autonomously) from the government in its day-to-day business. The corporation is governed by the Broadcasting Act[14] of 1991, under a board of directors and is directly responsible to Parliament through the Department of Canadian Heritage. General management of the organization is in the hands of a president, who is appointed by the Governor General of Canada in Council, on the advice of the prime minister.
According to The Hill Times, a clause in Bill C-60, an omnibus budget implementation bill introduced by the government of Stephen Harper in 2013, "appears to contradict a longstanding arm's-length relationship between the independent CBC and any government in power."[15][16] The clause allows the "prime minister's cabinet to approve salaries, working conditions and collective bargaining positions for the CBC."[15]
Board of directors[edit]
In accordance with the Broadcasting Act, a board of directors is responsible for the management of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. The board is made up of 12 members, including the Chair and the President and CEO. A current list of directors is available from the Canadian Governor in Council here.[17]
Presidents[edit]

1936–1939: Leonard Brockington
1940–1944: René Morin
1944–1945: Howard B. Chase
1945–1958: A. Davidson Dunton
1958–1967: J. Alphonse Ouimet
1968–1972: George F. Davidson
1972–1975: Laurent A. Picard
1975–1982: A.W. Johnson
1982–1989: Pierre Juneau
1989: William T. Armstrong
1989–1994: Gérard Veilleux
1994–1995: Anthony S. Manera
1995–1999: Perrin Beatty
1999–2007: Robert Rabinovitch
2008–present: Hubert T. Lacroix

Ombudsmen[edit]
English

Esther Enkin (January 1, 2013 – present)[18]
Kirk LaPointe (November 2010 – 2012)
Vince Carlin (January 2006 – December 2010)
David Bazay (1995 – January 2006)
William Morgan

French

Pierre Tourangeau (November 14, 2011 – present)
Julie Miville-Dechêne (April 1, 2007 – July 2011)[19]
Renaud Gilbert (2000–2007)
Marcel Pépin (1997–1999)
Mario Cardinal (1993–1997)
Bruno Gauron (1992)

Financing[edit]
For the fiscal year 2006, the CBC received a total of $1.53 billion from all revenue sources, including government funding via taxpayers, subscription fees, advertising revenue, and other revenue (e.g., real estate). Expenditures for the year included $616 million for English television, $402 million for French television, $126 million for specialty channels, a total of $348 million for radio services in both languages, $88 million for management and technical costs, and $124 million for "amortization of property and equipment." Some of this spending was derived from amortization of funding from previous years.[20]
Among its revenue sources for the year ending March 31, 2006, the CBC received $946 million in its annual funding from the federal government, as well as $60 million in "one-time" supplementary funding for programming. However, this supplementary funding has been repeated annually for a number of years. This combined total is just over a billion dollars annually and is a source of heated debate. To supplement this funding, the CBC's television networks and websites sell advertising, while cable/satellite-only services such as CBC News Network additionally collect subscriber fees, in line with their privately owned counterparts. CBC's radio services do not sell advertising except when required by law (for example, to political parties during federal elections).
CBC's funding differs from that of the public broadcasters of many European nations, which collect a licence fee, or those in the United States, such as PBS and NPR, which receive some public funding but rely to a large extent on voluntary contributions from individual viewers and listeners. A Nanos Research poll from August 2014 conducted for Asper Media (National Post, Financial Post) showed 41% of Canadians wanted funding increased, 46% wanted it maintained at current levels, and only 10% wanted to see it cut.[21]
The network's defenders note that the CBC's mandate differs from private media's, particularly in its focus on Canadian content; that much of the public funding actually goes to the radio networks; and that the CBC is responsible for the full cost of most of its prime-time programming, while private networks can fill up most of their prime-time schedules with American series acquired for a fraction of their production cost. CBC supporters also point out that additional, long-term funding is required to provide better Canadian dramas and improved local programming to attract and sustain a strong viewership.
According to the Canadian Media Guild, the $115-million deficit reduction action plan cuts to CBC which started with the 2012 budget and were fully realized in 2014, amounted to "one of the biggest layoffs of content creators and journalists in Canadian history."The 2014 cuts combined with earlier ones totaled "3,600 jobs lost at CBC since 2008. The CMG asked the federal government to reverse the cuts[22] and to repeal Clause 17 of omnibus budget bill C-60 "to remove government's interference in CBC's day-to-day operations."[22]
In September 2015, the Canadian Media Guild announced that the CBC planned to sell all of its properties across Canada to gain a temporary increase in available funds. Media relations manager Alexandra Fortier denied this and stated that the corporation planned to sell only half of its assets.[23]
In September 2015 Hubert Lacroix, president of CBC/Radio-Canada, spoke at the international public broadcasters' conference in Munich, Germany. He claimed for the first time that public broadcasters were "at risk of extinction."[24] The Canadian Media Guild responded that Lacroix had "made a career of shredding" the CBC by cutting one quarter of its staff—approximately 2,000 jobs since 2010 under Lacroix's tenure. More than 600 jobs were cut in 2014 in order "to plug a $130-million budget shortfall."[24] Isabelle Montpetit, president of Syndicat des communications de Radio-Canada (SCRC), observed that Lacroix was hand-picked by Stephen Harper for the job as president of the CBC.[24] For the fiscal year 2015, the CBC received $1.036 billion from government funding and took 5% funding cuts from the previous year.[25]
In 2015, the Liberal Party was returned to power. As part of its election platform, it promised to restore the $115 million of funding to the CBC that was cut by the Harper Government, over three years, and add $35 million, for a total extra funding of $150 million.[26]
On November 28, 2016, the CBC issued a request for $400 million in additional funding, which it planned to use towards removing advertising from its television services, production and acquisition of Canadian content, and "additional funding of new investments to face consumer and technology disruption". The broadcaster argued that it had operated "[under] a business model and cultural policy framework that is profoundly broken", while other countries "[reaped] the benefits of strong, stable, well-funded public broadcasters."[27]
Services[edit]




The CBC Regional Broadcast Centre in Vancouver


News[edit]
Main article: CBC News
CBC News is the largest broadcast newsgathering operation in Canada, providing services to CBC radio as well as CBC News Network, local supper-hour newscasts, CBC News Online, and Air Canada's in-flight entertainment. New CBC News services are also proving popular such as news alerts to mobile phones and PDAs. Desktop news alerts, e-mail alerts, and digital television alerts are also available.
Radio[edit]
Further information: CBC Radio
CBC Radio has five separate services, three in English, known as CBC Radio One, CBC Radio 2 and CBC Radio 3, and two in French, known as Ici Radio-Canada Première and Ici Musique. CBC Radio One and Première focus on news and information programming, but they air some music programs, variety shows and comedy; in the past, they also aired some sports programming. CBC Radio One and Première used to broadcast primarily on the AM band, but many stations have moved over to FM. Over the years, a number of CBC radio transmitters with a majority of them on the AM band have either moved to FM or had shut down completely.
Further information: List of defunct CBC radio transmitters in Canada
The CBC plans to phase out more CBC AM transmitters across Canada.[28] This goal however remains to be seen in light of the CBC budget cutbacks.
Long-range radio plan[edit]
The CBC's long-range radio plan (LRRP) was developed by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) in collaboration with the CBC to identify those FM frequencies that would likely be required to deliver the CBC's radio services to the maximum number of Canadians. The CBC is not subject to any conditions or expectations concerning its LRRP. The CBC noted that Première Chaîne (now Ici Radio-Canada Première) and CBC Radio One were available to about 99 percent of the Canadian population. The CBC stated that it plans to maintain its radio service but has no plans to grow the coverage area. It described the LRRP as a planning vehicle and indicated that it would no longer use it. Given reductions in public funding to the CBC and given that Première Chaîne and Radio One are available to the vast majority of Canadians, the commission considers that the CBC's plan to maintain current coverage and discontinue the LRRP is reasonable. Accordingly, the Commission accepts the CBC's proposal to discontinue the LRRP.[29]
Other CBC Radio services[edit]
CBC Radio 2 and Ici musique, found exclusively on FM, air arts and cultural programming, with a focus on music. CBC Radio 3, found only online and on satellite radio, airs exclusively independent Canadian music.
CBC Radio also operated two shortwave services. One, Radio Nord Québec, broadcast domestically to Northern Quebec on a static frequency of 9625 kHz, and the other, Radio Canada International, provided broadcasts to the United States and around the world in eight languages. Both shortwave services were shut down in 2012 due to budget cuts; the Sackville transmitter site was dismantled in 2014.[30]
Additionally, the Radio One stations in St. John's and Vancouver operated shortwave relay transmitters, broadcasting at 6160 kHz. Some have suggested[31] that CBC/Radio-Canada create a new high-power shortwave digital radio service for more effective coverage of isolated areas.
In November 2004, the CBC, in partnership with Standard Broadcasting and Sirius Satellite Radio, applied to the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) for a licence to introduce satellite radio service to Canada. The CRTC approved the subscription radio application, as well as two others for satellite radio service, on June 16, 2005. Sirius Canada launched on December 1, 2005, with a number of CBC Radio channels, including the new services CBC Radio 3 and Bande à part.
In some areas, especially national or provincial parks, the CBC also operates an AM or FM transmitter rebroadcasting weather alerts from the Meteorological Service of Canada's Weatheradio Canada service.
Television[edit]
Further information: CBC Television and Ici Radio-Canada Télé
The CBC operates two national broadcast television networks; CBC Television in English, and Ici Radio-Canada Télé in French. Like private broadcasters, both those networks sell advertising, but offer more Canadian-produced programming. Most CBC television stations, including those in the major cities, are owned and operated by the CBC itself and carry a common schedule, aside from local programming.
Some stations that broadcast from smaller cities are private affiliates of the CBC, that is, stations which are owned by commercial broadcasters and air a predominantly CBC schedule. However, most affiliates of the English network opt out of some network programs to air local programming or more popular foreign programs acquired from other broadcasters. Private affiliates of the French network, all of which are located in Quebec, rarely have the means to provide alternate programming, and thus diverge from the main network schedule only for local newscasts. Such private affiliates are becoming increasingly rare, and there have been indications that the CBC plans to discontinue all affiliation agreements with non-CBC owned television stations in the 2010s.
CBC television stations in Nunavut, the Northwest Territories and Yukon tailor their programming mostly to the local native population, and broadcast in many native languages, such as Inuktitut, Gwich'in, and Dene.
One of the most popular shows is the weekly Saturday night broadcast of NHL hockey games. In English, the program is known as Hockey Night in Canada, and in French, it was called La Soirée du hockey. Both shows began in 1952. The French edition was discontinued in 2004, though Radio-Canada stations outside of Quebec simulcast some Saturday night games produced by RDS until 2006. The network suffered considerable public embarrassment when it lost the rights to the show's theme music following a protracted lawsuit launched by the song's composer and publishers.[32] In 2013, CBC lost the rights to telecast NHL games to Rogers Media-owned Sportsnet. Although CBC continues to broadcast the NHL as a licensed broadcaster until 2026[citation needed] all editorial content is produced by Rogers under a time-brokerage agreement.[33]
Ratings for CBC Television have declined in recent years. In Quebec, where the majority speaks French, la Télévision de Radio-Canada is popular and garners some of the highest ratings in the province.
Both terrestrial networks have also begun to roll out high-definition television feeds, with selected National Hockey League and Canadian Football League games produced in HD for the English network. After the digital switchover, CBC chose to use the 720p format on CBC and Radio-Canada.[34]
The CBC also wholly owns and operates three specialty television channels – CBC News Network, an English-language news channel; Réseau de l'information (RDI), a French-language news channel; and Explora, a Category B digital service. It owns a managing interest in the Francophone arts service ARTV, and (82%) of the digital channel, documentary
Children's programming[edit]
Main article: Kids' CBC
Children's programming air under the commercial-free preschool programming block called Kids' CBC.
Online[edit]
Further information: CBC.ca and Radio-Canada.ca
The CBC has two main websites. One is in English, at CBC.ca, which was established in 1996;[35] the other is in French.[36] The website allows the CBC to produce sections which complement the various programs on television and radio. In 2012, the corporation launched CBC Music, a digital music service which produces and distributes 40 music-related webstreams, including the existing audio streams of CBC Radio 2 and CBC Radio 3.[37]
In 2012, the CBC announced its plans for a new local news service in Hamilton, Ontario.[38] With the Hamilton area already within the broadcast range of CBC Radio and CBC Television's services in Toronto, it was not financially or technically feasible for the public broadcaster to launch new conventional radio or television stations in Hamilton; accordingly, the corporation has developed a new model, with Hamilton as its test project, to launch a local digital service that would be accessible on the Internet and telecommunications devices such as tablets and smartphones.[38] The project launched in May 2012.[39]
Merchandising[edit]
Established in 2002, the CBC/Radio Canada merchandising business operates retail locations and cbcshop.ca,[40] its educational sales department CBC Learning[41] sells CBC content and media to educational institutions, CBC Merchandising also licenses brands such as Hockey Night in Canada (whose branding is still owned by the CBC)[42] and Coronation Street (as a Canadian licensee under arrangement from ITV Studios).
Interactive television[edit]
CBC provides viewers with interactive on demand television programs every year through digital-cable services like Rogers Cable.
Commercial services[edit]
CBC Records is a Canadian record label which distributes CBC programming, including live concert performances and album transcripts of news and information programming such as the Massey Lectures, in album format. Music albums on the label, predominantly in the classical and jazz genres, are distributed across Canada in commercial record stores, while albums containing spoken word programming are predominantly distributed by the CBC's own retail merchandising operations.
Miscellaneous[edit]
CBC provides news, business, weather and sports information on Air Canada's inflight entertainment as Enroute Journal.
Unions[edit]
Unions representing employees at CBC/Radio-Canada include:[43]

Canadian Media Guild (CMG)[44] represents on-air, production, technical, administrative and support staff outside of Québec and Moncton.
Association of Professionals and Supervisors (APS)*[45]
American Federation of Musicians of the United States and Canada (AFM)*[46]
Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists (performers; ACTRA)[47]
International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees (stagehands; IATSE)[48]
Writers Guild of Canada (WGC)*[49]
Association des réalisateurs (AR)[50]
Syndicat des communications de Radio-Canada (SCRC)[51]
Société des auteurs de la radio, de la télévision et du cinéma (SARTeC).[52]
Syndicat Canadien de la fonction publique, Conseil des sections locales, Groupe des employé(e)s de bureau et professionnel(le)s (SCFP).[53]
Société professionnelle des auteurs-compositeurs du Québec (SPACQ)[54]
Syndicat des technicien(ne)s et des artisan(e)s du réseau français (STARF).[55]
Union des artistes (UDA)[56]

Labour issues[edit]
During the summer of 1981 there was a major disruption of CBC programming as the technicians union, the National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians, went on strike. Local newscasts were cut back to the bare minimum. This had the effect of delaying the debut of The Journal, which had to wait until January 1982.
On August 15, 2005, 5,500 employees of the CBC (about 90%) were locked out by CBC CEO Robert Rabinovitch in a dispute over future hiring practices. At issue were the rules governing the hiring of contract workers in preference to full-time hires. The locked-out employees were members of the Canadian Media Guild, representing all production, journalistic and on-air personnel outside Quebec and Moncton, including several foreign correspondents. While CBC services continued during the lockout, they were primarily made up of repeats, with news programming from the BBC and newswires. Major CBC programs such as The National and Royal Canadian Air Farce were not produced during the lockout; some non-CBC-owned programs seen on the network, such as The Red Green Show, shifted to other studios. Meanwhile, the locked-out employees produced podcasts and websites such as CBCunplugged.com.
After a hiatus, talks re-opened. On September 23, t Joe Fontana, the federal minister of labour, called Robert Rabinovitch and Arnold Amber (the president of the CBC branch of the Canadian Media Guild) to his office for talks aimed at ending the dispute.
Late in the evening of October 2, 2005, it was announced that the CBC management and staff had reached a tentative deal which resulted in the CBC returning to normal operations on October 11. Some speculated that the looming October 8 start date for the network's most important television property, Hockey Night in Canada, had acted as an additional incentive to resolve the dispute.
The CBC has been affected by a number of other labour disputes since the late 1990s:

In early 1999, CBC English- and French-network technicians in all locations outside Quebec and Moncton, members of the Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada, went on strike.[57] The Canadian Media Guild was set to strike as well, but the CBC settled with both unions.[58]
A similar dispute, again involving all technicians outside Quebec and Moncton, occurred in late 2001 and concluded by the end of the year.[59]
In spring 2002, on-air staff in Quebec and Moncton (again, on both English and French networks) were locked out by local management, leaving, among other things, NHL playoff games without commentary on French television.[60]

While all labour disputes resulted in cut-back programming and numerous repeat airings, the 2005 lockout may have been the most damaging to CBC. All local programming in the affected regions was cancelled and replaced by abbreviated national newscasts and national radio morning shows. BBC World (television) and World Service (radio) and Broadcast News feeds were used to provide the remainder of original news content, and the CBC website consisted mainly of rewritten wire copy. Some BBC staff protested against their material being used during the CBC lockout. "The NUJ and BECTU will not tolerate their members' work being used against colleagues in Canada", said a joint statement by BBC unions. The CMG questioned[61] whether, with its limited Canadian news content, the CBC was meeting its legal requirements under the Broadcasting Act and its CRTC licences.
Galaxie (which CBC owned at the time) supplied some music content for the radio networks. Tapes of aired or produced documentaries, interviews and entertainment programs were also aired widely. Selected television sports coverage, including that of the Canadian Football League, continued, but without commentary.
As before, French-language staff outside of Quebec were also affected by the 2005 lockout, although with Quebec producing the bulk of the French networks' programming, those networks were not as visibly affected by the dispute apart from local programs.
Cultural significance[edit]
In the 1950s the CBC provided hands-on training and employment for actors, writers, and directors in the developing field of its television dramatic services. Later many of these people moved to the United States to work in New York and Hollywood.
The CBC was the only television network broadcasting in Canada until the creation of ITO, a short-lived predecessor of today's CTV, in 1960; even then, large parts of Canada did not receive CTV service until the late 1960s or early 1970s. The CBC also had the only national radio network. Its cultural impact was therefore significant since many Canadians had little or no choice for their information and entertainment other than from these two powerful media outlets.
Even after the introduction of commercial television and radio, the CBC has remained one of the main elements in Canadian popular culture through its obligation to produce Canadian television and radio programming. The CBC has made programs for mass audiences and for smaller audiences interested in drama, performance arts, documentaries, current affairs, entertainment and sport.
The CBC's cultural influence, like that of many public broadcasters, has decreased in recent decades. This is partly due to severe budget cuts by the Canadian federal government, which began in the late 1980s and levelled off in the late 1990s. It is also due to industry-wide fragmentation of television audiences (the decline of network television generally, due to the rise in specialty channel viewership, as well as the increase of non-television entertainment options such as video games, the Internet, etc.) Private networks in Canada face the same competition, but their viewership is declining more slowly than CBC Television's.
In English-speaking Canada, the decline in CBC viewership can be partly attributed to popularity of private television networks' rebroadcast of American programming with substituted Canadian advertising. American programs appear to attract higher audiences than do much of the made-in-Canada programming that is a CBC specialty.
Viewership on the CBC's French television network has also declined, mostly because of stiff competition from private French-language networks. Audience fragmentation is another issue. However, in contrast to the anglophone audience, French Canadians prefer home-grown television programming, a vibrant Quebec star system is in place, and little American or foreign content airs on French-language networks, public or private. And the CBC's French-language radio channel is sometimes the top-rated network.
In the case of breaking news, including federal elections, CBC Television may obtain the largest number of viewers. For instance, after election night 2006, CBC Television took out full-page newspaper ads claiming that 2.2 million Canadians watched their coverage, more than any other broadcaster. However, in similar ads, CTV also claimed to be number one, stating there was a CBC audience of only 1.2 million. In both cases, the methodologies were not clear from the ads, such as time periods and whether simulcasts on one or both of the networks' news channels (Newsworld for CBC, Newsnet for CTV) were counted.
Competition from private broadcasters like CTV, Global, City, and other broadcast television stations and specialty channels has lessened the CBC's reach, but nevertheless it remains a major influence on Canadian popular culture. According to the corporation's research, in 2011 92% of Canadians considered the CBC to be an essential service.[62]
International broadcasts[edit]
Newsworld International and Trio[edit]
From 1994 to 2000, the CBC, in a venture with Power Broadcasting (former owner of CKWS in Kingston), jointly owned two networks:

Newsworld International (NWI), an American cable channel that rebroadcast much of the programming of CBC Newsworld (now known as CBC News Network).
Trio, an arts and entertainment channel.

In 2000, CBC and Power Broadcasting sold these channels to Barry Diller's USA Networks. Diller's company was later acquired by Vivendi Universal, which in turn was partially acquired by NBC to form NBC Universal. NBC Universal still owns the Trio brand, which no longer has any association with the CBC (and became an Internet-only broadband channel which was later folded into Bravo.) The channel was shut down and was replaced with the NBC Universal channel Sleuth, which later became Cloo.
However, the CBC continued to program NWI, with much of its programming simulcast on the domestic Newsworld service. In late 2004, as a result of a further change in NWI's ownership to the INdTV consortium (including Joel Hyatt and former Vice-President of the United States Al Gore), NWI ceased airing CBC programming on August 1, 2005, when it became Current TV. Current later folded and became Al Jazeera America on August 20, 2013.
U.S. border audiences[edit]
In U.S. border communities such as Bellingham and Seattle, Washington; Buffalo, New York; Detroit, Michigan and Burlington, Vermont, CBC radio and television stations can be received over-the-air and have a significant audience.[63] Farther from the border, some American fans of the network have acquired Canadian IP addresses to stream its sports broadcasts.[64] Some CBC programming is also rebroadcast on local public radio, such as New Hampshire Public Radio, Vermont Public Radio and the Maine Public Broadcasting Network. CBC television channels are available on cable systems located near the Canada–US border. For example, CBET Windsor is available on cable systems in the Detroit, Michigan, and Toledo, Ohio, areas; much of the rest of the state of Michigan receives CBMT Montreal on cable. CBUT Vancouver is broadcast on Comcast in the Seattle, Washington, area. At night, the AM radio transmissions of both CBC and Radio-Canada services can be received over much of the northern portion of the United States, from stations such as CBW in Winnipeg, CBK in Saskatchewan and CJBC in Toronto.
Carriage of CBC News[edit]
On September 11, 2001, several American broadcasters without their own news operations, including C-SPAN, carried the CBC's coverage of the September 11 attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C. In the days after September 11, C-SPAN carried CBC's nightly newscast, The National, anchored by Peter Mansbridge. The quality of this coverage was recognised specifically by the Canadian Journalism Foundation; editor-in-chief Tony Burman later accepted the Excellence in Journalism Award (2004), for "rigorous professional practice, accuracy, originality and public accountability", on behalf of the service.
C-SPAN has also carried CBC's coverage of major events affecting Canadians, including: Canadian federal elections, key proceedings in Canadian Parliament, Six days in September 2000 that marked the death and state funeral of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the power outage crisis in summer 2003, U.S. presidential elections (e.g. in 2004, C-SPAN picked up The National the day after the election for the view from Canadians), state visits and official visits of American presidents to Canada, and Barack Obama inauguration in 2009.
Several PBS stations also air some CBC programming. However, these programs are syndicated by independent distributors, and are not governed by the PBS "common carriage" policy.
Other American broadcast networks sometimes air CBC reports, especially for Canadian events of international significance. For example, in the early hours after the Swissair Flight 111 disaster, CNN aired CBC's live coverage of the event. Also in the late 1990s, CNN Headline News aired a few CBC reports of events that were not significant outside Canada.
CBC Radio[edit]
Some CBC Radio One programs, such as Definitely Not the Opera, WireTap, Q, and As It Happens, also air on some stations associated with American Public Media or Public Radio International. Some of the CBC's radio networks are available to SiriusXM subscribers in the United States, including CBC Radio One (a special feed that exclusively contains CBC-produced content and no regional programs) and Première (a simulcast of its Montreal flagship CBF-FM), CBC Radio 3, and music-oriented services exclusive to SiriusXM.
Caribbean and Bermuda[edit]
Several Caribbean nations carry feeds of CBC TV:

Bahamas, on the coral wave (Cable Bahamas) television system in the Northern Bahamas (Channel 8).
Barbados,

on the Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation Multi-Choice TV Cable system (Channel 703), and
on the Columbus Communications owned cable system "Flow Barbados" (channel 132).


Bermuda, on the CableVision digital cable service.
Grenada, carried on Columbus Communications owned cable system Flow Grenada.
Jamaica, distributed in areas served by Flow Jamaica.
Trinidad and Tobago, on the Columbus Communications Trinidad Ltd. (CCTL) television system.

Availability of CBC channels and programming[edit]
CBC Television, Ici Radio-Canada Télé, CBC News Network and all other CBC channels can be received through cable and satellite TV channel providers across Canada, like through Bell TV, Rogers Cable, Videotron, Cogeco, and other smaller TV providers. The CBC and Radio-Canada channel signals can also be obtained free of charge, over-the-air, through antenna receivers in Canada's largest markets or in some border states along the Canada-U.S. border; however, CBC is not obtainable as a "free-to-air" (FTA) channel on FTA satellites (signals are encrypted on the Anik space satellites and require a dedicated satellite receiver).
Controversies[edit]
Closed captioning[edit]
CBC Television was an early leader in broadcasting programming with closed captioning for the hearing impaired, airing its first captioned programming in 1981.[65] Captioned programming in Canada began with the airing of Clown White in English-language and French-language versions on CBC Television and Radio-Canada, respectively. Most sources list that event as occurring in 1981,[66] while others list the year as 1982.[67]
In 1997, Henry Vlug, a deaf lawyer in Vancouver, filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission alleging that an absence of captioning on some programming on CBC Television and Newsworld infringed on his rights as a person with a disability. A ruling in 2000 by the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal, which later heard the case, sided with Vlug and found that an absence of captioning constituted discrimination on the basis of disability.[68] The Tribunal ordered CBC Television and Newsworld to caption the entirety of their broadcast days, "including television shows, commercials, promos and unscheduled news flashes, from sign-on until sign-off."
The ruling recognized that "there will inevitably be glitches with respect to the delivery of captioning" but that "the rule should be full captioning." In a negotiated settlement to avoid appealing the ruling to the Federal Court of Canada, CBC agreed to commence 100% captioning on CBC Television and Newsworld beginning November 1, 2002.[69] CBC Television and Newsworld are apparently the only broadcasters in the world required to caption the entire broadcast day. However, published evidence asserts that CBC is not providing the 100% captioning ordered by the Tribunal.[70]
In 2004, retired Canadian Senator Jean-Robert Gauthier, a hard-of-hearing person, filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission against Radio-Canada concerning captioning, particularly the absence of real-time captioning on newscasts and other live programming. As part of the settlement process, Radio-Canada agreed to submit a report on the state of captioning, especially real-time captioning, on Radio-Canada and RDI.[71] The report, which was the subject of some criticism, proposed an arrangement with Cité Collégiale, a college in Ottawa, to train more French-language real-time captioners.[72][73]
English-language specialty networks owned or co-owned by CBC, including documentary, have the lower captioning requirements typical of larger Canadian broadcasters (90% of the broadcast day by the end of both networks' licence terms[74][75]). ARTV, the French-language specialty network co-owned by CBC, has a maximum captioning requirement of 53%.[76]
Beyond the Red Wall[edit]
In November 2007, the CBC replaced its documentary Beyond the Red Wall: Persecution of Falun Gong, about persecution of Falun Gong members in China, at the last minute with a rerun episode regarding President Pervez Musharaf in Pakistan. The broadcaster had said to the press that "the crisis in Pakistan was considered more urgent and much more newsworthy", but sources from within the network itself had stated that the Chinese government had called the Canadian Embassy and demanded repeatedly that the program be taken off the air. The documentary in question was to air on Tuesday, November 6, 2007 on CBC Newsworld, but was replaced.[77] The documentary aired two weeks later on November 20, 2007,[78] after editing.[79]
Radio-Canada rebranding[edit]
On June 5, 2013, the CBC announced that it would be phasing out the Radio-Canada brand from its French-language broadcast properties, and unifying them under names prefixed with "Ici" ("here" or "this is"); for instance, the CBC planned to re-brand Télévision de Radio-Canada as "Ici Télé", Première Chaîne as "Ici Première", and move its French-language website from radio-canada.ca to ici.ca. Radio-Canada vice president Louis Lalande stated that the new name complemented its multi-platform operations, while also serving as an homage to the broadcaster's historic station identification slogan "ici Radio-Canada" ("this is Radio-Canada").[80]
The announcement was criticized by politicians (such as Minister of Canadian Heritage James Moore), who felt that the new "Ici" brand was too confusing, and that the CBC was diminishing the value of the Radio-Canada name through its plans to downplay it. The re-branding was also criticized for being unnecessary spending, reportedly costing $400,000, in the midst of budget cuts at the CBC.[81] On June 10, in response to the criticism, Hubert Lacroix apologized for the decision and announced that the new brands for its main radio and television networks would be revised to restore the Radio-Canada name alongside Ici, such as "Ici Radio-Canada Première".[82][83]
The CBC also filed a trademark lawsuit against Sam Norouzi, founder of CFHD-DT, a new multicultural station in Montreal, seeking to have his own registration on the name "ICI" (as an abbreviation of "International Channel/Canal International") cancelled because it was too similar to its own Ici-related trademarks. Despite Norouzi's "ICI" trademark having been registered prior to the registration of CBC's own "Ici" trademarks, the corporation argued that Norouzi's application contained incorrect information surrounding his first use of the name in commerce, and also asserted the long-time use of "Ici Radio-Canada" as part of its imaging. Norouzi stated that he planned to fight the CBC in court.[84]
Employee harassment policy[edit]
In 2015, after allegations that CBC Radio host Jian Ghomeshi had harassed colleagues, Ghomeshi was placed on leave; his employment was terminated in October when the CBC indicated that they had "graphic evidence" that he had injured a female employee.[85] The corporation commissioned an independent investigation. The resulting report by Janice Rubin, a partner at law firm Rubin Thomlinson LLP, discussed employee complaints about Ghomeshi that were not seriously considered by the CBC. Rubin concluded that CBC management had "failed to take adequate steps" when it became aware of Ghomeshi's "problematic behaviour."[86]
Ghomeshi was charged by police on multiple counts of sexual assault but was found not guilty of all but one of these in March 2016. He was to be tried in June on the last remaining charge, relating to a complainant who had also worked at CBC; her name was later revealed to be Kathryn Borel. On May 11, 2016 however, the Crown withdrew the charge after Ghomeshi signed a peace bond (which does not include an admission of guilt) and apologized to Borel.[87] Borel was critical of the CBC for its handling of her initial complaint about Ghomeshi's behavior. "When I went to the CBC for help, what I received in return was a directive that, yes, he could do this and, yes, it was my job to let him," she told the assembled media representatives.[88]
The CBC apologized to Borel publicly on May 11 in a statement by the head of public affairs Chuck Thompson. "What Ms. Borel experienced in our workplace should never have happened and we sincerely apologize...," he stated.[89] The Corporation has also maintained that it had accepted Rubin's report and had "since made significant progress" on a revised policy of improved training and methods for handling bullying and harassment complaints.[90]
In the May 11, 2016 Toronto Star article by Jacques Gallant cited above, public relations expert Martin Waxman spoke of a "damning indictment" of the CBC which included the following comment. "Yes, they did their inquiry, but if I were the CBC, I would think strongly about what is wrong with the culture and what they can do to repair it," he said. The Star also quoted employment lawyer Howard Levitt stating that "harassment has not been fully addressed at the CBC" in his estimation. Levitt called the Rubin report a "whitewash" and reiterated his suggestion that a federal commission should conduct a more detailed enquiry into workplace issues at the public broadcaster.
Allegations of bias[edit]
See also: CBC News § Allegations of bias
Several outlets and politicians have accused CBC News of bias.[91][92][93] The CBC has denied these allegations.[94]
Over-the-air digital television transition[edit]
Main article: CBC Television
See also: Digital television in Canada
See also: List of defunct CBC and Radio-Canada television transmitters
The CRTC ordered that in 28 "mandatory markets", full power over-the-air analogue television transmitters had to cease transmitting by August 31, 2011. Broadcasters could either continue serving those markets by transitioning analogue transmitters to digital or cease broadcasting over-the-air. Cable, IPTV, and satellite services are not involved or affected by this digital transition deadline.
While its fellow Canadian broadcasters converted most of their transmitters to digital by the Canadian digital television transition deadline of August 31, 2011, CBC converted only about half of the analogue transmitters in mandatory to digital (15 of 28 markets with CBC TV, and 14 of 28 markets with SRC). Due to financial difficulties reported by the corporation, the corporation published a plan whereby communities that receive analogue signals by re-broadcast transmitters in mandatory markets would lose their over-the-air (OTA) signals as of the deadline. Rebroadcast transmitters account for 23 of the 48 CBC and SRC transmitters in mandatory markets. Mandatory markets losing both CBC and SRC over-the-air signals include London, Ontario (metropolitan area population 457,000) and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan (metro area 257,000). In both of those markets, the corporation's television transmitters are the only ones that were not converted to digital.
On July 31, 2012, CBC shut down all of its approximately 620 analogue television transmitters, following an announcement of these plans on April 4, 2012. This reduced the total number of the corporation's television transmitters across the country to 27. According to the CBC, this would reduce the corporation's yearly costs by $10 million. No plans have been announced to use subchannels to maintain over-the-air signals for both CBC and SRC in markets where the corporation has one digital transmitter. In fact, in its CRTC application to shut down all of its analogue television transmitters, the CBC communicated its opposition to use of subchannels, citing, amongst other reasons, costs.[95] CBC/R-C claims that only 1.7 percent of Canadian viewers actually lost access to CBC and Radio-Canada programming due to the very high penetration of cable and satellite. In some areas (particularly remote and rural regions), cable or satellite have long been essential for acceptable television.[96]
Personalities[edit]
Main article: List of Canadian Broadcasting Corporation personalities
Notable CBC alumni have included television and radio personalities, former Governors General of Canada Jeanne Sauvé, Adrienne Clarkson, and Michaëlle Jean, as well as former Quebec premier René Lévesque.
See also[edit]


Canada portal
Media portal



BBC
Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission
CBC Museum
Concentration of media ownership
Media in Canada
Public Francophone Radios
Radio Television Hong Kong
Réseau de l'information
TOU.TV
TVOntario

Notes and references[edit]


^ a b c Financial Results for Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2017. Retrieved November 12, 2017
^ Our Operations Retrieved November 12, 2017
^ McCausland, Tammy (June 1, 2010). "The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation". Maple Leaf Web. Retrieved May 25, 2017. 
^ Canadian Communications Foundation Archived March 15, 2005, at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Radio Canada International goes off-air, moving online-only after 67 years of shortwave service". J-Source. June 25, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2013. 
^ a b c "Retro revival: CBC's changing logo through the years". CBC News. 
^ "YouTube – CBC Butterfly". Youtube.com. June 22, 2006. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "YouTube – RARE – Ici Radio-Canada – Musique différente". Youtube.com. Retrieved June 29, 2011. 
^ "YouTube – This is CBC 1982". Youtube.com. Retrieved June 29, 2011. 
^ "Canadian Broadcasting Corporation logo and television identification storyboard". Ccca.ca. March 15, 2001. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Playback :: The cuts continue at Mother Corp". Playbackmag.com. August 7, 2000. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Behind the CBC's Hit Piece on Medicare :: Mediacheck". thetyee.ca. January 6, 2006. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "CNN Transcript – Breaking News: CBC Reports Former Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau Dead – September 28, 2000". CNN. 
^ a b "Broadcasting Act". Laws.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved April 9, 2017. 
^ a b "Bill C-60: Tories Quietly Taking Control of CBC, Group Alleges". Huffington Post. April 30, 2013. Retrieved October 14, 2015. 
^ Naumetz, Tim (May 1, 2013). "Feds threatening journalist independence of CBC under new power over wages, benefits, collective bargaining, say critics". The Hill Times. Ottawa. Retrieved October 14, 2015. 
^ "Organization Profile - Canadian Broadcasting Corporation". Appointments.gc.ca. July 20, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2012. 
^ "Esther Enkin Appointed as New CBC Ombudsman". radio-canada.ca. November 28, 2012. Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ "Bureau de l'ombudsman". Radio-Canada.ca. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "CBC Annual Report 2005-2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 9, 2009. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ Csanady, Ashley (September 5, 2014). "Majority of Conservative voters like the CBC: poll". Canada.com. Retrieved May 13, 2015. 
^ a b "CBC/Radio-Canada needs more funding and true independence: CMG proposals" (PDF). Canadian Media Guild. July 2014. p. 11. Retrieved 14 October 2015. 
^ Robinson, Michael (September 22, 2015). "CBC property sell-off questioned by union". The Toronto Star. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ a b c Tencer, Daniel (September 18, 2015). "CBC President Hubert Lacroix: Public Broadcasters 'Risk Being Boiled To Death'". The Huffington Post Canada. Retrieved October 14, 2015. 
^ "CBC/Radio-Canada Annual Report 2014-2015". Retrieved March 25, 2016. 
^ Szklarski, Cassandra (December 7, 2015). "A new era for CBC, hopefully: Things could finally start looking up for the beleaguered public broadcaster in 2016". Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Retrieved December 8, 2015. 
^ "CBC/Radio Canada asks for $400M in increased government funding to go ad-free". CBC News. Retrieved 29 November 2016. 
^ CBC/Radio-Canada - Long Range Radio Plan
^ Broadcasting Decision CRTC 2013-263, Availability of radio service, CRTC, May 28, 2013
^ Broadcasting Decision CRTC 2012-602-1, CFFB Iqaluit – New transmitters in Puvirnituq, Kuujjuarapik, Inukjuak, Salluit and Kuujjuaq (Fort Chimo) – Correction, CRTC, November 5, 2012
^ "CBC-SRC North/Radio-Canada/Radio One Audibility Improvement Proposal". Cbc.am. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "How CBC Lost Its Hockey Them". The Tyee. June 13, 2008. 
^ "NHL deal with Rogers huge blow to CBC: Mudhar". Toronto Star. November 26, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2016. 
^ "CBC HD Switches To 720p From 1080i - Digital Forum". Digitalhome.ca. Retrieved August 15, 2012. 
^ "10th Anniversary". CBC.ca. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "Radio-Canada.ca". Radio-Canada.ca. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "CBC digital music service launched". CBC News, February 13, 2012.
^ a b "CBC announces location of Hamilton service" Archived February 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. Broadcaster, February 8, 2012.
^ Dunphy, Bill (May 9, 2012). "CBC Hamilton launches digital service". The Hamilton Spectator. Retrieved May 9, 2012. 
^ Home Page - CBCCNSUMER Online eStore. Cbcshop.ca. Retrieved on September 23, 2013.
^ "CBC Learning brings the best in Canadian programming to classrooms". CNW Telbec. June 14, 2007. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "Canadian trade-mark data: Application no. 0357653". Canadian Trade-marks Database. Canadian Intellectual Property Office. September 16, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2014. 
^ "Unions and Associations". CBC. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "cmg.ca". cmg.ca. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "apscbcsrc.org". apscbcsrc.org. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "afm.org". afm.org. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "actra.ca". actra.ca. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "iatse-intl.org". iatse-intl.org. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "writersguildofcanada.com". writersguildofcanada.com. October 1, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "arrq.qc.ca". arrq.qc.ca. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "scrc.qc.ca". SCRC. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "sacd.fr". sacd.fr. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "scfp.ca". scfp.ca. June 12, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "Accueil". Spacq. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "starfmtl.qc.ca". starfmtl.qc.ca. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "uniondesartistes.com". uniondesartistes.com. Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ CBC Position on CEP Strike Action Archived March 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ CEP, CMG ink deal with CBC Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ CBC Technicians' Lockout Ends — Collective agreement ratified by CEP membership Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "North East RadioWatch: June 3, 2002". Bostonradio.org. June 3, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2012. 
^ BBC benefits on the backs of CBC employees Archived December 11, 2005, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Annual Report for 2001–2002" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 9, 2009. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ Gerstner, Joanne (February 20, 2010). "Canadian TV switch displeases Americans". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ Szklarski, Cassandra (February 10, 2014). "Some U.S. viewers turn to CBC amid complaints about NBC's Olympic coverage". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "CBC/Radio-Canada–History–1980s". Cbc.radio-canada.ca. Archived from the original on June 28, 2010. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Welcome to.../Bienvenue à". Collections.ic.gc.ca. May 1, 2001. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Closed captioning standards and protocol for Canadian English language television programming services" (PDF). Canadian Association of Broadcasters. 2008. Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "Vlug v. CBC". Chrt-tcdp.gc.ca. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Canadian Human Rights Commission :: Resources :: News Room :: News Releases". Chrc-ccdp.ca. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ Clark, Joe (August 3, 2006). "Backgroung: CBC captioning, errors and omissions". Retrieved September 30, 2015. 
^ "Canadian Human Rights Commission :: Resources :: What's New". Chrc-ccdp.ca. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Canadian Human Rights Commission :: Resources :: News Room :: Télévision de Radio-Canada's Working Committee". Chrc-ccdp.ca. Archived from the original on September 2, 2010. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ "Response to report on captioning on French CBC channels (Joe Clark: Media Access)". Joe Clark. Retrieved February 19, 2011. 
^ Decision CRTC 2000-453 Archived December 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Decision CRTC 2000-455 Archived December 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Decision CRTC 2000-386 Archived December 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Star News Services (November 8, 2007). "Falun Gong documentary yanked by CBC". Windsor Star. Canwest Global (Windsor Star's Star News Services). pp. B1. Archived from the original (Newspaper) on December 2, 2008. Retrieved November 8, 2007. CBC pulls documentary on Falun Gong at demands of Chinese Government 
^ Beyond the Red Wall: The Persecution of Falun Gong, Cbc.ca, November 20, 2007. Archived November 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ CBC still tinkering with Falun Gong documentary, TheStar.com, November 20, 2007.
^ "French CBC announces new name: 'Radio' and 'Canada' are out". Canadian Press. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2013. 
^ Faguy, Steve (June 10, 2013). "Radio-Canada's 'Ici' rebranding spells trouble for businessman". The Gazette. Retrieved June 11, 2013. 
^ "Radio-Canada retreats on rebranding company as ICI". CBC News. Retrieved June 11, 2013. 
^ "Radio-Canada president apologizes for 'Ici' rebranding plan". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. June 10, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2013. 
^ "Radio-Canada's 'Ici' rebranding spells trouble for businessman". The Gazette. Postmedia Network. Retrieved June 11, 2013. 
^ Hasham, Alyshah (January 29, 2016). "CBC fired Jian Ghomeshi after seeing 'graphic evidence': internal memo". Toronto Star. Toronto. Retrieved May 12, 2016. 
^ Armstrong, James (April 16, 2015). "CBC management condoned Jian Ghomeshi's behaviour: report". Global News. Corus Entertainment Inc. Retrieved May 12, 2016. The fallout from the downfall of one of CBC's biggest stars hit the corporation hard on Wednesday. An independent report found managers at the CBC knew about Jian Ghomeshi's abusive behaviour at work, but did nothing to stop it. 
^ Fraser, Laura (May 11, 2016). "Jian Ghomeshi trial: Ex CBC radio host signs peace bond, Crown drops sex assault charge". CBC News. CBC/Radio Canada. Retrieved May 11, 2016. "No workplace friendship or creative environment excuses this sort of behaviour, especially when there's a power imbalance as there was with Ms. Borel," Ghomeshi told the court. 
^ "CBC apologizes to Kathryn Borel over handling of Jian Ghomeshi complaint". CBC News. CBC/Radio Canada. May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2016. Circumstances around Ghomeshi complaint 'should never have happened,' CBC says 
^ "Full text: CBC statement on Kathryn Borel and Ghomeshi scandal". 680 News. Rogers Digital Media. May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2016. We've revised our process for capturing the details of bullying and harassment complaints. We are responding to complaints with renewed discipline and rigour, and learning from the data to improve prevention and early resolution. 
^ Gallant, Jacques (May 11, 2016). "Much more change seen as needed at CBC in Jian Ghomeshi's wake". Toronto Star. Toronto. Retrieved May 12, 2016. Corporation says culture shift about workplace harassment is underway, but outsiders are dubious. 
^ "CBC: Not the public's broadcaster after all". National Post. December 11, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2017. 
^ Hopper, Tristan (September 23, 2015). "CBC tries to hide its happy face as Liberals and NDP vow to pump up funding for public broadcaster". National Post. Retrieved May 26, 2015. 
^ "Amiel: Why the CBC needs new blood - Macleans.ca". 2015-06-18. Retrieved 2016-08-30. 
^ "Why is CBC so biased?". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017. 
^ "Re: Notice of Decommissioning of CBC/Radio-Canada's Analogue Television Rebroadcasting Transmitters – Reply argument of CBC/Radio-Canada". Retrieved October 6, 2013. 
^ "CBC-TV, TVO end analog transmission". cbc.ca. August 3, 2012. 


Further reading[edit]

Allen, Gene, and Daniel J. Robinson, eds. Communicating in Canada's Past: Essays in Media History (University of Toronto Press, 2009)
Graham, Sean. "A Canadian Network? The CBC and Television, 1936–1939." Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television (2014) pp: 1-19.
Ménard, Marion. CBC/Radio-Canada: Overview and Key Issues (Library of Parliament publication No. 2013-92; 2013) online; 11 pages
Murray, Gil. Nothing on but the radio: a look back at radio in Canada and how it changed the world (Dundurn, 2003); Popular history
Peers, Frank W. The politics of Canadian broadcasting, 1920-1951 (University of Toronto Press, 1969)
Taras, David. Digital Mosaic: Media, Power, and Identity in Canada (University of Toronto Press, 2015)
Teer-Tomaselli, Ruth. "Empire and broadcasting in the interwar years: towards a consideration of public broadcasting in the British dominions." Critical Arts (2015) 29#1 pp: 77-93.
Weir, Earnest Austin. The struggle for national broadcasting in Canada (McClelland and Stewart, 1965)

Primary sources[edit]

Bird, Roger, ed. (1988). Documents of Canadian Broadcasting. MQUP. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)

In French[edit]

Bergeron, Raymonde, and Marcelle Ouellette. Voix, visages et legends: Radio-Canada 1936-1986. Montréal, Qué.: Entreprises Radio-Canada, 1986. N.B.: The subtitle appears on front cover. 256 p., ill. with b&w ports. ISBN 0-88794-328-4
Witmer, Glenn Edward, and Jacques Chaput, eds. 50 [i.e. Cinquante] ans de radio: Radio-Canada, 1936-1986. Montréal, Qué.: Entreprises Radio-Canada, 1986. 47 p., amply ill., chiefly with b&w photos.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.



Official website (Mobile)
Archival papers held at University of Toronto Archives and Records Management Services







v
t
e


 Public broadcasting in Canada



Television




National




English-language



CBC

CBC News Network
CBC North
CBC Television
Documentary


BBC Worldwide1

BBC Canada2,3
BBC Kids3







French-language



Radio-Canada

Ici ARTV2,3
Ici Explora
Ici Radio-Canada Télé
Ici RDI
TV5 Québec Canada2
Unis2










Provincial




English-language



Knowledge Network
TVOntario





French-language



Télé-Québec
TFO











Radio



CBC

CBC Radio One
CBC Radio 2
CBC Radio 34


Radio-Canada

Ici Radio-Canada Première
Ici Musique







Non-profit



CFTU-DT
CFTV-DT
CJRT-FM
CKUA Radio Network





Former



CBC/Radio-Canada

Bande à part4
CBC Parliamentary Television Network
Dominion Network
Trans-Canada Network


Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission
Access
Saskatchewan Communications Network
Broadcasting Corporation of Newfoundland





Proposed



CBC/Radio-Canada

CBC-2
Télé-2










1Foreign broadcaster.
2Partially privately owned.
3Partially foreign-owned.
4No terrestrial broadcasting.












v
t
e


Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Television



English networks



CBC Television
CBC News Network
CBC North
documentary Channel





French networks



Ici ARTV
Ici Explora
Ici Radio-Canada Télé
Ici RDI
TV5 Québec Canada
TV5Monde
Unis





Defunct channels



CBC Parliamentary Television Network
Newsworld International
Trio





Proposed channels



CBC-2
Télé-2





Facilities




Master control



Toronto
Montreal





Regional



Ottawa
Vancouver








Brands and assets



Hockey Night in Canada






Site: CBC.ca










v
t
e


CBC Radio



Terrestrial networks



Radio One
Radio 2
Première
Ici Musique
CBC North / Radio Nord-Québec





Digital networks



Radio 3
FrancoCountry
Chansons
CBC Music Sonica
CBC Music / espace.mu





Historical networks



Trans-Canada Network
Dominion Network
Bande à part
Sports extra





Special services



Radio Canada International
Weatheradio Canada





Precursors



CNR Radio
Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission
Broadcasting Corporation of Newfoundland





People



Personalities (of both radio and television)








CBC radio stations
SRC radio stations












v
t
e


CBC Television stations in Canada



Owned-and-operated stations



CBAT Fredericton
CBCT Charlottetown
CBET Windsor
CBHT Halifax
CBKT Regina
CBLT Toronto
CBMT Montreal
CBNT St. John's
CBOT Ottawa
CBRT Calgary
CBUT Vancouver
CBWT Winnipeg
CBXT Edmonton
CFYK Yellowknife





See also



Ici Radio-Canada Télé TV stations
List of CBC television stations
List of Ici Radio-Canada Télé television stations












v
t
e


CBC Radio stations in Canada



CBC Radio One



CBR Calgary
CBCT Charlottetown
CBY Corner Brook
CBX Edmonton
CBZF Fredericton
CBG Gander
CBT Grand Falls-Windsor
CFGB Happy Valley-Goose Bay
CBHA Halifax
CHAK Inuvik
CFFB Iqaluit
CBYK Kamloops
CBTK Kelowna
CBKA La Ronge
CBDQ Labrador City
CBCL London
CBAM Moncton
CBME Montreal
CBO Ottawa
CBLA-2 Paris (Kitchener/Waterloo)
CBYG Prince George
CFPR Prince Rupert
CBVE Quebec City
CBQR Rankin Inlet
CBD Saint John
CBN St. John's
CBCS Sudbury
CBI Sydney
CBWK Thompson
CBQT Thunder Bay
CBLA Toronto
CBU Vancouver
CBCV Victoria
CBK Watrous (Regina/Saskatoon)
CFWH Whitehorse
CBEW Windsor
CBW Winnipeg
CFYK Yellowknife





CBC Radio 2



CBR Calgary
CBX Edmonton
CBH Halifax
CBM Montreal
CBOQ Ottawa
CBK Regina
CBN St. John's
CBBS Sudbury
CBI Sydney
CBQ Thunder Bay
CBL Toronto
CBU Vancouver
CBE Windsor
CBW Winnipeg





See also



CBC Radio 3
SRC radio stations
Weatheradio Canada
Radio Canada International
CBC North
Bande à part












v
t
e


Ici Radio-Canada Télé television stations in Canada



Owned-and-operated stations



CBAFT Moncton
CBFT Montreal
CBKFT Regina
CBLFT Toronto
CBOFT Ottawa
CBUFT Vancouver
CBVT Quebec City
CBWFT Winnipeg
CBXFT Edmonton
CJBR Rimouski
CKSH Sherbrooke
CKTM Trois-Rivières
CKTV Saguenay





Privately-owned affiliates



CKRN Rouyn-Noranda
CKRT Rivière-du-Loup





See also



CBC TV stations












v
t
e


Radio-Canada radio stations



Ici Première



CBAF-15 Charlottetown
CBFG Chisasibi
CHFA Edmonton
CBAF-5 Halifax
CBGA Matane
CBAF Moncton
CBF Montreal
CBOF Ottawa
CBV Quebec City
CBKF Regina
CJBR Rimouski
CHLM Rouyn-Noranda
CBJ Saguenay
CBSI Sept-Îles
CBF-10 Sherbrooke
CBON Sudbury
CJBC Toronto
CBF-8 Trois-Rivières
CBUF Vancouver
CBEF Windsor
CKSB-10 Winnipeg





Ici Musique



CBCX Calgary
CBAX Halifax
CBAL Moncton
CBFX Montreal
CBOX Ottawa
CBVX Quebec City
CBRX Rimouski
CBJX Saguenay
CBBX Sudbury
CJBC Toronto
CBUX Vancouver
CKSB Winnipeg





Former private affiliates



CFRG Gravelbourg
CFLM La Tuque
CFNS Saskatoon
CFBR Sudbury
CKLD Thetford Mines
CFCL Timmins
CFDA Victoriaville
CKVM Ville-Marie





See also



Bande à part
Sports extra
CBC Radio 3
CBC radio stations
Weatheradio Canada
Radio Canada International
CBC North












v
t
e


CBC Television programs




List of programs broadcast by CBC Television



Primetime



21 Thunder (2017–)
Alias Grace (2017)
Anne (2017–)
Baroness von Sketch Show (2016–)
Canada's Smartest Person (2012–)
Canada: The Story of Us (2017)
CBC Music Backstage Pass (2013–)
CBC Selects (2014–)
Crash Gallery (2015–)
Dragons' Den (2006–)
Exhibitionists (2015–)
Firsthand (2015–)
Fool Canada (2015–)
Frankie Drake Mysteries (2017–)
The Great Canadian Baking Show (2017–)
Ha!ifax Comedy Fest (1995–)
Heartland (2007–)
Hello Goodbye (2015–)
Hockey Night in Canada (1952–)
Interrupt This Program (2015–)
Keeping Canada Safe (2017)
Kim's Convenience (2016–)
Mr. D (2012–)
Murdoch Mysteries (2012–)
The Nature of Things (1960–)
Rick Mercer Report (2004–)
Schitt's Creek (2015–)
Still Standing (2015–)
This Hour Has 22 Minutes (1993–)
True North Calling (2017–)
Winnipeg Comedy Festival (2002–)
Workin' Moms (2017–)





Daytime



The Goods (2016–)




CBC Kids



The Adventures of Napkin Man! (2013–)
Animal Mechanicals (2008–)
Artzooka! (2010–)
Bo on the Go!
Busytown Mysteries (2007–)
The Doodlebops (2004–)
Dot. (2016)
Lunar Jim (2006–)
Monster Math Squad (2012–)
My Goldfish Is Evil (2006–)
Pirates: Adventures in Art (2010–)
Poko (2003–)
Razzberry Jazzberry Jam (2008–)
The Save-Ums! (2003–)
Snapshots (2016)
Theodore Tugboat (1993–)








Late night/Specials



Canadian Reflections (1978–)





News



Absolutely Canadian (2012–)
CBC News Network (simulcast; 2016–)
The Fifth Estate (1975–)
Mansbridge One on One (1999–)
Marketplace (1972–)
The National (1954–)
The Passionate Eye (1993–)





Upcoming



Burden of Proof (Winter 2018)
Caught (Winter 2018)
Crawford (Winter 2018)
The Detectives (Fall 2017)
The Filmmakers (Summer 2017)
Little Dog (Winter 2018)
The Stats of Life (Fall 2017)












v
t
e


Radio dramas produced by CBC Radio



Series



Nazi Eyes on Canada (1942)
Jake and the Kid (1950-1956)
Johnny Chase: Secret Agent of Space (1978-1981)
Nero Wolfe (1982)
Steve, The First (2005)
Steve, The Second (2006)
Monsoon House (2006-2009)
Afghanada (2006-2011)
Canadia: 2056 (2007-2008)
Backbencher (2010-2011)
Trust Inc. (2012)





Anthologies



Nightfall (1980-1983)
Vanishing Point (1984-1986)
The Mystery Project (1992-2002)





Plays



The Investigator (1954)
Strike! (2007)












v
t
e


Members of the European Broadcasting Union



Active members




Current



ARD
ARMR
ARMTV
BBC
BHRT
BNR
BNT
BTRC
C1R
Canal+
CLT/RTL
COPE
ČRo
ČT
CyBC
DR
E1
ENRS
ENTV
ERR
ERSL
ERT
ERTT
ERTU
France 24
FTV
GPB
HRT
İTV
JRTV
LNC
LR
LRT
LTV
M6
MCD
MRT
FI/MTV
MTVA
NPO
NRK
NTU
ORF
PBS
PR
Radio France
RAI
RDO
RFI
RMC
ROR
RTBF
RTCG
RTÉ
RTP
RTS
RTSH
RTVA
RTVE
RTVS
RTVSLO
RÚV
SER
SMTV
SNRT
SR
SRG SSR
SVT
TDA
TF1
TG4
TL
TMC (French)
TRM
TV2 (DK)
TV2 (NO)
TV4
TVP
TVR
TRT
UA:PBC
UKIB
UR
VGTRK
VR
VRT
Yle
ZDF





Applicants



1FLTV
2M TV
IPBC
KRTC
QR
RTK





Former



IBA
JRT
LJBC
MR
MTV
NERIT
SRo
STV
TMC (Italian)
UJRT








Associate members and
approved participants




Associate



ABC (Australia)
ABC (United States)
All India Radio
APM
Bayrak
Canal 13 (Chile)
CBC/SRC
CBS
CCTV
Fuji TV/JOCX-DTV
ICRT
IRIB
JBA
KA
KBS
La7
MBC
Mediaset
NBAB
NBC
NHK
NPR
ORTAS
PARTSO
RB
RNZ
RTHK
RTM
SABC
SBS
TBS/JORX-DTV
TEME
TFM/JOAU-FM
TVC/FPA
TVM (Mauritania)
TVNZ
WFMT
WGBH
WNYC-FM/NYPR





Approved



3sat
Arte
Abertis Telecom
CAT
Euronews
JPMRD
RTRN
TV5Monde














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_Broadcasting_Corporation&oldid=818039647"					Categories: Canadian Broadcasting CorporationCanadian federal departments and agenciesCanadian federal Crown corporationsDepartment of Canadian HeritageCompanies based in OttawaPublicly funded broadcastersMultilingual broadcastersGovernment agencies established in 19361936 establishments in CanadaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse mdy dates from March 2016Use Canadian English from January 2015All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian EnglishArticles containing French-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia