

Canadian Armed Forces


Forces armées canadiennes



Badge of the Canadian Armed Forces



Current form
1 February 1968 – present


Service branches
Royal Canadian Navy
Canadian Army
Royal Canadian Air Force


Headquarters
National Defence Headquarters, Ottawa, Ontario


Website
www.forces.gc.ca


Leadership


Commander-in-Chief
Queen Elizabeth II
represented by
Governor General Julie Payette


Minister of National Defence
Minister Harjit Sajjan


Chief of the Defence Staff[2]
General Jonathan Vance[1]


Manpower


Military age
16–60 years old[N 1]


Conscription
No


Available for
military service
8,031,266 males, age 17–49[5],
7,755,550[N 2] females, age 17–49[5]


Fit for
military service
6,633,472 males, age 17–49[5],
6,389,669[N 2] females, age 17–49[5]


Active personnel
68,250 (31 March 2011)[3]


Reserve personnel
27,000 (Paid Primary)
5,000 (Rangers)
[3]


Deployed personnel
2000+ [4]


Expenditures


Budget
C$18.6 billion,[6] (2016–2017)


Percent of GDP
0.97%
1.19% (Disputed)[7]


Industry


Domestic suppliers
L-3 Communications MAS
Bombardier Aerospace
CAE
Meggitt Training Systems Canada
Colt Canada
Textron Systems Canada
Kongsberg Protech Systems Canada
Rheinmetall Defence Canada
Irving Shipbuilding Inc.
General Dynamics Land Systems Canada
Raytheon Canada Limited
Seaspan Marine Corporation
Thales Canada[8]
Boeing Canada[9]


Related articles


History
Fenian Raids
Wolseley Expedition
North-West Rebellion
Second Boer War
First World War
Russian Civil War
Second World War
Cold War
Korean War
October Crisis
Gulf War
Bosnian War
Oka Crisis
Kosovo War
Afghanistan War
Iraq War
Somali Civil War
2011 Libyan Civil War
Operation Serval
2014 military intervention against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant


Ranks
Canadian Armed Forces ranks and insignia


The Canadian Armed Forces (CAF; French: Forces armées canadiennes, FAC), or Canadian Forces (CF) (French: Forces canadiennes, FC),[10] are the unified armed forces of Canada, as constituted by the National Defence Act, which states: "The Canadian Forces are the armed forces of Her Majesty raised by Canada and consist of one Service called the Canadian Armed Forces."[10]
This unified institution consists of sea, land, and air elements referred to as the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN), Canadian Army, and Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF). Personnel may belong to either the Regular Force or the Reserve Force, which has four sub-components: the Primary Reserve, Supplementary Reserve, Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service, and the Canadian Rangers. Under the National Defence Act, the Canadian Armed Forces are an entity separate and distinct from the Department of National Defence (the federal government department responsible for administration and formation of defence policy), which also exists as the civilian support system for the Forces.[11][12][13]
The Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian Armed Forces is the reigning Canadian monarch, Queen Elizabeth II,[14] who is represented by the Governor General of Canada.[15][16] The Canadian Armed Forces is led by the Chief of the Defence Staff, who is advised and assisted by the Armed Forces Council.



Contents


1 Defence policy
2 History

2.1 Origins and establishment
2.2 Since unification
2.3 Role of women


3 Current structure

3.1 Royal Canadian Navy
3.2 Canadian Army
3.3 Royal Canadian Air Force
3.4 Canadian Joint Operations Command
3.5 Canadian Special Operations Forces Command
3.6 Information Management Group
3.7 Canadian Forces Health Services Group


4 Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force

4.1 Primary Reserve
4.2 Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service
4.3 Canadian Rangers


5 Uniforms
6 Military expenditures
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



Defence policy[edit]




Flag of the Canadian Armed Forces


Since the Second World War, Canadian defence policy has consistently stressed three overarching objectives:

The defence of Canada itself;
The defence of North America in co-operation with US forces;
Contributing to broader international security.[17]

During the Cold War, a principal focus of Canadian defence policy was contributing to the security of Europe in the face of the Soviet military threat. Toward that end, Canadian ground and air forces were based in Europe from the early 1950s until the early 1990s.
However, since the end of the Cold War, as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has moved much of its defence focus "out of area", the Canadian military has also become more deeply engaged in international security operations in various other parts of the world – most notably in Afghanistan from 2002 to 2014.[18]
Canadian defence policy today is based on the Canada First Defence Strategy,[19] introduced in 2008. Based on that strategy, the Canadian military is oriented and being equipped to carry out six core missions within Canada, in North America and globally. Specifically, the Canadian Armed Forces are tasked with having the capacity to:

Conduct daily domestic and continental operations, including in the Arctic and through NORAD (the North American Aerospace Defense Command);
Support a major international event in Canada, such as the 2010 Winter Olympics;
Respond to a major terrorist attack;
Support civilian authorities during a crisis in Canada such as a natural disaster;
Lead and/or conduct a major international operation for an extended period; and
Deploy forces in response to crises elsewhere in the world for shorter periods.[20]

Consistent with the missions and priorities outlined above, the Canadian Armed Forces also contribute to the conduct of Canadian defence diplomacy through a range of activities, including the deployment of Canadian Defence Attachés,[21] participation in bilateral and multilateral military forums (e.g. the System of Cooperation Among the American Air Forces), ship and aircraft visits, military training and cooperation,[22] and other such outreach and relationship-building efforts.
History[edit]
Main article: Military history of Canada
See also: History of the Canadian Army, Royal Canadian Navy, and Royal Canadian Air Force
Origins and establishment[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Prior to Confederation in 1867, residents of the colonies in what is now Canada served as regular members of French and British forces and in local militia groups. The latter aided in the defence of their respective territories against attacks by other European powers, Aboriginal peoples, and later American forces during the American Revolutionary War and War of 1812, as well as in the Fenian raids, Red River Rebellion, and North-West Rebellion. Consequently, the lineages of some Canadian army units stretch back to the early 19th century, when militia units were formed to assist in the defence of British North America against invasion by the United States.




Canadian troops of the Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders welcomed by liberated crowds in Leeuwarden, Netherlands, 16 April 1945.


The responsibility for military command remained with the British Crown-in-Council, with a commander-in-chief for North America stationed at Halifax until the final withdrawal of British Army and Royal Navy units from that city in 1906. Thereafter, the Royal Canadian Navy was formed, and, with the advent of military aviation, the Royal Canadian Air Force. These forces were organised under the Department of Militia and Defence, and split into the Permanent and Non-Permanent Active Militias—frequently shortened to simply The Militia. By 1923, the department was merged into the Department of National Defence, but land forces in Canada were not referred to as the Canadian Army until November 1940.




2nd Canadian Division soldiers advance behind a tank during the battle of Vimy Ridge.


The first overseas deployment of Canadian military forces occurred during the Second Boer War, when several units were raised to serve under British command. Similarly, when the United Kingdom entered into conflict with Germany in the First World War, Canadian troops were called to participate in European theatres. The Canadian Crown-in-Council then decided to send its forces into the Second World War, as well as the Korean War.
Since 1947, Canadian military units have participated in more than 200 operations worldwide, and completed 72 international operations. Canadian soldiers, sailors, and aviators came to be considered world-class professionals through conspicuous service during these conflicts and the country's integral participation in NATO during the Cold War, First Gulf War, Kosovo War, and in United Nations Peacekeeping operations, such as the Suez Crisis, Golan Heights, Cyprus, Croatia, Bosnia, Afghanistan, and Libya. Canada maintained an aircraft carrier from 1957 to 1970 during the Cold War, which never saw combat but participated in patrols during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Battles which are particularly notable to the Canadian military include the Battle of Vimy Ridge, the Dieppe Raid, the Battle of Ortona, the Battle of Passchendaele, the Normandy Landings, the Battle for Caen, the Battle of the Scheldt, the Battle of Britain, the Battle of the Atlantic, the strategic bombing of German cities, and more recently the Battle of Medak Pocket, in Croatia.
At the end of the Second World War, Canada possessed the fourth-largest air force and fifth-largest naval surface fleet in the world, as well as the largest volunteer army ever fielded.[23] Conscription for overseas service was introduced only near the end of the war, and only 2,400 conscripts actually made it into battle. Originally, Canada was thought to have had the third-largest navy in the world, but with the fall of the Soviet Union, new data based on Japanese and Soviet sources found that to be incorrect.[24]
Since unification[edit]
See also: Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces and Structure of the Canadian Armed Forces in 1989
The current iteration of the Canadian Armed Forces dates from 1 February 1968,[25] when the Royal Canadian Navy, Canadian Army, and Royal Canadian Air Force were merged into a unified structure and superseded by elemental commands. Its roots, however, lie in colonial militia groups that served alongside garrisons of the French and British armies and navies; a structure that remained in place until the early 20th century. Thereafter, a distinctly Canadian army and navy was established, followed by an air force, that, because of the constitutional arrangements at the time, remained effectively under the control of the British government until Canada gained legislative independence from the United Kingdom in 1931, in part due to the distinguished achievement and sacrifice of the Canadian Corps in the First World War.[26][27]
After the 1980s, the use of the "Canadian Armed Forces" name gave way to "Canadian Forces";[citation needed] The "Canadian Armed Forces" name returned in 2013.
Land Forces during this period also deployed in support of peacekeeping operations within United Nations sanctioned conflicts. The nature of the Canadian Forces has continued to evolve. They have been deployed in Afghanistan until 2011, under the NATO-led United Nations International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), at the request of the Government of Afghanistan.




At sunset a convoy of Canadian armoured vehicles watches over the area near Khadan Village, Afghanistan.


The Armed Forces are today funded by approximately $20.1 billion annually[28] and are presently ranked 74th in size compared to the world's other armed forces by number of total personnel, and 58th in terms of active personnel, standing at a strength of roughly 68,000, plus 27,000 reservists, 5000 Rangers, and 19,000 supplementary reserves, bringing the total force to approximately 119,000.[29] The number of primary reserve personnel is expected to go up to 30,000 by 2020, and the number of active to at least 70,000. In addition, 5000 rangers and 19,000 supplementary personnel will be serving. If this happens the total strength would be around 124,000.[30] These individuals serve on numerous CF bases located in all regions of the country, and are governed by the Queen's Regulations and Orders and the National Defence Act.
In 2008 the Government of Canada made efforts, through the Canada First Defence Strategy, to modernize the Canadian Armed Forces, through the purchase of new equipment, improved training and readiness, as well as the establishment of the Canadian Special Operations Regiment. More funds were also put towards recruitment, which had been dwindling throughout the 1980s and '90s, possibly because the Canadian populace had come to perceive the CAF as peacekeepers rather than as soldiers, as shown in a 2008 survey conducted for the Department of National Defence. The poll found that nearly two thirds of Canadians agreed with the country's participation in the invasion of Afghanistan, and that the military should be stronger, but also that the purpose of the forces should be different, such as more focused on responding to natural disasters.[31] Then CDS, Walter Natynczyk, said later that year that while recruiting has become more successful, the CF was facing a problem with its rate of loss of existing members, which increased between 2006 and 2008 from 6% to 9.2% annually.[32]




Canadian Armed Forces personnel carry the coffin of a comrade who was killed onto an aircraft at Kandahar Air Field, 1 February 2009


The 2006 renewal and re-equipment effort has resulted in the acquisition of specific equipment (main battle tanks, artillery, unmanned air vehicles and other systems) to support the mission in Afghanistan. It has also encompassed initiatives to renew certain so-called "core capabilities" (such as the air force's medium range transport aircraft fleet – the C-130 Hercules – and the army's truck and armoured vehicle fleets). In addition, new systems (such as C-17 Globemaster III strategic transport aircraft and CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift helicopters) have also been acquired for the Armed Forces. Although the viability of the Canada First Defence Strategy continues to suffer setbacks from challenging and evolving fiscal and other factors, it originally aimed to:

Increase the number of military personnel to 70,000 Regular Forces and 30,000 primary Reserve Forces;
Replace the Royal Canadian Navy's current auxiliary oiler ships with 2–3 new vessels under the Joint Support Ship Project;
Build 15 warships to replace existing destroyers and frigates under the Single Class Surface Combatant Project;
Acquire new Arctic patrol vessels under the Arctic Patrol Ship Project;
Replace the current maritime patrol aircraft with 10 to 12 new patrol aircraft;
Strengthen readiness and operational capabilities; and,
Improve and modernize defence infrastructure.[20]

Role of women[edit]




RCAF CC-177 Globemaster on approach to CFB Trenton


In the 1950s, the recruitment of women was open to roles in medicine, communication, logistics, and administration. The roles of women in the CAF began to expand in 1971, after the Department reviewed the recommendations of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women, at which time it lifted the ceiling of 1,500 women personnel, and gradually expanded employment opportunities into the non-traditional areas—vehicle drivers and mechanics, aircraft mechanics, air-traffic controllers, military police, and firefighters. The Department further reviewed personnel policies in 1978 and 1985, after Parliament passed the Canadian Human Rights Act and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. As a result of these reviews, the Department changed its policies to permit women to serve at sea in replenishment ships and in a diving tender, with the army service battalions, in military police platoons and field ambulance units, and in most air squadrons.[33]
In 1987, occupations and units with the primary role of preparing for direct involvement in combat on the ground or at sea were still closed to women: infantry, armoured corps, field artillery, air-defence artillery, signals, field engineers, and naval operations. On 5 February 1987, the Minister of National Defence created an office to study the impact of employing men and women in combat units. These trials were called Combat-Related Employment of Women.[33]
All military occupations were open to women in 1989, with the exception of submarine service, which opened in 2000. Throughout the 1990s, the introduction of women into the combat arms increased the potential recruiting pool by about 100 percent. It also provided opportunities for all persons to serve their country to the best of their abilities. Women were fully integrated in all occupations and roles by the government of Jean Chrétien, and by 8 March 2000, even allowed to serve on submarines.[33]
All equipment must be suitable for a mixed-gender force. Combat helmets, rucksacks, combat boots, and flak jackets are designed to ensure women have the same level of protection and comfort as their male colleagues. The women's uniform is similar in design to the men's uniform, but conforms to the female figure, and is functional and practical. Women are also provided with an annual financial entitlement for the purchase of brassiere undergarments.[33]
Current structure[edit]
Further information: The Canadian Crown and the Canadian Armed Forces
The Canadian constitution determines that the Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian Armed Forces is the country's sovereign,[14] who, since 1904, has authorized his or her viceroy, the governor general, to exercise the duties ascribed to the post of Commander-in-Chief and to hold the associated title since 1905.[16] All troop deployment and disposition orders, including declarations of war, fall within the royal prerogative and are issued as Orders in Council, which must be signed by either the monarch or governor general. Under the Westminster system's parliamentary customs and practices, however, the monarch and viceroy must generally follow the advice of his or her ministers in Cabinet, including the prime minister and minister of national defence, who are accountable to the elected House of Commons.
The Armed Forces' 115,349 personnel are divided into a hierarchy of numerous ranks of officers and non-commissioned members. The governor general appoints, on the advice of the prime minister, the Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) as the highest ranking commissioned officer in the Armed Forces and who, as head of the Armed Forces Council, is in command of the Canadian Forces. The Armed Forces Council generally operates from National Defence Headquarters (NDHQ) in Ottawa, Ontario. On the Armed Forces Council sit the heads of Canadian Joint Operations Command and Canadian Special Operations Forces Command, the Vice Chief of the Defence Staff, and the heads of the Royal Canadian Navy, the Canadian Army, the Royal Canadian Air Force and other key Level 1 organizations. The sovereign and most other members of the Canadian Royal Family also act as colonels-in-chief, honorary air commodores, air commodores-in-chief, admirals, and captains-general of Canadian Forces units, though these positions are ceremonial.
Canada's Armed forces operate out of 27 Canadian Forces bases (CFB) across the country, including NDHQ. This number has been gradually reduced since the 1970s with bases either being closed or merged. Both officers and non-commissioned members receive their basic training at the Canadian Forces Leadership and Recruit School in Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu. Officers will generally either directly enter the Canadian Armed Forces with a degree from a civilian university, or receive their commission upon graduation from the Royal Military College of Canada. Specific element and trade training is conducted at a variety of institutions throughout Canada, and to a lesser extent, the world.
Royal Canadian Navy[edit]
Main article: Royal Canadian Navy




HMCS Algonquin, a guided-missile destroyer


The Royal Canadian Navy (RCN), headed by the Commander of the Royal Canadian Navy, includes 33 warships and submarines deployed in two fleets: Maritime Forces Pacific (MARPAC) at CFB Esquimalt on the west coast, and Maritime Forces Atlantic (MARLANT) at Her Majesty's Canadian Dockyard in Halifax on the east coast, as well as one formation: the Naval Reserve Headquarters (NAVRESHQ) at Quebec City, Quebec. The fleet is augmented by various aircraft and supply vessels. The RCN participates in NATO exercises and operations, and ships are deployed all over the world in support of multinational deployments.
Canadian Army[edit]
Main article: Canadian Army




Soldiers from the Canadian Grenadier Guards in the Kandahar Province of Afghanistan


The Canadian Army is headed by the Commander of the Canadian Army and administered through four divisions—the 2nd Canadian Division, the 3rd Canadian Division, the 4th Canadian Division and the 5th Canadian Division—the Canadian Army Doctrine and Training System and the Canadian Army Headquarters.[34][35]
Currently, the Regular Force component of the Army consists of three field-ready brigade groups: 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Edmonton and CFB Shilo; 2 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Petawawa and CFB Gagetown; and 5 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, at CFB Valcartier and Quebec City. Each contains one regiment each of artillery, armour, and combat engineers, three battalions of infantry (all scaled in the British fashion), one battalion for logistics, a squadron for headquarters/signals, and several smaller support organizations. A tactical helicopter squadron and a field ambulance are co-located with each brigade, but do not form part of the brigade's command structure.
The 2nd, 3rd and 4th Canadian Divisions each has a Regular Force brigade group, and each division except the 1st has two to three Reserve Force brigades groups. In total, there are ten Reserve Force brigade groups. The 5th Canadian Division and the 2nd Canadian Division each have two Reserve Force brigade groups, while the 4th Canadian Division and the 3rd Canadian Division each have three Reserve Force brigade groups. Major training and support establishments exist at CFB Gagetown, CFB Montreal and CFB Wainwright.
Royal Canadian Air Force[edit]
Main article: Royal Canadian Air Force




CF-18 Hornet launches laser-guided bomb


The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) is headed by the Commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force. The commander of 1 Canadian Air Division and Canadian NORAD Region, based in Winnipeg, is responsible for the operational command and control of Air Force activities throughout Canada and worldwide. 1 Canadian Air Division operations are carried out through eleven wings located across Canada. The commander of 2 Canadian Air Division is responsible for training and support functions. 2 Canadian Air Division operations are carried out at two wings. Wings represent the grouping of various squadrons, both operational and support, under a single tactical commander reporting to the operational commander and vary in size from several hundred personnel to several thousand.
Major air bases are located in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland and Labrador, while administrative and command and control facilities are located in Winnipeg and North Bay. A Canadian component of the NATO Airborne Early Warning Force is also based at NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen near Geilenkirchen, Germany.
The RCAF and Joint Task Force (North) (JTFN) also maintain at various points throughout Canada's northern region a chain of forward operating locations, each capable of supporting fighter operations. Elements of CF-18 squadrons periodically deploy to these airports for short training exercises or Arctic sovereignty patrols.
Canadian Joint Operations Command[edit]
Main article: Canadian Joint Operations Command
The Canadian Joint Operations Command is an operational element established in October 2012 with the merger of Canada Command, the Canadian Expeditionary Force Command and the Canadian Operational Support Command. The new command, created as a response to the cost-cutting measures in the 2012 federal budget, combines the resources, roles and responsibilities of the three former commands under a single headquarters.
Canadian Special Operations Forces Command[edit]
Main article: Canadian Special Operations Forces Command
The Canadian Special Operations Forces Command (CANSOFCOM) is a formation capable of operating independently but primarily focused on generating special operations forces (SOF) elements to support CJOC. The command includes Joint Task Force 2 (JTF2), the Canadian Joint Incident Response Unit (CJIRU) based at CFB Trenton, as well as the Canadian Special Operations Regiment (CSOR) and 427 Special Operations Aviation Squadron (SOAS) based at CFB Petawawa.
Information Management Group[edit]
Among other things, the Information Management Group is responsible for the conduct of electronic warfare and the protection of the Armed Forces' communications and computer networks. Within the group, this operational role is fulfilled by the Canadian Forces Information Operations Group, headquartered at CFS Leitrim in Ottawa, which operates the following units: the Canadian Forces Information Operations Group Headquarters (CFIOGHQ), the Canadian Forces Electronic Warfare Centre (CFEWC), the Canadian Forces Network Operation Centre (CFNOC), the Canadian Forces Signals Intelligence Operations Centre (CFSOC), the Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Leitrim, and the 764 Communications Squadron. In June 2011 the Canadian Armed Forces Chief of Force Development announced the establishment of a new organization, the Directorate of Cybernetics, headed by a Brigadier General, the Director General Cyber (DG Cyber). Within that directorate the newly established CAF Cyber Task Force, has been tasked to design and build cyber warfare capabilities for the Canadian Armed Forces.[36][37]
Canadian Forces Health Services Group[edit]
Main article: Canadian Forces Health Services Group
The Health Services Group is a joint formation that includes over 120 general or specialized units and detachments providing health services to the Canadian Armed Forces. With few exceptions, all elements are under command of the Surgeon General for domestic support and force generation, or temporarily assigned under command of a deployed Joint Task Force through Canadian Joint Operations Command.[38][39]
Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force[edit]
The Canadian Armed Forces have a total reserve force of approximately 50,000 primary and supplementary that can be called upon in times of national emergency or threat. For the components and sub-components of the Canadian Armed Forces Reserve Force, the order of precedence follows:

(1) Primary Reserve (26,000),
(2) Supplementary Reserve (11,000) Prior to 2002 this consisted of:

(a) Supplementary Ready Reserve, and
(b) Supplementary Holding Reserve,



after 2002 there is no sub division of the Supplementary Reserve.

(3) Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service (7,500), and
(4) Canadian Rangers (5,000).[40]

Primary Reserve[edit]
Main article: Primary Reserve
Approximately 26,000 citizen soldiers, sailors, and airpersons,[29] trained to the level of and interchangeable with their Regular Force counterparts, and posted to CAF operations or duties on a casual or ongoing basis, make up the Primary Reserve. This group is represented, though not commanded, at NDHQ by the Chief of Reserves and Employer Support, who is usually a major general or rear admiral, and is divided into four components that are each operationally and administratively responsible to its corresponding environmental command in the Regular Force – the Naval Reserve (NAVRES), Land Force Reserve (LFR), and Air Reserve (AIRRES) – in addition to one force that does not fall under an environmental command, the Health Services Reserve under the Canadian Forces Health Services Group.
Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service[edit]
The Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service (COATS)[41] consists of officers and non-commissioned members who conduct training, safety, supervision and administration of nearly 60,000 cadets aged 12 to 18 years in the Canadian Cadet Movement. The majority of members in COATS are officers of the Cadet Instructors Cadre (CIC) branch of the CAF. Members of the Reserve Force Sub-Component COATS who are not employed part-time (Class A) or full-time (Class B) may be held on the "Cadet Instructor Supplementary Staff List" (CISS List) in anticipation of employment in the same manner as other reservists are held as members of the Supplementary Reserve.
Canadian Rangers[edit]
The Canadian Rangers, who provide surveillance and patrol services in Canada's arctic and other remote areas, are an essential reserve force component used for Canada's exercise of sovereignty over its northern territory.
Uniforms[edit]
Main article: Uniforms of the Canadian Forces




A sergeant of The British Columbia Regiment (Duke of Connaught's Own) wearing the ceremonial dress of the regiment, standing behind a C9 LMG


Although the Canadian Armed Forces are a single service, there are three similar but distinctive environmental uniforms (DEUs): navy blue (which is actually black) for the navy, rifle green for the army, and light blue for the air force. CAF members in operational occupations generally wear the DEU to which their occupation "belongs." CAF members in non-operational occupations (the "purple" trades) are allocated a uniform according to the "distribution" of their branch within the CAF, association of the branch with one of the former services, and the individual's initial preference. Therefore, on any given day, in any given CAF unit, all three coloured uniforms may be seen.
The uniforms of the CAF are sub-divided into five orders of dress:[42]

Ceremonial dress, including regimental full dress, patrol dress, naval "high-collar" whites, and service dress uniforms with ceremonial accoutrements such as swords, white web belts, gloves, etc.;
Mess dress, which ranges from full mess kit with mess jacket, cummerbund, or waistcoat, etc., to service dress with bow tie;
Service dress, also called a walking-out or duty uniform, is the military equivalent of the business suit, with an optional white summer uniform for naval CF members;
Operational dress, an originally specialized uniform for wear in an operational environment, now for everyday wear on base or in garrison; and
Occupational dress, which is specialized uniform articles for particular occupations (e.g., medical / dental).

Only service dress is suitable for CAF members to wear on any occasion, barring "dirty work" or combat. With gloves, swords, and medals (No. 1 or 1A), it is suitable for ceremonial occasions and "dressed down" (No. 3 or lower), it is suitable for daily wear. Generally, after the elimination of base dress (although still defined for the Air Force uniform), operational dress is now the daily uniform worn by most members of the CF, unless service dress is prescribed (such as at the NDHQ, on parades, at public events, etc.). Approved parkas are authorized for winter wear in cold climates and a light casual jacket is also authorized for cooler days. The navy, most army, and some other units have, for very specific occasions, a ceremonial/regimental full dress, such as the naval "high-collar" white uniform, kilted Highland, Scottish, and Irish regiments, and the scarlet uniforms of the Royal Military Colleges.[43]




The Canadian Army, Royal Canadian Navy and Royal Canadian Air Force each have a distinctive service dress uniform differentiated by colour, cut and headdress.


Authorized headdress for the Canadian Armed Forces are the: beret, wedge cap, ballcap, Yukon cap, and tuque (toque). Each is coloured according to the distinctive uniform worn: navy (white or navy blue), army (rifle green or "regimental" colour), air force (light blue). Adherents of the Sikh faith may wear uniform turbans (dastar) (or patka, when operational) and Muslim women may wear uniform tucked hijabs under their authorized headdress. Jews may wear yarmulke under their authorized headdress and when bareheaded. The beret is probably the most widely worn headgear and is worn with almost all orders of dress (with the exception of the more formal orders of Navy and Air Force dress), and the colour of which is determined by the wearer's environment, branch, or mission. Naval personnel, however, seldom wear berets, preferring either service cap or authorized ballcaps (shipboard operational dress), which only the Navy wear. Air Force personnel, particularly officers, prefer the wedge cap to any other form of headdress. There is no naval variant of the wedge cap. The Yukon cap and tuque are worn only with winter dress, although clearance and combat divers may wear tuques year-round as a watch cap. Soldiers in Highland, Scottish, and Irish regiments generally wear alternative headdress, including the glengarry, balmoral, tam o'shanter, and caubeen instead of the beret. The officer cadets of both Royal Military Colleges wear gold-braided "pillbox" (cavalry) caps with their ceremonial dress and have a unique fur "Astrakhan" for winter wear. The Canadian Army wears the CG634 helmet.
Military expenditures[edit]




Actros Armoured Heavy Support Vehicle System trucks in Valcartier.


The Constitution of Canada gives the federal government exclusive responsibility for national defence, and expenditures are thus outlined in the federal budget. For the 2016–17 fiscal year, the amount allocated for defence spending was CAD$18.6 billion.[6]
The Federal Government now factors in military related spending from departments such as Veterans Affairs, Public Works, and the Treasury Board when calculating "defence spending".[7] Defence spending should not be confused with "national defence spending".
It is believed that this move was made in order to improve Canada's defence related NATO reporting metrics.[44]
See also[edit]


Canadian Armed Forces portal
War portal







Book: Canada






Authorized marches of the Canadian Forces
Canada First Defence Strategy
Canadian Forces ranks and insignia
Canadian Cadet Organizations
Canadian Coast Guard
Canadian Forces order of precedence
Canadian Forces Radio and Television
Canadian war cemeteries
Code of Service Discipline
Communications Security Establishment Canada
Defence diplomacy
List of Canadian military occupations
List of Canadian military operations
List of conflicts in Canada
List of infantry weapons and equipment of the Canadian military
North Warning System
Planned Canadian Forces projects
Upholder/Victoria-class submarine


Notes[edit]



^ Persons 16 years of age, with parental permission, can join the Canadian Armed Forces.
^ a b (2010 est.)



References[edit]


^ "Gen. Jonathan Vance becomes chief of defence staff, vows to tackle harassment". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 17 June 2015. 
^ Department of National Defence. "National Defence and the Canadian Armed Forces > Chief of the Defence Staff". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 16 October 2008. 
^ a b "Recruiting and Retention in the Canadian Armed Forces > Canada > Military". Department of National Defence. 31 December 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009. 
^ Treasury Board Secretariat. "Estimates > Reports on Plans and Priorities > 2012–2013". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 16 December 2012. 
^ "The World Factbook > Canada > Military". Central Intelligence Agency. 19 November 2015. Retrieved 23 November 2015. 
^ a b "Planned Expenditures". forces.gc.ca. Department of National Defence. Retrieved 24 March 2016. 
^ a b "Strong, Secure, Engaged" (PDF). http://dgpaapp.forces.gc.ca. Minister of National Defence.  External link in |website= (help)
^ Canadian Defence Review Canada's 2011 Top 50 Defence Companies Archived 31 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on: 15 December 2011
^ Canadian Defence Review Canada's 2011 Top 50 Defence Companies Archived 31 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on: 28 August 2011
^ a b Elizabeth II (1985). National Defence Act. II.14. Ottawa: Queen's Printer for Canada. Archived from the original on 30 November 2009. Retrieved 20 January 2009. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions — What is the relationship between DND and the CAF?". Department of National Defence. 2013-07-27. Retrieved 2014-04-11. 
^ "About the Canadian Armed Forces". Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada. 27 July 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2015. 
^ "About the Department of National Defence and the Canadian Armed Forces – National Defence Act". Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada. 23 May 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2015. 
^ a b Victoria (29 March 1867). Constitution Act, 1867. III.15. Westminster: Queen's Printer. Retrieved 15 January 2009. 
^ Lagassé, Philippe (December 2013). "The Crown's Powers of Command-in Chief: Interpreting Section 15 of Canada's Constitution Act, 1867" (PDF). Review of Constitutional Studies. 18 (2): 189–220. 
^ a b "Governor General of Canada > Commander-in-Chief". Rideau Hall. Retrieved 15 January 2009. 
^ "About Us – National Defence – Canadian Forces". 
^ "Canadian military involvement in Afghanistan formally ends". 12 March 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2017. 
^ Department of National Defence (30 March 2009). "Canada First Defence Strategy". Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 15 February 2015. 
^ a b Department of National Defence http://www.forces.gc.ca/site/focus/first-premier/defstra/summary-sommaire-eng.asp
^ "Canadian Defence Attaché Network". Outcan.forces.gc.ca. 22 July 2010. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 23 March 2011. 
^ For example, through the Military Training and Cooperation Program and its ancillary activities http://www.forces.gc.ca/admpol/mtcp-eng.html
^ World War – Willmott, H.P. et al.; Dorling Kindersley Limited, London, 2004, Page 168
^ http://www.navalreview.ca/wp-content/uploads/public/vol5num3/vol5num3art2.pdf
^ Gilmour, Sarah (17 May 2006). "Navy celebrates 96 years" (PDF). The Maple Leaf. 9: 10. 
^ Nersessian, Mary (9 April 2007). "Vimy battle marks birth of Canadian nationalism". CTV. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 20 January 2009. 
^ Cook, Tim (2008). Shock troops: Canadians fighting the Great War, 1917–1918. Toronto: Viking. ISBN 0-670-06735-0. 
^ "Current Operations". Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 2 August 2014. 
^ a b Department of National Defence (19 December 2008). "National Defence and the Canadian Forces > About DND/CF". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 2 January 2009. 
^ "News Release – Canada First Defence Strategy". Casr.ca. 18 June 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2012. 
^ The Canadian Press (5 September 2005). "Canadians still view troops as peacekeepers: DND poll". CTV. Retrieved 5 September 2008. 
^ The Canadian Press (21 November 2008). "Military as message for job seekers: we want you". CTV. Retrieved 22 November 2008. 
^ a b c d Defence, Government of Canada, National. "National Defence – Canadian Armed Forces – Backgrounder – Women in the Canadian Armed Forces". 
^ "Army News (National) – Canadian Army – Article – Historical Features of the Canadian Army Restored". 
^ "1st Canadian Division". 
^ The Maple Leaf, 22 June 2011, Vol. 14, No. 22, p.3
^ Khang Pham, Cyber Security: Do Your Part, The Maple Leaf, Vol. 15, No. 2, February 2012, p.12
^ "Canadian Forces Health Services website" Retrieved on 18 February 2012
^ "Canadian Forces Health Services Group Surgeon General’s Report 2010" Retrieved on 18 February 2012
^ Department of National Defence (15 February 2012). "National Defence and the Canadian Forces > CFOA 66-6 Precedence in the Canadian Forces". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 15 February 2012. 
^ "Administrative Order: Implementation of Cadet Organizations Administration and Training Service", NDHQ 1085-30 (D Cdts 6) dated 2 July 2009.
^ Canada – National Defence: "A-AD-265-000/AG-001 CANADIAN FORCES DRESS INSTRUCTIONS"
^ Government of Canada. "Canadian Military Heritage > Officer cadet, Royal Military College of Canada, 1954". Queen's Printer for Canada. Retrieved 23 January 2009. 
^ Scotti, Monique. "Even with new military investments, Canada to fall short of NATO target". Global News. 


Further reading[edit]
Main article: Bibliography of Canadian military history


Beaudet, Normand (1993). Le Mythe de la défense canadienne. Montréal: Éditions Écosociété. ISBN 2-921561-11-5
Morton, Desmond (1999). A military history of Canada (4th ed.). Toronto: McClelland and Stewart. ISBN 0-7710-6514-0. 
Rennick, Joanne Benham (2013). "Canadian Values and Military Operations in the Twenty-First Century," Armed Forces & Society 39, No. 3, pp. 511–30
Leuprecht, Christian & Sokolsky, Joel. (2014). Defense Policy "Walmart Style" Canadian Lessons in "not so grand" Grand Strategy. Armed Forces & Society Journal Online First.
Granatstein, J. L (2004). Canada's army: waging war and keeping the peace. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-8020-8696-9 
Zuehlke, Mark (2006). Canadian Military Atlas: Four Centuries of Conflict from New France to Kosovo. Douglas & McIntyre. ISBN 978-1-55365-209-0 
Faces of War at Library and Archives Canada


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Canadian Armed Forces.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Military of Canada.



Official website of the Canadian Armed Forces
Official website of the Canadian Army
Official website of the Royal Canadian Navy
Official website of the Royal Canadian Air Force
Combat Camera – Official CF photo website
Canadian Military Documentary channel on YouTube





 Links related to Canadian Armed Forces











v
t
e


 Canadian Armed Forces






Royal Canadian Navy
Canadian Army
Royal Canadian Air Force





Military history



Royal Canadian Navy
Canadian Army
Royal Canadian Air Force





Leadership



Commander-in-Chief
Chief of the Defence Staff
Vice Chief of the Defence Staff
Armed Forces Council
Commander of the Royal Canadian Navy
Commander of the Canadian Army
Commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force
Canadian Forces Chief Warrant Officer





Commands



Canadian Joint Operations Command
Canadian Special Operations Forces Command
Canadian Forces Intelligence Command
Primary Reserve








Bibliography
Conflicts
Operations
Victories
Peacekeeping








 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Evolution of the Military of Canada



Current Canadian Forces



Canadian Armed Forces

Canadian Army
Royal Canadian Navy
Royal Canadian Air Force







History of the Canadian Forces



History of the Canadian Army
History of the Royal Canadian Air Force
History of the Royal Canadian Navy
Unification of the Canadian Armed Forces





Canadian military formation



Canadian Expeditionary Force
Canadian Militia

Permanent Active Militia
Non-Permanent Active Militia


Royal Flying Corps Canada
Naval Service of Canada





Military formation in British North America



Provincial Marine
Royal Navy
British Army

regulars, provincial regiments and volunteer militia units







Military formation in New France



Military of New France
Carignan-Salières Regiment
Compagnies Franches de la Marine
Troupes de la marine








 Book
 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Royal Canadian Navy  



Components



Maritime Forces Atlantic
Maritime Forces Pacific
Naval Reserve





History



History of the Royal Canadian Navy
Military History of Canada





Ships




Information



Ships

Current fleet
Historic fleet


Her Majesty's Canadian Ship





Halifax-class frigates



HMCS Halifax (FFH 330)
HMCS Vancouver (FFH 331)
HMCS Ville de Québec (FFH 332)
HMCS Toronto (FFH 333)
HMCS Regina (FFH 334)
HMCS Calgary (FFH 335)
HMCS Montréal (FFH 336)
HMCS Fredericton (FFH 337)
HMCS Winnipeg (FFH 338)
HMCS Charlottetown (FFH 339)
HMCS St. John's (FFH 340)
HMCS Ottawa (FFH 341)





Victoria-class submarines



HMCS Victoria (SSK 876)
HMCS Windsor (SSK 877)
HMCS Corner Brook (SSK 878)
HMCS Chicoutimi (SSK 879)





Kingston-class coastal defence vessels



HMCS Kingston (MM 700)
HMCS Glace Bay (MM 701)
HMCS Nanaimo (MM 702)
HMCS Edmonton (MM 703)
HMCS Shawinigan (MM 704)
HMCS Whitehorse (MM 705)
HMCS Yellowknife (MM 706)
HMCS Goose Bay (MM 707)
HMCS Moncton (MM 708)
HMCS Saskatoon (MM 709)
HMCS Brandon (MM 710)
HMCS Summerside (MM 711)





Orca-class patrol vessels



CFAV Orca (PCT 55)
CFAV Raven (PCT 56)
CFAV Caribou (PCT 57)
CFAV Renard (PCT 58)
CFAV Wolf (PCT 59)
CFAV Grizzly (PCT 60)
CFAV Cougar (PCT 61)
CFAV Moose (PCT 62)





Naval Reserve Divisions



HMCS Brunswicker
HMCS Cabot
HMCS Carleton
HMCS Cataraqui
HMCS Champlain
HMCS Chippawa
HMCS d'Iberville
HMCS Discovery
HMCS Donnacona
HMCS Griffon
HMCS Hunter
HMCS Jolliet
HMCS Malahat
HMCS Montcalm
HMCS Nonsuch
HMCS Prevost
HMCS Queen
HMCS Queen Charlotte
HMCS Radisson
HMCS Scotian
HMCS Star
HMCS Tecumseh
HMCS Unicorn
HMCS York





Future procurement



Single Class Surface Combatant
Protecteur-class auxiliary vessel
Harry DeWolf-class offshore patrol vessel
Amphibious Assault Ship
Project Resolve (MS Asterix)








Aircraft (RCAF)



List of aircraft of the Royal Canadian Navy
CH-124 Sea King
CP-140 Aurora
CP-140A Arcturus
CH-148 Cyclone





Bases



CFB Esquimalt
CFB Halifax
CFS St. John's
CFMETR, Nanoose Bay
NRS Aldergrove
NRS Newport Corner
NRS Mill Cove





Leadership



Commander of the Royal Canadian Navy
Chief Petty Officer of the Navy








 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Canadian Army 



History



History of the Canadian Army
Canadian Corps
First Canadian Army
Military History of Canada
Fort Frontenac Library





Structure



Structure of the Canadian Army
2nd Canadian Division
3rd Canadian Division
4th Canadian Division
5th Canadian Division
List of Units





Mechanized brigade groups



1 CMBG
2 CMBG
5 CMBG





Brigade groups



31 CBG
32 CBG
33 CBG
34 CBG
35 CBG
36 CBG
37 CBG
38 CBG
39 CBG
41 CBG





Small arms



C9 machine-gun
C7A1 rifle/C8A1 carbine/C7A2 rifle
C6 machine-gun
Browning .50 calibre heavy machine gun
Browning-HP 9 mm pistol
P225, 226
C15 Long Range Sniper Weapon (LRSW)
C3A1 sniper rifle
C14 Timberwolf
C13 fragmentation grenade
M203 grenade launcher
M72 SRAAW(L)





Crewed weapons



Carl Gustav SRAAW(M)
ERYX SRAAW(H)
TOW LRAAW(H)
81 mm mortar
60 mm mortar
Javelin short-range air defence missile
Skyguard
C3 close support howitzer
LG1 Mark II 105 mm towed howitzer
M777 lightweight 155mm howitzer
C16 CASW





Armoured fighting vehicles



LAV III
Coyote Reconnaissance Vehicle
ADATS
Leopard C2
Leopard 2
Bison APC
M113A3 and MTVL
RG-31
Textron TAPV





Schools



Canadian Army Command and Staff College
Peace Support Training Centre
Canadian Army Advanced Warfare Centre








 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Royal Canadian Air Force 






Commander of the Royal Canadian Air Force
Chief Warrant Officer of the Air Force
Installations


List of aircraft


List of Wings
1 Wing Kingston
3 Wing Bagotville
4 Wing Cold Lake
5 Wing Goose Bay
8 Wing Trenton
9 Wing Gander
12 Wing Shearwater
14 Wing Greenwood
15 Wing Moose Jaw
16 Wing Borden
17 Wing Winnipeg
19 Wing Comox
22 Wing North Bay
List of Squadrons


Training
Canadian Forces School of Aerospace Technology and Engineering


History
Canadian Aviation Corps (1914-1915)
Canadian Air Force (1918-1920)
Canadian Air Force (1920-1924)
Royal Canadian Air Force (1924-1968)
Canadian Forces Air Command (1975-2011)
Royal Canadian Air Force (2011-present)








 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 North Atlantic Treaty Organization



History



North Atlantic Treaty
Summit
Operations
Enlargement








Structure



Council
Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe

Air Command
Land Command
Maritime Command
JFC Brunssum
JFC Naples


Allied Command Transformation
Parliamentary Assembly
Standardization Agreement





People



Secretary General
Chairman of the Military Committee
Supreme Allied Commander Europe
Supreme Allied Commander Transformation





Members




Main members



Albania
Belgium
Bulgaria
Canada
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Multilateral relations



Atlantic Treaty Association
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
Mediterranean Dialogue
Istanbul Cooperation Initiative
Partnership for Peace












v
t
e


Militaries of the Americas



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela





Dependencies and
other territories



Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Caribbean Netherlands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Falkland Islands
French Guiana
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Maarten
Saint Martin, (Collectivity of)
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 147664183
LCCN: n79034381
ISNI: 0000 0001 2295 5076
SUDOC: 035535865
BNF: cb131952351 (data)
NLA: 36440668
NKC: ko2003171869











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_Armed_Forces&oldid=818498391"					Categories: Canadian Armed ForcesDepartment of National Defence (Canada)Military of CanadaUniformed services of CanadaMilitary education and training in CanadaHidden categories: CS1 errors: external linksWebarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from January 2012Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing French-language textArticles needing additional references from January 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2015Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCommons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers