




















Canoe sprint is a sport in which athletes race canoes or kayaks on calm water.
Race categories vary by the number of athletes in the boat, the length of the course, and whether the boat is a canoe or kayak. Canoe sprints are sometimes referred to as flat water racing. The distances recognized by the ICF for international canoe sprint races are 200m, 500m, and 1000m. These races take place on straight courses with each boat paddling in its own designated lane. Longer marathon races do exist, notably the 5000m (also an ICF-recognized distance) - these usually have athletes starting in a large pack at a start line before paddling around a set course with marked turning points (there are no assigned lanes). For each race a number of heats, semi-finals and a final may be necessary, depending on the number of competitors.
The sport is governed by the International Canoe Federation. The International Canoe Federation is the worldwide canoeing organization and creates the standard rules for the different disciplines of canoe/kayak competition. The ICF recognizes several competitive and non-competitive disciplines of canoeing, of which Sprint and Slalom are the only two competing in the Olympic games. National organizations include the United States Canoe Association, the British Canoe Union, Singapore Canoe Federation, Croatian Canoe Federation, Australian Canoeing, and the Pakistan Canoe and Kayak Federation.
On the whole, Europe has dominated the sport, winning over 90 per cent of all available medals.[1]
The official boats recognized by the ICF as 'International Boats' are: K1, K2, K4, C1, C2 and C4, where the number indicates the number of paddlers, “K” stands for kayak and “C” for canoe.[2] The ICF rules for these boats define, among others, the maximum length, the minimum weight and the shape of the boats - for instance, a K1 must be 520 cm long and weighs at least 8 kg for marathons or 12 kg for sprints. Originally, width (beam) restrictions were also enforced; these were revoked in 2000, spurring a flurry of innovations in boat designs. Modern boats are usually made of carbon fiber, aramid fiber (e.g., Kevlar) with epoxy resin, or variants of high-performance fiber-glass.



Contents


1 Kayak
2 Canoe
3 Gallery
4 References



Kayak[edit]
Main article: Sprint kayak
In a kayak, the paddler is seated in the direction of travel, and uses a double-bladed paddle. Kayaks have a rudder for steering and course adjustment, which is operated by the feet of the paddler in the front. The paddle used is usually a 'wing paddle' (although standard asymmetrical paddles can also be used) - wing paddles have blades which are shaped to resemble a wing or spoon, creating lift and increasing the power and stability of the stroke. There are many variations of said wing paddles, ranging from longer and narrower options for more stability throughout the entire stroke to more extreme 'teardrop' shaped paddles for a firmer application of power at the start of the stroke.
Canoe[edit]
Main article: Sprint canoe
In a canoe the paddler kneels on one knee with the other leg forward and foot flat on the floor of the boat, and paddles a single-bladed paddle on one side only with what is known as a 'J-stroke' to control the boat's direction.[3] In Canada, a racing class exists for the C-15 or WC or "War Canoe", as well as a similarly designed C-4 (which is much shorter and more squat than an 'International' C-4). An antiquated boat class is the C-7, resembling a large C4 which was debuted by the ICF with little success. For racing canoes, the blade is typically short and broad, with a 'power face' on one side that is either flat or scalloped out. The shaft will typically be longer than a tripping canoe paddle, because the kneeling position puts the paddler higher above the surface of the water. More recent designs of canoe racing paddles often have a slight bent shaft, commonly 12-14 degrees. (a concept of canoe designer Eugene Jensen in the 1960s). Many high-performance canoe paddlers prefer the feel of a wooden handle with a carbon fiber shaft and blade, while nearly all high-performance kayak paddlers use paddles made completely of carbon fiber.[citation needed]
Gallery[edit]










































References[edit]



^ "What is sprint?". Retrieved 18 July 2014. 
^ https://www.canoeicf.com/discipline/canoe-sprint.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Canoe sprint". ICF. Retrieved 26 April 2014. 









v
t
e


Canoeing and kayaking



Main competitive disciplines



Canoe sprint
Canoe slalom
Canoe marathon
Canoe polo
Wildwater canoeing
Canoe sailing
Playboating





Olympics



Summer Olympics
Male medalists
Female medalists
Venues





Other disciplines



Creeking
Dragon boating
Extreme racing
Playboating
Surf skiing
Surf kayaking
Snow boating
Squirt boating


Standup paddleboarding





International Canoe Federation (ICF)
Championships



Sprint (Men's Canadian medalists
Women's Canadian medalists
Men's kayak medalists
Women's kayak medalists
Paracanoe medalists)
Slalom (Men's canoe medalists
Women's canoe medalists
Men's kayak medalists
Women's kayak medalists
Mixed canoe medalists)
Slalom Junior & U23
Marathon





Recreation



Small-craft sailing
Whitewater canoeing / kayaking
Sea kayaking
Canoe camping
Kayak fishing
Canoe and Kayak diving
Dongola racing
Canoe orienteering
Canoe livery
Playboating





Modern boats



Canoe
Kayak
Concrete canoe
Flyak
Folding kayak
International Canoe
Malia
Recreational kayak
Sprint canoe





Traditional boats



Aleutian kayak
Cayuco
Chundan Vallam
Dugout
Fur brigade
Outrigger canoe
Pacific Northwest
Rabaska
Sturgeon-nosed canoe
Taimen
Umiak
Waka
War canoe





Techniques



Canoe paddle strokes
Eskimo Rescue
Kayak roll
Portage





Equipment



Artificial whitewater
Albano buoy system
Outrigger
Paddle
Paddle float
Paddle leash
Royalex
Sea sock
Spray deck
Tuilik





Kayakers



Doug Ammons
Jimmy Blakeney
Tyler Bradt
Paul Caffyn
Tad Dennis
Chris Duff
Nigel Foster
Maria Francis
Douglas C. Gordon
Štěpánka Hilgertová
Freya Hoffmeister
Eric Jackson
Ramo Kolenović
Brad Ludden
Andrew McAuley
Mark Pollock
Oskar Speck
Rush Sturges
Clay Wright
Alexander Yermilov





Venues



Canoeing and kayaking venues





Competitions



List of world records in canoeing
Adirondack Canoe Classic
Au Sable River Canoe Marathon
Devizes to Westminster International Canoe Marathon
Dusi Canoe Marathon
Hawkesbury Canoe Classic
YMCA Massive Murray Paddle
National Student Rodeo
Thameside Series
Waterside Series
Riverland Paddling Marathon





Festivals



Canadian International Dragon Boat Festival
Duanwu Festival
Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival in New York
Houston Dragon Boat Festival
Lethbridge Dragon Boat Festival
Ottawa Dragon Boat Festival
Toronto International Dragon Boat Race Festival





Governing bodies



European Canoe Association
American Canoe Association
Australian Canoeing
British Canoeing
British Dragon Boat Racing Association
Canoe Kayak Canada
Canoe Wales
Croatian Canoe Federation
Israel Canoe Association
Scottish Canoe Association
Portuguese Canoe Federation
USA Canoe/Kayak





Other organisations



Association of International Paddle Sport Federations
Canadian Canoe Museum
International Dragon Boat Federation
Sir Alexander Mackenzie Canada Sea-to-Sea Bicentennial Expeditions
UK Rivers Access Campaign





Media



La Chasse-galerie
Paddle-to-the-Sea (film)
The Rise and Fall of the Great Lakes
Waterwalker












v
t
e


Summer Olympic sports



2016 program



Archery
Athletics
Badminton
Basketball
Boxing
Canoeing

Canoe slalom
Canoe sprint


Cycling

BMX
Mountain bike
Road cycling
Track cycling


Diving
Equestrian

Dressage
Eventing
Show jumping


Fencing
Field hockey
Football
Golf
Gymnastics

Artistic gymnastics
Rhythmic gymnastics
Trampolining


Handball
Judo
Modern pentathlon
Rowing
Rugby sevens
Sailing
Shooting
Swimming
Synchronised swimming
Table tennis
Taekwondo
Tennis
Triathlon
Volleyball

Beach volleyball


Water polo
Weightlifting
Wrestling

Freestyle wrestling
Greco-Roman wrestling







2020 addition



Baseball

Softball


Karate
Skateboarding
Sport climbing
Surfing








See also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sports











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canoe_sprint&oldid=807908447"					Categories: Canoe sprintCanoeing disciplinesSummer Olympic disciplinesCanoe racingHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2009