






This article is part of the series on
Administrative divisions of France




Main article




Regions
(incl. overseas regions)




Departments
(incl. overseas departments)




Arrondissements




Cantons




Intercommunality
Métropole
Communauté urbaine
Communauté d'agglomération
Communauté de communes




Communes
Associated communes
Municipal arrondissements




Others in Overseas France
Overseas collectivities
Sui generis collectivity
Overseas country
Overseas territory
Clipperton Island



The cantons of France are territorial subdivisions of the French Republic's arrondissements and departments.
Apart from their role as organizational units in certain aspects of the administration of public services and justice, the chief purpose of the cantons today is to serve as constituencies for the election of the members of the representative assembly (General Council) in each department. For this reason, such elections are known in France as "cantonal elections".
There are currently 4,055 cantons (including 172 overseas) in France.[1] Most of them group together some communes (the lowest administrative division of the French Republic), although larger communes may comprise several cantons, since the cantons are intended to be roughly equal in size of population – unlike the communes, which range in size from more than two million inhabitants (Paris) to just one person (Rochefourchat).



Contents


1 Role and administration
2 History
3 Statistics
4 See also
5 References



Role and administration[edit]
The role of the canton is, essentially, to provide a framework for departmental elections. Each canton elects a person to represent it at the conseil général du département – or general council for the department, which is the principal administrative division of the French Republic.
In urban areas, a single commune generally includes several cantons. Conversely, in rural areas, a canton may comprise several smaller communes. In the latter case, administrative services, the gendarmerie headquarters for example, are often situated in the principal town (chef-lieu) of the canton, although there are exceptions, such as cantons Gaillon-Campagne and Sarreguemines-Campagne, which have in common a "chief-town" which does not belong to either canton.
For statistical (INSEE) purposes, the twenty arrondissements of Paris – the administrative subdivisions of that city – are sometimes considered cantons, but they serve no greater electoral function.
Cantons also form legal districts, as seats of Tribunaux d'instance or "Courts of First Instance" (also, "TI"...). Historically, the cantons are called justices de paix or "district courts".
History[edit]
The cantons were created in 1790 at the same time as the départements by the Revolutionary Committee for the Division of Territory (Comité de division). They were more numerous than today (between 40 and 60 to each département). Cantons were, at first, grouped into what were called districts. After the abolition of the district in 1800, they were reorganized by the Consulate into arrondissements. The number of cantons was then drastically reduced (between 30 and 50 units) by the Loi du 8 pluviôse an IX (28 January 1801), or the "Law for the Reduction of the Number of District Courts", or Loi portant réduction du nombre de justices de paix in French. The département prefects were told by the government to group the communes within newly established cantons. The département lists, once approved by the government, were published in the Bulletin des lois in 1801 and 1802; these lists are still the basis of the administrative divisions of France in place today, although cantons with small populations have been eliminated and new cantons created in areas of strong demographic growth. On the whole, their number has increased appreciably.
In May 2013 a law was adopted that reduced the number of cantons drastically.[2] This law came into effect at the French departmental elections in March 2015. Before the cantonal reform, there were 4,032 cantons.[3] The 2013 reform law also changed the representation of the cantons in the departmental councils: each canton is now represented by a man and a woman.[2]
Statistics[edit]
The number of cantons varies from one département to another; the Territoire de Belfort, for example, has 9, while Nord has 41.
See also[edit]

Administrative divisions of France
Canton (subnational entity)
List of cantons of France

References[edit]


^ INSEE, Populations légales 2012 des cantons - découpage 2015
^ a b LOI n° 2013-403 du 17 mai 2013 relative à l'élection des conseillers départementaux, des conseillers municipaux et des conseillers communautaires, et modifiant le calendrier électoral
^ INSEE (French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies) Code Officiel Géographique








v
t
e


Cantons of France




List of cantons of France



By department



Ain
Aisne
Allier
Alpes-de-Haute-Provence
Hautes-Alpes
Alpes-Maritimes
Ardèche
Ardennes
Ariège
Aube
Aude
Aveyron
Bouches-du-Rhône
Calvados
Cantal
Charente
Charente-Maritime
Cher
Corrèze
Corse-du-Sud
Haute-Corse
Côte-d'Or
Côtes-d'Armor
Creuse
Dordogne
Doubs
Drôme
Eure
Eure-et-Loir
Finistère
Gard
Haute-Garonne
Gers
Gironde
Hérault
Ille-et-Vilaine
Indre
Indre-et-Loire
Isère
Jura
Landes
Loir-et-Cher
Loire
Haute-Loire
Loire-Atlantique
Loiret
Lot
Lot-et-Garonne
Lozère
Maine-et-Loire
Manche
Marne
Haute-Marne
Mayenne
Meurthe-et-Moselle
Meuse
Morbihan
Moselle
Nièvre
Nord
Oise
Orne
Pas-de-Calais
Puy-de-Dôme
Pyrénées-Atlantiques
Hautes-Pyrénées
Pyrénées-Orientales
Bas-Rhin
Haut-Rhin
Rhône
Haute-Saône
Saône-et-Loire
Sarthe
Savoie
Haute-Savoie
Seine-Maritime
Seine-et-Marne
Yvelines
Deux-Sèvres
Somme
Tarn
Tarn-et-Garonne
Var
Vaucluse
Vendée
Vienne
Haute-Vienne
Vosges
Yonne
Territoire de Belfort
Essonne
Hauts-de-Seine
Seine-Saint-Denis
Val-de-Marne
Val-d'Oise
Overseas departments: Guadeloupe
(Martinique)
(Guyane)
Réunion
Mayotte











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cantons_of_France&oldid=778483954"					Categories: Fourth-level administrative country subdivisionsCantons of FranceSubdivisions of FranceLAU 1 statistical regions of the European UnionHidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2012