For other uses, see Canyon (disambiguation).
"Cañon" redirects here. For other uses, see Canon (disambiguation).
"Gorge" redirects here. For other uses, see Gorge (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







The Grand Canyon, Arizona, at the confluence of the Colorado and Little Colorado rivers


A canyon (Spanish: cañón; archaic British English spelling: cañon[1]) or gorge is a deep cleft between escarpments or cliffs resulting from weathering and the erosive activity of a river over geologic timescales.[citation needed] Rivers have a natural tendency to cut through underlying surfaces, eventually wearing away rock layers as sediments are removed downstream. A river bed will gradually reach a baseline elevation, which is the same elevation as the body of water into which the river drains. The processes of weathering and erosion will form canyons when the river's headwaters and estuary are at significantly different elevations,[2] particularly through regions where softer rock layers are intermingled with harder layers more resistant to weathering.
A canyon may also refer to a rift between two mountain peaks, such as those in ranges including the Rocky Mountains, the Alps, the Himalayas or the Andes. Usually a river or stream and erosion carve out such splits between mountains. Examples of mountain-type canyons are Provo Canyon in Utah or Yosemite Valley in California's Sierra Nevada. Canyons within mountains, or gorges that have an opening on only one side, are called box canyons. Slot canyons are very narrow canyons that often have smooth walls.
Steep-sided valleys in the seabed of the continental slope are referred to as submarine canyons. Unlike canyons on land, submarine canyons are thought to be formed by turbidity currents and landslides.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Formation

2.1 Box canyon


3 Largest canyons
4 Cultural significance
5 Notable examples

5.1 Africa

5.1.1 Namibia
5.1.2 South Africa
5.1.3 Tanzania


5.2 Americas

5.2.1 Argentina
5.2.2 Brazil
5.2.3 Canada
5.2.4 Colombia
5.2.5 Mexico
5.2.6 Peru
5.2.7 United States


5.3 Asia

5.3.1 China
5.3.2 India
5.3.3 Others


5.4 Europe

5.4.1 England
5.4.2 France
5.4.3 Others


5.5 Oceania

5.5.1 Australia
5.5.2 New Zealand




6 Canyons on other planetary bodies
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Etymology[edit]




Sumidero Canyon, Mexico


The word canyon is Spanish in origin (cañón,[3] pronounced [kaˈɲon]), with the same meaning. The word canyon is generally used in North America while the words gorge and ravine are used in Europe and Oceania, though gorge and ravine are also used in some parts of North America. In the United States, place names generally use canyon in the southwest and gorge in the northeast, with the rest of the country graduating between these two according to geography. In Canada, a gorge is usually narrow while a ravine is more open and often wooded. The military-derived word defile is occasionally used in the United Kingdom.
Formation[edit]
Most canyons were formed by a process of long-time erosion from a plateau or table-land level. The cliffs form because harder rock strata that are resistant to erosion and weathering remain exposed on the valley walls.
Canyons are much more common in arid than in wet areas because physical weathering has a more localized effect in arid zones. The wind and water from the river combine to erode and cut away less resistant materials such as shales. The freezing and expansion of water also serves to help form canyons. Water seeps into cracks between the rocks and freezes, pushing the rocks apart and eventually causing large chunks to break off the canyon walls, in a process known as frost wedging.[4] Canyon walls are often formed of resistant sandstones or granite.




Snake River Canyon, Idaho


Sometimes large rivers run through canyons as the result of gradual geological uplift. These are called entrenched rivers, because they are unable to easily alter their course. In the United States, the Colorado River in the Southwest and the Snake River in the Northwest are two examples of tectonic uplift.
Canyons often form in areas of limestone rock. As limestone is soluble to a certain extent, cave systems form in the rock. When these collapse, a canyon is left, as in the Mendip Hills in Somerset and Yorkshire Dales in Yorkshire, England.
Box canyon[edit]
For the Colorado canyon, see Box Canyon, Colorado.
A box canyon is a small canyon that is generally shorter and more narrow than a river canyon, with steep walls on three sides, allowing access and egress only through the mouth of the canyon. Box canyons were frequently used in the western United States as convenient corrals, with their entrances fenced.[5]
Largest canyons[edit]
The definition of "largest canyon" is imprecise, because a canyon can be large by its depth, its length, or the total area of the canyon system. Also, the inaccessibility of the major canyons in the Himalaya contributes to their not being regarded as candidates for the biggest canyon. The definition of "deepest canyon" is similarly imprecise, especially if one includes mountain canyons as well as canyons cut through relatively flat plateaus (which have a somewhat well-defined rim elevation).




The deepest canyon in the world, the Indus Gorge with Nanga Parbat, the world's 9th highest mountain, rising to the south.


The deepest canyon in the world is at the confluence of the Gilgit and Indus rivers, where the Karakoram Highway was constructed; the river flows at an elevation of about 1,000 m (3,300 ft) above sea level. To the south by 15 km, rising in one continuous sweep above the Indus, the world's largest such rise is the summit of the world's ninth-highest mountain, Nanga Parbat, 8,126 m (26,660 ft) high. Rising to the north, also visible from the bridge over the Gilgit, is the westernmost of the great Himalayan peaks, Rakaposhi, 7,788 m (25,550 ft) high. That makes the Indus gorge 7,120 m (23,360 ft) deep from river to peak at that point, more than 600 m (2,000 ft) greater than the depth of the Kali Gandaki Gorge and 1,500 m (5,000 ft) deeper than the Yarlung Tsangpo Gorge. These are the three deepest canyons in the world. Only the largest mountain ranges of Asia have the scale for such canyons to have formed. The Andes of South America are high mountains, but not on the same scale as the Himalayas, Karakoram, or Hindu Kush, which all come together at the confluence of the Gilgit and the Indus in Pakistani Kashmir.
The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon (or Tsangpo Canyon), along the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet, is regarded by some as the deepest canyon in the world at 5,500 m (18,000 ft). It is slightly longer than the Grand Canyon in the United States.[6] Others consider the Kali Gandaki Gorge in midwest Nepal to be the deepest canyon, with a 6400 m (21,000 ft) difference between the level of the river and the peaks surrounding it.
Vying for deepest canyon in the Americas are the Cotahuasi Canyon and Colca Canyon, in southern Peru. Both have been measured at over 3500 m (12,000 ft) deep.
The Grand Canyon of northern Arizona in the United States, with an average depth of 1,600 m (one mile) and a volume of 4.17 trillion cubic metres,[7] is one of the world's largest canyons. It was among the 28 finalists of the New7Wonders of Nature worldwide poll. (Some referred to it as one of the 7 natural wonders of the world.[8]) Copper Canyon in Chihuahua, Mexico is deeper and longer than the Grand Canyon.
The largest canyon in Africa is the Fish River Canyon in Namibia.[9]
In August 2013, the discovery of Greenland's Grand Canyon was reported, based on the analysis of data from Operation IceBridge. It is located under an ice sheet. At 750 kilometres (466 mi) long, it is believed to be the longest canyon in the world.[10]
The Capertee Valley in Australia is commonly reported as being the second largest (in terms of width) canyon in the world.[11][12]





Panoramic view of the Capertee Valley in Australia, the second largest (in terms of width) of any canyon in the world


Cultural significance[edit]
Some canyons have notable cultural significance. Evidence of early humanoids has been discovered in Africa's Olduvai Gorge. In the southwestern United States, canyons are important archeologically because of the many cliff-dwellings built in such areas, largely by the ancient Pueblo people who were their first inhabitants.
Notable examples[edit]
The following list includes only the most notable canyons of the world, arranged by continent and then country.
For a more complete list, see List of canyons.
Africa[edit]




Fish River Canyon, Namibia


Namibia[edit]

Fish River Canyon

South Africa[edit]

Blyde River Canyon, Mpumalanga
Oribi Gorge, Kwa-Zulu Natal

Tanzania[edit]

Olduvai Gorge

Americas[edit]
Argentina[edit]

Atuel Canyon, Mendoza Province

Brazil[edit]




Itaimbezinho Canyon, Brazil



Itaimbezinho Canyon, Rio Grande do Sul

Canada[edit]

Grand Canyon of the Stikine, British Columbia
Horseshoe Canyon, Alberta
Niagara Gorge, Ontario
Ouimet Canyon, Ontario

Colombia[edit]

Chicamocha Canyon, Santander Department

Mexico[edit]

Copper Canyon, Chihuahua
Sumidero Canyon, Chiapas

Peru[edit]

Colca Canyon, Arequipa
Cotahuasi Canyon, Arequipa

United States[edit]




Green River overlook, Canyonlands National Park, Utah



Antelope Canyon, Arizona
Black Canyon of the Gunnison, Colorado
Canyon de Chelly, Arizona
Canyonlands National Park, canyons of the Colorado River and its main tributary the Green River, Utah
Columbia River Gorge, Washington and Oregon
Glen Canyon, Utah and Arizona
Glenwood Canyon, Colorado
Grand Canyon, Arizona
Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, Wyoming
Palo Duro Canyon, Texas
Rio Grande Gorge, New Mexico
Waimea Canyon, Hawaii
Zion Canyon, Utah

Asia[edit]




One of the Three Gorges of the Yangtze river, China


China[edit]

Three Gorges, Chongqing
Tiger Leaping Gorge, Yunnan
Yarlung Zangbo Grand Canyon, Tibet Autonomous Region

India[edit]

Gandikota, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh
Raneh Falls, Chhatarpur district, Madhya Pradesh

Others[edit]

Kazakhstan—Charyn Canyon
Nepal—Kali Gandaki Gorge
Pakistan—Indus River Gorge through the Himalaya

Europe[edit]
England[edit]




Cheddar Gorge, England



Avon Gorge, Bristol
Cheddar Gorge, Somerset

France[edit]

Ardèche Gorges, Rhône-Alpes
Daluis Gorge, Provence
Gorges du Tarn
Verdon Gorge, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence

Others[edit]




Aare Gorge, Switzerland



Bulgaria—Trigrad Gorge
Greece—Vikos Gorge
Greenland—Greenland's Grand Canyon
Iceland—Fjaðrárgljúfur Canyon
Macedonia—Matka Canyon
Montenegro—Tara River Canyon
Norway—Sautso Canyon
Poland/Slovakia—Dunajec River Gorge
Serbia—Rugova Canyon
Switzerland—Aare Gorge

Oceania[edit]
Australia[edit]




Joffre Gorge, Karijini National Park, Australia



Joffre Gorge, Karijini National Park, Western Australia
Katherine Gorge, Northern Territory
Kings Canyon, Northern Territory
Murchison River Gorge, Western Australia

New Zealand[edit]

Manawatu Gorge, North Island
Skippers Canyon, South Island

Canyons on other planetary bodies[edit]

Ithaca Chasma on Saturn's moon Tethys
Valles Marineris on Mars, the largest known canyon in the solar system
Vid Flumina on Saturn's largest moon Titan is the only known liquid-floored canyon in the solar system besides Earth[13]

Venus has many craters and canyons on its surface. The troughs on the planet are part of a system of canyons that is more than 6 400 km long.
See also[edit]



Environment portal




Antecedent drainage stream
Canyoning
Draw (terrain)
Geomorphology
Gully
Steephead valley
Valley

References[edit]



^ "canon". archaic spelling of canyon 
^ Ward Cameron. "Understanding Canyon Formation". 
^  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Canyon". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
^ "The Geology of the Grand Canyon". Retrieved 2015-10-01. 
^ "box canyon". Encarta World English Dictionary. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-10-31. Retrieved 2009-08-04. 
^ "China Virtual Museums: Canyon". Kepu.net. 
^ "Park Statistics". National Park Service. USA. 
^ Truong, Alice (1 July 2011). "Everything About the Grand Canyon". Discovery Communications. Retrieved 5 February 2012. 
^ Cohen, Callan; Spottiswoode, Claire & Rossouw, Jonathan (2006). Southern African Birdfinder. p. 210. ISBN 1-86872-725-4. 
^ "Grand Canyon of Greenland Discovered under Ice". news.discovery.com. 
^ Fitzsimons, David (14 December 2015). "Capertee Valley: Australia's own Grand Canyon". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved March 28, 2016. 
^ Kruszelnicki, Dr. Karl S. (22 May 2012). "Grand Canyon is not so grand › Dr Karl's Great Moments In Science". ABC Science. Retrieved March 28, 2016. 
^ Valerio Poggiali, Marco Mastrogiuseppe, Alexander G. Hayes, Roberto Seu, Samuel P. D. Birch, Ralph Lorenz, Cyril Grima, Jason D. Hofgartner, "Liquid-filled Canyons on Titan", 9 August 2016, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL069679/abstract



External links[edit]



Look up canyon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


 Media related to Canyons at Wikimedia Commons






v
t
e


River morphology



Large-scale features



Drainage basin
Drainage system (geomorphology)
Estuary
Strahler number (stream order)
River valley
River delta
River sinuosity





Alluvial rivers



Anabranch
Avulsion (river)
Bar (river morphology)
Braided river
Channel pattern
Cut bank
Floodplain
Meander
Meander cutoff
Mouth bar
Oxbow lake
Point bar
Riffle
Rapids
Riparian zone
River bifurcation
River channel migration
River mouth
Slip-off slope
Stream pool
Thalweg





Bedrock river



Canyon
Knickpoint
Plunge pool





Bedforms



Ait
Antidune
Dune
Current ripple





Regional processes



Aggradation
Base level
Degradation (geology)
Erosion and tectonics
River rejuvenation





Mechanics



Deposition (geology)
Water erosion
Exner equation
Hack's law
Helicoidal flow
Playfair's law
Sediment transport








Category
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4147252-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canyon&oldid=817409227"					Categories: Canyons and gorgesErosion landformsFluvial landformsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles needing additional references from May 2014All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers