





This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



This article is about the economic system. For other uses, see Capitalism (disambiguation).
"Capitalist" and "Free enterprise" redirect here. For the racehorse, see Capitalist (horse). For other uses, see Free enterprise (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Capitalism







Concepts


Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Capitalist mode of production
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Wage slavery








Economic systems


Anglo-Saxon
Free market
Laissez-faire
Mercantile
Mixed
Nordic
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social market
State
Welfare
East Asian








Economic theories


American
Austrian
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Marxian
Modern Monetary
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Supply-side








Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production








Development


Advanced
Consumer
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Rentier
State monopoly
Techno








People


Adam Smith
John Stuart Mill
David Ricardo
Thomas Malthus
Jean-Baptiste Say
Milton Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
John Maynard Keynes
Alfred Marshall
Ludwig von Mises
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Schumpeter
Thorstein Veblen
Max Weber
Ronald Coase








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Black capitalism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Corporatism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Exploitation
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy








Ideologies


Anarcho-capitalism
Democratic capitalism
Dirigisme
Eco-capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Inclusive capitalism
Liberalism (economic)
Libertarianism
Neo-Capitalism
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Social democracy








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Economic systems




By ideology


Anarchist
Capitalist
Christian
Communalist
Communist
Corporatist
Democratic
Dirigist
Distributist
Fascist
Feminist
Feudalism
Georgist
Green
Islamic
Laissez-faire
Market socialist
Mercantilist
Mutualist
Neo-mercantilist
Participatory
Protectionist
Socialist
State capitalist
Syndicalist








By coordination


Closed (autarky)
Decentralized
Digital
Dual
Gift
Informal
Market
Mixed
Natural
Open
Planned
Robinson Crusoe
Subsistence
Underground
Vertical archipelago
Virtual
Welfare








By regional model


Asian

East Asian
Chinese
Singaporean


European

Anglo-Saxon
German
Nordic
Rhenish
Soviet










Sectors


Common property
Private
Public
Voluntary








Transition


Collectivization
Communization
Corporatization
Demutualization
Deregulation
Expropriation
Financialization
Liberalization
Marketization
Municipalization
Mutualization
Nationalization
Privatization
Socialization








Coordination


Barter
Cybernetics
Democratic
Free market
In kind
Indicative planning
Market
Material balancing
Planned
Peer-to-peer
Price
Regulated market
Self-managed
Shared
Access economy








Other types


Corporate capitalism
Expeditionary
Hunter-gatherer
Inclusive Democracy
Information
Islamic economics
Manorialism
Newly industrialized
Palace
Plantation
Plutonomy
Post-capitalist
Post-industrial
Post-scarcity
Resource-based
Social market
Socialist market
State monopoly capitalist
Token
Traditional
Transition
World








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





Capitalism is an economic system and an ideology based on private ownership of the means of production and their operation for profit.[1][2][3] Characteristics central to capitalism include private property, capital accumulation, wage labor, voluntary exchange, a price system and competitive markets.[4][5] In a capitalist market economy, decision-making and investment are determined by the owners of the means of production in financial and capital markets, whereas prices and the distribution of goods and services are mainly determined by competition in goods and services markets.[6][7]
Economists, political economists, sociologists, and historians have adopted different perspectives in their analyses of capitalism and have recognized various forms of it in practice. These include laissez-faire or free market capitalism, welfare capitalism and state capitalism. Different forms of capitalism feature varying degrees of free markets, public ownership,[8] obstacles to free competition and state-sanctioned social policies. The degree of competition in markets, the role of intervention and regulation and the scope of state ownership vary across different models of capitalism.[9] The extent to which different markets are free, as well as the rules defining private property, are matters of politics and policy. Most existing capitalist economies are mixed economies, which combine elements of free markets with state intervention and in some cases economic planning.[10]
Market economies have existed under many forms of government, in many different times, places and cultures. However, the development of capitalist societies marked by a universalization of money-based social relations, a consistently large and system-wide class of workers who must work for wages and a capitalist class which dominates control of wealth and political power developed in Western Europe in a process that led to the Industrial Revolution. Capitalist systems with varying degrees of direct government intervention have since become dominant in the Western world and continue to spread.
Capitalism has been criticized for establishing power in the hands of a minority capitalist class that exists through the exploitation of a working class majority; for prioritizing profit over social good, natural resources and the environment; and for being an engine of inequality and economic instabilities. Supporters argue that it provides better products through competition, creates strong economic growth, yields productivity and prosperity that greatly benefits society, as well as being the most efficient system known for allocation of resources.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Agrarian capitalism
2.2 Mercantilism
2.3 Industrial capitalism
2.4 Modern capitalism

2.4.1 Relationship to democracy


2.5 Varieties of capitalism


3 Characteristics

3.1 Summary
3.2 The market
3.3 Profit motive
3.4 Private property
3.5 Market competition
3.6 Reserve army of labour

3.6.1 Composition of the relative surplus population


3.7 As a mode of production


4 Wage labour

4.1 Types
4.2 Comparison to slavery


5 Systemic weaknesses

5.1 Externalities
5.2 Anti-competitive practices


6 Capital accumulation

6.1 Background
6.2 Concentration and centralisation
6.3 The rate of accumulation
6.4 The circuit of capital accumulation from production
6.5 Simple and expanded reproduction
6.6 Capital accumulation as social relation


7 Supply and demand

7.1 Graphical representation of supply and demand

7.1.1 Supply schedule
7.1.2 Demand schedule


7.2 Equilibrium
7.3 Partial equilibrium
7.4 Empirical estimation
7.5 Macroeconomic uses of demand and supply
7.6 History


8 Capitalism and war
9 Types of capitalism

9.1 Advanced capitalism
9.2 Finance capitalism
9.3 Mercantilism
9.4 Free-market economy
9.5 Social-market economy
9.6 State capitalism
9.7 Corporate capitalism
9.8 Mixed economy
9.9 Racial capitalism
9.10 Others


10 Role of government

10.1 Adverse characteristics of capitalist governments


11 Criticism

11.1 Profit motive
11.2 Marxian responses
11.3 Supply and demand
11.4 Counter-criticisms

11.4.1 Austrian School
11.4.2 Ayn Rand


11.5 Economic growth


12 Economic freedom
13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Etymology[edit]


Other terms sometimes used for capitalism:

Capitalist mode of production[11]
Economic liberalism[12]
Free enterprise[13]
Free enterprise economy[14]
Free market[13][15]
Free market economy[14]
Laissez-faire[16]
Market economy[17]
Market liberalism[18][19]
Neoliberalism[20]
Self-regulating market[13]
Profits system[21]




The term "capitalist", meaning an owner of capital, appears earlier than the term "capitalism" and it dates back to the mid-17th century. "Capitalism" is derived from capital, which evolved from capitale, a late Latin word based on caput, meaning "head" – also the origin of chattel and cattle in the sense of movable property (only much later to refer only to livestock). Capitale emerged in the 12th to 13th centuries in the sense of referring to funds, stock of merchandise, sum of money or money carrying interest.[22][23][24] By 1283, it was used in the sense of the capital assets of a trading firm and it was frequently interchanged with a number of other words – wealth, money, funds, goods, assets, property and so on.[25]
The Hollandische Mercurius uses capitalists in 1633 and 1654 to refer to owners of capital.[26] In French, Étienne Clavier referred to capitalistes in 1788,[27] six years before its first recorded English usage by Arthur Young in his work Travels in France (1792).[24][28] In his Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (1817), David Ricardo referred to "the capitalist" many times.[29] Samuel Taylor Coleridge, an English poet, used "capitalist" in his work Table Talk (1823).[30] Pierre-Joseph Proudhon used the term "capitalist" in his first work, What is Property? (1840), to refer to the owners of capital. Benjamin Disraeli used the term "capitalist" in his 1845 work Sybil.[24]
The initial usage of the term "capitalism" in its modern sense has been attributed to Louis Blanc in 1850 ("What I call 'capitalism' that is to say the appropriation of capital by some to the exclusion of others") and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon in 1861 ("Economic and social regime in which capital, the source of income, does not generally belong to those who make it work through their labour").[31] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels referred to the "capitalistic system"[32][33] and to the "capitalist mode of production" in The Capital (1867).[34] The use of the word "capitalism" in reference to an economic system appears twice in Volume I of The Capital, p. 124 (German edition) and in Theories of Surplus Value, tome II, p. 493 (German edition). Marx did not extensively use the form capitalism, but instead those of capitalist and capitalist mode of production, which appear more than 2,600 times in the trilogy The Capital. According to the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), the term "capitalism" first appeared in English in 1854 in the novel The Newcomes by novelist William Makepeace Thackeray, where he meant "having ownership of capital".[35] Also according to the OED, Carl Adolph Douai, a German-American socialist and abolitionist, used the phrase "private capitalism" in 1863.
History[edit]
Main article: History of capitalism
Capital has existed incipiently on a small scale for centuries,[36] in the form of merchant, renting and lending activities, and occasionally as small-scale industry with some wage labour. Simple commodity exchange, and consequently simple commodity production, which are the initial basis for the growth of capital from trade, have a very long history. The "capitalistic era" according to Karl Marx dates from 16th century merchants and small urban workshops.[37] Marx knew that wage labour existed on a modest scale for centuries before capitalist industry. Early Islam promulgated capitalist economic policies, which migrated to Europe through trade partners from cities such as Venice.[38] Capitalism in its modern form can be traced to the emergence of agrarian capitalism and mercantilism in the Renaissance.[39]
Thus for much of history, capital and commercial trade existed, but it did not lead to industrialisation or dominate the production process of society. That required a set of conditions, including specific technologies of mass production, the ability to independently and privately own and trade in means of production, a class of workers willing to sell their labour power for a living, a legal framework promoting commerce, a physical infrastructure allowing the circulation of goods on a large scale, and security for private accumulation. Many of these conditions do not currently exist in many Third World countries, although there is plenty of capital and labour. Thus, the obstacles for the development of capitalist markets are less technical and more social, cultural and political.
Agrarian capitalism[edit]
The economic foundations of the feudal agricultural system began to shift substantially in 16th-century England; the manorial system had broken down, and land began to become concentrated in the hands of fewer landlords with increasingly large estates. Instead of a serf-based system of labor, workers were increasingly employed as part of a broader and expanding money-based economy. The system put pressure on both landlords and tenants to increase the productivity of agriculture to make profit; the weakened coercive power of the aristocracy to extract peasant surpluses encouraged them to try better methods, and the tenants also had incentive to improve their methods, in order to flourish in a competitive labor market. Terms of rent for land were becoming subject to economic market forces rather than to the previous stagnant system of custom and feudal obligation.[40][41]
By the early 17th-century, England was a centralized state in which much of the feudal order of Medieval Europe had been swept away. This centralization was strengthened by a good system of roads and by a disproportionately large capital city, London. The capital acted as a central market hub for the entire country, creating a very large internal market for goods, contrasting with the fragmented feudal holdings that prevailed in most parts of the Continent.
Mercantilism[edit]
Main article: Mercantilism




A painting of a French seaport from 1638 at the height of mercantilism


The economic doctrine prevailing from the 16th to the 18th centuries is commonly called mercantilism.[37][42] This period, the Age of Discovery, was associated with the geographic exploration of the foreign lands by merchant traders, especially from England and the Low Countries. Mercantilism was a system of trade for profit, although commodities were still largely produced by non-capitalist methods.[43] Most scholars consider the era of merchant capitalism and mercantilism as the origin of modern capitalism,[44][45] although Karl Polanyi argued that the hallmark of capitalism is the establishment of generalized markets for what he called the "fictitious commodities:" land, labor, and money. Accordingly, he argued that "not until 1834 was a competitive labor market established in England, hence industrial capitalism as a social system cannot be said to have existed before that date.[46]




Robert Clive after the Battle of Plassey, which began East India Company rule in India


England began a large-scale and integrative approach to mercantilism during the Elizabethan Era (1558–1603). A systematic and coherent explanation of balance of trade was made public through Thomas Mun's argument England's Treasure by Forraign Trade, or the Balance of our Forraign Trade is The Rule of Our Treasure. It was written in the 1620s and published in 1664.[47]
European merchants, backed by state controls, subsidies, and monopolies, made most of their profits by buying and selling goods. In the words of Francis Bacon, the purpose of mercantilism was "the opening and well-balancing of trade; the cherishing of manufacturers; the banishing of idleness; the repressing of waste and excess by sumptuary laws; the improvement and husbanding of the soil; the regulation of prices ..."[48]
The British East India Company and the Dutch East India Company inaugurated an expansive era of commerce and trade.[49][50] These companies were characterized by their colonial and expansionary powers given to them by nation-states.[49] During this era, merchants, who had traded under the previous stage of mercantilism, invested capital in the East India Companies and other colonies, seeking a return on investment.
Industrial capitalism[edit]




A Watt steam engine: the steam engine fuelled primarily by coal propelled the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain[51]


In the mid-18th century, a new group of economic theorists, led by David Hume[52] and Adam Smith, challenged fundamental mercantilist doctrines such as the belief that the world's wealth remained constant and that a state could only increase its wealth at the expense of another state.
During the Industrial Revolution, industrialists replaced merchants as a dominant factor in the capitalist system and affected the decline of the traditional handicraft skills of artisans, guilds, and journeymen. Also during this period, the surplus generated by the rise of commercial agriculture encouraged increased mechanization of agriculture. Industrial capitalism marked the development of the factory system of manufacturing, characterized by a complex division of labor between and within work process and the routine of work tasks; and finally established the global domination of the capitalist mode of production.[42]
Britain also abandoned its protectionist policy, as embraced by mercantilism. In the 19th century, Richard Cobden and John Bright, who based their beliefs on the Manchester School, initiated a movement to lower tariffs.[53] In the 1840s, Britain adopted a less protectionist policy, with the repeal of the Corn Laws and the Navigation Acts.[42] Britain reduced tariffs and quotas, in line with David Ricardo's advocacy for free trade.
Modern capitalism[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (February 2017)







The gold standard formed the financial basis of the international economy from 1870–1914


Capitalism was carried across the world by broader processes of globalization and, by the end of the 18th century, became the dominant global economic system, in turn intensifying processes of economic and other globalization.[54] Later, in the 20th century, capitalism overcame a challenge by centrally-planned economies and is now the encompassing system worldwide,[14][55] with the mixed economy being its dominant form in the industrialized Western world.
Industrialization allowed cheap production of household items using economies of scale, while rapid population growth created sustained demand for commodities. Globalization in this period was decisively shaped by 18th-century imperialism.[56]
After the First and Second Opium Wars and the completion of British conquest of India, vast populations of these regions became ready consumers of European exports. Also in this period, areas of sub-Saharan Africa and the Pacific islands were incorporated into the world system. Meanwhile, the conquest of new parts of the globe, notably sub-Saharan Africa, by Europeans yielded valuable natural resources such as rubber, diamonds and coal and helped fuel trade and investment between the European imperial powers, their colonies, and the United States.

The inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea, the various products of the whole earth, and reasonably expect their early delivery upon his doorstep. Militarism and imperialism of racial and cultural rivalries were little more than the amusements of his daily newspaper. What an extraordinary episode in the economic progress of man was that age which came to an end in August 1914.[57]

In this period, the global financial system was mainly tied to the gold standard. The United Kingdom first formally adopted this standard in 1821. Soon to follow were Canada in 1853, Newfoundland in 1865, the United States and Germany (de jure) in 1873. New technologies, such as the telegraph, the transatlantic cable, the radiotelephone, the steamship and railway allowed goods and information to move around the world at an unprecedented degree.[58]




The New York stock exchange traders' floor (1963)


In the period following the global depression of the 1930s, the state played an increasingly prominent role in the capitalistic system throughout much of the world. The postwar boom ended in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and the situation was worsened by the rise of stagflation.[59] Monetarism, a modification of Keynesianism that is more compatible with laissez-faire, gained increasing prominence in the capitalist world, especially under the leadership of Ronald Reagan in the U.S. and Margaret Thatcher in the UK in the 1980s. Public and political interest began shifting away from the so-called collectivist concerns of Keynes's managed capitalism to a focus on individual choice, called "remarketized capitalism".[60]
According to Harvard academic Shoshana Zuboff a new genus of capitalism, surveillance capitalism monetizes data acquired through surveillance.[61][62][63] She states it was first discovered and consolidated at Google, emerged due to the "coupling of the vast powers of the digital with the radical indifference and intrinsic narcissism of the financial capitalism and its neoliberal vision that have dominated commerce for at least three decades, especially in the Anglo economies"[62] and depends on the global architecture of computer mediation which produces a distributed and largely uncontested new expression of power she calls "Big Other".[64]
Relationship to democracy[edit]




Many analysts[who?] assert that China is one of the main examples of state capitalism in the 21st century


The relationship between democracy and capitalism is a contentious area in theory and in popular political movements. The extension of universal adult male suffrage in 19th century Britain occurred along with the development of industrial capitalism, and democracy became widespread at the same time as capitalism, leading capitalists to posit a causal or mutual relationship between them.[65] However, in the 20th century, according to some authors, capitalism also accompanied a variety of political formations quite distinct from liberal democracies, including fascist regimes, absolute monarchies, and single-party states.[42] Democratic peace theory asserts that democracies seldom fight other democracies, but critics of that theory suggest that this may be because of political similarity or stability rather than because they are democratic or capitalist.
Moderate critics argue that though economic growth under capitalism has led to democracy in the past, it may not do so in the future, as authoritarian regimes have been able to manage economic growth without making concessions to greater political freedom.[66][67]
One of the biggest supporters of the idea that capitalism promotes political freedom, Milton Friedman, argues that competitive capitalism allows economic and political power to be separate, ensuring that they do not clash with one another. This idea has been challenged given the current influence capitalist lobbying has had on policy in the United States. The approval of Citizens United (organization), has led people to question the very idea that competitive capitalism promotes political freedom. The ruling on Citizens United allows corporations to spend undisclosed and unregulated amounts of money on political campaigns, shifting outcomes to the interests and undermining true democracy. As explained in Robin Hahnel’s writings, the centerpiece of the ideological defense of the free market system is the concept of economic freedom, and that supporters equate economic democracy with economic freedom and claim that only the free market system can provide economic freedom. According to Hahnel, there are a few objections to the premise that capitalism offers freedom through economic freedom. These objections are guided by critical questions about who or what decides whose freedoms are more protected. Often, the question of inequality is brought up when discussing how well capitalism promotes democracy. An argument that could stand is that economic growth can lead to inequality given that capital can be acquired at different rates by different people. In Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Thomas Piketty of the Paris School of Economics asserts that inequality is the inevitable consequence of economic growth in a capitalist economy and the resulting concentration of wealth can destabilize democratic societies and undermine the ideals of social justice upon which they are built.[68] Marxists, anarchists (except for anarcho-capitalists), and other leftists argue that capitalism is incompatible with democracy since capitalism according to Marx entails "dictatorship of the bourgeoisie" (owners of the means of production) while democracy entails rule by the people.[citation needed]
States with capitalistic economic systems have thrived under political regimes deemed to be authoritarian or oppressive. Singapore has a successful open market economy as a result of its competitive, business-friendly climate and robust rule of law; nonetheless, it often comes under fire for (1) its brand of government, which, though democratic and consistently one of the least corrupt,[69] operates largely under a one-party rule, and (2) not vigorously defending freedom of expression, given its government-regulated press, as well as penchant for upholding laws protecting ethnic and religious harmony, judicial dignity and personal reputation. The private (capitalist) sector in the People's Republic of China has grown exponentially and thrived since its inception, despite having an authoritarian government. Augusto Pinochet's rule in Chile led to economic growth and high levels of inequality[70] by using authoritarian means to create a safe environment for investment and capitalism.
Varieties of capitalism[edit]
Peter A. Hall and David Soskice argued that modern economies have developed two different forms of capitalism: liberal market economies (or LME) (e.g. US, UK, Canada, New Zealand, Ireland) and coordinated market economies (CME) (e.g. Germany, Japan, Sweden, Austria). Those two types can be distinguished by the primary way in which firms coordinate with each other and other actors, such as trade unions. In LMEs firms primarily coordinate their endeavors by way of hierarchies and market mechanisms. Coordinated market economies more heavily rely on non-market forms of interaction in the coordination of their relationship with other actors (for a detailed description see Varieties of Capitalism). These two forms of capitalisms developed different industrial relations, vocational training and education, corporate governance, inter-firm relations and relations with employees. The existence of these different forms of capitalism has important societal effects, especially in periods of crisis and instability. Since the early 2000s the number of labor market outsiders has rapidly grown in Europe, especially among the youth, potentially influencing social and political participation. Using varieties of capitalism theory it is possible to disentangle the different effects on social and political participation that an increase of labor market outsiders has in liberal and coordinated market economies (Ferragina et al. 2016).[71] The social and political disaffection, especially among the youth, seems to be more pronounced in liberal than coordinated market economies. This signals an important problem for liberal market economies in a period of crisis. If the market does not provide consistent job opportunities (as it has in previous decades), the shortcomings of liberal social security systems may depress social and political participation even further than in other capitalist economies.
Characteristics[edit]
Further information: Academic perspectives on capitalism
Capitalism is "production for exchange" driven by the desire for personal accumulation of money receipts in such exchanges, mediated by free markets. The markets themselves are driven by the needs and wants of consumers and those of society as a whole. Contemporary mainstream economics, particularly that associated with the right, holds that by an "invisible hand",[72] through little more than the freedom of the market, is able to match social production to these needs and desires.[73]
Summary[edit]
In general, capitalism as an economic system and mode of production can be summarised by the following:[74]

Capital accumulation:[75] Production for profit and accumulation as the implicit purpose of all or most of production, constriction or elimination of production formerly carried out on a common social or private household basis.[73]
Commodity production: Production for exchange on a market; to maximise exchange-value instead of use-value.
Private ownership of the means of production:[9]
High levels of wage labour.[76]
The investment of money to make a profit.[77]
The use of the price mechanism to allocate resources between competing uses.[9]
Freedom of capitalists to act in their self-interest in managing their business and investments.[78]

The market[edit]




The price (P) of a product is determined by a balance between production at each price (supply, S) and the desires of those with purchasing power at each price (demand, D): this results in a market equilibrium, with a given quantity (Q) sold of the product, whereas a rise in demand would result in an increase in price and an increase in output


In free-market and laissez-faire forms of capitalism, markets are used most extensively with minimal or no regulation over the pricing mechanism. In mixed economies, which are almost universal today,[79] markets continue to play a dominant role but are regulated to some extent by government in order to correct market failures, promote social welfare, conserve natural resources, fund defense and public safety or for other reasons. In state capitalist systems, markets are relied upon the least, with the state relying heavily on state-owned enterprises or indirect economic planning to accumulate capital.
Supply is the amount of a good or service produced by a firm and which is available for sale. Demand is the amount that people are willing to buy at a specific price. Prices tend to rise when demand exceeds supply, and fall when supply exceeds demand. In theory, the market is able to coordinate itself when a new equilibrium price and quantity is reached.
Competition arises when more than one producer is trying to sell the same or similar products to the same buyers. In capitalist theory, competition leads to innovation and more affordable prices. Without competition, a monopoly or cartel may develop. A monopoly occurs when a firm supplies the total output in the market; the firm can therefore limit output and raise prices because it has no fear of competition. A cartel is a group of firms that act together in a monopolistic manner to control output and prices.
Efforts are made by government to prevent the creation of monopolies and cartels. In 1890, the Sherman Anti-Trust Act became the first legislation passed by the U.S. Congress to limit monopolies. [80]
Profit motive[edit]
The profit motive is a theory in capitalism which posits that the ultimate goal of a business is to make money. Stated differently, the reason for a business's existence is to turn a profit. The profit motive functions on the rational choice theory, or the theory that individuals tend to pursue what is in their own best interests. Accordingly, businesses seek to benefit themselves and/or their shareholders by maximizing profits.
In capitalist theoretics, the profit motive is said to ensure that resources are being allocated efficiently. For instance, Austrian economist Henry Hazlitt explains: “If there is no profit in making an article, it is a sign that the labor and capital devoted to its production are misdirected: the value of the resources that must be used up in making the article is greater than the value of the article itself."[81] In other words, profits let companies know whether an item is worth producing. Theoretically in free and competitive markets, maximising profits ensures that resources are not wasted.
Private property[edit]
The relationship between the state, its formal mechanisms, and capitalist societies has been debated in many fields of social and political theory, with active discussion since the 19th century. Hernando de Soto is a contemporary economist who has argued that an important characteristic of capitalism is the functioning state protection of property rights in a formal property system where ownership and transactions are clearly recorded.[82]
According to de Soto, this is the process by which physical assets are transformed into capital, which in turn may be used in many more ways and much more efficiently in the market economy. A number of Marxian economists have argued that the Enclosure Acts in England, and similar legislation elsewhere, were an integral part of capitalist primitive accumulation and that specific legal frameworks of private land ownership have been integral to the development of capitalism.[83][84]
Market competition[edit]
Main article: Competition (economics)
In capitalist economics, market competition is the rivalry among sellers trying to achieve such goals as increasing profits, market share, and sales volume by varying the elements of the marketing mix: price, product, distribution, and promotion. Merriam-Webster defines competition in business as "the effort of two or more parties acting independently to secure the business of a third party by offering the most favourable terms".[85] It was described by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations (1776) and later economists as allocating productive resources to their most highly valued uses[86] and encouraging efficiency. Smith and other classical economists before Cournot were referring to price and non-price rivalry among producers to sell their goods on best terms by bidding of buyers, not necessarily to a large number of sellers nor to a market in final equilibrium.[87] Competition is widespread throughout the market process. It is a condition where "buyers tend to compete with other buyers, and sellers tend to compete with other sellers".[88] In offering goods for exchange, buyers competitively bid to purchase specific quantities of specific goods which are available, or might be available if sellers were to choose to offer such goods. Similarly, sellers bid against other sellers in offering goods on the market, competing for the attention and exchange resources of buyers. Competition results from scarcity – there is never enough to satisfy all conceivable human wants – and occurs "when people strive to meet the criteria that are being used to determine who gets what".[88]
Reserve army of labour[edit]
Main article: Reserve army of labour
In a Marxist analysis of the capitalist economy, the reserve army of labour refers to the unemployed and under-employed.[89] It is synonymous with "industrial reserve army" or "relative surplus population", except that the unemployed can be defined as those actually looking for work and that the relative surplus population also includes people unable to work. The use of the word "army" refers to the workers being conscripted and regimented in the workplace in a hierarchy, under the commanding heights of the economy.
Prior to the start of the capitalist era in human history (i.e. before the 1500s), structural unemployment on a mass scale rarely existed, other than that caused by natural disasters and wars.[90] In ancient societies, all people who could work necessarily had to work, otherwise they would starve; a slave or a serf by definition could not become "unemployed". There was normally very little possibility of "earning a crust" without working at all, and the usual attitude toward beggars and idlers was harsh.[91] Children began to work already at a very early age. Indeed, the word "employment" is linguistically a product of the capitalist era. A permanent level of unemployment presupposes a working population which is to a large extent dependent on a wage or salary for a living, without having other means of livelihood, as well as the right of enterprises to hire and fire employees in accordance with commercial or economic conditions. The expression "unemployed" in English, in the sense of "temporarily out of work", dates back to the 1660s; reference to "the unemployed" as a group was first made in 1782; and reference to "unemployment" as a general condition is first attested in 1888.[92]
The first recorded discussion of the reserve army of labour is in a manuscript written by Karl Marx:

Big industry constantly requires a reserve army of unemployed workers for times of overproduction. The main purpose of the bourgeois in relation to the worker is, of course, to have the commodity labour as cheaply as possible, which is only possible when the supply of this commodity is as large as possible in relation to the demand for it, i.e., when the overpopulation is the greatest. Overpopulation is therefore in the interest of the bourgeoisie, and it gives the workers good advice which it knows to be impossible to carry out. Since capital only increases when it employs workers, the increase of capital involves an increase of the proletariat, and, as we have seen, according to the nature of the relation of capital and labour, the increase of the proletariat must proceed relatively even faster. The... theory... which is also expressed as a law of nature, that population grows faster than the means of subsistence, is the more welcome to the bourgeois as it silences his conscience, makes hard-heartedness into a moral duty and the consequences of society into the consequences of nature, and finally gives him the opportunity to watch the destruction of the proletariat by starvation as calmly as other natural event without bestirring himself, and, on the other hand, to regard the misery of the proletariat as its own fault and to punish it. To be sure, the proletarian can restrain his natural instinct by reason, and so, by moral supervision, halt the law of nature in its injurious course of development. — Karl Marx, Wages, December 1847[93]

Marx introduced the concept in chapter 25 of the first volume of Das Kapital,[94] which states:

Capitalistic accumulation itself... constantly produces, and produces in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a relatively redundant population of workers, i.e., a population of greater extent than suffices for the average needs of the valorisation of capital, and therefore a surplus-population... It is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of labourers, if the cost is about the same... The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this motive. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital.

His argument is that as capitalism develops, the organic composition of capital will increase, which means that the mass of constant capital grows faster than the mass of variable capital. Fewer workers can produce all that is necessary for society's requirements. In addition, capital will become more concentrated and centralised in fewer hands. This being the absolute historical tendency, part of the working population will tend to become surplus to the requirements of capital accumulation over time. Paradoxically, the larger the wealth of society, the larger the industrial reserve army will become. Marx called it "the antagonism of capital accumulation" and he cites his The Poverty of Philosophy, (Chapter 2, Section 1) to explain this phenomenon in relation with relations of production.[95] One could add that the larger the wealth of society, the more people it can support who do not work. However, as Marx develops the argument further, it also becomes clear that, depending on the state of the economy, the reserve army of labour will either expand or contract, alternately being absorbed or expelled from the employed workforce.

Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are exclusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. They are, therefore, not determined by the variations of the absolute number of the working population, but by the varying proportions in which the working-class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the relative amount of the surplus-population, by the extent to which it is now absorbed, now set free.

In recent years, there has been growing research on the concept of "the precariat", to describe a growing reliance on temporary, part-time workers with precarious status, who share aspects of the proletariat and the reserve army of labor.[96] Precarious workers do work part-time or full-time in temporary jobs, but they cannot really earn enough to live on, and depend partly on friends or family, or on state benefits, to survive. Typically they do not become truly "unemployed", but they don't have a stable job to go to either.[97] The rise of "the precariat" has been attributed to the emergence of global neoliberalism.[98]
Although non-employed people who are unable or uninterested in performing legal paid work are not considered among the "unemployed", the concept of "conjunctural unemployment" is used in economics nowadays.[99] Economists often distinguish between short-term "frictional" or "cyclical" unemployment, and longer-term "structural unemployment". Sometimes there is a short-term mismatch between the demand and supply of labour, at other times there is much less total demand for labour than supply for a long-time. If no possibility for getting a job at all in the foreseeable future exists, many younger people decide to migrate or emigrate to a place where they can find work.
Composition of the relative surplus population[edit]
Marx discusses the army of labor and the reserve army in Capital, Ch. 25, Section IV. The Army of Labor consists in those working-class people employed in average or better than average jobs. Not every one in the working class gets one of these jobs. There are then four other categories where members of the working class might find themselves: the "stagnant pool", the floating reserves, the latent reserve, and pauperdom. Finally, people may leave the army and the reserve army by turning to criminality, and Marx refers to such people as "lumpenproletariat".[100]

The stagnant part consists of marginalised people with "extremely irregular employment". Stagnant pool jobs are characterized by below average pay, dangerous working conditions, they may be temporary. Those caught in the stagnant pool have jobs, so the modern definition of the employed would include both the army of labor plus the stagnant pool. However, they are constantly on the lookout for something better.

The modern unemployed would refer primarily to the floating reserve, people who used to have good jobs, but are now out of work. They certainly hope that their unemployment is temporary ("conjunctural unemployment"), but they are well aware that they could fall into the stagnant pool or the pauper class.

The latent part consists of that segment of the population not yet fully integrated into capitalist production. In Marx' day, he was referring to people living off of subsistence agriculture who were looking for monetary employment in industry. In modern times, people coming from slums in developing countries where they survive largely by non-monetary means, to developed cities where they work for pay might form the latent. Housewives who move from unpaid to paid employment for a business could also form a part of the latent reserve. They are not unemployed, because they are not necessarily actively looking for a job; but if capital needs extra workers, it can pull them out of the latent reserve. In this sense, the latent forms a reservoir of potential workers for industries.
Pauperdom is where one might end up. The homeless is the modern term for paupers. Marx calls them people who cannot adapt to capital's never ending change. For Karl Marx, "the sphere of pauperism", including those still able to work, orphans and pauper children, and the "demoralised and ragged" or "unable to work".

As a mode of production[edit]
Further information: Mode of production
In Karl Marx' critique of political economy and subsequent Marxian analyses, the capitalist mode of production refers to the systems of organising production and distribution within capitalist societies. Private money-making in various forms (renting, banking, merchant trade, production for profit, etc.) preceded the development of the capitalist mode of production as such. The capitalist mode of production proper, based on wage-labour and private ownership of the means of production, and on industrial technology, began to grow rapidly in Western Europe from the industrial revolution, later extending to most of the world.[citation needed]
The term capitalist mode of production is defined by private ownership of the means of production, extraction of surplus value by the owning class for the purpose of capital accumulation, wage-based labour, and, at least as far as commodities are concerned, being market-based.[101]
Capitalism in the form of money-making activity has existed in the shape of merchants and money-lenders who acted as intermediaries between consumers and producers engaging in simple commodity production (hence the reference to "merchant capitalism") since the beginnings of civilisation. What is specific about the “capitalist mode of production” is that most of the inputs and outputs of production are supplied through the market (i.e. they are commodities) and essentially all production is in this mode.[9] For example, in flourishing Feudalism, most or all of the factors of production including labour are owned by the feudal ruling class outright and the products may also be consumed without a market of any kind, it is production for use within the feudal social unit and for limited trade.[75] This has the important consequence that the whole organisation of the production process is reshaped and re-organised to conform with economic rationality as bounded by capitalism, which is expressed in price relationships between inputs and outputs (wages, non-labour factor costs, sales, profits) rather than the larger rational context faced by society overall. That is, the whole process is organised and re-shaped in order to conform to “commercial logic”. Essentially, capital accumulation comes to define economic rationality in capitalist production.[73]
A society, region or nation is capitalist if the predominant source of incomes and products being distributed is capitalist activity, but even so this does not yet mean necessarily that the capitalist mode of production is dominant in that society.
Wage labour[edit]
Main article: Wage labour




An industrial worker amidst heavy steel semi-products (Kinex Bearings, Bytča, Slovakia, c. 1995–2000)


Wage labour refers to the sale of labour under a formal or informal employment contract to an employer.[102] These transactions usually occur in a labour market where wages are market determined.[103] Individuals who possess and supply financial capital or labor to productive ventures often become owners, either jointly (as shareholders) or individually. In Marxist economics these owners of the means of production and suppliers of capital are generally called capitalists. The description of the role of the capitalist has shifted, first referring to a useless intermediary between producers to an employer of producers, and eventually came to refer to owners of the means of production.[104] Labor includes all physical and mental human resources, including entrepreneurial capacity and management skills, which are needed to produce products and services. Production is the act of making goods or services by applying labor power.[105][106]
Critics of the capitalist mode of production see wage labour as a major, if not defining, aspect of hierarchical industrial systems. Most opponents of the institution support worker self-management and economic democracy as alternatives to both wage labour and to capitalism. While most opponents of the wage system blame the capitalist owners of the means of production for its existence, most anarchists and other libertarian socialists also hold the state as equally responsible as it exists as a tool utilised by capitalists to subsidise themselves and protect the institution of private ownership of the means of production. As some opponents of wage labour take influence from Marxist propositions, many are opposed to private property, but maintain respect for personal property.
Types[edit]
The most common form of wage labour currently is ordinary direct, or "full-time", employment in which a free worker sells his or her labour for an indeterminate time (from a few years to the entire career of the worker), in return for a money-wage or salary and a continuing relationship with the employer which it does not in general offer contractors or other irregular staff. However, wage labour takes many other forms, and explicit as opposed to implicit (i.e. conditioned by local labour and tax law) contracts are not uncommon. Economic history shows a great variety of ways in which labour is traded and exchanged. The differences show up in the form of:

Employment status: a worker could be employed full-time, part-time, or on a casual basis. He or she could be employed for example temporarily for a specific project only, or on a permanent basis. Part-time wage labour could combine with part-time self-employment. The worker could be employed also as an apprentice.
Civil (legal) status: the worker could for example be a free citizen, an indentured labourer, the subject of forced labour (including some prison or army labour); a worker could be assigned by the political authorities to a task, they could be a semi-slave or a serf bound to the land who is hired out part of the time. So the labour might be performed on a more or less voluntary basis, or on a more or less involuntary basis, in which there are many gradations.
Method of payment (remuneration or compensation). The work done could be paid "in cash" (a money-wage) or "in kind" (through receiving goods and/or services), or in the form of "piece rates" where the wage is directly dependent on how much the worker produces. In some cases, the worker might be paid in the form of credit used to buy goods and services, or in the form of stock options or shares in an enterprise.
Method of hiring: the worker might engage in a labour-contract on his or her own initiative, or he or she might hire out their labour as part of a group. But he or she may also hire out their labour via an intermediary (such as an employment agency) to a third party. In this case, he or she is paid by the intermediary, but works for a third party which pays the intermediary. In some cases, labour is subcontracted several times, with several intermediaries. Another possibility is that the worker is assigned or posted to a job by a political authority, or that an agency hires out a worker to an enterprise together with means of production.

Comparison to slavery[edit]
Main article: Wage slavery




Pinkerton guards escort strikebreakers in Buchtel, Ohio, 1884


Wage labour has long been compared to slavery.[107][108][109][110] As a result, the phrase “wage slavery” is often utilised as a pejorative for wage labour.[111] Similarly, advocates of slavery looked upon the "comparative evils of Slave Society and of Free Society, of slavery to human Masters and slavery to Capital",[112] and proceeded to argue that wage slavery was actually worse than chattel slavery.[113] Slavery apologists like George Fitzhugh contended that workers only accepted wage labour with the passage of time, as they became "familiarised and inattentive to the infected social atmosphere they continually inhale".[112] Scholars have debated the exact relationship between wage labor, slavery, and capitalism at length, especially for the antebellum United States.[114]
Similarities between wage labour and slavery were noted as early as Cicero in Ancient Rome.[115] With the advent of the industrial revolution, thinkers such as Proudhon and Marx elaborated the comparison between wage labour and slavery in the context of a critique of societal property not intended for active personal use,[116][117] while Luddites emphasised the dehumanisation brought about by machines. Before the American Civil War, Southern defenders of African American slavery invoked the concept of wage slavery to favorably compare the condition of their slaves to workers in the North.[118][119] The United States abolished slavery during the Civil War, but labor union activists found the metaphor useful. According to Lawrence Glickman, in the Gilded Age "references abounded in the labor press, and it is hard to find a speech by a labour leader without the phrase".[120]


The slave, together with his labour-power, was sold to his owner once for all.... The [wage] labourer, on the other hand, sells his very self, and that by fractions.... He [belongs] to the capitalist class; and it is for him ... to find a buyer in this capitalist class.[121]
“
”

Karl Marx
According to Noam Chomsky, analysis of the psychological implications of wage slavery goes back to the Enlightenment era. In his 1791 book On the Limits of State Action, classical liberal thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt explained how "whatever does not spring from a man's free choice, or is only the result of instruction and guidance, does not enter into his very nature; he does not perform it with truly human energies, but merely with mechanical exactness" and so when the labourer works under external control, "we may admire what he does, but we despise what he is".[122] Both the Milgram and Stanford experiments have been found useful in the psychological study of wage-based workplace relations.[123] Additionally, as per anthropologist David Graeber, the earliest wage labour contracts we know about were in fact contracts for the rental of chattel slaves (usually the owner would receive a share of the money, and the slave, another, with which to maintain his or her living expenses.) Such arrangements, according to Graeber, were quite common in New World slavery as well, whether in the United States or Brazil.[124] C. L. R. James argued in The Black Jacobins that most of the techniques of human organisation employed on factory workers during the industrial revolution were first developed on slave plantations.[125]




Girl pulling a coal tub in mine, from official report of the British parliamentary commission in the mid 19th century[126]


Some anti-capitalist thinkers claim that the elite maintain wage slavery and a divided working class through their influence over the media and entertainment industry,[127][128] educational institutions, unjust laws, nationalist and corporate propaganda, pressures and incentives to internalise values serviceable to the power structure, state violence, fear of unemployment[129] and a historical legacy of exploitation and profit accumulation/transfer under prior systems, which shaped the development of economic theory:
Adam Smith noted that employers often conspire together to keep wages low:[130]

The interest of the dealers... in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even opposite to, that of the public… [They] have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public… We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters, though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject. Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of labor above their actual rate… It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force the other into a compliance with their terms.

Aristotle made the statement "...the citizens must not live a mechanic or a mercantile life (for such a life is ignoble and inimical to virtue), nor yet must those who are to be citizens in the best state be tillers of the soil (for leisure is needed both for the development of virtue and for active participation in politics)",[131] often paraphrased as "all paid jobs absorb and degrade the mind."[132] Cicero wrote in 44 BC that "…vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their slavery".[133] Somewhat similar criticisms have also been expressed by some proponents of liberalism, like Henry George,[134][135] Silvio Gesell and Thomas Paine,[136] as well as the Distributist school of thought within the Roman Catholic Church.
To Marxist and anarchist thinkers like Bakunin and Kropotkin, wage slavery was a class condition in place due to the existence of private property and the state. This class situation rested primarily on:

the existence of property not intended for active use,
the concentration of ownership in few hands,
the lack of direct access by workers to the means of production and consumption goods
the perpetuation of a reserve army of unemployed workers.

For Marxists, labour-as-commodity, which is how they regard wage labour,[137] provides a fundamental point of attack against capitalism.[138] "It can be persuasively argued", noted one concerned philosopher, "that the conception of the worker's labour as a commodity confirms Marx's stigmatization of the wage system of private capitalism as 'wage-slavery;' that is, as an instrument of the capitalist's for reducing the worker's condition to that of a slave, if not below it."[139] That this objection is fundamental follows immediately from Marx's conclusion that wage labour is the very foundation of capitalism: "Without a class dependent on wages, the moment individuals confront each other as free persons, there can be no production of surplus value; without the production of surplus-value there can be no capitalist production, and hence no capital and no capitalist!"[140]
Systemic weaknesses[edit]
Externalities[edit]
Main articles: Externality and Commons
Market failure occurs when an externality is present and a market will often either under-produce a product with a positive externalisation or overproduce a product that generates a negative externalisation. Air pollution, for instance, is a negative externalisation that cannot be easily incorporated into markets as the world's air is not owned and then sold for use to polluters. So, too much pollution could be emitted and people not involved in the production pay the cost of the pollution instead of the firm that initially emitted the air pollution. Critics of market failure theory, like Ronald Coase, Harold Demsetz, and James M. Buchanan argue that government programs and policies also fall short of absolute perfection. While all nations currently have some kind of market regulations, the desirable degree of regulation is disputed.[citation needed]
Anti-competitive practices[edit]
Main article: Anti-competitive practices
Further information: Competition law
The doctrine of free competition is essential to the functioning of a capitalist economy and as such anti-competitive behaviour in the market poses a crucial weakness in capitalist economics. Issues such as monopolistic behaviour on the part of corporations and aspects of intellectual property laws pose problems to capitalist economies.
Capital accumulation[edit]
Main article: Capital accumulation
Further information: Money
The accumulation of capital refers to the process of "making money", or growing an initial sum of money through investment in production. Capitalism is based around the accumulation of capital, whereby financial capital is invested in order to make a profit and then reinvested into further production in a continuous process of accumulation. In Marxian economic theory, this dynamic is called the law of value. Capital accumulation forms the basis of capitalism, where economic activity is structured around the accumulation of capital, defined as investment in order to realize a financial profit.[141] In this context, "capital" is defined as money or a financial asset invested for the purpose of making more money (whether in the form of profit, rent, interest, royalties, capital gain or some other kind of return).[142]
In economics, accounting and Marxian economics, capital accumulation is often equated with investment of profit income or savings, especially in real capital goods. The concentration and centralisation of capital are two of the results of such accumulation. In modern macroeconomics and econometrics the phrase capital formation is often used in preference to "accumulation", though the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) refers nowadays to "accumulation". The phrase [clarification needed] is occasionally used in national accounts.
Background[edit]
Accumulation can be measured as the monetary value of investments, the amount of income that is reinvested, or as the change in the value of assets owned (the increase in the value of the capital stock). Using company balance sheets, tax data and direct surveys as a basis, government statisticians estimate total investments and assets for the purpose of national accounts, national balance of payments and flow of funds statistics. Usually the Reserve Banks and the Treasury provide interpretations and analysis of this data. Standard indicators include Capital formation, Gross fixed capital formation, fixed capital, household asset wealth, and foreign direct investment.
Organisations such as the International Monetary Fund, the UNCTAD, the World Bank Group, the OECD, and the Bank for International Settlements used national investment data to estimate world trends. The Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat and the Japan Statistical Office provide data on the United States, Europe and Japan respectively. Other useful sources of investment information are business magazines such as Fortune, Forbes, The Economist, Business Week, etc., and various corporate "watchdog" organisations and non-governmental organisation publications. A reputable scientific journal is the Review of Income & Wealth. In the case of the United States, the "Analytical Perspectives" document (an annex to the yearly budget) provides useful wealth and capital estimates applying to the whole country.
In Karl Marx' economic theory, capital accumulation refers to the operation whereby profits are reinvested increasing the total quantity of capital. Capital is viewed by Marx as expanding value, that is, in other terms, as a sum of capital, usually expressed in money, that is transformed through human labor into a larger value, extracted as profits and expressed as money. Here, capital is defined essentially as economic or commercial asset value in search of additional value or surplus-value. This requires property relations which enable objects of value to be appropriated and owned, and trading rights to be established. Capital accumulation has a double origin, namely in trade and in expropriation, both of a legal or illegal kind. The reason is that a stock of capital can be increased through a process of exchange or "trading up" but also through directly taking an asset or resource from someone else, without compensation. David Harvey calls this accumulation by dispossession.
The continuation and progress of capital accumulation depends on the removal of obstacles to the expansion of trade, and this has historically often been a violent process. As markets expand, more and more new opportunities develop for accumulating capital, because more and more types of goods and services can be traded in. But capital accumulation may also confront resistance, when people refuse to sell, or refuse to buy (for example a strike by investors or workers, or consumer resistance).
Concentration and centralisation[edit]
According to Marx, capital has the tendency for concentration and centralization in the hands of the wealthy. Marx explains: "It is concentration of capitals already formed, destruction of their individual independence, expropriation of capitalist by capitalist, transformation of many small into few large capitals. ... Capital grows in one place to a huge mass in a single hand, because it has in another place been lost by many. ... The battle of competition is fought by cheapening of commodities. The cheapness of commodities demands, caeteris paribus, on the productiveness of labour, and this again on the scale of production. Therefore, the larger capitals beat the smaller. It will further be remembered that, with the development of the capitalist mode of production, there is an increase in the minimum amount of individual capital necessary to carry on a business under its normal conditions. The smaller capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which Modern Industry has only sporadically or incompletely got hold of. Here competition rages ... It always ends in the ruin of many small capitalists, whose capitals partly pass into the hands of their conquerors, partly vanish."[143]
The rate of accumulation[edit]
In Marxian economics, the rate of accumulation is defined as (1) the value of the real net increase in the stock of capital in an accounting period, (2) the proportion of realised surplus-value or profit-income which is reinvested, rather than consumed. This rate can be expressed by means of various ratios between the original capital outlay, the realised turnover, surplus-value or profit and reinvestments (see, e.g., the writings of the economist Michał Kalecki).
Other things being equal, the greater the amount of profit-income that is disbursed as personal earnings and used for consumptive purposes, the lower the savings rate and the lower the rate of accumulation is likely to be. However, earnings spent on consumption can also stimulate market demand and higher investment. This is the cause of endless controversies in economic theory about "how much to spend, and how much to save".
In a boom period of capitalism, the growth of investments is cumulative, i.e. one investment leads to another, leading to a constantly expanding market, an expanding labor force, and an increase in the standard of living for the majority of the people.
In a stagnating, decadent capitalism, the accumulation process is increasingly oriented towards investment on military and security forces, real estate, financial speculation, and luxury consumption. In that case, income from value-adding production will decline in favour of interest, rent and tax income, with as a corollary an increase in the level of permanent unemployment. The more capital one owns, the more capital one can also borrow. The inverse is also true, and this is one factor in the widening gap between the rich and the poor.
Ernest Mandel emphasised that the rhythm of capital accumulation and growth depended critically on (1) the division of a society's social product between "necessary product" and "surplus product", and (2) the division of the surplus product between investment and consumption. In turn, this allocation pattern reflected the outcome of competition among capitalists, competition between capitalists and workers, and competition between workers. The pattern of capital accumulation can therefore never be simply explained by commercial factors, it also involved social factors and power relationships.
The circuit of capital accumulation from production[edit]
Strictly speaking, capital has accumulated only when realised profit income has been reinvested in capital assets. But the process of capital accumulation in production has, as suggested in the first volume of Marx' Das Kapital, at least seven distinct but linked moments:

The initial investment of capital (which could be borrowed capital) in means of production and labor power.
The command over surplus-labour and its appropriation.
The valorisation (increase in value) of capital through production of new outputs.
The appropriation of the new output produced by employees, containing the added value.
The realisation of surplus-value through output sales.
The appropriation of realised surplus-value as (profit) income after deduction of costs.
The reinvestment of profit income in production.

All of these moments do not refer simply to an "economic" or commercial process. Rather, they assume the existence of legal, social, cultural and economic power conditions, without which creation, distribution and circulation of the new wealth could not occur. This becomes especially clear when the attempt is made to create a market where none exists, or where people refuse to trade.
Simple and expanded reproduction[edit]
In volume 2 of Das Kapital, Marx continues the story and shows that, with the aid of bank credit, capital in search of growth can more or less smoothly mutate from one form to another, alternately taking the form of money capital (liquid deposits, securities, etc.), commodity capital (tradable products, real estate etc.), or production capital (means of production and labor power).
His discussion of the simple and expanded reproduction of the conditions of production offers a more sophisticated model of the parameters of the accumulation process as a whole. At simple reproduction, a sufficient amount is produced to sustain society at the given living standard; the stock of capital stays constant. At expanded reproduction, more product-value is produced than is necessary to sustain society at a given living standard (a surplus product); the additional product-value is available for investments which enlarge the scale and variety of production.
The bourgeois claim there is no economic law according to which capital is necessarily re-invested in the expansion of production, that such depends on anticipated profitability, market expectations and perceptions of investment risk. Such statements only explain the subjective experiences of investors and ignore the objective realities which would influence such opinions. As Marx states in Vol. 2, simple reproduction only exists if the variable and surplus capital realised by Dept. 1 – producers of means of production – exactly equals that of the constant capital of Dept. 2, producers of articles of consumption (p. 524). Such equilibrium rests on various assumptions, such as a constant labor supply (no population growth). Accumulation does not imply a necessary change in total magnitude of value produced but can simply refer to a change in the composition of an industry (p. 514).
Ernest Mandel introduced the additional concept of contracted economic reproduction, i.e. reduced accumulation where business operating at a loss outnumbers growing business, or economic reproduction on a decreasing scale, for example due to wars, natural disasters or devalorisation.
Balanced economic growth requires that different factors in the accumulation process expand in appropriate proportions. But markets themselves cannot spontaneously create that balance, in fact what drives business activity is precisely the imbalances between supply and demand: inequality is the motor of growth. This partly explains why the worldwide pattern of economic growth is very uneven and unequal, even although markets have existed almost everywhere for a very long-time. Some people argue that it also explains government regulation of market trade and protectionism.
Capital accumulation as social relation[edit]
"Accumulation of capital" sometimes also refers in Marxist writings to the reproduction of capitalist social relations (institutions) on a larger scale over time, i.e., the expansion of the size of the proletariat and of the wealth owned by the bourgeoisie.
This interpretation emphasises that capital ownership, predicated on command over labor, is a social relation: the growth of capital implies the growth of the working class (a "law of accumulation"). In the first volume of Das Kapital Marx had illustrated this idea with reference to Edward Gibbon Wakefield's theory of colonisation:

Wakefield discovered that in the Colonies, property in money, means of subsistence, machines, and other means of production, does not as yet stamp a man as a capitalist if there be wanting the correlative – the wage-worker, the other man who is compelled to sell himself of his own free-will. He discovered that capital is not a thing, but a social relation between persons, established by the instrumentality of things. Mr. Peel, he moans, took with him from England to Swan River, West Australia, means of subsistence and of production to the amount of £50,000. Mr. Peel had the foresight to bring with him, besides, 3,000 persons of the working-class, men, women, and children. Once arrived at his destination, 'Mr. Peel was left without a servant to make his bed or fetch him water from the river.' Unhappy Mr. Peel, who provided for everything except the export of English modes of production to Swan River!
— Das Kapital, vol. 1, ch. 33

In the third volume of Das Kapital, Marx refers to the "fetishism of capital" reaching its highest point with interest-bearing capital, because now capital seems to grow of its own accord without anybody doing anything.

The relations of capital assume their most externalised and most fetish-like form in interest-bearing capital. We have here 



M
−

M
′



{\displaystyle M-M'}

, money creating more money, self-expanding value, without the process that effectuates these two extremes. In merchant's capital, 



M
−
C
−

M
′



{\displaystyle M-C-M'}

, there is at least the general form of the capitalistic movement, although it confines itself solely to the sphere of circulation, so that profit appears merely as profit derived from alienation; but it is at least seen to be the product of a social relation, not the product of a mere thing. (...) This is obliterated in 



M
−

M
′



{\displaystyle M-M'}

, the form of interest-bearing capital. (...) The thing (money, commodity, value) is now capital even as a mere thing, and capital appears as a mere thing. The result of the entire process of reproduction appears as a property inherent in the thing itself. It depends on the owner of the money, i.e., of the commodity in its continually exchangeable form, whether he wants to spend it as money or loan it out as capital. In interest-bearing capital, therefore, this automatic fetish, self-expanding value, money generating money, are brought out in their pure state and in this form it no longer bears the birth-marks of its origin. The social relation is consummated in the relation of a thing, of money, to itself. Instead of the actual transformation of money into capital, we see here only form without content.
— "Das Kapital", vol. 1, ch. 24

Supply and demand[edit]




The price P of a product is determined by a balance between production at each price (supply S) and the desires of those with purchasing power at each price (demand D): the diagram shows a positive shift in demand from D1 to D2, resulting in an increase in price (P) and quantity sold (Q) of the product


In capitalist economic structures, supply and demand is an economic model of price determination in a market. It concludes that in a competitive market, the unit price for a particular good will vary until it settles at a point where the quantity demanded by consumers (at current price) will equal the quantity supplied by producers (at current price), resulting in an economic equilibrium for price and quantity.
The four basic laws of supply and demand are:[144]:37

If demand increases (demand curve shifts to the right) and supply remains unchanged, then a shortage occurs, leading to a higher equilibrium price.
If demand decreases (demand curve shifts to the left) and supply remains unchanged, then a surplus occurs, leading to a lower equilibrium price.
If demand remains unchanged and supply increases (supply curve shifts to the right), then a surplus occurs, leading to a lower equilibrium price.
If demand remains unchanged and supply decreases (supply curve shifts to the left), then a shortage occurs, leading to a higher equilibrium price.

Graphical representation of supply and demand[edit]
Although it is normal to regard the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied as functions of the price of the goods, the standard graphical representation, usually attributed to Alfred Marshall, has price on the vertical axis and quantity on the horizontal axis, the opposite of the standard convention for the representation of a mathematical function.
Since determinants of supply and demand other than the price of the goods in question are not explicitly represented in the supply-demand diagram, changes in the values of these variables are represented by moving the supply and demand curves (often described as "shifts" in the curves). By contrast, responses to changes in the price of the good are represented as movements along unchanged supply and demand curves.
Supply schedule[edit]
A supply schedule is a table that shows the relationship between the price of a good and the quantity supplied. Under the assumption of perfect competition, supply is determined by marginal cost. That is: firms will produce additional output while the cost of producing an extra unit of output is less than the price they would receive.
A hike in the cost of raw goods would decrease supply, shifting costs up, while a discount would increase supply, shifting costs down and hurting producers as producer surplus decreases.
By its very nature, conceptualising a supply curve requires the firm to be a perfect competitor (i.e. to have no influence over the market price). This is true because each point on the supply curve is the answer to the question "If this firm is faced with this potential price, how much output will it be able to and willing to sell?" If a firm has market power, its decision of how much output to provide to the market influences the market price, therefore the firm is not "faced with" any price, and the question becomes less relevant.
Economists distinguish between the supply curve of an individual firm and between the market supply curve. The market supply curve is obtained by summing the quantities supplied by all suppliers at each potential price. Thus, in the graph of the supply curve, individual firms' supply curves are added horizontally to obtain the market supply curve.
Economists also distinguish the short-run market supply curve from the long-run market supply curve. In this context, two things are assumed constant by definition of the short run: the availability of one or more fixed inputs (typically physical capital), and the number of firms in the industry. In the long-run, firms can adjust their holdings of physical capital, enabling them to better adjust their quantity supplied at any given price. Furthermore, in the long-run potential competitors can enter or exit the industry in response to market conditions. For both of these reasons, long-run market supply curves are generally flatter than their short-run counterparts.
The determinants of supply are:

Production costs: how much a goods costs to be produced. Production costs are the cost of the inputs; primarily labor, capital, energy and materials. They depend on the technology used in production, and/or technological advances. See: Productivity.
Firms' expectations about future prices.
Number of suppliers.

Demand schedule[edit]
A demand schedule, depicted graphically as the demand curve, represents the amount of some goods that buyers are willing and able to purchase at various prices, assuming all determinants of demand other than the price of the good in question, such as income, tastes and preferences, the price of substitute goods, and the price of complementary goods, remain the same. Following the law of demand, the demand curve is almost always represented as downward-sloping, meaning that as price decreases, consumers will buy more of the good.[145]
Just like the supply curves reflect marginal cost curves, demand curves are determined by marginal utility curves.[146] Consumers will be willing to buy a given quantity of a good, at a given price, if the marginal utility of additional consumption is equal to the opportunity cost determined by the price, that is the marginal utility of alternative consumption choices. The demand schedule is defined as the willingness and ability of a consumer to purchase a given product in a given frame of time.
While the aforementioned demand curve is generally downward-sloping, there may be rare examples of goods that have upward-sloping demand curves. Two different hypothetical types of goods with upward-sloping demand curves are Giffen goods (an inferior but staple good) and Veblen goods (goods made more fashionable by a higher price).
By its very nature, conceptualising a demand curve requires that the purchaser be a perfect competitor – that is, that the purchaser has no influence over the market price. This is true because each point on the demand curve is the answer to the question "If this buyer is faced with this potential price, how much of the product will it purchase?" If a buyer has market power, so its decision of how much to buy influences the market price, then the buyer is not "faced with" any price, and the question is meaningless.
Like with supply curves, economists distinguish between the demand curve of an individual and the market demand curve. The market demand curve is obtained by summing the quantities demanded by all consumers at each potential price. Thus, in the graph of the demand curve, individuals' demand curves are added horizontally to obtain the market demand curve.
The determinants of demand are:

Income.
Tastes and preferences.
Prices of related goods and services.
Consumers' expectations about future prices and incomes that can be checked.
Number of potential consumers.

Equilibrium[edit]
Further information: Economic equilibrium
In the context of supply and demand, economic equilibrium refers to a state where economic forces such as supply and demand are balanced and in the absence of external influences the (equilibrium) values of economic variables will not change. For example, in the standard text-book model of perfect competition, equilibrium occurs at the point at which quantity demanded and quantity supplied are equal.[147] Market equilibrium in this case refers to a condition where a market price is established through competition such that the amount of goods or services sought by buyers is equal to the amount of goods or services produced by sellers. This price is often called the competitive price or market clearing price and will tend not to change unless demand or supply changes and the quantity is called "competitive quantity" or market clearing quantity.
Partial equilibrium[edit]
Main article: Partial equilibrium
Partial equilibrium, as the name suggests, takes into consideration only a part of the market to attain equilibrium.
Jain proposes (attributed to George Stigler): "A partial equilibrium is one which is based on only a restricted range of data, a standard example is price of a single product, the prices of all other products being held fixed during the analysis."[148]
The supply-and-demand model is a partial equilibrium model of economic equilibrium, where the clearance on the market of some specific goods is obtained independently from prices and quantities in other markets. In other words, the prices of all substitutes and complements, as well as income levels of consumers are constant. This makes analysis much simpler than in a general equilibrium model which includes an entire economy.
Here the dynamic process is that prices adjust until supply equals demand. It is a powerfully simple technique that allows one to study equilibrium, efficiency and comparative statics. The stringency of the simplifying assumptions inherent in this approach make the model considerably more tractable, but may produce results which while seemingly precise do not effectively model real world economic phenomena.
Partial equilibrium analysis examines the effects of policy action in creating equilibrium only in that particular sector or market which is directly affected, ignoring its effect in any other market or industry assuming that they being small will have little impact if any.
Hence this analysis is considered to be useful in constricted markets.
Léon Walras first formalised the idea of a one-period economic equilibrium of the general economic system, but it was French economist Antoine Augustin Cournot and English political economist Alfred Marshall who developed tractable models to analyse an economic system.
Empirical estimation[edit]
Demand and supply relations in a market can be statistically estimated from price, quantity, and other data with sufficient information in the model. This can be done with simultaneous-equation methods of estimation in econometrics. Such methods allow solving for the model-relevant "structural coefficients", the estimated algebraic counterparts of the theory. The parameter identification problem is a common issue in "structural estimation". Typically, data on exogenous variables (that is: variables other than price and quantity, both of which are endogenous variables) are needed to perform such an estimation. An alternative to "structural estimation" is reduced-form estimation, which regresses each of the endogenous variables on the respective exogenous variables.
Macroeconomic uses of demand and supply[edit]
Demand and supply have also been generalised to explain macroeconomic variables in a market economy, including the quantity of total output and the general price level. The Aggregate Demand – Aggregate Supply model may be the most direct application of supply and demand to macroeconomics, but other macroeconomic models also use supply and demand. Compared to microeconomic uses of demand and supply, different (and more controversial) theoretical considerations apply to such macroeconomic counterparts as aggregate demand and aggregate supply. Demand and supply are also used in macroeconomic theory to relate money supply and money demand to interest rates, and to relate labor supply and labor demand to wage rates.
History[edit]
According to Hamid S. Hosseini, the power of supply and demand was understood to some extent by several early Muslim scholars, such as fourteenth-century Mamluk scholar Ibn Taymiyyah, who wrote: "If desire for goods increases while its availability decreases, its price rises. On the other hand, if availability of the good increases and the desire for it decreases, the price comes down."[149]




Adam Smith


John Locke's 1691 work Some Considerations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money.[150] includes an early and clear description of supply and demand and their relationship. In this description demand is rent: "The price of any commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of buyer and sellers” and “that which regulates the price... [of goods] is nothing else but their quantity in proportion to their rent".
The phrase "supply and demand" was first used by James Denham-Steuart in his Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy, published in 1767. Adam Smith used the phrase in his 1776 book The Wealth of Nations, and David Ricardo titled one chapter of his 1817 work Principles of Political Economy and Taxation "On the Influence of Demand and Supply on Price".[151]
In The Wealth of Nations, Smith generally assumed that the supply price was fixed but that its "merit" (value) would decrease as its "scarcity" increased, in effect what was later called the law of demand also. Ricardo, in Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, more rigorously laid down the idea of the assumptions that were used to build his ideas of supply and demand. Antoine Augustin Cournot first developed a mathematical model of supply and demand in his 1838 Researches into the Mathematical Principles of Wealth, including diagrams.
During the late 19th century the marginalist school of thought emerged. This field mainly was started by Stanley Jevons, Carl Menger, and Léon Walras. The key idea was that the price was set by the most expensive price, that is, the price at the margin. This was a substantial change from Adam Smith's thoughts on determining the supply price.
In his 1870 essay "On the Graphical Representation of Supply and Demand", Fleeming Jenkin in the course of "introduc[ing] the diagrammatic method into the English economic literature" published the first drawing of supply and demand curves therein,[152] including comparative statics from a shift of supply or demand and application to the labor market.[153] The model was further developed and popularized by Alfred Marshall in the 1890 textbook Principles of Economics.[151]
Capitalism and war[edit]
War typically causes the diversion, destruction and creation of capital assets as capital assets are both destroyed or consumed and diverted to types of production needed to fight the war. Many assets are wasted and in some few cases created specifically to fight a war. War driven demands may be a powerful stimulus for the accumulation of capital and production capability in limited areas and market expansion outside the immediate theatre of war. Often this has induced laws against perceived and real war profiteering.
The total hours worked in the United States rose by 34 percent during World War II, even though the military draft reduced the civilian labor force by 11 percent.[154]




Assembling the North American B-25 Mitchell at Kansas City, 1942: the common view among economic historians is that the Great Depression ended with the advent of World War II


War destruction can be illustrated by looking at World War II. Industrial war damage was heaviest in Japan, where 1/4 of factory buildings and 1/3 of plant & equipment were destroyed; 1/7 of electric power-generating capacity was destroyed and 6/7 of oil refining capacity. The Japanese merchant fleet lost 80% of their ships. In Germany in 1944, when air attacks were heaviest, 6.5% of machine tools were damaged or destroyed, but around 90% were later repaired. About 10% of steel production capacity was lost. In Europe, the United States and the Soviet Union enormous resources were accumulated and ultimately dissipated as planes, ships, tanks, etc. were built and then lost or destroyed.
Germany's total war damage was estimated at about 17.5% of the pre-war total capital stock by value, i.e. about 1/6. In the Berlin area alone, there were 8 million refugees lacking basic necessities. In 1945, less than 10% of the railways were still operating. 2395 rail bridges were destroyed and a total of 7500 bridges, 10,000 locomotives and more than 100,000 goods wagons were destroyed. Less than 40% of the remaining locomotives were operational.
However, by the first quarter of 1946 European rail traffic, which was given assistance and preferences (by western appointed military governors) for resources and material as an essential asset, regained its prewar operational level. At the end of the year, 90% of Germany's railway lines were operating again. In retrospect, the rapidity of infrastructure reconstruction appears astonishing.
Initially, in May 1945 newly installed United States president Harry S. Truman's directive had been that no steps would be taken towards economic rehabilitation of Germany. In fact, the initial industry plan of 1946 prohibited production in excess of half of the 1938 level; the iron and steel industry was allowed to produce only less than a third of pre-war output. These plans were rapidly revised and better plans were instituted. In 1946, over 10% of Germany's physical capital stock (plant & equipment) was also dismantled and confiscated, most of it going to the USSR. By 1947, industrial production in Germany was at 1/3 of the 1938 level, and industrial investment at about 1/2 the 1938 level.
The first big strike-wave in the Ruhr occurred in early 1947 – it was about food rations and housing, but soon there were demands for nationalisation. The United States appointed military governor (Newman) however stated at the time that he had the power to break strikes by withholding food rations. The clear message was: "no work, no eat". As the military controls in Western Germany were nearly all relinquished and the Germans were allowed to rebuild their own economy with Marshall Plan aid things rapidly improved. By 1951, German industrial production had overtaken the prewar level. The Marshall Aid funds were important, but, after the currency reform (which permitted German capitalists to revalue their assets) and the establishment of a new political system, much more important was the commitment of the United States to rebuilding German capitalism and establishing a free market economy and government, rather than keeping Germany in a weak position. Initially, average real wages remained low, lower even than in 1938, until the early 1950s, while profitability was unusually high. So the total investment fund, aided by credits, was also high, resulting in a high rate of capital accumulation which was nearly all reinvested in new construction or new tools. This was called the German economic miracle or "Wirtschaftswunder".[155]
In Italy, the victorious Allies did three things in 1945: they imposed their absolute military authority; they quickly disarmed the Italian partisans from a very large stock of weapons; and they agreed to a state guarantee of wage payments, as well as a veto on all sackings of workers from their jobs.[156] Although the Italian Communist Party grew very large immediately after the war ended – it achieved a membership of 1.7 million people in a population of 45 million – it was outmaneouvred through a complicated political battle by the Christian Democrats, after three years.[157] In the 1950s, an economic boom began in Italy, at first fuelled by internal demand, and then also by exports.[158]
In modern times, it has often been possible to rebuild physical capital assets destroyed in wars completely within the space of about 10 years, except in cases of severe pollution by chemical warfare or other kinds of irreparable devastation. However, damage to human capital has been much more devastating, in terms of fatalities (in the case of World War II, about 55 million deaths), permanent physical disability, enduring ethnic hostility and psychological injuries which have effects for at least several generations.
Types of capitalism[edit]
There are many variants of capitalism in existence that differ according to country and region. They vary in their institutional makeup and by their economic policies. The common features among all the different forms of capitalism is that they are based on the production of goods and services for profit, predominantly market-based allocation of resources, and they are structured upon the accumulation of capital. The major forms of capitalism are listed hereafter:
Advanced capitalism[edit]
Main article: Advanced capitalism
Advanced capitalism is the situation that pertains to a society in which the capitalist model has been integrated and developed deeply and extensively for a prolonged period. Various writers identify Antonio Gramsci as an influential early theorist of advanced capitalism, even if he did not use the term himself. In his writings Gramsci sought to explain how capitalism had adapted to avoid the revolutionary overthrow that had seemed inevitable in the 19th century. At the heart of his explanation was the decline of raw coercion as a tool of class power, replaced by use of civil society institutions to manipulate public ideology in the capitalists' favour.[159][160][161]
Jürgen Habermas has been a major contributor to the analysis of advanced-capitalistic societies. Habermas observed four general features that characterise advanced capitalism:

Concentration of industrial activity in a few large firms
Constant reliance on the state to stabilise the economic system
A formally democratic government that legitimises the activities of the state and dissipates opposition to the system
The use of nominal wage increases to pacify the most restless segments of the work force[162]

Finance capitalism[edit]
See also: Capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory)
In their critique of capitalism, Marxism and Leninism both emphasise the role of "Finance Capital" as the determining and ruling-class interest in capitalist society, particularly in the latter stages.[163][164]
Rudolf Hilferding is credited[by whom?] with first bringing the term "finance capitalism" into prominence through Finance Capital, his 1910 study of the links between German trusts, banks, and monopolies – a study subsumed by Lenin into Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917), his analysis of the imperialist relations of the great world powers.[165] Lenin concluded that the banks at that time operated as "the chief nerve centres of the whole capitalist system of national economy":[166] for the Comintern (founded in 1919), the phrase "dictatorship of finance capitalism"[167] became a regular one.
Braudel would later point to two earlier periods when finance capitalism had emerged in human history – with the Genoese in the 16th century and with the Dutch in the 17th and 18th centuries – although at those points it developed from commercial capitalism.[168][need quotation to verify] Giovanni Arrighi extended Braudel's analysis to suggest that a predominance of finance capitalism is a recurring, long-term phenomenon, whenever a previous phase of commercial/industrial capitalist expansion reaches a plateau.[169]
Mercantilism[edit]
Main articles: Mercantilism and Protectionism




The subscription room at Lloyd's of London in the early 19th century


Mercantilism is a nationalist form of early capitalism that came into existence approximately in the late 16th century. It is characterized by the intertwining of national business interests to state-interest and imperialism, and consequently, the state apparatus is utilized to advance national business interests abroad. An example of this is colonists living in America who were only allowed to trade with and purchase goods from their respective mother countries (e.g. Britain, Portugal, France). Mercantilism was driven by the belief that the wealth of a nation is increased through a positive balance of trade with other nations; it corresponds to the phase of capitalist development sometimes called the primitive accumulation of capital.
Free-market economy[edit]
See also: Free market and Laissez-faire
Free-market economy refers to a capitalist economic system where prices for goods and services are set freely by the forces of supply and demand and are allowed to reach their point of equilibrium without intervention by government policy. It typically entails support for highly competitive markets and private ownership of productive enterprises. Laissez-faire is a more extensive form of free-market economy where the role of the state is limited to protecting property rights.
Social-market economy[edit]
Main articles: Social market and Nordic model
A social-market economy is a nominally free-market system where government intervention in price formation is kept to a minimum but the state provides significant services in the area of social security, unemployment benefits and recognition of labor rights through national collective bargaining arrangements. This model is prominent in Western and Northern European countries, and Japan, albeit in slightly different configurations. The vast majority of enterprises are privately owned in this economic model.
Rhine capitalism refers to the contemporary model of capitalism and adaptation of the social market model that exists in continental Western Europe today.
State capitalism[edit]
Main article: State capitalism
State capitalism is a capitalist market economy dominated by state-owned enterprises, where the state enterprises are organized as commercial, profit-seeking businesses. The designation has been used broadly throughout the 20th century to designate a number of different economic forms, ranging from state-ownership in market economies to the command economies of the former Eastern Bloc. According to Aldo Musacchio, a professor at Harvard Business School, state capitalism is a system in which governments, whether democratic or autocratic, exercise a widespread influence on the economy either through direct ownership or various subsidies. Musacchio notes a number of differences between today's state capitalism and its predecessors. In his opinion, gone are the days when governments appointed bureaucrats to run companies: the world's largest state-owned enterprises are now traded on the public markets and kept in good health by large institutional investors. Contemporary state capitalism is associated with the East Asian model of capitalism, dirigisme and the economy of Norway.[170] Alternatively, Merriam-Webster defines state capitalism as "an economic system in which private capitalism is modified by a varying degree of government ownership and control".[171]
Friedrich Engels, in Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, argued that state-owned enterprises would characterize the final stage of capitalism, consisting of ownership and management of large-scale production and communication by the bourgeois state.[172] In his writings, Vladimir Lenin characterized the economy of Soviet Russia as state capitalist, believing state capitalism to be an early step toward the development of socialism.[173][174]
Some economists and left-wing academics including Richard D. Wolff and Noam Chomsky argue that the economies of the former Soviet Union and Eastern bloc represented a form of state capitalism because their internal organization within enterprises and the system of wage labor remained intact.[175][176][177]
The term is not used by Austrian school economists to describe state ownership of the means of production. The economist Ludwig von Mises argued that the designation of "state capitalism" was simply a new label for the old labels of "state socialism" and "planned economy", and differed only in non-essentials from these earlier designations.[178]
The debate between proponents of private versus state capitalism is centered around questions of managerial efficacy, productive efficiency, and fair distribution of wealth.
Corporate capitalism[edit]
Main article: Corporate capitalism
See also: State monopoly capitalism and Crony capitalism
Corporate capitalism is a free or mixed-market economy characterized by the dominance of hierarchical, bureaucratic corporations.
Mixed economy[edit]
Main article: Mixed economy
See also: Economic interventionism
A mixed economy is a largely market-based economy consisting of both private and public ownership of the means of production and economic interventionism through macroeconomic policies intended to correct market failures, reduce unemployment and keep inflation low. The degree of intervention in markets varies among different countries. Some mixed economies, such as France under dirigisme, also featured a degree of indirect economic planning over a largely capitalist-based economy.
Most modern capitalist economies are defined as "mixed economies" to some degree.[citation needed]
Racial capitalism[edit]
In her article "Racial Capitalism," Nancy Leong defines racial capitalism as "the process" that occurs when individuals or institutions profit "from the racial identity of another person."[179]
Others[edit]
Other variants of capitalism include:





Anarcho-capitalism
Community capitalism
Neo-capitalism




State monopoly capitalism
Welfare capitalism
Supercapitalism




Technocapitalism





Role of government[edit]
Further information: Competition regulator, Consumer protection, and Competition law
In a capitalist system, the government does not prohibit private property or prevent individuals from working where they please. The government does not prevent firms from determining what wages they will pay and what prices they will charge for their products. However, many countries have minimum wage laws and minimum safety standards.
Under some versions of capitalism, the government carries out a number of economic functions, such as issuing money, supervising public utilities and enforcing private contracts. Many countries have competition laws that prohibit monopolies and cartels from forming. Despite anti-monopoly laws, large corporations can form near-monopolies in some industries. Such firms can temporarily drop prices and accept losses to prevent competition from entering the market, and then raise them again once the threat of entry is reduced. In many countries, public utilities (e.g. electricity, heating fuel, communications) are able to operate as a monopoly under government regulation, due to high economies of scale.
Government agencies regulate the standards of service in many industries, such as airlines and broadcasting, as well as financing a wide range of programs. In addition, the government regulates the flow of capital and uses financial tools such as the interest rate to control factors such as inflation and unemployment.[180]
Adverse characteristics of capitalist governments[edit]
Democratic socialists argue that the role of the state in a capitalist society is to defend the interests of the bourgeoisie.[181] These governments take actions to implement such things as unified national markets, national currencies, and customs system.[181] Capitalist governments have also been criticised as oligarchic in nature[182] due to the inevitable inequality[183][184] characteristic of economic progress.[185][186]
Criticism[edit]
Further information: Opposition to capitalism and Criticism of capitalism




The Industrial Workers of the World poster "Pyramid of Capitalist System" (1911)


Critics of capitalism associate the economic system with social inequality; unfair distribution of wealth and power; materialism; repression of workers and trade unionists; social alienation; economic inequality; unemployment; and economic instability. Many socialists consider capitalism to be irrational, in that production and the direction of the economy are unplanned, creating many inconsistencies and internal contradictions.[187] Capitalism and individual property rights have been associated with the tragedy of the anticommons where owners are unable to agree. Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff postulates that capitalist economies prioritize profits and capital accumulation over the social needs of communities, and capitalist enterprises rarely include the workers in the basic decisions of the enterprise.[188]
Some labor historians and scholars have argued that unfree labor – by slaves, indentured servants, prisoners or other coerced persons – is compatible with capitalist relations. Tom Brass argued that unfree labor is acceptable to capital.[189][190] Historian Greg Grandin argues that capitalism has its origins in slavery: "when historians talk about the Atlantic market revolution, they are talking about capitalism. And when they are talking about capitalism, they are talking about slavery."[191] Historian Edward E. Baptist claims that slavery was an integral component in the violent development of American and global capitalism.[192]
According to Immanuel Wallerstein, institutional racism has been "one of the most significant pillars" of the capitalist system and serves as "the ideological justification for the hierarchization of the work-force and its highly unequal distributions of reward".[193]
Many aspects of capitalism have come under attack from the anti-globalization movement, which is primarily opposed to corporate capitalism. Environmentalists have argued that capitalism requires continual economic growth, and that it will inevitably deplete the finite natural resources of Earth and cause mass extinctions of animal and plant life.[194][195][196] Such critics argue that, while this neoliberalism or contemporary capitalism has indeed increased global trade, it has also destroyed traditional ways of life, exacerbated inequality and increased global poverty – with more living today in abject poverty than before neoliberalism, and that environmental indicators indicate massive environmental degradation since the late 1970s.[20][197][198]
Some scholars blame the financial crisis of 2007–08 on the neoliberal capitalist model.[205] Following the banking crisis of 2007, Alan Greenspan told the United States Congress on 23 October 2008: "The whole intellectual edifice collapsed. I made a mistake in presuming that the self-interests of organizations, specifically banks and others, were such that they were best capable of protecting their own shareholders. ... I was shocked."[206]
Many religions have criticized or opposed specific elements of capitalism. Traditional Judaism, Christianity, and Islam forbid lending money at interest,[207][208] although alternative methods of banking have been developed. Some Christians have criticized capitalism for its materialist aspects and its inability to account for the wellbeing of all people.[209] Many of Jesus' parables deal with economic concerns: farming, shepherding, being in debt, doing hard labor, being excluded from banquets and the houses of the rich, and have implications for wealth and power distribution.[210][211] Catholic scholars and clergy have often criticized capitalism because of its disenfranchisement of the poor often promoting distributism as an alternative. In his 84-page apostolic exhortation Evangelii gaudium, Catholic Pope Francis described unfettered capitalism as "a new tyranny" and called on world leaders to fight rising poverty and inequality:[212]

Some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world. This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and naive trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system. Meanwhile, the excluded are still waiting.[213]

Proponents of capitalism argue that it creates more prosperity than any other economic system, and that its benefits are mainly to the ordinary person.[214] Critics of capitalism variously associate it with economic instability,[215] an inability to provide for the well-being of all people,[216] and an unsustainable danger to the natural environment.[194] Socialists maintain that, although capitalism is superior to all previously existing economic systems (such as feudalism or slavery), the contradiction between class interests will only be resolved by advancing into a completely new social system of production and distribution in which all persons have an equal relationship to the means of production.[217]
The term capitalism in its modern sense is often attributed to Karl Marx.[43][218] In his magnum opus Capital, Marx analysed the "capitalist mode of production" using a method of understanding today known as Marxism. However, Marx himself rarely used the term "capitalism", while it was used twice in the more political interpretations of his work, primarily authored by his collaborator Friedrich Engels. In the 20th century, defenders of the capitalist system often replaced the term capitalism with phrases such as free enterprise and private enterprise and replaced capitalist with rentier and investor in reaction to the negative connotations associated with capitalism.[104]
Profit motive[edit]
The majority of criticisms against the profit motive centre on the idea that profits should not supersede the needs of people. Michael Moore's film Sicko, for example, attacks the healthcare industry for its alleged emphasis on profits at the expense of patients.[219] Moore explains:

We should have no talk of profit when it comes to helping people who are sick. The profit motive should be nowhere involved in this. And you know what? It's not fair to the insurance companies either because they have a fiduciary responsibility to make as much money as they can for their shareholders. Well, the way they make more money is to deny claims or to kick people off the rolls or to not even let people on the rolls because they have a pre-existing condition. You know, all of that is wrong.[220]

Another common criticism of the profit motive is that it is believed to encourage selfishness and greed. Critics of the profit motive contend that companies disregard morals or public safety in the pursuit of profits.[221]
Free-market economists counter that the profit motive, coupled with competition, actually reduces the final price of an item for consumption, rather than raising it. They argue that businesses profit by selling a good at a lower price and at a greater volume than the competition. Economist Thomas Sowell uses supermarkets as an example to illustrate this point: “It has been estimated that a supermarket makes a clear profit of about a penny on a dollar of sales. If that sounds pretty skimpy, remember that it is collecting that penny on every dollar at several cash registers simultaneously and, in many cases, around the clock.”[222]
U.S. economist Milton Friedman has argued that greed and self-interest are universal human traits. On a 1979 episode of The Phil Donahue Show, Friedman states: “The world runs on individuals pursuing their separate interests.” He continues by explaining that only in capitalist countries, where individuals can pursue their own self-interest, people have been able to escape from “grinding poverty”.[223]
Marxian responses[edit]
Main article: Marxian economics


Part of a series on


Marxian economics







Concepts



Capital (accumulation)
Capitalist mode of production
Class process
Commodity (production)
Concrete and abstract labor
Constant capital
Exchange value
Exploitation
Labour power
Labour theory of value
Law of accumulation
Law of value
Means of production
Mode of production
Monopoly capitalism
Organic composition of capital
Productive forces
Profit
Prices of production
Primitive accumulation
Rate of exploitation
Rate of profit
Real prices and ideal prices
Relations of production
Reproduction
Reserve army of labour
Socially necessary labour time
Socialist mode of production
Socialization
Simple commodity production
Surplus value
Surplus labour
Surplus product
Use value
Wage labour
Wage slavery
Value-form
Value product
Variable capital









Topics



Capital controversy
Crisis theory
Economic determinism
Immiseration thesis
Historical materialism
Okishio's theorem
Overaccumulation
Overdetermination
Overproduction
Kondratiev wave
Technological determinism
Technological unemployment

Temporal single-system
interpretation

Falling profit-rate tendency
Transformation problem
Underconsumption
Value









Variants



Analytical Marxism
Classical Marxism
Orthodox Marxism
Overaccumulation
Neo-Marxian economics
Underconsumptionism









Works




A Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy

Das Kapital
Grundrisse

Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts of 1844

The Accumulation of Capital
Monopoly Capital

The Theory of
Capitalist Development

Finance Capital









People



Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Vladimir Lenin
Rosa Luxemburg
Rudolf Hilferding
Leon Trotsky
Karl Kautsky
Ernest Mandel
Antonie Pannekoek
János Kornai
Andrew Kliman
Richard D. Wolff
Nikolai Kondratiev
Paul Sweezy
Nobuo Okishio
Ian Steedman
John Roemer
David Laibman
Paul A. Baran
Stephen Resnick
Michał Kalecki









Journals




Cambridge Journal of
Economics


International Journal of
Political Economy

Monthly Review
New School Economic Review
real-world economics review
Rethinking Marxism
Science and Society









Related topics



Evolutionary economics
Classical economics
Marxism
Marxist sociology
Neoclassical economics
Perspectives on capitalism
Political economy
Schools of economic thought
Socialist economics
Critiques of capitalism









Economics portal
Marxism portal







v
t
e





Marx considered capitalism to be a historically specific mode of production (the way in which the productive property is owned and controlled, combined with the corresponding social relations between individuals based on their connection with the process of production).[42]
The capitalist stage of development or "bourgeois society", for Marx, represented the most advanced form of social organization to date, but he also thought that the working classes would come to power in a worldwide socialist or communist transformation of human society as the end of the series of first aristocratic, then capitalist, and finally working class rule was reached.[224][225]
Following Adam Smith, Marx distinguished the use value of commodities from their exchange value in the market. Capital, according to Marx, is created with the purchase of commodities for the purpose of creating new commodities with an exchange value higher than the sum of the original purchases. For Marx, the use of labor power had itself become a commodity under capitalism; the exchange value of labor power, as reflected in the wage, is less than the value it produces for the capitalist.
This difference in values, he argues, constitutes surplus value, which the capitalists extract and accumulate. In his book Capital, Marx argues that the capitalist mode of production is distinguished by how the owners of capital extract this surplus from workers – all prior class societies had extracted surplus labor, but capitalism was new in doing so via the sale-value of produced commodities.[226] He argues that a core requirement of a capitalist society is that a large portion of the population must not possess sources of self-sustenance that would allow them to be independent, and are instead forced to sell their labor for a wage.[227][228][229]
In conjunction with his criticism of capitalism was Marx's belief that the working class, due to its relationship to the means of production and numerical superiority under capitalism, would be the driving force behind the socialist revolution.[230] This argument is intertwined with Marx' version of the labor theory of value arguing that labor is the source of all value, and thus of profit.
Vladimir Lenin, in Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916), further developed Marxist theory and argued that capitalism necessarily led to monopoly capitalism and the export of capital – which he also called "imperialism" – to find new markets and resources, representing the last and highest stage of capitalism.[231] Some 20th-century Marxian economists consider capitalism to be a social formation where capitalist class processes dominate, but are not exclusive.[232]
Capitalist class processes, to these thinkers, are simply those in which surplus labor takes the form of surplus value, usable as capital; other tendencies for utilization of labor nonetheless exist simultaneously in existing societies where capitalist processes predominate. However, other late Marxian thinkers argue that a social formation as a whole may be classed as capitalist if capitalism is the mode by which a surplus is extracted, even if this surplus is not produced by capitalist activity, as when an absolute majority of the population is engaged in non-capitalist economic activity.[233]
In Limits to Capital (1982), David Harvey outlines an overdetermined, "spatially restless" capitalism coupled with the spatiality of crisis formation and resolution.[234] Harvey used Marx's theory of crisis to aid his argument that capitalism must have its "fixes" but that we cannot predetermine what fixes will be implemented, nor in what form they will be. His work on contractions of capital accumulation and international movements of capitalist modes of production and money flows has been influential.[235] According to Harvey, capitalism creates the conditions for volatile and geographically uneven development [236]
Sociologists such as Ulrich Beck envisioned the society of risk as a new cultural value which saw risk as a commodity to be exchanged in globalized economies. This theory suggested that disasters and capitalist economy were inevitably entwined. Disasters allow the introduction of economic programs which otherwise would be rejected, as well as decentralizing the class structure in production.[237]
Supply and demand[edit]
At least two assumptions are necessary for the validity of the standard model: first, that supply and demand are independent; second, that supply is "constrained by a fixed resource". If these conditions do not hold, then the Marshallian model cannot be sustained. Sraffa's critique focused on the inconsistency (except in implausible circumstances) of partial equilibrium analysis and the rationale for the upward slope of the supply curve in a market for a produced consumption good.[238] The notability of Sraffa's critique is also demonstrated by Paul A. Samuelson's comments and engagements with it over many years, for example:

"What a cleaned-up version of Sraffa (1926) establishes is how nearly empty are all of Marshall's partial equilibrium boxes. To a logical purist of Wittgenstein and Sraffa class, the Marshallian partial equilibrium box of constant cost is even more empty than the box of increasing cost."[239]

Aggregate excess demand in a market is the difference between the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied as a function of price. In the model with an upward-sloping supply curve and downward-sloping demand curve, the aggregate excess demand function only intersects the axis at one point, namely, at the point where the supply and demand curves intersect. The Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem shows that the standard model cannot be rigorously derived in general from general equilibrium theory.[240]
The model of prices being determined by supply and demand assumes perfect competition. But:

"economists have no adequate model of how individuals and firms adjust prices in a competitive model. If all participants are price-takers by definition, then the actor who adjusts prices to eliminate excess demand is not specified".[241]

Goodwin, Nelson, Ackerman, and Weisskopf write:

"If we mistakenly confuse precision with accuracy, then we might be misled into thinking that an explanation expressed in precise mathematical or graphical terms is somehow more rigorous or useful than one that takes into account particulars of history, institutions or business strategy. This is not the case. Therefore, it is important not to put too much confidence in the apparent precision of supply and demand graphs. Supply and demand analysis is a useful precisely formulated conceptual tool that clever people have devised to help us gain an abstract understanding of a complex world. It does not – nor should it be expected to – give us in addition an accurate and complete description of any particular real world market."[242]

Counter-criticisms[edit]
Austrian School[edit]
Austrian School economists have argued that capitalism can organise itself into a complex system without an external guidance or central planning mechanism. Friedrich Hayek considered the phenomenon of self-organisation as underpinning capitalism. Prices serve as a signal as to the urgent and unfilled wants of people, and the opportunity to earn profits if successful, or absorb losses if resources are used poorly or left idle, gives entrepreneurs incentive to use their knowledge and resources to satisfy those wants. Thus the activities of millions of people, each seeking his own interest, are coordinated.[243]
Ayn Rand[edit]
The novelist and philosopher Ayn Rand made positive moral defenses of laissez-faire capitalism, most notably in her 1957 novel Atlas Shrugged, and in her 1966 collection of essays Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal. She argued that capitalism should be supported on moral grounds, not just on the basis of practical benefits.[244][245] Her ideas have had significant influence over conservative and libertarian supporters of capitalism, especially within the American Tea Party movement.[246] Rand defined capitalism as "a social system based on the recognition of individual rights, including property rights, in which all property is privately owned."[247] According to Rand, the role of government in a capitalist state has three broad categories of proper functions: First, the police "to protect men from criminals". Second, the armed services "to protect men from foreign invaders". Third, the law courts "to settle disputes among men according to objective laws".[248]
Economic growth[edit]




World's GDP per capita shows exponential growth since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution[249]






Capitalism and the economy of the People's Republic of China


Many theorists and policymakers in predominantly capitalist nations have emphasized capitalism's ability to promote economic growth, as measured by gross domestic product (GDP), capacity utilization or standard of living. This argument was central, for example, to Adam Smith's advocacy of letting a free market control production and price, and allocate resources. Many theorists have noted that this increase in global GDP over time coincides with the emergence of the modern world capitalist system.[250][251]
Between 1000 and 1820, the world economy grew sixfold, a faster rate than the population growth, so individuals enjoyed, on average, a 50% increase in income. Between 1820 and 1998, world economy grew 50-fold, a much faster rate than the population growth, so individuals enjoyed, on average, a 9-fold increase in income.[252] In most capitalist economic regions such as Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the economy grew 19-fold per person, even though these countries already had a higher starting level, and in Japan, which was poor in 1820, the increase per person was 31-fold. In the Third World there was an increase, but only 5-fold per person.[252]
Economic freedom[edit]
In his book The Road to Serfdom, Friedrich Hayek asserts that the economic freedom of capitalism is a requisite of political freedom. He argues that the market mechanism is the only way of deciding what to produce and how to distribute the items without using coercion. Milton Friedman, Andrew Brennan and Ronald Reagan also promoted this view. Friedman claimed that centralized economic operations are always accompanied by political repression. In his view, transactions in a market economy are voluntary, and that the wide diversity that voluntary activity permits is a fundamental threat to repressive political leaders and greatly diminish their power to coerce. Some of Friedman's views were shared by John Maynard Keynes, who believed that capitalism is vital for freedom to survive and thrive.[253][254] Freedom House, an American think tank that conducts international research on, and advocates for, democracy, political freedom, and human rights, has argued "there is a high and statistically significant correlation between the level of political freedom as measured by Freedom House and economic freedom as measured by the Wall Street Journal/Heritage Foundation survey."[255]
See also[edit]


Anti-capitalism
Christian views on poverty and wealth
Corporatocracy
Crony capitalism
Economic sociology
Eye of a needle
Late capitalism
Le Livre noir du capitalisme – 1998 French book (The Black Book of capitalism)
Market socialism
Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought
Post-capitalism
Post-Fordism
Rent-seeking
State monopoly capitalism
Sustainable capitalism


References[edit]

Notes




^ Zimbalist, Sherman and Brown, Andrew, Howard J. and Stuart (October 1988). Comparing Economic Systems: A Political-Economic Approach. Harcourt College Pub. pp. 6–7. ISBN 978-0-15-512403-5. Pure capitalism is defined as a system wherein all of the means of production (physical capital) are privately owned and run by the capitalist class for a profit, while most other people are workers who work for a salary or wage (and who do not own the capital or the product). 
^ Rosser, Mariana V.; Rosser, J Barkley (23 July 2003). Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy. MIT Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-262-18234-8. In capitalist economies, land and produced means of production (the capital stock) are owned by private individuals or groups of private individuals organized as firms. 
^ Chris Jenks. Core Sociological Dichotomies. "Capitalism, as a mode of production, is an economic system of manufacture and exchange which is geared toward the production and sale of commodities within a market for profit, where the manufacture of commodities consists of the use of the formally free labor of workers in exchange for a wage to create commodities in which the manufacturer extracts surplus value from the labor of the workers in terms of the difference between the wages paid to the worker and the value of the commodity produced by him/her to generate that profit." London, England, UK; Thousand Oaks, California, US; New Delhi, India. SAGE. p. 383.
^ Heilbroner, Robert L. "Capitalism". Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume, eds. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. 2nd ed. (Palgrave Macmillan, 2008) doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0198
^ Louis Hyman and Edward E. Baptist (2014). American Capitalism: A Reader. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4767-8431-1.
^ Gregory and Stuart, Paul and Robert (28 February 2013). The Global Economy and its Economic Systems. South-Western College Pub. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-285-05535-0. Capitalism is characterized by private ownership of the factors of production. Decision making is decentralized and rests with the owners of the factors of production. Their decision making is coordinated by the market, which provides the necessary information. Material incentives are used to motivate participants. 
^ "Definition of CAPITALISM". 
^ Gregory and Stuart, Paul and Robert (28 February 2013). The Global Economy and its Economic Systems. South-Western College Pub. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-285-05535-0. Real-world capitalist systems are mixed, some having higher shares of public ownership than others. The mix changes when privatization or nationalization occurs. Privatization is when property that had been state-owned is transferred to private owners. Nationalization occurs when privately owned property becomes publicly owned. 
^ a b c d Macmillan Dictionary of Modern Economics, 3rd Ed., 1986, p. 54.
^ Stilwell, Frank. “Political Economy: the Contest of Economic Ideas.” First Edition. Oxford University Press. Melbourne, Australia. 2002.
^ Mandel, Ernst (2002). An Introduction to Marxist Economic Theory. Resistance Books. p. 24. ISBN 978-1-876646-30-1. Retrieved 29 January 2017. 
^ Werhane, P. H. (1994). "Adam Smith and His Legacy for Modern Capitalism". The Review of Metaphysics. Philosophy Education Society. 47 (3). 
^ a b c "Free enterprise". Roget's 21st Century Thesaurus, Third Edition. Philip Lief Group 2008.
^ a b c Capitalism. Encyclopædia Britannica. 10 November 2014. 
^ www.mutualist.org. "... based on voluntary cooperation, free exchange, or mutual aid."
^ Barrons Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms, 1995; p. 74.
^ "Market economy", Merriam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary
^ "About Cato". Cato Institute • cato.org. Retrieved 6 November 2008. 
^ "The Achievements of Nineteenth-Century Classical Liberalism". Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. 

Although the term "liberalism" retains its original meaning in most of the world, it has unfortunately come to have a very different meaning in late twentieth-century America. Hence terms such as "market liberalism," "classical liberalism," or "libertarianism" are often used in its place in America.


^ a b The crisis of neoliberalism. The Real News. 30 March 2010. Retrieved 3 January 2014.

"When we speak of neoliberalism, we speak of contemporary capitalism." – Gérard Duménil, former Research Director at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)


^ Shutt, Harry (2010). Beyond the Profits System: Possibilities for the Post-Capitalist Era. Zed Books. ISBN 1-84813-417-7. 
^ Braudel p. 232
^ Harper, Douglas. "cattle". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ a b c James Augustus Henry Murray. "Capital". A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles. Oxford English Press. Vol. 2. p. 93.
^ Braudel p. 233
^ Braudel p. 234
^ E.g., "L'Angleterre a-t-elle l'heureux privilège de n'avoir ni Agioteurs, ni Banquiers, ni Faiseurs de services, ni Capitalistes ?" in [Étienne Clavier] (1788) De la foi publique envers les créanciers de l'état : lettres à M. Linguet sur le n° CXVI de ses annales p. 19
^ Arthur Young. Travels in France.
^ Ricardo, David. Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. 1821. John Murray Publisher, 3rd edition.
^ Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Tabel The Complete Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. p. 267.
^ Braudel, Fernand. The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Century, Harper and Row, 1979, p. 237.
^ Karl Marx. Chapter 16: "Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value." Das Kapital: "The prolongation of the working-day beyond the point at which the laborer would have produced just an equivalent for the value of his labor-power, and the appropriation of that surplus-labor by capital, this is production of absolute surplus-value. It forms the general groundwork of the capitalist system, and the starting-point for the production of relative surplus-value."
^ Karl Marx. Chapter Twenty-Five: "The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation". Das Kapital.
^ Saunders, Peter (1995). Capitalism. University of Minnesota Press. P. 1.
^ James Augustus Henry Murray. "Capitalism" p. 94.
^ Warburton, David. Macroeconomics from the beginning: The General Theory, Ancient Markets, and the Rate of Interest. Paris, Recherches et Publications, 2003. p. 49.
^ a b "An Introduction to Marxist Economic Theory". Resistance Books. 1 January 2002 – via Google Books. 
^ Koehler, Benedikt. Early Islam and the Birth of Capitalism (Lexington Books, 2014).
^ "Cradle of capitalism" – via The Economist. 
^ Brenner, Robert (1 January 1982). "The Agrarian Roots of European Capitalism". Past & Present (97): 16–113. JSTOR 650630. 
^ "The Agrarian Origins of Capitalism". Retrieved 17 December 2012. 
^ a b c d e Burnham, Peter (2003). Capitalism: The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics. Oxford University Press. 
^ a b Scott, John (2005). Industrialism: A Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford University Press. 
^ Burnham (2003)
^ Encyclopædia Britannica (2006)
^ Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation. Beacon Press, Boston. 1944. p. 87.
^ David Onnekink; Gijs Rommelse (2011). Ideology and Foreign Policy in Early Modern Europe (1650–1750). Ashgate Publishing. p. 257. ISBN 9781409419143. 
^ Quoted in Sir George Clark, The Seventeenth Century (New York, Oxford University Press, 1961), p. 24.
^ a b Banaji, Jairus (2007). "Islam, the Mediterranean and the rise of capitalism". Journal Historical Materialism. Brill Publishers. 15: 47–74. doi:10.1163/156920607X171591. 
^ Economic system:: Market systems. Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. 
^ Watt steam engine image: located in the lobby of into the Superior Technical School of Industrial Engineers of the UPM [clarification needed] (Madrid)
^ Hume, David (1752). Political Discourses. Edinburgh: A. Kincaid & A. Donaldson. 
^ "laissez-faire". Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. 
^ James, Paul; Gills, Barry (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 1: Global Markets and Capitalism. London: Sage Publications. 
^ James Fulcher, Capitalism, A Very Short Introduction. “In one respect there can, however, be little doubt that capitalism has gone global and that is in the elimination of alternative systems.” p. 99. Oxford University Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-19-280218-7.
^ James, Paul; Gills, Barry (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 1: Global Markets and Capitalism. London: Sage Publications. 
^ "PBS.org". PBS.org. 24 October 1929. Retrieved 31 July 2010. 
^ Michael D. Bordo, Barry Eichengreen, Douglas A. Irwin. Is Globalization Today Really Different than Globalization a Hundred Years Ago? NBER [clarification needed] Working Paper No. 7195. June 1999.
^ Barnes, Trevor J. (2004). Reading economic geography. Blackwell Publishing. p. 127. ISBN 0-631-23554-X. 
^ Fulcher, James. Capitalism. 1st ed. New York, Oxford University Press, 2004.
^ Powles, Julia (2 May 2016). "Google and Microsoft have made a pact to protect surveillance capitalism". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 February 2017. 
^ a b Zuboff, Shoshana (5 March 2016). "Google as a Fortune Teller: The Secrets of Surveillance Capitalism". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Retrieved 9 February 2017. 
^ Sterling, Bruce. "Shoshanna Zuboff condemning Google "surveillance capitalism"". WIRED. Retrieved 9 February 2017. 
^ Zuboff, Shoshana (9 April 2015). "Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilization". Journal of Information Technology. Social Science Research Network. 30 (1): 75–89. doi:10.1057/jit.2015.5. SSRN 2594754 . 
^ Kaminski, Joseph. "Capitalism and the Industrial Revolution". Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. 
^ Mesquita, Bruce Bueno de (September 2005). "Development and Democracy". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ Single, Joseph T. (September 2004). "Why Democracies Excel". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 February 2008. [permanent dead link]
^ Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-43000-X p. 571.
^ "Transparency International Corruption Measure 2015". Transparency International Corruption Measure 2015 – By Country / Territory. Transparency International. Retrieved 20 September 2016. 
^ Klein, Naomi (2008). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. Picador. ISBN 0-312-42799-9 p. 105.
^ Emanuele Ferragina et al.(2016). "Outsiderness and participation in liberal market economies." PACO The Open Journal of Sociopolitical Studies, 9, 986–1014 http://scholar.google.fr/scholar_url?url=http%3A%2F%2Fsiba-ese.unisalento.it%2Findex.php%2Fpaco%2Farticle%2Fdownload%2F16664%2F14327&hl=fr&sa=T&ei=AN-iWPD-EIupmAHrx5vACw&scisig=AAGBfm3_dOCLibWFNHNtG62FKywcq7PxNA&nossl=1&ws=1920x909
^ Adam Smith, often mis-attributed in this sense. See the Wealth of Nations section for what Smith actually said.
^ a b c "The contradictions of capitalism – Democratic Socialist Perspective". dsp.org.au. 
^ "Althusser and the Renewal of Marxist Social Theory". 
^ a b Marx, Karl. "Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I – Chapter Thirty Two". 
^ Foundation, Internet Memory. "[ARCHIVED CONTENT] UK Government Web Archive – The National Archives". 
^ James Fulcher, Capitalism A Very Short Introduction, "the investment of money in order to make a profit, the essential feature of capitalism", p. 14, Oxford, 2004, ISBN 978-0-19-280218-7.
^ Reisman, George (1998). Capitalism: A complete understanding of the nature and value of human economic life. Jameson Books. ISBN 0-915463- 73-3. 
^ James Fulcher, Capitalism A Very Short Introduction, "...in the wake of the 1970 crisis, the neo-liberal model of capitalism became intellectually and ideologically dominant", p. 58, Oxford, 2004, ISBN 978-0-19-280218-7.
^ Staff, Investopedia (24 November 2003). "Monopoly". Investopedia. Retrieved 2 March 2017. 
^ Hazlitt, Henry. "The Function of Profits". Economics in One Lesson. Ludwig Von Mises Institute. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ Hernando de Soto. "The mystery of capital". Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ Karl Marx. "Capital, v. 1. Part VIII: primitive accumulation". Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ N. F. R. Crafts (April 1978). "Enclosure and labor supply revisited". Explorations in economic history. 15 (15): 172–83. doi:10.1016/0014-4983(78)90019-0. 
^ "Definition of COMPETITION". 
^ George J. Stigler, 2008. ([1987] [clarification needed] 2008 [clarification needed]. "competition", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Abstract.
^ Mark Blaug, 2008. "Invisible hand", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition, v. 4, p. 565. Abstract.
^ a b Heyne, Paul; Boettke, Peter J.; Prychitko, David L. (2014). The Economic Way of Thinking (13th ed.). Pearson. pp. 102–06. ISBN 978-0-13-299129-2. 
^ Francis Green, “The Reserve Army Hypothesis: A Survey of Empirical Applications”, in Paul Dunne (ed.), Quantitative Marxism, Cambridge, Polity Press, 1991, pp. 123–40.
^ Garraty, John A. (1978). Unemployment in History: Economic Thought and Public Policy. New York: Harper and Row. ISBN 0-06-011457-6. , chapter 2.
^ Garraty, p. 14.
^ Online Etymological Dictionary, entry "unemployed".
^ “Wages”, Works of Karl Marx 1847; source: MECW [clarification needed] Volume 6, p. 415; written: at the end of December 1847; first published: in Russian in the journal Sotsialisticheskoye khozyaistvo, 1924 and in German in the journal Unter dem Banner des Marxismus [clarification needed], 1925.
^ Karl Marx, Das Kapital, chapter 25
^ Capital, Volume I, Chapter 25
^ Choonara, Esme (October 2011). "Is there a precariat?". Socialist Review. 
^ Jan Breman, "A bogus concept?", New Left Review 84, November–December 2013, pp. 130–38.
^ Lorna Fox O'Mahony, David O'Mahony and Robin Hickey (eds.), Moral Rhetoric and the Criminalisation of Squatting: Vulnerable Demons? (London, Routledge, 2014), ISBN 0-415-74061-4 p. 25.
^ Fine, Ben (1998). Labour Market Theory: A Constructive Reassessment. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-16676-4. 
^ Duggan, Marie Christine (2013) "Reserve Army of Labor and Migration" in the Encyclopedia of Global Human Migration, edited by E. Ness, Wiley Publishers. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781444351071.wbeghm451/abstract
^ Encyclopedia of Marxism at marxism.org. "Capitalism". marxists.org. Retrieved 8 July 2011. 
^ Steinfeld 2009, p. 3: "All labor contracts were/are designed legally to bind a worker in one way or another to fulfill the labor obligations the worker has undertaken. That is one of the principal purposes of labor contracts."
^ Deakin & Wilkinson 2005.
Marx 1990, p. 1005, defines wage labour succinctly as "the labour of the worker who sells his own labour-power."
^ a b Williams, Raymond (1983). "Capitalism". Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society, revised edition. Oxford University Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-19-520469-7. 
^ Christopher T. S. Ragan and Richard G. Lipsey. Microeconomics. Twelfth Canadian Edition ed. Toronto, Pearson Education Canada, 2008. Print.
^ Robbins, Richard H. Global problems and the culture of capitalism. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2007. Print.
^ Thompson 1966, p. 599.
^ Thompson 1966, p. 912.
^ Ostergaard 1997, p. 133.
^ Lazonick 1990, p. 37.
^ Hallgrimsdottir & Benoit 2007; Roediger 2007a.
The term is not without its critics, as Roediger 2007b, p. 247, notes: "[T]he challenge to loose connections of wage (or white) slavery to chattel slavery was led by Frederick Douglass and other Black, often fugitive, abolitionists. Their challenge was mercilessly concrete. Douglass, who tried out speeches in work places before giving them in halls, was far from unable to speak to or hear white workers, but he and William Wells Brown did challenge metaphors regarding white slavery sharply. They noted, for example, that their escapes from slavery had left job openings and wondered if any white workers wanted to take the jobs."
^ a b Fitzhugh 1857, p. xvi
^ Carsel 1940.
^ "Capitalism and Slavery in the United States (Topical Guide) – H-Slavery – H-Net". 
^ "...vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their slavery." – De Officiis [1]
^ Proudhon 1890.
^ Marx 1969, Chapter VII
^ Foner 1995, p. xix.
^ Jensen 2002.
^ Lawrence B. Glickman (1999). A Living Wage: American Workers and the Making of Consumer Society. Cornell UP. p. 19. ISBN 0801486149. 
^ Marx 1847, Chapter 2
^ Chomsky 1993, p. 19
^ Thye & Lawler 2006.
^ Graeber 2004, p. 71
^ Graeber 2007, p. 106.
^ Testimony Gathered by Ashley's Mines Commission Laura Del Col, West Virginia University
^ "Democracy Now". 19 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. 
^ Chomsky, Noam (1992). "Interview". Archived from the original on 21 July 2006. 
^ "Thought Control". Socio-Politics. Question Everything. 
^ Adam Smith – An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations – The Adam Smith Institute Archived 1 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Aristotle, Politics 1328b–1329a, H. Rackham trans.
^ "The Quotations Page: Quote from Aristotle". 
^ De Officiis Liber I XI.II
^ George 1981, Chapter 15
^ "Conversation with Noam Chomsky, p. 2 of 5". 
^ "Social Security History". 
^ Marx 1990, p. 1006: "[L]abour-power, a commodity sold by the worker himself."
^ Another one, of course, being the capitalists' theft from workers via surplus-value.
^ Nelson 1995, p. 158. This marxist objection is what motivated Nelson's essay, which argues that labour is not, in fact, a commodity.
^ Marx 1990, p. 1005. Emphasis in the original.
See also p. 716: "[T]he capitalist produces [and reproduces] the worker as a wage-labourer. This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the worker, is the absolutely necessary condition for capitalist production."
^ "Economics A–Z: Capital". The Economist. Retrieved 25 March 2015. 
^ "Encyclopedia of Marxism – Glossary of terms: Capital". Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 25 March 2015. 
^ Marx, Karl. "Economic Manuscripts: Capital Vol. I – Chapter Twenty-Five". 
^ Besanko, David; Braeutigam, Ronald (2010). Microeconomics (4th ed.). Wiley. 
^ Note that unlike most graphs, supply & demand curves are plotted with the independent variable (price) on the vertical axis and the dependent variable (quantity supplied or demanded) on the horizontal axis.
^ "Marginal Utility and Demand". Retrieved 9 February 2007. 
^ Varian, Hal R. (1992). Microeconomic Analysis (Third ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 0-393-95735-7. 
^ Jain, T.R. (2006). Microeconomics and Basic Mathematics. New Delhi: VK Publications. p. 28. ISBN 81-87140-89-5. 
^ Hosseini, Hamid S. (2003). "Contributions of Medieval Muslim Scholars to the History of Economics and their Impact: A Refutation of the Schumpeterian Great Gap". In Biddle, Jeff E.; Davis, Jon B.; Samuels, Warren J. A Companion to the History of Economic Thought. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell. pp. 28–45 [28 & 38]. doi:10.1002/9780470999059.ch3. ISBN 0-631-22573-0.  (citing Hamid S. Hosseini, 1995. "Understanding the Market Mechanism Before Adam Smith: Economic Thought in Medieval Islam," History of Political Economy, Vol. 27, No. 3, 539–61).
^ John Locke (1691) Some Considerations on the consequences of the Lowering of Interest and the Raising of the Value of Money
^ a b Thomas M. Humphrey, 1992. "Marshallian Cross Diagrams and Their Uses before Alfred Marshall", Economic Review, Mar/Apr, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, pp. 3–23.
^ A. D. Brownlie and M. F. Lloyd Prichard, 1963. "Professor Fleeming Jenkin, 1833–1885 Pioneer in Engineering and Political Economy", Oxford Economic Papers, 15(3), p. 211.
^ Fleeming Jenkin, 1870. "The Graphical Representation of the Laws of Supply and Demand, and their Application to Labour", in Alexander Grant, ed., Recess Studies, Edinburgh. Ch. VI, pp. 151–85. Edinburgh. Scroll to chapter link.
^ Grattan, Ellen R.; Ohanian, Lee E. (December 1999). "The macroeconomic effects of big fiscal shocks: the case of world war II" (PDF). Minneapolis Federal Reserve, Working Paper 599. 
^ Armstrong, Glyn & Harrison, Capitalism since world war 2. Fontana, 1984. See also Karl Hardach, "Germany 1914–1917", in: Carlo M. Cipolla, The Fontana History of Europe, Part One. Fontana, 1976, p. 224.
^ Ginsborg, Paul (1990). A History of Contemporary Italy – Society and Politics 1943–1988. London: Penguin Books. p. 70. ISBN 0-14-012496-9. 
^ Ginsborg (1990), chapter 3.
^ Ginsborg (1990), p. 214.
^ Lears, T. J. Jackson (1985) "The Concept of Cultural Hegemony"
^ Holub, Renate (2005) Antonio Gramsci: Beyond Marxism and Postmodernism
^ Boggs, Carl (2012) Ecology and Revolution: Global Crisis and the Political Challenge
^ Habermas, 1988: 37, 75.
^ Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism ibid. Finance Capital and the Finance Oligarchy
^ Foster, John Bellamy; Financialization, Robert W. McChesney Topics:; Crisis, Global Economic; Economy, Political (1 October 2009). "Monopoly-Finance Capital and the Paradox of Accumulation". Monthly Review. 
^ Frederic Jameson, 'Culture and Finance Capital', in The Jameson Reader (2005) p. 257
^ Quoted in E. H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution 2 (1971) p. 137
^ Quoted in F. A Voight, Unto Caesar (1938) p. 22
^ C. J. Calhoun/G. Derluguian, Business as Usual (2011) p. 57
^ Jameson, pp. 259–60
^ Musacchio, Aldo. "Economist Debates: State capitalism: Statements". The Economist. 
^ State capitalism. Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 7 July 2015.
^ Frederick Engels. "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (Chpt. 3)". Marxists.org. Retrieved 8 January 2014. 
^ V. I. Lenin. The Tax in Kind. Lenin’s Collected Works, 1st English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, vol. 32, pp. 329–65.
^ V. I. Lenin. To the Russian Colony in North America. Lenin Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 1971, Moscow, vol. 42, pp. 425c–427a.
^ "State capitalism" in the Soviet Union, M. C. Howard and J. E. King
^ Noam Chomsky (1986). The Soviet Union Versus Socialism. Our Generation. Retrieved 9 July 2015.
^ Richard D. Wolff (27 June 2015). Socialism Means Abolishing the Distinction Between Bosses and Employees. Truthout. Retrieved 9 July 2015.
^ Von Mises, Ludwig (1979). Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis. Indianapolis: LibertyClassics. ISBN 0-913966-63-0. Retrieved 31 May 2007. The socialist movement takes great pains to circulate frequently new labels for its ideally constructed state. Each worn-out label is replaced by another which raises hopes of an ultimate solution of the insoluble basic problem of Socialism – until it becomes obvious that nothing has been changed but the name. The most recent slogan is 'State Capitalism.' It is not commonly realized that this covers nothing more than what used to be called Planned Economy and State Socialism, and that State Capitalism, Planned Economy, and State Socialism diverge only in non-essentials from the "classic" ideal of egalitarian Socialism 
^ Leong, Nancy (2013). "Racial Capitalism". Harvard Law Review. 126: 2152. 
^ "Capitalism." World Book Encyclopedia. 1988. p. 194.
^ a b "The role and character of the state under capitalism – Democratic Socialist Perspective". 
^ "Capitalism vs Socialism – Difference and Comparison – Diffen". 
^ "Capitalism and Inequality". 15 September 2015. 
^ "Inequality inevitable under capitalism – expert". 
^ "Theories of Class and Social Inequality". 
^ "Is Wealth and Income Inequality Inevitable in a Capitalist System? – Pragmatic Capitalism". 
^ Brander, James A. Government policy toward business. 4th ed. Mississauga, Ontario, John Wiley & Sons Canada, 2006. Print.
^ Frances Goldin, Debby Smith, Michael Smith (2014). Imagine: Living in a Socialist USA. Harper Perennial. ISBN 0-06-230557-3 pp. 49–50.
^ Cass, Towards a Comparative Political Economy of Unfree Labor (1999)
^ Marcel van der Linden (Fall 2003). "Labour History as the History of Multitudes". Labour / Le Travail. 52: 235–44. doi:10.2307/25149390. JSTOR 25149390. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ Gourevitch, Alex, "Capitalism and Slavery: An Interview with Greg Grandin", Jacobin (August 2014). Retrieved 4 August 2014.
^ Edward E. Baptist. The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery And The Making Of American Capitalism. Basic Books, September 2014. ISBN 0-465-00296-X.
^ Wallerstein, Immanuel (1983). Historical Capitalism. Verso Books. p. 78. ISBN 0-86091-761-4. 
^ a b McMurty, John (1999). The Cancer Stage of Capitalism. Pluto Press. ISBN 0-7453-1347-7. 
^ George Monbiot (1 October 2014). It's time to shout stop on this war on the living world. The Guardian. Retrieved 31 October 2014.
^ Dawson, Ashley (2016). Extinction: A Radical History. OR Books. ISBN 978-1-944869-01-4. 
^ Jones, Campbell, Martin Parker and Rene Ten Bos, For Business Ethics. (Routledge, 2005) ISBN 0-415-31135-7, p. 101.
^ IMF: The last generation of economic policies may have been a complete failure. Business Insider. May 2016.
^ Lavoie, Marc (Winter 2012–2013). "Financialization, neo-liberalism, and securitization". Journal of Post Keynesian Economics. 35 (2): 215–33. doi:10.2753/pke0160-3477350203. JSTOR 23469991. (Subscription required (help)). 
^ Stein, Howard (25 July 2012). "The Neoliberal Policy Paradigm and the Great Recession" (PDF). Panoeconomicus. 59 (4): 421–40. doi:10.2298/PAN1204421S. Retrieved 4 June 2017. The role of deregulation and related neoliberal policies as a both a source of massive financialization of the economy and cause of the Great Recession is widely recognized in the literature (David M. Kotz 2009; Bill Lucarelli 2009; Joseph Stiglitz 2010; William Tabb 2012). Some authors aptly call it the “crisis of neoliberal capitalism” (Kotz 2010). 
^ Susan Braedley and Meg Luxton, Neoliberalism and Everyday Life (McGill-Queen's University Press, 2010), ISBN 0-7735-3692-2, p. 3
^ Manfred B. Steger and Ravi K. Roy. Neoliberalism: A Very Short Introduction. (Oxford University Press, 2010.) ISBN 0-19-956051-X. p. 123.
^ Gérard Duménil and Dominique Lévy, The Crisis of Neoliberalism. (Harvard University Press, 2013), ISBN 0-674-07224-3
^ David M Kotz, The Rise and Fall of Neoliberal Capitalism (Harvard University Press, 2015), ISBN 0-674-72565-4
^ [199][200][201][202][203][204]
^ New York Times, 23 October 2007.
^ Baba Metzia 61b
^ Moehlman, 1934, pp. 6–7.
^ "III. The Social Doctrine of the Church". The Vatican. Archived from the original on 19 February 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ Ross Gittins (9 April 2012). "What Jesus said about capitalism". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 28 April 2012. 
^ Thomas Gubleton, archbishop of Detroit speaking in Capitalism: A Love Story
^ O'Leary, Naomi, "Pope Attacks 'Tyranny' of Markets in Manifesto for Papacy". Reuters (November 2013). Retrieved 30 December 2013.
^ Zachary A. Goldfarb and Michelle Boorstein (26 November 2013). Pope Francis denounces ‘trickle-down’ economic theories in critique of inequality. The Washington Post. Retrieved 26 November 2013.
^ Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. [Chicago] University of Chicago, 1962.
^ Krugman, Paul, Wells, Robin, Economics, Worth Publishers, New York (2006)
^ "Caritas in veritate paragraph 36". Retrieved 7 October 2014. 
^ The Rise of Capitalism, 2011. Socialist Standard, no. 1284, August 2011.
^ ""capitalism, n.2". OED Online". 
^ "Press Room." Michaelmoore.com. [clarification needed] Michael Moore. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ Ballasy, Nicholas. "Michael Moore: ‘It's Absolutely a Good Thing’ for Government to Drive Private Health Insurance Out of Business." Michael Moore: 'It's Absolutely a Good Thing' for Government to Drive Private Health Insurance Out of Business. CNS News, 2 October 2009. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ "'Occupy Wall Street' Protests Give Voice to Anger Over Greed, Corporate Culture." PBS.com, 5 October 2011. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ Sowell, Thomas. "Profit Motive Underrated By Intelligentsia." Sun-Sentinel, 26 December 2003. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ Pantin, Travis. "Milton Friedman Answers Phil Donahue's Charges". The New York Sun, 12 November 2007. Web. 22 April 2013.
^ The Communist Manifesto
^ "To Marx, the problem of reconstituting society did not arise from some prescription, motivated by his personal predilections; it followed, as an iron-clad historical necessity – on the one hand, from the productive forces grown to powerful maturity; on the other, from the impossibility further to organize these forces according to the will of the law of value." – Leon Trotsky, "Marxism in our Time", 1939 (Inevitability of Socialism), WSWS.org
^ Karl Marx. "Capital. V. 3. Chapter 47: Genesis of capitalist ground rent". Marxists. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ Karl Marx. Chapter Twenty-Five: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. Das Kapital.
^ Dobb, Maurice, 1947. Studies in the Development of Capitalism. New York, International Publishers Co.
^ David Harvey 1989 The Condition of Postmodernity
^ Wheen, Francis. Books That Shook the World: Marx's Das Kapital • 1st ed., London, Atlantic Books, 2006.
^ "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism". Marxists. 1916. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ See, for example, the works of Stephen Resnick and Richard Wolff.
^ Ste. Croix; G. E. M. de (1982). The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World. pp. 52–53. 
^ David Harvey. The Limits to Capital. Verso, 17 January 2007. ISBN 1-84467-095-3
^ Lawson, Victoria. Making Development Geography (Human Geography in the Making). New York: A Hodder Arnold Publication, 2007. Print.
^ Harvey, David. Notes towards a theory of uneven geographical development. Print.
^ Beck, U. (1992). Risk society: Towards a new modernity (Vol. 17). Sage.
^ Avi J. Cohen, "'The Laws of Returns Under Competitive Conditions': Progress in Microeconomics Since Sraffa (1926)?", Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 9, no. 3 (Jul.-Sep.): 1983)
^ Paul A. Samuelson, "Reply" in Critical Essays on Piero Sraffa's Legacy in Economics (edited by H. D. Kurz), Cambridge University Press, 2000
^ Alan Kirman, "The Intrinsic Limits of Modern Economic Theory: The Emperor has No Clothes", The Economic Journal, vol. 99, no. 395, Supplement: Conference Papers (1989): pp. 126–39
^ Alan P. Kirman, "Whom or What Does the Representative Individual Represent?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 6, no. 2 (Spring 1992): pp. 117–36
^ Goodwin, N, Nelson, J; Ackerman, F; & Weisskopf, T: Microeconomics in Context 2d ed. Sharpe 2009 ISBN 978-0-7656-2301-0
^ Walberg, Herbert (2003). "4, What is Capitalism?". Education and Capitalism. Hoover Institution Press. pp. 87–89. ISBN 0-8179-3972-5. 
^ Burns, Jennifer (2006). "Godless Capitalism: Ayn Rand and the Conservative Movement". In Lichtenstein, Nelson. American Capitalism: Social Thought and Political Economy in the Twentieth Century. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 282–83. ISBN 978-0-8122-3923-2. 
^ Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas (1984). "Capitalism". In Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas. The Philosophic Thought of Ayn Rand. Chicago: University of Illinois Press. pp. 173–74. ISBN 0-252-01033-7. OCLC 9392804. 
^ Weiss, Gary (2012). Ayn Rand Nation: The Hidden Struggle for America's Soul. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 14–16. ISBN 978-0-312-59073-4. OCLC 740628885. 
^ Ayn Rand, “What Is Capitalism?” Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal, 19
^ Ayn Rand,"Nature of Government", Virtue of selfishness.
^ Angus Maddison (2001). The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Paris: OECD. ISBN 92-64-18998-X. 
^ Robert E. Lucas Jr. "The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future". Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2003 Annual Report. Archived from the original on 27 November 2007. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ J. Bradford DeLong. "Estimating World GDP, One Million B.C. – Present". Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ a b Martin Wolf, Why Globalization works, pp. 43–45
^ Friedrich Hayek (1944). The Road to Serfdom. University Of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-32061-8. 
^ Bellamy, Richard (2003). The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought. Cambridge University Press. p. 60. ISBN 0-521-56354-2. 
^ Adrian Karatnycky. Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties. Transaction Publishers. 2001. ISBN 978-0-7658-0101-2. p. 11.




Bibliography



Bacher, Christian (2007). Capitalism, Ethics and the Paradoxon of Self-Exploitation. Munich: GRIN Verlag. p. 2. ISBN 978-3-638-63658-2. 
Carsel, Wilfred (1940). "The Slaveholders' Indictment of Northern Wage Slavery". Journal of Southern History. 6 (4): 504–20. JSTOR 2192167. 
Deakin, Simon; Wilkinson, Frank (2005). The Law of the Labour Market: Industrialization, Employment, and Legal Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-815281-1. 
De George, Richard T. (1986). Business Ethics. New York: Macmillan. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-02-328010-8. 
Elkins, Caroline (2005). Britain's Gulag: The Brutal End of Empire in Kenya. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0-224-07363-9. 
Fitzhugh, George (1857). Cannibals All! or, Slaves Without Masters. Richmond, VA: A. Morris. ISBN 9781429016438. 
Fulcher, James (2004). Capitalism A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280218-7. 
Graeber, David (2004). Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology. Prickly Paradigm Press. ISBN 978-0-9728196-4-0. 
Graeber, David (2007). Possibilities: Essays on Hierarchy, Rebellion and Desire. AK Press. ISBN 978-1-904859-66-6. 
Hallgrimsdottir, Helga Kristin; Benoit, Cecilia (2007). "From Wage Slaves to Wage Workers: Cultural Opportunity Structures and the Evolution of the Wage Demands of the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor, 1880–1900". Social Forces. 85 (3): 1393–411. doi:10.1353/sof.2007.0037. JSTOR 4494978. 
James, Paul; Gills, Barry (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 1: Global Markets and Capitalism. London: Sage Publications. 
Krahn, Harvey J., and Graham S. Lowe (1993). Work, Industry, and Canadian Society. Second ed. Scarborough, Ont.: Nelson Canada. xii, 430 p. ISBN 0-17-603540-0
Lash, Scott; Urry, John (2000). "Capitalism". In Abercrombie, Nicholas; Hill, Stephen; Turner, Bryan S. The Penguin Dictionary of Sociology (4th ed.). London: Penguin Books. pp. 36–40. ISBN 978-0-14-051380-6. 
McCraw, Thomas K. (August 2011). "The Current Crisis and the Essence of Capitalism". The Montreal Review. ISSN 0707-9656. 
Nelson, John O. (1995). "That a Worker's Labour Cannot Be a Commodity". Philosophy. 70 (272): 157–65. doi:10.1017/s0031819100065359. JSTOR 3751199. 
Obrinsky, Mark (1983). Profit Theory and Capitalism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press  – via Questia (subscription required). p. 1. ISBN 978-0-8122-7863-7. 
Olusoga, David; Erichsen, Casper W. (2010). The Kaiser's Holocaust: Germany's Forgotten Genocide. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-23141-6. 
Marx, Karl (1847). Wage Labour and Capital. 
Marx, Karl (1990) [1867]. Capital, Volume I. London: Penguin Classics. ISBN 978-0-14-044568-8. 
Roediger, David (2007a) [1991]. The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class (revised and expanded ed.). London & New York: Verso. ISBN 978-1-84467-145-8. 
Roediger, David (2007b). "An Outmoded Approach to Labour and Slavery". Labour/Le Travail. 60: 245–50. JSTOR 25149808. 
Steinfeld, Robert (2009). "Coercion/Consent in Labor" (PDF). COMPAS Working Paper No. 66. Oxford: University of Oxford. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 3 March 2013. 
Wolf, Eric R. (1982). Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-04459-3. 
Wood, Ellen Meiksins (2002). The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View. London: Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-392-5. 
Young, John (1997). Peasant Revolution in Ethiopia: The Tigray People's Liberation Front, 1975–1991. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-02606-2. 


Further reading[edit]


Alperovitz, Gar (2011). America Beyond Capitalism: Reclaiming Our Wealth, Our Liberty, and Our Democracy, 2nd Edition. Democracy Collaborative Press. ISBN 0-9847857-0-1.
Altvater, Elmar; Crist, Eileen; Haraway, Donna; Hartley, Daniel; Parenti, Christian; McBrien, Justin; Moore, Jason (2016). Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and the Crisis of Capitalism. PM Press. ISBN 1629631485. 
Ascher, Ivan. Portfolio Society: On the Capitalist Mode of Prediction. Zone Books, 2016. ISBN 978-1935408741
Baptist, Edward E. The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism. New York, Basic Books, 2014. ISBN 0-465-00296-X.
Barbrook, Richard (2006). The Class of the New (paperback ed.). London: OpenMute. ISBN 0-9550664-7-6. 
Block, Fred; Somers, Margaret R. (2014). The Power of Market Fundamentalism: Karl Polyani's Critique. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-05071-6. 
Braudel, Fernand. Civilization and Capitalism.
Callinicos, Alex. "Wage Labour and State Capitalism – A reply to Peter Binns and Mike Haynes", International Socialism, second series, 12, Spring 1979.
Farl, Erich. "The Genealogy of State Capitalism". In: International London, vol. 2, no. 1, 1973.
Gough, Ian. State Expenditure in Advanced Capitalism New Left Review.
Habermas, J. [1973] Legitimation Crisis (eng. translation by T. McCarthy). Boston, Beacon. From Google books; excerpt.
Harvey, David (2014). Seventeen Contradictions and the End of Capitalism. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-936026-X. 
Hyman, Louis and Edward E. Baptist (2014). American Capitalism: A Reader. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4767-8431-1.
James, Paul; Patomäki, Heikki (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 2: Global Finance and the New Global Economy. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul; Palen, Ronen (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 3: Global Economic Regimes and Institutions. London: Sage Publications. 
James, Paul; O’Brien, Robert (2007). Globalization and Economy, Vol. 4: Globalizing Labour. London: Sage Publications. 
Jameson, Fredric (1991). Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.
Kotler, Philip (2015). Confronting Capitalism: Real Solutions for a Troubled Economic System. AMACOM. ISBN 978-0814436455
Mandel, Ernest (1999). Late Capitalism. ISBN 978-1859842027
Mander, Jerry (2012). The Capitalism Papers: Fatal Flaws of an Obsolete System. Counterpoint. ISBN 1-61902-158-7. 
Marcel van der Linden, Western Marxism and the Soviet Union. New York, Brill Publishers, 2007.
Mayfield, Anthony. "Economics", in his On the Brink: Resource Depletion, Debt Collapse, and Super-technology ([Vancouver, B.C., Canada]: On the Brink Publishing, 2013), pp. 50–104.
Musacchio, Aldo; Lazzarini, Sergio G. (2014). Reinventing State Capitalism: Leviathan in Business, Brazil and Beyond. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-72968-1. 
Newitz, Annalee (2006). Pretend We′re Dead: Capitalist Monsters in American Pop Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822337454. 
Panitch, Leo, and Sam Gindin (2012). The Making of Global Capitalism: the Political Economy of American Empire. London, Verso. ISBN 978-1-84467-742-9.
Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. ISBN 0-674-43000-X. 
Polanyi, Karl (2001). The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time. Beacon Press; 2nd ed. ISBN 0-8070-5643-X
Reisman, George (1998). Capitalism: A complete understanding of the nature and value of human economic life. Jameson Books. ISBN 0-915463- 73-3. 
Richards, Jay W. (2009). Money, Greed, and God: Why Capitalism is the Solution and Not the Problem. New York: HarperOne. ISBN 978-0-06-137561-3
Roberts, Paul Craig (2013). The Failure of Laissez-faire Capitalism: towards a New Economics for a Full World. Atlanta, Ga.: Clarity Press. ISBN 978-0-9860362-5-5
Robinson, William I. Global Capitalism and the Crisis of Humanity. Cambridge University Press, 2014. ISBN 1-107-69111-7
Schram, Sanford F. (2015). The Return of Ordinary Capitalism: Neoliberalism, Precarity, Occupy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190253028. 
Shaikh, Anwar. "Capital as a Social Relation" (New Palgrave article)
Sombart, Werner (1916) Der moderne Kapitalismus. Historisch-systematische Darstellung des gesamteuropäischen Wirtschaftslebens von seinen Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart. Final edn. 1916, repr. 1969, paperback edn. (3 vols. in 6): 1987 Munich: dtv. (Also in Spanish; no English translation yet.)
Wallerstein, Immanuel (1983). Historical Capitalism. Verso Books. ISBN 0-86091-761-4. 
Wolff, Richard D. (2012). Democracy at Work: A Cure for Capitalism. Haymarket Books. ISBN 1-60846-247-1. 
Wood, Ellen Meiksins (2002). The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View. Verso. ISBN 1-85984-392-1. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Capitalism.





Wikisource has the text of the 1922 Encyclopædia Britannica article Capitalism.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Capitalism





Look up capitalism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Capitalism on In Our Time at the BBC.
Selected Titles on Capitalism and Its Discontents. Harvard University Press



Library resources about
Capitalism





Resources in your library










v
t
e


Aspects of capitalism
(academic views)



General



Business cycle
Competition
Economic bubble
Economic development
Entrepreneurship
Ecoprenuership
Externalities
Financial Revolution
Globalization
History of capitalist theory
Industrial Revolution
Innovation
Invention
Market failure
Merit
Multinational corporation
Oligopoly
Privatization
Profit
Property rights
Regulation
Wage labour
Wealth





Ideology



American Dream
Bipartisanship
Democracy
Free market
Individualism
Laissez-faire
Libertarianism
Neoliberalism





Cultural aspects



Culture of capitalism
Advertising
Consumerism
Decentralization
Economic mobility
Liberty
Mainstream
Philanthropy
Private foundation
Rule of law
Social alienation
Spontaneous order





Social aspects



Economic inequality
Employment
Freedom of association
Labour market flexibility
Labour supply
Productivity
Prosperity
Social venture capital
Unemployment





Criticism



Criticism
Anti-capitalism
Market fundamentalism
Marxism
Wage slavery





Antithesis



Anarchism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Communism
Eco-socialism
Libertarian socialism
Mercantilism
Post-scarcity economy
Sharing economy
Social anarchism
Socialism
Syndicalism












v
t
e


Marxist phraseology and terminology



Philosophy and politics
(Marxist)



Barracks communism
Base and superstructure
Bourgeoisie
Bourgeois democracy
Bourgeois nationalism
Bourgeois socialism
Capitalist mode of production
Class struggle
Commodification
Dialectics
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Historical materialism
Imperialism
Liquidationism
Lumpenproletariat
Means of labor
Metabolic rift
Petite bourgeoisie
Primitive accumulation of capital
Proletarian internationalism
Proletarian revolution
Pure communism
Revolutionary spontaneity
Revolutionary wave
Scientific socialism
Socialist mode of production
Super-imperialism
Theoretician
Two stage theory
Wage slavery
Workers' council
Workers' control
World revolution





Economics and sociology
(Marxian)



Accumulation of capital
Capital
Capitalist mode of production
Crisis of capitalism
Commanding heights of the economy
Commodity
Commodity production
Dominant ideology
Exchange value
Free association
Law of value
Materialism
Means of production
Mode of production
Productive forces
Production for use
Relations of production
Ruling class
Simple commodity production
Socialist mode of production
Socially necessary labour time
Socialization
Subject of labor
Surplus value
Use value
Value
Worker cooperative





Marxist–Leninist



Cadre
Central Committee
Democratic centralism
Dual power
Enemy of the people
Foco
General line of the party
National liberation
New class
People's democracy
Politburo
Political rehabilitation
Popular front
Real socialism
Revisionism
Revolutionary terror
Socialist accumulation
Socialism in one country
Social fascism
Social imperialism
Soviet democracy
United front
Vanguardism





Trotskyist



Bureaucratic collectivism
Deformed workers' state
Degenerated workers' state
New class
Permanent revolution
Social revolution





Maoist



Antagonistic contradiction
Capitalist roader
Four Olds
Marxism–Leninism–Maoism
Mass line
New Democracy
One Divides Into Two
People's war
Revolutionary base area
Struggle session








Companies portal
Capitalism portal
Politics portal





Authority control



GND: 4029577-1
HDS: 15982
NDL: 00570922












						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capitalism&oldid=817697769"					Categories: CapitalismEconomic ideologiesEconomic liberalismProduction economicsProfitSocial philosophyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2016All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from June 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksPages containing links to subscription-only contentWikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2016Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2015All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Use American English from January 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse dmy dates from November 2017Articles to be expanded from February 2017All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2016All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2016Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011Subscription required using viaWikipedia articles with GND identifiers