"Capital cities" redirects here. For other uses, see Capital City (disambiguation).




Washington D.C., the capital of the United States






Countries whose capital is not their largest city






  Countries whose capital is on the coast
  Countries whose capital is not on the coast
  Countries without a coast







  Countries that currently have multiple capital cities
  Countries that have had multiple capital cities in the past



A capital city (or simply capital) is the municipality exercising primary status in a country, state, province, or other administrative region, usually as its seat of government. A capital is typically a city that physically encompasses the government's offices and meeting places; the status as capital is often designated by its law or constitution. In some jurisdictions, including several countries, the different branches of government are located in different settlements. In some cases, a distinction is made between the official (constitutional) capital and the seat of government, which is in another place.
Capital cities that are also the prime economic, cultural, or intellectual centres of a nation or an empire are sometimes referred to as primate cities. Examples are Athens, Brussels, Buenos Aires, Cairo, London, Mexico City, Paris, Stockholm, Tokyo, and Warsaw.
News media will often use the name of a capital city as an alternative name for the country it is the capital of or of the government which is seated there, as a form of metonymy, e.g. "relations between Washington and London".



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Origins
3 Modern capitals
4 Planned capitals
5 Unusual capital city arrangements

5.1 Capitals that are not the seat of government
5.2 Disputed capitals


6 Intergovernmental organizations
7 Capital as symbol
8 Capitals in military strategy
9 See also
10 References



Terminology[edit]
The word capital derives from the Latin caput (genitive capitis), meaning "head".
In several English-speaking states, the terms county town and county seat are also used in lower subdivisions. In some unitary states, subnational capitals are may be known as "administrative centres". The capital is often the largest city of its constituent, though not always.
Origins[edit]




The Roman Forum was surrounded by many government buildings as the capital of Ancient Rome.


Historically, the major economic centre of a state or region often becomes the focal point of political power, and becomes a capital through conquest or federation.[1] (The modern capital city has, however, not always existed: in medieval Western Europe, an itinerant (wandering) government was common.)[2] Examples are Ancient Babylon, Abbasid Baghdad, Ancient Athens, Rome, Constantinople, Chang'an, Ancient Cusco, Madrid, Paris, London, Moscow, Beijing, Tokyo, Vienna, Lisbon and Berlin. The capital city naturally attracts politically motivated people and those whose skills are needed for efficient administration of national or imperial governments, such as lawyers, political scientists, bankers, journalists, and public policy makers. Some of these cities are or were also religious centres,[3] e.g. Constantinople (more than one religion), Rome (the Roman Catholic Church), Jerusalem (more than one religion), Ancient Babylon, Moscow (the Russian Orthodox Church), Belgrade (the Serbian Orthodox Church), Paris, and Peking.
The convergence of political and economic or cultural power is by no means universal. Traditional capitals may be economically eclipsed by provincial rivals, e.g. Nanking by Shanghai, Quebec City by Montreal, and numerous US state capitals. The decline of a dynasty or culture could also mean the extinction of its capital city, as occurred at Babylon[4] and Cahokia.
Although many capitals are defined by constitution or legislation, many long-time capitals have no legal designation as such: for example Bern, Edinburgh, Lisbon, London, Paris, and Wellington. They are recognised as capitals as a matter of convention, and because all or almost all the country's central political institutions, such as government departments, supreme court, legislature, embassies, etc., are located in or near them.
Modern capitals[edit]




Tehran, capital and largest city of Iran, with the Alborz Mountains in the background


Counties in the United Kingdom have historic county towns, which are often not the largest settlement within the county and often are no longer administrative centres, as many historical counties are now only ceremonial, and administrative boundaries are different.
In Canada, there is a federal capital, while the ten provinces and three territories all have capital cities. The states of such countries as Mexico, Brazil (including the famous cities of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, capitals of their respective states), and Australia all have capital cities. For example, the six state capitals of Australia are Adelaide; Brisbane; Hobart; Melbourne; Perth; and Sydney. In Australia, the term "capital cities" is regularly used, to refer to the aforementioned state capitals plus the federal capital Canberra and Darwin, the capital of the Northern Territory. Abu Dhabi is the capital city of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi and the United Arab Emirates overall.
In unitary states which consist of multiple constituent countries, such as the United Kingdom or the Kingdom of Denmark, each country will usually have a capital city. Unlike in federations, there is usually not a separate national capital, but rather the capital city of one constituent country will also be the capital of the state overall, such as London, which is the capital of England and the United Kingdom. Similarly, each of the autonomous communities of Spain and regions of Italy has a capital city, such as Seville or Naples, while Madrid is the capital of the Community of Madrid and the Kingdom of Spain as a whole and Rome is the capital of Italy and the region of Lazio.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, each of its constituent states (or Länder - plural of Land) has its own capital city, such as Dresden, Wiesbaden, Mainz, Düsseldorf, Stuttgart, and Munich, as do all of the republics of the Russian Federation. The national capitals of Germany and Russia: the Stadtstaat of Berlin and the Federal City of Moscow, are also constituent states of both countries in their own right. Each of the States of Austria and Cantons of Switzerland also have their own capital cities. Vienna, the national capital of Austria, is also one of the states, while Bern is the capital of both Switzerland and the Canton of Bern.
Many national capitals are also the largest city in their respective countries, but in many countries this is not the case.
Planned capitals[edit]




The L'Enfant Plan for Washington, D.C., the capital of the United States


Governing entities sometimes plan, design and build new capital cities to house the seat of government of a polity or of a subdivision. Deliberately planned and designed capitals include:

La Plata, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina
Abuja, Nigeria (1991)
Aracaju, Sergipe, Brazil (1855)
Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh, India (2016)
Ankara, Turkey (1923)
Astana, Kazakhstan (1997)
Austin, Texas, USA (1839)
Belmopan, Belize (1970)
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil (1897)
Brasília, Brazil (1960)
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India (1948)
Bireuen, Aceh, Indonesia (1948)
Bukittinggi, West Sumatra, Indonesia (1948)
Constantinople, Roman Empire (324-330)
Dhaka, Bangladesh (1971)
Canberra, Australia (1927)
Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana, India (1966)
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India (1960)
Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil (1933)
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA (1825)
Islamabad, Pakistan (1960)
Frankfort, Kentucky, USA (1792)
Jefferson City, Missouri, USA (1821)
Jhongsing New Village, Taiwan (1955)
Naypyidaw, Burma (2005-2006)
New Delhi, India (1911)
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA (1889)
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (1857)
Palmas, Tocantins, Brazil (1989)
Quezon City, Philippines (1948–76)
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA (1792)
Valletta, Malta (1571)
Washington, D.C., USA (1800)
Wellington, New Zealand (moved in 1865)
Yogyakarta, Indonesia (1946)

These cities satisfy one or both of the following criteria:

A deliberately planned city that was built expressly to house the seat of government, superseding a capital city that was in an established population center. There have been various reasons for this, including overcrowding in that major metropolitan area, and the desire to place the capital city in a location with a better climate (usually a less tropical one).
A town that was chosen as a compromise among two or more cities (or other political divisions), none of which was willing to concede to the other(s) the privilege of being the capital city. Usually, the new capital is geographically located roughly equidistant between the competing population centres.





The Australian Parliament opened in the small town of Canberra in 1927 as a compromise between the largest cities, Sydney and Melbourne.


Some examples of the second situation (compromise locations) include:

Canberra, Australia, chosen as a compromise located between Melbourne and Sydney.
Frankfort, Kentucky, midway between Louisville and Lexington, Kentucky.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, located along the boundary between the Province of Ontario and the Province of Quebec – the two most populous of the ten provinces – and midway between their respective provincial capitals, Toronto, Ontario and Quebec City, Quebec.
Tallahassee, Florida, chosen as the midpoint between Pensacola and St. Augustine, Florida - then the two largest cities in Florida.
Wellington became the capital city of New Zealand in 1865. It lies at the southern tip of the North Island of New Zealand, the smaller of New Zealand's two main islands (which subsequently became the more populous island,[5]) immediately across Cook Strait from the South Island. The previous capital, Auckland, lies much further north in the North Island; the move followed a long argument for a more central location for parliament.[6]
Managua, Nicaragua, chosen to appease rivals in León and Granada, which also were associated with the liberal and conservative political factions respectively

Changes in a nation's political regime sometimes result in the designation of a new capital. Newly-independent Kazakhstan moved its capital to the existing city of Astana. Naypyidaw was founded in Burma's interior as the former capital, Rangoon, was claimed to be too overcrowded.[7]
Unusual capital city arrangements[edit]
See also: List of countries with multiple capitals




The Supreme Court, the seat of Switzerland's judiciary, is in Lausanne, although the executive and legislature are located in Bern.






Parliament House, Singapore. As a city-state, Singapore requires no specific capital.






The Blue Palace, the official residence of Montenegro's president, is in Cetinje, although the executive and legislature are located in Podgorica.


A few states have multiple capitals, and there are also several states that have no capital. Some have a city as the capital but with most government agencies elsewhere.
There is also a ghost town which is currently the de jure capital of a territory: Plymouth in Montserrat.

 Canary Islands (Spain): Until 1927 the capital of the Province of Canarias was Santa Cruz de Tenerife. When the Canary Islands became an autonomous community in 1982, Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas de Gran Canaria were both given capital status.[8][9] There is currently a balance of institutions between the two capitals; the Canary Islands is the only autonomous community in Spain which has two capitals.
 Chile: Santiago is the capital even though the National Congress of Chile meets in Valparaíso.
 Czech Republic: Prague is the sole constitutional capital. Brno is home to all three of the country's highest courts, making it the de facto capital of the Czech judicial branch.
 Estonia: the Supreme Court and the Ministry of Education and Research are located in Tartu.
 Finland: During the summer, the President resides at the Kultaranta in Naantali; presidential sessions of the government are held there as well.
 France: The French constitution does not recognise any capital city in France. By law[10] Paris is the seat of both houses of Parliament (the National Assembly and the Senate), but their joint congresses are held at the Palace of Versailles. In case of emergency, the seat of the constitutional powers can be transferred to another town, in order for the Houses of Parliament to sit in the same location as the President and Cabinet.
 Germany: The official capital Berlin is home to the parliament and the highest bodies of the executive branch (consisting of the ceremonial presidency and effective chancellery). Various ministries are located in the former West German capital of Bonn, which now has the title "Federal City". The Federal Constitutional Court has its seat in Karlsruhe which, as a consequence, is sometimes called Germany's "judicial capital"; none of Germany's highest judicial organs are located in Berlin. Various German government agencies are located in other parts of Germany.
 India:

Andhra Pradesh: Hyderabad is the de jure capital of the state until 2024, while Amaravati is the de facto capital city. The state governor and high court are located in Hyderabad.
Chhattisgarh: Raipur is the administrative and legislative capital, while the high court is located in Bilaspur.
Jammu and Kashmir: Srinagar serves as the summer capital of the state while Jammu is the winter capital. The entire state machinery shifts from one city to another every six months.
Kerala: Thiruvananthapuram is the administrative and legislative capital of the state, while the high court is located in Kochi.
Himachal Pradesh: Shimla is the primary capital city. Dharamshala, the capital of Central Tibetan Administration, is the second winter capital of the state.
Madhya Pradesh: Bhopal is the administrative and legislative capital of the state, while the high court is located in Jabalpur.
Punjab and Haryana: Both states share Chandigarh as their capital city. The city itself is administered as a Union territory.
Rajasthan: Jaipur is the administrative and legislative capital of the state, while the high court is located in Jodhpur.
Uttarakhand: Dehradun is the administrative and legislative capital, while the high court is located in Nainital.




 South Korea: Seoul remains as the capital and seat of the government's branches, but many government agencies have moved to Sejong City.
 Malaysia: Kuala Lumpur is the constitutional capital, home of the King, and seat of Parliament, but the federal administrative centre and judiciary have been moved 30 kilometres (19 mi) south to Putrajaya.
 Montenegro: The official capital Podgorica is home to the parliament and the executive, but the seat of the presidency is in the former royal capital of Cetinje.
 Myanmar (Burma): Naypyidaw was designated the national capital in 2005, the same year it was founded, but most government offices and embassies are still located in Yangon (Rangoon).
 Nauru: Nauru, a microstate of only 21 square kilometres (8.1 sq mi), has no distinct capital city, but has a capital district instead.
 Pakistan: Islamabad is a purpose-built capital city; construction started in 1960 and was completed by 1966, replacing the traditional capital Karachi; Rawalpindi was used in the interim.
 Portugal: The Portuguese constitution has no reference to a capital. Although Lisbon is home to the parliament, the presidency, and the judiciary, no Portuguese official document states that Lisbon is the national capital.[11]
 Sri Lanka: Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte is designated the administrative capital and the location of the parliament, while the former capital, Colombo, is now designated as the "commercial capital".[12][13] However, many government offices are still located in Colombo. Both cities are in the Colombo District.
 South Africa: The administrative capital is Pretoria, the legislative capital is Cape Town, and the judicial capital is Bloemfontein. This is the outcome of the compromise that created the Union of South Africa in 1910.
  Switzerland: Bern is the Federal City of Switzerland and functions as de facto capital. However, the Swiss Supreme Court is located in Lausanne.
 Tanzania: Dodoma was designated the national capital in 1996, but most government offices and embassies are still located in Dar es Salaam.[14]
 Monaco,  Singapore, and the   Vatican City, as well as the territories of  Hong Kong and  Macau, are city-states, and thus do not contain any distinct capital city as a whole. However, in Singapore's case, the main judiciary and legislative offices are located in the Downtown Core. Similarly, while Victoria was the capital of colonial Hong Kong, the district of Central serves as the seat of government offices today.
U.S. states:

 California: The executive and legislative branches and most government agencies are based in Sacramento but the California Supreme Court is headquartered in San Francisco.
 Illinois: Springfield has the seats of the branches of government and serves as the official capital. However various Illinois government officials primarily reside in and/or are primarily active in Chicago (see: Government of Illinois#Capital city for a further explanation)[15][16]
 Louisiana: The executive and legislative branches and most government agencies are based in Baton Rouge, but the Louisiana Supreme Court is located in New Orleans.



Capitals that are not the seat of government[edit]
There are several countries where, for various reasons, the official capital and de facto seat of government are separated:

 Benin: Porto-Novo is the official capital, but Cotonou is the seat of government.
 Bolivia: Sucre is the constitutional capital, and the supreme tribunal of justice is located in Sucre, making it the judicial capital. The palacio quemado, the national congress and national electoral court are located in La Paz, making it the seat of government.
 Ivory Coast: Yamoussoukro was designated the national capital in 1983, but most government offices and embassies are still located in Abidjan.
 Georgia: Since 2012, the seat of government has been Kutaisi, but the President's residence and the Supreme Court remain in Tbilisi, the official capital.
 Netherlands: Amsterdam is the constitutional national capital even though the Dutch government, the parliament, the supreme court, the Council of State, and the work palace of the King are all located in The Hague, as are all the embassies. (For more details see: Capital of the Netherlands.)
 Philippines: Presidential Decree No. 940, issued on June 24, 1976, designates the whole of Metropolitan Manila as the seat of government, with the City of Manila as the capital.[17]

Some historical examples of similar arrangements, where the recognized capital was not the official seat of government:

 Kingdom of England: The traditional capital was the City of London, while Westminster, outside of the boundaries of the City of London, was the seat of government. They are both today part of the urban core of Greater London.
 Kingdom of France: The traditional capital was Paris, though from 1682-1789 the seat of government was at the Palace of Versailles, located in a rural area southwest of Paris.

Disputed capitals[edit]

 Israel and  Palestinian Authority: Both Israel[18] and the Palestinian Authority[19] claim Jerusalem as capital. Jerusalem serves as Israel's capital, with the presidential residence, government offices, supreme court and parliament (Knesset) located there, while the Palestinian Authority has no de facto or de jure control over any of Jerusalem. Many countries, with the notable exception of the United States, which recognizes Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,[20] take the position that the final status of Jerusalem is unsettled pending future negotiations. Most countries maintain their diplomatic missions to Israel in Tel Aviv, while diplomatic missions to the Palestinians are in various places such as Ramallah, Gaza City, Cairo and Damascus.

Intergovernmental organizations[edit]




United Nations Headquarters, New York



European Union (see details): Brussels is generally considered as the seat of the European Union, alongside Strasbourg where the European Parliament has its official seat and votes[21] because it hosts the major institutions of the EU. The judiciary and some of the executive's work are located in Luxembourg and other bodies and agencies in other cities. Although the main seats are fixed in the EU's treaties which form its legal basis, they do not use the term "capital" for any city.

Europol: The Hague


United Nations: New York City is the main meeting place of the highest bodies of the UN, but significant parts of its structure exist in other cities, notably Vienna, Geneva, Nairobi and The Hague.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization: Paris
Food and Agriculture Organization: Rome


African Union: Addis Ababa and Midrand
Andean Parliament: Bogotá
Arab League: Cairo
Asian Development Bank: Manila
Association of Caribbean States: Port of Spain
Association of Southeast Asian Nations: Jakarta
Caribbean Community: Georgetown
Caribbean Development Bank: Bridgetown
Commonwealth of Nations: London
European Food Safety Authority: Parma
European Organization for Nuclear Research: Meyrin, a suburb of Geneva
Helsinki Commission: Helsinki
International Court of Justice: The Hague
International Organization for Standardization: Geneva
Interpol: Lyon
North Atlantic Treaty Organization: Brussels
Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States: Castries
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development: Paris
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation: Jeddah
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe: Vienna
Organization of American States: Washington, D.C.
Organization of Ibero-American States: Madrid
Regional Security System (Caribbean): Bridgetown and Saint Johns
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation: Kathmandu
Union of South American Nations: Cochabamba and Quito
World Bank: Washington, D.C.
World Tourism Organization: Madrid

Capital as symbol[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



With the rise of modern empires and the nation-state, the capital city has become a symbol for the state and its government, and imbued with political meaning. Unlike medieval capitals, which were declared wherever a monarch held his or her court, the selection, relocation, founding, or capture of a modern capital city is an emotional event. For example:

The ruined and almost uninhabited Athens was made capital of newly independent Greece in 1834, four years after the country gained its independence, with the romantic notion of reviving the glory of Ancient Greece. Similarly, following the Cold War and German reunification, Berlin is now once again the capital of Germany. Other restored capital cities include Moscow after the October Revolution.
A symbolic relocation of a capital city to a geographically or demographically peripheral location may be for either economic or strategic reasons (sometimes known as a forward capital or spearhead capital). Peter the Great moved his government from Moscow to Saint Petersburg to give the Russian Empire a western orientation. The economically significant city of Nafplion became the first capital of Greece, when Athens was an unimportant village. The Ming emperors moved their capital to Peking from the more central Nanking to help supervise the border with the Mongols. During the 1857 rebellion, Indian rebels considered Delhi their capital, and Bahadur Shah Zafar was proclaimed emperor, but the ruling British had their capital in Calcutta. In 1877, the British formally held a 'Durbar' in Delhi, proclaiming Queen Victoria as 'Empress of India'. Delhi finally became the colonial capital after the Coronation Durbar of King-Emperor George V in 1911, continuing as independent India's capital from 1947. Other examples include Abuja, Astana, Brasília, Helsinki, Islamabad, Naypyidaw and Yamoussoukro.
The selection or founding of a "neutral" capital city, one unencumbered by regional or political identities, was meant to represent the unity of a new state when Ankara, Turkey; Bern, Switzerland; Canberra, Australia; Madrid; Ottawa; Washington, D.C.; and Wellington, New Zealand became capital cities. Sometimes, the location of a new capital city was chosen to terminate squabbling or possible squabbling between various entities, such as in the cases of Canberra, Ottawa, Washington, and Wellington.
The British-built town of New Delhi represented a simultaneous break and continuity with the past, the location of Delhi being where many imperial capitals were built (Indraprastha, Dhillika, and Shahjahanabad) but the actual capital being the new British-built town designed by Edwin Lutyens. Wellington, on the southwestern tip of the North Island of New Zealand, replaced the much more northerly city of Auckland in to place the national capital close to the South Island and hence to placate its residents, many of whom sympathies with separatism.
During the American Civil War, tremendous resources were expended to defend Washington, D.C., which actually bordered on the Confederate States of America (with the Commonwealth of Virginia), from Confederate attack even though the relatively small federal government could easily have been moved elsewhere. Likewise, great resources were expended by the Confederacy in defending the Confederate capital from attack by the Union, in its exposed location of Richmond, Virginia, barely 100 miles (160 km) south of Washington.

Capitals in military strategy[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire, was the final part of the empire to fall to the Ottoman Turks due to its strong defences.


The capital city is usually but not always a primary target in a war, as capturing it usually guarantees capture of much of the enemy government, victory for the attacking forces, or at the very least demoralization for the defeated forces.
In ancient China, where governments were massive centralized bureaucracies with little flexibility on the provincial level, a dynasty could easily be toppled with the fall of its capital. In the Three Kingdoms period, both Shu and Wu fell when their respective capitals of Chengdu and Jianye fell. The Ming dynasty relocated its capital from Nanjing to Beijing, where they could more effectively control the generals and troops guarding the borders from Mongols and Manchus. The Ming was destroyed when the Li Zicheng took their seat of power, and this pattern repeats itself in Chinese history, until the fall of the traditional Confucian monarchy in the 20th century. After the Qing Dynasty's collapse, decentralization of authority and improved transportation and communication technologies allowed both the Chinese Nationalists and Chinese Communists to rapidly relocate capitals and keep their leadership structures intact during the great crisis of Japanese invasion.
National capitals were arguably less important as military objectives in other parts of the world, including the West, because of socioeconomic trends toward localized authority, a strategic modus operandi especially popular after the development of feudalism and reaffirmed by the development of democratic and capitalistic philosophies. In 1204, after the Latin Crusaders captured the Byzantine capital, Constantinople, Byzantine forces were able to regroup in several provinces; provincial noblemen managed to reconquer the capital after 60 years and preserve the empire for another 200 years after that. The British forces sacked various American capitals repeatedly during the Revolutionary War and War of 1812, but American forces could still carry on fighting from the countryside, where they enjoyed support from local governments and the traditionally independent civilian frontiersmen. Exceptions to these generalizations include highly centralized states such as France, whose centralized bureaucracies could effectively coordinate far-flung resources, giving the state a powerful advantage over less coherent rivals, but risking utter ruin if the capital were taken. In their military strategies, traditional enemies of France such as Prussia (in the Franco-Prussian War of 1871) focused on the capture of Paris.
See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Capitals.



Capital region
List of capital cities by altitude
List of national capitals and largest cities by country
List of capitals outside the territories they serve
List of former national capitals
List of national capitals in alphabetical order
Temporary capital

References[edit]


^ "What does a Capital City Mean?". 5 December 2012. Archived from the original on 31 May 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. 
^ "Where Next: The Reasons Why (Some) Countries Move Their Capitals". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. 
^ Makas, Emily Gunzburger; Conley, Tanja Damljanovic (4 December 2009). "Capital Cities in the Aftermath of Empires: Planning in Central and Southeastern Europe". Routledge. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017 – via Google Books. 
^ Seymour, Michael (29 August 2014). "Babylon: Legend, History and the Ancient City". I.B.Tauris. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017 – via Google Books. 
^ "The South Island was the more densely populated from 1860 until 1900, largely because of the discovery of gold in the sixties, the relatively easy availability of land, and the South Island's freedom from Maori troubles. After 1900, when the populations of the two islands were roughly equal, the North Island went ahead rapidly." Archived 31 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Levine, Stephen (13 July 2012). "Capital city - A new capital". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. 
^ Pedrosa, Veronica (20 November 2006). "Burma's 'seat of the kings'". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 23 November 2006. Retrieved 21 November 2006. 
^ Real Decreto de 30 de noviembre de 1833 en wikisource
^ Real Decreto de 30 de noviembre de 1833 en el sitio web oficial del Gobierno de Canarias[dead link]
^ Ordonnance n° 58-1100 du 17 novembre 1958 relative au fonctionnement des assemblées parlementaires Archived 30 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine. article 1
^ "Lisboa não tem documento que a oficialize como capital de Portugal", Revista Port.com (in Portuguese), 13 April 2015, archived from the original on 7 November 2016, retrieved 5 November 2016 
^ Lansford, Tom (24 March 2015). Political Handbook of the World 2015. Singapore: CQ Press. ISBN 978-1-4833-7157-3. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. 
^ Boxall, Sheryl (2008). DeRouen, Karl; Bellamy, Paul, eds. International Security and the United States: An Encyclopedia, Volume 2. Westport, Connecticut, USA: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 728. ISBN 978-0-275-99255-2. 
^ "Tanzania". CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 27 June 2014. 
^ Reeder, Scott. "What does it cost taxpayers to pay for lawmakers’ empty Springfield residences?" (Archive). Illinois News Network. September 11, 2014. Retrieved on May 26, 2016.
^ Gauen, Pat. "Illinois corruption explained: the capital is too far from Chicago " (Archive). St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Retrieved on May 26, 2016.
^ "Presidential Decree No. 940 : Philippine Laws, Statutes and Codes". Chan Robles Virtual Law Library. 24 June 1976. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014. Retrieved 20 April 2014. 
^ See Jerusalem Law
^ 2003 Basic Law of Palestine Archived 11 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine., Title One: Article 3
^ Landler, Mark (6 December 2017). "Trump Recognizes Jerusalem as Israel's Capital". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 December 2017. 
^ Demey, Thierry (2007). Brussels, capital of Europe. S. Strange (trans.). Brussels: Badeaux. ISBN 2-9600414-2-9. 








v
t
e


Designations for types of administrative territorial entities








English terms








Common English terms1



Area



Insular area
Local government area
Protected area
Special area
Statistical area

Combined statistical area
Metropolitan statistical area
Micropolitan statistical area


Urban area





Canton

Half-canton



Borough



County borough
Metropolitan borough





Capital



Federal capital
Imperial capital





City



City state
Autonomous city
Charter city
Independent city
Incorporated city
Imperial city
Free imperial city
Royal free city





Community



Autonomous community
Residential community





County



Administrative county
Autonomous county
Consolidated city-county
Metropolitan county

Non-metropolitan


Viscountcy





Country



Overseas country





Department



Overseas department





District



Capital district
City district
Congressional district
Electoral district
Federal district
Indian government district
Land district
Metropolitan district

Non-metropolitan district


Military district
Municipal district
Police district
Regional district
Rural district
Sanitary district
Subdistrict
Urban district
Special district





Division



Census division
Police division
Subdivision





Municipality



County municipality

Norway
Nova Scotia
Regional county municipality


Direct-controlled municipality
District municipality
Mountain resort municipality
Neutral municipality
Regional municipality
Resort municipality
Rural municipality
Specialized municipality





Prefecture



Autonomous prefecture
Subprefecture
Super-prefecture
Praetorian prefecture





Province



Autonomous province
Overseas province
Roman province





Region



Administrative region
Autonomous region
Capital region
Development region
Economic region
Mesoregion
Microregion
Overseas region
Planning region
Special administrative region
Statistical region
Subregion





Reserve



Biosphere reserve
Ecological reserve
Game reserve
Indian reserve
Nature reserve





State



Federal state
Free state
Sovereign state





Territory



Capital territory

Federal capital territory


Dependent territory
Federal territory
Military territory
Organized incorporated territory
Overseas territory
Union territory
Unorganized territory





Town



Census town
Market town





Township



Charter township
Civil township
Paper township
Survey township
Urban township





Unit



Autonomous territorial unit
Local administrative unit
Municipal unit
Regional unit





Zone



Economic zone

Exclusive economic zone
Free economic zone
Special economic zone


Free-trade zone
Neutral zone
Self-administered zone










Other English terms



Current



Alpine resort
Bailiwick
Banner

Autonomous


Block
Cadastre
Circle
Circuit
Colony
Commune
Condominium
Constituency
Duchy
Eldership
Emirate
Federal dependency
Governorate
Hamlet
Ilkhanate
Indian reservation
Manor

Royal


Muftiate
Neighbourhood
Parish
Periphery
Precinct
Principality
Protectorate
Quarter
Regency
Autonomous republic
Riding
Sector

Autonomous


Shire
Sultanate
Suzerainty
Townland
Village

Administrative
Summer


Ward






Historical



Agency
Barony
Burgh
Exarchate
Hide
Hundred
Imperial Circle
March
Monthon
Presidency
Residency
Roman diocese
Seat
Tenth
Tithing



















Non-English or loanwords







Current



Amt
Bakhsh
Barangay
Bezirk
Regierungsbezirk
Comune
Frazione
Fu
Gemeinde
Județ
Kunta / kommun

Finland
Sweden


Län
Località
Megye
Muban
Oblast

Autonomous


Okrug
Ostān
Poblacion
Purok
Shahrestān
Sum
Sýsla
Tehsil
Vingtaine





Historical



Commote
Gau
Heerlijkheid
Köping
Maalaiskunta
Nome

Egypt
Greece


Pagus
Pargana
Plasă
Satrapy
Socken
Subah
Syssel
Zhou












v
t
e


Arabic terms for country subdivisions



First-level



Muhafazah (محافظة governorate)
Wilayah (ولاية province)
Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Mudiriyah (مديرية directorate)
Imarah (إمارة emirate)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Shabiyah (شعبية "popularate")





Second / third-level



Mintaqah (منطقة region)
Qadaa (قضاء district)
Nahiyah (ناحية subdistrict)
Markaz (مركز district)
Mutamadiyah (معتمدية "delegation")
Daerah/Daïra (دائرة circle)
Liwa (لواء banner / sanjak)





City / township-level



Amanah (أمانة municipality)
Baladiyah (بلدية municipality)
Ḥai (حي neighborhood / quarter)
Mahallah (محلة)
Qarya (قرية)
Sheyakhah (شياخة "neighborhood subdivision")






English translations given are those most commonly used.








v
t
e


French terms for country subdivisions






arrondissement
département
préfecture
subprefectures










v
t
e


Greek terms for country subdivisions



Modern



apokentromenes dioikiseis / geniki dioikisis§ / diamerisma§ / periphereia
nomos§ / periphereiaki enotita
demos / eparchia§ / koinotita§





Historical



archontia/archontaton
bandon
demos
despotaton
dioikesis
doukaton
droungos
eparchia
exarchaton
katepanikion
kephalatikion
kleisoura
meris
naukrareia
satrapeia
strategis
thema
toparchia
tourma






§ signifies a defunct institution








v
t
e


Portuguese terms for country subdivisions



Regional subdivisions



Estado
Distrito federal
Província
Região
Distrito
Comarca
Capitania





Local subdivisions



Município
Concelho
Freguesia
Comuna
Circunscrição





Settlements



Cidade
Vila
Aldeia
Bairro
Lugar








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Slavic terms for country subdivisions



Current



dzielnica
gmina
krai
kraj
krajina / pokrajina
městys
obec
oblast / oblast' / oblasti / oblys / obwód / voblast'
okręg
okres
okrug
opština / općina / občina / obshtina
osiedle
powiat / povit
raion
selsoviet / silrada
sołectwo
voivodeship / vojvodina
županija





Historical



darugha
gromada
guberniya / gubernia
jurydyka
khutor
obshchina
okolia
opole
pogost
prowincja
sorok
srez
starostwo / starostva
uyezd
volost
ziemia
župa










v
t
e


Spanish terms for country subdivisions



National, Federal



Comunidad autónoma
Departamento
Distrito federal
Estado
Provincia
Región





Regional, Metropolitan



Cantón
Comarca
Comuna
Corregimiento
Delegación
Distrito
Mancomunidad
Merindad
Municipalidad
Municipio
Parroquia

Ecuador
Spain







Urban, Rural



Aldea
Alquería
Anteiglesia
Asentamiento

Asentamiento informal
Pueblos jóvenes


Barrio
Campamento
Caserío
Ciudad

Ciudad autónoma


Colonia
Lugar
Masía
Pedanía
Población
Ranchería
Sitio
Vereda
Villa
Village (Pueblito/Pueblo)








Historical subdivisions in italics.










v
t
e


Turkish terms for country subdivisions



Modern



il (province)
ilçe (district)
şehir (city)
kasaba (town)
belediye (municipality)
belde (community)
köy (village)
mahalle (neighbourhood/quarter)





Historical



ağalık (feudal district)
bucak (subdistrict)
beylerbeylik (province)
kadılık (subprovince)
kaza (sub-province)
hidivlik (viceroyalty)
mutasarrıflık (subprovince)
nahiye (nahiyah)
paşalık (province)
reya (Romanian principalities)
sancak (prefecture)
vilayet (province)
voyvodalık (Romanian provinces)















1 Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics.
See also: Census division, Electoral district, Political division, and List of administrative divisions by country








Authority control



LCCN: sh85019972
GND: 4127960-8
NDL: 00572463











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capital_city&oldid=818355089"					Categories: Types of country subdivisionsCapitalsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2017CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Articles needing additional references from April 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from February 2012Use dmy dates from April 2012Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers