This article is about passenger car and pickup classifications. For commercial vehicle classifications, see Truck classification.






This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Article needs large amounts of proofreading and organization. Please help improve this article if you can. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Governments and private organizations have developed car classification schemes that are used for innumerable purposes including regulation, description and categorization, among others. This article details commonly used classification schemes in use worldwide.



Contents


1 Classification methods
2 Size and usage-based vehicle classification systems worldwide
3 Economy car

3.1 Microcar
3.2 Hatchbacks

3.2.1 Ultracompact car
3.2.2 City car
3.2.3 Supermini/subcompact car




4 Family car

4.1 Small family car/compact car
4.2 Large family / mid-size


5 Saloons / sedans

5.1 Large family / mid-size
5.2 Full size / large
5.3 Crossover SUV
5.4 Minivans / MPVs


6 Luxury vehicle

6.1 Compact executive
6.2 Executive/mid-luxury
6.3 Full-size luxury / Grand saloon
6.4 Estate cars / station wagons


7 Sports cars

7.1 Hot hatch
7.2 Sports saloon / sports sedan
7.3 Sports car
7.4 Grand tourer
7.5 Supercar
7.6 Muscle car
7.7 Pony car
7.8 Convertible


8 Off-roaders

8.1 Sport utility vehicle


9 Commercial vehicle

9.1 Van


10 Other car classification terms

10.1 Non-English terms


11 See also
12 References
13 External links



Classification methods[edit]
Vehicles can be categorized in numerous ways. For example, by means of the body style and the "level of commonality in vehicle construction as defined by number of doors and roof treatment (e.g., sedan, convertible, fastback, hatchback) and number of seats" that require seat belts to meet safety regulations.[1]
Regulatory agencies may also establish a vehicle classification system for determining a tax amount. In the United Kingdom, a vehicle is taxed according to the vehicle's construction, engine, weight, type of fuel and emissions, as well as the purpose for which it is used.[2] Other jurisdictions may determine vehicle tax based upon environmental principles, such as the user pays principle.[3] In another example, certain cities in the United States in the 1920s chose to exempt electric-powered vehicles because officials believed those vehicles did not cause "substantial wear upon the pavements".[4]
Another standard for road vehicles of all types that is used internationally (except for Australia, India, and the U.S.) is ISO 3833-1977.[5]
In an example from private enterprise, many car rental companies use[where?] the ACRISS Car Classification Code to describe the size, type and equipment of vehicles to ensure that rental agents can match customer needs to available vehicles, regardless of distance between the agent and the rental company or the languages spoken by either party. In the United States, since 2010 the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety uses a scheme it has developed that takes into account a combination of both vehicle shadow (length times width) and weight.[6]


US Highway Loss Data Institute classification
Definition


Regular Two Door
Two door sedans and hatchbacks


Regular Four Door
Four door sedans and hatchbacks


Station Wagons
Four doors, a rear hatch and four pillars


Minivans
Vans with sliding rear doors


Sports
Two seaters and cars with significant high performance features


Luxury
Relatively expensive cars that are not classified as sports (price in USD to curb weight in pounds more than 9.0 in 2010) (small cars over $27,000, midsize cars over $31,500, large cars over $36,000, etc.)




US Insurance Institute for Highway Safety | Highway Loss Data Institute 'Guide to car size groups' (includes minivans)[7]



Shadow (square footage of exterior length × width)


Curb Weight
70 to 80 sq ft (6.5–7.4 m2)
81 to 90 sq ft (7.5–8.4 m2)
91 to 100 sq ft (8.5–9.3 m2)
101 to 110 sq ft (9.4–10.2 m2)
>110 sq ft (10.2 m2)


2,001 to 2,500 lb (900–1,150 kg)
Mini
Small
Small
Small
Midsize


2,501 to 3,000 lb (1,150–1,350 kg)
Small
Small
Midsize
Midsize
Midsize


3,001 to 3,500 lb (1,350–1,600 kg)
Small
Midsize
Midsize
Large
Large


3,501 to 4,000 lb (1,600–1,800 kg)
Small
Midsize
Large
Large
Very Large


>4,000 lb (1,800 kg)
Midsize
Midsize
Large
Very Large
Very Large




US IIHS|HLDI Guide to SUV size groups[8]



curb weight


Mini
<=3,000 lb (1,350 kg) and shadow <80 sq ft (7.4 m2)


Small
3,001 to 3,750 lb (1,350–1,700 kg)


Midsize
3,751 to 4,750 lb (1,700–2,150 kg)


Large
4,751 to 5,750 lb (2,150–2,600 kg)


Very large
>5,750 lb (2,600 kg) or shadow >115 sq ft (10.7 m2)


The United States National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) separates vehicles into classes by the curb weight of the vehicle with standard equipment including the maximum capacity of fuel, oil, coolant, and air conditioning, if so equipped.[9]


US NHTSA classification
Code
Curb weight


Passenger cars: mini
PC/Mi
1,500 to 1,999 lb (700–900 kg)


Passenger cars: light
PC/L
2,000 to 2,499 lb (900–1,150 kg)


Passenger cars: compact
PC/C
2,500 to 2,999 lb (1,150–1,350 kg)


Passenger cars: medium
PC/Me
3,000 to 3,499 lb (1,350–1,600 kg)


Passenger cars: heavy
PC/H
3,500 lb (1,600 kg) and over


Sport utility vehicles
SUV
–


Pickup trucks
PU
–


Vans
VAN
–


The United States Federal Highway Administration has developed a classification scheme used for automatically calculating road use tolls. There are two broad categories depending on whether the vehicle carries passengers or commodities. Vehicles that carry commodities are further subdivided by number of axles and number of units, including both power and trailer units.[10]
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) has developed a classification scheme used to compare fuel economy among similar vehicles. Passenger vehicles are classified based on a vehicle's total interior passenger and cargo volumes. Trucks are classified based upon their gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). Heavy duty vehicles are not included within the EPA scheme.[11]


US EPA car class
Total passenger and cargo volume (cu. ft.)


Two-seaters
Any (designed to seat only two adults)


Minicompact
Less than 85 cu ft (2,400 l)


Subcompact
85 to 99 cu ft (2,400–2,800 l)


Compact
100 to 109 cu ft (2,850–3,100 l)


Mid-size
110 to 119 cu ft (3,100–3,350 l)


Large
120 cu ft (3,400 l) or more


Small station wagons
Less than 130 cu ft (3,700 l)


Mid-size station wagons
130 to 159 cu ft (3,700–4,500 l)


Large station wagons
160 cu ft (4,550 l) or more


A similar set of classes is used by the Canadian EPA.[12] The Canadian National Collision Database (NCDB) system defines "passenger car" as a unique class, but also identifies two other categories involving passenger vehicles—the "passenger van" and "light utility vehicle"—and these categories are inconsistently handled across the country with the boundaries between the vehicles increasingly blurred.[13]
In Australia, the Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries publishes its own classifications.[14]
Size and usage-based vehicle classification systems worldwide[edit]
This is a summary table listing several different methods of vehicle classification.



Vehicle classification


view
talk
edit






Not well-defined / vernacular
Defined by law or regulation
Examples


Market segment (American English)
Market segment (British English)
Market segment (Australian English)[15]
US EPA Size Class[16]
Euro NCAP Structural Category[17]
Euro NCAP Class (1997–2009)
Euro Market Segment[18]


Microcar
Microcar, Bubble car
N/A
N/A
—
Quadricycle
A-segment mini cars
Bond Bug, Isetta, Mega City, Renault Twizy


Subcompact car
Economy car
City car
Microcar
Minicompact
Passenger car
Supermini
Citroën C1, Fiat 500, Hyundai Eon, Mitsubishi i-MiEV, Renault Twingo


Supermini
Light car
Subcompact
B-segment small cars
Ford Fiesta, Kia Rio, Opel Corsa, Peugeot 208, Volkswagen Polo


Compact car
Small family car
Small car
Compact
Small family car
C-segment medium cars
Honda Civic, Mazda3, Suzuki Ciaz, Renault Mégane, Toyota Corolla


Mid-size car
Large family car
Medium car
Mid-size
Large family car
D-segment large cars
Chevrolet Malibu, Ford Fusion, Peugeot 508, Subaru Legacy, Volkswagen Passat


Entry-level luxury car
Compact executive car
Medium car above $60,000
N/A
Acura ILX, Alfa Romeo Giulia, Audi A4, Lexus ES, Mercedes-Benz C-Class


Full-size car
Executive car
Large car
Large
Executive
E-segment executive cars
Chevrolet Impala, Ford Taurus, Mazda Xedos 9, Hyundai Grandeur, Holden Commodore, first and second generation


Mid-size luxury car
Large car above $70,000
N/A
Audi A6, Cadillac CTS, Chrysler 300, Tesla Model S, Acura TLX


Full-size luxury car
Luxury car
Upper large car above $100,000
N/A
—
F-segment luxury cars
BMW 7 Series, Lincoln Town Car, Mercedes-Benz S-Class, Porsche Panamera, Maserati Quattroporte


Grand tourer
Grand tourer
Sports car
N/A
—
S-segment sports coupés
Aston Martin DB9, Bentley Continental GT, Ferrari GTC4Lusso, Jaguar XK, Maserati GranTurismo


Supercar
Supercar
N/A
—
Bugatti Veyron, LaFerrari, Lamborghini Aventador, Pagani Zonda, Porsche 918 Spyder


Convertible
Convertible
N/A
—
BMW 6 Series, Chevrolet Camaro, Mercedes CLK, Volvo C70, Volkswagen Eos


Roadster
Roadster
Two-seater
Roadster sports
BMW Z4, Lotus Elise, Mazda MX-5, Porsche Boxster, Mercedes-Benz SLK


—
Mini MPV
N/A
Minivan
MPV
Small MPV
M-segment multi purpose cars
Citroen C3 Picasso, Ford B-Max, Opel Meriva, Fiat 500L


MPV
Compact MPV
People mover
Chevrolet Orlando, Ford C-Max, Opel Zafira, Renault Scenic, Volkswagen Touran


Minivan
Large MPV
Large MPV
Chrysler Town and Country, Kia Carnival, Citroën C4 Grand Picasso, Renault Espace, Toyota Sienna


Cargo van
Van
Van
Cargo van
—
Chevrolet Express 1500 Cargo, Fiat Ducato/Ram ProMaster, Ford Transit, Renault Master, Volkswagen Transporter


Passenger van
Minibus
People mover
Passenger van
—
Chevrolet Express 1500 Passenger, Ford E350 Wagon, Mercedes-Benz Viano


Mini SUV
Mini 4x4
Small SUV
Small sport utility vehicle
Off-roader
Small off-road 4x4
J-segment sport utility cars (including off-road vehicles)
Daihatsu Terios, Ford Ecosport, Jeep Renegade, Peugeot 2008, Suzuki Jimny


Compact SUV
Compact SUV
Medium SUV
Alfa Romeo Stelvio, Chevrolet Equinox, Ford Escape, Honda CR-V, Jeep Cherokee, Kia Sportage


Mid-size SUV
Large 4x4
Large SUV
Standard sport utility vehicle
Large off-road 4x4
Ford Expedition, Hyundai Santa Fe, Jeep Grand Cherokee, Volkswagen Touareg, Volvo XC90


Full-size SUV
Upper large SUV
Range Rover, Cadillac Escalade, Toyota Land Cruiser


Mini pickup truck
Pick-up
Ute
Small Pickup truck
Pickup
Pick-up
—
Chevrolet Montana, Fiat Strada, Renault Duster Oroch, Volkswagen Saveiro


Mid-size pickup truck
Ford Ranger, Chevrolet Colorado, Mitsubishi Triton/L200, Nissan Navara, Toyota Hilux


Full-size pickup truck
Pickup
Standard pickup truck
Dodge Ram, Ford F-150, GMC Sierra, Nissan Titan, Toyota Tundra


Heavy duty pickup truck
Chevrolet Silverado HD, Ram Heavy Duty, Ford Super Duty


Special purpose vehicle
—
Limousine
Special purpose vehicle
—
—
—
Lincoln MKT Livery


Economy car[edit]
Main article: economy car
Microcar[edit]




Microcar Abaca


Main articles: Microcar and Bubble car
Straddling the boundary between car and motorbike, these vehicles have engines under 1.0 litre, typically seat only two passengers, and are sometimes unorthodox in construction. Some microcars are three-wheelers, while the majority have four wheels. Microcars were popular in post-war Europe, where their appearance led them to be called "Bubble cars". More recent microcars are often electric powered.
Examples of microcars:

Isetta
Smart Fortwo
Tata Nano

Hatchbacks[edit]
Main article: Hatchback
Ultracompact car[edit]






This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (July 2013)



In 2012, Japan's Transport and Tourism Ministry allowed local government to use ultracompact cars as transport for residents and tourists in their limiting areas. The size of ultracompact cars will be less than minicars, but have engine greater than 50cc displacement and able to transport 1 or 2 persons. Ultracompact cars cannot use minicars standard, because of strict safety standards for minicars. The regulation about running capacity and safety performance of ultracompact cars will be published in early autumn. Today, there are cars smaller than ultracompact cars, called category-1 motorized vehicles which it has 50cc displacement or less and only one seat for the driver.[19]
City car[edit]




Citroën C1


Main articles: City car and Kei car
A city car is a small automobile intended for use in urban areas. Unlike microcars, a city car's greater speed, capacity and (in perception at least) occupant protection are safer in mixed traffic environments and weather conditions. While city cars can reach highway speeds, that is not their intended use. In Japan, city cars are called kei cars.[20] Kei cars have to meet strict size and engine requirements: engines have a maximum displacement of 660 cc and the car's length must be under 3400 mm.
Examples of kei cars:

Daihatsu Move
Honda Life
Suzuki Cervo

Examples of city cars:

Fiat Panda
Maruti 800
Mini (Original 1959 model)

Other small cars:

Carver One
Citroën Type C
Smith Flyer

Supermini/subcompact car[edit]




Renault Clio IV


Main articles: Supermini car and Subcompact car
This class is known as supermini in the UK, subcompact in North America. Superminis have three, four or five doors, and even as an estate shape. They are designed to seat four passengers comfortably. Current supermini hatchbacks are approximately 3900 mm long, while saloons and estate cars are around 4200 mm long. Currently (2013) sedan variants are generally not available in Europe and are marketed at a lower price than hatchback models in North America.
In Europe, the first superminis were the Fiat 500 of 1957 and the Austin Mini of 1959. Superminis can be premium cars, such as the Citroën DS3, named 2010 Car of the Year by Top Gear Magazine. Superminis are some of the best selling vehicles in Europe with 25% of the market shares (2013). In 2007, the Peugeot 207 has been the most sold car in Europe, whereas the best seller is almost systematically a car from the compact segment.
In Australia, the motoring press tends to distinguish between a light car such as the Daihatsu Charade or early models of the Holden Barina, and slightly larger models such as the Ford Fiesta which is considered to be a small car. As the general size of vehicles in this class has gradually increased, the category of light car has almost disappeared.
Examples of superminis/subcompact cars:

Opel Corsa
Peugeot 208
Volkswagen Polo

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Superminis".
Family car[edit]
Main article: family car
Small family car/compact car[edit]




Volkswagen Golf


Main article: Compact car
Small family/compact cars refer to the hatchbacks and shortest saloons and estate cars with similar size. They are approximately 4,250 mm (167 in) long in case of hatchbacks and 4,500 mm (177 in) in the case of saloons and estate cars. Compact cars have room for five adults and usually have engines between 1.4 and 2.2 litres, but some have engines of up to 2.5 litres.
Examples of hatchback small family cars/compact cars:

Peugeot 308
Toyota Auris
Renault Megane

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Small Family Cars". In Australia, this class is generally referred to as being small-medium sized cars.
Large family / mid-size[edit]




Citroën DS5


Main article: Mid-size car
Traditionally, mid-size cars are sedans, but recently cars such as the Citroën DS5, which is a large hatchback family car, have introduced other body styles.[21]

Saloons / sedans[edit]
Main article: Sedan (automobile)
Large family / mid-size[edit]




Toyota Camry


Main article: Mid-size car
A class described as "large family" in Europe and "mid-size" in the USA, these cars have room for five adults and a large trunk (boot). Engines are more powerful than small family/compact cars and six-cylinder engines are more common than in smaller cars. Car sizes vary from region to region; in Europe, large family cars are rarely over 4,700 mm (15.4 ft) long, while in North America, Middle East and Australasia they may be well over 4,800 mm (15.7 ft).
Examples of large family cars/mid-size cars:

Chevrolet Malibu
Ford Mondeo
Kia Optima

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Large Family Cars". These are known in Australia as Medium sized cars.
Full size / large[edit]




Holden Commodore


Main article: Full-size car
This term is used most in North America, Middle East and Australia where it refers to the largest affordable sedans on the market. Full-size cars may be well over 4,900 mm (16.1 ft) long.
Examples of full-size cars:

Dodge Charger
Ford Falcon
Toyota Avalon [22]


Crossover SUV[edit]




Mitsubishi Outlander


Main article: Crossover (automobile)
Crossover SUVs are derived from an automobile platform using a monocoque construction with light off-road capability and lower ground clearance than SUVs. They may be styled similar to conventional "off-roaders", or may be look similar to an estate car or station wagon.
Examples of crossover SUVs:

Chevrolet Equinox
Nissan Qashqai
Tata Aria

Minivans / MPVs[edit]




Renault Espace, one of the first true minivans






Ford C-Max, a compact MPV






Opel Meriva a mini MPV


Main article: Minivan
Also known as "people carriers", this class of cars resembles tall estate cars. Larger MPVs may have seating for up to eight passengers. (Beyond that size, similar vehicles tend to be derived from vans (see below) and in Europe are called minibuses.)
Being taller than a family car improves visibility for the driver (while reducing visibility for other road users) and may help access for the elderly or disabled. They also offer more seats and increased load capacity than hatchbacks or estate cars.
Examples of mini MPVs:

Citroën C3 Picasso
Ford B-Max
Nissan Note

Examples of compact MPVs:

Opel Zafira Tourer
Peugeot 5008
Renault Scénic

Both categories are equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Small MPVs".
Examples of large MPVs / minivans:

Dodge Caravan
Ford S-Max
Mazda5

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "MPVs".
Luxury vehicle[edit]
Main article: Luxury vehicle
Compact executive[edit]




Lexus IS


Main articles: Compact executive car and D-segment
These are luxurious equivalents to mid-size and compact cars. Rear seat room and trunk space are smaller than executive cars simply because of their smaller overall size.
Examples of compact premium cars/entry-level luxury cars:

Audi A4
BMW 3 Series
Buick Regal

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Large Family Cars".
Executive/mid-luxury[edit]




BMW 5 Series


Main articles: Executive car and E-segment
These are luxurious equivalents to full-size cars. This also refers to the largest hatchbacks within the similar length in this class, such as the Porsche Panamera.
Examples of executive cars/mid-luxury cars:

Peugeot 607
Jaguar XF
MG Magnette

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Executive Cars".
Full-size luxury / Grand saloon[edit]




Mercedes-Benz S-Class


See also: Luxury vehicle and F-segment
Also known as full-size luxury cars, grand saloons, or premium large cars, while "Oberklasse" is used in Germany. Typically a four-door saloon (sedan). These are the most powerful saloons, with six, eight and twelve-cylinder engines and have more equipment than smaller models. Vehicles in this category include some of the models from the flagship lines of luxury car brands, such as Cadillac CT6,[23] Lincoln Town Car and Maserati Quattroporte.[citation needed]
Examples of grand saloons:

Audi A8
Lexus LS
BMW 7 Series

Estate cars / station wagons[edit]




Peugeot 508 SW


Main article: Station Wagon
A station wagon (also known as an estate or estate car) is an automobile with a body style variant of a sedan/saloon with its roof extended rearward over a shared passenger/cargo volume with access at the back via a third or fifth door (the liftgate or tailgate), instead of a trunk lid. The body style transforms a standard three-box design into a two-box design—to include an A, B, and C-pillar, as well as a D-pillar. Station wagons can flexibly reconfigure their interior volume via fold-down rear seats to prioritize either passenger or cargo volume.
Examples of estates/station wagons:

Hyundai i40 Tourer
Jaguar XF Sportbrake
Mercedes-Benz CLS Shooting Brake

Sports cars[edit]
Main article: Sports car
Hot hatch[edit]




Peugeot 205 GTI crowned "The Greatest Ever Hot Hatch"[24]


Main article: Hot hatch
A hot hatch is a high-performance hatchback, based on standard superminis or small family cars with improved performance, handling and styling. Hot hatches are very popular in Europe, where hatchbacks are by far the most common body style for this size of car. In North America, sport compacts are usually sold as saloons or coupés rather than hatchbacks.
Examples of hot hatches:

Volkswagen Golf GTi
Peugeot 205 GTi
Fiat 500 Abarth

Sports saloon / sports sedan[edit]




Pontiac G8 GT


Main article: Sports sedan
These are high-performance versions of saloons. Sometimes originally homologated for production based motorsports (touring cars or rally cars) and like regular saloons, seats four or five people.
Examples of sports saloons/sedans:

BMW M5
Mazdaspeed6/Mazda 6 MPS
Dodge Charger

Examples of sport compact saloons/sedans:

Dodge SRT-4
Lotus Cortina
Mitsubishi EVO

Sports car[edit]




Jaguar E-Type


Main article: Sports car
The term "sports car" does not appear to have a clear definition.[25] It is commonly used to describe vehicles which prioritise acceleration and handling; however, some people claim it is also defined as a vehicle with two seats.[26]
A Sports car (sportscar or sport car) is a small, usually two-seat, two-door automobile designed for spirited performance and nimble handling.[27] Sports cars may be spartan or luxurious but high maneuverability and minimum weight are requisite.[28]
Examples of sports cars:

Chevrolet Corvette
Mazda MX-5
Porsche 911


Grand tourer[edit]




Maserati GranTurismo


Main article: Grand tourer
Larger, more powerful and heavier than sports cars, these vehicles typically have a FR layout and seating for four passengers (2+2). These are more expensive than sports cars but not as expensive as supercars. Grand Tourers encompass both luxury and high-performance. Some grand tourers are hand-built.
Examples of grand tourers:

Aston Martin V8
Lexus SC300/400
Ferrari 612 Scaglietti


Supercar[edit]




Lamborghini Countach


Main article: Supercar
Supercar is a term generally used for ultra-high-end exotic cars, whose performance is superior to that of its contemporaries. The proper application of the term is subjective and disputed, especially among enthusiasts.[citation needed]
Examples of supercars:

McLaren P1
Koenigsegg Agera R
Bugatti Veyron 16.4


Muscle car[edit]




1970 AMC The Machine


Main article: Muscle car
The muscle car term generally refers to rear wheel drive mid-size cars with powerful V8 engines, typically manufactured in the U.S.[29][30] Some definitions limit it to two-door vehicles;[31] however, others include four-door body style versions.[32] Although opinions vary, it is generally accepted that classic muscle cars were produced in the late 1960s and early 1970s.[33][34][35][36] Muscle cars were also produced in Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and other nations.
Examples of American muscle cars from the 1960s and 1970s:

Ford Torino
Plymouth Road Runner
Pontiac GTO

Examples of Australian muscle cars:

Ford Falcon
Holden Monaro
Valiant Charger


Pony car[edit]




1966 Ford Mustang


Main article: Pony car
The pony car is a class of American Muscle car[37] automobile launched and inspired by the Ford Mustang in 1964. It describes an affordable, compact, highly styled car with a sporty or performance-oriented image.[38][39]
Examples of pony cars:

AMC Javelin
Chevrolet Camaro
Dodge Challenger


Convertible[edit]




Full-sized convertible with its fabric covered top folded behind the rear seat


Main articles: Convertible and Retractable hardtop
A body design that features a flexibly operating roof for open or enclosed mode driving. Also known as a cabriolet or roadster (if a 2-seater). Historically, convertibles used folding roof structures with fabric or other flexible materials. Some designs have roofs made of metal or other stiff materials that retract into the body.
Examples of cabriolets:

Mazda MX-5
Honda S2000
Volvo C70


Off-roaders[edit]
Main article: four-wheel drive
Off-road vehicles, or "off-roaders" are sometimes referred to as "four-wheel drives", "four by fours", or 4x4s — this can happen colloquially in cases where certain models or even an entire range does not possess four-wheel drive.
Sport utility vehicle[edit]




Jeep Commander






Kia Sportage


Main articles: Sport utility vehicle and compact sport utility vehicle
Sport utility vehicles are off-road vehicles with four-wheel drive and true off-road capability. They most often feature high ground clearance and an upright, boxy body design. Sport Utilities are typically defined by a body on frame construction which offers more off-road capability but reduced on-road ride comfort and handling compared to a cross-over or car based utility vehicle.
Examples of compact SUVs:

Land Rover Freelander
Jeep Patriot
Toyota FJ Cruiser

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Small Off-Roaders".
Examples of SUVs:

Land Rover Discovery
Mitsubishi Pajero
Mahindra Scorpio

This category is equivalent to the EuroNCAP class "Large Off-Roaders".
Commercial vehicle[edit]
Main article: Commercial vehicle
Van[edit]




American conversion van


Main article: Van
In some countries, the term "van" can refer to a small panel van based on a passenger car design (often the estate model / station wagon); it also refers to light trucks, which themselves are sometimes based on SUVs or MPVs. (But note that those retaining seats and windows, while being larger and more utilitarian than MPVs, may be called "minibuses".) The term is also used in the term "camper van" (or just "camper") — equivalent to a North American recreational vehicle (RV).
In the United States, the term "van" refers to vehicles that, like European minibuses, are even larger than large MPVs and are rarely seen being driven for domestic purposes — except for "conversion vans". These possess extremely large interior space and are often more intended for hauling cargo than people. Most vans use body-on-frame construction and are thus suitable for extensive modification and coachwork, known as conversion. Conversion vans are often quite luxurious, boasting comfortable seats, soft rides, built-in support for electronics such as television sets, and other amenities. The more elaborate conversion vans straddle the line between cars and recreational vehicles.
Examples of North American "vans":

Dodge Ram Van
Ford E-Series
GMC Savana

Examples of European "vans":

Ford Transit
Volkswagen Transporter
Mercedes-Benz Sprinter

Examples of Japanese "vans"

Toyota Hiace
Nissan NV

Other car classification terms[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Bakkie 
A generic South African term for light pickup truck.[40]


Baquet
refers to cars made in the early 1900s in Europe. Baquet means bath tub. These cars had two rows of raised seats similar to horse-drawn carriages. Baquets usually did not have front doors, a top, or windshield.[41]


Buggy
A Buggy is an automobile with wheels that project beyond the vehicle body.[citation needed]


Cabrio coach
Normally a two-door body design with special form of car roof, where a retractable textile cover amounts to a large sunroof.[42]


Coupé
A 2-door, 2- or 4-seat car with a fixed roof. Its doors are often longer than those of an equivalent sedan and the rear passenger area smaller; the roof may also be low. In cases where the rear seats are very small and not intended for regular use it is called a 2+2 (pronounced "two plus two"). Originally, a coupé was required to have only one side window per side, but this consideration has not been used for many years. Occasionally seen as Fixed Head Coupé, or FHC, particularly when referring to a hardtop version of a convertible.


Combi Coupé
A 2-door, 4-seat car with hatchback door at rear and, collapsible rear seats, resembling a fastback. The idea is to maximize the carrying capacity without bargaining on the performance.


Coupé utility
A passenger-car derived vehicle with an integral exterior cargo area.


Crossover (or CUV)
A loose marketing term to describe a vehicle that blends features of a SUV with features of a car — especially forgoing the body on frame construction of the SUV in favor of the car's unibody or monocoque construction. Crossovers usually borrow drivetrains and other parts from traditional cars in the same manufacturer's line. Crossovers typically employ an FF layout or an FF-based four-wheel drive layout with a transverse engine, rather than an FR layout or an FR-based 4WD layout with a longitudinal engine as is typically used on traditional truck-based SUVs.


Drop Head Coupé
Often abbreviated to DHC. Generally a European term referring to a 2-door, 4 place automobile with a retractable canvas / cloth top with both a padded headliner and rollup windows (as opposed to side curtains).[citation needed]


Estate
British name for a station wagon.


Fastback
A design where the roof slopes at a smooth angle to the tail of the car, but the rear window does not open as a separate "door".


Flower Car
in US, similar to ute in Australia, i.e. generic for Chevy El Camino, Ford Ranchero, GMC Sprint/Diablo, etc.[citation needed]


Hatchback
Incorporates a shared passenger and cargo volume, with rearmost accessibility via a rear third or fifth door, typically a top-hinged liftgate—and features such as fold-down rear seats to enable flexibility within the shared passenger/cargo volume. As a two-box design, the body style typically includes A, B and C-pillars, and may include a D-pillar.


Hardtop
Originally a removable solid roof on a convertible; later, also a fixed-roof car whose doors have no fixed window frames, which is designed to resemble such a convertible (sometimes also called "Fixed Head Coupé", or FHC.)


Hearse
A converted car (often a station wagon), light truck or minivan usually used to transport the dead. Often longer and heavier than the vehicle on which they are usually based. Can sometimes double up as an ambulance in some countries, such as the United States, especially in rural areas.


Kammback
Originally, a car with a tapered rear that cuts off abruptly.


Landaulet
A limousine with the passenger section covered by a convertible top.


Leisure activity vehicle
A small van, generally related to a supermini, with a second or even a third seat row, and a large, tall boot.


Liftback
A broad marketing term for a hatchback, which incorporates a shared passenger and cargo volume, with rearmost accessibility via a top-hinged liftgate.


Limousine
By definition, a chauffeur-driven car with a (normally glass-windowed) division between the front seats and the rear. In German, the term simply means a sedan.


Microvan
Term for a boxy wagon-type of car that is smaller than a conventional minivan; often without rear sliding door(s). Examples are Citroën Picasso, Renault Scénic, Toyota Yaris Verso or Mercedes-Benz A-Class. In Japan, this term is used for Kei car based vans.


Minibus
Designed to carry fewer people than a full-size bus, generally up to 16 people in multiple rows of seats. Passenger access in normally via a sliding door on one side of the vehicle. One example of a van with a minibus version available is the Ford Transit.


MPV 
Multi-purpose vehicle, a large car or small bus designed to be used on and off-road and easily convertible to facilitate loading of goods from facilitating carrying people.


Notchback
A configuration where the third box of a three-box styling configuration is less pronounced — especially where the rear deck (third box) is short or where the rear window is upright.


People carrier or people mover
European name to describe what is usually referred to in North America as a Minivan.


Phaeton 
A Phaeton is a style of open car or carriage without proper weather protection for passengers.[citation needed]


Pickup truck (or pickup)
A light-duty, open-bed truck.


Pillarless
Usually a prefix to coupé, fastback, or hardtop; completely open at the sides when the windows are down, without a central pillar, e.g. the Sunbeam Rapier fastback coupé.


Ragtop
Originally an open car like a roadster, but with a soft top (cloth top) that can be raised or lowered. Unlike a convertible, it had no roll-up side windows.[citation needed] Now often used as slang for a convertible.


Retractable Hardtop
aka Coupé convertible or Coupé Cabriolet. A type of convertible forgoing a foldable textile roof in favor of a multi-segment rigid roof retracts into the lower bodywork.


Roadster
Originally a two-seat open car with minimal weather protection — without top or side glass — though possibly with optional hard or soft top and side curtains (i.e., without roll-up glass windows). In modern usage, the term means simply a two-seat sports car convertible, a variation of spyder.


Sedan
A car seating four or more with a fixed roof that is full-height up to the rear window. Known in British English as a saloon. Sedans can have 2 or 4-doors. This is the most common body style[citation needed]. In the U.S., this term has been used[by whom?] to denote a car with fixed window frames, as opposed to the hardtop style wherein the sash, if any, winds down with the glass.


Sedan delivery
North American term for a vehicle similar to a wagon but without side windows, similar to a panel truck but with two doors (one on each side), and one or two rear doors[citation needed]


Sport utility vehicle (SUV)
Derivative of a pickup truck or 4-wheel-drive vehicle, but with fully enclosed passenger cabin interior and carlike levels of interior equipment.


Spyder (or Spider)
Similar to a roadster but originally with less weather protection.[citation needed]Nowadays it simply means a convertible with two seater only. The name comes from the old carriages with two seats and no roof, whose small central cabin and big wheels at the corners are reminiscent of a spider.[citation needed]


Shooting-brake
Initially a vehicle used to carry shooting parties with their equipment and game; later used to describe custom-built wagons by high-end coachbuilders, subsequently synonymous with station wagon or estate; and in contemporary usage a three or five-door wagons combining features of a wagon and a coupé.


Station wagon
A variant of a sedan/saloon, (also known as estate or estate car) or with its roof extended rearward over a shared passenger/cargo volume; access at the back via a third or fifth door instead of a trunk lid; flexible configurations to vary passenger or cargo volume; and two or three rows of seating — in a two-box design with a A, B & C-pillar, as well as a D pillar.


T-top
A derivative of the Targa top, called a T-bar roof, this fixed-roof design has two removable panels and retains a central narrow roof section along the front to back axis of the car (e.g. Toyota MR2 Mark I.)


Targa top
A semi-convertible style used on some sports cars, featuring a fully removable hard top roof panel which leaves the A and B pillars in place on the car body.


Town car (US)
Essentially the inverse of the landaulet, a historical body style in which the front seats were open and the rear compartment closed, normally with a removable top to cover the front chauffeur's compartment. In Europe the style is also known as Sedanca de Ville, often shortened to Sedanca or de Ville. Note that the modern Lincoln Town Car derives its name, but nothing else, from this style.


Ute
A term used originally in Australia and New Zealand to describe usually two-wheel-drive, traditionally passenger vehicles with a cargo tray in the rear integrated with the passenger body; as opposed to a pickup whose cargo tray is not integrated with the passenger body.


Wagon delivery
North American term (mainly U.S. and Canada). Similar to a sedan delivery, with four doors.[citation needed]


Van
In North America "van" refers to a truck-based commercial vehicle of the wagon style, whether used for passenger or commercial use. Usually a van has no windows at the side rear (panel van), although for passenger use, side windows are included. In other parts of the world, 'van' denotes a passenger-based wagon with no rear side windows.

Non-English terms[edit]
Some non-English language terms are familiar from their use on imported vehicles in English-speaking nations even though the terms have not been adopted into English.

Barchetta 
Italian term for a roadster with no roof. The name, roughly "small boat", comes from an exclamation when the Ferrari 166MM Touring was shown.
Berlina 
Italian term for a sedan.
Berline 
French term for a sedan.
Berlinetta 
Italian term for a sport coupé.
Break 
French term for a station wagon.
Camioneta 
Brazilian Portuguese term for a station wagon (specially in the state of Rio de Janeiro). Spanish term also used in Argentina and Uruguay.
Carrinha 
Portuguese term for a station wagon. Not used in Brazilian Portuguese.
Espada 
Portuguese nickname for a limousine (the same word for Sword – long piece of metal). Not used in Brazilian Portuguese.
Furgoneta 
Spanish and Polish term for a van, in the latter language almost always used in its diminutive form furgonetka.
Furgão 
Portuguese alternative term (less used) for a van. Used in Brazilian Portuguese, most often for vans but sometimes for panel van variants of passenger cars.
Kombi 
is a German abbreviation of "Kombinationswagen" (Combination Car) and it is German name for station wagon. Since Germany is a major producer of cars for many European countries, the term Kombi in this meaning is also used in Swedish, Czech, Slovak, Polish, Slovenian, Serbian, Bosnian, Croatian, Hungarian, Spanish, Portuguese, Bulgarian. In Afrikaans and in Australia, Kombi is also used to refer to a Volkswagen Microbus. In Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay the word specifically refers to the VW Microbus.
Perua
Brazilian Portuguese term either designating a van (especially as spoken in the city of São Paulo) or a station wagon (in the city of Rio de Janeiro).
Turismo 
Spanish term for a sedan. Literally means tourism, used mostly in Latin American countries and Spain.
Ijapa 
Yoruba term for a two door car. Literally modeled after a Tortoise animal. Also refers to Volkswagen Beetle.
Vagoneta 
Bolivian Spanish Colloquial term for a station wagon (with o without SUV capabilities).

See also[edit]

ACRISS Car Classification Code
Car color
Car safety and road safety
Production vehicle
Three-wheeler
Truck classification
Vehicle category
Vehicle size class

References[edit]


^ Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Protection of Environment, PT. 425 699. US: Office of the Federal Register. 2010. p. 862. ISBN 9780160889318. Retrieved 1 March 2016. 
^ "Notes About Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency: Tax Classes" (PDF). www.direct.gov.uk. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Sperling, Daniel; Kurani, Ken (September 2001). Transportation, Energy, and Environmental Policy. Transportation Research Board. p. 230. ISBN 0-309-08571-3. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Berry, Claude Perrin (1921). The law of automobiles. Callaghan. p. 137. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ International Organization for Standardization. "ISO 3833:1977 Road vehicles – Types – Terms and definitions" (PDF). autoparts-standard.org. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Technical Appendix, Arlington, Virginia: Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Highway Loss Data Institute (HLDI), 2010 
^ "Vehicle size and weight: Bigger heavier vehicles protect their occupants better". Fatality Facts. Insurance Institute for Highway Safety. Retrieved May 29, 2017. 
^ "Technical Appendix" (PDF), IIHS.org, Arlington, VA: Highway Loss Data Institute, p. 4, December 2006, retrieved May 29, 2017 
^ "NHTSA 5-Star Ratings FAQ". U.S. Department of Transportation. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "FHWA Vehicle Types". U.S. Federal Highway Administration. 5 April 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "How are vehicle size classes defined?". U.S. Department of Energy. Retrieved 22 April 2012. 
^ "Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999" (PDF). Canada Gazette Part II. 137 (1). Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Clayton, Alan; Montufar1, Jeannette; Middleton, Dan; McCauley, Bill (August 2000). "Feasibility of a New Vehicle Classification System for Canada" (PDF). U.S. Department of Transportation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 November 2004. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "VFACTS Motor Vehicle Classifications and Definitions". Australia: Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Alborz, Fallah. "New Car Sales Figures June 2015". Car Advice. Car Advice. Retrieved 1 August 2015. 
^ 40 C.F.R. 600 Subpart D §315-08
^ NCAP Comparable cars
^ Case No COMP/M.1406 - Hyundai / Kia: Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 Merger Procedure: Article 6(1)(b) Non-opposition Date: 17/03/1999
^ "Ultracompact vehicles to hit Japan's roads this year". 10 July 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Japan Seeks to Squelch Its Tiny Cars". New York Times. Retrieved 17 February 2015. 
^ "20 Best Family Vehicle to look for in 2017". Lets drive car. 2017-02-18. Retrieved 2017-04-23. 
^ "Fuel Economy of the 2010 Toyota Avalon". Fueleconomy.gov. Retrieved 2016-07-16. 
^ "Cadillac CT6 June 2016 Retrieved 2016-07-06". Caranddriver.com. 2016-05-25. Retrieved 2016-07-16. 
^ "Peugeot 205 GTi Crowned "The Greatest Ever Hot Hatch"". Car Scoop. 16 January 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2016. 
^ Chandler, David. "Definition of a Sports Car". Streetdirectory.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Sports car – Definition from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Sports car – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Csere, Csaba; Swan, Tony (January 2005). "10 Best Cars: Best Luxury Sports Car". Car and Driver. Archived from the original on 6 May 2006. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Koch, Jeff (October 2004). "The First Muscle Car: Older Than You". Hemmings Muscle Machines. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Muscle Car Definition". Musclecarclub.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Simple Definition of muscle car". Merriam-Webster Online. Retrieved 21 May 2016. Any of a group of American-made 2-door sports coupes with powerful engines designed for high-performance driving. 
^ "Muscle Car Definition: Understand the Requirements". CarsDirect. 27 January 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Muscle Car Definition". Muscle Car Club Muscle. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Sherman, Don (4 June 2006). "Muscle Cars Now Worth Millions". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Classic Muscle Cars Library". How Stuff Works. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Muscle Car Definition". Muscle Car Society. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ Roy, Rex (27 February 2008). "Car culture: A child's Pony Car education essential". The Detroit News. Archived from the original (fee required) on 12 August 2014. 
^ Gunnell, John (2005). American Cars of The 1960s: A Decade of Diversity. Krause Publications. pp. 47–50. ISBN 978-0-89689-131-9. 
^ "Pony Car History". modernponycars.com. Archived from the original on 23 April 2008. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Bakkie: definition". Oxforddictionaries.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Body Styles". aaca.org. 
^ Haajanen, Lennart W. (2003). CIllustrated Dictionary of Automobile Body Styles. McFarland. p. 29. ISBN 9781476614809. Retrieved 17 August 2015. 


External links[edit]

EuroNCAP classifications (unexplained)







v
t
e


Car design



Car classification



By size

Microcar
City car
Kei
Subcompact
Supermini
Family car
Compact
Mid-size
Full-size




Custom

Hot rod
Lead sled
Lowrider
Street rod
T-bucket




Luxury

Compact executive
Executive
Personal luxury car




Minivan / Multi-purpose vehicle (MPV)

Compact MPV
Mini MPV




Sport utility vehicle (SUV)

Compact SUV
Crossover SUV
Mini SUV




Sports car

Grand tourer
Hot hatch
Muscle
Pony
Sport compact
Supercar




Antique
Classic
Economy
Leisure activity vehicle
Ute
Van
Voiturette





Body styles



2+2
Baquet
Barchetta
Berlinetta
Brougham
Cabrio coach
Cabriolet / Convertible
Coupé
Coupé de Ville
Coupé utility
Drophead coupe (Convertible)
Fastback
Hardtop
Hatchback
Landaulet
Liftback
Limousine
Multi-stop truck
Notchback
Panel van
Phaeton
Pickup truck
Quad coupé
Retractable hardtop
Roadster
Runabout
Saloon / Sedan
Sedan delivery
Sedanca de Ville (Coupé de Ville)
Shooting-brake
Spider / Spyder (Roadster)
Station wagon
Targa top
Torpedo
Touring car
Town car (Coupé de Ville)
T-top
Vis-à-vis





Specialized vehicles



Amphibious
Driverless (autonomous)
Hearse
Gyrocar
Roadable aircraft
Taxicab
Tow truck





Propulsion



Alternative fuel
Autogas
Biodiesel
Diesel
Electric (battery
NEV)
Ethanol (E85)
Fuel cell
Gasoline / petrol (direct injection)
Homogeneous charge compression ignition
Hybrid (plug-in)
Hydrogen
Internal combustion
Liquid nitrogen
Steam





Drive wheels



Front-wheel
Rear-wheel
Two-wheel
Four-wheel
Six-wheel
Eight-wheel
Twelve-wheel





Engine position



Front
Mid
Rear





Layout (engine / drive)



Front / front 
 Front mid / front 
 Rear / front 
 Front / rear 
 Rear mid / rear 
 Rear / rear 
 Front / four-wheel 
 Mid / four-wheel 
 Rear / four-wheel 





Engine configuration
(internal combustion)



Boxer
Flat
Four-stroke
H-block
Reciprocating
Single-cylinder
Straight
Two-stroke
V (Vee)
W engine
Wankel








Portal
Category











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Car_classification&oldid=815526528"					Categories: Car classificationsHidden categories: Articles needing cleanup from January 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from January 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from January 2017Use dmy dates from November 2012Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from December 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2013All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015Articles needing additional references from September 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2009Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014