"Jung" redirects here. For other uses, see Jung (disambiguation).


Carl Jung



A portrait of Jung, unknown date



Born
Carl Gustav Jung
(1875-07-26)26 July 1875
Kesswil, Thurgau, Switzerland


Died
6 June 1961(1961-06-06) (aged 85)
Küsnacht, Zürich, Switzerland


Alma mater
University of Basel


Known for
Analytical psychology
Psychological types
Collective unconscious
Complex
Archetypes
Anima and animus
Synchronicity
Shadow


Spouse(s)
Emma Jung


Scientific career


Fields
Psychiatry, psychology, psychotherapy, analytical psychology


Institutions
Burghölzli, Swiss Army (commissioned officer in World War I)


Doctoral advisor
Eugen Bleuler


Influences
Bleuler, Freud, Kant, Nietzsche,[1] Schopenhauer[1]


Influenced
Joseph Campbell, Hermann Hesse, Erich Neumann, Ross Nichols, Alan Watts, Jordan Peterson, Terence McKenna





Signature







Part of a series of articles on


Psychoanalysis







Concepts



Psychosexual development
Psychosocial development (Erikson)
Unconscious
Preconscious
Consciousness
Psychic apparatus
Id, ego and super-ego
Libido
Drive
Transference
Countertransference
Ego defenses
Resistance
Projection
Denial
Dreamwork









Important figures



Alfred Adler
Michael Balint
Wilfred Bion
Josef Breuer
Nancy Chodorow
Max Eitingon
Erik Erikson
Ronald Fairbairn
Paul Federn
Otto Fenichel
Sándor Ferenczi
Anna Freud
Sigmund Freud
Erich Fromm
Harry Guntrip
Karen Horney
Edith Jacobson
Ernest Jones
Carl Jung
Abram Kardiner
Heinz Kohut
Melanie Klein
Jacques Lacan
Ronald Laing
Margaret Mahler
Jacques-Alain Miller
Sandor Rado
Otto Rank
Wilhelm Reich
Joan Riviere
Isidor Sadger
Ernst Simmel
Sabina Spielrein
James Strachey
Harry Stack Sullivan
Susan Sutherland Isaacs
Donald Winnicott









Important works



The Interpretation of Dreams (1899)
The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901)

Three Essays on the Theory
of Sexuality (1905)

Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920)
The Ego and the Id (1923)









Schools of thought



Self psychology
Lacanian
Jungian
Object relations
Interpersonal
Reichian
Relational
Ego psychology









Training




Boston Graduate School of
Psychoanalysis

British Psychoanalytic Council
British Psychoanalytical Society

Columbia University Center for
Psychoanalytic Training and Research

International Psychoanalytical Association
World Association of Psychoanalysis









 Psychology portal







v
t
e





Carl Gustav Jung (/jʊŋ/; Swiss German: [ˈkarl ˈɡʊstaf jʊŋ]; 26 July 1875 – 6 June 1961) was a Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who founded analytical psychology.
His work has been influential not only in psychiatry but also in anthropology, archaeology, literature, philosophy, and religious studies. As a notable research scientist based at the famous Burghölzli hospital, under Eugen Bleuler, he came to the attention of the Viennese founder of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud. The two men conducted a lengthy correspondence and collaborated on an initially joint vision of human psychology.
Freud saw in the younger man, the potential heir he had been seeking to carry on his "new science" of psychoanalysis. Jung's researches and personal vision, however, made it impossible for him to bend to his older colleague's doctrine and a breach became inevitable. This break was to have historic as well as painful personal repercussions that have lasted to this day. Jung was also an artist, craftsman and builder as well as a prolific writer. Many of his works were not published until after his death and some are still awaiting publication.
Among the central concepts of analytical psychology is individuation—the lifelong psychological process of differentiation of the self out of each individual's conscious and unconscious elements. Jung considered it to be the main task of human development. He created some of the best known psychological concepts, including synchronicity, archetypal phenomena, the collective unconscious, the psychological complex, and extraversion and introversion.



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early years

1.1.1 Childhood family
1.1.2 Childhood memories
1.1.3 University studies and early career
1.1.4 Wartime army service
1.1.5 Marriage




2 Relationship with Freud

2.1 Meeting and collaboration
2.2 Divergence and break
2.3 Midlife isolation

2.3.1 London 1913–14
2.3.2 The Red Book




3 Travels

3.1 England (1920, 1923, 1925)
3.2 United States 1924–25, 1936–37
3.3 East Africa
3.4 India


4 Final publications and death
5 Thought

5.1 Key concepts
5.2 Extraversion and Introversion
5.3 Persona
5.4 Spirituality
5.5 Interpretation of quantum mechanics
5.6 Alchemy
5.7 Art therapy
5.8 Dance / Movement
5.9 Political views

5.9.1 Views on the state
5.9.2 Germany, 1933 to 1939
5.9.3 Anti-Semitism and Nazism
5.9.4 Service to the Allies During World War II




6 Legacy
7 In popular culture

7.1 Literature
7.2 Art
7.3 Music
7.4 Theatre, film and television
7.5 Video games


8 Bibliography
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Biography[edit]
Early years[edit]
Childhood family[edit]




The clergy house in Kleinhüningen, Basel where Jung grew up


Carl Gustav Jung[a] was born in Kesswil, in the Swiss canton of Thurgau, on 26 July 1875 as the second and first surviving son of Paul Achilles Jung (1842–1896) and Emilie Preiswerk (1848–1923). Their first child, born in 1873, was a boy named Paul who survived only a few days.[2][3] Being the youngest son of a noted Basel physician of German descent, also called Karl Gustav Jung (de) (1794–1864), whose hopes of achieving a fortune never materialised, Paul Jung did not progress beyond the status of an impoverished rural pastor in the Swiss Reformed Church; his wife had also grown up in a large family, whose Swiss roots went back five centuries. Emilie was the youngest child of a distinguished Basel churchman and academic, Samuel Preiswerk (de) (1799–1871), and his second wife. Preiswerk was antistes, the title given to the head of the Reformed clergy in the city, as well as a Hebraist, author and editor, who taught Paul Jung as his professor of Hebrew at Basel University.[4]
When Jung was six months old, his father was appointed to a more prosperous parish in Laufen, but the tension between his parents was growing. Emilie Jung was an eccentric and depressed woman; she spent considerable time in her bedroom where she said that spirits visited her at night.[5] Although she was normal during the day, Jung recalled that at night his mother became strange and mysterious. He reported that one night he saw a faintly luminous and indefinite figure coming from her room with a head detached from the neck and floating in the air in front of the body. Jung had a better relationship with his father.[5]
Jung's mother left Laufen for several months of hospitalization near Basel for an unknown physical ailment. His father took the boy to be cared for by Emilie Jung's unmarried sister in Basel, but he was later brought back to his father's residence. Emilie Jung's continuing bouts of absence and often depressed mood influenced her son's attitude towards women—one of "innate unreliability".[6] This was a view that he later called the "handicap I started off with".[7] He believed it contributed to his sometimes patriarchal views of women, but these were common in the society of his time.[8] After three years of living in Laufen, Paul Jung requested a transfer; he was called to Kleinhüningen, next to Basel in 1879. The relocation brought Emilie Jung closer into contact with her family and lifted her melancholy.[9] When he was nine years old, Jung's sister Johanna Gertrud (1884–1935) was born. Known in the family as "Trudi", she later became a secretary to her brother.[10]
Childhood memories[edit]
Jung was a solitary and introverted child. From childhood, he believed that, like his mother,[11] he had two personalities—a modern Swiss citizen and a personality more suited to the 18th century.[12] "Personality Number 1", as he termed it, was a typical schoolboy living in the era of the time. "Personality Number 2" was a dignified, authoritative and influential man from the past. Although Jung was close to both parents, he was disappointed by his father's academic approach to faith.[13]
A number of childhood memories made lifelong impressions on him. As a boy, he carved a tiny mannequin into the end of the wooden ruler from his pencil case and placed it inside the case. He added a stone, which he had painted into upper and lower halves, and hid the case in the attic. Periodically, he would return to the mannequin, often bringing tiny sheets of paper with messages inscribed on them in his own secret language.[14] He later reflected that this ceremonial act brought him a feeling of inner peace and security. Years later, he discovered similarities between his personal experience and the practices associated with totems in indigenous cultures, such as the collection of soul-stones near Arlesheim or the tjurungas of Australia. He concluded that his intuitive ceremonial act was an unconscious ritual, which he had practiced in a way that was strikingly similar to those in distant locations which he, as a young boy, knew nothing about.[15] His observations about symbols, archetypes, and the collective unconscious were inspired, in part, by these early experiences combined with his later research.[16][17]
At the age of 12, shortly before the end of his first year at the Humanistisches Gymnasium in Basel, Jung was pushed to the ground by another boy so hard that he momentarily lost consciousness. (Jung later recognized that the incident was his fault, indirectly.) A thought then came to him—"now you won't have to go to school anymore."[18] From then on, whenever he walked to school or began homework, he fainted. He remained at home for the next six months until he overheard his father speaking hurriedly to a visitor about the boy's future ability to support himself. They suspected he had epilepsy. Confronted with the reality of his family's poverty, he realized the need for academic excellence. He went into his father's study and began poring over Latin grammar. He fainted three more times but eventually overcame the urge and did not faint again. This event, Jung later recalled, "was when I learned what a neurosis is."[19]
University studies and early career[edit]
Jung did not plan to study psychiatry since it was not considered prestigious at the time. But, studying a psychiatric textbook, he became very excited when he discovered that psychoses are personality diseases. His interest was immediately captured—it combined the biological and the spiritual, exactly what he was searching for.[20] In 1895 Jung began to study medicine at the University of Basel. Barely a year later in 1896, his father Paul died and left the family near destitute. They were helped out by relatives who also contributed to Jung's studies.[21] During his student days, he entertained his contemporaries with the family legend, that his paternal grandfather was the illegitimate son of Wolfgang Goethe and his German great-grandmother, Sophie Ziegler. In later life, he pulled back from this tale, saying only that Sophie was a friend of Goethe's niece.[22]
In 1900 Jung began working at the Burghölzli psychiatric hospital in Zürich with Eugen Bleuler. Bleuler was already in communication with the Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud. Jung's dissertation, published in 1903, was titled On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult Phenomena. In 1906 he published Diagnostic Association Studies, and later sent a copy of this book to Freud. It turned out that Freud had already bought a copy.[23]
Eventually a close friendship and a strong professional association developed between the elder Freud and Jung, which left a sizeable correspondence. For six years they cooperated in their work.[24] In 1912, however, Jung published Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido (known in English as Psychology of the Unconscious), which made manifest the developing theoretical divergence between the two. Consequently, their personal and professional relationship fractured—each stating that the other was unable to admit he could possibly be wrong. After the culminating break in 1913, Jung went through a difficult and pivotal psychological transformation, exacerbated by the outbreak of the First World War. Henri Ellenberger called Jung's intense experience a "creative illness" and compared it favorably to Freud's own period of what he called neurasthenia and hysteria.[citation needed]
Wartime army service[edit]
During World War I Jung was drafted as an army doctor and soon made commandant of an internment camp for British officers and soldiers (The Swiss were neutral, and obliged to intern personnel from either side of the conflict who crossed their frontier to evade capture). Jung worked to improve the conditions of soldiers stranded in neutral territory and encouraged them to attend university courses.[25]
Marriage[edit]
In 1903, Jung married Emma Rauschenbach, seven years his junior and the elder daughter of a wealthy industrialist in eastern Switzerland, Johannes Rauschenbach-Schenck, and his wife. Rauschenbach was the owner, among other concerns, of IWC Schaffhausen – the International Watch Company, manufacturers of luxury time-pieces. Upon his death in 1905, his two daughters and their husbands became owners of the business. Jung's brother-in-law became the principal proprietor, but the Jungs remained shareholders in a thriving business that ensured the family's financial security for decades.[26] Emma Jung, whose education had been limited, evinced considerable ability and interest in her husband's research and threw herself into studies and acted as his assistant at Burghölzli. She eventually became a noted psychoanalyst in her own right. They had five children: Agathe, Gret, Franz, Marianne, and Helene. The marriage lasted until Emma's death in 1955.[27]
During his marriage, Jung engaged in extramarital relationships. His alleged affairs with Sabina Spielrein[28] and Toni Wolff[29] were the most widely discussed. Though it was mostly taken for granted that Jung's relationship with Spielrein included a sexual relationship, this assumption has been disputed, in particular by Henry Zvi Lothane.[30][31]
Relationship with Freud[edit]
See also: Psychoanalysis
Meeting and collaboration[edit]
Jung was thirty when he sent his Studies in Word Association to Sigmund Freud in Vienna in 1906. The two men met for the first time the following year and Jung recalled the discussion between himself and Freud as interminable. He recalled that they talked almost unceasingly for thirteen hours.[32] Six months later, the then 50-year-old Freud sent a collection of his latest published essays to Jung in Zurich. This marked the beginning of an intense correspondence and collaboration that lasted six years and ended in May 1913.[33] At that time Jung resigned as the chairman of the International Psychoanalytical Association, a position to which he had been elected with Freud's support.




Group photo 1909 in front of Clark University. Front row, Sigmund Freud, G. Stanley Hall, Carl Jung. Back row, Abraham Brill, Ernest Jones, Sándor Ferenczi.


Jung and Freud influenced each other during the intellectually formative years of Jung's life. Jung had become interested in psychiatry as a student by reading Psychopathia Sexualis by Richard von Krafft-Ebing. In 1900, Jung completed his degree, and started work as an intern (voluntary doctor) under the psychiatrist, Eugen Bleuler at Burghölzli Hospital.[34] It was Bleuler who introduced him to the writings of Freud by asking him to write a review of The Interpretation of Dreams (1899). In 1905 Jung was appointed as a permanent 'senior' doctor at the hospital and also became a lecturer Privatdozent in the medical faculty of Zurich University.[35] In that period psychology as a science was still in its early stages, but Jung became a qualified proponent of Freud's new "psycho-analysis." At the time, Freud needed collaborators and pupils to validate and spread his ideas. Burghölzli was a renowned psychiatric clinic in Zurich and Jung's research had already gained him international recognition. Preceded by a lively correspondence, Jung met Freud for the first time, in Vienna on 3 March 1907.[36] In 1908, Jung became an editor of the newly founded Yearbook for Psychoanalytical and Psychopathological Research.
in 1909, Jung traveled with Freud and the Hungarian psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi to the United States; they took part in a conference at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts. The conference at Clark University was planned by the psychologist G. Stanley Hall and included twenty-seven distinguished psychiatrists, neurologists and psychologists. It represented a watershed in the acceptance of psychoanalysis in North America. This forged welcome links between Jung and influential Americans.[37] Jung returned to the United States the next year for a brief visit.
In 1910, Jung became Chairman for Life of the International Psychoanalytical Association with Freud's support. Freud would come to call Jung "his adopted eldest son, his crown prince and successor".[38]
Divergence and break[edit]




Jung outside Burghölzli in 1910.


While Jung worked on his Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido (Psychology of the Unconscious), tensions became manifest between him and Freud because of their disagreements over the nature of libido and religion.[39][clarification needed] Jung de-emphasized the importance of sexual development and focused on the collective unconscious: the part of the unconscious that contains memories and ideas that Jung believed were inherited from ancestors. While he did think that libido was an important source for personal growth, unlike Freud, Jung did not believe that libido alone was responsible for the formation of the core personality.[40] Jung believed his personal development was influenced by factors he felt were unrelated to sexuality.
In 1912 these tensions came to a peak because Jung felt severely slighted after Freud visited his colleague Ludwig Binswanger in Kreuzlingen without paying him a visit in nearby Zurich, an incident Jung referred to as "the Kreuzlingen gesture". Shortly thereafter, Jung again traveled to the United States and gave the Fordham University lectures, a six-week series, which were published as The Theory of Psychoanalysis (1912). While they contain some remarks on Jung's dissenting view on the libido, they represent largely a "psychoanalytical Jung" and not the theory of analytical psychology, for which he became famous in the following decades.
Another primary disagreement with Freud stemmed from their differing concepts of the unconscious.[41] Jung saw Freud's theory of the unconscious as incomplete and unnecessarily negative and inelastic. According to Jung, Freud conceived the unconscious solely as a repository of repressed emotions and desires.[42] Jung's observations overlap to an extent with Freud's model of the unconscious, what Jung called the "personal unconscious", but his hypothesis is more about a process than a static model and he also proposed the existence of a second, overarching form of the unconscious beyond the personal, that he named the psychoid – a term borrowed from Driesch, but with a somewhat altered meaning.[43] The collective unconscious, is not so much a 'geographical location', but a deduction from the alleged ubiquity of archetypes over space and time. Freud had actually mentioned a collective level of psychic functioning but saw it primarily as an appendix to the rest of the psyche.[citation needed]
In November 1912, Jung and Freud met in Munich for a meeting among prominent colleagues to discuss psychoanalytical journals.[44] At a talk about a new psychoanalytic essay on Amenhotep IV, Jung expressed his views on how it related to actual conflicts in the psychoanalytic movement. While Jung spoke, Freud suddenly fainted and Jung carried him to a couch.[45]
Jung and Freud personally met for the last time in September 1913 for the Fourth International Psychoanalytical Congress in Munich. Jung gave a talk on psychological types, the introverted and extraverted type in analytical psychology. This constituted the introduction of some of the key concepts which came to distinguish Jung's work from Freud's in the next half century.
Midlife isolation[edit]
It was the publication of Jung's book Psychology of the Unconscious in 1912 that led to the break with Freud. Letters they exchanged show Freud's refusal to consider Jung's ideas. This rejection caused what Jung described in his 1962 autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, as a "resounding censure". Everyone he knew dropped away except for two of his colleagues. Jung described his book as "an attempt, only partially successful, to create a wider setting for medical psychology and to bring the whole of the psychic phenomena within its purview." (The book was later revised and retitled Symbols of Transformation in 1922).
London 1913–14[edit]
Jung spoke at meetings of the Psycho-Medical Society in London in 1913 and 1914. His travels were soon interrupted by the war, but his ideas continued to receive attention in England primarily through the efforts of Constance Long who translated and published the first English volume of his collected writings.[46][47]
The Red Book[edit]
In 1913, at the age of thirty-eight, Jung experienced a horrible "confrontation with the unconscious". He saw visions and heard voices. He worried at times that he was "menaced by a psychosis" or was "doing a schizophrenia". He decided that it was valuable experience and, in private, he induced hallucinations or, in his words, "active imaginations". He recorded everything he felt in small journals. Jung began to transcribe his notes into a large red leather-bound book, on which he worked intermittently for sixteen years.[8]
Jung left no posthumous instructions about the final disposition of what he called the Liber Novus or the Red Book. Sonu Shamdasani, a historian of psychology from London, tried for three years to persuade Jung's resistant heirs to have it published. Up to mid-September 2008, fewer than two dozen people had seen it. Ulrich Hoerni, Jung's grandson who manages the Jung archives, decided to publish it to raise the additional funds needed when the Philemon Foundation was founded.[8]
In 2007, two technicians for DigitalFusion, working with New York City publishers W. W. Norton & Company, scanned the manuscript with a 10,200-pixel scanner. It was published on 7 October 2009, in German with a "separate English translation along with Shamdasani's introduction and footnotes" at the back of the book, according to Sara Corbett for The New York Times. She wrote, "The book is bombastic, baroque and like so much else about Carl Jung, a willful oddity, synched with an antediluvian and mystical reality."[8]
The Rubin Museum of Art in New York City displayed the original Red Book journal, as well as some of Jung's original small journals, from 7 October 2009 to 15 February 2010.[48] According to them, "During the period in which he worked on this book Jung developed his principal theories of archetypes, collective unconscious, and the process of individuation." Two-thirds of the pages bear Jung's illuminations of the text.[48]
Travels[edit]
Jung emerged from his period of isolation in the late nineteen-teens with the publication of several journal articles, followed in 1921 with Psychological Types, one of his most influential books. There followed a decade of active publication, interspersed with overseas travels.
England (1920, 1923, 1925)[edit]
Constance Long arranged for Jung to deliver a seminar in Cornwall in 1920. Another seminar was held in 1923, this one organized by Helton Godwin Baynes (known as Peter), and another in 1925.[49]
United States 1924–25, 1936–37[edit]
Jung made a more extensive trip westward in the winter of 1924–5, financed and organized by Fowler McCormick and George Porter. Of particular value to Jung was a visit with Chief Mountain Lake of the Taos Pueblo near Taos, New Mexico.[49] Jung made another trip to America in 1936, giving lectures in New York and New England for his growing group of American followers. He returned in 1937 to deliver the Terry Lectures at Yale University, later published as Psychology and Religion.[50]
East Africa[edit]
In October 1925, Jung embarked on his most ambitious expedition, the "Bugishu Psychological Expedition" to East Africa. He was accompanied by Peter Baynes and an American associate, George Beckwith. On the voyage to Africa, they became acquainted with an English woman named Ruth Bailey, who joined their safari a few weeks later. The group traveled through Kenya and Uganda to the slopes of Mount Elgon, where Jung hoped to increase his understanding of "primitive psychology" through conversations with the culturally isolated residents of that area. Later he concluded that the major insights he had gleaned had to do with himself and the European psychology in which he had been raised.[51][52]
India[edit]
In December 1937, Jung left Zurich again for an extensive tour of India with Fowler McCormick. In India, he felt himself "under the direct influence of a foreign culture" for the first time. In Africa, his conversations had been strictly limited by the language barrier, but in India he was able to converse extensively. Hindu philosophy became an important element in his understanding of the role of symbolism and the life of the unconscious, though he avoided a meeting with Ramana Maharshi. He described Ramana as being absorbed in "the self", but admits to not understanding Ramana's self-realisation or what he actually did do. He also admits that his field of psychology is not competent in understanding the eastern insight of the Atman "the self". Jung became seriously ill on this trip and endured two weeks of delirium in a Calcutta hospital. After 1938, his travels were confined to Europe.[53]
Final publications and death[edit]




C. G. Jung Institute, Küsnacht, Switzerland


Jung continued to publish books until the end of his life, including Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies (1959), which analyzed the archetypal meaning and possible psychological significance of the reported observations of UFOs.[54] He also enjoyed a friendship with an English Roman Catholic priest, Father Victor White, who corresponded with Jung after he had published his controversial Answer to Job.[55]
Jung died on 6 June 1961 at Küsnacht, after a short illness.[56][57] He had been beset by circulatory diseases.[58]
Thought[edit]
Jung's thought was formed by early family influences, which on the maternal side were a blend of interest in the occult and in solid reformed academic theology. On his father's side were two important figures, his grandfather the physician and academic scientist, Karl Gustav Jung and the family's actual connection with Lotte Kestner, the niece of the German polymath, Johann Wolfgang Goethe' s "Löttchen".[59] Although he was a practicing clinician and writer and as such founded analytical psychology, much of his life's work was spent exploring related areas such as physics, vitalism, Eastern and Western philosophy, alchemy, astrology, and sociology, as well as literature and the arts. Jung's interest in philosophy and the occult led many to view him as a mystic, although his preference was to be seen as a man of science.[60]
Key concepts[edit]
The major concepts of analytical psychology as developed by Jung include:[61]
Archetype – a concept "borrowed" from anthropology to denote supposedly universal and recurring mental images or themes. Jung's definitions of archetypes varied over time and have been the subject of debate as to their usefulness.
Archetypal images – universal symbols that can mediate opposites in the psyche, often found in religious art, mythology and fairy tales across cultures
Complex – the repressed organisation of images and experiences that governs perception and behaviour
Extraversion and introversion – personality traits of degrees of openness or reserve contributing to psychological type.[62]
Shadow – the repressed, therefore unknown, aspects of the personality including those often considered to be negative
Collective unconscious – aspects of unconsciousness experienced by all people in different cultures
Anima – the contrasexual aspect of a man's psyche, his inner personal feminine conceived both as a complex and an archetypal image
Animus – the contrasexual aspect of a woman's psyche, her inner personal masculine conceived both as a complex and an archetypal image
Self – the central overarching concept governing the individuation process, as symbolised by mandalas, the union of male and female, totality, unity. Jung viewed it as the psyche's central archetype
Individuation – the process of fulfilment of each individual "which negates neither the conscious or unconscious position but does justice to them both".[63]
Synchronicity – an acausal principle as a basis for the apparently random simultaneous occurrence of phenomena.[64]
Extraversion and Introversion[edit]
Main article: Extraversion and introversion
Jung was one of the first people to define introversion and extraversion in a psychological context. In Jung’s Psychological Types, he theorizes that each person falls into one of two categories, the introvert and the extravert. These two psychological types Jung compares to ancient archetypes, Apollo and Dionysus. The introvert is likened with Apollo, who shines light on understanding. The introvert is focused on the internal world of reflection, dreaming and vision. Thoughtful and insightful, the introvert can sometimes be uninterested in joining the activities of others. The extravert is associated with Dionysus, interested in joining the activities of the world. The extravert is focused on the outside world of objects, sensory perception and action. Energetic and lively, the extrovert may lose their sense of self in the intoxication of Dionysian pursuits.[65] Jungian introversion and extraversion is quite different from the modern idea of introversion and extroversion.[66] Modern theories often stay true to behaviourist means of describing such a trait (sociability, talkativeness, assertiveness etc.) whereas Jungian introversion and extraversion is expressed as a perspective: introverts interpret the world subjectively, whereas extraverts interpret the world objectively.[67]
Persona[edit]
See also: persona (psychology)
In his psychological theory – which is not necessarily linked to a particular theory of social structure – the persona appears as a consciously created personality or identity fashioned out of part of the collective psyche through socialization, acculturation and experience.[68] Jung applied the term persona, explicitly because, in Latin, it means both personality and the masks worn by Roman actors of the classical period, expressive of the individual roles played.
The persona, he argues, is a mask for the "collective psyche", a mask that 'pretends' individuality, so that both self and others believe in that identity, even if it is really no more than a well-played role through which the collective psyche is expressed. Jung regarded the "persona-mask" as a complicated system which mediates between individual consciousness and the social community: it is "a compromise between the individual and society as to what a man should appear to be".[69] But he also makes it quite explicit that it is, in substance, a character mask in the classical sense known to theatre, with its double function: both intended to make a certain impression to others, and to hide (part of) the true nature of the individual.[70] The therapist then aims to assist the individuation process through which the client (re)gains his "own self" – by liberating the self, both from the deceptive cover of the persona, and from the power of unconscious impulses.
Jung's theory has become enormously influential in management theory; not just because managers and executives have to create an appropriate "management persona" (a corporate mask) and a persuasive identity,[71] but also because they have to evaluate what sort of people the workers are, in order to manage them (for example, using personality tests and peer reviews).[72]
Spirituality[edit]
Jung's work on himself and his patients convinced him that life has a spiritual purpose beyond material goals.[73][74] Our main task, he believed, is to discover and fulfill our deep innate potential. Based on his study of Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Gnosticism, Taoism, and other traditions, Jung believed that this journey of transformation, which he called individuation, is at the mystical heart of all religions. It is a journey to meet the self and at the same time to meet the Divine.[75] Unlike Freud's objectivist worldview, Jung's pantheism may have led him to believe that spiritual experience was essential to our well-being, as he specifically identifies individual human life with the universe as a whole.[76][77] Jung's ideas on religion gave a counterbalance to the Freudian scepticism of religion. Jung's idea of religion as a practical road to individuation is still treated in modern textbooks on the psychology of religion, though his ideas have also been criticized.[78]
Jung recommended spirituality as a cure for alcoholism and he is considered to have had an indirect role in establishing Alcoholics Anonymous.[79] Jung once treated an American patient (Rowland Hazard III), suffering from chronic alcoholism. After working with the patient for some time and achieving no significant progress, Jung told the man that his alcoholic condition was near to hopeless, save only the possibility of a spiritual experience. Jung noted that occasionally such experiences had been known to reform alcoholics where all else had failed.
Hazard took Jung's advice seriously and set about seeking a personal spiritual experience. He returned home to the United States and joined a First-Century Christian evangelical movement known as the Oxford Group (later known as Moral Re-Armament). He also told other alcoholics what Jung had told him about the importance of a spiritual experience. One of the alcoholics he brought into the Oxford Group was Ebby Thacher, a long-time friend and drinking buddy of Bill Wilson, later co-founder of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). Thacher told Wilson about the Oxford Group, and through them Wilson became aware of Hazard's experience with Jung. The influence of Jung thus indirectly found its way into the formation of Alcoholics Anonymous, the original twelve-step program.
The above claims are documented in the letters of Jung and Bill Wilson, excerpts of which can be found in Pass It On, published by Alcoholics Anonymous.[80] Although the detail of this story is disputed by some historians, Jung himself discussed an Oxford Group member, who may have been the same person, in talks given around 1940. The remarks were distributed privately in transcript form, from shorthand taken by an attender (Jung reportedly approved the transcript), and later recorded in Volume 18 of his Collected Works, The Symbolic Life,

For instance, when a member of the Oxford Group comes to me in order to get treatment, I say, 'You are in the Oxford Group; so long as you are there, you settle your affair with the Oxford Group. I can't do it better than Jesus.[81]

Jung goes on to state that he has seen similar cures among Roman Catholics.
Interpretation of quantum mechanics[edit]
Jung influenced one philosophical interpretation (not the science) of quantum physics with the concept of synchronicity regarding some events as non-causal. That idea influenced the physicist Wolfgang Pauli (with whom, via a letter correspondence, he developed the notion of unus mundus in connection with the notion of nonlocality) and some other physicists.[82]
Alchemy[edit]
The work and writings of Jung from the 1940s onwards focused on alchemy.
In 1944 Jung published Psychology and Alchemy, in which he analyzed the alchemical symbols and came to the conclusion that there is a direct relationship between them and the psychoanalytical process.[b] He argued that the alchemical process was the transformation of the impure soul (lead) to perfected soul (gold), and a metaphor for the individuation process.[20]
In 1963 Mysterium Coniunctionis first appeared in English as part of The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. Mysterium Coniunctionis was Jung's last book and focused on the "Mysterium Coniunctionis" archetype, known as the sacred marriage between sun and moon. Jung argued that the stages of the alchemists, the blackening, the whitening, the reddening and the yellowing, could be taken as symbolic of individuation — his favourite term for personal growth (75).
Art therapy[edit]
Jung proposed that art can be used to alleviate or contain feelings of trauma, fear, or anxiety and also to repair, restore and heal.[14] In his work with patients and in his own personal explorations, Jung wrote that art expression and images found in dreams could be helpful in recovering from trauma and emotional distress. He often drew, painted, or made objects and constructions at times of emotional distress, which he recognized as more than recreational.[14]
Dance / Movement[edit]
Dance/Movement as an active imagination was created by C.G. Jung and Toni Wolff in 1916[83] and was practiced by Tina Keller-Jenny and other analysts, but remained largely unknown until the 1950s when it was rediscovered by Marian Chace and therapist Mary Whitehouse, who after studying with Martha Graham and Mary Wigman, became herself a dancer and dance teacher of modern dance,[84] as well as Trudy Schoop in 1963, who is considered one of the founders of the Dance/Movement therapy in the States.
Political views[edit]
Views on the state[edit]
Jung stressed the importance of individual rights in a person's relation to the state and society. He saw that the state was treated as "a quasi-animate personality from whom everything is expected" but that this personality was "only camouflage for those individuals who know how to manipulate it",[85] and referred to the state as a form of slavery.[86][87][88][89] He also thought that the state "swallowed up [people's] religious forces",[90] and therefore that the state had "taken the place of God"—making it comparable to a religion in which "state slavery is a form of worship".[88] Jung observed that "stage acts of [the] state" are comparable to religious displays: "Brass bands, flags, banners, parades and monster demonstrations are no different in principle from ecclesiastical processions, cannonades and fire to scare off demons".[91] From Jung's perspective, this replacement of God with the state in a mass society led to the dislocation of the religious drive and resulted in the same fanaticism of the church-states of the Dark Ages—wherein the more the state is 'worshipped', the more freedom and morality are suppressed;[92] this ultimately leaves the individual psychically undeveloped with extreme feelings of marginalization.[93]
Germany, 1933 to 1939[edit]
Jung had many friends and respected colleagues who were Jewish and he maintained relations with them through the 1930s when anti-semitism in Germany and other European nations was on the rise. However, until 1939, he also maintained professional relations with psychotherapists in Germany who had declared their support for the Nazi regime and there were allegations that he himself was a Nazi sympathizer.
In 1933, after the Nazis gained power in Germany, Jung took part in restructuring of the General Medical Society for Psychotherapy (Allgemeine Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Psychotherapie), a German-based professional body with an international membership. The society was reorganized into two distinct bodies:

A strictly German body, the Deutsche Allgemeine Ärztliche Gesellschaft für Psychotherapie, led by Matthias Göring, an Adlerian psychotherapist[94] and a cousin of the prominent Nazi Hermann Göring;
International General Medical Society for Psychotherapy, led by Jung. The German body was to be affiliated to the international society, as were new national societies being set up in Switzerland and elsewhere.[95]

The International Society's constitution permitted individual doctors to join it directly, rather than through one of the national affiliated societies, a provision to which Jung drew attention in a circular in 1934.[96] This implied that German Jewish doctors could maintain their professional status as individual members of the international body, even though they were excluded from the German affiliate, as well as from other German medical societies operating under the Nazis.[97]
As leader of the international body, Jung assumed overall responsibility for its publication, the Zentralblatt für Psychotherapie. In 1933, this journal published a statement endorsing Nazi positions[98] and Hitler's book Mein Kampf.[99] In 1934, Jung wrote in a Swiss publication, the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, that he experienced "great surprise and disappointment"[100] when the Zentralblatt associated his name with the pro-Nazi statement.
Jung went on to say "the main point is to get a young and insecure science into a place of safety during an earthquake".[101] He did not end his relationship with the Zentralblatt at this time, but he did arrange the appointment of a new managing editor, Carl Alfred Meier of Switzerland. For the next few years, the Zentralblatt under Jung and Meier maintained a position distinct from that of the Nazis, in that it continued to acknowledge contributions of Jewish doctors to psychotherapy.[102]
In the face of energetic German attempts to Nazify the international body, Jung resigned from its presidency in 1939,[102] the year the Second World War started.
Anti-Semitism and Nazism[edit]
Jung's interest in European mythology and folk psychology has led to accusations of Nazi sympathies, since they shared the same interest.[103][104][45] He became, however, aware of the negative impact of these similarities:

Jung clearly identifies himself with the spirit of German Volkstumsbewegung throughout this period and well into the 1920s and 1930s, until the horrors of Nazism finally compelled him to reframe these neopagan metaphors in a negative light in his 1936 essay on Wotan.[105]

There are writings showing that Jung's sympathies were against, rather than for, Nazism.[c] In his 1936 essay "Wotan", Jung described the influence of Hitler on Germany as "one man who is obviously 'possessed' has infected a whole nation to such an extent that everything is set in motion and has started rolling on its course towards perdition."[106][107]
Jung would later say that:

Hitler seemed like the 'double' of a real person, as if Hitler the man might be hiding inside like an appendix, and deliberately so concealed in order not to disturb the mechanism ... You know you could never talk to this man; because there is nobody there ... It is not an individual; it is an entire nation.[108]

In an interview with Carol Baumann in 1948, Jung denied rumors regarding any sympathy for the Nazi movement, saying:

It must be clear to anyone who has read any of my books that I have never been a Nazi sympathizer and I never have been anti-Semitic, and no amount of misquotation, mistranslation, or rearrangement of what I have written can alter the record of my true point of view. Nearly every one of these passages has been tampered with, either by malice or by ignorance. Furthermore, my friendly relations with a large group of Jewish colleagues and patients over a period of many years in itself disproves the charge of anti-Semitism.[109][d]

Evidence contrary to Jung’s denials has been adduced with reference to his writings, correspondence and public utterances of the 1930s.[110] Attention has been drawn to articles Jung published in the Zentralblatt fur Psychotherapie stating: “The Aryan unconscious has a greater potential than the Jewish unconscious” and "The Jew, who is something of a nomad, has never yet created a cultural form of his own and as far as we can see never will".[111] His remarks on the superiority of the "Aryan unconscious" and the “corrosive character” of Freud’s “Jewish gospel” have been cited as evidence of an anti-semitism “fundamental to the structure of Jung’s thought”.[112]
Service to the Allies During World War II[edit]
Jung was in contact with Allen Dulles of the Office of Strategic Services (predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency) and provided valuable intelligence on the psychological condition of Hitler. Dulles referred to Jung as "Agent 488" and offered the following description of his service: “Nobody will probably ever know how much Professor Jung contributed to the Allied Cause during the war, by seeing people who were connected somehow with the other side.” Jung's service to the Allied cause through the OSS remained classified after the war.[113]
Legacy[edit]
The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), a popular psychometric instrument, and the concepts of socionics were developed from Jung's theory of psychological types. Jung saw the human psyche as "by nature religious" and made this religiousness the focus of his explorations. Jung is one of the best known contemporary contributors to dream analysis and symbolization. His influence on popular psychology, the "psychologization of religion", spirituality and the New Age movement has been immense. A Review of General Psychology survey, published in 2002, ranked Jung as the 23rd most cited psychologist of the 20th century.[114]
In popular culture[edit]
Literature[edit]

Laurens van der Post, Afrikaner author who claimed to have had a 16-year friendship with Jung, from which a number of books and a film were created about Jung's life.[115] The accuracy of van der Post's claims about the closeness of his relationship to Jung has been questioned.[116]
Hermann Hesse, author of works such as Siddhartha and Steppenwolf, was treated by Joseph Lang, a student of Jung. For Hesse this began a long preoccupation with psychoanalysis, through which he came to know Jung personally.[117]

Art[edit]




Original statue of Jung in Mathew Street, Liverpool, a half-body on a plinth captioned "Liverpool is the pool of life"



The visionary Swiss painter Peter Birkhäuser was treated by a student of Jung, Marie-Louise von Franz, and corresponded with Jung regarding the translation of dream symbolism into works of art.[118]
American Abstract Expressionist Jackson Pollock underwent Jungian psychotherapy in 1939 with Joseph Henderson. His therapist made the decision to engage him through his art, and had Pollock make drawings, which led to the appearance of many Jungian concepts in his paintings.[119][120]
Contrary to some sources,[121] Jung did not visit Liverpool but recorded a dream in which he had, and of which he wrote "Liverpool is the pool of life, it makes to live." As a result, a statue of Jung was erected in Mathew Street in 1987 but, being made of plaster, was vandalised and replaced by a more durable version in 1993.[122]

Music[edit]

Musician David Bowie described himself as Jungian in his relationship to dreams and the unconscious. Australian artist Tanja Stark extensively explored Jungian aspects of his work in her essay "Crashing Out with Sylvian: David Bowie, Carl Jung and the Unconscious". Bowie sang of Jung on his album Aladdin Sane (a word play on sanity) and attended the exhibition of The Red Book in New York with artist Tony Oursler, who described Bowie as "... reading and speaking of the psychoanalyst with passion". Bowie's 1967 song "Shadow Man" poetically encapsulates a key Jungian concept, while in 1987 Bowie tellingly described the Glass Spiders of Never Let Me Down as Jungian mother figures around which he not only anchored a worldwide tour, but also created an enormous onstage effigy.[123]
The Police released an album called Synchronicity influenced by the ideas of Jung. The album cover artwork features a photograph of lead singer Sting reading Jung's book Synchronicity, with text from this book overlaid across the image.
Progressive Metal band Tool have a song, Forty Six & 2, from their album Aenima, which apparently focuses on Jung's concept of when reached in a certain time, the human body will have reached a state of evolution where there will be more than the exceeded amount of autonomous chromosomes, breaking down to 44 autonomous chromosomes, and the extra 2 being processed into sexual chromosomes.

Theatre, film and television[edit]

Federico Fellini brought to the screen an exuberant imagery shaped by his encounter with the ideas of Jung, especially Jungian dream interpretation. Fellini preferred Jung to Freud because Jungian analysis defined the dream not as a symptom of a disease that required a cure but rather as a link to archetypal images shared by all of humanity.[124]
BBC interview with Jung for Face to Face with John Freeman at Jung's home in Zurich. 1959.[125]
Stanley Kubrick's 1987 film Full Metal Jacket features an underlying theme about the duality of man throughout the action and dialogue of the film. One scene plays out this way: A Colonel asks a soldier, "You write 'Born to Kill' on your helmet and you wear a peace button. What's that supposed to be, some kind of sick joke?" To which the soldier replies, "I think I was trying to suggest something about the duality of man, sir... The Jungian thing, sir."[126]
The Soul Keeper, a 2002 film about Sabina Spielrein and Jung.
The Talking Cure, a 2002 play by Christopher Hampton
A Dangerous Method, a 2011 film directed by David Cronenberg based on Hampton's play The Talking Cure, is a fictional dramatisation of Jung's life as a psychoanalyst between 1904 and 1913. It mainly concerns his relationships with Freud and Sabina Spielrein, a Russian woman who became his lover and student and, later, an analyst herself.
Matter of Heart (1986), a documentary on Jung featuring interviews with those who knew him and archive footage.
Carl Gustav Jung, Salomón Shang, 2007. A documentary film made of interviews with C. G. Jung, found in American university archives.
The World Within. C. G. Jung in his own words, 1990 documentary (on YouTube)

Video games[edit]

The Persona series of games is heavily based on his theories,[127] as is the Nights into Dreams series of games.[128]

Bibliography[edit]
Main article: Carl Jung publications
See also[edit]


Psychiatry portal
Psychology portal



Topics

Anima and animus
Archetypal literary criticism
Archetypal pedagogy
Archetypal psychology
Art therapy
Bollingen Tower
The Collected Works of C. G. Jung
Collective unconscious
Cryptomnesia
Jungian interpretation of religion
Jungian Type Index
Jung Type Indicator
Keirsey Temperament Sorter
Logos
Logotherapy
Neo-Freudian
Nekyia
Participation mystique
Personality test
Psychodynamics
The Red Book
Reincarnation
Synchronicity
Synesthesia
The Sekhmet Hypothesis – archetypal symbolism presented by youth trends
Unus mundus
Wounded healer

People

Otto Gross – colleague, analysand and influence on Jung
R. F. C. Hull – translator of Jung's writings into English
Hugh Crichton-Miller – friend and founder of the Tavistock Clinic
Gerhard Adler – friend and co-editor of the Collected Works in English
Irene Claremont de Castillejo – analytical psychologist and author on the feminine
Martin Buber – see the Buber-Jung disputations
Victor White – Catholic convert and priest who corresponded with Jung
Wolfgang Pauli – theoretical physicist and Nobel laureate who corresponded with Jung
Michael Fordham – co-editor of the Collected Works in English and developer of Jungian child theory; founder of 'the London School'
Carl Kerenyi – Hungarian scholar of Greek mythology, colleague and influence on Jung
Joseph Campbell – mythologist, populariser of Jungian ideas
Linda Fierz-David – one of the earliest Jungian analysts in Zurich
Mary Esther Harding – British doctor who became one of the earliest Jungian analysts in the United States
Margaret Lowenfeld – British doctor and creator of sandplay and tutor of the Swiss Jungian, Dora Kalff, who developed sandplay as a diagnostic tool
Frances Wickes – early American Jungian child therapist, lecturer, author and friend of Jung
Erich Neumann – developer of matriarchal mythological adaptations of Jungian thought
Richard Noll – controversial critic of Jung's work
Anthony Stevens – analytical psychologist, psychiatrist and author
Winifred Rushforth – Edinburgh doctor and clinic founder who corresponded with Jung
John Beebe – Jungian analyst, typologist and commentator on Jungian ideas
Andrew Samuels – Analytical psychologist, academic and moderniser of Jungian ideas
Joel Ryce-Menuhin – proponent of sandplay therapy
Herbert Silberer Early colleague and influence on Jung
D. T. Suzuki – see An Introduction to Zen Buddhism, for which C. G. Jung wrote a preface
Richard Wilhelm – Translator of the I Ching

Organizations

International Association for Analytical Psychology
International Association for Jungian Studies

Jung in works of fiction

Possessing the Secret of Joy
The Interpretation of Murder
A Dangerous Method
Pilgrim


Notes[edit]


^ As a university student Jung changed the modernized spelling of Karl to the original family form of Carl. Bair, Deirdre (2003). Jung: A Biography. New York: Back Bay Books. pp. 7, 53. ISBN 0-316-15938-7. 
^ 'For Jung, alchemy is not only part of the pre-history of chemistry, that is, not only laboratory work, but also an essential part of the history of psychology as the history of the discovery of the deep structure of the psyche and its unconscious. Jung emphasized the significance of the symbolic structure of alchemical texts, a structure that is understood as a way independent of laboratory research, as a structure per se.' Calian, George Florin (2010). Alkimia Operativa and Alkimia Speculativa. Some Modern Controversies on the Historiography of Alchemy. Budapest: Annual of Medieval Studies at CEU. pp. 167–168. 
^ C. G. Jung, Die Beziehungen zwishen dem Ich und dem Unbewußten, chapter one, second section, 1928. Also, C. G. Jung, Aufsatze zur Zeitgeschichte, 1946. Speeches made in 1933, 1937 are excerpted. He was protesting the "slavery by the government" and the "chaos and insanity" of the mob, because of the very fact that they were the part of the mob and were under its strong influence. He wrote that because of the speeches he delivered he was blacklisted by the Nazis. They eliminated his writings.
^ A full response from Jung discounting the rumors can be found in C. G Jung Speaking, Interviews and Encounters, Princeton University Press, 1977.


References[edit]


^ a b Polly Young-Eisendrath. The Cambridge Companion To Jung. Cambridge University, 2010. pp. 24–30. 
^ Wehr, Gerhard (1987). Jung: A Biography. Boston/Shaftesbury, Dorset: Shambhala. p. 9. ISBN 0-87773-455-0. 
^ Brome, Vincent (1978). Jung (1 ed.). New York: Atheneum. p. 28. 
^ Wehr, Gerhard (1987). Jung: A Biography. Boston/Shaftesbury, Dorset: Shambhala. pp. 17–19. ISBN 0-87773-455-0. 
^ a b Memories, Dreams, Reflections. p. 18. 
^ Dunne, Claire (2002). Carl Jung: Wounded Healer of the Soul: An Illustrated Biography. Continuum. p. 5. 
^ Memories, Dreams, Reflections, p. 8.
^ a b c d Corbett, Sara (16 September 2009). "The Holy Grail of the Unconscious". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-09-20. 
^ Bair, p. 25.
^ Wehr, Gerhard (1987). Jung: A Biography. Boston/Shaftesbury, Dorset: Shambhala. p. 349. ISBN 0-87773-455-0. 
^ Stepp, G. "Carl Jung: Forever Jung". Vision Journal. Retrieved 19 December 2011. 
^ Memories, Dreams, Reflections. pp. 33–34. 
^ Wehr records that Paul Jung's chosen career path was to achieve a doctorate in philology. He was an Arabist; but the family money ran out for his studies. Relief came from a family legacy, however, a condition of the will was that it should only be offered to a family member who intended to study theology and become a pastor. Paul Jung therefore had his career determined by a will, not his will. See page 20.
^ a b c Malchiodi, Cathy A. (2006). The Art Therapy Sourcebook. McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-07-146827-5. 
^ Memories, Dreams, Reflections. pp. 22–23. 
^ Wehr, G. p. 144
^ "Carl Jung | Biography, Theory, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-07-19. 
^ Memories, Dreams, Reflections. p. 30. 
^ Memories, Dreams, Reflections. p. 32. 
^ a b Carl Jung Retrieved on 2009-3-7
^ Wehr, G. p. 57.
^ Wehr, Gerhard (1987). Jung: A Biography. Boston/Shaftesbury, Dorset: Shambhala. p. 14. ISBN 0-87773-455-0. 
^ McGuire, William (1979). The Freud/Jung Letters. Picador. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0330258915. 
^ See section Relationship with Freud.
^ Crowley, Vivianne (1999). Jung: A Journey of Transformation. Quest Books. p. 56. ISBN 0-8356-0782-8. 
^ "C. G. JUNG: Experiences". IWC Schaffhausen. Retrieved 2015-09-07. 
^ Wehr, G. p. 423
^ Hayman, Ronald (1999). A Life of Jung. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. pp. 84–5, 92, 98–9, 102–7, 121, 123, 111, 134–7, 138–9, 145, 147, 152, 176, 177, 184, 185, 186, 189, 194, 213–4. ISBN 0-393-01967-5. 
^ A Life of Jung. pp. 184–8, 189, 244, 261, 262. 
^ Carotenuto, A. A secret symmetry. Sabina Spielrien between Jung and Freud. Tran. Arno Pomerans, John Shepley, Krishna Winston. New York : Pantheon Books, 1982
^ Lothane. Z. Tender love and transference. Unpublished letters of C G Jung and Sabina Spielrein. International Journal of Psychoanalysis'. 80, 1999, 1189–1204; Lothane, Z. (2007b). The snares of seduction in life and in therapy, or what do young [Jewish] girls (Spielrein) seek in their Aryan heroes (Jung), and vice versa? International Forum of Psychoanalysis, 16:12–27, 81–94
^ Peter Gay, Freud: A life for Our Time (London, 1988) p. 202.
^ McGuire, W. 1974. The correspondence between Sigmund Freud and C.G. Jung. Translated by Ralph Manheim and R.F.C. Hull. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691098906
^ Wehr, Gerhard. (1987). Jung – A Biography. Boston/Shaftesbury: Shambhala. ISBN 0 87773 455 0. pp. 77
^ Wehr, pp. 79–85.
^ Wehr, p.105-6.
^ Rosenzwieg, Saul (1992). Freud, Jung and Hall the King-Maker. ISBN 0-88937-110-5. 
^ Ellenberger, Henri, The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry. New York: Basic Books. Hardcover edition: 1970, ISBN 0-465-01672-3. Paperback edition: 1981, ISBN 0-465-01673-1.
^ Jung, Carl (1963). Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Pantheon Books. p. 206. 
^ Carlson, Heth (2010). Psychology: The Science of Behavior. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. p. 434. ISBN 978-0-205-64524-4. 
^ Mary Williams, “The Indivisibility of the Personal and Collective Unconscious”, Journal of Analytical Psychology 8.1, January 1963. See also: Jung, Collected Works vol. 9.I (1959), "The Concept of the Collective Unconscious" (1936), ¶91 (p. 43).
^ Vernon, Mark (2011-06-06). "Carl Jung, part 2: A troubled relationship with Freud – and the Nazis". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-07-19. 
^ Addison, Ann (2009). "Jung, vitalism and the psychoid: an historical reconstruction". 54, no.1. Journal of Analytical Psychology: 123. 
^ Jones, Ernest, ed. Lionel Trilling and Steven Marcus. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, New York: Anchor Books, 1963.
^ a b Vernon, Mark (6 June 2011). "Carl Jung, part 2: A troubled relationship with Freud – and the Nazis". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 June 2015. 
^ McGuire, William. (1995), 'Firm Affinities: Jung's relations with Britain and the United States' in Journal of analytical Psychology, 40, p. 301-326.
^ Jung, C. G. (1916). Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology. Dr. Constance E. Long. Bailliere, Tindall and Cox. 
^ a b "The Red Book of C. G. Jung". Rubin Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 11 July 2009. Retrieved 2009-09-20. 
^ a b McGuire, William (1995). "Firm Affinities: Jung's relations with Britain and the United States". Journal of Analytical Psychology. 40 (3): 301–326. doi:10.1111/j.1465-5922.1995.00301.x. 
^ Jung, Carl (1988). Psychology and Western Religion. Ark Routledge. p. v. ISBN 0744800919. A third and equally weighty essay is Psychology and Religion, originally given as the Terry Lectures at Yale University in 1937.  Editorial Note by William McGuire.
^ Duvall, John N. (2008). Race and White Identity in Southern Fiction: From Faulkner to Morrison. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 165. ISBN 9780230611825. 
^ Burleson, Blake W. (2005). Jung in Africa. ISBN 0-8264-6921-3. 
^ Bair, Deirdre (2003). Jung: A Biography. pp. 417–430. ISBN 0-316-07665-1. 
^ The Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Page = 152, by Siegfried M. Clemens, Carl Gustav Jung, 1978.
^ In Psychology and Religion, v.11, Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Princeton. It was first published as Antwort auf Hiob, Zurich, 1952 and translated into English in 1954, in London.
^ Hayman, Ronald (2001). A Life of Jung. New York: W.W. Norton. p. 450. ISBN 0-393-01967-5. 
^ Bair, Deirdre (2003). Jung. Boston: Little, Brown. pp. 622–3. ISBN 0-316-07665-1. 
^ https://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0726.html
^ Wehr, Gerhard. p.14.
^ Lachman, Gary (2010). Jung the Mystic. New York: Tarcher/Penguin. p. 258. ISBN 978-1-58542-792-5. 
^ Anthony Stevens (1991) On Jung London: Penguin Books, pp. 27–53
^ Dicks-Mireaux, M. J. (1964). "Extraversion-Introversion in Experimental Psychology: Examples of Experimental Evidence and their Theoretical Explanations", Journal of Analytical Psychology, 9, 2.
^ Anthony Stevens (1991) On Jung London: Penguin Books, p. 199.
^ Bright, George. (1997) "Synchronicity as a basis of analytic attitude", Journal of Analytical Psychology, 42, 4
^ C.G. Jung. Psychological Types. Princeton University Press, 1971. pp. 136–147. 
^ Stepp, G. "People: Who Needs Them". Vision Journal. Retrieved 19 December 2011. 
^ Arild, Sigurd (19 April 2014). "5 Basic Facts about Jung and Types". CelebrityTypes. CelebrityTypes International. p. 1. Retrieved 9 June 2015. 
^ Jolande Székács Jacobi, Masks of the Soul. William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1977; Robert H. Hopcke, Persona. Berkeley: Shambhala Publications, 1995.
^ Carl Gustav Jung", The Relations between the Ego and the Unconscious", in: Joseph Campbell (ed.), The Portable Jung. New York: Viking Press, 1971, p. 106.
^ Carl Gustav Jung, Two Essays on Analytical Psychology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2nd ed. 1977, p. 157.
^ Joann S. Lublin, "How to Look and Act Like a Leader", Wall Street Journal, 12 September 2011.
^ Kees van der Pijl, "May 1968 and the Alternative Globalist Movement – Cadre Class Formation and the Transition to Socialism". In: Angelika Ebbinghaus et al. (ed.), 1968: A View of the Protest Movements 40 Years after, from a Global Perspective. 43rd International Conference of Labour and Social History 2008. Vienna: Akademische Verlagsanstalt, 2009, pp. 192, 193, 194.
^ Aniela Jaffe, foreword to Memories, Dreams, Reflections
^ Dunne, Clare (2002). "Prelude". Carl Jung: Wounded Healer of the Soul: An Illustrated Biography. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 3. ISBN 978-0-8264-6307-4. 
^ Frick, Eckhard; Lautenschlager, Bruno (2007). Auf Unendliches bezogen – Spirituelle Entdeckungen bei C. G. Jung. Munich: Koesel. p. 204. ISBN 978-3-466-36780-1. 
^ Crowley, Vivianne (2000). Jung: A Journey of Transformation: Exploring His Life and Experiencing His Ideas. Wheaton Illinois: Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0782-7. 
^ Andrew Reid Fuller, "Psychology and Religion: Eight Points of View", 2002, p. 111
^ Wulff, David (1991). Psychology of Religion: Classic and Contemporary Views. Wiley and Sons. p. 464. ISBN 0471502367. 
^ Levin, Jerome David (1995). "Other Etiological Theories of Alcoholism". Introduction to Alcoholism Counseling. Taylor & Francis. p. 167. ISBN 978-1-56032-358-7. 
^ Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc. (1984) Pass It On: The Story of Bill Wilson and How the A.A. Message Reached the World. New York: Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc. ISBN 0-916856-12-7, page. 381–386.
^ Jung, C. G.; Adler, G. and Hull, R. F. C., eds. (1977), Collected Works of C. G. Jung, Volume 18: The Symbolic Life: Miscellaneous Writings Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-09892-0, p. 272, as noted 2007-08-26 at http://www.stellarfire.org/additional.html
^ Jung, C. G. and Wolfgang Pauli, The Interpretation of Nature and Psyche, New York: Pantheon Books, 1955.
^ Chodorow, Joan (1991). "Dance Therapy and Depth Psychology: The Moving Imagination (Paperback) - Routledge". Routledge.com. Retrieved 2017-11-23. 
^ Pallaro, Patrizia (2007-01-15). Authentic Movement: Moving the Body, Moving the Self, Being Moved: A Collection of Essays - Volume Two. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. p. 33. ISBN 1846425867. 
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. pp. 15–16. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ C. G. Jung, Die Beziehungen zwischen dem Ich und dem Unbewußten, chapter one, second section, 1928. Also, C. G. Jung Aufsätze zur Zeitgeschichte, 1946. Speeches made in 1933 and 1937 are excerpted.
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. p. 14. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ a b Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. pp. 23–24. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ Jung, Carl (1960). Psychology and Religion. The Vail-Ballou Press ic. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-300-16650-7. 
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. p. 23. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. p. 25. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. p. 24. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ Jung, Carl (2006). The Undiscovered Self: The Problem of the Individual in Modern Society. New American Library. p. 14 & 45. ISBN 0-451-21860-4. 
^ Lifton, Robert Jay (27 January 1985) "Psychotherapy in the Third Reich" New York Times
^ Jaffé, Aniela (1972); From the Life and Work of C. G.Jung; Hodder and Stoughton, London. ISBN 0-340-12515-2; pp. 79–80.
^ An English translation of the circular is in Jung, Carl G. (1970); Collected Works, Volume 10; Routledge and Kegan Paul, London; ISBN 0-7100-1640-9; pp. 545–546.
^ Jaffé, Aniela (1972); From the Life and Work of C. G.Jung; Hodder and Stoughton, London. ISBN 0-340-12515-2; p. 82.
^ Jaffé, Aniela (1972); From the Life and Work of C. G.Jung; Hodder and Stoughton, London. ISBN 0-340-12515-2; p. 80.
^ Mark Medweth. "Jung and the Nazis", in Psybernetika, Winter 1996.
^ Article republished in English in Jung, Carl G. (1970); Collected Works, Volume 10; Routledge and Kegan Paul, London; ISBN 0-7100-1640-9; p. 538.
^ Article republished in English in Jung, Carl G. (1970); Collected Works, Volume 10; Routledge and Kegan Paul, London; ISBN 0-7100-1640-9; p. 538. See also Stevens, Anthony, Jung: a very short introduction, Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-19-285458-5
^ a b Jaffé, Aniela (1972); From the Life and Work of C. G. Jung; Hodder and Stoughton, London. ISBN 0-340-12515-2; p. 83.
^ Noll, Richard (1994). The Jung Cult: Origins of a Charismatic Movement (1st ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 336. 
^ Grossman 1979.
^ Noll, Richard (1994). The Jung Cult: Origins of a Charismatic Movement (1st ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 134. 
^ Sherry, Jay (2010). Carl Gustav Jung: Avant-Garde Conservative. Palgrave Macmillan. 
^ Jung, Carl G. (1970); Collected Works, Volume 10; Routledge and Kegan Paul, London; ISBN 0-7100-1640-9; p. 185.
^ C. G. Jung Speaking: Interviews and Encounters, eds William McGuire and R. F. C. Hull (London: Thames and Hudson, 1978), pp. 91–93, 115–135, 136–40.
^ Interview with Carol Baumann, published in the Bulletin of Analytical Psychology Club of New York, December 1949.
^ Clark, R.W (1980) Freud: the Man and the Cause. London: Cape, pp. 492–3
^ Falk, A Anti-Semitism A History and Psychoanalysis of Contemporary Hatred Westport Connecticut: Praeger, 2008, pp. 110–111
^ Samuels, Andrew. (1997), Institute of Historical Research, University of London e-seminar.“Jung and Anti-Semitism”, Also published in the Jewish Quarterly, Spring 1994.
^ https://www.thedailybeast.com/the-shrink-as-secret-agent-jung-hitler-and-the-oss
^ Haggbloom, Steven J.; Warnick, Jason E.; Jones, Vinessa K.; Yarbrough, Gary L.; Russell, Tenea M.; Borecky, Chris M.; McGahhey, Reagan; et al. (2002). "The 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century". Review of General Psychology. 6 (2): 139–152. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.6.2.139. CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ "Laurens van der Post". Retrieved 2007-12-02. 
^ Jones, J.D.F. (2001). Storyteller: The Many Lives of Laurens van der Post. ISBN 0-7867-1031-4. 
^ Liukkonen, Petri. "Hermann Hesse". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. 
^ Birkhäuser, Peter; Marie-Louise von Franz, Eva Wertanschlag and Kaspar Birkhäuser (1980–1991). Light from the Darkness: The Paintings of Peter Birkhäuser. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser Verlag. ISBN 3-7643-1190-8. 
^ Abstract Expressionism, Jackson Pollock's "Psychoanalytic Drawings" Paintings" Retrieved 24 July 2010
^ Stockstad, Marilyn (2005). Art History. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc. ISBN 0-13-145527-3. 
^ Grant, Linda (2003-06-05). "History broke Liverpool, and it broke my heart". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2010-02-24. 
^ Cavanagh, Terry (1997). Public sculpture of Liverpool. Liverpool University Press. ISBN 978-0-85323-711-2. Retrieved 23 May 2012. 
^ Stark, Tanja, (2015) “Crashing Out with Sylvian: David Bowie, Carl Jung and the Unconscious” in Deveroux, E., M.Power and A. Dillane (eds) David Bowie: Critical Perspectives: Routledge Press Contemporary Music Series. (chapter 5)
^ Bondanella, Peter E. The Films of Federico Fellini. p. 94. ISBN 0-521-57573-7. 
^ "BBC interview". 19 February 2011. 
^ [1] The Kubrick Site: Full Metal Jacket.
^ Megami Ibunroku Persona Digital Collection: Persona World (in Japanese). ASCII Media Works. 1998. pp. 6–11. ISBN 978-4757200142.  Translated scans
^ Valentine, Digi (13 July 2007). "A Yuji Naka Interview". Nights into Dreams. Sonic Retro. Archived from the original on 24 March 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2015. 


Further reading[edit]
Introductory texts

Modern Man in Search of a Soul, a book of psychological essays by Jung collected in 1933
Jung, Carl Gustav; Marie-Luise von Franz (1964). Man and His Symbols. Doubleday. ISBN 84-493-0161-0. 
Carl Gustav Jung, Analytical Psychology: Its Theory and Practice (The Tavistock Lectures) (Ark Paperbacks), 1990, ISBN 0-7448-0056-0
Anthony Stevens, Jung. A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994, ISBN 0-19-285458-5
Anthony Stevens, On Jung, Princeton University Press, 1990 (1999)
The Basic Writings of C. G. Jung, edited by V. S. de Laszlo (The Modern Library, 1959)
The Portable Jung, edited by Joseph Campbell (Viking Portable), ISBN 0-14-015070-6
Edward F Edinger, Ego and Archetype, (Shambhala Publications), ISBN 0-87773-576-X
Robert Hopcke, A Guided Tour of the Collected Works of C. G. Jung, ISBN 1-57062-405-4
Edward C. Whitmont, The Symbolic Quest: Basic Concepts of Analytical Psychology, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1969, 1979, ISBN 0-691-02454-5
O'Connor, Peter A. (1985). Understanding Jung, understanding yourself. New York, NY: Paulist Press. ISBN 0-8091-2799-7. 
The Cambridge Companion to Jung, second edition, eds Polly Young-Eisendrath and Terence Dawson, published in 2008 by Cambridge University Press

Texts in various areas of Jungian thought

Robert Aziz, C. G. Jung's Psychology of Religion and Synchronicity (1990), currently in its 10th printing, is a refereed publication of State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-0166-9
Robert Aziz, Synchronicity and the Transformation of the Ethical in Jungian Psychology in Carl B. Becker, ed., Asian and Jungian Views of Ethics. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1999. ISBN 0-313-30452-1
Robert Aziz, The Syndetic Paradigm: The Untrodden Path Beyond Freud and Jung (2007), a refereed publication of The State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-6982-8
Robert Aziz, Foreword in Lance Storm, ed., Synchronicity: Multiple Perspectives on Meaningful Coincidence. Pari, Italy: Pari Publishing, 2008. ISBN 978-88-95604-02-2
Wallace Clift, Jung and Christianity: The Challenge of Reconciliation. New York: The Crossroad Publishing Company, 1982. ISBN 0-8245-0409-7
Edward F. Edinger, The Mystery of The Coniunctio, ISBN 0-919123-67-8
Wolfgang Giegerich, The Soul's Logical Life, ISBN 3-631-38225-1
James A Hall M.D., Jungian Dream Interpretation, ISBN 0-919123-12-0
James Hillman, "Healing Fiction", ISBN 0-88214-363-8
Montiel, Luis, "El rizoma oculto de la psicología profunda. Gustav Meyrink y Carl Gustav Jung", Frenia, 2012, ISBN 978-84-695-3540-0
Catherine M Nutting, Concrete Insight: Art, the Unconscious, and Transformative Spontaneity, UVic Thesis 2007 214
Andrew Samuels, Critical Dictionary of Jungian Analysis, ISBN 0-415-05910-0
June Singer, Boundaries of the Soul, ISBN 0-385-47529-2. On psychotherapy
Marion Woodman, The Pregnant Virgin: A Process of Psychological Transformation, ISBN 0-919123-20-1
Simosko, Vladimir. Jung, Music, and Music Therapy: Prepared for the Occasion of the C.G. "Jung and the Humanities" Colloquium, 1987. Winnipeg, Man., The Author, 1987

Academic texts

Andrew Samuels, The Political Psyche (Routledge), ISBN 0-415-08102-5
Lucy Huskinson, Nietzsche and Jung: The Whole Self in the Union of Opposites (Routledge), ISBN 1-58391-833-7
Davydov, Andrey. From Carl Gustav Jung's Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious to Individual Archetypal Pattern. HPA Press, 2014. ISBN 9781311820082
Remo, F. Roth: Return of the World Soul, Wolfgang Pauli, C.G. Jung and the Challenge of Psychophysical Reality [unus mundus], Part 1: The Battle of the Giants. Pari Publishing, 2011, ISBN 978-88-95604-12-1
Remo, F. Roth: Return of the World Soul, Wolfgang Pauli, C.G. Jung and the Challenge of Psychophysical Reality [unus mundus], Part 2: A Psychophysical Theory. Pari Publishing, 2012, ISBN 978-88-95604-16-9

Jung-Freud relationship

Kerr, John. A Most Dangerous Method: The Story of Jung, Freud, and Sabina Spielrein. Knopf, 1993. ISBN 0-679-40412-0.

Other people's recollections of Jung

van der Post, Laurens, Jung and the Story of Our Time, New York : Pantheon Books, 1975. ISBN 0-394-49207-2
Hannah, Barbara, Jung, his life and work; a biographical memoir, New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1976. SBN: 399-50383-8

Critical scholarship

Dohe, Carrie B. Jung's Wandering Archetype: Race and Religion in Analytical Psychology. London: Routledge, 2016. ISBN 978-1138888401
Grossman, Stanley (1979). "C.G. Jung and National Socialism". Jung in Contexts: A Reader. ISBN 9780415205580. 
Hanegraaff, Wouter J. (1996). "New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought". Leiden/New York/Koln: E.J. Brill. 
Wulff, David M. (1991). "Psychology of Religion: Classic and Contemporary Views". New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Paul Bishop, Carl Jung (Critical Lives) (Reaktion Books, 2014)
Noll, Richard (1994). The Jung Cult: Origins of a Charismatic Movement (1st ed.). Princeton University Press. p. 336. 
Richard Noll, The Aryan Christ: The Secret Life of Carl Jung (Random House, 1997)
Anthony Stevens, On Jung (second edition)
Sonu Shamdasani, Cult Fictions, ISBN 0-415-18614-5
Sonu Shamdasani, Jung and the Making of Modern Psychology: The Dream of a Science, ISBN 0-521-53909-9
Sonu Shamdasani, Jung Stripped Bare, ISBN 1-85575-317-0
Bair, Deirdre. Jung: A Biography. Boston: Little, Brown and Co, 2003

External links[edit]


Library resources about
Carl Jung





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




By Carl Jung




Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries







Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Carl Jung





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Carl Gustav Jung.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Carl Jung



Publications by and about Carl Jung in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library
C.G. Jung Institute, Zurich
Carl Jung Resources
The Jung Page
Philemon Foundation
Works by or about Carl Jung at Internet Archive
Works by Carl Jung at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Carl Jung: Foreword to the I Ching
The Association Method Full text article from 1916. Originally Published in the Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology.
On The Psychology & Pathology of So-Called Occult Phenomena Full text article from 1916. Originally published in the Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology.
The Seven Sermons to the Dead, 1916 Carl Gustav Jung
Jung's 'Essay on Wotan'
Bollingen Foundation Collection From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division, Library of Congress
Carl Gustav Jung: Arquetipos, Mística e Inconsciente Colectivo (Jung Society – Dublin)
'The World Within. C. G. Jung in his own words 1990 documentary





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Carl Gustav Jung



Theories



Analytical psychology
Cognitive functions
Interpretation of religion
Personality type
Synchronicity
Theory of neurosis





Concepts




The psyche



Anima and animus
Collective unconscious
Complex
Electra complex
Inner child
Personal unconscious
Persona
Self
Shadow





Jungian archetypes



Apollo
Trickster
Wise Old Man and Wise Old Woman
Wounded healer





Other



Active imagination
Enantiodromia
Extraversion and introversion
Individuation
Participation mystique








Works and
publications




Early



Psychology of the Unconscious
Two Essays on Analytical Psychology
Psychological Types





Later



Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self
Answer to Job
Synchronicity
Symbols of Transformation





Posthumous



Man and His Symbols
Memories, Dreams, Reflections
Red Book

Black Books


Seven Sermons to the Dead





The Collected Works
of C. G. Jung



Psychiatric Studies (1970)
Experimental Researches (1973)
Psychogenesis of Mental Disease (1960)
Freud & Psychoanalysis (1961)
Symbols of Transformation (1967, a revision of Psychology of the Unconscious, 1912) .
Psychological Types (1971)
Two Essays on Analytical Psychology (1967)
Structure & Dynamics of the Psyche (1969)
Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious (1969)
Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self (1969)
Civilization in Transition (1970)
Psychology and Religion: West and East (1970)
Psychology and Alchemy (1968)
Alchemical Studies (1968)
Mysterium Coniunctionis (1970)
Spirit in Man, Art, and Literature (1966)
Practice of Psychotherapy (1966)
Development of Personality (1954)
The Symbolic Life (1977)
General Bibliography (Revised Edition) (1990)
General Index (1979)








People




Jungfrauen



Marie-Louise von Franz
Barbara Hannah
Jolande Jacobi
Aniela Jaffé
Emma Jung
Toni Wolff





Colleagues



Sigmund Freud
Wolfgang Pauli
Sabina Spielrein
Victor White
Richard Wilhelm





Followers



Joseph Campbell
James Hillman
Erich Neumann
Laurens van der Post
Sonu Shamdasani
June Singer
Anthony Stevens








Organizations



Bollingen Foundation
C. G. Jung Institute in Zürich
Int'l Assoc. for Analytical Psychology
Int'l Assoc. for Jungian Studies
Philemon Foundation





Popular culture



A Dangerous Method
Synchronicity (album
song 1
2)
Shadow Man
The Soul Keeper





Other



Archetypal literary criticism
Archetypal pedagogy
Bollingen Prize
Bollingen Tower
Burghölzli
Eranos
I Ching
The Secret of the Golden Flower












v
t
e


Psychology






History
Philosophy
Portal
Psychologist





Basic psychology



Abnormal
Affective science
Affective neuroscience
Behavioral genetics
Behavioral neuroscience
Behaviorism
Cognitive/Cognitivism
Cognitive neuroscience
Comparative
Cross-cultural
Cultural
Developmental
Differential
Ecological
Evolutionary
Experimental
Gestalt
Intelligence
Mathematical
Neuropsychology
Personality
Positive
Psycholinguistics
Psychophysics
Psychophysiology
Quantitative
Social
Theoretical





Applied psychology



Anomalistic
Applied behavior analysis
Assessment
Clinical
Community
Consumer
Counseling
Critical
Educational
Ergonomics
Feminist
Forensic
Health
Industrial and organizational
Legal
Media
Military
Music
Occupational health
Pastoral
Political
Psychometrics
Psychotherapy
Religion
School
Sport and exercise
Suicidology
Systems
Traffic





Methodologies



Animal testing
Archival research
Behavior epigenetics
Case study
Content analysis
Experiments
Human subject research
Interviews
Neuroimaging
Observation
Qualitative research
Quantitative research
Self-report inventory
Statistical surveys






Psychologists




William James (1842–1910)
Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936)
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Edward Thorndike (1874–1949)
Carl Jung (1875–1961)
John B. Watson (1878–1958)
Clark L. Hull (1884–1952)
Kurt Lewin (1890–1947)
Jean Piaget (1896–1980)
Gordon Allport (1897–1967)
J. P. Guilford (1897–1987)
Carl Rogers (1902–1987)
Erik Erikson (1902–1994)
B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)
Donald O. Hebb (1904–1985)
Ernest Hilgard (1904–2001)
Harry Harlow (1905–1981)
Raymond Cattell (1905–1998)
Abraham Maslow (1908–1970)
Neal E. Miller (1909–2002)
Jerome Bruner (1915–2016)
Donald T. Campbell (1916–1996)
Hans Eysenck (1916–1997)
Herbert A. Simon (1916–2001)
David McClelland (1917–1998)
Leon Festinger (1919–1989)
George Armitage Miller (1920–2012)
Richard Lazarus (1922–2002)
Stanley Schachter (1922–1997)
Robert Zajonc (1923–2008)
Albert Bandura (b. 1925)
Roger Brown (1925–1997)
Endel Tulving (b. 1927)
Lawrence Kohlberg (1927–1987)
Noam Chomsky (b. 1928)
Ulric Neisser (1928–2012)
Jerome Kagan (b. 1929)
Walter Mischel (b. 1930)
Elliot Aronson (b. 1932)
Daniel Kahneman (b. 1934)
Paul Ekman (b. 1934)
Michael Posner (b. 1936)
Amos Tversky (1937–1996)
Bruce McEwen (b. 1938)
Larry Squire (b. 1941)
Richard E. Nisbett (b. 1941)
Martin Seligman (b. 1942)
Ed Diener (b. 1946)
Shelley E. Taylor (b. 1946)
John Anderson (b. 1947)
Ronald C. Kessler (b. 1947)
Joseph E. LeDoux (b. 1949)
Richard Davidson (b. 1951)
Susan Fiske (b. 1952)
Roy Baumeister (b. 1953)





Lists



Counseling topics
Disciplines
Important publications
Organizations
Outline
Psychologists
Psychotherapies
Research methods
Schools of thought
Timeline
Topics








Wiktionary definition
Wiktionary category
Wikisource
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikinews
Wikibooks












v
t
e


Psychotherapy (list)



Schools




Psychodynamic



Psychoanalysis
Adlerian therapy
Analytical therapy
Mentalization-based treatment
Transference focused psychotherapy





Cognitive and
behavioral



Behavior therapy
Cognitive behavioral therapy

Cognitive therapy
Compassion focused therapy
Dialectical behavior therapy


Rational emotive behavior therapy
Combined with Applied behavior analysis

Clinical behavior analysis or CBA
Functional analytic psychotherapy
Acceptance and commitment therapy







Humanistic



Person-centered therapy
Emotionally focused therapy
Existential therapy
Focusing
Gestalt therapy
Logotherapy





Other



Art therapy
Dance therapy
Feminist therapy
Interpretive therapy
Multimodal therapy
Music therapy
Narrative therapy
Play therapy
Reality therapy
Systemic therapy
Transactional analysis
List





Integrative



Eclectic psychotherapy
Integrative psychotherapy
Transtheoretical model








Approaches



Brief psychotherapy
Counseling
Online counseling
Residential treatment
Self-help
Support groups





Research



Clinical formulation
Clinical pluralism
Common factors theory
Practitioner–scholar model
Society for Psychotherapy Research





Techniques




Behaviour therapy



Aversion therapy
Applied behavior analysis (ABA) (formerly Behavior modification)
Desensitization
Homework





Other individual therapy



Autogenic training
Biofeedback
Cognitive restructuring
Exposure therapy
Free association
Hypnotherapy





Group psychotherapy



Family therapy
Psychodrama
Sensitivity training
Relationship counseling








People



Philippe Pinel (1745–1826)
Josef Breuer (1842–1925)
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Pierre Janet (1859–1947)
Alfred Adler (1870–1937)
Sándor Ferenczi (1873–1933)
Carl Jung (1875–1961)
Ludwig Binswanger (1881–1966)
Melanie Klein (1882–1960)
Otto Rank (1884–1939)
Karen Horney (1885–1952)
Harry Stack Sullivan (1892–1949)
Fritz Perls (1893–1970)
Anna Freud (1895–1982)
Donald Winnicott (1896–1971)
Wilhelm Reich (1897–1957)
Milton H. Erickson (1901–1980)
Jacques Lacan (1901–1981)
Erik Erikson (1902–1994)
Carl Rogers (1902–1987)
Viktor Frankl (1905–1997)
George Kelly (1905–1967)
Rollo May (1909–1994)
Virginia Axline (1911–1988)
Carl Whitaker (1912–1995)
Albert Ellis (1913–2007)
James Bugental (1915–2008)
Joseph Wolpe (1915–1997)
Virginia Satir (1916–1988)
Aaron T. Beck (b. 1921)
Salvador Minuchin (1921–2017)
Hans Herrman Strupp (1921–2006)
Paul Watzlawick (1921–2007)
Haim Ginott (1922–1973)
Arthur Janov (1924–2017)
Eugene Gendlin (1926–2017)
R. D. Laing (1927–1989)
Jean Baker Miller (1927–2006)
Otto F. Kernberg (b. 1928)
Irvin D. Yalom (b. 1931)
Arnold Lazarus (1932–2013)
Lorna Smith Benjamin (b. 1934)
Marsha M. Linehan (b. 1943)
Vittorio Guidano (1944–1999)
Les Greenberg (b. 1945)
William R. Miller (b. 1947)
Michael White (1948–2008)
Jeffrey Young (b. 1950)
Peter Fonagy (b. 1952)













Psychology portal
Switzerland portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 88819182
LCCN: n79003358
ISNI: 0000 0004 2660 4224
GND: 118558749
SELIBR: 192036
SUDOC: 026943204
BNF: cb11909239m (data)
BIBSYS: 90061849
ULAN: 500320294
HDS: 14425
MusicBrainz: a10120fb-622d-4504-ac71-c218095d4977
NLA: 36062685
NDL: 00444983
NKC: jn19990004107
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\004509
BNE: XX1722231
RKD: 295408
IATH: w6d79dc8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carl_Jung&oldid=817929291"					Categories: Carl Jung1875 births1961 deaths20th-century philosophers20th-century Swiss writersDisease-related deaths in SwitzerlandETH Zurich facultyHistory of mental healthHistory of psychiatryPantheismPeople associated with the University of ZurichPeople from Arbon DistrictPeople from KüsnachtPeople from Rapperswil-JonaPsychodynamicsPsychologists of religionPsychology writersSwiss astrologersSwiss autobiographersSwiss philosophersSwiss psychiatristsSwiss psychologistsSwiss ProtestantsSymbologistsUniversity of Basel alumniHidden categories: CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)Use dmy dates from July 2013Biography with signatureArticles with hCardsInterlanguage link template link numberAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksAC with 18 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with RKDartists identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers