
Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel




Abbreviation
Order of Carmelites (O.Carm.)


Motto
Zelo zelatus sum pro Domino Deo exercituum (Vulgate, 1 Kings 19:10;14)
("With zeal have I been
zealous for the Lord
God of hosts")


Formation
Late 12th century


Type
Roman Catholic religious order


Headquarters
Via Giovanni Lanza,
Rome, Italy



Prior General

Most Rev. Fr. Fernando Millán Romeral


Website
www.ocarm.org


The Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel or Carmelites (sometimes simply Carmel by synecdoche; Latin: Ordo Fratrum Beatissimæ Virginis Mariæ de Monte Carmelo) is a Roman Catholic religious order founded, probably in the 12th century, on Mount Carmel in the Crusader States, hence the name Carmelites. However, historical records about its origin remain uncertain.[1] Saint Bertold has traditionally been associated with the founding of the order, but few clear records of early Carmelite history have survived, and this is likely to be a later extrapolation by hagiographers.[2]



Contents


1 Charism
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 Early history
2.3 Reforms
2.4 Controversies with other orders
2.5 Modern history


3 Habit and scapular
4 Visions and devotions
5 See also

5.1 Other Branches of the Carmelite Order
5.2 Communities of Carmelite Sisters
5.3 Spirituality
5.4 Tradition


6 Notes
7 References
8 Sources
9 Further reading
10 External links

10.1 Provinces of the Carmelite Order





Charism[edit]




Pietro Novelli, Our Lady of Mount Carmel and Carmelite Saints (Simon Stock (c. 1165–1265) (standing), Angelus of Jerusalem (1185–1220) (kneeling), Mary Magdalene de Pazzi (1566–1607), Teresa of Ávila (1515–82)), 1641 (Museo Diocesano, Palermo).


The charism (or spiritual focus) of the Carmelite Order is contemplation. Carmelites understand contemplation in a broad sense encompassing prayer, community, and service. These three elements are at the heart of the Carmelite charism. The most recent statement about the charism of Carmel was in the 1995 Constitutions of the Order, in which Chapter 2 is entirely devoted to the idea of charism. Carmel understands contemplation and action to be complementary, not contradictory. What is distinctive of Carmelites is the way that they practice the elements of prayer, community and service, taking particular inspiration from the prophet Elijah and the Blessed Virgin Mary, patrons of the Order.[3]
The Order is considered by the Catholic Church to be under the special protection of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and thus has a strong Marian devotion to Our Lady of Mount Carmel. As in most of the orders dating to medieval times, the First Order is the friars (who are active/contemplative), the Second Order is the nuns (who are cloistered), and the Third Order consists of laypeople who continue to live in the world, and can be married, but participate in the charism of the order by liturgical prayers, apostolates, and contemplative prayer. There are also offshoots such as active Carmelite sisters.
History[edit]
Origins[edit]
Carmelite tradition traces the origin of the order to a community of hermits on Mount Carmel,[4] which succeeded the schools of the prophets in ancient Israel or the Crusader states. There are no certain records of hermits on this mountain before the 1190s. By this date a group of men had gathered at the well of Elijah on Mount Carmel. These men, who had gone to Palestine from Europe either as pilgrims or as crusaders, chose Mount Carmel in part because it was the traditional home of Elijah.[5] The foundation is believed to have been dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary. (The Carmelites were forced to leave the site, and the Holy Land, in 1291. Their original conventual buildings were destroyed several times, but members of the order were able to return in the nineteenth century under the Ottoman Empire. A monastery of Discalced Carmelite friars was built close to the original site under the auspices of Fr. Julius of the Saviour and consecrated on 12 June 1836.)
Some time between 1206 and 1214 the hermits, about whom very little is known, approached St. Albert of Jerusalem, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem and Papal legate, for a Rule. (Albert is credited with giving a rule to the Humiliati during his long tenure as Bishop of Vercelli, and was well-versed in diplomacy, being sent by Pope Innocent III as Papal Legate to what was known as the Eastern Province.) Albert created a document, the Rule of St Albert,[5] which is both juridically terse and replete with Scriptural allusions, thereby grounding the hermits in the life of the universal Church and their own aspirations.
The rule consisted of sixteen articles, which enjoined strict obedience to their prior, residence in individual cells, constancy in prayer, the hearing of Mass every morning in the oratory of the community, vows of poverty and toil, daily silence from vespers until terce the next morning, abstinence from all forms of meat except in cases of severe illness, and fasting from Holy Cross Day (September 14) until the Easter of the following year.
The Rule of St. Albert addresses a prior whose name is only listed as "B." When later required to name their founders, the Brothers referred to both Elijah and the Blessed Virgin as early models of the community. Later, under pressure from other European Mendicant orders to be more specific, the name "Saint Bertold" was given, possibly drawn from the oral tradition of the Order.




Carmelite nuns.


Early history[edit]
Virtually nothing is known of the Carmelites from 1214, when Albert died, until 1238. The Rule of St. Albert was approved by Pope Honorius III in 1226, and again by Pope Gregory IX in 1229, with a modification regarding ownership of property and permission to celebrate divine services. The Carmelites next appear in the historical record, in 1238, when with the increasing cleavage between the West and the East, the Carmelites found it advisable to leave the Near East. Many moved to Cyprus and Sicily.[6]
In 1242, the Carmelites migrated west, establishing a settlement at Aylesford, Kent, England,[7] and Hulne, near Alnwick in Northumberland. Two years later, they established a chapter in southern France. Settlements were established at Losenham, Kent, and Bradmer, on the north Norfolk coast, before 1247. By 1245 the Carmelites were so numerous in England that they were able to hold their first general chapter at Aylesford, where Saint Simon Stock, then eighty years old, was chosen general.[8] During his rule of twenty years the order prospered: foundations were made at London and Cambridge (1247), Marseilles (1248), Cologne (1252), York (before 1253), Monpellier (before 1256), Norwich, Oxford and Bristol (1256), Paris (1258), and elsewhere. By 1274, there were 22 Carmelite houses in England, about the same number in France, eleven in Catalonia, three in Scotland, as well as some in Italy, Germany and elsewhere.[9]
Acknowledging the changed circumstances of life outside the Holy Land, the Carmelites appealed to the papal curia for a modification of the Rule. Pope Innocent IV entrusted the drafting of a modified Rule to two Dominicans, and the new Rule was promulgated by Pope Innocent IV in his 1247 Bull Quem honorem Conditoris. This both brought it closer to the model generally envisaged for mendicant orders in Europe at the time, and made allowances for the changed needs of an Order now based in Europe rather than the Holy Land: for instance, foundations were no longer required to be made in desert places, the canonical office was recited, and abstinence was mitigated.[10]
There is scholarly debate over the significance for the Carmelites of the decree at the Second Council of Lyon in 1274 that no order founded after 1215 should be allowed to continue. This action put an end to several other mendicant orders, including the Sack Friars, and the Pied, Crutched and Apostolic Friars. The Carmelites, as an order whose Rule had been promulgated by the Pope only after 1215, should in theory have been included in this set. Certainly, the rapidly expansion of the Order was halted after 1274, with far fewer houses established in subsequent years. Later Carmelite apologists, from the fourteenth century onwards, however, interpreted the Second Council of Lyon as a confirmation of the Order.[11] Such tensions may in part explain why, at a General Chapter in London in 1281, the order asserted that it had ancient origins from Elijah and Elisha at Mount Carmel.[12][13]
Such tension appears to have lessened under subsequent popes, however. In 1286, Honorius IV confirmed the Carmelite Rule, and in 1298 Boniface VIII formally removed the restrictions placed on the Order by the Second Council of Lyon. In 1326, John XXII's bull Super Cathedram extended to the order all the rights and exemptions that existed for the older existing Franciscans and Dominicans, signalling an acceptance of the Carmelites at the heart of Western religious life.
The Order grew quickly after reaching Europe. By the end of the thirteenth century, the order had around 150 houses in Europe, divided into twelve provinces throughout Europe and the Mediterranean.[14] In England, the Order had 30 houses under four 'distinctions': London, Norwich, Oxford and York, as well as new houses in Scotland and Ireland. It has been estimated that the total Carmelite population in England between 1296 and 1347 was about 720, with the largest house (London), having over 60 friars, but most averaging between 20 and 30.[15]
Reforms[edit]




Saint Teresa of Ávila (1515–82).






Saint John of the Cross (1542–91).


Quite early in their history, the Carmelites began to develop ministries in keeping with their new status as mendicant religious. This resulted in the production in 1270 of a letter Ignea Sagitta (Flaming Arrow)[16] by the ruling prior general from 1266 to 1271, Nicholas of Narbonne (also known as Nicholas Gallicus, or Nicholas the Frenchman), who called for a return to a strictly eremitical life. His belief that most friars were ill-suited to an active apostolate was based on a number of scandals.[17][18] The letter is symbolic of the tensions the Carmelites grappled with in the thirteenth century between their eremitical origins (expressed particularly in a desire for solitude and a focus on contemplation) and their more recent transformation into a fundamentally mendicant order (expressed in the desire to respond to the Church's apostolic mission).
By the late 14th century, the Carmelites were becoming increasingly interested in their origins; the lack of a distinctive named founder (by contrast with the Dominicans and Franciscans) may have been a factor in the development of numerous legends surrounding Carmelite origins. One particularly influential book was the Institution of the First Monks, the first part of a four-part work from the late fourteenth century. It was almost certainly composed by Philip Ribot, Catalan Carmelite provincial, though Ribot passed off his work as a collection of earlier writings that he edited, claiming that the Institution itself was written by John XLIV, supposedly a patriarch of Jerusalem, who purportedly wrote the text in Greek in 412. The Institution tells of the founding of the Carmelite order by the prophet Elijah and gives a fanciful history of the order in the pre- and early Christian era.[19] It was hugely influential, and has been described as the "chief book of spiritual reading in the Carmelite order" until the seventeenth century.[20]




Carmelite nuns with their religious habits (in Nogoyá, Argentina).


In the late 14th and 15th centuries the Carmelites, like a number of other religious orders, declined and reform became imperative. In 1432 the Carmelites obtained from Pope Eugenius IV the bull Romani pontificis, which mitigated the Rule of St Albert and the 1247 modification, on the ground that the original demanded too much of the friars. The main clauses modified concerned fasting and remaining within individual cells: the bull allowed them to eat meat three days a week and to perambulate in the cloisters of their convents. This reform brought the Carmelites closer into line with other mendicant orders, but it was also the source of much subsequent tension, as others refused to accept this change in the nature of the Order, seeing it as a loss of Carmel's original vision and spirit.[21]
Such tension erupted almost immediately. Shortly before 1433 three priories in Valais, Tuscany, and Mantua were reformed by the preaching of Thomas Conecte of Rennes and formed the Congregation of Mantua,[5] refusing to accept the mitigation of 1432. They instead insisted on a more severe monastic observance than that applied between 1247 and 1432. Under the Mantuan observance, entrance to the cloister was forbidden to outsiders, the friars were banned from being outside the convent without good reason, and money was distributed from a common chest.[22] In 1443, they obtained a bull from Pope Eugenius IV which effectively declared the Mantua chapter independent of the rest of the Order, with its own special set of Constitutions and governed by its own vice prior general. Under the reconciliatory efforts of prior-general Blessed John Soreth (c. 1395–1471; prior-general 1451–71), however, the Mantuan congregation was brought closer to the main Carmelite order, such that in 1462 the Mantuans even accepted parts of the 1432 mitigation.
This was likely in part due to Soreth's own reforming impulses. In 1459, for instance, Pope Pius II left the regulation of fasts to the discretion of the prior general; Soreth accordingly sought until his death in 1471 to restore the primitive asceticism.
Soreth also founded the order of Carmelite nuns in 1452 (with authorisation from the papal bull Cum Nulla). The first convent, Our Lady of Angels, was in Florence, but the movement rapidly spread to Belgium (in 1452), France, and Spain (with the foundation of the Incarnation in Avila in 1479).
In 1476, a papal bull cum nulla of Pope Sixtus IV founded the Carmelites of the Third Order. They received a special rule in 1635, which was amended in 1678.
The need for reform of the Carmelite order was recognized by the early sixteenth century, and some early attempts at reform were made then, notably from 1523 onwards by Nicholas Audet, vicar-general of the order. His plans saw some fruit: during three years of travels through France and Germany, introducing his reforms into the houses of the order, more than one hundred houses were reformed. Audet met resistance in other places, however: in the Spanish province of Castile, more than half the friars walked away.[23]




The Convent of Saint Joseph in Ávila (Spain) was the first foundation of the Discalced Carmelites.


Reform in Spain began in earnest in the 1560s, with the work of Saint Teresa of Ávila, who, together with Saint John of the Cross, established the Discalced Carmelites. Teresa's foundations were welcomed by King Philip II of Spain, who was most anxious for all Orders to be reformed according to the principles of the Council of Trent (1545–1563). But she created practical problems at the grassroots level. The proliferation of new religious houses in towns that were already struggling to cope economically was an unwelcome prospect. Local townspeople resisted direction by the nobility and diocesan clergy. Teresa tried to make her monasteries as self-sufficient as was practicable, and restricted the number of nuns per community accordingly.
The Discalced Carmelites also faced much opposition from other unreformed Carmelite houses (notably, Carmelites from Toledo arrested and imprisoned John of the Cross in their own monastery). Only in the 1580s did the Discalced Carmelites gain official approval of their status. In 1593, the Discalced Carmelites had their own superior general styled propositus general - the first being Fr. Nicholas Doria. Due to the politics of foundation, the Discalced friars in Italy were canonically erected as a separate juridical entity.
After the rise of Protestantism and the devastation of the French Wars of Religion, a spirit of reform renewed 16th-17th century France, as well as the Carmelite Order in France. In the late 16th century, Pierre Behourt began an effort to restore the state of the Province of Touraine, which was continued by the practical reforms of Philip Thibault. The Provincial Chapter of 1604 appointed Thibault the prior of the Convent in Rennes, and moved the Novitiate to Rennes, thereby ensuring that new members of the Province would be formed by the reform minded friars.[24] The Observance of Rennes advocated poverty, the interior life and regular observance as the antidote to the laxity and decadence into which religious life had fallen, in addition, incorporating currents of renewal from the Discaled Reform, the French School, and the Society of Jesus. Thibault is said to have wished to marry the spirit of the Society with the Order of Carmelites as far as possible.[25] One of the most renowned figures of the Reform was John of St. Samson, a blind lay brother, highly regarded for his humility and exalted spiritual life. In 1612, Br. John was moved to the Convent at Rennes and, in addition to playing the organ, served as the instructor and spiritual director of the novices. Thus John of St. Samson became known as the "Soul of the Reform." Eventually, the Observance of Rennes spread to priories throughout France, Belgium, and Germany, and became known as the Touraine Reform, after the Province from which the movement originated.[26]
Carmelite nunneries were established in New Spain (Mexico), the first founded in 1604 in Puebla de los Angeles, New Spain's second largest city, followed by one in the capital Mexico City 1616. In all, before Mexican independence in 1821, there were five Carmelite convents among 56 nunneries.[27]
Controversies with other orders[edit]
By the middle of the 17th century, the Carmelites had reached their zenith. At this period, however, they became involved in controversies with other orders, particularly with the Jesuits. The special objects of attack were the traditional origin of the Carmelites and the source of their scapular. The Sorbonne, represented by Jean Launoy, joined the Jesuits in their polemics against the Carmelites.
Papebroch, the Bollandist editor of the Acta Sanctorum, was answered by the Carmelite Sebastian of St. Paul, who made such serious charges against the orthodoxy of his opponent's writings that the very existence of the Bollandists was threatened. The peril was averted, however. In 1696 a decree of Juan Tomás de Rocaberti, archbishop of Valencia and inquisitor-general of the Holy Office, forbade all further controversies between the Carmelites and Jesuits. Two years later, on November 20, 1698, Pope Innocent XII issued a brief that definitely ended the controversy on pain of excommunication, and placed all writings in violation of the brief on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum.
Modern history[edit]
Since the 1430s, the Congregation of Mantua had continued to function in its little corner of Italy. It was only at the end of the 19th century that those following the reform of Tourraine (by this time known as the "strict observance") and the Mantuan Congregation were formally merged under one set of constitutions. The friars following Mantua conceded to Tourraine's Constitutions but insisted that the older form of the habit - namely their own - should be adopted. In a photograph of the period Blessed Titus Brandsma is shown in the habit of Tourraine as a novice; in all subsequent images he wears that of the newly styled Ancient Observance.
The French Revolution led to the suppression of the order, with the nuns dispersed into small groups who lived out of view in private houses. After the end of the disturbances the wealthy heiress and Carmelite nun Camille de Soyécourt did much to restore the order.[28] The secularization in Germany, and the repercussions on religious orders following the unification of Italy were strong blows to the Carmelites.[citation needed] By the last decades of the 19th century, there were approximately 200 Carmelite men throughout the world. At the beginning of the 20th century, however, new leadership and less political interference[who?] allowed a rebirth of the Order. Existing provinces began re-founding provinces that had become defunct. The theological preparation of the Carmelites was strengthened, particularly with the foundation of St. Albert's College in Rome.




A Carmelite nun reading in the cell of her convent.


By 2001, the membership had increased to approximately 2,100 men in 25 provinces, 700 enclosed nuns in 70 monasteries, and 13 affiliated Congregations and Institutes. In addition, the Third Order of lay Carmelites count 25,000-30,000 members throughout the world. Provinces exist in Australia, Brazil, Britain, Canada, Chile, Hungary, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Singapore, Spain, Portugal and the United States. Delegations directly under the Prior General exist in Argentina, France, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, Lebanon, the Philippines and Portugal.
Carmelite Missions exist in Bolivia, Burkino Faso, Cameroon, Colombia, India, Kenya, Lithuania, Mexico, Mozambique, Peru, Romania, Tanzania, Trinidad, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
Monasteries of enclosed Carmelite nuns exist in Brazil, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, the Netherlands, New Zealand (in Christchurch since 1933), Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States. Hermit communities of either men or women exist in Brazil, France, Indonesia, Lebanon, Italy and the United States.




The Carmelite Martyrs of Guadalajara, Spain.


The Discalced Carmelite Order built the priory of Elijah (1911) at the site of Elijah's epic contest with the prophets of Ba'al (1 Kings 18:20-40). The monastery is situated about 25 kilometers south of Haifa on the eastern side of the Carmel, and stands on the foundations of a series of earlier monasteries. The site is held sacred by Christians, Jews and Muslims; the name of the area is el-Muhraqa, an Arabic construction meaning "place of burning", and is a direct reference to the biblical account.
Several Carmelite figures who have received significant attention in the 20th century, including Saint Thérèse of Lisieux,[29] one of only four female Doctors of the Church,[30] so named because of her famous teaching on the "way of confidence and love" set forth in her best-selling memoir, "Story of a Soul";[31] Titus Brandsma, a Dutch scholar and writer who was killed in Dachau concentration camp because of his stance against Nazism; and Saint Teresa Benedicta of the Cross (née Edith Stein), a Jewish convert to Catholicism who was also imprisoned and died at Auschwitz.
Saint Raphael Kalinowski (1835–1907) was the first friar to be canonized in the Order since co-founder Saint John of the Cross. The writings and teachings of Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, a Carmelite friar of the 17th century, continue as a spiritual classic under the title The Practice of the Presence of God. Other non-religious (i.e., non-vowed monastic) great figures include Saint George Preca, a Maltese priest and Carmelite Tertiary. The Feast of All Carmelite Saints and Blesseds is celebrated on Nov. 14.[32]
Habit and scapular[edit]





Part of a series on


Scapulars
of the Catholic Church



Sacramental garments



General




Saint Simon Stock
Our Lady of Mount Carmel
Rosary and scapular
Sabbatine Privilege




Specific scapulars




Mount Carmel (Brown)
Fivefold Scapular
Passion (Red)
Passion (Black)
Seven Sorrows of Mary (Black)
The Archangel (Blue/Black)
Good Counsel (White)
Sacred Heart of Jesus (White)
Immaculate Heart of Mary (White)
Immaculate Conception (Blue)
Green Scapular (Green)
Scapular of Our Lady of Walsingham
Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary




 Catholicism portal





v
t
e





In 1287, the original way of life of the order was changed to conform to that of the mendicant orders on the initiative of St. Simon Stock and at the command of Pope Innocent IV. Their former habit of a mantle with black and white or brown and white stripes—the black or brown stripes representing the scorches the mantle of Elijah received from the fiery chariot as it fell from his shoulders—was discarded. They wore the same habit as the Dominicans, except that the cloak was white. They also borrowed much from the Dominican and Franciscan constitutions. Their distinctive garment was a scapular of two strips of dark cloth, worn on the breast and back, and fastened at the shoulders. Tradition holds that this was given to St. Simon Stock by the Blessed Virgin Mary, who appeared to him and promised that all who wore it with faith and piety and who died clothed in it would be saved.[33][34][35] There arose a sodality of the scapular, which affiliated a large number of laymen with the Carmelites.
A miniature version of the Carmelite scapular is popular among Roman Catholics and is one of the most popular devotions in the Church. Wearers usually believe that if they faithfully wear the Carmelite scapular (also called "the brown scapular" or simply "the scapular") and die in a state of grace, they will be saved from eternal damnation. Catholics who decide to wear the scapular are usually enrolled by a priest, and some choose to enter the Scapular Confraternity. The Lay Carmelites of the Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel wear a scapular which is smaller than the shortened scapular worn by some Carmelite religious for sleeping, but still larger than the devotional scapulars.
Visions and devotions[edit]
Among the various Catholic orders, Carmelite nuns have had a proportionally high ratio of visions of Jesus and Mary and have been responsible for key Catholic devotions.
From the time of her clothing in the Carmelite religious habit (1583) until her death (1607), Saint Mary Magdalene de Pazzi is said to have had a series of raptures and ecstasies.

First, these raptures sometimes seized upon her whole being with such force as to compel her to rapid motion (e.g. towards some sacred object).
Secondly, she was frequently able, whilst in ecstasy, to carry on working e.g., embroidery, painting, with perfect composure and efficiency.
Thirdly, during these raptures Saint Mary Magdalene de Pazzi gave utterance to maxims of Divine Love, and to counsels of perfection for souls. These were preserved by her companions, who (unknown to her) wrote them down.





The Carmel of Beja, in Portugal, where apparitions of the Child Jesus were reported by two Carmelite nuns.


In the Carmelite convent of Beja, in Portugal, two Carmelite nuns of the Ancient Observance reported several apparitions and mystical revelations throughout her life: Venerable Mother Mariana of the Purification received numerous apparitions of the Child Jesus and her body was found incorrupt after her death;[36] Venerable Mother Maria Perpétua da Luz wrote 60 books with messages from heaven;[37] both religious died with the odor of sanctity.
In the 19th century, another Carmelite nun, Saint Thérèse of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face, was instrumental in spreading devotion to the Holy Face[38] throughout France in the 1890s with her many poems and prayers. Eventually Pope Pius XII approved the devotion in 1958 and declared the Feast of the Holy Face of Jesus as Shrove Tuesday (the day before Ash Wednesday) for all Catholics. Therese of Lisieux emerged as one of the most popular saints for Catholics in the 20th century, and a statue of her can be found in many European and North American Catholic churches built prior to the Second Vatican Council (after which the number of statues tended to be reduced when churches were built).
In the 20th century, in the last apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Fátima, Portugal, Sister Lúcia, one of the most famous visionaries of Our Lady, said that the Virgin appeared to her as Our Lady of Mount Carmel (holding the Brown Scapular). Many years after, Lúcia became a Carmelite nun. When Sister Lúcia was asked in an interview why the Blessed Virgin appeared as Our Lady of Mount Carmel in her last apparition, she replied: "Because Our Lady wants all to wear the Scapular... The reason for this," she explained, "is that the Scapular is our sign of consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary". When asked if the Brown Scapular is as necessary to the fulfillment of Our Lady’s requests as the Rosary, Sister Lúcia answered: "The Scapular and the Rosary are inseparable".[39]
See also[edit]

Enclosed religious orders
Dialogues of the Carmelites
Ipswich Whitefriars
There is a very small body of Anglican Carmelites.

Other Branches of the Carmelite Order[edit]

Byzantine Discalced Carmelites
Discalced Carmelites (also known as Teresian Carmelites)
Hermits of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel
Lay Carmelites (Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel)
Monks of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel
Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites
Episcopal Carmel of Saint Teresa

Communities of Carmelite Sisters[edit]

Carmelite Sisters of the Most Sacred Heart of Los Angeles
Carmelite Sisters for the Aged and Infirm

Spirituality[edit]

Elijah
Teresa of Ávila (Doctor of the Church)
John of the Cross (Doctor of the Church)
Thérèse of Lisieux (Doctor of the Church)
Mary Magdalene de' Pazzi
Sister Lúcia of Fátima
Nuno of Saint Mary
Simon Stock
Elizabeth of the Trinity
Marie-Antoinette de Geuser "Consumata"
Edith Stein "Teresa Benedicta of the Cross"
Teresa of the Andes
Teresa Margaret of the Sacred Heart
Joaquina de Vedruna
Angelus of Jerusalem
Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection
Francisco Palau
Angelo Paoli
Jan Tyranowski
Martyrs of Compiègne
Titus Brandsma
John of St. Samson

Tradition[edit]

Book of the First Monks
Carmelite Rite
Carmelite Rule of St. Albert
Constitutions of the Carmelite Order
Our Lady of Mount Carmel
Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel

Notes[edit]



^ Zimmerman, Benedict. "The Carmelite Order." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 11 Oct. 2014
^ Not until the late fourteenth century was 'B,' the prior of the earliest known community of Carmelites, expanded to read Brocard. See Keith J Egan, "The Spirituality of the Carmelites," in Jill Raitt with Bernard McGinn and John Meyendorff, eds, Christian Spirituality: High Middle Ages and Reformation, (London: SCM, 1989), p. 50. See also  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
^ "The Carmelite Charism: Contemplation". 
^ Benedetto and Duke 2008, p. 123.
^ a b c "A Brief History of The Carmelites - THE OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF THE CARMELITE ORDER". 
^ Andrew Jotischky,The Carmelites and Antiquity: Mendicants and Their Pasts in the Middle Ages, (Oxford, 2002), p.12
^ Probably as a result of an invitation from Sir Richard Grey of Codnor, who had gone on Crusade, landing at Acre in October 1240. He probably met the order here, and offered them sanctuary on his lands.
^ Much legend surrounds Simon Stock, generally emerging in late fourteenth century hagiography. Keith J Egan, "The Spirituality of the Carmelites," in Jill Raitt with Bernard McGinn and John Meyendorff, eds, Christian Spirituality: High Middle Ages and Reformation, (London: SCM, 1989), p50
^ Andrew Jotischky,The Carmelites and Antiquity: Mendicants and their pasts in the Middle Ages, (Oxford, 2002), p14
^ Peter Tyler, 'Carmelite Spirituality', in Peter Tyler, ed, The Bloomsbury Guide to Christian Spirituality, (2012), p118
^ Jotischky, The Carmelites and Antiquity, (2002), p16
^ Peter Tyler, 'Carmelite Spirituality', in Peter Tyler, ed, The Bloomsbury Guide to Christian Spirituality, (2012), p120
^ The Carmelite claim to stand in a direct line of descent from Elijah as contemplatives on Mount Carmel is featured in the first lines of the Constitutions of 1281, the so-called Rubrica Prima, a document probably originating in the 1240s. This was most influentially put forward, though, in a series of works by Philip Ribot (d1391), including The Institution of the First Monks, which powerfully established a Carmelite foundational myth. See John Welch, The Carmelite Way, (1996), p52
^ John Welch, The Carmelite Way, (1996), p10
^ Andrew Jotischky, The Carmelites and Antiquity (2002), p24
^ Translated by Bede Edwards in The Sword, (June 1979), pp3-52
^ Richard Copsey argues that the Ignea Sagitta was unknown until the early fifteenth century, raising the question whether it was ever publicly issued.
^ In 1271, Nicholas disappears from the historical record. It is unclear whether he resigned, or, as Richard Copey believes, died.
^ Keith J Egan, 'The Spirituality of the Carmelite Order', in Jill Raitt with Bernard McGinn and John Meyendorff, eds, Christian Spirituality: High Middle Ages and Reformation, (London: SCM, 1989), p56.
^ By Otger Steggink
^ Jotischky, The Carmelites and Antiquity (2002), p41
^ John Welch, The Carmelite Way, (1996), p13
^ John Welch, The Carmelite Way, (1996), p17
^ Smet, O.Carm., Joachim. The Mirror of Carmel: A Brief History of the Carmelite Order. 2011: Carmelite Media. pp. 230–232. 
^ Bremond, Henri (1930). A Literary History of Religious Thought in France from the Wars of religion Down to Our Own Times; Vol. 2 [II], The Coming of Mysticism (1590-162). Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. p. 275. 
^ Smet, Joachim. The Mirror of Carmel: A Brief History of the Carmelite Order. pp. 233–235. 
^ Asunción Lavrin, Brides of Christ: Conventual Life in Colonial Mexico. Stanford: Stanford University Press 2008, pp.359-71.
^ Mère Saint-Jérôme (1851), La Vie de la Révérende Mère Thérèse Camille de Soyécourt, carmélite (in French), Vve Poussielgue-Rusand, p. 309, retrieved 16 February 2017 
^ ""Saint Therese of Lisieux: A Gateway" Blog - Saint Therese of Lisieux". 
^ O’Riordan, Maureen. "Doctor of the Universal Church". Saint Therese of Lisieux: A Gateway. Retrieved April 4, 2010. 
^ O’Riordan, Maureen. "Writings". Saint Therese of Lisieux: A Gateway. Retrieved April 4, 2010. 
^ "All Carmelite Saints (Feast) - THE OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF THE CARMELITE ORDER". 
^ EWTN "History of the Scapular" [1]
^ Matthew Bunson, 2008, The Catholic Almanac, ISBN 978-1-59276-441-9 page 155
^ Gerald M. Costello, 2001, Treasury of Catholic Stories, OSV Press, ISBN 978-0-87973-979-9, page 128
^ SERPA, J. J. Gonçalves; Venerável Madre Mariana da Purificação: Carmelita Calçada de Beja. Colecção: Almas heróicas de Beja; 230pp.; Gouveia: 1960.
^ SANTA ANNA, Frei Joseph Pereira de; Vida da Insigne Mestra de Espírito, a Virtuosa Madre Maria Perpétua da Luz, Religiosa Carmelita Calçada; Lisboa: Oficina de Antonio Pedrozo, 1742.
^ O’Riordan, Maureen. "Therese and the Holy Face of Jesus". Saint Therese of Lisieux: A Gateway. Retrieved April 4, 2010. 
^ Haffert, James Mathias; Mary in Her Scapular Promise. AMI Press, 1954.



References[edit]

Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion
Copsey, Richard and Fitzgerald-Lombard, Patrick (eds.), Carmel in Britain: studies on the early history of the Carmelite Order (1992–2004).
"The Carmelite Order" by Benedict Zimmerman. The Catholic Encyclopedia, 1908.

Sources[edit]

Benedetto, Robert; Duke, James O., eds. (2008). "Carmelite Order". The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History: The early, medieval, and Reformation eras. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 123. ISBN 0664224164. 

Further reading[edit]

T. Brandsma, Carmelite Mysticism, Historical Sketches: 50th Anniversary Edition, (Darien, IL, 1986), ASIN B002HFBEZG
J. Boyce, Carmelite Liturgy and Spiritual Identity. The Choir Books of Kraków, Turnhout, 2009, Brepols Publishers, ISBN 978-2-503-51714-8
W. McGreal, At the Fountain of Elijah: The Carmelite Tradition, (Maryknoll, NY, 1999), ISBN 1-57075-292-3
J. Smet, The Carmelites: A History of the Brothers of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, 4. vol. (Darien IL, 1975)
J. Welch, The Carmelite Way: An Ancient Path for Today’s Pilgrim, (New York: 1996), ISBN 0-8091-3652-X

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roman Catholic Carmelite orders.



Order of the Brothers of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
Order of the Discalced Carmelites
Index of Carmelite Websites
Carmelite Hermitage
Meditations from Carmel
"Sayings of Light and Love" - Spiritual Maxims of John of the Cross
The Carmelite history and vocation
"Mystical Brain" by Isabelle Raynauld (2006) - a documentary film about five Carmelite Nuns who volunteered to have their brains scanned while they meditated by recalling mystical experiences

Provinces of the Carmelite Order[edit]

Carmelites of the Province of the Assumption, British Province (founded c. 1241; refounded 1969)
Carmelites of the Most Pure Heart of Mary Province, USA/Canada/Peru/Mexico/El Salvador (founded 1890)
Carmelites of the North American Province of St. Elias (founded 1931)







v
t
e


Catholic religious institutes




Including orders (monastic/cenobitic/enclosed/idiorrhythmic), Canons Regular, mendicants, second orders, Clerks Regular, and congregations of the Catholic Church



Male
and
female



Alexians
Assumptionists (A.A.)
Augustinian Recollects (O.A.R.)
Basilian Alepians (B.A.)
Basilian Chouerites (B.C.)
Benedictines (O.S.B.)
Canossians (F.D.C.C.)
Carmelites (O. Carm.)
Carthusians (O. Cart.)
Cistercians (O. Cist.)
Congregation of Our Lady of Sion (N.D.S.)
Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (SS.CC.)
Congregations of the Heart of Mary
Discalced Carmelites (O.C.D.)
Dominicans (O.P.)
Franciscans (O.F.M.)
Institute of the Incarnate Word (I.V.E.)
Maryknoll (M.M.)
Mercedarians (O. de M.)
Miles Jesu
Missionaries of Charity (M.C.)
Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo (C.S.)
Premonstratensians (O.Praem.)
Servants of Charity (S.C.)
Servite Order (O.S.M.)
Society of the Atonement (S.A.)
T.O.R. Franciscans
Trappists (O.C.S.O.)
Trinitarian Order (O.SS.T.)










Male



Adorno Fathers (C.R.M.)
Albertine Brothers
Augustinians (O.S.A.)
Barnabites (B.)
Basilians (C.S.B.)
Brotherhood of Hope (B.H.)
Brothers of Our Lady of Mercy (F.D.M.)
Camillians (M.I.)
Canons Regular of Saint John Cantius
Capuchins (O.F.M. Cap.)
Christian Brothers (Irish) (C.F.C.)
Immaculate Heart of Mary (C.I.C.M.)
Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament (S.S.S.)
Claretians (C.M.F.)
Companions of the Cross (C.C.)
Congregation of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux (C.S.T.)
Conventual Franciscans (O.F.M. Conv.)
Crosiers (O.S.C.)
De La Salle Brothers (F.S.C.)
Discalced Augustinians (O.A.D.)
Franciscan Friars of the Renewal (C.F.R.)
Franciscan Missionaries of the Eternal Word (M.F.V.A.)
Gabrielites
Holy Cross (C.S.C.)
Holy Ghost Fathers (C.S.Sp)
Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest (I.C.R.S.S.)
Jesuits (S.J.)
Josephite Fathers (S.S.J.)
Legion of Christ (L.C.)
Little Brothers of Jesus
Marians of the Immaculate Conception (M.I.C.)
Marianists (S.M.)
Marist Brothers (F.M.S.)
Marists (S.M.)
Mechitarists (C.A.M.)
Missionaries of La Salette (M.S.)
Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales (M.S.F.S)
Missionaries of the Poor (M.O.P.)
Missionaries of the Precious Blood (C.PP.S.)
Missionaries of the Sacred Heart (M.S.C.)
Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary
Oblates of Mary Immaculate (O.M.I.)
Missionary Society of St. Columban
Oblates of the Virgin Mary (O.M.V.)
Oblates of St. Francis de Sales (O.S.F.S.)
Oratory of Saint Philip Neri (C.O.)
Order of Friars Minor (O.F.M.)
Pallottines (S.A.C.)
Passionists (C.P.)
Paulist Fathers (C.S.P.)
Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter (F.S.S.P.)
Redemptorists (C.Ss.R.)
Rogationists of the Heart of Jesus (R.C.J.)
Sacred Heart Brothers
Salesians (S.D.B.)
Servants of Jesus and Mary (S.J.M.)
Society of the Divine Word (S.V.D.)
Society of Saint Edmund (S.S.E.)
Sons of the Most Holy Redeemer (F.SS.R.)
Vincentians (C.M.)
White Fathers (M. Afr.)
Xaverian Brothers (C.F.X.)
Sulpicians (P.S.S.)





Female



Adorers of the Blood of Christ (A.S.C.)
Apostolic Carmel (A.C.)
Basilian Alepian Sisters
Basilian Chouerite Sisters
Bridgettines
Brigidines
Congregation of the Franciscan Hospitaller Sisters of the Immaculate Conception (CONFHIC)
Daughters of Charity
Daughters of Divine Love
Daughters of Mary of the Immaculate Conception
Faithful Companions of Jesus
Felicians (C.S.S.F.)
Filippini Sisters (M.P.F.)
Handmaids of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
Hijas de Jesús
Holy Spirit Adoration Sisters
Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary
Institute of the Maids of the Poor
Little Sisters of Jesus
Little Sisters of the Poor
Lovers of the Holy Cross
Marianites of Holy Cross
Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God (S.M.I.C.)
Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (I.C.M.)
Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart
Oblate Sisters of Providence
Oblates of Jesus the Priest
Oblate Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Fatima (O.M.V.F.)
Order of Our Lady of Charity (O.D.N.C.)
Order of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary
Poor Clares (O.S.C.)
Religious of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (R.C.S.J.)
Religious of the Virgin Mary (R.V.M.)
Servants of St. Joseph (S.S.J.)
Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament
Sisters of Charity
Sisters of Charity of Saints Bartolomea Capitanio and Vincenza Gerosa (SCCG)
Sisters of the Christian Doctrine (Nancy)
Sisters of the Cross and Passion
Sisters of the Destitute
Sisters of the Good Shepherd (R.G.S)
Sisters of Holy Cross
Sisters of the Holy Cross
Sisters of the Holy Family-Louisiana
Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary
Sisters of the Immaculate Conception
Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary
Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Sisters of Life
Sisters of Mercy (R.S.M.)
Sisters of Providence of Saint Mary-of-the-Woods
Sisters of Saint Francis (general)
Sisters of Saint Francis (U.S.)
Sisters of Saint Joseph
The Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace
Sisters of Saint Joseph of the Sacred Heart (R.S.J.)
Society of the Helpers of the Holy Souls
Ursulines (O.S.U.)
White Sisters








 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Catholic Church






Index
Outline





History
(Timeline)



Jesus
Holy Family

Mary
Joseph


Apostles
Early Christianity
History of the papacy
Ecumenical councils
Missions
Great Schism of East
Crusades
Great Schism of West
Protestant Reformation
Council of Trent
Counter-Reformation
Catholic Church by country
Vatican City

index






Vatican II



Definition of the Church
Ecumenism
Dei verbum
Dignitatis humanae
Gaudium et spes
Lumen gentium
Nostra aetate
Sacrosanctum concilium











Hierarchy
(Precedence)




Pope (List)



Pope Francis (2013–)

conclave
inauguration
theology
canonizations
visits


Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI (2005–2013)







Roman Curia
College of Cardinals

Cardinal


Patriarchate
Episcopal conference
Patriarch
Major archbishop
Primate
Metropolitan
Archbishop
Diocesan bishop
Coadjutor bishop
Auxiliary bishop
Titular bishop
Bishop emeritus
Abbot
Abbess
Superior general
Provincial superior
Grand Master
Prior (-ess)
Priest
Brother

Friar


Sister
Monk
Nun
Hermit
Master of novices
Novice
Oblate
Postulant
Laity





Theology



Body and soul
Bible
Catechism
Divine grace
Dogma
Ecclesiology

Four Marks of the Church


Original sin

List


Salvation
Sermon on the Mount
Ten Commandments
Trinity
Worship




Mariology



Assumption
History
Immaculate Conception
Mariology of the popes
Mariology of the saints
Mother of God
Perpetual virginity
Veneration








Philosophy



Natural law
Moral theology
Personalism
Social teaching
Philosophers





Sacraments



Baptism
Confirmation
Eucharist
Penance
Anointing of the Sick

Last rites


Holy orders
Matrimony





Saints



Mary
Apostles
Archangels
Confessors
Disciples
Doctors of the Church
Evangelists
Church Fathers
Martyrs
Patriarchs
Prophets
Virgins





Doctors
of the
Church







Gregory the Great
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Jerome
John Chrysostom
Basil of Caesarea
Gregory of Nazianzus
Athanasius of Alexandria
Cyril of Alexandria
Cyril of Jerusalem
John of Damascus
Bede the Venerable
Ephrem the Syrian
Thomas Aquinas
Bonaventure
Anselm of Canterbury
Isidore of Seville
Peter Chrysologus
Leo the Great
Peter Damian
Bernard of Clairvaux
Hilary of Poitiers
Alphonsus Liguori
Francis de Sales
Peter Canisius
John of the Cross
Robert Bellarmine
Albertus Magnus
Anthony of Padua
Lawrence of Brindisi
Teresa of Ávila
Catherine of Siena
Thérèse of Lisieux
John of Ávila
Hildegard of Bingen
Gregory of Narek








Institutes,
orders,
and societies



Assumptionists
Annonciades
Augustinians
Basilians
Benedictines
Bethlehemites
Blue nuns
Camaldoleses
Camillians
Carmelites
Carthusians
Cistercians
Clarisses
Conceptionists
Crosiers
Dominicans
Franciscans
Good Shepherd Sisters
Hieronymites
Jesuits
Mercedarians
Minims
Olivetans
Oratorians
Piarists
Premonstratensians
Redemptorists
Servites
Theatines
Trappists
Trinitarians
Visitandines





Associations
of the faithful



International Federation of Catholic Parochial Youth Movements
International Federation of Catholic Universities
International Kolping Society
Schoenstatt Apostolic Movement
International Union of Catholic Esperantists
Community of Sant'Egidio





Charities



Aid to the Church in Need
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic Home Missions
Catholic Relief Services
CIDSE





Particular
churches
(By country)



Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches: Albanian
Armenian
Belarusian
Bulgarian
Chaldean
Coptic
Croatian and Serbian
Eritrean
Ethiopian
Georgian
Greek
Hungarian
Italo-Albanian
Macedonian
Maronite
Melkite
Romanian
Russian
Ruthenian
Slovak
Syriac
Syro-Malabar
Syro-Malankara
Ukrainian




Liturgical rites



Alexandrian
Antiochian
Armenian
Byzantine
East Syrian
Latin

Anglican Use
Ambrosian
Mozarabic
Roman


West Syrian











 Catholicism portal
 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal


 Book
Name
 Media

 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject











Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 168672016
LCCN: n80020567
ISNI: 0000 0001 2302 6797
GND: 1018585-9
SUDOC: 026502852
BNF: cb133186017 (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carmelites&oldid=816661707"					Categories: Carmelite OrderChristian religious orders established in the 12th centuryHidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2012All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2012Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers