
Cartoonist


Cartoonist Jack Elrod at work on a Sunday page of the Mark Trail comic strip



Comics


  
Speech balloons



Comics studies




Education
History

by country


Glossary




Methods




Cartooning
Fumetti




Media




Comic book
Comic strip
Editorial cartoon
Gag cartoon
Graphic novel
Webcomic




Community




Awards
Collecting
Publishers




 Comics portal





v
t
e





A cartoonist (also comic strip creator) is a visual artist who specializes in drawing cartoons. This work is often created for entertainment, political commentary, or advertising. Cartoonists may work in many formats, such as animation, booklets, comic strips, comic books, editorial cartoons, graphic novels, manuals, gag cartoons, graphic design, illustrations, storyboards, posters, shirts, books, advertisements, greeting cards, magazines, newspapers, and video game packaging.



Contents


1 History

1.1 In the West


2 Comics
3 Types of animation
4 Creation
5 Art styles

5.1 Tools


6 See also
7 References

7.1 Works cited


8 Further reading
9 External links

9.1 Societies and organizations
9.2 Communities





History[edit]
In the West[edit]
The English satirist and editorial cartoonist William Hogarth, who emerged In the 18th century, has been credited with pioneering Western sequential art. His work ranged from realistic portraiture to comic strip-like series of pictures called "modern moral subjects". Much of his work poked fun at contemporary politics and customs; illustrations in such style are often referred to as "Hogarthian".[1] Following the work of Hogarth, political cartoons began to develop in England in the latter part of the 18th century under the direction of its great exponents, James Gillray and Thomas Rowlandson, both from London. Gillray explored the use of the medium for lampooning and caricature, calling the king (George III), prime ministers and generals to account, and has been referred to as the father of the political cartoon.[2]
While never a professional cartoonist, Benjamin Franklin is credited with having the first cartoon published in an American newspaper.[3] In the 19th century, professional cartoonists such as Thomas Nast introduced other familiar American political symbols, such as the Republican elephant.[3]




Benjamin Franklin's "Join, or Die" (1754), credited as the first cartoon published in an American newspaper.






Charles Dana Gibson was an influential American cartoonist in the early 20th century.


During the 20th century, numerous magazines carried single-panel gag cartoons by such freelance cartoonists as Charles Addams, Irwin Caplan, Chon Day, Clyde Lamb, and John Norment. These were almost always published in black and white, although Collier's often carried cartoons in color. The debut of Playboy introduced full-page color cartoons by Jack Cole, Eldon Dedini, Roy Raymonde and others. Single-panel cartoonists syndicated to newspapers included Dave Breger, Hank Ketcham, George Lichty, Fred Neher, Irving Phillips, and J. R. Williams.
Comics[edit]
Comic strips received widespread distribution to mainstream newspapers by syndicates[4] such as the Universal Press Syndicate, United Media, or King Features. Sunday strips go to a coloring company such as American Color before they are published.
Some comic strip creators publish in the alternative press or on the Internet. Comic strip artists may also sometimes work in book-length form, creating graphic novels. Both vintage and current strips receive reprints in book collections.
The major comic book publishers (such as Marvel or DC) utilize teams of cartoonists to produce the art (typically separating pencil work, inking and lettering while the color is added digitally by colorists). When a consistent artistic style is wanted among different cartoonists (such as Archie Comics), character model sheets may be used as reference.
Calum MacKenzie, in his preface to the exhibition catalog, The Scottish Cartoonists (Glasgow Print Studio Gallery, 1979) defined the selection criteria:

The difference between a cartoonist and an illustrator was the same as the difference between a comedian and a comedy actor—the former both deliver their own lines and take full responsibility for them, the latter could always hide behind the fact that it was not his entire creation.[5]

Types of animation[edit]




Dip pens have traditionally been a popular drawing tool for cartoonists.


Animated cartooning is created for short films, advertising, feature films and television. It is also sometimes used in live-action films for dream sequences or opening titles. An animation artist is commonly referred to as an animator rather than a cartoonist. They create motion pictures as well. Animation studios such as DreamWorks Animation, Pixar, Walt Disney Animation Studios, and Blue Sky Studios create CGI or computer-animated films that are more three-dimensional.
There are many books of cartoons in both paperback and hardcover, such as the collections of cartoons from The New Yorker. Prior to the 1960s, cartoons were mostly ignored by museums and art galleries. In 1968, the cartoonist and comedian Roger Price opened the first New York City gallery devoted exclusively to cartoons, mainly work by the leading magazine gag cartoonists. Today, there are several museums devoted to cartoons, notably the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum, run by curator Jenny E. Robb at Ohio State University.
Creation[edit]




Self-caricature by an Indian Cartoonist Shekhar Gurera


Comics artists usually sketch a drawing in pencil before going over the drawing in India ink, using either a dip pen or a brush. Artists may also use a lightbox to create the final image in ink. Some artists, Brian Bolland, for example, use computer graphics, with the published work as the first physical appearance of the artwork. By many definitions (including McCloud's, above), the definition of comics extends to digital media such as webcomics and the mobile comic.
The nature of the comics work being created determines the number of people who work on its creation, with successful comic strips and comic books being produced through a studio system, in which an artist assembles a team of assistants to help create the work. However, works from independent companies, self-publishers, or those of a more personal nature can be produced by a single creator.
Within the comic book industry of North America, the studio system has come to be the main method of creation. Through its use by the industry, the roles have become heavily codified, and the managing of the studio has become the company's responsibility, with an editor discharging the management duties. The editor assembles a number of creators and oversees the work to publication.
Any number of people can assist in the creation of a comic book in this way, from a plotter, a breakdown artist, a penciller, an inker, a scripter, a letterer, and a colorist, with some roles being performed by the same person.
In contrast, a comic strip tends to be the work of a sole creator, usually termed a cartoonist. However, it is not unusual for a cartoonist to employ the studio method, particularly when a strip become successful. Mort Walker employed a studio, while Bill Watterson and Charles Schulz did not. Gag, political, and editorial cartoonists tend to work alone as well, though a cartoonist may use assistants.
Art styles[edit]




Scott McCloud, whose work Understanding Comics identified the different styles of art used within comics.


While almost all comics art is in some sense abbreviated, and also while every artist who has produced comics work brings their own individual approach to bear, some broader art styles have been identified. Comic strip artists Cliff Sterrett, Frank King, and Gus Arriola often used unusual, colorful backgrounds, sometimes veering into abstract art.
The basic styles have been identified as realistic and cartoony, with a huge middle ground for which R. Fiore has coined the phrase liberal. Fiore has also expressed distaste with the terms realistic and cartoony, preferring the terms literal and freestyle, respectively.[6]
Scott McCloud has created "The Big Triangle"[7] as a tool for thinking about comics art. He places the realistic representation in the bottom left corner, with iconic representation, or cartoony art, in the bottom right, and a third identifier, abstraction of image, at the apex of the triangle. This allows placement and grouping of artists by triangulation.

The cartoony style uses comic effects and a variation of line widths for expression. Characters tend to have rounded, simplified anatomy. Noted exponents of this style are Carl Barks and Jeff Smith.[6]
The realistic style, also referred to as the adventure style is the one developed for use within the adventure strips of the 1930s. They required a less cartoony look, focusing more on realistic anatomy and shapes, and used the illustrations found in pulp magazines as a basis. This style became the basis of the superhero comic book style since Joe Shuster and Jerry Siegel originally worked Superman up for publication as an adventure strip.[8]

McCloud also notes that in several traditions, there is a tendency to have the main characters drawn rather simplistic and cartoony, while the backgrounds and environment are depicted realistically. Thus, he argues, the reader easily identifies with the characters, (as they are similar to one's idea of self), whilst being immersed into a world, that's three-dimensional and textured.[9] Good examples of this phenomenon include Hergé's The Adventures of Tintin (in his "personal trademark" Ligne claire style), Will Eisner's Spirit and Osamu Tezuka's Buddha, among many others.
Tools[edit]
Artists use a variety of pencils, paint brushes, or paper, typically Bristol board, and a waterproof ink.[10] When inking, many artists preferred to use a Winsor & Newton Series 7, #3 brush as the main tool, which could be used in conjunction with other brushes, dip pens, a fountain pen, and/or a variety of technical pens or markers. Mechanical tints can be employed to add grey tone to an image. An artist might paint with acrylics, gouache, poster paints, or watercolors. Color can also be achieved through crayons, pastels or colored pencils.
Eraser, rulers, templates, set squares and a T-square assist in creating lines and shapes. A drawing table provides an angled work surface with lamps sometimes attached to the table. A light box allows an artist to trace his pencil work when inking, allowing for a looser finish. Knives and scalpels fill a variety of needs, including cutting board or scraping off mistakes. A cutting mat aids paper trimming. Process white is a thick opaque white material for covering mistakes. Adhesives and tapes help composite an image from different sources.
See also[edit]


Comics portal
Cartoon portal




Comic book creator
Editorial cartoonist
Harvey Award
List of cartoonists
List of newspaper comic strips
Mangaka
The Someday Funnies
Webcomic
Women in comics


References[edit]


^ The British Museum. Beer Street, William Hogarth - Fine Art Print Retrieved 11 April 2010.
^ "Satire, sewers and statesmen: why James Gillray was king of the cartoon". The Guardian. 16 June 2015. 
^ a b Hess & Northrop 2011, p. 24.
^ "The Comics Reporter". Retrieved 17 November 2009. 
^ MacKenzie, Calum. The Scottish Cartoonists. Glasgow Print Studio Gallery, 1979.
^ a b Fiore 2010.
^ "The Big Triangle". scottmccloud.com. Retrieved 2012-07-06. 
^ Santos, 1998. The Golden Era... June 1938 to 1945, Part I[permanent dead link]
^ McCloud 1993, p. 48.
^ "16 essential art tools for artists". 


Works cited[edit]


Hess, Stephen; Northrop, Sandy (2011). American Political Cartoons: The Evolution of a National Identity, 1754-2010. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-1119-4. 


Further reading[edit]

Steve Edgell, Tim Pilcher, Brad Brooks, The Complete Cartooning Course: Principles, Practices, Techniques (London: Barron’s, 2001).

External links[edit]



Look up Cartoonist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cartoonists.


Societies and organizations[edit]

Professional Cartoonists' Organisation (UK)
National Cartoonists Society
Association of American Editorial Cartoonists
Society of Illustrators
Society of Children’s Book Writers and Illustrators
Society of Illustrators of Los Angeles
The Association of Illustrators
The Illustrators Partnership of America
AIIQ - l’Association des Illustrateurs et Illustratrices du Québec
Colorado Alliance of Illustrators
Institute For Archaeologists Graphics Archaeology Group
Guild of Natural Science Illustrators
Guild of Natural Science Illustrators-Northwest
Illustrators Australia
Newsart
Australian Cartoonists Association

Communities[edit]

DeviantART
ConceptArt
toonsUp
Mojizu
Illustrateur
Comic Design
SteamKat







v
t
e


Comics




Glossary of comics terminology



Formats



Comic book

Ashcan copy
Minicomic


Comic strip

Comic strip formats
Daily comic strip
Lianhuanhua
Sunday comics
Sunday strip
Topper
Yonkoma


Digital comics

Mobile comic
Webcomic


Graphic novel

Trade paperback










Techniques



Film comic
Motion comic
Photo comics
Text comics





Creators



Artists
cartoonists
Female comics creators

list






By country



American
Australian
Canadian
Cuban
Japanese (Manga)








History



Years in comics
American (Ages: Golden Age
Silver Age
Bronze Age
Modern Age

Events)


Japanese (Manga)
Webcomics





Genres



Abstract
Adult
Alternative
Autobiographical
Celebrity comics
Crime
Erotic
Fantasy (list)
Horror
Romance (list)
Science fiction
Superhero
Teen humor
Tijuana Bible
Underground
War
Western





Tropes



Antihero
Funny animal
Superhero
Supervillain
Masking
Rogue
Widescreen comics





By country




Africa



South Africa





Americas



Argentina
Brazil
Canada

Quebec


Mexico
United States (list)





Asia



China and Taiwan (list)

Hong Kong


India (list)
Japan (lists)
Korea (list)
Philippines
Thailand





Europe



Czech Republic
France and Belgium (list)

Belgium


Germany
Hungary
Italy (list)
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Serbia
Spain (list)
United Kingdom

Wales







Oceania



Australia








Lists




By type



Comic books
Comic strips
Webcomics





By source



Based on fiction
Based on films
Based on video games
Based on television programs





Other lists



Comic books on CD/DVD
Comics and comic strips made into feature films
Comics solicited but never published
Publishing companies
Dystopian comics
Furry comics
Feminist comic books
Limited series
Wrestling-based comic books











 Portal
 Category
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Animation topics



By country







Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
Czech Republic
Estonia
India
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Thailand
United States
Vietnam





History



Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Hungary
Iran
Korea
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States








Industry



Animator

List


Animation department
Animation director
Story artist
Animation studios

List


Animation database
Biologist simulators
Animation film festivals

international
regional


Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends)
Outsourcing
International Animation Day





Works



Films

Based on cartoons
Computer-animated
Feature-length
Lost or unfinished
Package
Short
Short series
Stop-motion


Series

Direct-to-video
Internet
Television







Techniques




Traditional



Limited animation
Masking
Rotoscoping





Stop motion



Barrier grid
Clay

strata-cut


Cutout (silhouette)
Graphic
Model

go motion


Object
Pixilation
Puppetoon





Computer
(history, timeline)




2D



Flash
PowerPoint
SVG
CSS
Digital puppetry





3D



Cel shading
Crowd
Morph target
Motion capture
Non-photorealistic rendering
Procedural
Skeletal
Machinima
Digital puppetry
Virtual cinematography








Other methods



Blocking
Chuckimation
Drawn-on-film
Flip book
Inbetweening
Kinegram
Paint-on-glass
Pinscreen
Pixel art
Pose to pose
Rubber hose
Sand
Syncro-Vox
Zoetrope








Variants



Abstract animation (visual music)
Adult animation
Animated cartoon
Animated sitcom
Animated documentary
Cartoon pornography
Educational animation
Erotic animation
Independent animation
Instructional animation





Related topics



Animation music

Mickey Mousing


Character animation

model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model


Twelve principles
Motion comic
Films with live action and animation

highest grossing


Cartoon physics
Cartoon violence
Most expensive animated films








 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Pens



Types



Active pen
Ballpoint/biro
Demonstrator
Digital
Dip
Fountain
Fudepen
Gel
Ink brush
Light
Qalam
Quill
Rastrum
Reed
Rollerball
Ruling
Skin
Stylus
Technical (rapidograph)




Markers



Dry erase
Highlighter
Paint
Permanent
UV








Parts and tools



Blotting paper
Ink blotter
Inkwell
Nib (Flex nibs)
Penknife
Pounce





Pen inks



Alizarine
Fountain pen
India/Indian
Iron gall
Stark's





Other



Ballpoint pen drawing
Ballpoint pen knife
Counterfeit banknote detection pen
Birmingham pen trade

Birmingham Pen Trade Heritage Association
Pen Museum


Kalamos
Pen computing
Penmanship
Pen painting
Pen spinning
Retipping





Related



Calligraphy
Cartooning
Pencil
Mechanical pencil
Narayam








 List of pen types, brands and companies









Authority control



GND: 4361998-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartoonist&oldid=797855642"					Categories: CartoonistsComic strip cartoonistsComics creatorsVisual arts occupationsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers