For other uses, see Cave (disambiguation).
"Cavern" redirects here. For other uses, see Cavern (disambiguation).




Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico, United States


A cave is a hollow place in the ground,[1][2] specifically a natural underground space large enough for a human to enter. Caves form naturally by the weathering of rock and often extend deep underground. The word cave can also refer to much smaller openings such as sea caves, rock shelters, and grottos, though strictly speaking a cave is exogene, meaning it is deeper than its opening is wide,[3] and a rock shelter is endogene.[4] A cavern is a specific type of cave, naturally formed in soluble rock with the ability to grow speleothems.[5]
Speleology is the science of exploration and study of all aspects of caves and the cave environment. Visiting or exploring caves for recreation may be called caving, potholing, or spelunking.



Contents


1 Types and formation

1.1 Solutional cave
1.2 Primary cave
1.3 Sea cave or littoral cave
1.4 Corrasional cave or erosional cave
1.5 Glacier cave
1.6 Fracture cave
1.7 Talus cave
1.8 Anchialine cave


2 Physical patterns
3 Geographic distribution
4 Records and superlatives

4.1 World's five longest surveyed caves


5 Ecology
6 Archaeological and cultural importance
7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Types and formation[edit]
The formation and development of caves is known as speleogenesis, which can occur over the course of millions of years.[6] Caves are formed by various geologic processes and can be variable sizes. These may involve a combination of chemical processes, erosion from water, tectonic forces, microorganisms, pressure, and atmospheric influences. Isotopic dating techniques can be applied to cave sediments, in order to determine the timescale when geologic events may have occurred to help form and shape present day caves.[6]
It is estimated that the maximum depth of a cave cannot be more than 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) due to the pressure of overlying rocks.[7] For karst caves the maximum depth is determined on the basis of the lower limit of karst forming processes, coinciding with the base of the soluble carbonate rocks.[8] Most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution.[9]
Caves can be classified in various other ways as well, including active vs. relict; active caves have water flowing through them, relict caves to not, though water may be retained in them. Types of active caves include inflow caves ("into which a stream sinks"), outflow caves ("from which a stream emerges"), and through caves ("traversed by a stream").[10]




Speleothems in Hall of the Mountain King of Ogof Craig a Ffynnon, a solutional cave in South Wales.


Solutional cave[edit]
Main article: Solutional cave
Solutional caves or karst caves are the most frequently occurring caves. Such caves form in rock that is soluble; most occur in limestone, but they can also form in other rocks including chalk, dolomite, marble, salt, and gypsum. Rock is dissolved by natural acid in groundwater that seeps through bedding planes, faults, joints, and comparable features. Over time cracks enlarge to become caves and cave systems.
The largest and most abundant solutional caves are located in limestone. Limestone dissolves under the action of rainwater and groundwater charged with H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and naturally occurring organic acids. The dissolution process produces a distinctive landform known as karst, characterized by sinkholes and underground drainage. Limestone caves are often adorned with calcium carbonate formations produced through slow precipitation. These include flowstones, stalactites, stalagmites, helictites, soda straws and columns. These secondary mineral deposits in caves are called speleothems.
The portions of a solutional cave that are below the water table or the local level of the groundwater will be flooded.[11]
Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico and nearby Carlsbad Cavern are now believed to be examples of another type of solutional cave. They were formed by H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas rising from below, where reservoirs of oil give off sulfurous fumes. This gas mixes with groundwater and forms H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The acid then dissolves the limestone from below, rather than from above, by acidic water percolating from the surface.
Primary cave[edit]




Exploring a lava tube in Hawaii.


Caves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called primary caves.
Lava tubes are formed through volcanic activity and are the most common primary caves. As lava flows downhill, its surface cools and solidifies. Hot liquid lava continues to flow under that crust, and if most of it flows out, a hollow tube remains. Examples of such caves can be found in the Canary Islands, Jeju-do, the basaltic plains of Eastern Idaho, and other places. Kazumura Cave near Hilo, Hawaii is a remarkably long and deep lava tube; it is 65.6 km long (40.8 mi).
Lava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes. Other caves formed through volcanic activity include rift caves, lava mold caves, open vertical volcanic conduits, and inflationary caves.
Sea cave or littoral cave[edit]
Main article: Sea cave




Painted Cave, a large sea cave, Santa Cruz Island, California


Sea caves are found along coasts around the world. A special case is littoral caves, which are formed by wave action in zones of weakness in sea cliffs. Often these weaknesses are faults, but they may also be dykes or bedding-plane contacts. Some wave-cut caves are now above sea level because of later uplift. Elsewhere, in places such as Thailand's Phang Nga Bay, solutional caves have been flooded by the sea and are now subject to littoral erosion. Sea caves are generally around 5 to 50 metres (16 to 164 ft) in length, but may exceed 300 metres (980 ft).
Corrasional cave or erosional cave[edit]




Salt cave in Mount Sodom, Israel.


Corrasional or erosional caves are those that form entirely by erosion by flowing streams carrying rocks and other sediments. These can form in any type of rock, including hard rocks such as granite. Generally there must be some zone of weakness to guide the water, such as a fault or joint. A subtype of the erosional cave is the wind or aeolian cave, carved by wind-born sediments. Many caves formed initially by solutional processes often undergo a subsequent phase of erosional or vadose enlargement where active streams or rivers pass through them.
Glacier cave[edit]
Main article: Glacier cave




Glacier cave in Big Four Glacier, Big Four Mountain, Washington, ca. 1920


Glacier caves are formed by melting ice and flowing water within and under glaciers. The cavities are influenced by the very slow flow of the ice, which tends to collapse the caves again. Glacier caves are sometimes misidentified as "ice caves", though this latter term is properly reserved for bedrock caves that contain year-round ice formations.
Fracture cave[edit]
Fracture caves are formed when layers of more soluble minerals, such as gypsum, dissolve out from between layers of less soluble rock. These rocks fracture and collapse in blocks of stone.
Talus cave[edit]
Talus caves are formed by the openings among large boulders that have fallen down into a random heap, often at the bases of cliffs. These unstable deposits are called talus or scree, and may be subject to frequent rockfalls and landslides.
Anchialine cave[edit]
Main article: Anchialine cave
Anchialine caves are caves, usually coastal, containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water). They occur in many parts of the world, and often contain highly specialized and endemic fauna.
Physical patterns[edit]

Branchwork caves resemble surface dendritic stream patterns; they are made up of passages that join downstream as tributaries. Branchwork caves are the most common of cave patterns and are formed near sinkholes where groundwater recharge occurs. Each passage or branch is fed by a separate recharge source and converges into other higher order branches downstream.[12]
Angular network caves form from intersecting fissures of carbonate rock that have had fractures widened by chemical erosion. These fractures form high, narrow, straight passages that persist in widespread closed loops.[12]
Anastomotic caves largely resemble surface braided streams with their passages separating and then meeting further down drainage. They usually form along one bed or structure, and only rarely cross into upper or lower beds.[12]
Spongework caves are formed when solution cavities are joined by mixing of chemically diverse water. The cavities form a pattern that is three-dimensional and random, resembling a sponge.[12]
Ramiform caves form as irregular large rooms, galleries, and passages. These randomized three-dimensional rooms form from a rising water table that erodes the carbonate rock with hydrogen-sulfide enriched water.[12]
Pit caves (vertical caves, potholes, or simply "pits") consist of a vertical shaft rather than a horizontal cave passage. They may or may not be associated with one of the above structural patterns.

Geographic distribution[edit]




Domica Cave in Slovak Karst (Slovakia)


Caves are found throughout the world, but only a small portion of them have been explored and documented by cavers. The distribution of documented cave systems is widely skewed toward countries where caving has been popular for many years (such as France, Italy, Australia, the UK, the United States, etc.). As a result, explored caves are found widely in Europe, Asia, North America and Oceania, but are sparse in South America, Africa, and Antarctica.
This is a rough generalization, as large expanses of North America and Asia contain no documented caves, whereas areas such as the Madagascar dry deciduous forests and parts of Brazil contain many documented caves. As the world's expanses of soluble bedrock are researched by cavers, the distribution of documented caves is likely to shift. For example, China, despite containing around half the world's exposed limestone—more than 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 sq mi)—has relatively few documented caves.
Records and superlatives[edit]

The cave system with the greatest total length of surveyed passage is Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, US, at 652 km (405 mi).[13]
The longest surveyed underwater cave, and second longest overall, is Sistema Sac Actun in Yucatán, Mexico at 335 km (208 mi).[13]
The deepest known cave — measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point — is Krubera Cave in Georgia, with a depth of 2,197 m (7,208 ft).[14] This was the first cave to be explored to a depth of more than 2 km (1.2 mi). (The first cave to be descended below 1 km (0.62 mi) was the famous Gouffre Berger in France.) The Sarma and Illyuzia-Mezhonnogo-Snezhnaya caves in Georgia, (1,830 m or 6,000 ft, and 1,753 m or 5,751 ft respectively) are the current second- and third-deepest caves.[14] The deepest outside Georgia is Lamprechtsofen Vogelschacht Weg Schacht in Austria, which is 1,623 m (5,325 ft) deep.[14]
The deepest vertical shaft in a cave is 603 m (1,978 ft) in Vrtoglavica Cave in Slovenia. The second deepest is Ghar-e-Ghala at 562 m (1,844 ft) in the Parau massif near Kermanshah in Iran.[15]
The deepest surveyed underwater cave at 404 metres (1,325 ft) is the Hranice Abyss in the Czech Republic.[16]
The largest known room is Sarawak Chamber, in the Gunung Mulu National Park (Miri, Sarawak, Borneo, Malaysia), a sloping, boulder strewn chamber with an area of approximately 700 by 400 m (2,297 by 1,312 ft) and a height of 80 m (260 ft). The nearby Clearwater Cave System is believed to be the world's largest cave by volume, with a calculated volume of 3,800,000 m3 (130,000,000 cu ft).[17] The largest room in a show cave is the salle de La Verna in the French Pyrenees.
The largest passage ever discovered is in the Son Doong Cave in Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park in Quảng Bình Province, Vietnam. It is 4.6 km (2.9 mi) in length, 80 m (260 ft) high and wide over most of its length, but over 140 m (460 ft) high and wide for part of its length.[18]

World's five longest surveyed caves[edit]
For more, see List of longest caves.

Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, US[13]
Sistema Sac Actun/Sistema Dos Ojos, Mexico[13]
Jewel Cave, South Dakota, US[13]
Sistema Ox Bel Ha, Mexico[13]
Optymistychna Cave, Ukraine[13]

Ecology[edit]
Main article: Biospeleology




Townsend's big-eared bats in a cave in California






Olms in a Slovenian cave


Cave-inhabiting animals are often categorized as troglobites (cave-limited species), troglophiles (species that can live their entire lives in caves, but also occur in other environments), trogloxenes (species that use caves, but cannot complete their life cycle fully in caves) and accidentals (animals not in one of the previous categories). Some authors use separate terminology for aquatic forms (for example, stygobites, stygophiles, and stygoxenes).
Of these animals, the troglobites are perhaps the most unusual organisms. Troglobitic species often show a number of characteristics, termed troglomorphic, associated with their adaptation to subterranean life. These characteristics may include a loss of pigment (often resulting in a pale or white coloration), a loss of eyes (or at least of optical functionality), an elongation of appendages, and an enhancement of other senses (such as the ability to sense vibrations in water). Aquatic troglobites (or stygobites), such as the endangered Alabama cave shrimp, live in bodies of water found in caves and get nutrients from detritus washed into their caves and from the feces of bats and other cave inhabitants. Other aquatic troglobites include cave fish, and cave salamanders such as the olm and the Texas blind salamander.
Cave insects such as Oligaphorura (formerly Archaphorura) schoetti are troglophiles, reaching 1.7 millimetres (0.067 in) in length. They have extensive distribution and have been studied fairly widely. Most specimens are female, but a male specimen was collected from St Cuthberts Swallet in 1969.
Bats, such as the gray bat and Mexican free-tailed bat, are trogloxenes and are often found in caves; they forage outside of the caves. Some species of cave crickets are classified as trogloxenes, because they roost in caves by day and forage above ground at night.
Because of the fragile nature of the cave ecosystem, and the fact that cave regions tend to be isolated from one another, caves harbor a number of endangered species, such as the Tooth cave spider, liphistius trapdoor spider, and the gray bat.
Caves are visited by many surface-living animals, including humans. These are usually relatively short-lived incursions, due to the lack of light and sustenance.
Cave entrances often have typical florae. For instance, in the eastern temperate United States, cave entrances are most frequently (and often densely) populated by the bulblet fern, Cystopteris bulbifera.
Archaeological and cultural importance[edit]




Taíno petroglyphs in a cave in Puerto Rico


Throughout history, primitive peoples have made use of caves. The earliest human fossils found in caves come from a series of caves near Krugersdorp and Mokopane in South Africa. The cave sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai B, Drimolen, Malapa, Cooper's D, Gladysvale, Gondolin and Makapansgat have yielded a range of early human species dating back to between three and one million years ago, including Australopithecus africanus, Australopithecus sediba and Paranthropus robustus. However, it is not generally thought that these early humans were living in the caves, but that they were brought into the caves by carnivores that had killed them.
The first early hominid ever found in Africa, the Taung Child in 1924, was also thought for many years to come from a cave, where it had been deposited after being predated on by an eagle. However, this is now debated (Hopley et al., 2013; Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.). Caves do form in the dolomite of the Ghaap Plateau, including the Early, Middle and Later Stone Age site of Wonderwerk Cave; however, the caves that form along the escarpment's edge, like that hypothesised for the Taung Child, are formed within a secondary limestone deposit called tufa. There is numerous evidence for other early human species inhabiting caves from at least one million years ago in different parts of the world, including Homo erectus in China at Zhoukoudian, Homo rhodesiensis in South Africa at the Cave of Hearths (Makapansgat), Homo neandertalensis and Homo heidelbergensis in Europe at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, Homo floresiensis in Indonesia, and the Denisovans in southern Siberia.
In southern Africa, early modern humans regularly used sea caves as shelter starting about 180,000 years ago when they learned to exploit the sea for the first time (Marean et al., 2007; Nature). The oldest known site is PP13B at Pinnacle Point. This may have allowed rapid expansion of humans out of Africa and colonization of areas of the world such as Australia by 60-50,000 years ago. Throughout southern Africa, Australia, and Europe, early modern humans used caves and rock shelters as sites for rock art, such as those at Giants Castle. Caves such as the yaodong in China were used for shelter; other caves were used for burials (such as rock-cut tombs), or as religious sites (such as Buddhist caves). Among the known sacred caves are China's Cave of a Thousand Buddhas[19] and the sacred caves of Crete.
See also[edit]


Cave conservancy
Cave gate
Cave waterfall
Caving organizations
Cenote
List of caves
Pit cave
Speleology
Speleothem
Subterranean river
Underground lake


References[edit]


^ Whitney, W. D. (1889). "Cave, n.1." def. 1. The Century dictionary: An encyclopedic lexicon of the English language (Vol. 1, p. 871). New York: The Century Co.
^ "Cave" Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM (v. 4.0) © Oxford University Press 2009
^ Moratto, Michael J. (2014). California Archaeology. Academic Press. p. 304. ISBN 9781483277356. 
^ Lowe, J. John; Walker, Michael J. C. (2014). Reconstructing Quaternary Environments. Routledge. pp. 141–42. ISBN 9781317753711. 
^ "Cavern Geology" (PDF). National Caves Association. Retrieved 29 June 2016. 
^ a b Laureano, Fernando V.; Karmann, Ivo; Granger, Darryl E.; Auler, Augusto S.; Almeida, Renato P.; Cruz, Franciso W.; Strícks, Nicolás M.; Novello, Valdir F. (2016-11-15). "Two million years of river and cave aggradation in NE Brazil: Implications for speleogenesis and landscape evolution". Geomorphology. 273: 63–77. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.08.009. 
^ authors И. Кудрявцева, Д. Люри. name Geography. publishing house Аванта+. year 1994. volume 3. page 472. ISBN 5-86529-015-0
^ Комиссия спелеологии и карстоведения. Д. А. Тимофеев, В. Н. Дублянский, Т. З. Кикнадзе. Терминология карста. Базис карстования D.A. Timofeev, V.N. Dublyansky, T.Z. Kiknadze, 1991, Karst Terminology, The Commission Speleology and Karst, Moscow Center of the Russian Geographical Society
^ "How Caves Form". Nova (TV series). Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Silvestru, Emil (2008). The Cave Book. New Leaf. p. 38. ISBN 9780890514962. 
^ John Burcham. "Learning about caves; how caves are formed". Journey into amazing caves. Project Underground. Archived from the original on May 3, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2009. 
^ a b c d e Easterbrook, Don, 1999, Surface Processes and Landforms [2nd edition], New Jersey, Prentice Hall, p. 207
^ a b c d e f g World’s Longest Caves List from The National Speleological Society
^ a b c World's Deepest Caves List from The National Speleological Society
^ Brocklebank, Tony. "Iranian cavers discover one of the world's deepest shafts". Darkness Below UK. Retrieved 1 January 2017. 
^ "Exclusive: Deepest Underwater Cave Discovered". 
^ "Is the Clearwater System the biggest of them all?". The Mulu Caves Project. Retrieved 19 November 2016. 
^ Owen, James (2009-07-04). "World's Biggest Cave Found in Vietnam". National Geographic News. National Geographic Society. Retrieved 2009-07-29. 
^ Olsen, Brad (2004). Sacred Places Around the World: 108 Destinations. CCC Publishing. p. 16. ISBN 9781888729160. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Caves.





Wikivoyage has travel information for Caves.





Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Cave.








v
t
e


Cave topics and lists by country




Glossary of caving and speleology



Main topics



Cave conservation
Cave painting
Cave survey
Caving
Caving equipment
Karst
Speleogenesis
Speleology
List
Caves by country





Types and formation
processes



Anchihaline cave
Cave-in
Cenote
Foiba
Glacier cave
Ice cave
Karst spring
Lava cave
Ley tunnel
Mine

Exploration


Pit cave
Ponor
Sea cave
Show cave
Sinkhole
Spring
Subterranean river
Suffosion
Sump
Underground lake





Speleothems
and Speleogens
(Cave formations)



Anthodite
Boxwork
Calcite rafts
Cave pearl
Cave popcorn
Dogtooth spar
Flowstone
Frostwork
Helictite
Moonmilk
Rimstone
Shelfstone
Snottite
Soda straw
Speleoseismite
Stalactite
Stalagmite
Vug








Lists of caves
By country
By depth
By length
Prehistoric







Africa



Somaliland
South Africa





Americas



Belize
Brazil
Canada
Guatemala
Haiti
Mexico
United States

Arkansas
Maryland







Asia



China
India
Iran
Israel
Lebanon
Malaysia
Sri Lanka
Turkey
Vietnam





Europe



Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
France
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Poland
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain

Cantabria
World Heritage Sites:

Cave Art of Northern Spain
Cave Art of Iberian Mediterranean Basin
Cave Art of the Iberian Southern Tip




Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom

England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales







Oceania



Australia

New South Wales
Western Australia


New Zealand
Papua New Guinea








Cave dwellings



Cave dweller
Kome Caves
Nok and Mamproug Cave Dwellings
Yaodong









Authority control



GND: 4025362-4
NDL: 00561642











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cave&oldid=817355188"					Categories: CavesCoastal geographyErosion landformsFluvial landformsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers