
CBC News





Type

Department of the CBC


Industry
Media


Founded
January 1, 1941


Headquarters
Canadian Broadcasting Centre
Toronto, Ontario, Canada



Area served

Specific services for Canada and rest of world


Services
Radio and television broadcasts


Owner
CBC


Website
cbc.ca/news/


CBC News is the division of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation responsible for the news gathering and production of news programs on the corporation's English-language operations, namely CBC Television, CBC Radio, CBC News Network, and CBC.ca. Founded in 1941, CBC News is the largest news broadcaster in Canada and has local, regional and national broadcasts and stations.
It works closely with, but is separate from, Radio-Canada Info, the news operations of the French-language Radio-Canada networks.



Contents


1 History
2 News output

2.1 Television

2.1.1 Local news


2.2 Radio
2.3 Online
2.4 Weather Centre


3 Programming

3.1 Television
3.2 Radio


4 CBC News standards
5 Allegations of bias
6 Ombudsman
7 CBC News bureaux

7.1 International


8 CBC News in other countries
9 Foreign correspondents
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



History[edit]
The first CBC newscast was a bilingual radio report on 2 November 1936. The CBC News Service was inaugurated during World War II on 1 January 1941 when Dan McArthur, chief news editor, had Wells Ritchie prepare for the announcer Charles Jennings a national report at 8:00 pm. Readers who followed Jennings were Lorne Greene, Frank Herbert and Earl Cameron. CBC News Roundup (French counterpart: La revue de l'actualité) startet on 16 August 1943 at 7:45 pm,[1] being replaced by The World at Six on 31 October 1966.
On English-language television the first newscast, part of CBC Newsmagazine, was given on 8 September 1952 on CBLT (Toronto), the only English station then telecasting. Later that year CBC National News was introduced (anchors: Larry Henderson, Earl Cameron, Stanley Burke), then changing its name to The National in 1970.[2]
News output[edit]
Television[edit]
Main articles: CBC Television and CBC News Network
The Television News section of CBC News is responsible for the news programs on CBC Television and CBC News Network, including national news programs like The National, and news, business, weather and sports information for Air Canada's inflight entertainment.[3]
The distinctive music on all CBC television news programs was introduced in 2006. It was part of the extensive rebranding of all news programming under the CBC News title.
Local news[edit]
Main article: CBC Television local newscasts
Most local newscasts on CBC Television are currently branded as CBC News: [city/province name], such as CBC News: Toronto at Six.
Radio[edit]
Main article: CBC Radio
CBC Radio News produces on-the-hour updates for the CBC's national radio stations and provides content for regional updates. The majority of news and information is aired on CBC Radio One and Première Chaîne.
Online[edit]
CBC News Online is the CBC's CBC.ca news website. Launched in 1996, it was named one of the most popular news websites in Canada in 2012.[4] The website provides regional, national, and international news coverage, and arts and entertainment, and sport news. Many reports are accompanied by podcasting, audio and video from the CBC's television and radio news services.
Weather Centre[edit]
In November 2005, the CBC News Weather Centre was established to cover local and international weather, using in part data provided by Environment Canada. Claire Martin was hired to serve as the primary face of the Weather Centre.[5]
In April 2014, the national Weather Centre was effectively disbanded due to CBC budget cuts (Martin had left the CBC a few months prior); weather presenters at local CBC stations were retained but with the added responsibility of supplying reports for The National and CBC News Network.[6]
In November 2014, citing difficulties implementing this new system, CBC announced a one-year trial content sharing partnership with The Weather Network, the privately owned cable specialty channel, which went into effect on December 8. Under the partnership, in exchange for access to weather-related news coverage from the CBC, The Weather Network provides the national weather reports seen on The National and CBCNN daytime programming, as well as local forecasts for CBC Toronto's weekend newscasts.[6] Apart from Toronto, weather coverage during local newscasts was not affected, and CBC Vancouver meteorologist Johanna Wagstaffe continues to provide weather coverage for the Vancouver-based (primetime) editions of CBC News Now on CBCNN.
Most local CBC stations have retained their weather team to provide local weather information, including:

Johanna Wagstaffe - CBC Vancouver meteorologist
Ian Black - CBC Ottawa meteorologist
John Sauder - CBC Manitoba meteorologist
Kalin Mitchell - CBC Maritimes meteorologist
Colette Kennedy - CBC fill-in meteorologist
Farah Singh - CBC Saskatchewan weather specialist
Frank Cavallaro - CBC Montreal weather specialist
Tanara McLean - CBC Edmonton/Calgary weather specialist

The content partnership with the Weather Network has continued beyond the original one-year period, and has been expanded. The weather section of CBC.ca has been phased out in favour of forecasts from The Weather Network, and local CBC news headlines are displayed on the latter's website.[7]
Programming[edit]
Television[edit]
CBC News provides the following television programs.

The National, flagship news program
CBC News Now
The Fifth Estate, weekly news magazine
Doc Zone, flagship documentary series
The Passionate Eye, documentary series
Marketplace, consumer news magazine
The Exchange with Amanda Lang, business news program
Power & Politics, political news program
Mansbridge One on One
Local newscasts
CBC News Magazine (1952–81)
The Journal (1982–92)
Daybreak (CBC)

Radio[edit]
CBC News provides the following radio programs.

World Report, morning newscast
The World This Hour, late afternoon newscast
The World at Six, national dinner-hour newscast
The World This Weekend
The House, weekly national political affairs show
Local newscasts

CBC News standards[edit]
The CBC follows the Journalistic Standards and Practices which provides the policy framework within which CBC journalism seeks to meet the expectations and obligations it faces from the public.[8]
Allegations of bias[edit]
Several conservative outlets and politicians have accused the CBC of bias in its news coverage, including the National Post,[9] former prime minister Stephen Harper[10] and columnist Barbara Amiel.[11]
In 2009, CBC President Hubert Lacroix commissioned a study to determine whether its news was biased, and if so, to what extent. He said: "Our job — and we take it seriously — is to ensure that the information that we put out is fair and unbiased in everything that we do".[12] The study, the methodology of which was not specified, was due to report results in the fall of 2010.[12]
In April 2010, the Conservatives accused pollster Frank Graves of giving partisan advice to the Liberal Party of Canada, noting his donations to the party since 2003. Graves directed a number of public opinion research projects on behalf of the CBC as well as other media organizations, and also appeared on a number of CBC television programs relating to politics. An investigation conducted by the CBC ombudsman found no evidence to support these allegations, stating that personal donor history is not relevant to one's objectivity as a pollster.[13]
The CBC itself has denied all allegations of bias, saying that "It is the duty of CBC News to inform its viewers across the country about what is happening, without bias or prejudice, and without telling them what to think. We believe that it is our obligation to report fairly and truthfully."[14]
Ombudsman[edit]
The CBC sets out to maintain its accuracy, integrity and fairness in its journalism. As a Canadian institution and a press undertaking, CBC set out the Journalistic Standards and Practices and works in compliance with these principles. Balanced viewpoints must be presented through on-the-air discussions. As it is with other public and private journalistic undertakings, credibility in the eyes of the general population is seen as the corporation's most valuable asset. The CBC Ombudsman is completely independent of CBC program staff and management, reporting directly to the President of the CBC and, through the President, to the Corporation's board of directors.[15]
CBC News bureaux[edit]




CBC Ottawa Broadcast Centre in Ottawa






Maison de Radio-Canada in Montreal






Canadian Broadcasting Centre in Toronto


CBC has reporters stationed in the following cities. Main cities are listed with the notation (M).

Whitehorse, Yukon (M)
Victoria, British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia (M)
Kamloops, British Columbia
Kelowna, British Columbia
Yellowknife, Northwest Territories (M)
Calgary, Alberta (M)
Edmonton, Alberta (M)
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
Regina, Saskatchewan (M)
Winnipeg, Manitoba (M)
Thunder Bay, Ontario
Windsor, Ontario (M)
London, Ontario
Sudbury, Ontario
Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario
Hamilton, Ontario
Toronto, Ontario (M)
Ottawa, Ontario (M)
Montreal, Quebec (M)
Quebec City, Quebec (M)
Fredericton, New Brunswick (M)
Saint John, New Brunswick
Happy Valley-Goose Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador
Moncton, New Brunswick
Halifax, Nova Scotia (M)
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island (M)
Sydney, Nova Scotia
Corner Brook, Newfoundland and Labrador
Gander, Newfoundland and Labrador
St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador (M)
Iqaluit, Nunavut

International[edit]

London, United Kingdom (M)
Jerusalem, Israel (M)
Beijing, China (M)
Washington, D.C., United States (M)
New York City, United States (M)

CBC also uses satellite bureaus, with reporters who fly in when a story occurs outside the bureaus. In the late 1990s, the CBC and other media outlets cut back their overseas operations.
CBC News in other countries[edit]
From 1994 to 2000, the CBC, in a venture with Power Broadcasting (former owner of CKWS in Kingston), jointly owned two networks:

Newsworld International (NWI), an American cable channel that rebroadcast much of the programming of CBC Newsworld
Trio, an arts and entertainment channel

In 2000, CBC and Power Broadcasting sold these channels to Barry Diller's USA Networks. Diller's company was later acquired by Vivendi Universal, which in turn was partially acquired by NBC to form NBC Universal. NBC Universal still owns the Trio brand, which no longer has any association with the CBC (and, as of the end of 2005, became an Internet-only broadband channel). However, the CBC continued to program NWI, with much of its programming simulcast on the domestic Newsworld service.
In late 2004, as a result of a further change in NWI's ownership to the INdTV consortium (including Joel Hyatt and former Vice-President of the United States Al Gore), NWI ceased airing CBC programming on August 1, 2005, when it was renamed Current TV. It was sold to the Al Jazeera Media Network in 2013 and became Al Jazeera America.
On September 11, 2001, several American broadcasters without their own news operations, including C-SPAN, carried the CBC's coverage of the September 11, 2001 attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C.. In the days after September 11, C-SPAN carried CBC's nightly newscast, The National, anchored by Peter Mansbridge. The quality of this coverage was recognized specifically by the Canadian Journalism Foundation; editor-in-chief Tony Burman later accepted the Excellence in Journalism Award (2004) – for "rigorous professional practice, accuracy, originality and public accountability" – on behalf of the service.
C-SPAN has also carried CBC's coverage of major events affecting Canadians, including:

Canadian federal elections
Six days in September 2000 that marked the death and state funeral of Pierre Elliott Trudeau
The war in Iraq: The National aired on C-SPAN each night for about three weeks following the start of the war on Iraq
The power outage crisis in summer 2003
Key proceedings in Canadian Parliament
U.S. presidential elections: In 2004, C-SPAN picked up The National the day after the election for the view from Canadians. In 2008, C-SPAN carried the CBC's coverage of the election.
State visits and official visits of American presidents to Canada
Barack Obama inauguration in 2009.

With the launch of Sirius Canada in December 2005, some of the CBC's radio networks (including CBC Radio One, Radio Canada International, and Sirius-exclusives Radio Three and Bande à part channels) are available to Sirius subscribers in the United States.
Foreign correspondents[edit]

London - Nahlah Ayed/Margaret Evans
Jerusalem - Derek Stoffel/Saša Petricic
Beijing - Andrew Lee
Washington DC - Paul Hunter/Keith Boag/Meagan Fitzpatrick/Lyndsay Duncombe
New York - Steven D'Souza
Los Angeles - Kim Brunhuber

See also[edit]


Television in Canada portal



List of Canadian Broadcasting Corporation personalities
CNN

References[edit]



^ Annual Report of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 1944, p. 7, at Google Books
^ Colombo, John Robert: Colombo's Canadian references, p. 99, at Google Books
^ enRoute Guide (January 2007) Archived 2007-07-10 at the Wayback Machine.
^ [1] Archived February 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ http://www.channelcanada.com/canadian-channels/nets/cbc/cbc-news-announces-cbc-news-weather-centre
^ a b Houpt, Simon (2014-11-10). "Its outlook stormy, CBC turns to the Weather Network". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 2014-12-30. 
^ "CBC Weather - Toronto". CBC.ca. Retrieved March 13, 2016. Changes are coming to the weather pages you are visiting at CBCNews.ca. Starting soon, weather pages such as this will no longer be available. Instead, CBC News has partnered with The Weather Network to provide weather information on CBCNews.ca pages. Please visit your local news page to find your local news and weather. 
^ [2] Archived June 19, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "CBC: Not the public's broadcaster after all". National Post. December 11, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2017. 
^ Hopper, Tristan (September 23, 2015). "CBC tries to hide its happy face as Liberals and NDP vow to pump up funding for public broadcaster". National Post. Retrieved May 26, 2015. 
^ "Amiel: Why the CBC needs new blood - Macleans.ca". 2015-06-18. Retrieved 2016-08-30. 
^ a b "CBC to study whether its news is biased". Ottawa Sun. 
^ "Complaints about comments made by Frank Graves, President of EKOS Research, about a possible strategy for the Liberal Party" (PDF). CBC Office of the Ombudsman. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2010.  External link in |publisher= (help)
^ "Why is CBC so biased?". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017. 
^ "The Office of the Ombudsman". Cbc.ca. Retrieved 2012-04-29. 



External links[edit]

CBC News
CBC Annual Reports (1996-97 to present)







v
t
e


Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Television



English networks



CBC Television
CBC News Network
CBC North
documentary Channel





French networks



Ici ARTV
Ici Explora
Ici Radio-Canada Télé
Ici RDI
TV5 Québec Canada
TV5Monde
Unis





Defunct channels



CBC Parliamentary Television Network
Newsworld International
Trio





Proposed channels



CBC-2
Télé-2





Facilities




Master control



Toronto
Montreal





Regional



Ottawa
Vancouver








Brands and assets



Hockey Night in Canada






Site: CBC.ca










v
t
e


Television news in Canada



Broadcast news
divisions



CBC News

CBC Television
national/local


CTV News (CTV/CTV Two)
CityNews (City)
Global News (Global)
Le Téléjournal (Ici Radio-Canada Télé)
TVA Nouvelles (TVA)
Omni News (Omni Television)





Specialty
channels




National



English
ATN NDTV 24x7
ATN Times Now
Business News Network
CBC News Network
CPAC (English)
CTV News Channel
IDNR-TV
The Weather Network


French
Avis de Recherche
CPAC (French)
Ici RDI
Le Canal Nouvelles
MétéoMédia


Third language
5 Kanal
ATN DD News
Fairchild TV News (Fairchild TV)
Sky TG24
Zee 24 Taas





Regional



English
CP24 (GTA)
Global News: BC 1 (British Columbia)





Audio and/or
text only



AMI-audio
Canadian Press Cable Service
Canal M





Defunct



Argent
Bloomberg TV Canada
CBC Parliamentary Television Network
CHCH-DT1
CityNews Channel
ichannel
MSNBC Canada
Niagara News TV
Sun News Network


1 - Still on the air, but no longer carrying a dedicated news format.





Foreign



Aaj Tak (India)
ABP News (India)
Aksyon TV International (Philippines)
Al Arabiya (United Arab Emirates)
Al Jazeera English (Qatar)
ARY News (Pakistan)
BBC World News (UK)
CNN (USA)
CNN International (USA)
CNBC (USA)
CCTV News (China)
Deutsche Welle (Germany)
euronews (France)
France 24 (France)
India Today (India)
HLN (USA)
Fox News Channel (USA)
MSNBC (USA)
NASA TV (USA)
NTN 24 (Colombia)
Phoenix InfoNews Channel (Hong Kong)
Rai News24 (Italy)
RT (Russia)
SIC Notícias (Portugal)














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CBC_News&oldid=816371473"					Categories: 1941 establishments in CanadaCanadian podcastersCanadian news websitesCBC NewsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: external linksPages using deprecated image syntax