"CIA" redirects here. For other uses, see CIA (disambiguation).

Central Intelligence Agency


Seal of the Central Intelligence Agency




Flag of the Central Intelligence Agency



Intelligence agency overview


Formed
September 18, 1947; 70 years ago (1947-09-18)


Preceding Intelligence agency



Office of Strategic Services[1]





Headquarters
George Bush Center for Intelligence
Langley, Virginia, U.S.
38°57′07″N 77°08′46″W﻿ / ﻿38.95194°N 77.14611°W﻿ / 38.95194; -77.14611


Motto
"The Work of a Nation. The Center of Intelligence."
Unofficial motto: "And you shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32)[2]


Employees
21,575 (estimate)[3]


Annual budget
$15 billion (as of 2013[update])[3][4][5]


Intelligence agency executives



Mike Pompeo, Director
Gina Haspel, Deputy Director





Parent Intelligence agency
None (independent)


Website
cia.gov


The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is a civilian foreign intelligence service of the United States federal government, tasked with gathering, processing, and analyzing national security information from around the world, primarily through the use of human intelligence (HUMINT). As one of the principal members of the U.S. Intelligence Community (IC), the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence and is primarily focused on providing intelligence for the President and Cabinet.
Unlike the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which is a domestic security service, the CIA has no law enforcement function and is mainly focused on overseas intelligence gathering, with only limited domestic intelligence collection. Though it is not the only U.S. government agency specializing in HUMINT, the CIA serves as the national manager for coordination of HUMINT activities across the U.S. intelligence community. Moreover, the CIA is the only agency authorized by law to carry out and oversee covert action at the behest of the President.[6][7][8][9] It exerts foreign political influence through its tactical divisions, such as the Special Activities Division.[10]
Before the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, the CIA Director concurrently served as the head of the Intelligence Community; today, the CIA is organized under the Director of National Intelligence (DNI). Despite transferring some of its powers to the DNI, the CIA has grown in size as a result of the September 11 attacks. In 2013, The Washington Post reported that in fiscal year 2010, the CIA had the largest budget of all IC agencies, exceeding previous estimates.[3][11]
The CIA has increasingly expanded its role, including covert paramilitary operations.[3] One of its largest divisions, the Information Operations Center (IOC), has shifted focus from counter-terrorism to offensive cyber-operations.[12]



Contents


1 Purpose
2 Organizational structure

2.1 Executive Office
2.2 Directorate of Analysis
2.3 Directorate of Operations
2.4 Directorate of Science and Technology
2.5 Directorate of Support


3 Training
4 Budget
5 Employees

5.1 Polygraphing


6 Relationship with other intelligence agencies

6.1 U.S. agencies
6.2 Foreign intelligence services


7 History

7.1 Immediate predecessors
7.2 National Security Act
7.3 Intelligence vs. action
7.4 Korean War
7.5 1953 Iranian coup d'état
7.6 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
7.7 Syria
7.8 Indonesia
7.9 Congo
7.10 Gary Powers U-2 shootdown
7.11 Dominican Republic
7.12 Bay of Pigs
7.13 Early Cold War, 1953–1966
7.14 Indochina, Tibet and the Vietnam War (1954–1975)

7.14.1 Johnson


7.15 Nixon
7.16 Congressional Investigations
7.17 Chad
7.18 Afghanistan
7.19 Iran/Contra

7.19.1 Lebanon


7.20 Poland 1980–89
7.21 Operation Desert Storm
7.22 Fall of the USSR
7.23 President Clinton

7.23.1 Aldrich Ames


7.24 Osama Bin Laden

7.24.1 Al-Qaeda and the "Global War on Terrorism"
7.24.2 Use of vaccination programs


7.25 Failures in intelligence analysis
7.26 Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s
7.27 Iraq War
7.28 2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions
7.29 Operation Neptune Spear
7.30 Syrian Civil War
7.31 Reorganization
7.32 Drones


8 Open Source Intelligence
9 Outsourcing and privatization
10 Controversies

10.1 Domestic wiretapping
10.2 Extraordinary rendition
10.3 Security failures
10.4 Counterintelligence failures
10.5 Human rights concerns
10.6 External investigations and document releases
10.7 Influencing public opinion and law enforcement
10.8 Drug trafficking
10.9 Alleged lying to Congress

10.9.1 Covert programs hidden from Congress
10.9.2 Intelligence Committee investigation


10.10 Improper search of computers used by Senate investigators
10.11 Resignation of officials and agents who would not work for Donald Trump
10.12 WikiLeaks' disclosure of CIA's cyber tools


11 In fiction
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Purpose
When the CIA was created, its purpose was to create a clearinghouse for foreign policy intelligence and analysis. Today its primary purpose is to collect, analyze, evaluate, and disseminate foreign intelligence, and to perform covert actions.
According to its fiscal 2013 budget, the CIA has five priorities:[3]

Counterterrorism, the top priority
Nonproliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
Warning/informing American leaders of important overseas events.
Counterintelligence
Cyber intelligence.

Organizational structure




Mike Pompeo, the current director of the Central Intelligence Agency.






Chart showing the organization of the Central Intelligence Agency.


Main article: Organizational structure of the Central Intelligence Agency
The CIA has an executive office and five major directorates:

The Directorate of Digital Innovation
The Directorate of Analysis
The Directorate of Operations
The Directorate of Support
The Directorate of Science and Technology

Executive Office
The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (D/CIA) reports directly to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI); in practice, the CIA director interfaces with the DNI, Congress, and the White House, while the Deputy Director is the internal executive of the CIA.
The Executive Office also supports the U.S. military by providing it with information it gathers, receiving information from military intelligence organizations, and cooperates on field activities. The Executive Director is in charge of the day to day operation of the CIA. Each branch of the military service has its own Director.[13] The Associate Director of military affairs, a senior military officer, manages the relationship between the CIA and the Unified Combatant Commands, who produce and deliver to the CIA regional/operational intelligence and consume national intelligence produced by the CIA.[14][15]
Directorate of Analysis




Aerial view of the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters, Langley, Virginia.


The Directorate of Analysis, through much of its history known as the Directorate of Intelligence (DI), is tasked with helping "the President and other policymakers make informed decisions about our country’s national security" by looking "at all the available information on an issue and organiz[ing] it for policymakers".[16] The Directorate has four regional analytic groups, six groups for transnational issues, and three that focus on policy, collection, and staff support.[17] There is an office dedicated to Iraq; regional analytical offices covering the Near East and South Asia, Russia and Europe; and the Asian Pacific, Latin American, and African office.
Directorate of Operations
Main article: National Clandestine Service
The Directorate of Operations is responsible for collecting foreign intelligence (mainly from clandestine HUMINT sources), and for covert action. The name reflects its role as the coordinator of human intelligence activities between other elements of the wider U.S. intelligence community with their own HUMINT operations. This Directorate was created in an attempt to end years of rivalry over influence, philosophy and budget between the United States Department of Defense (DOD) and the CIA. In spite of this, the Department of Defense recently organized its own global clandestine intelligence service, the Defense Clandestine Service (DCS),[18] under the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA).
This Directorate is known to be organized by geographic regions and issues, but its precise organization is classified.[19]
Directorate of Science and Technology
Main article: Directorate of Science & Technology
The Directorate of Science & Technology was established to research, create, and manage technical collection disciplines and equipment. Many of its innovations were transferred to other intelligence organizations, or, as they became more overt, to the military services.
For example, the development of the U-2 high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft was done in cooperation with the United States Air Force. The U-2's original mission was clandestine imagery intelligence over denied areas such as the Soviet Union.[20] It was subsequently provided with signals intelligence and measurement and signature intelligence capabilities, and is now operated by the Air Force.
Imagery intelligence collected by the U-2 and reconnaissance satellites was analyzed by a DS&T organization called the National Photointerpretation Center (NPIC), which had analysts from both the CIA and the military services. Subsequently, NPIC was transferred to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).
Directorate of Support
Main article: Directorate of Support
The Directorate of Support has organizational and administrative functions to significant units including:

The Office of Security
The Office of Communications
The Office of Information Technology

Training
Further information: CIA University, Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis, Camp Peary, Harvey Point, and Warrenton Training Center
The CIA established its first training facility, the Office of Training and Education, in 1950. Following the end of the Cold War, the CIA's training budget was slashed, which had a negative effect on employee retention.[21][22] In response, Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet established CIA University in 2002.[21][16] CIA University holds between 200 and 300 courses each year, training both new hires and experienced intelligence officers, as well as CIA support staff.[21][22] The facility works in partnership with the National Intelligence University, and includes the Sherman Kent School for Intelligence Analysis, the Directorate of Analysis' component of the university.[16][23][24]
For later stage training of student operations officers, there is at least one classified training area at Camp Peary, near Williamsburg, Virginia. Students are selected, and their progress evaluated, in ways derived from the OSS, published as the book Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services.[25] Additional mission training is conducted at Harvey Point, North Carolina.[26]
The primary training facility for the Office of Communications is Warrenton Training Center, located near Warrenton, Virginia. The facility was established in 1951 and has been used by the CIA since at least 1955.[27][28]
Budget
Main article: United States intelligence budget
Details of the overall United States intelligence budget are classified.[3] Under the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, the Director of Central Intelligence is the only federal government employee who can spend "un-vouchered" government money.[29] The government showed its 1997 budget was 26.6 billion dollars for the fiscal year.[30] The government has disclosed a total figure for all non-military intelligence spending since 2007; the fiscal 2013 figure is $52.6 billion. According to the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures, the CIA's fiscal 2013 budget is $14.7 billion, 28% of the total and almost 50% more than the budget of the National Security Agency. CIA's HUMINT budget is $2.3 billion, the SIGINT budget is $1.7 billion, and spending for security and logistics of CIA missions is $2.5 billion. "Covert action programs", including a variety of activities such as the CIA's drone fleet and anti-Iranian nuclear program activities, accounts for $2.6 billion.[3]
There were numerous previous attempts to obtain general information about the budget.[31] As a result, it was revealed that CIA's annual budget in Fiscal Year 1963 was US $550 million (inflation-adjusted US$ 4.4 billion in 2018),[32] and the overall intelligence budget in FY 1997 was US $26.6 billion (inflation-adjusted US$ 40.6 billion in 2018).[33] There have been accidental disclosures; for instance, Mary Margaret Graham, a former CIA official and deputy director of national intelligence for collection in 2005, said that the annual intelligence budget was $44 billion,[34] and in 1994 Congress accidentally published a budget of $43.4 billion (in 2012 dollars) in 1994 for the non-military National Intelligence Program, including $4.8 billion for the CIA.[3] After the Marshall Plan was approved, appropriating $13.7 billion over five years, 5% of those funds or $685 million were made available to the CIA.[35]
Employees
Polygraphing
Robert Baer, a CNN analyst and former CIA operative, stated that normally a CIA employee undergoes a polygraph examination every three to four years.[36]
Relationship with other intelligence agencies


Part of a series on


Global surveillance





Disclosures




Origins
Pre-2013
2013–present
Reactions




Systems




XKeyscore
PRISM
ECHELON
Carnivore
DISHFIRE
STONEGHOST
Tempora
Frenchelon
Fairview
MYSTIC
DCSN
Boundless Informant
BULLRUN
PINWALE
Stingray
SORM




Agencies




Five Eyes
BND
DGSE
FSB
MSS




People




Michael S. Rogers
Keith Alexander
James Bamford
James Clapper
Duncan Campbell
Edward Snowden
Russ Tice
Barack Obama
Julian Assange




Places




The Doughnut
Fort Meade
Menwith Hill
Pine Gap
Southern Cross Cable
Utah Data Center
Bad Aibling Station
Dagger Complex




Laws




Five Eyes

UKUSA Agreement
Lustre


U.S.

USA Freedom Act
FISA amendments


EU

Data Retention Directive
Data Protection Directive






Proposed changes




U.S.

FISA Improvements Act
Other proposals






Concepts




Mass surveillance
Culture of fear
Secure communication
SIGINT
Call detail record
Surveillance issues in smart cities




Related topics




Espionage
Intelligence agency
Cryptography

Tor
VPNs


Human rights

Privacy
Liberty


Satellites
Stop Watching Us
Nothing to hide argument






 Mass surveillance portal







v
t
e





The CIA acts as the primary US HUMINT and general analytic agency, under the Director of National Intelligence, who directs or coordinates the 16 member organizations of the United States Intelligence Community. In addition, it obtains information from other U.S. government intelligence agencies, commercial information sources, and foreign intelligence services.[citation needed]
U.S. agencies
CIA employees form part of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) workforce, originally created as a joint office of the CIA and US Air Force to operate the spy satellites of the US military.
The Special Collections Service is a joint CIA and National Security Agency (NSA) office that conducts clandestine electronic surveillance in embassies and hostile territory throughout the world.
Foreign intelligence services
The role and functions of the CIA are roughly equivalent to those of the United Kingdom's Secret Intelligence Service (the SIS or MI6), the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (ASIS), the French foreign intelligence service Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure (DGSE), the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (Sluzhba Vneshney Razvedki, SVR), the Chinese Ministry of State Security (MSS), the Indian Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), the Egyptian General Intelligence Service, and Israel's Mossad. While the preceding agencies both collect and analyze information, some like the U.S. State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research are purely analytical agencies.[citation needed]
The closest links of the U.S. IC to other foreign intelligence agencies are to Anglophone countries: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. There is a special communications marking that signals that intelligence-related messages can be shared with these four countries.[37] An indication of the United States' close operational cooperation is the creation of a new message distribution label within the main U.S. military communications network. Previously, the marking of NOFORN (i.e., No Foreign Nationals) required the originator to specify which, if any, non-U.S. countries could receive the information. A new handling caveat, USA/AUS/CAN/GBR/NZL Five Eyes, used primarily on intelligence messages, gives an easier way to indicate that the material can be shared with Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, and New Zealand.
The task of the division called "Verbindungsstelle 61" of the German Bundesnachrichtendienst is keeping contact to the CIA office in Wiesbaden.[38] Ireland's Directorate of Military Intelligence liaises with the CIA, although it is not a member of the Five Eyes.[39]
History






This section should include only a brief summary of History of the Central Intelligence Agency. See Wikipedia:Summary style for information on how to properly incorporate it into this article's main text. (September 2017)







The 113 stars on the CIA Memorial Wall in the original CIA headquarters, each representing a CIA officer killed in action


Main article: History of the Central Intelligence Agency
The Central Intelligence Agency was created on July 26, 1947, when Harry S. Truman signed the National Security Act into law. A major impetus for the creation of the CIA was the unforeseen attack on Pearl Harbor. In addition, towards the end of World War II the U.S. government felt the need for a group to coordinate intelligence efforts.
Immediate predecessors
The success of the British Commandos during World War II prompted U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of an intelligence service modeled after the British Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), and Special Operations Executive. This led to the creation of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). On September 20, 1945, shortly after the end of World War II, Harry S. Truman signed an executive order dissolving the OSS, and by October 1945 its functions had been divided between the Departments of State and War. The division lasted only a few months. The first public mention of the "Central Intelligence Agency" appeared on a command-restructuring proposal presented by Jim Forrestal and Arthur Radford to the U.S. Senate Military Affairs Committee at the end of 1945.[40] Despite opposition from the military establishment, the United States Department of State and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),[41] Truman established the National Intelligence Authority[42] in January 1946, which was the direct predecessor of the CIA.[43] Its operational extension was known as the Central Intelligence Group (CIG)[44]
National Security Act
Lawrence Houston, head counsel of the SSU, CIG, and, later CIA, was principal draftsman of the National Security Act of 1947,[45][46] which dissolved the NIA and the CIG, and established both the National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.[44][47] In 1949 Houston helped to draft the Central Intelligence Agency Act (Public law 81-110), which authorized the agency to use confidential fiscal and administrative procedures, and exempted it from most limitations on the use of Federal funds. It also exempted the CIA from having to disclose its "organization, functions, officials, titles, salaries, or numbers of personnel employed." It created the program "PL-110" to handle defectors and other "essential aliens" who fell outside normal immigration procedures.[48][49]
Intelligence vs. action
At the outset of the Korean War the CIA still only had a few thousand employees, a thousand of whom worked in analysis. Intelligence primarily came from the Office of Reports and Estimates, which drew its reports from a daily take of State Department telegrams, military dispatches, and other public documents. The CIA still lacked its own intelligence gathering abilities.[50] On August 21, 1950, shortly after the invasion of South Korea, Truman announced Walter Bedell Smith as the new Director of the CIA to correct what was seen as a grave failure of Intelligence.[clarification needed][50]
The CIA had different demands placed on it by the different bodies overseeing it. Truman wanted a centralized group to organize the information that reached him,[51][52] the Department of Defense wanted military intelligence and covert action, and the State Department wanted to create global political change favorable to the US. Thus the two areas of responsibility for the CIA were covert action and covert intelligence. One of the main targets for intelligence gathering was the Soviet Union, which had also been a priority of the CIA's predecessors.[51][52][53]
United States Air Force general Hoyt Vandenberg, the CIG's second director, created the Office of Special Operations (OSO), as well as the Office of Reports and Estimates (ORE).[52] Initially the OSO was tasked with spying and subversion overseas with a budget of $15 million, the largesse of a small number of patrons in congress. Vandenberg's goals were much like the ones set out by his predecessor; finding out "everything about the Soviet forces in Eastern and Central Europe – their movements, their capabilities, and their intentions."[54]
On June 18, 1948, the National Security Council issued Directive 10/2[55] calling for covert action against the USSR,[56] and granting the authority to carry out covert operations against "hostile foreign states or groups" that could, if needed, be denied by the U.S. government. To this end, the Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) was created inside the new CIA. The OPC was quite unique; Frank Wisner, the head of the OPC, answered not to the CIA Director, but to the secretaries of defense, state, and the NSC, and the OPC's actions were a secret even from the head of the CIA. Most CIA stations had two station chiefs, one working for the OSO, and one working for the OPC.[57]
The early track record of the CIA was poor, with the agency unable to provide sufficient intelligence about the Soviet takeovers of Romania and Czechoslovakia, the Soviet blockade of Berlin, and the Soviet atomic bomb project. In particular, the agency failed to predict the Chinese entry into the Korean War with 300,000 troops.[58][59] The famous double agent Kim Philby was the British liaison to American Central Intelligence. Through him the CIA coordinated hundreds of airdrops inside the iron curtain, all compromised by Philby. Arlington Hall, the nerve center of CIA cryptanalysis, was compromised by Bill Weisband, a Russian translator and Soviet spy.[60]
However, the CIA was successful in influencing the 1948 Italian election in favor of the Christian Democrats.[61] The $200 million Exchange Stabilization Fund, earmarked for the reconstruction of Europe, was used to pay wealthy Americans of Italian heritage. Cash was then distributed to Catholic Action, the Vatican's political arm, and directly to Italian politicians. This tactic of using its large fund to purchase elections was frequently repeated in the subsequent years.[62]
Korean War
At the beginning of the Korean War, CIA officer Hans Tofte claimed to have turned a thousand North Korean expatriates into a guerrilla force tasked with infiltration, guerrilla warfare, and pilot rescue.[63] In 1952 the CIA sent 1,500 more expatriate agents north. Seoul station chief Albert Haney would openly celebrate the capabilities of those agents, and the information they sent.[63] In September 1952 Haney was replaced by John Limond Hart, a Europe veteran with a vivid memory for bitter experiences of misinformation.[63] Hart was suspicious of the parade of successes reported by Tofte and Haney and launched an investigation which determined that the entirety of the information supplied by the Korean sources was false or misleading.[64] After the war, internal reviews by the CIA would corroborate Hart's findings. The CIA's Seoul station had 200 officers, but not a single speaker of Korean.[64] Hart reported to Washington that Seoul station was hopeless, and could not be salvaged. Loftus Becker, Deputy Director of Intelligence, was sent personally to tell Hart that the CIA had to keep the station open to save face. Becker returned to Washington, pronounced the situation to be "hopeless", and that, after touring the CIA's Far East operations, the CIA's ability to gather intelligence in the far east was "almost negligible".[64] He then resigned. Air Force Colonel James Kallis stated that CIA director Allen Dulles continued to praise the CIA's Korean force, despite knowing that they were under enemy control.[65] When China entered the war in 1950, the CIA attempted a number of subversive operations in the country, all of which failed due to the presence of double agents. Millions of dollars were spent in these efforts.[66] These included a team of young CIA officers airdropped into to China who were ambushed, and CIA funds being used to set up a global heroin empire in Burma's Golden Triangle following a betrayal by another double agent.[66]
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Main article: 1953 Iranian coup d'état
In 1951, Mohammad Mosaddegh, a member of the National Front, was elected Iranian prime-minister.[67] As prime minister, he nationalized the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company which his predecessor had supported. The nationalization of the British-funded Iranian oil industry, including the largest oil refinery in the world, was disastrous for Mossadeq. A British naval embargo closed the British oil facilities, which Iran had no skilled workers to operate. In 1952 Mosaddegh resisted the royal refusal to approve his Minister of War, and resigned in protest. The National Front took to the streets in protest. Fearing a loss of control, the military pulled its troops back five days later, and the Shah gave in to Mosaddegh's demands. Mosaddegh quickly replaced military leaders loyal to the Shah with those loyal to him, giving him personal control over the military. Given six months of emergency powers, Mosaddegh unilaterally passed legislation. When that six months expired, his powers were extended for another year. In 1953 Mossadeq dismissed parliament and assumed dictatorial powers. This power grab triggered the Shah to exercise his constitutional right to dismiss Mosaddegh. Mosaddegh launched a military coup as the Shah fled the country. As was typical of CIA operations, CIA interventions were preceded by radio announcements on July 7, 1953, made by the CIA's intended victim by way of operational leaks.[68] On August 19, a CIA paid mob led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini would spark what a US embassy officer called "an almost spontaneous revolution"[69] but Mosaddegh was protected by his new inner military circle, and the CIA had been unable to gain influence within the Iranian military. Their chosen man, former general Fazlollah Zahedi, had no troops to call on.[68] General McClure, commander of the American military assistance advisory group, would get his second star buying the loyalty of the Iranian officers he was training. An attack on his house would force Mossadegh to flee. He surrendered the next day, and his coup came to an end.[70] The end result would be a 60/40 oil profit split in favor of Iran (possibly similar to agreements with Saudi Arabia and Venezuela).[67] [clarification needed]
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Main article: 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
The return of the Shah to power, and the impression, cultivated by Allen Dulles, that an effective CIA had been able to guide that nation to friendly and stable relations with the west triggered planning for Operation PBSUCCESS, a plan to overthrow Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz.[71] The plan was exposed in major newspapers before it happened after a CIA agent left plans for the coup in his Guatemala City hotel room.[72]
The Guatemalan Revolution of 1944–54 overthrew the U.S. backed dictator Jorge Ubico and brought a democratically elected government to power. The government began an ambitious agrarian reform program attempting to grant land to millions of landless peasants. This program threatened the land holdings of the United Fruit Company, who lobbied for a coup by portraying these reforms as communist.[73][74][75][76]
On June 18, 1954, Carlos Castillo Armas led 480 CIA-trained men across the border from Honduras into Guatemala. The weapons had also come from the CIA.[77] The CIA also mounted a psychological campaign to convince the Guatemalan people and government that Armas' victory was a fait accompli, the largest part of which was a radio broadcast entitled "The Voice of Liberation" which announced that Guatemalan exiles led by Castillo Armas were shortly about to liberate the country.[77] On June 25, a CIA plane bombed Guatemala City, destroying the government's main oil reserves. Árbenz ordered the army to distribute weapons to local peasants and workers.[78] The army refused, forcing Jacobo Árbenz's resignation on June 27, 1954. Árbenz handed over power to Colonel Carlos Enrique Diaz.[78] The CIA then orchestrated a series of power transfers that ended with the confirmation of Castillo Armas as president in July 1954.[78] Armas was the first in a series of military dictators that would rule the country, triggering the brutal Guatemalan Civil War in which some 200,000 people were killed, mostly by the U.S.-backed military.[73][79][80][81][82][83]
Syria
In 1949, Colonel Adib Shishakli rose to power in Syria in a CIA-backed coup. Four years later, he would be overthrown by the military, Ba'athists, and communists. The CIA and MI6 started funding right wing members of the military, but suffered a large setback in the aftermath of the Suez Crisis. CIA Agent Rocky Stone, who had played a minor role in the Iranian Revolution, was working at the Damascus embassy as a diplomat, but was actually the station chief. Syrian officers on the CIA dole quickly appeared on television stating that they had received money from "corrupt and sinister Americans" "in an attempt to overthrow the legitimate government of Syria."[84] Syrian forces surrounded the embassy and rousted Agent Stone, who confessed and subsequently made history as the first American diplomat expelled from an Arab nation. This strengthened ties between Syria and Egypt, helping establish the United Arab Republic, and poisoning the well for the US for the foreseeable future.[84]
Indonesia
The charismatic leader of Indonesia was President Sukarno. His declaration of neutrality in the Cold War put the suspicions of the CIA on him. After Sukarno hosted Bandung Conference, promoting the Non-Aligned Movement, the Eisenhower White House responded with NSC 5518 authorizing "all feasible covert means" to move Indonesia into the Western sphere.[85]
The US had no clear policy on Indonesia. Ike sent his special assistant for security operations, F. M. Dearborn Jr., to Jakarta. His report that there was great instability, and that the US lacked stable allies, reinforced the domino theory. Indonesia suffered from what he described as "subversion by democracy".[86] The CIA decided to attempt another military coup in Indonesia, where the Indonesian military was trained by the US, had a strong professional relationship with the US military, had a pro-American officer corps that strongly supported their government, and a strong belief in civilian control of the military, instilled partly by its close association with the US military.[87]
On September 25, 1957, Eisenhower ordered the CIA to start a revolution in Indonesia with the goal of regime change. Three days later, Blitz, a Soviet-controlled weekly in India,[88] reported that the US was plotting to overthrow Sukarno. The story was picked up by the media in Indonesia. One of the first parts of the operation was an 11,500 ton US navy ship landing at Sumatra, delivering weapons for as many as 8,000 potential revolutionaries.[89][not in citation given]
The CIA described Agent Al Pope's bombing and strafing of Indonesia in a CIA B-26 to the President as attacks by "dissident planes". Pope's B-26 was shot down over Ambon, Indonesia on May 18, 1958, and he bailed out. When he was captured, the Indonesian military found his personnel records, after action reports, and his membership card for the officer's club at Clark Field. On March 9, Foster Dulles, the Secretary of State, and brother of DCI Allen Dulles, made a public statement calling for a revolt against communist despotism under Sukarno. Three days later, the CIA reported to the White House that the Indonesian Army's actions against CIA-instigated revolution was suppressing communism.[90]
After Indonesia, Eisenhower displayed mistrust of both the CIA and its Director, Allen Dulles. Dulles too displayed mistrust of the CIA itself. Abbot Smith, a CIA analyst who later became chief of the Office of National Estimates, said, "We had constructed for ourselves a picture of the USSR, and whatever happened had to be made to fit into this picture. Intelligence estimators can hardly commit a more abominable sin." Something reflected in the intelligence failure in Indonesia. On December 16, Eisenhower received a report from his intelligence board of consultants that said the agency was "incapable of making objective appraisals of its own intelligence information as well as its own operations."[91]
Congo
In the election of Patrice Lumumba, and his acceptance of Soviet support the CIA saw another possible Cuba. This view swayed the White House. Ike ordered that Lumumba be "eliminated". The CIA delivered a quarter of a million dollars to Joseph Mobutu, their favored Congolese political figure. Mobutu delivered Lumumba to the Belgians, the former colonial masters of Congo, who executed him in short order.[92]
Gary Powers U-2 shootdown
Main article: 1960 U-2 incident




Suspended from the ceiling of the glass enclosed atrium: three models of the U-2, Lockheed A-12, and D-21 drone. These models are exact replicas at one-sixth scale of the real planes. All three had photographic capabilities. The U-2 was one of the first espionage planes developed by the CIA. The A-12 set unheralded flight records. The D-21 drone was one of the first unmanned aircraft ever built. Lockheed Martin Corporation donated all three models to the CIA.


After the Bomber Gap came the Missile Gap. Eisenhower wanted to use the U-2 to disprove the Missile Gap, but he had banned U-2 overflights of the USSR after meeting Secretary Khrushchev at Camp David. Another reason the President objected to the use of the U-2 was that, in the nuclear age, the intelligence he needed most was on their intentions, without which, the US would face a paralysis of intelligence. He was particularly worried that U-2 flights could be seen as preparations for first strike attacks. He had high hopes for an upcoming meeting with Khrushchev in Paris. Eisenhower finally gave into CIA pressure to authorize a 16-day window for flights, which was extended an additional six days because of poor weather. On May 1, 1960, the USSR shot down a U-2 flying over the Soviet territory. To Eisenhower, the ensuing coverup destroyed his perceived honesty, and his hope of leaving a legacy of thawing relations with Khrushchev. It would also mark the beginning of a long downward slide in the credibility of the Office of the President of the United States. Eisenhower later said that the U-2 coverup was the greatest regret of his Presidency.[93]:160
Dominican Republic
The human rights abuses of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo had a history of more than three decades, but in August 1960 the United States severed diplomatic relations. The CIA's Special group had decided to arm Dominicans in hopes of an assassination. The CIA had dispersed three rifles, and three .38 revolvers, but things paused as Kennedy assumed office. An order approved by Kennedy resulted in the dispersal of four machine guns. Trujillo died from gunshot wounds two weeks later. In the aftermath, Robert Kennedy wrote that the CIA had succeeded where it had failed many times in the past, but in the face of that success, it was caught flatfooted, having failed to plan what to do next.[94]
Bay of Pigs
Main article: Bay of Pigs invasion
The CIA welcomed Fidel Castro on his visit to DC, and gave him a face-to-face briefing. The CIA hoped that Castro would bring about a friendly democratic government, and planned to curry his favor with money and guns. On December 11, 1959, a memo reached the DCI's desk recommending Castro's "elimination". Dulles replaced the word "elimination" with "removal", and set the wheels in motion. By mid-August 1960, Dick Bissell would seek, with the blessing of the CIA, to hire the Mafia to assassinate Castro.[95]
The Bay of Pigs Invasion was a failed military invasion of Cuba undertaken by the CIA-sponsored paramilitary group Brigade 2506 on April 17, 1961. A counter-revolutionary military, trained and funded by the CIA, Brigade 2506 fronted the armed wing of the Democratic Revolutionary Front (DRF) and intended to overthrow the increasingly communist government of Fidel Castro. Launched from Guatemala, the invading force was defeated within three days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces, under the direct command of Prime Minister Fidel Castro. US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was concerned at the direction Castro's government was taking, and in March 1960, Eisenhower allocated $13.1 million to the CIA to plan Castro's overthrow. The CIA proceeded to organize the operation with the aid of various Cuban counter-revolutionary forces, training Brigade 2506 in Guatemala. Over 1,400 paramilitaries set out for Cuba by boat on April 13. Two days later on April 15, eight CIA-supplied B-26 bombers attacked Cuban air fields. On the night of April 16, the main invasion landed in the Bay of Pigs, but by April 20, the invaders finally surrendered. The failed invasion strengthened the position of Castro's leadership as well as his ties with the USSR. This led eventually to the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. The invasion was a major embarrassment for US foreign policy. US President John F. Kennedy ordered a number of internal investigations across Latin America.[citation needed]
The Taylor Board was commissioned to determine what went wrong in Cuba. The Board came to the same conclusion that the Jan '61 President's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities had concluded, and many other reviews prior, and to come, that Covert Action had to be completely isolated from intelligence and analysis. The Inspector General of the CIA investigated the Bay of Pigs. His conclusion was that there was a need to drastically improve the organization and management of the CIA. The Special Group (Later renamed the 303 committee) was convened in an oversight role.[citation needed]
Early Cold War, 1953–1966




Lockheed U-2 "Dragon Lady", the first generation of near-space reconnaissance aircraft






Early CORONA/KH-4B imagery IMINT satellite






The USAF's SR-71 Blackbird was developed from the CIA's A-12 OXCART.


The CIA was involved in anti-Communist activities in Burma, Guatemala, and Laos.[96] There have been suggestions that the Soviet attempt to put missiles into Cuba came, indirectly, when they realized how badly they had been compromised by a U.S.-UK defector in place, Oleg Penkovsky.[97] One of the biggest operations ever undertaken by the CIA was directed at Zaïre in support of general-turned-dictator Mobutu Sese Seko.[98]
Indochina, Tibet and the Vietnam War (1954–1975)
See also: CIA Tibetan program, Vietnam War, Phoenix Program, Operation Barrel Roll, and Laotian Civil War
The OSS Patti mission arrived in Vietnam near the end of World War II, and had significant interaction with the leaders of many Vietnamese factions, including Ho Chi Minh.[99]
The CIA Tibetan program consists of political plots, propaganda distribution, as well as paramilitary and intelligence gathering based on U.S. commitments made to the Dalai Lama in 1951 and 1956.[100]
During the period of U.S. combat involvement in the Vietnam War, there was considerable argument about progress among the Department of Defense under Robert McNamara, the CIA, and, to some extent, the intelligence staff of Military Assistance Command Vietnam.[101]
Sometime between 1959 and 1961 the CIA started Project Tiger, a program of dropping South Vietnamese agents into North Vietnam to gather intelligence. These were failures; the Deputy Chief for Project Tiger, Captain Do Van Tien, admitted that he was an agent for Hanoi.[102]
Johnson
In the face of the failure of Project Tiger, the Pentagon wanted CIA paramilitary forces to participate in their Op Plan 64A, this resulted in the CIA's foreign paramilitaries being put under the command of the DOD, a move seen as a slippery slope inside the CIA, a slide from covert action towards militarization.[103]
A CIA analyst's assessment of Vietnam was that the US was "becoming progressively divorced from reality... [and] proceeding with far more courage than wisdom".[104]
Nixon
In 1971, the NSA and CIA were engaged in domestic spying. The DOD was eavesdropping on Kissinger. The White House, and Camp David were wired for sound. Nixon and Kissinger were eavesdropping on their aides, as well as reporters. Famously, Nixon's Plumbers had in their number many former CIA agents, including Howard Hunt, Jim McCord, and Eugenio Martinez. On July 7, 1971, John Ehrlichman, Nixon's domestic policy chief, told DCI Cushman, Nixon's hatchet-man in the CIA, to let Cushman "know that [Hunt] was in fact doing some things for the President... you should consider he has pretty much carte blanche"[105] Importantly, this included a camera, disguises, a voice altering device, and ID papers furnished by the CIA, as well as the CIA's participation developing film from the burglary Hunt staged on the office of Pentagon Papers leaker Daniel Ellsberg's psychologist.[citation needed]
On June 17, Nixon's Plumbers were caught burglarizing the DNC offices in the Watergate. On June 23, DCI Helms was ordered by the White House to wave the FBI off using national security as a pretext. The new DCI, Walters, another Nixon hack, called the acting director of the FBI and told him to drop the investigation as ordered.[106] On June 26, Nixon's counsel John Dean ordered DCI Walters to pay the plumbers untraceable hush money. The CIA was the only part of the government that had the power to make off the book payments, but it could only be done on the orders of the CI, or, if he was out of the country, the DCI. The Acting Director of the FBI started breaking ranks. He demanded the CIA produce a signed document attesting to the national security threat of the investigation. Jim McCord's lawyer contacted the CIA informing them that McCord had been offered a Presidential pardon if he fingered the CIA, testifying that the break-in had been an operation of the CIA. Nixon had long been frustrated by what he saw as a liberal infection inside the CIA, and had been trying for years to tear the CIA out by its roots. McCord wrote "If [DCI] Helms goes (takes the fall) and the Watergate operation is laid at the CIA's feet, where it does not belong, every tree in the forest will fall. It will be a scorched desert."[107]
On November 13, after Nixon's landslide re-election, Nixon told Kissinger "[I intend] to ruin the Foreign Service. I mean ruin it – the old Foreign Service – and to build a new one." He had similar designs for the CIA, and intended to replace Helms with James Schlesinger.[107] Nixon had told Helms that he was on the way out, and promised that Helms could stay on until his 60th birthday, the mandatory retirement age. On February 2, Nixon broke that promise, carrying through with his intention to "remove the deadwood" from the CIA. "Get rid of the clowns" was his order to the incoming CI. Kissinger had been running the CIA since the beginning of Nixon's presidency, but Nixon impressed on Schlesinger that he must appear to congress to be in charge, averting their suspicion of Kissinger's involvement.[108] Nixon also hoped that Schlesinger could push through broader changes in the intelligence community that he had been working towards for years, the creation of a Director of National Intelligence, and spinning off the covert action part of the CIA into a separate organ. Before Helms would leave office, he would destroy every tape he had secretly made of meetings in his office, and many of the papers on Project MKUltra. In Schlesinger's 17-week tenure, he would fire more than 1,500 employees. As Watergate threw the spotlight on the CIA, Schlesinger, who had been kept in the dark about the CIA's involvement, decided he needed to know what skeletons were in the closet. He issued a memo to every CIA employee directing them to disclose to him any CIA activity they knew of past or present that could fall outside the scope of the CIA's charter.[citation needed]
This became the Family Jewels. It included information linking the CIA to the assassination of foreign leaders, the illegal surveillance of some 7,000 U.S. citizens involved in the antiwar movement (Operation CHAOS), the CIA had also experimented on U.S. and Canadian citizens without their knowledge, secretly giving them LSD (among other things) and observing the results.[109] This prompted Congress to create the Church Committee in the Senate, and the Pike Committee in the House. President Gerald Ford created the Rockefeller Commission,[109] and issued an executive order prohibiting the assassination of foreign leaders. DCI Colby leaked the papers to the press, later he stated that he believed that providing Congress with this information was the correct thing to do, and ultimately in the CIA's own interests.[110]
Congressional Investigations
Acting Attorney General Laurence Silberman learned of the existence of the Family Jewels, he issued a subpoena for them, prompting eight congressional investigations on the domestic spying activities of the CIA. Bill Colby's short tenure as DCI would end with the Halloween Massacre. His replacement was George H.W. Bush. At the time, the DOD had control of 80% of the intelligence budget.[111] Communication and coordination between the CIA and the DOD would suffer greatly under Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. The CIA's budget for hiring clandestine officers had been squeezed out by the paramilitary operations in south-east Asia, and hiring was further strained by the government's poor popularity. This left the Agency bloated with middle management, and anemic in younger officers. With employee training taking five years, the Agency's only hope would be on the trickle of new officers coming to fruition years in the future. The CIA would see another setback as communists would take Angola. William J. Casey, a member of Ford's Intelligence Advisory Board, would press Bush to allow a team from outside the CIA to produce Soviet military estimates as a "Team B". Bush gave the OK. The "B" team was composed of hawks. Their estimates were the highest that could be justified, and they painted a picture of a growing Soviet military when the Soviet military was actually shrinking. Many of their reports found their way to the press. As a result of the investigations, Congressional oversight of the CIA eventually evolved into a select intelligence committee in the House, and Senate supervising covert actions authorized by the President.[citation needed]
Chad
Chad's neighbor Libya was a major source of weaponry to communist rebel forces. The CIA seized the opportunity to arm and finance Chad's Prime Minister, Hissène Habré after he created a breakaway government in Western Sudan,[112] even giving him Stinger missiles.[113]
Afghanistan
See also: CIA activities in Afghanistan and Operation Cyclone
Further information: Allegations of CIA assistance to Osama bin Laden
In Afghanistan, the CIA funneled $40 billion worth of weapons,[114] which included over two thousand FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles,[115] to Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), which funneled them to almost 100,000 Afghan resistance fighters, notably the Mujahideen, and foreign "Afghan Arabs" from forty Muslim countries.[116][117]
Iran/Contra
Under President Jimmy Carter, the CIA was conducting covertly funded pro-American opposition against the Sandinista. In March 1981, Reagan told Congress that the CIA would protect El Salvador by preventing the shipment of Nicaraguan arms into the country to arm Communist rebels. This was a ruse. The CIA was actually arming and training Nicaraguans Contras in Honduras in hopes that they could depose the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.[118] Through William J. Casey's tenure as DCI little of what he said in the National Security Planning Group, or to President Reagan was supported by the intelligence branch of the CIA, so Casey formed the Central American Task Force, staffed with yes men from Covert Action.[118] On December 21, 1982, Congress passed a law restricting the CIA to its stated mission, restricting the flow of arms from Nicaragua to El Salvador, prohibiting the use of funds to oust the Sandinistas. Reagan testified before Congress, assuring them that the CIA was not trying to topple the Nicaraguan government.[citation needed]
Lebanon
The CIA's prime source in Lebanon was Bashir Gemayel, a member of the Christian Maronite sect. The CIA was blinded by the uprising against the Maronite minority. Israel invaded Lebanon, and, along with the CIA, propped up Gemayel. This got Gemayel's assurance that Americans would be protected in Lebanon. 13 days later he was assassinated. Imad Mughniyah, a Hezbollah assassin would target Americans in retaliation for the Israeli invasion, the Sabra and Shatila massacre, and the US Marines of the Multi-National Force for their role in opposing the PLO in Lebanon. On April 18, 1983, a 2,000 lb car bomb exploded in the lobby of the American embassy in Beirut, killing 63 people including 17 Americans, and 7 CIA officers, including Robert Ames, one of the CIA's best Middle East experts. America's fortunes in Lebanon would only suffer more as America's poorly-directed retaliation for the bombing was interpreted by many as support for the Christian Maronite minority. On October 23, 1983, two bombs (1983 Beirut Bombing) were set off in Beirut, including a 10 ton bomb at a US military barracks that killed 242 people. Both attacks are believed to have been planned by Iran by way of Mughniyah.[citation needed]
The Embassy bombing had taken the life of the CIA's Beirut Station Chief, Ken Haas. Bill Buckley was sent in to replace him. Eighteen days after the US Marines left Lebanon, Buckley was kidnapped. On March 7, 1984, Jeremy Levin, CNN Bureau Chief in Beirut was kidnapped. Twelve more Americans would be kidnapped in Beirut during the Reagan Administration. Manucher Ghorbanifar, a former Savak agent was an information seller, and the subject of a rare CIA burn notice for his track record of misinformation. He reached out to the Agency offering a back channel to Iran, suggesting a trade of missiles that would be lucrative to the intermediaries.[119]
Poland 1980–89
See also: Poland–United States relations
Unlike the Carter Administration, the Reagan Administration supported the Solidarity movement in Poland, and—based on CIA intelligence—waged a public relations campaign to deter what the Carter administration felt was "an imminent move by large Soviet military forces into Poland." Colonel Ryszard Kukliński, a senior officer on the Polish General Staff was secretly sending reports to the CIA.[120] The CIA transferred around $2 million yearly in cash to Solidarity, which suggests that $10 million total is a reasonable estimate for the five-year total. There were no direct links between the CIA and Solidarnosc, and all money was channeled through third parties.[121] CIA officers were barred from meeting Solidarity leaders, and the CIA's contacts with Solidarnosc activists were weaker than those of the AFL-CIO, which raised 300 thousand dollars from its members, which were used to provide material and cash directly to Soldarity, with no control of Solidarity's use of it. The U.S. Congress authorized the National Endowment for Democracy to promote democracy, and the NED allocated $10 million to Solidarity.[122] When the Polish government launched a crackdown of its own in December 1981, however, Solidarity was not alerted. Potential explanations for this vary; some believe that the CIA was caught off guard, while others suggest that American policy-makers viewed an internal crackdown as preferable to an "inevitable Soviet intervention."[123] CIA support for Solidarity included money, equipment and training, which was coordinated by Special Operations CIA division.[124] Henry Hyde, U.S. House intelligence committee member, stated that USA provided "supplies and technical assistance in terms of clandestine newspapers, broadcasting, propaganda, money, organizational help and advice".[125] Michael Reisman from Yale Law School named operations in Poland as one of the covert actions of CIA during Cold War.[126] Initial funds for covert actions by CIA were $2 million, but soon after authorization were increased and by 1985 CIA successfully infiltrated Poland[127] Rainer Thiel in Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980–1989 mentions how covert operations by CIA and spy games among others allowed USA to proceed with successful regime change.[128]
Operation Desert Storm
Main article: Gulf War
During the Iran-Iraq war, the CIA had backed both sides. The CIA had maintained a network of spies in Iran, but in 1989 a CIA mistake compromised every agent they had in there, and the CIA had no agents in Iraq. In the weeks before the Invasion of Kuwait the CIA downplayed the military buildup. During the war CIA estimates of Iraqi abilities and intentions flip-flopped and were rarely accurate. In one particular case, the DOD had asked the CIA to identify military targets to bomb. One target the CIA identified was an underground shelter. The CIA didn't know that it was a civilian bomb shelter. In a rare instance the CIA correctly determined that the coalition forces efforts were coming up short in their efforts to destroy SCUD missiles. Congress took away the CIA's role in interpreting spy-satellite photos, putting the CIA's satellite intelligence operations under the auspices of the military. The CIA created its office of military affairs, which operated as "second-echelon support for the pentagon... answering... questions from military men [like] 'how wide is this road?'"[129]
Fall of the USSR
Gorbachev's announcement of the unilateral reduction of 500,000 Soviet troops took the CIA by surprise. Moreover, Doug MacEachin, the CIA's Chief of Soviet analysis said that even if the CIA had told the President, the NSC, and Congress about the cuts beforehand, it would have been ignored. "We never would have been able to publish it."[130] All the CIA numbers on the USSR's economy were wrong. Too often the CIA relied on people inexperienced with that which they were supposed to be the expert on. Bob Gates had preceded Doug MacEachin as Chief of Soviet analysis, and he had never visited Russia. Few officers, even those stationed in country spoke the language of the people they were spying on. And the CIA had no capacity to send agents to respond to developing situations. The CIA analysis of Russia during the entire cold war was either driven by ideology, or by politics. William J. Crowe, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, noted that the CIA "talked about the Soviet Union as if they weren't reading the newspapers, much less developed clandestine intelligence."[131]
President Clinton
On January 25, 1993, Mir Qazi opened fire at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, killing two agents and wounding three others. On February 26, Al-Qaeda terrorists led by Ramzi Yousef bombed the parking garage below the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City, killing six people and injuring 1,402 others.
During the Bosnian War, the CIA ignored signs within and without of the Srebrenica massacre. Two weeks after news reports of the slaughter, the CIA sent a U-2 to photograph it; a week later the CIA completed its report on the matter. During Operation Allied Force, the CIA had incorrectly provided the coordinates of the Chinese Embassy as a Yugoslav military target resulting in its bombing.[citation needed]
In France, the CIA had orders for economic intelligence; a female CIA agent revealed her connections to the CIA to the French. Dick Holm, Paris Station Chief, was expelled.[citation needed] In Guatemala, the CIA produced the Murphy Memo, based on audio recordings made by bugs planted by Guatemalan intelligence in the bedroom of Ambassador Marilyn McAfee. In the recording, Ambassador McAfee verbally entreated "Murphy". The CIA circulated a memo in the highest Washington circles accusing Ambassador McAfee of having an extramarital lesbian affair with her secretary, Carol Murphy. There was no affair. Ambassador McAfee was calling to Murphy, her poodle.[132]
Harold James Nicholson would burn several serving officers and three years of trainees before he was caught spying for Russia. In 1997 the House would pen another report, which said that CIA officers know little about the language or politics of the people they spy on; the conclusion was that the CIA lacked the "depth, breadth, and expertise to monitor political, military, and economic developments worldwide."[133] Russ Travers said in the CIA in-house journal that in five years "intelligence failure is inevitable".[134] In 1997 the CIA's new director George Tenet would promise a new working agency by 2002. The CIA's surprise at India's detonation of an atom bomb was a failure at almost every level. After the 1998 embassy bombings by Al Qaeda, the CIA offered two targets to be hit in retaliation. One of them was the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory, where traces of chemical weapon precursors had been detected. In the aftermath it was concluded that "the decision to target al Shifa continues a tradition of operating on inadequate intelligence about Sudan." It triggered the CIA to make "substantial and sweeping changes" to prevent "a catastrophic systemic intelligence failure."[135] Between 1991 and 1998 the CIA lost 3,000 employees.[citation needed]
Aldrich Ames
See also: Aldrich Ames
Between 1985 and 1986 the CIA lost every spy it had in Eastern Europe. The details of the investigation into the cause were obscured from the new Director, and the investigation had little success, and has been widely criticized. In June 1987, Major Florentino Aspillaga Lombard, the chief of Cuban Intelligence in Czechoslovakia drove into Vienna, and walked into the American Embassy to defect. He revealed that every single Cuban spy on the CIA payroll was a double agent, pretending to work for the CIA, but secretly still being loyal to Castro. On February 21, 1994, FBI agents pulled Aldrich Ames out of his Jaguar.[136] In the investigation that ensued, the CIA discovered that many of the sources for its most important analyses of the USSR were based on Soviet disinformation fed to the CIA by controlled agents. On top of that, it was discovered that, in some cases, the CIA suspected at the time that the sources were compromised, but the information was sent up the chain as genuine.[137][138]
Osama Bin Laden
Agency files show that it is believed Osama Bin Laden was funding the Afghan rebels against the USSR in the 1980s.[139] In 1991, Bin Laden returned to his native Saudi Arabia protesting the presence of troops, and Operation Desert Storm. He was expelled from the country. In 1996 the CIA created a team to hunt Bin Laden. They were trading information with the Sudanese until, on the word of a source that would later be found to be a fabricator, the CIA closed its Sudan station later that year. In 1998 Bin Laden would declare war on America, and, on August 7, strike in Tanzania and Nairobi. On October 12, 2000, Al Qaeda bombed the USS Cole. In 1947 when the CIA was founded, there were 200 agents in the Clandestine Service. In 2001, of the 17,000 employees in the CIA, there were 1,000 in the Clandestine Service. Of that 1,000 few would accept hardship postings. In the first days of George W. Bush's presidency, Al Qaeda threats were ubiquitous in daily Presidential CIA briefings, but it may have become a case of the boy who cries wolf. The Agency's predictions were dire, but carried little weight, and the attentions of the President and his defense staff were elsewhere. The CIA arranged the arrests of suspected Al Qaeda members through cooperation with foreign agencies, but the CIA could not definitively say what effect these arrests had had, and it could not gain hard intelligence from those captured. The President had asked the CIA if Al Qaeda could plan attacks in the US. On August 6, Bush received a daily briefing with the headline, not based on current, solid intelligence, "Al Qaeda determined to strike inside the US." The US had been hunting Bin Laden since 1996 and had had several opportunities, but neither Clinton, nor Bush had wanted to risk their skin taking an active role in a murky assassination plot, and the perfect opportunity had never materialized for a trigger shy DCI that would have given him the reassurances he needed to take the plunge. That day, Richard A. Clarke sent National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice warning of the risks, and decrying the inaction of the CIA.[140]
Al-Qaeda and the "Global War on Terrorism"
Further information: CIA transnational anti-terrorism activities, Human rights violations by the CIA, and Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture




The CIA prepared a series of leaflets announcing bounties for those who turned in or denounced individual suspected of association with the Taliban or al Qaeda.


The CIA had long been dealing with terrorism originating from abroad, and in 1986 had set up a Counterterrorist Center to deal specifically with the problem. At first confronted with secular terrorism, the Agency found Islamist terrorism looming increasingly large on its scope.[citation needed]
In January 1996, the CIA created an experimental "virtual station," the Bin Laden Issue Station, under the Counterterrorist Center, to track Bin Laden's developing activities. Al-Fadl, who defected to the CIA in spring 1996, began to provide the Station with a new image of the Al Qaeda leader: he was not only a terrorist financier, but a terrorist organizer, too. FBI Special Agent Dan Coleman (who together with his partner Jack Cloonan had been "seconded" to the Bin Laden Station) called him Qaeda's "Rosetta Stone".[141]
In 1999, CIA chief George Tenet launched a grand "Plan" to deal with al-Qaeda. The Counterterrorist Center, its new chief Cofer Black and the center's Bin Laden unit were the Plan's developers and executors. Once it was prepared Tenet assigned CIA intelligence chief Charles E. Allen to set up a "Qaeda cell" to oversee its tactical execution.[142] In 2000, the CIA and USAF jointly ran a series of flights over Afghanistan with a small remote-controlled reconnaissance drone, the Predator; they obtained probable photos of Bin Laden. Cofer Black and others became advocates of arming the Predator with missiles to try to assassinate Bin Laden and other al-Qaeda leaders. After the Cabinet-level Principals Committee meeting on terrorism of September 4, 2001, the CIA resumed reconnaissance flights, the drones now being weapons-capable.[citation needed]

September 11 attacks and its aftermath





US Special Forces help Northern Alliance troops away from a CIA-operated MI-17 Hip helicopter at Bagram Airbase, 2002


On September 11, 2001, 19 Al-Qaeda members hijacked four passenger jets within the Northeastern United States in a series of coordinated terrorist attacks. Two planes crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, the third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, and the fourth inadvertently into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. The attacks cost the lives of 2,996 people (including the 19 hijackers), caused the destruction of the Twin Towers, and damaged the western side of the Pentagon. Soon after 9/11, The New York Times released a story stating that the CIA's New York field office was destroyed in the wake of the attacks. According to unnamed CIA sources, while first responders, military personnel and volunteers were conducting rescue efforts at the World Trade Center site, a special CIA team was searching the rubble for both digital and paper copies of classified documents. This was done according to well-rehearsed document recovery procedures put in place after the Iranian takeover of the United States Embassy in Tehran in 1979. While it was not confirmed whether the agency was able to retrieve the classified information, it is known that all agents present that day fled the building safely.[citation needed]
While the CIA insists that those who conducted the attacks on 9/11 were not aware that the agency was operating at 7 World Trade Center under the guise of another (unidentified) federal agency, this center was the headquarters for many notable criminal terrorism investigations. Though the New York field offices' main responsibilities were to monitor and recruit foreign officials stationed at the United Nations, the field office also handled the investigations of the August 1998 bombings of United States Embassies in East Africa and the October 2000 bombing of the USS Cole.[143] Despite the fact that the CIA's New York branch may have been damaged by the 9/11 attacks and they had to loan office space from the US Mission to the United Nations and other federal agencies, there was an upside for the CIA.[143] In the months immediately following 9/11, there was a huge increase in the number of applications for CIA positions. According to CIA representatives that spoke with The New York Times, pre-9/11 the agency received approximately 500 to 600 applications a week, in the months following 9/11 the agency received that number daily.[144]
The intelligence community as a whole, and especially the CIA, were involved in presidential planning immediately after the 9/11 attacks. In his address to the nation at 8:30pm on September 11, 2001, George W. Bush mentioned the intelligence community: "The search is underway for those who are behind these evil acts, I've directed the full resource of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and bring them to justice."[145]
The involvement of the CIA in the newly coined "War on Terror" was further increased on September 15, 2001. During a meeting at Camp David George W. Bush agreed to adopt a plan proposed by CIA director George Tenet. This plan consisted of conducting a covert war in which CIA paramilitary officers would cooperate with anti-Taliban guerillas inside Afghanistan. They would later be joined by small special operations forces teams which would call in precision airstrikes on Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters. This plan was codified on September 16, 2001 with Bush's signature of an official Memorandum of Notification that allowed the plan to proceed.[146]




Former CIA director Robert Gates meets with Russian Minister of Defense and ex-KGB officer Sergei Ivanov, 2007


On November 25–27, 2001, Taliban prisoners revolted at the Qala Jangi prison west of Mazar-e-Sharif. Though several days of struggle occurred between the Taliban prisoners and the Northern Alliance members present, the prisoners did gain the upper hand and obtain North Alliance weapons. At some point during this period Johnny "Mike" Spann, a CIA officer sent to question the prisoners, was beaten to death. He became the first American to die in combat in the war in Afghanistan.[146]
After 9/11, the CIA came under criticism for not having done enough to prevent the attacks. Tenet rejected the criticism, citing the Agency's planning efforts especially over the preceding two years. He also considered that the CIA's efforts had put the Agency in a position to respond rapidly and effectively to the attacks, both in the "Afghan sanctuary" and in "ninety-two countries around the world".[147][148] The new strategy was called the "Worldwide Attack Matrix".
Anwar al-Awlaki, a Yemeni-American U.S. citizen and al-Qaeda member, was killed on September 30, 2011, by an air attack carried out by the Joint Special Operations Command. After several days of surveillance of Awlaki by the Central Intelligence Agency, armed drones took off from a new, secret American base in the Arabian Peninsula, crossed into northern Yemen, and fired a number of Hellfire missiles at al-Awlaki's vehicle. Samir Khan, a Pakistani-American al-Qaeda member and editor of the jihadist Inspire magazine, also reportedly died in the attack. The combined CIA/JSOC drone strike was the first in Yemen since 2002 – there have been others by the military's Special Operations forces – and was part of an effort by the spy agency to duplicate in Yemen the covert war which has been running in Afghanistan and Pakistan.[149][150]
Use of vaccination programs
The agency attracted widespread criticism after it used a doctor in Pakistan to set up a vaccination program in Abbottabad in 2011 to obtain DNA samples from the occupants of a compound where it was suspected bin Laden was living.[151]
Failures in intelligence analysis
A major criticism is failure to forestall the September 11 attacks. The 9/11 Commission Report identifies failures in the IC as a whole. One problem, for example, was the FBI failing to "connect the dots" by sharing information among its decentralized field offices.
The report concluded that former DCI George Tenet failed to adequately prepare the agency to deal with the danger posed by al-Qaeda prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001.[152] The report was finished in June 2005 and was partially released to the public in an agreement with Congress, over the objections of current DCI General Michael Hayden. Hayden said its publication would "consume time and attention revisiting ground that is already well plowed."[153] Tenet disagreed with the report's conclusions, citing his planning efforts vis-à-vis al-Qaeda, particularly from 1999.[154]
Abuses of CIA authority, 1970s–1990s
Conditions worsened in the mid-1970s, around the time of Watergate. A dominant feature of political life during that period were the attempts of Congress to assert oversight of the U.S. Presidency and the executive branch of the U.S. government. Revelations about past CIA activities, such as assassinations and attempted assassinations of foreign leaders (most notably Fidel Castro and Rafael Trujillo) and illegal domestic spying on U.S. citizens, provided the opportunities to increase Congressional oversight of U.S. intelligence operations.[109] CIA involvement in Contra cocaine trafficking in Nicaragua[155][156] and complicity in the actions of the death squads in El Salvador and Honduras also came to light.[157][158]








Nixon Oval Office meeting with H.R. Haldeman "Smoking Gun" Conversation June 23, 1972. (Full transcript).


Hastening the CIA's fall from grace were the burglary of the Watergate headquarters of the Democratic Party by former CIA officers, and President Richard Nixon's subsequent attempt to use the CIA to impede the FBI's investigation of the burglary. In the famous "smoking gun" recording that led to President Nixon's resignation, Nixon ordered his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, to tell the CIA that further investigation of Watergate would "open the whole can of worms" about the Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba.[159] In this way Nixon and Haldemann ensured that the CIA's No. 1 and No. 2 ranking officials, Richard Helms and Vernon Walters, communicated to FBI Director L. Patrick Gray that the FBI should not follow the money trail from the burglars to the Committee to Re-elect the President, as it would uncover CIA informants in Mexico. The FBI initially agreed to this due to a long-standing agreement between the FBI and CIA not to uncover each other's sources of information, though within a couple of weeks the FBI demanded this request in writing, and when no such formal request came, the FBI resumed its investigation into the money trail. Nonetheless, when the smoking gun tapes were made public, damage to the public's perception of CIA's top officials, and thus to the CIA as a whole, could not be avoided.[160]




President Gerald Ford meets with CIA Director-designate George H. W. Bush, December 17, 1975


Repercussions from the Iran-Contra affair arms smuggling scandal included the creation of the Intelligence Authorization Act in 1991. It defined covert operations as secret missions in geopolitical areas where the U.S. is neither openly nor apparently engaged. This also required an authorizing chain of command, including an official, presidential finding report and the informing of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, which, in emergencies, requires only "timely notification."
Iraq War
Main article: CIA activities in Iraq
Further information: Plame affair
72 days after the 9/11 attacks President Bush told his Secretary of Defense to update the US plan for an invasion of Iraq, but not to tell anyone. SecDef Rumsfeld asked Bush if he could bring DCI Tenet into the loop, to which Bush agreed.[161]
Feelers the CIA had put out to Iraq in the form of eight of their best officers in Kurdish territory in Northern Iraq hit a goldmine, unprecedented in the famously closed, almost fascist Hussein government. By December 2002 the CIA had close to a dozen good networks in Iraq[161]:242 and would advance so far that they would penetrate Iraq's SSO, and even tap the encrypted communications of the Deputy Prime Minister, even the bodyguard of Hussein's son became an agent. As time passed, the CIA would become more and more frantic about the possibility of their networks being compromised, "rolled up". To the CIA, the Invasion had to occur before the end of February 2003 if their sources inside Hussein's government were to survive. The rollup would happen as predicted, 37 CIA sources recognized by their Thuraya satellite telephones provided for them by the CIA.[161]:337




Former CIA deputy director Michael Morell (left) apologized to Colin Powell for the CIA's erroneous assessments of Iraq's WMD programs.[162]


The case Colin Powell presented before the United Nations (purportedly proving an Iraqi WMD program) was wishful thinking. DDCI John E. McLaughlin was part of a long discussion in the CIA about equivocation. McLaughlin, who would make, among others, the "slam dunk" presentation to the President, "felt that they had to dare to be wrong to be clearer in their judgements".[161]:197 The Al Qaeda connection, for instance, was from a single source, extracted through torture, and was later denied. Curveball was a known liar, and the sole source for the mobile chemical weapons factories.[163] A postmortem of the intelligence failures in the lead up to Iraq led by former DDCI Richard Kerr would conclude that the CIA had been a casualty of the cold war, wiped out in a way "analogous to the effect of the meteor strikes on the dinosaurs."[164]
The opening days of the Invasion of Iraq would see successes and defeats for the CIA. With its Iraq networks compromised, and its strategic and tactical information shallow, and often wrong, the intelligence side of the invasion itself would be a black eye for the Agency. The CIA would see some success with its "Scorpion" paramilitary teams composed of CIA Special Activities Division agents, along with friendly Iraqi partisans. CIA SAD officers would also help the US 10th Special Forces.[161][165][166] The occupation of Iraq would be a low point in the history of the CIA. At the largest CIA station in the world agents would rotate through 1–3 month tours. In Iraq almost 500 transient agents would be trapped inside the Green Zone while Iraq Station Chiefs would rotate with only a little less frequency.[167]
2004, DNI takes over CIA top-level functions
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 created the office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who took over some of the government and intelligence community (IC)-wide functions that had previously been the CIA's. The DNI manages the United States Intelligence Community and in so doing it manages the intelligence cycle. Among the functions that moved to the DNI were the preparation of estimates reflecting the consolidated opinion of the 16 IC agencies, and preparation of briefings for the president. On July 30, 2008, President Bush issued Executive Order 13470[168] amending Executive Order 12333 to strengthen the role of the DNI.[169]
Previously, the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) oversaw the Intelligence Community, serving as the president's principal intelligence advisor, additionally serving as head of the CIA. The DCI's title now is "Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" (D/CIA), serving as head of the CIA.
Currently, the CIA reports to the Director of National Intelligence. Prior to the establishment of the DNI, the CIA reported to the President, with informational briefings to congressional committees. The National Security Advisor is a permanent member of the National Security Council, responsible for briefing the President with pertinent information collected by all U.S. intelligence agencies, including the National Security Agency, the Drug Enforcement Administration, etc. All 16 Intelligence Community agencies are under the authority of the Director of National Intelligence.
Operation Neptune Spear
See also: Death of Osama bin Laden
On May 1, 2011, President Barack Obama announced that Osama bin Laden was killed earlier that day by "a small team of Americans" operating in Abbottabad, Pakistan, during a CIA operation.[170][171] The raid was executed from a CIA forward base in Afghanistan by elements of the U.S. Navy's Naval Special Warfare Development Group and CIA paramilitary operatives.[172]
It resulted in the acquisition of extensive intelligence on the future attack plans of al-Qaeda.[173][174][175]
The operation was a result of years of intelligence work that included the CIA's capture and interrogation of Khalid Sheik Mohammad (KSM), which led to the identity of a courier of Bin Laden's,[176][177][178] the tracking of the courier to the compound by Special Activities Division paramilitary operatives and the establishing of a CIA safe house to provide critical tactical intelligence for the operation.[179][180][181]
Syrian Civil War
Main article: CIA activities in Syria
Under the aegis of operation Timber Sycamore and other clandestine activities, CIA operatives and U.S. special operations troops have trained and armed nearly 10,000 rebel fighters at a cost of $1 billion a year.[182] The CIA has been sending weapons to anti-government rebels in Syria since at least 2012.[183] These weapons have been reportedly falling into hands of extremists, such as al-Nusra Front and ISIL.[184][185][186] Around February 2017, the CIA was instructed to halt military aid to Syrian rebels (Free Syrian Army or FSA), which also included training, ammunition, guided missiles, and salaries. Sources state that the hold on aid was not related to the transitions from Obama's administration to Trump's, but rather due to issues faced by the FSA. Based on responses by rebel officials, they believe that the aid freeze is related to concerns that weapons and funds will fall into the hands of ISIL. Based on information obtained by Reuters, five FSA groups have confirmed that they received funding and military support from an source called "MOM operations room." Several countries besides the U.S. had also contributed to the funding of the FSA. These countries include Turkey, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia.[187] On April 6, 2017, Al-Jazeera reported that funding to the FSA was partially restored. Based on information provided by two FSA sources, the new military operation room will receive its funds from the coalition "Friends of Syria". The coalition consists of members from the U.S, Turkey, Western Europe, and Gulf states, which previously supported the military operation known as MOM.[188]
It was reported in July 2017 that President Donald Trump had ordered a "phasing out" of the CIA's support for anti-Assad rebels.[189]
Reorganization
On March 6, 2015, the office of the D/CIA issued an unclassified edition of a statement by the Director, titled "Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future", as a press release for public consumption. The press release announced sweeping plans for the reorganization and reform of the CIA, which the Director believes will bring the CIA more in line with the Agency doctrine called the 'Strategic Direction'. Among the principal changes disclosed include the establishment of a new directorate, the Directorate of Digital Innovation, which is responsible for designing and crafting the digital technology to be used by the Agency, to keep the CIA always ahead of its enemies. The Directorate of Digital Innovation will also train CIA staff in the use of this technology, to prepare the CIA for the future, and it will also use the technological revolution to deal with cyber-terrorism and other perceived threats. The new directorate will be the chief cyber-espionage arm of the Agency going forward.[190]
Other changes which were announced include the formation of a Talent Development Center of Excellence, the enhancement and expansion of the CIA University and the creation of the office of the Chancellor to head the CIA University in order to consolidate and unify recruitment and training efforts. The office of the Executive Director will be empowered and expanded and the secretarial offices serving the Executive Director will be streamlined. The restructuring of the entire Agency is to be revamped according to a new model whereby governance is modelled after the structure and hierarchy of corporations, said to increase the efficiency of workflow and to greatly enable the Executive Director to manage day-to-day activity. As well, another stated intention was to establish 'Mission Centers', each one to deal with a specific geographic region of the world, which will bring the full collaboration and joint efforts of the five Directorates together under one roof. While the Directorate heads will still retain ultimate authority over their respective Directorate, the Mission Centers will be led by an Assistant Director who will work with the capabilities and talents of all five Directorates on mission specific goals for the parts of the world which they are given responsibility for.[190]
The unclassified version of the document ends with the announcement that the National Clandestine Service (NCS) will be reverting to its original Directorate name, the Directorate of Operations. The Directorate of Intelligence is also being renamed, it will now be the Directorate of Analysis.[190]
Drones
A new policy introduced by President Barack Obama removed the authority of the CIA to launch drone attacks and allowed these attacks only under Department of Defense command. This change was reversed by President Donald Trump, who authorized CIA drone strikes on suspected terrorists.[191]
Open Source Intelligence
Further information: Foreign Broadcast Information Service and Open Source Center
Until the 2004 reorganization of the intelligence community, one of the "services of common concern" that the CIA provided was Open Source Intelligence from the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS).[192] FBIS, which had absorbed the Joint Publication Research Service, a military organization that translated documents,[193] moved into the National Open Source Enterprise under the Director of National Intelligence.
During the Reagan administration, Michael Sekora (assigned to the DIA), worked with agencies across the intelligence community, including the CIA, to develop and deploy a technology-based competitive strategy system called Project Socrates. Project Socrates was designed to utilize open source intelligence gathering almost exclusively. The technology-focused Socrates system supported such programs as the Strategic Defense Initiative in addition to private sector projects.[194][195]
As part of its mandate to gather intelligence, the CIA is looking increasingly online for information, and has become a major consumer of social media. "We're looking at YouTube, which carries some unique and honest-to-goodness intelligence," said Doug Naquin, director of the DNI Open Source Center (OSC) at CIA headquarters. "We're looking at chat rooms and things that didn't exist five years ago, and trying to stay ahead."[196] CIA launched a Twitter account in June 2014.[197]
Outsourcing and privatization
See also: Intelligence Outsourcing
Many of the duties and functions of Intelligence Community activities, not the CIA alone, are being outsourced and privatized. Mike McConnell, former Director of National Intelligence, was about to publicize an investigation report of outsourcing by U.S. intelligence agencies, as required by Congress.[198] However, this report was then classified.[199][200] Hillhouse speculates that this report includes requirements for the CIA to report:[199][201]

different standards for government employees and contractors;
contractors providing similar services to government workers;
analysis of costs of contractors vs. employees;
an assessment of the appropriateness of outsourced activities;
an estimate of the number of contracts and contractors;
comparison of compensation for contractors and government employees;
attrition analysis of government employees;
descriptions of positions to be converted back to the employee model;
an evaluation of accountability mechanisms;
an evaluation of procedures for "conducting oversight of contractors to ensure identification and prosecution of criminal violations, financial waste, fraud, or other abuses committed by contractors or contract personnel"; and
an "identification of best practices of accountability mechanisms within service contracts."

According to investigative journalist Tim Shorrock:

...what we have today with the intelligence business is something far more systemic: senior officials leaving their national security and counterterrorism jobs for positions where they are basically doing the same jobs they once held at the CIA, the NSA and other agencies — but for double or triple the salary, and for profit. It's a privatization of the highest order, in which our collective memory and experience in intelligence — our crown jewels of spying, so to speak — are owned by corporate America. Yet, there is essentially no government oversight of this private sector at the heart of our intelligence empire. And the lines between public and private have become so blurred as to be nonexistent.[202][203]

Congress had required an outsourcing report by March 30, 2008.[201]

The Director of National Intelligence has been granted the authority to increase the number of positions (FTEs) on elements in the Intelligence Community by up to 10% should there be a determination that activities performed by a contractor should be done by a U.S. government employee."[201]

Part of the contracting problem comes from Congressional restrictions on the number of employees in the IC. According to Hillhouse, this resulted in 70% of the de facto workforce of the CIA's National Clandestine Service being made up of contractors. "After years of contributing to the increasing reliance upon contractors, Congress is now providing a framework for the conversion of contractors into federal government employees—more or less."[201]
As with most government agencies, building equipment often is contracted. The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), responsible for the development and operation of airborne and spaceborne sensors, long was a joint operation of the CIA and the United States Department of Defense. NRO had been significantly involved in the design of such sensors, but the NRO, then under DCI authority, contracted more of the design that had been their tradition, and to a contractor without extensive reconnaissance experience, Boeing. The next-generation satellite Future Imagery Architecture project "how does heaven look", which missed objectives after $4 billion in cost overruns, was the result of this contract.[204][205]
Some of the cost problems associated with intelligence come from one agency, or even a group within an agency, not accepting the compartmented security practices for individual projects, requiring expensive duplication.[206]
Controversies
See also: 1953 Iranian coup d'état, 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, CIA activities in Indonesia, and Operation Condor




Supplemental material used in Maxwell Taylor's report on the Bay of Pigs invasion.


The CIA: a forgotten history, by William Blum[207] and Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA by Tim Weiner[208] have accused the CIA of various covert actions, and human rights abuses. The CIA has responded to the claims made in Weiner's book,[209] and Jeffrey T. Richelson of the National Security Archive has also been critical of it.[210] Intelligence expert David Wise faulted Weiner for portraying Allen Dulles as "a doddering old man" rather than the "shrewd professional spy" he knew and for refusing "to concede that the agency's leaders may have acted from patriotic motives or that the CIA ever did anything right," but concluded: "Legacy of Ashes succeeds as both journalism and history, and it is must reading for anyone interested in the CIA or American intelligence since World War II."[211] In 2017, the CIA faced heat over WikiLeaks. They released a statement saying they conduct missions to aggressively collect intelligence, but denied the authenticity of the Wikileaks documents.[212]
Domestic wiretapping
In 1969, at the height of the antiwar movement in the US, CIA Director Helms received a message from Henry Kissinger ordering him to spy on the leaders of the groups requesting a moratorium on Vietnam. "Since 1962, three successive presidents had ordered the director of central intelligence to spy on Americans".[213]
Extraordinary rendition
Further information: Extraordinary rendition, Black site, and Rendition aircraft




The US Senate Report on CIA Detention Interrogation Program that details the use of torture during CIA detention and interrogation.


Extraordinary rendition is the apprehension and extrajudicial transfer of a person from one country to another.[214]
The term "torture by proxy" is used by some critics to describe situations in which the CIA[215][216][217][218] and other US agencies have transferred suspected terrorists to countries known to employ torture, whether they meant to enable torture or not. It has been claimed, though, that torture has been employed with the knowledge or acquiescence of US agencies (a transfer of anyone to anywhere for the purpose of torture is a violation of US law), although Condoleezza Rice (then the United States Secretary of State) stated that:

the United States has not transported anyone, and will not transport anyone, to a country when we believe he will be tortured. Where appropriate, the United States seeks assurances that transferred persons will not be tortured.[219]

Whilst the Obama administration has tried to distance itself from some of the harshest counterterrorism techniques, it has also said that at least some forms of renditions will continue.[220] The administration continued to allow rendition only "to a country with jurisdiction over that individual (for prosecution of that individual)" when there is a diplomatic assurance "that they will not be treated inhumanely."[221][222]
The US program has also prompted several official investigations in Europe into alleged secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving Council of Europe member states. A June 2006 report from the Council of Europe estimated 100 people had been kidnapped by the CIA on EU territory (with the cooperation of Council of Europe members), and rendered to other countries, often after having transited through secret detention centres ("black sites") used by the CIA, some located in Europe. According to the separate European Parliament report of February 2007, the CIA has conducted 1,245 flights, many of them to destinations where suspects could face torture, in violation of article 3 of the United Nations Convention Against Torture.[223]
Following the 11 September 2001 attacks the United States, in particular the CIA, has been accused of rendering hundreds of people suspected by the government of being terrorists—or of aiding and abetting terrorist organisations—to third-party states such as Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, and Uzbekistan. Such "ghost detainees" are kept outside judicial oversight, often without ever entering US territory, and may or may not ultimately be devolved to the custody of the United States.[224][225]
On October 4, 2001, a secret arrangement was made in Brussels, by all members of NATO. Lord George Robertson, British defence secretary and later NATO's secretary-general, would later explain that NATO members agree to provide "blanket overflight clearances for the United States and other allies' aircraft for military flights related to operations against terrorism."[226]
Security failures




Critics assert that funding the Afghan mujahideen (Operation Cyclone) played a role in causing the September 11 attacks.


On December 30, 2009, a suicide attack occurred in the Forward Operating Base Chapman attack in the province of Khost, Afghanistan. Seven CIA officers, including the chief of the base, were killed and six others seriously wounded in the attack.[227]
Counterintelligence failures
Perhaps the most disruptive period involving counterintelligence was James Jesus Angleton's search for a mole,[228] based on the statements of a Soviet defector, Anatoliy Golitsyn. A second defector, Yuri Nosenko, challenged Golitsyn's claims, with the two calling one another Soviet double agents.[229] Many CIA officers fell under career-ending suspicion; the details of the relative truths and untruths from Nosenko and Golitsyn may never be released, or, in fact, may not be fully understood. The accusations also crossed the Atlantic to the British intelligence services, who also were damaged by molehunts.[230]
Edward Lee Howard, David Henry Barnett, both field operations officers sold secrets to Russia, and William Kampiles, a low-level worker in the CIA 24-hour Operations Center. Kampiles sold the Soviets the detailed operational manual for the KH-11 reconnaissance satellite.[231]
Human rights concerns
Main article: Human rights violations by the CIA
See also: Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA torture




Operation Condor participants. Green: active members. Blue: collaborator (USA).


The CIA has been called into question for, at times, using torture, funding and training of groups and organizations that would later participate in killing of civilians and other non-combatants and would try or succeed in overthrowing democratically elected governments, human experimentation, and targeted killings and assassinations. The CIA has also been accused of a lack of financial and whistleblower controls which has led to waste and fraud.[232]
The Institute on Medicine as a Profession and the non-profit organization Open Society Foundations reviewed public records into the medical professions alleging complicity in the abuse of prisoners suspected of terrorism who were held in U.S. custody during the years after 9/11."[233][234] The reports found that health professionals "Aided cruel and degrading interrogations; Helped devise and implement practices designed to maximize disorientation and anxiety so as to make detainees more malleable for interrogation; and Participated in the application of excruciatingly painful methods of force-feeding of mentally competent detainees carrying out hunger strikes" are not all that surprising.[233] Medical professionals were sometimes used at black sites to monitor detainee health.[235] Whether or not the physicians were compelled is an open question.
Other human rights issues that are controversial include the case of Edward Snowden.[236][237][238] However, the significance of human right does not fall into this case regarding whether Snowden received his fair trial or not. Rather, the human rights associated with the Snowden leaks are regarding the types of document Snowden released. Snowden released a significant amount of information on the U.S. government's surveillance program of its citizens[239][240][241][242] to The Washington Post as well as foreign news reporters.
 Particularly, "between on or about June 5, 2013, and June 9, 2013, classified information was published on the internet and in print by multiple newspapers, including The Washington Post and The Guardian. The articles and internet postings by The Washington Post and The Guardian included classified documents that were marked TOP SECRET. The Washington Post and The Guardian later revealed that SNOWDEN was the principal source for the classified information on or about June 9, 2013, in a videotaped interview with The Guardian, admitted that he was the person who illegally provided those documents to reporters. Evidence indicates that SNOWDEN had access to the classified documents in question; accessed those documents; and, subsequently, provided those documents to media outlets without authorization and in violation of U.S. law."[236]
Furthermore, the leaks included documents at many levels of the National Security Agency (NSA) electronic surveillance activities. "The Snowden leaks have generated broad public debate over issues of security, privacy, and legality inherent in the NSA's surveillance of communications by American citizens. The records include: White House and ODNI efforts to explain, justify, and defend the programs; Correspondence between outside critics and executive branch officials; Fact sheets and white papers distributed (and sometimes later withdrawn) by the government; Key laws and court decisions (both Supreme Court and Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court); Documents on the Total Information Awareness (later Terrorist Information Awareness, or TIA) program, an earlier proposal for massive data collection Manuals on how to exploit the Internet for intelligence."[243]
External investigations and document releases
Main article: Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA
Several investigations (e.g., the Church Committee, Rockefeller Commission, Pike Committee, etc.) have been conducted about the CIA, and many documents have been declassified.[244]
Influencing public opinion and law enforcement
See also: CIA influence on public opinion, CIA and the media, CIA in fiction, Robertson Panel, and Operation Mockingbird
The CIA sometimes finds itself in conflict with other parts of the government when there is disagreement over the legality of specific covert programs. There is always the risk that one part of the government may make the covert operations of another part of the government public.[245]
Drug trafficking
Main articles: CIA transnational anti-crime and anti-drug activities and Allegations of CIA drug trafficking
Two offices of CIA Directorate of Analysis have analytical responsibilities in this area. The Office of Transnational Issues[246] applies unique functional expertise to assess existing and emerging threats to U.S. national security and provides the most senior U.S. policymakers, military planners, and law enforcement with analysis, warning, and crisis support.
CIA Crime and Narcotics Center[247] researches information on international narcotics trafficking and organized crime for policymakers and the law enforcement community. Since CIA has no domestic police authority, it sends its analytic information to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and other law enforcement organizations, such as the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury (OFAC).
Another part of CIA, the Directorate of Operations, collects human intelligence (HUMINT) in these areas.
Research by Dr. Alfred W. McCoy, Gary Webb, and others has pointed to CIA involvement in narcotics trafficking across the globe, although the CIA officially denies such allegations.[248][243] During the Cold War, when numerous soldiers participated in transport of Southeast Asian heroin to the United States by the airline Air America,[citation needed] the CIA's role in such traffic was reportedly rationalized as "recapture" of related profits to prevent possible enemy control of such assets.
Alleged lying to Congress
Former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi has stated that the CIA repeatedly misled Congress since 2001 about waterboarding and other torture, though Pelosi admitted to being told about the programs.[249][250] Six members of Congress have claimed that Director of the CIA Leon Panetta admitted that over a period of several years since 2001 the CIA deceived Congress, including affirmatively lying to Congress.[251] Some congressmen believe that these "lies" to Congress are similar to CIA lies to Congress from earlier periods.[252]
Covert programs hidden from Congress
On July 10, 2009, House Intelligence subcommittee Chairwoman Representative Jan Schakowsky (D, IL) announced the termination of an unnamed CIA covert program described as "very serious" in nature which had been kept secret from Congress for eight years.[253]


It's not as if this was an oversight and over the years it just got buried. There was a decision under several directors of the CIA and administration not to tell the Congress.

Jan Schakowsky, Chairwoman, U.S. House of Representatives Intelligence Subcommittee
CIA Director Panetta had ordered an internal investigation to determine why Congress had not been informed about the covert program. Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee Representative Silvestre Reyes announced that he is considering an investigation into alleged CIA violations of the National Security Act, which requires with limited exception that Congress be informed of covert activities. Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee Chairwoman Schakowsky indicated that she would forward a request for congressional investigation to HPSCI Chairman Silvestre Reyes.


"Director Panetta did brief us two weeks ago—I believe it was on the 24th of June—... and, as had been reported, did tell us that he was told that the vice president had ordered that the program not be briefed to the Congress."

Dianne Feinstein, Chairwoman of the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
As mandated by Title 50 of the United States Code Chapter 15, Subchapter III, when it becomes necessary to limit access to covert operations findings that could affect vital interests of the U.S., as soon as possible the President must report at a minimum to the Gang of Eight (the leaders of each of the two parties from both the Senate and House of Representatives, and the chairs and ranking members of both the Senate Committee and House Committee for intelligence).[254] The House is expected to support the 2010 Intelligence Authorization Bill including a provision that would require the President to inform more than 40 members of Congress about covert operations. The Obama administration threatened to veto the final version of a bill that included such a provision.[255][256] On July 16, 2008, the fiscal 2009 Intelligence Authorization Bill was approved by House majority containing stipulations that 75% of money sought for covert actions would be held until all members of the House Intelligence panel were briefed on sensitive covert actions. Under the George W. Bush administration, senior advisers to the President issued a statement indicating that if a bill containing this provision reached the President, they would recommend that he veto the bill.[257]
The program was rumored vis-à-vis leaks made by anonymous government officials on July 23, to be an assassinations program,[258][259] but this remains unconfirmed. "The whole committee was stunned....I think this is as serious as it gets," stated Anna Eshoo, Chairman, Subcommittee on Intelligence Community Management, U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI).
Allegations by Director Panetta indicate that details of a secret counterterrorism program were withheld from Congress under orders from former U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney. This prompted Senator Feinstein and Senator Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee to insist that no one should go outside the law.[260] "The agency hasn't discussed publicly the nature of the effort, which remains classified," said agency spokesman Paul Gimigliano.[261]
The Wall Street Journal reported, citing former intelligence officials familiar with the matter, that the program was an attempt to carry out a 2001 presidential authorization to capture or kill al-Qaeda operatives.[262]
Intelligence Committee investigation
On July 17, 2009, the House Intelligence Committee said it was launching a formal investigation into the secret program.[263] Representative Silvestre Reyes announced the probe will look into "whether there was any past decision or direction to withhold information from the committee".


"Is giving your kid a test in school an inhibition on his free learning?" Holt said. "Sure, there are some people who are happy to let intelligence agencies go about their business unexamined. But I think most people when they think about it will say that you will get better intelligence if the intelligence agencies don't operate in an unexamined fashion."

Rush Holt, Chairman, House Select Intelligence Oversight Panel, Committee on Appropriations[264]
Congresswoman Jan Schakowsky (D, IL), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, who called for the investigation, stated that the investigation was intended to address CIA failures to inform Congress fully or accurately about four issues: C.I.A. involvement in the downing of a missionary plane mistaken for a narcotics flight in Peru in 2001, and two "matters that remain classified", as well as the rumored-assassinations question. In addition, the inquiry is likely to look at the Bush administration's program of eavesdropping without warrants and its detention and interrogation program.[265] U.S. Intelligence Chief Dennis Blair testified before the House Intelligence Committee on February 3, 2010, that the U.S. intelligence community is prepared to kill U.S. citizens if they threaten other Americans or the United States.[266] The American Civil Liberties Union has said this policy is "particularly troubling" because U.S. citizens "retain their constitutional right to due process even when abroad." The ACLU also "expressed serious concern about the lack of public information about the policy and the potential for abuse of unchecked executive power."[267]
Improper search of computers used by Senate investigators
In July 2014 CIA Director John O. Brennan had to apologize to lawmakers because five CIA employees (two lawyers and three computer specialists) had surreptitiously searched Senate Intelligence Committee files and reviewed some committee staff members' e-mail on computers that were supposed to be exclusively for congressional investigators. Brennan ordered the creation of an internal personnel board, led by former senator Evan Bayh, to review the agency employees' conduct and determine "potential disciplinary measures."[268] However, according to some reports, Brennan didn't apologize for spying or doing anything wrong at all, even though his agency had been improperly accessing computers of the Senate Select Intelligence Committee (SSCI) and then, in the words of investigative reporter Dan Froomkin, "speaking a lie". This accusation was based on the CIA Director's earlier denials of Senator Dianne Feinstein's claims that the surreptitious CIA search of the SSCI computers occurred, was inappropriate, or "violated the separation of powers principles embodied in the United States Constitution, including the Speech and Debate clause" or other laws.[269][270][271]
Resignation of officials and agents who would not work for Donald Trump
In February 2017, reports emerged that key experts within the CIA were resigning because they would not work for U.S. President Donald Trump.[272] The Middle East Eye reported that two agents, Americans, who operated spy-rings within ISIS had resigned, because they did not want to see the contacts who worked for them sacrificed due to incompetence and anti-Muslim prejudice from within Trump's inner circle. Edward Price, a CIA official since 2006, stirred controversy when he published an op-ed in The Washington Post, explaining why he surprised himself by resigning, after he perceived Trump using his visit to CIA HQ for partisan political posturing.[273][274][275][276][277][278][279]
WikiLeaks' disclosure of CIA's cyber tools
Main article: Vault 7
In March 2017, WikiLeaks has published more than 8,000 documents on the CIA. The confidential documents, codenamed Vault 7, dated from 2013–2016, included details on the CIA's software capabilities, such as the ability to compromise cars, smart TVs,[280] web browsers (including Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Firefox, and Opera),[281][282][283] and the operating systems of most smartphones (including Apple's iOS and Google's Android), as well as other operating systems such as Microsoft Windows, macOS, and Linux.[284] WikiLeaks did not name the source, but said that the files had "circulated among former U.S. government hackers and contractors in an unauthorized manner, one of whom has provided WikiLeaks with portions of the archive."[280]
In a 2017 speech addressing CSIS, CIA Director Mike Pompeo referred to Wikileaks as "a non-state hostile intelligence service often abetted by state actors like Russia". He also said: "To give them the space to crush us with misappropriated secrets is a perversion of what our great Constitution stands for. It ends now."[285]
In fiction
Main article: CIA in fiction
Fictional depictions of the CIA exist in many books, films and video games. Some fiction draws, at least in parts, on actual historical events, while other works are entirely fictional. The television series Chuck (2007), was based solely on a man who accidentally sees secret CIA encryptions and eventually becomes an asset/liabilty, and later on an agent in the agency. Films include Charlie Wilson's War (2007), based on the story of U.S. Congressman Charlie Wilson and CIA operative Gust Avrakotos, who supported the Afghan mujahideen, and The Good Shepherd (2006), a fictional spy film produced and directed by Robert De Niro based loosely on the development of counter-intelligence in the CIA. The fictional character Jack Ryan in Tom Clancy's books is a CIA analyst.[286] Graham Greene's The Quiet American is about a CIA agent operating in Southeast Asia.[287] Fictional depictions of the CIA are also used in video games, such as Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 and Call of Duty: Black Ops.
See also


Government of the United States portal
Intelligence portal




Abu Omar case
Blue sky memo
CIA's relationship with the United States Military
Classified information in the United States
Freedom of Information Act (United States)
George Bush Center for Intelligence
History of the Central Intelligence Agency
Intellipedia
Kryptos
National Intelligence Board
Operation Peter Pan
Project MKUltra
Reagan Doctrine
Office of Strategic Services
Title 32 of the Code of Federal Regulations
U.S. Army and CIA interrogation manuals
United States and state-sponsored terrorism
United States Department of Homeland Security
United States Intelligence Community
The World Factbook, published by the CIA


Notes


^ "History of the CIA". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved March 28, 2014. 
^ "CIA Observes 50th Anniversary of Original Headquarters Building Cornerstone Laying". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved September 18, 2012. 
^ a b c d e f g h Gellman, Barton; Miller, Greg (August 29, 2013). "U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in 'black budget' summary". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2013. 
^ Kopel, Dave (July 28, 1997). "CIA Budget: An Unnecessary Secret". Cato Institute. Retrieved April 15, 2007. 
^ "Cloak Over the CIA Budget". The Washington Post. November 29, 1999. Retrieved July 4, 2008 – via Federation of American Scientists. 
^ Aftergood, Steven (October 6, 2011). "Secrecy News: Reducing Overclassification Through Accountability". Federation of American Scientists. Retrieved February 3, 2012. 
^ Woodward, Bob (November 18, 2001). "Secret CIA Units Playing Central Combat Role". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 26, 2012. 
^ "World Leaders - Paraguay". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ Eimer, Charlotte (September 28, 2005). "Spotlight on US troops in Paraguay". BBC News Online. Retrieved April 18, 2011. 
^ Phillips, Tom (October 23, 2006). "Paraguay in a spin about Bush's alleged 100,000 acre hideaway". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 18, 2011. 
^ Commission on the Roles and Capabilities of the United States Intelligence Community (March 1, 1996). "Preparing for the 21st Century: An Appraisal of U.S. Intelligence. Chapter 13 – The Cost of Intelligence". 
^ Gellman, Barton; Nakashima, Ellen (September 3, 2013). "U.S. spy agencies mounted 231 offensive cyber-operations in 2011, documents show". The Washington Post. 
^ "Leadership". Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ "CIA Support to the US Military During the Persian Gulf War". Central Intelligence Agency. June 16, 1997. 
^ "Organization chart". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on March 14, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. 
^ a b c "Offices of CIA – Intelligence & Analysis – History". CIA. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013. 
^ "Intelligence & Analysis". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved July 1, 2011. 
^ Miller, Greg (December 1, 2012). "DIA to send hundreds more spies overseas". The Washington Post. 
^ Blanton, Thomas S.; Evans, Michael L.; Martin, Kate (July 17, 2000). "Defense HUMINT Service Organizational Chart". The "Death Squad Protection" Act: Senate Measure Would Restrict Public Access to Crucial Human Rights Information Under the Freedom of Information Act. George Washington University National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 34. 
^ Pocock, Chris. 50 Years of the U-2: The Complete Illustrated History of the 'Dragon Lady'. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing Ltd. p. 404. ISBN 0-7643-2346-6. LCCN 89012535. 
^ a b c Wendt, Jeff. "A feature interview with Frans Bax, President, CIA University". Today's Campus. 
^ a b Host: Mary Louise Kelly (May 28, 2004). "Inside CIA University: Higher Ed for Operatives". Morning Edition. NPR. 
^ "Life in HR: Learning Resources". Central Intelligence Agency. February 12, 2013. Archived from the original on April 29, 2013. 
^ "Training Resources". Central Intelligence Agency. January 23, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2013. 
^ The OSS Assessment Staff (1969) [1948]. Assessment of Men, Selection of Personnel for the Office of Strategic Services. Johnson Reprint Corporation (original printing by Rinehart and Company, Inc.). 
^ Weiner, Tim (March 20, 1998). "Is the Explosion-Noisy Base a C.I.A. Spy School? What Base?". The New York Times. 
^ Pike, John (2001). "Warrenton Station B". Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved March 18, 2013. 
^ "Office of the General Counsel" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency. October 31, 1954. Retrieved March 27, 2013. 
^ Pedlow, Gregory W.; Welzenbach, Donald E. (1992). The Central Intelligence Agency and Overhead Reconnaissance: The U-2 and OXCART Programs, 1954–1974. Washington, D.C.: History Staff, Central Intelligence Agency. pp. 43–44. 
^ "Statement of the Director of Central Intelligence Regarding the Disclosure of the Aggregate Intelligence Budget for Fiscal Year 1997". Central Intelligence Agency. October 15, 1997. 
^ "Declaration of Steven Aftergood". Federation of American Scientists. May 5, 2003. Case No. 02-1146 (RMU). 
^ Central Intelligence Agency (September 1, 1965). "CIA Cost Reduction Program" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. 
^ "CIA Discloses FY 1998 Intelligence Budget Total". Federation of American Scientists. March 20, 1998. 
^ Shane, Scott (November 8, 2005). "Official Reveals Budget for U.S. Intelligence". The New York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2013. 
^ Legacy of Ashes, p.28.
^ "Exclusive: Dozens of CIA operatives on the ground during Benghazi attack". CNN. August 1, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2013. 
^ US Defense Information Services Agency (March 19, 1999). "Zdarm (Defense Messaging Service) Genser (General Service) Message Security Classifications, Categories, and Marking Phrase Requirements Version 1.2" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. 
^ "'Verbindungsstelle 61': Ermittlungen gegen Chef von geheimer BND-Gruppe". Spiegel Online (in German). February 8, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2014. 
^ "Secret army squad keeps watch on 60 Al Qaeda in Ireland". Irish Daily Star. March 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. 
^ "Army & Navy – MERGER: Navy Compromise". TIME. December 10, 1945. 
^ Factbook on Intelligence. Central Intelligence Agency. December 1992. pp. 4–5. 
^ "The Role of Intelligence". Congress and the Nation 1945–1964: A review of government and politics in the postwar years. Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Service. 1965. p. 306. 
^ Warner, Michael (1995). "The Creation of the Central Intelligence Group" (PDF). Studies in Intelligence. Center for the Study of Intelligence. 39 (5): 111–120. Retrieved September 16, 2011. 
^ a b "CIA – History". Federation of American Scientists. 
^ "Office of the General Counsel: History of the Office". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ Breneman, Gary M. "Lawrence R. Houston: A Biography" (PDF). National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 29, 2015. 
^ Zegart, Amy B. (September 23, 2007). "The CIA's license to fail". Los Angeles Times. 
^ "George Tenet v. John Doe" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. July 16, 2006. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Thorne, Jr., C. Thomas; Patterson, David S., eds. (1996). Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
^ a b Laurie, Clayton. "The Korean War and the Central Intelligence Agency" (PDF). Center for the Study of Intelligence. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 14.
^ a b c "Fifteen DCIs' First 100 Days" (PDF). Studies in Intelligence. Center for the Study of Intelligence. 38 (1). January 1993. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "A Look Back: The First Director of Central Intelligence". Central Intelligence Agency. July 24, 2014. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 17.
^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment". U.S. Department of State. Document 292, Section 5. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 29.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 33.
^ Rose, P. K. (2001). "Two Strategic Intelligence Mistakes in Korea, 1950". Studies in Intelligence. Center for the Study of Intelligence. 45 (5): 57-65. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965) Congress and the Nation 1945–1964. p.306.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 51.
^ Gouda, Frances (2002). American Visions of the Netherlands East Indies/Indonesia: US Foreign Policy and Indonesian Nationalism, 1920-1949. Amsterdam University Press. p. 365. ISBN 978-90-5356-479-0. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 27.
^ a b c Weiner 2007, p. 56.
^ a b c Weiner 2007, p. 57.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 58.
^ a b Weiner 2007, pp. 58–61.
^ a b Gasiorowski, Mark; Byrne, Malcolm (2004). Mohammad Mosaddeq and the 1953 Coup in Iran. Syracuse University Press. p. 360. ISBN 978-0-81563-018-0. 
^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 87.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 90.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 91.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 93.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 95.
^ a b Schlesinger, Stephen (June 3, 2011). "Ghosts of Guatemala's Past". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2014. 
^ Cooper, Allan D. (2009). The Geography of Genocide. University Press of America. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-7618-4097-8. 
^ Dosal, Paul J. (1995). Doing Business with the Dictators: A Political History of United Fruit in Guatemala, 1899–1944. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-84202-590-4. 
^ Jones, Maggie (June 30, 2016). "The Secrets in Guatemala's Bones". The New York Times. 
^ a b Immerman 1982, pp. 161–170.
^ a b c Immerman 1982, pp. 173–178.
^ Cullather, Nick (9 October 2006). Secret History, Second Edition: The CIA's Classified Account of Its Operations in Guatemala, 1952–1954. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-5468-2. 
^ Gleijeses, Piero (1992). Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United States, 1944-1954. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02556-8. 
^ Streeter, Stephen M. (2000). Managing the Counterrevolution: The United States and Guatemala, 1954-1961. Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0-89680-215-5. 
^ Bowen, Gordon L. (1983). "U.S. Foreign Policy toward Radical Change: Covert Operations in Guatemala, 1950–1954". Latin American Perspectives. 10 (1): 88–102. 
^ Navarro, Mireya (February 26, 1999). "Guatemalan Army Waged 'Genocide,' New Report Finds". The New York Times. 
^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 139.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 143.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 145.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 146.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 170.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 148.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 153.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 154.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 163.
^ Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of ashes : The history of the CIA (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 172.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 161.
^ "The Role of Intelligence" (1965). Congress and the Nation. p. 306
^ Schecter, Jerrold L.; Deriabin, Peter S. (1992). The Spy Who Saved the World: How a Soviet Colonel Changed the Course of the Cold War. Scribner. ISBN 0-684-19068-0. 
^ Gibbs, David N. (1995). "Let Us Forget Unpleasant Memories: The US State Department's Analysis of the Congo Crisis". Journal of Modern African Studies. 33 (1): 175–180. doi:10.1017/s0022278x0002098x. JSTOR 161559. There seems little doubt that the Congo was targeted by one of the largest covert operations in the history of the CIA, and its significance has been noted repeatedly by former officers, as well as by scholars. Americans in both the CIA station and the embassy directly intervened in Congolese affairs, bribing parliamentarians, setting up special units of the military, and promoting the career of General Mobutu. In addition to any assassination plots, it is well documented that the United States played an important role in two efforts to overthrow Lumumba, both in September 1960.... 
^ Patti, Archimedes L. A. (1980). Why Viet Nam?: Prelude to America's albatross. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-04156-9. 
^ "Status Report on Tibetan Operations". Office of the Historian. January 26, 1968. 
^ Adams, Sam (1994). War of Numbers: an Intelligence Memoir. Steerforth Press. ISBN 1-883642-23-X. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 213.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 237.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 248.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 319.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 321.
^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 322.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 323.
^ a b c Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York City: Basic Books. pp. 49–51. ISBN 0-465-04195-7. 
^ Carl Colby (director) (September 2011). The Man Nobody Knew: In Search of My Father, CIA Spymaster William Colby (Motion picture). New York City: Act 4 Entertainment. Retrieved September 18, 2011. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 347.
^ Bronner, Michael (December 11, 2014). "Our Man in Africa". Foreign Policy. 
^ Bronner, Michael (July 3, 2013). "Former Chad leader Hissène Habré charged with crimes against humanity". The Guardian. 
^ "The Cost of an Afghan 'Victory'". The Nation. 1999. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2013. 
^ Walsh, Declan (July 25, 2010). "Afghanistan war logs: US covered up fatal Taliban missile strike on Chinook". The Guardian. 
^ "Story of US, CIA and Taliban". The Brunei Times. 2009. Archived from the original on December 5, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. 
^ West, Julian (September 23, 2001). "Pakistan's 'godfathers of the Taliban' hold the key to hunt for bin Laden". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved April 9, 2011. 
^ a b Weiner 2007, p. 380.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 397.
^ Davies, Richard T. (2004). "The CIA and the Polish Crisis of 1980–1981". Journal of Cold War Studies. 6 (3): 120–123. 
^ Domber, Gregory F. (2008). Supporting the Revolution: America, Democracy, and the End of the Cold War in Poland, 1981—1989. ProQuest. p. 199. , revised as Domber 2014, p. 110.
^ Domber, Gregory F. (August 28, 2014). "What Putin Misunderstands about American Power". University of California Press Blog. University of North Carolina Press. 
^ MacEachin, Douglas J. (June 28, 2008). "US Intelligence and the Polish Crisis 1980–1981". Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ Bernstein, Carl (June 24, 2001). "The Holy Alliance". TIME – via CarlBernstein.com. 
^ Sussman, Gerald (2010). Branding Democracy: U.S. Regime Change in Post-Soviet Eastern Europe. New York: Peter Lang. p. 128. ISBN 978-1-43310-530-2. 
^ Arsanjani, Mahnoush H.; Cogan, Jacob Katz; Sloane, Robert D.; Wiessner, Siegfried, eds. (2011). Looking to the Future: Essays on International Law in Honor of W. Michael Reisman. Leiden & Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-9-00417-361-3. 
^ Daugherty, William J. (2004). Executive Secrets: Covert Action and the Presidency. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. pp. 201–203. ISBN 978-0-81312-334-9. 
^ Thiel, Rainer (2010). Nested Games of External Democracy Promotion: The United States and the Polish Liberalization 1980–1989. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften. p. 273. ISBN 978-3-53117-769-4. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 428.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 429.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 430.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 459.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 465.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 466.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 470.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 448.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 450.
^ "FBI History: Famous Cases — Aldrich Hazen Ames". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 460.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 480.
^ Mayer, Jane (September 11, 2006). "Junior: The clandestine life of America's top Al Qaeda source". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 28, 2014. 
^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (2007). At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 119–120. ISBN 0-06-114778-8. OCLC 71163669. 
^ a b Risen, James (November 4, 2001). "A Nation Challenged: The Intelligence Agency; Secret C.I.A. Site in New York Was Destroyed on Sept. 11". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2013. 
^ Schmitt, Eric (October 22, 2001). "A Nation Challenged: The Intelligence Agencies; Job Seekers Flood Spy Agencies". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2013. 
^ Bush, George W. "President George W. Bush's Address To The Nation on September 11, 2001". YouTube. Retrieved December 3, 2013. 
^ a b "Fighting on Two Fronts: A Chronology". PBS Frontline. Retrieved December 3, 2013. 
^ Tenet, George; Harlow, Bill (2007). At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 121–122. ISBN 0-06-114778-8. OCLC 71163669. 
^ Tenet & Harlow (2007), pp. 177–8
^ "Same US military unit that got Osama bin laden [sic] killed Anwar al-Awlaki". The Daily Telegraph. London. September 30, 2011. Retrieved February 12, 2012. 
^ Mazzetti, Mark; Schmitt, Eric; Worth, Robert F. (September 30, 2011). "Two-Year Manhunt Led to Killing of Awlaki in Yemen". The New York Times. Retrieved November 29, 2013. 
^ Shah, Saeed (July 11, 2011). "CIA organised fake vaccination drive to get Osama bin Laden's family DNA". The Guardian. London. Retrieved March 12, 2015. 
^ Jones, Milo L. & Silberzahn, Philippe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001. Stanford University Press. pp. 198–202. ISBN 978-0-80479-336-0. 
^ Stout, David; Mazzetti, Mark (August 21, 2007). "Tenet's C.I.A. Unprepared for Qaeda Threat, Report Says". The New York Times. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ "CIA criticises ex-chief over 9/11". BBC News online. August 22, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2009. 
^ "US Concedes Contras Linked to Drugs, But Denies Leadership Involved". New York City. Associated Press. April 17, 1986. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. 
^ Delaval, Craig (2000). "Cocaine, Conspiracy Theories & the C.I.A. in Central America". Frontline. Boston, Massachusetts: PBS. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. 
^ Cohn, Gary; Thompson, Ginger (June 11, 1995). "When a wave of torture and murder staggered a small U.S. ally, truth was a casualty". The Baltimore Sun. Baltimore, Maryland. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2017. 
^ Lakhani, Nina (October 23, 2015). "Confidential files on El Salvador human rights stolen after legal action against CIA". The Guardian. London, England. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. 
^ "Transcript of a recording of a meeting between President Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman in the oval office". Wyzant. June 23, 1972. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Gray III, L. Patrick; Gray, Ed (2008). In Nixon's Web: A Year in the Crosshairs of Watergate. Times Books/Henry Holt. ISBN 0-8050-8256-5. 
^ a b c d e Woodward, Bob (2004). Plan of Attack. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 467. ISBN 074325547X. 
^ "Morell 'wanted to apologize' to Powell about WMD evidence". CBS News. May 11, 2015. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 491.
^ Weiner 2007, p. 496.
^ Tucker, Mike; Faddis, Charles (2008). Operation Hotel California: The Clandestine War inside Iraq. The Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-59921-366-8. 
^ "An interview on public radio with the author". Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Weiner 2007, p. 493.
^ "Executive Order 13470". Federation of American Scientists. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Strohm, Chris (August 1, 2008). "Bush Orders Intelligence Overhaul". Congress Daily – via Nuclear Threat Initiative. 
^ "Osama Bin Laden killed in CIA operation". The Washington Post. May 8, 2011. 
^ Dilanian, Ken (May 2, 2011). "CIA led U.S. special forces mission against Osama bin Laden". Los Angeles Times. 
^ Gaffney, Frank J., Jr. (May 2, 2011). "Gaffney: Bin Laden's welcome demise". The Washington Times. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Gertz, Bill (May 2, 2011). "Intelligence break led to bin Laden's hide-out". The Washington Times. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Schwartz, Mathew J. (May 5, 2011). "Cracking Bin Laden's Hard Drives". InformationWeek. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2011. 
^ "Osama bin Laden dead: CIA paramilitaries and elite Navy SEAL killed Al Qaeda leader". The Economic Times. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2011. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Counterterrorism chief declares al-Qaida 'in the past'". MSNBC. May 2, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Ross, Tim (May 4, 2011). "Osama bin Laden dead: trusted courier led US special forces to hideout". The Daily Telegraph. London. 
^ "Debate rages about role of torture". CNN. May 20, 2011. 
^ Miller, Greg (May 5, 2011). "CIA spied on bin Laden from safe house". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Mazzetti, Mark; Cooper, Helene; Baker, Peter (May 2, 2011). "Clues Gradually Led to the Location of Osama bin Laden". The New York Times. 
^ "Pakistan rattled by news of CIA safe house in Abbottabad". CBS News. May 6, 2011. Archived from the original on May 9, 2011. 
^ Miller, Greg; DeYoung, Karen (June 12, 2015). "Secret CIA effort in Syria faces large funding cut". The Washington Post. 
^ Cloud, David S.; Abdulrahim, Raja (June 21, 2013). "U.S. has secretly provided arms training to Syria rebels since 2012". Los Angeles Times. 
^ Mekhennet, Souad (August 18, 2014). "The terrorists fighting us now? We just finished training them". The Washington Post. 
^ Mahmood, Mona (November 23, 2014). "US air strikes in Syria driving anti-Assad groups to support Isis". The Guardian. 
^ Hersh, Seymour (January 7, 2016). "Military to Military". London Review of Books. 38 (1). Retrieved November 29, 2016. 
^ "US Mideast Crisis Syria Rebels". Reuters. [dead link]
^ Petkova, Mariya (April 6, 2017). "Syria's 'moderate rebels' to form a new alliance". Al Jazeera. 
^ Jaffe, Greg; Entous, Adam (July 19, 2017). "Trump ends covert CIA program to arm anti-Assad rebels in Syria, a move sought by Moscow". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 21, 2017. 
^ a b c "Message to the Workforce from CIA Director John Brennan: Our Agency's Blueprint for the Future". Central Intelligence Agency. March 6, 2015. 
^ Welna, David (March 14, 2017). "Trump Restores CIA Power To Launch Drone Strikes". NPR. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ Mercado, Stephen (April 15, 2007). "Reexamining the Distinction Between Open Information and Secrets". Center for the Study of Intelligence. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ "Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS)". Harvard College Library. Retrieved July 1, 2011. 
^ Smith, Esther (May 5, 1988). "DoD Unveils Competitive Tool: Project Socrates Offers Valuable Analysis". Washington Technology. 
^ Wrubel, Robert (July 10, 1990). "The Frontal Assault: A Conversation with Michael Sekora". Financial World. 
^ Claburn, Thomas (February 6, 2008). "CIA Monitors YouTube For Intelligence". InformationWeek. Archived from the original on February 10, 2008. Retrieved February 11, 2008. 
^ Pfeiffer, Eric (June 6, 2014). "CIA outwits impersonators by embracing Twitter, Facebook". Yahoo! News. 
^ "Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, Conference Committee Report" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. December 6, 2007. 
^ a b Hillhouse, R. J. (July 8, 2007). "Who Runs the CIA? Outsiders for Hire". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Keefe, Patrick Radden (June 25, 2007). "Don't Privatize Our Spies". The New York Times. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ a b c d Hillhouse, R. J. (December 18, 2007). "CIA Contractors: Double or Nothin'". thespywhobilledme.com. 
^ Shorrock, Tim (May 29, 2008). "Former high-ranking Bush officials enjoy war profits". Salon.com. Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved June 16, 2008. 
^ Hurt III, Harry (June 15, 2008). "The Business of Intelligence Gathering". The New York Times. Retrieved June 18, 2008. 
^ Butler, Amy (March 20, 2005). "SBIRS High in the Red Again". Aviation Week. 
^ Taubman, Philip (November 11, 2007). "In Death of Spy Satellite Program, Lofty Plans and Unrealistic Bids". The New York Times. Retrieved April 29, 2013. 
^ Rich, Ben R. (1996). Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years of Lockheed. Back Bay Books. ISBN 0-316-74330-5. 
^ Blum, William (1986). The CIA: a forgotten history. Zed Books. ISBN 0-86232-480-7. 
^ Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51445-3. 
^ Dujmovic, Nicholas (November 26, 2007). "Review of 'Legacy of Ashes: The History of CIA'". Studies in Intelligence. Center for the Study of Intelligence. 51 (3). Retrieved February 12, 2012. 
^ Richelson, Jeffrey (September 11, 2007). "Sins of Omission and Commission". Washington Decoded. Retrieved July 4, 2008. 
^ Wise, David (July 22, 2007). "Covert Action". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 30, 2016. 
^ "CIA Statement on Claims by Wikileaks". Central Intelligence Agency. March 8, 2017. 
^ Weiner, Tim. "Legacy of Ashes". Random House, 2008, p. 342.
^ Garcia, Michael John (September 8, 2009). "Renditions: Constraints Imposed by Laws on Torture" (PDF). Congressional Research Service – via Federation of American Scientists.  Link from "Online Resources". United States Counter-Terrorism Training and Resources for Law Enforcement. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. 
^ Savage, Charlie (February 17, 2009). "Obama's War on Terror May Resemble Bush's in Some Areas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ "Background Paper on CIA's Combined Use of Interrogation Techniques" (PDF). American Civil Liberties Union. December 30, 2004. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ Horton, Scott (August 28, 2009). "New CIA Docs Detail Brutal 'Extraordinary Rendition' Process". Huffington Post. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ "Fact sheet: Extraordinary rendition". American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved March 29, 2007. 
^ "Remarks of Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice Upon Her Departure for Europe, 5 December 2005". U.S. State Department. Retrieved August 17, 2012. 
^ "Obama preserves renditions as counter-terrorism tool". The Los Angeles Times. February 1, 2009. Retrieved November 21, 2011. 
^ Erdbrink, Thomas (September 1, 2011). "N.Y. billing dispute reveals details of secret CIA rendition flights". The Washington Post. 
^ Wang, Marian (September 6, 2011). "Under Obama Administration Renditions—and Secrecy Around Them—Continue". ProPublica. Retrieved October 7, 2011. 
^ "Resolution 1507: Alleged secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers of detainees involving Council of Europe member states". Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. June 27, 2006. Archived from the original on June 12, 2010. 
^ Mayer, Jane (February 14, 2005). "Outsourcing Torture: The secret history of America's 'extraordinary rendition' program". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 20, 2007. 
^ Rajiva, Lila (December 5, 2005). "The CIA's Rendition Flights to Secret Prisons: The Torture-Go-Round". CounterPunch. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. According to former CIA case officer Bob Baer, "If you want a serious interrogation, you send a prisoner to Jordan. If you want them to be tortured, you send them to Syria. If you want someone to disappear—never to see them again—you send them to Egypt. 
^ Grey, Stephen (November 25, 2007). "Flight logs reveal secret rendition". The Sunday Times. London. Retrieved February 22, 2009. 
^ Rubin, Alissa J.; Mazzetti, Mark (December 31, 2009). "Afghan Base Hit by Attack Has Pivotal Role in Conflict". The New York Times. Retrieved January 1, 2010. 
^ Wise, David (1992). Molehunt: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA. Random House. ISBN 0-394-58514-3. 
^ Baer, Robert (2003). See No Evil: The True Story of a Ground Soldier in the CIA's War on Terrorism. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 1-4000-4684-X. 
^ Wright, Peter; Greengrass, Paul (1987). Spycatcher. William Heinemann. ISBN 0-670-82055-5. 
^ McKinley, Cynthia A. S. (1996). "When the Enemy Has Our Eyes". Federation of American Scientists. 
^ Jones, Ishmael (January 7, 2010). "Intelligence Reform is the President's Urgent Challenge". The Washington Times. 
^ a b Neier, Aryeh; Rothman, David J. (November 4, 2013). "Doctors Aided CIA Torture, Records Show". Open Societies Foundation. Retrieved December 11, 2013. 
^ Paramaguru, Kharunya (November 4, 2013). "CIA Made Doctors Complicit in Torture After 9/11, Report Says". TIME. Retrieved December 11, 2013. 
^ Siems, Larry (2012). The Torture Report: What the Documents Say About America's Post 9-11 Torture Program. New York: OR Books. p. 216. 
^ a b "The Snowden Affair: Electronic Briefing Book No. 436". The National Security Archive. September 4, 2013. 
^ Harper, Lauren (July 12, 2013). "Not Quite Another "Year of the Spy"". Unredacted: The National Security Archive blog. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ Harper, Lauren (January 17, 2014). "The "Top 10" Surveillance Lies Edward Snowden's Leaks Shed "Heat and Light" Upon". Unredacted: The National Security Archive blog. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "Office of the Inspector General's review of the President's Surveillance Program" (PDF). National Security Archive. March 24, 2009. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "Unclassified Report on the President's Surveillance Program" (PDF). National Security Archive. July 10, 2009. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "Minimization Procedures used by the National Security Agency in connection with Acquisitions of Foreign Intelligence" (PDF). National Security Archive. January 1, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ "PRISM/US-984XN Overview or The SIGAD Used Most in NSA Reporting Overview" (PDF). National Security Archive. April 2013. Retrieved August 26, 2017. 
^ a b Solomon, Norman. "Snow Job". Extra!. Archived from the original on February 11, 2005. Retrieved November 3, 2009. 
^ Van Wagenen, James S. (April 4, 2007). "A Review of Congressional Oversight". Center for the Study of Intelligence. Retrieved September 15, 2012. 
^ Saunders, Frances Stonor (1999). The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters. The New Press. ISBN 1-56584-664-8. 
^ "Office of Transnational Issues". Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ "CIA Crime and Narcotics Center". Central Intelligence Agency. 
^ Webb, Gary (1999). Dark Alliance. Seven Stories Press. ISBN 978-1-88836-393-7. 
^ "Panetta Tells Lawmakers CIA Misled Congress Post-2001". Bloomberg. July 9, 2009. 
^ Coomarasamy, James (May 14, 2009). "Pelosi says CIA lied on 'torture'". BBC News. 
^ "House Dems: Panetta testified CIA has misled Congress repeatedly". CNN. July 9, 2009. 
^ "CIA 'often lied to congressmen'". BBC News. July 9, 2009. 
^ "Lawmaker: Panetta terminated secret program". MSNBC.com. July 10, 2009. Retrieved August 14, 2010. 
^ "US CODE: Title 50,413b. Presidential approval and reporting of covert actions". Legal Information Institute. July 20, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Hess, Pamela. "Lawmaker says CIA director ended secret program". The Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 14, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2009 – via Google News. 
^ "US Congress secret briefings". Yahoo! News. [dead link]
^ Pincus, Walter (July 17, 2008). "House Passes Intelligence Authorization Bill". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ "Senators: CIA concealment may have broken law". USA Today. Associated Press. July 12, 2009. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ Hess, Pamela (July 13, 2009). "Calls grow for probe of CIA plan for al-Qaida hits". Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011. 
^ "Cheney ordered intel withheld from Congress-senator". Reuters. July 12, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Gorman, Siobhan (July 15, 2009). "CIA Plan Envisioned Hit Teams Killing al Qaeda Leaders". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Gorman, Siobhan (July 13, 2009). "CIA Had Secret Al Qaeda Plan". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 6, 2009. 
^ Zakaria, Tabassum (July 18, 2009). "House launches investigation into CIA program". Reuters. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ "Holt Calls for Next Church Committee on CIA". The Washington Independent. July 29, 2009. Archived from the original on March 4, 2010. Retrieved March 16, 2010. 
^ Mazzetti, Mark; Shane, Scott (July 18, 2009). "House Looks into Secrets Withheld From Congress". The New York Times. Retrieved April 28, 2010. 
^ Starr, Barbara (February 4, 2010). "Intelligence chief: U.S. can kill Americans abroad". CNN. 
^ "Intelligence Official Acknowledges Policy Allowing Targeted Killings of Americans". American Civil Liberties Union. February 4, 2010. 
^ Miller, Greg (July 31, 2014). "CIA director John Brennan apologizes for search of Senate committee's computers". The Washington Post. 
^ Froomkin, Dan (September 26, 2014). "Anatomy of a Non-Denial Denial". The Intercept. 
^ Feinstein, Dianne (March 11, 2014). "Statement on Intel Committee's CIA Detention, Interrogation Report". U.S. Senate. 
^ Froomkin, Dan (August 1, 2014). "It's About the Lying". The Intercept. 
^ Hearst, David (February 23, 2017). "CIA 'terrorist hunters' to quit in opposition to US president". Middle East Eye. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Contracted agents, some of whom run networks of sources within al-Qaeda and the Islamic State (IS) group have either quit or threatened to quit amid frustration in the intelligence services since Trump took office last month. 
^ Price, Edward (February 20, 2017). "I didn't think I'd ever leave the CIA, but because of Trump I quit". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 24, 2017. 
^ Millstein, Seth (February 20, 2017). "Who Is Edward Price? The CIA Agent Quit Because Of The Trump Administration". Bustle. Archived from the original on February 24, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Price joined the CIA in 2006 and most recently worked as a spokesman for the National Security Council, yet Trump's actions over his first month in office caused Price to conclude that he "cannot in good faith serve this administration as an intelligence professional." 
^ Rosva, Edward (February 21, 2017). "National Security Council spokesman quits CIA, writes scathing editorial in Washington Post". Salon. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017. 
^ Sharman, Jon (February 21, 2017). "CIA analyst quits after 11 years because of Donald Trump's 'disturbing' behaviour". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Edward Price joined up in 2006 and was "convinced that it was the ideal place to serve my country". He became a terrorism expert and worked under the George W Bush and Barack Obama administrations, recently serving on the staff of the National Security Council, and believed he would never leave. 
^ Sommerfeldt, Chris (February 21, 2017). "Senior CIA analyst resigns because of President Trump's 'disturbing' actions in office". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Over a decade ago, Edward Price told his father that he was going to get a job at the Central Intelligence Agency. It wouldn't just be his "first real job," he told his dad — it would be his career, passion and life. 
^ Binelli, Raphael (February 21, 2017). "Un alto esponente della Cia si dimette: "Non posso servire l'amministrazione Trump"" [A senior official of the CIA resigns: "I can not serve the Trump administration"]. Il Giornale (in Italian). Milan. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017. 
^ Kelly, Mary Louise (February 20, 2017). "Disgusted By Trump, A CIA Officer Quits. How Many More Could Follow?". NPR. Retrieved February 24, 2017. Now Price is 34. And it was another vivid image that led him to quit: that of President Trump on Jan. 21, his first full day in office, delivering a speech at CIA headquarters in Northern Virginia. Trump chose to speak in front of the CIA's wall of stars — stars that honor CIA officers who died in the line of duty. 
^ a b Shane, Scott; Mazzetti, Mark; Rosenberg, Matthew (March 7, 2017). "WikiLeaks Releases Trove of Alleged C.I.A. Hacking Documents". The New York Times. Retrieved March 7, 2017. 
^ Greenberg, Andy (March 7, 2017). "How the CIA Can Hack Your Phone, PC, and TV (Says WikiLeaks)". WIRED. Retrieved April 8, 2017. 
^ Murdock, Jason (March 7, 2017). "Vault 7: CIA hacking tools were used to spy on iOS, Android and Samsung smart TVs". International Business Times. Retrieved April 8, 2017. 
^ "WikiLeaks posts trove of CIA documents detailing mass hacking". CBS News. March 7, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017. 
^ Page, Carly (March 7, 2017). "Vault 7: Wikileaks reveals details of CIA's hacks of Android, iPhone Windows, Linux, MacOS, and even Samsung TVs". Computing. 
^ Greenwald, Glenn (April 14, 2017). "Trump's CIA Director Pompeo, Targeting WikiLeaks, Explicitly Threatens Speech and Press Freedoms". The Intercept. 
^ Clancy, Tom (1984). The Hunt for Red October. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-87021-285-0. 
^ Greene, Graham (2004). The Quiet American. Penguin Classics. ISBN 0-14-303902-4. 


References

Immerman, Richard H. (1982). The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign Policy of Intervention. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-71083-2. 
Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 0-385-51445-X. OCLC 82367780. 

Further reading

Agee, Philip (1975). Inside the Company: CIA Diary. Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 0-140-04007-2. 
Aldrich, Richard J. (2001). The Hidden Hand: Britain, America and Cold War Secret Intelligence. London: John Murray. ISBN 0-7195-5423-3. OCLC 46513534. 
Andrew, Christopher (1996). For the President's Eyes Only. HarperCollins. ISBN 0-00-638071-9. 
Baer, Robert (2003). Sleeping with the Devil: How Washington Sold Our Soul for Saudi Crude. Crown. ISBN 1-4000-5021-9. 
Bearden, Milton; James Risen (2003). The Main Enemy: The Inside Story of the CIA's Final Showdown With the KGB. Random House. ISBN 0-679-46309-7. 
Coll, Steve (2004). Ghost Wars: The Secret History of the CIA, Afghanistan, and Bin Laden, from the Soviet Invasion to September 10, 2001. Penguin Group. ISBN 9781594200076. 
Dujmovic, Nicholas, "Drastic Actions Short of War: The Origins and Application of CIA's Covert Paramilitary Function in the Early Cold War," Journal of Military History, 76 (July 2012), 775–808
Gibson, Bryan R. (2015). Sold Out? US Foreign Policy, Iraq, the Kurds, and the Cold War. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-48711-7. 
Johnson, Loch K. (1991). America's Secret Power: The CIA in a Democratic Society. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-505490-3. 
Jones, Ishmael (2010). The Human Factor: Inside the CIA's Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture. Encounter Books. ISBN 978-1-59403-223-3. 
Jones, Milo; Silberzahn, Philippe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804793360. 
Marchetti, Victor; John D. Marks (1974). The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence. Knopf. ISBN 0-394-48239-5. 
McCoy, Alfred W. (1972). The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia. Harper Colophon. ISBN 978-0-06-090328-2. 
McCoy, Alfred W. (2006). A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror. New York: Owl Books (Henry Holt & Co.). ISBN 0-8050-8248-4. OCLC 78821099. 
Kessler, Ronald (2003). The CIA at War: Inside the Secret Campaign Against Terror. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-31932-0. 
Kinzer, Stephen (2003). All the Shah's Men: An American Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470185490. 
Mahle, Melissa Boyle (2004). Denial and Deception: An Insider's View of the CIA from Iran-Contra to 9/11. Nation Books. ISBN 1-56025-649-4. 
Powers, Thomas (1979). The Man Who Kept the Secrets: Richard Helms & the CIA. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 9780394507774. 
Prouty, L. Fletcher (Col. USAF, (Ret.)) (1973). The Secret Team: The CIA and Its Allies In Control of the World. Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-23776-5. 
Rositzke, Harry (1977). The CIA's Secret Operations. Reader's Digest Press. ISBN 0-88349-116-8. 
Ruth, Steven (2011). My Twenty Years as a CIA Officer: It's All About The Mission. Charleston, SC: CreateSpace. ISBN 978-1-4565-7170-2. 
Sheymov, Victor (1993). Tower of Secrets. U.S. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-55750-764-8. 
Smith, W. Thomas, Jr. (2003). Encyclopedia of the Central Intelligence Agency. Facts on File. ISBN 0-8160-4667-0. 
Turner, Stansfield (2006). Burn Before Reading: Presidents, CIA Directors, and Secret Intelligence. Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-8666-8. 
Wallace, Robert; Melton, H. Keith; Schlesinger, Henry R. (2008). Spycraft: The Secret History of the CIA's Spytechs, from Communism to al-Qaeda. New York: Dutton. ISBN 0-525-94980-1. OCLC 18255288. 
Wise, David; Ross, Thomas B. (1964). The Invisible Government. Random House. ISBN 978-0394430775. 

External links

Find more aboutCentral Intelligence Agencyat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Texts from Wikisource



Official website
CIA Freedom of Information Act Electronic Reading Room
Landscapes of Secrecy: The CIA in History, Fiction and Memory (2011)
Works by or about Central Intelligence Agency at Internet Archive
Works by Central Intelligence Agency at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Central Intelligence Collection at Internet Archive







v
t
e


Central Intelligence Agency




United States Intelligence Community (CIA Headquarters: George Bush Center for Intelligence, Langley, Virginia)



Geographic activities



Americas
Russia and Europe
Africa
Asia








Transnational activities



Terrorism
Arms control, WMD, and proliferation
Crime and illicit drug trade
Health and economy
Human rights
Influence on public opinion





Organisation



Directorate of Analysis
Directorate of Science & Technology
Directorate of Operations (Special Activities Division, National Resources Division)
Directorate of Support








Official reports by the U.S. Government on the CIA












v
t
e


United States Intelligence Community



Intelligence
Community




Defense



Defense Intelligence Agency (Defense Clandestine Service • Defense Attaché System • National Intelligence University • Missile and Space Intelligence Center • National Center for Medical Intelligence • Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance)
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Central Security Service, Special Collection Service)




Armed Forces



Army Intelligence and Security Command
Marine Corps Intelligence
Office of Naval Intelligence
Twenty-Fifth Air Force
Coast Guard Intelligence (Homeland Security)








Civilian



Bureau of Intelligence and Research (State)
Central Intelligence Agency (Directorate of Operations • Special Activities Division • Open Source Center • Directorate of Science and Technology • CIA University)
Drug Enforcement Administration (Justice)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Justice)
Office of Intelligence and Analysis (Homeland Security)
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Treasury)
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (Energy)











Director of
National
Intelligence



Director of National Intelligence
National Counterterrorism Center
National Counterproliferation Center
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
National Intelligence Council
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
Joint Intelligence Community Council
Chief Information Officer





Executive Office
of the President



National Security Advisor
National Security Council
President's Intelligence Advisory Board
Homeland Security Council
Homeland Security Advisor
President's Daily Brief





Other



Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
Army Intelligence Support Activity
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
Intellipedia





Oversight



United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
Office of Management and Budget





Defunct



Contingency Fund for Foreign Intercourse
Counterintelligence Field Activity
Military Information Division
Military Intelligence Division
Military Intelligence Service
Office of Strategic Services
Office of Special Plans
Strategic Support Branch












v
t
e


National intelligence agencies



Foreign
intelligence



Afghanistan: NDS
Albania: SHISH
Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Armenia: SNB
Australia: ASIS
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bahrain: NSA
Bangladesh: NSI
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA
Brazil: ABIN
Brunei: BRD
Bulgaria: NRS
Cameroon: BMM
Canada: CSIS
Chad: ANS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Cuba: DI
Czech Republic: ÚZSI
Denmark: FE
Djibouti: BSRG
Ecuador: SENAIN
Egypt: Mukhabarat
Estonia: EFIS
France: DGSE
Gambia: SIS
Georgia: GIS
Germany: BND
Ghana: BNI, BGU, RDU
Greece: EYP
Hungary: IH
India: RAW
Indonesia: BIN
Iran: VAJA
Iraq: GSD
Ireland: G2
Israel: Mossad
Italy: AISE
Ivory Coast: NSC
Japan: NPA
CIRO
Jordan: GID
Kazakhstan: Syrbar
Kenya: NIS
Kyrgyzstan: SNB
Kuwait: KSS
Latvia: SAB
Lithuania: VSD
Lebanon: GDGS
Libya: MJ
Republic of Macedonia: UBK
Malaysia: MEIO
Maldives: NSS
Mexico: CISEN
Mongolia: GIA
Montenegro: ANB
Morocco: DGST
Mozambique: SISE
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: NIA
North Korea: RGB
Norway: E-tjenesten
Oman: Palace Office
Pakistan: ISI
Papua New Guinea: NIO
Philippines: NICA
Poland: AW
Portugal: SIED
Qatar: QSS
Romania: SIE
Russia: SVR
Saudi Arabia: Al Mukhabarat Al A'amah
Serbia: BIA
Sierra Leone: CISU
Singapore: SID
Slovakia: SIS
Slovenia: SOVA
Somalia: NISA
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: NIS
Spain: CNI
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sudan: JAWM
Sweden: KSI
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: NSB
Tajikistan: MoS
Thailand: NIA
Togo: NIA
Tunisia: TIA
Turkey: MİT
Turkmenistan: KNB
Uganda: ISO
Ukraine: SZRU
United Arab Emirates: UAEI
United Kingdom: SIS (MI6)
United States: CIA
Uzbekistan: SNB
Vietnam: TC2





Domestic
intelligence



Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Australia: ASIO
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bangladesh: SB
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: VS/SE
Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA
Brazil: PF
Brunei: IRD
Canada: CSIS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Czech Republic: BIS
Denmark: PET
Egypt: EHS
Estonia: KAPO
Finland: Supo
France: DGSI
Germany: BfV
Ghana: GPS, CID
Greece: EYP
Hungary: AH
India: IB, CBI, NSC, AIRMS
Iran: VAJA, IRGC, PAVA
Ireland: CSB, SDU, NSU
Israel: Shin Bet
Italy: AISI
Kazakhstan: NSC
Kenya: NIS
Latvia: DP
Lithuania: STT
Republic of Macedonia: IA
Malaysia: SB
Japan: NPA, PSIA
Netherlands: NCTb
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: SSS
Norway: PST
North Korea: SSD
Oman: ISS
Pakistan: IB, FIA
Philippines: NBI
Poland: ABW
Portugal: SIS
Romania: SRI
Russia: FSB
Saudi Arabia: Mabahith
Serbia: BIA
Singapore: ISD
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: SPO
Spain: CITCO
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sweden: SÄPO
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: MJIB
Thailand: ISOC, SB
Turkey: KDGM
Ukraine: SBU
United Kingdom: Security Service (MI5), NDEDIU, NCA, NBIS
United States: FBI
Uzbekistan: SNB
Venezuela: SEBIN
Vietnam: TC5
Zimbabwe: CIO





Military
intelligence



Australia: DIO
Bangladesh: DGFI
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Brazil: DIE
Canada: Int Branch
China: MID
Croatia: VSOA
Czech Republic: VZ
Denmark: FE
Egypt: DMISR
Finland: PE TIEDOS
France: DRM, DGSE
Germany: MAD
Ghana: MIU
Hungary: KNBSZ
Iran: General Staff, SAHEFAJA, SAHEFASA, SAHEFAVEDJA
India: DMI, DIA
Indonesia: BAIS
Ireland: G2
Israel: Aman
Italy: CII
Japan: MIC
Kazakhstan: NSC
Lithuania: AOTD
Republic of Macedonia: MSSI
Malaysia: DSID
Morocco: DGED
Netherlands: MIVD
New Zealand: DDIS
Norway: E-tjenesten
Pakistan: MI, NI, AI
Philippines: ISAFP
Poland: SKW, SWW
Portugal: CISMIL
Romania: DGIA
Russia: GRU
Serbia: VOA, VBA
Singapore: MIO
Slovakia: VSS
Slovenia: OVS
South Africa: SANDF-ID
South Korea: DSC
Spain: Armed Forces Intelligence Center
Sri Lanka: DMI
Sweden: MUST
Switzerland: MND
Syria: MI, AFID
Taiwan: MND
Thailand: AFSC
Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B., JİTEM
Ukraine: HUR MO
United Kingdom: DI
United States: DIA
Venezuela: DGCIM
Vietnam: TC2





Signals
intelligence



Australia: ASD
Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD
Canada: CSE
China: SIGINT
Croatia: OTC
Finland: PVTIEDL
France: DGSE
Germany: BND
Ghana: RDU
India: JCB,NTRO
Indonesia: LEMSANEG
Ireland: CIS
Israel: 8200
Japan: DIH
Kazakhstan: NSC
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: GCSB
Pakistan: JSIB
Russia: Spetssvyaz
South Africa: SSA
Sweden: FRA
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: MI
Turkey: MİT-ETİB, MİT-SİB
Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok
United Kingdom: GCHQ
United States: NSA





Imagery
intelligence



Australia: AGO
Finland: PVTIEDL
India: DAI
Israel: Air Intelligence Group
New Zealand: GEOINT NZ
Portugal: CIGeoE
Russia: TsVTI GRU
United Kingdom: DGIFC
United States: NGA





Related
topics



Espionage
Global surveillance disclosures

Chelsea Manning
Snowden leaks
WikiLeaks


Great Firewall of China

Mass surveillance in China


Law enforcement
Surveillance

Big Brother
Call detail record
Carnivore
Dishfire
ECHELON
PRISM
Stone Ghost
Turbulence (NSA programme)


National security
Surveillance issues in smart cities












v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


War on Terror






War in Afghanistan
Iraq War
War in North-West Pakistan
Symbolism of terrorism





Participants




Operational



ISAF
Operation Enduring Freedom participants
Afghanistan
Northern Alliance
Iraq (Iraqi Armed Forces)
NATO
Pakistan
United Kingdom
United States
European Union
Philippines
Ethiopia





Targets



al-Qaeda
Osama bin Laden
al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
Abu Sayyaf
Anwar al-Awlaki
Al-Shabaab
Boko Haram
Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami
Hizbul Mujahideen
Islamic Courts Union
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
Jaish-e-Mohammed
Jemaah Islamiyah
Lashkar-e-Taiba
Taliban
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan








Conflicts




Operation
Enduring Freedom



War in Afghanistan
OEF – Philippines
Georgia Train and Equip Program
Georgia Sustainment and Stability
OEF – Horn of Africa
OEF – Trans Sahara
Drone strikes in Pakistan





Other



Operation Active Endeavour
Insurgency in the Maghreb (2002–present)
Insurgency in the North Caucasus
Moro conflict in the Philippines
Iraq War
Iraqi insurgency
Operation Linda Nchi
Terrorism in Saudi Arabia
War in North-West Pakistan
War in Somalia (2006–09)
2007 Lebanon conflict
al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen
Korean conflict








See also



Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse
Axis of evil
Black sites
Bush Doctrine
Clash of Civilizations
Cold War
Combatant Status Review Tribunal
Criticism of the War on Terror
Death of Osama bin Laden
Enhanced interrogation techniques
Torture Memos
Extrajudicial prisoners
Extraordinary rendition
Guantanamo Bay detention camp
Iranian Revolution
Islamic terrorism
Islamism
Military Commissions Act of 2006
North Korea and weapons of mass destruction
Terrorist Surveillance Program
Operation Noble Eagle
Operation Eagle Assist
Pakistan's role
Patriot Act
President's Surveillance Program
Protect America Act of 2007
September 11 attacks
State Sponsors of Terrorism
Targeted killing
Targeted Killing in International Law
Targeted Killings: Law and Morality in an Asymmetrical World
Unitary executive theory
Unlawful combatant
Withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan
CAGE








 Terrorism portal
 War portal









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 140094734
LCCN: n79099301
ISNI: 0000 0001 2170 1744
GND: 1021698-4
SELIBR: 133754
SUDOC: 027225496
BNF: cb118839832 (data)
NLA: 35564157
NKC: kn20021205002
BNE: XX111625











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_Intelligence_Agency&oldid=818535838"					Categories: Central Intelligence Agency1947 establishments in VirginiaGovernment agencies established in 1947Anti-communist organizations in the United StatesMcLean, VirginiaUnited States intelligence agenciesCold War in popular cultureHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with dead external links from March 2010CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismUse American English from February 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from December 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles containing French-language textArticles containing Russian-language textArticles containing German-language textArticles containing overly long summariesWikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2015All articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009Articles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers