This article is about the time zone in North America. For other uses, see Central Standard Time (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Central Time Zone (North America)




  Regions in the Central Time Zone prior to 2015 (Quintana Roo is now in the Eastern Time Zone)




UTC offset


CST
UTC−6:00


CDT
UTC−5:00


Current time (Refresh the clock.)


CST
4:53 am on  Jan 3, 2018


Observance of DST


DST is observed in certain regions of this time zone between the 2nd Sunday in March and the 1st Sunday in November.


DST ended
Nov 5, 2017


DST begins
Mar 11, 2018


The North American Central Time Zone (CT) is a time zone in parts of Canada, the United States, Mexico, Central America, some Caribbean Islands, and part of the Eastern Pacific Ocean.
Central Standard Time (CST) is six hours behind Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). During summer most (but not all) of the zone uses daylight saving time (DST), and changes to Central Daylight Time (CDT) which is five hours behind UTC.



Contents


1 Regions using (North American) Central Time

1.1 Canada
1.2 United States
1.3 Mexico
1.4 Central America and Caribbean Islands
1.5 Eastern Pacific islands and other areas


2 Central Daylight Time
3 Alphabetical list of major Central Time Zone metropolitan areas
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



Regions using (North American) Central Time[edit]
Canada[edit]
Main article: Time in Canada
The province of Manitoba is the only province or territory in Canada that observes Central Time in all areas.
The following Canadian provinces and territories observe Central Time in the areas noted, while their other areas observe Eastern Time:

Nunavut (territory): western areas (most of Kivalliq Region and part of Qikiqtaaluk Region)
Ontario (province): a portion of the northwest bordering southeastern Manitoba, in and around Kenora.

Also, most of the province of Saskatchewan is on Central Standard Time year-round, never adjusting for Daylight Saving Time. Major exceptions include Lloydminster, a city situated on the boundary between Alberta and Saskatchewan. The city charter stipulates that it shall observe Mountain Time and DST, putting the community on the same time as all of Alberta, including the major cities of Calgary and Edmonton. As a result, during the summer, clocks in the entire province match those in Alberta, but during the winter, clocks in most of the province match those in Manitoba.
United States[edit]
Main article: Time in the United States
Nine states are contained entirely in the Central Time Zone:

Alabama
Arkansas
Illinois
Iowa
Louisiana
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Wisconsin

Note: Although all of Alabama is legally on Central Time, Phenix City and some of the nearby community of Smiths Station unofficially observe Eastern Time, as these areas are part of the metropolitan area of the considerably larger city of Columbus, Georgia in the Eastern Time Zone. Lanett and Valley observe Eastern Time historically because they were textile mill towns and the original home office of their mills was in West Point, Georgia.[1]
Seven states are split between the Central Time Zone and the Mountain Time Zone:

Kansas - all, except for Sherman, Wallace, Greeley, and Hamilton counties
Nebraska - eastern two thirds
New Mexico - Nara Visa
North Dakota - all, except for southwest regions
Oklahoma - all, except for Kenton
South Dakota - eastern half
Texas - all, except for El Paso and Hudspeth counties

Five states are split between the Central Time Zone and the Eastern Time Zone:

Florida - Florida Panhandle on Alabama border
Indiana - northwest and southwest regions
Kentucky - western half
Michigan - Gogebic, Iron, Dickinson, and Menominee counties
Tennessee - West Tennessee and Middle Tennessee

Mexico[edit]
Main article: Time in Mexico
Most of Mexico—roughly the eastern three-fourths—lies in the Central Time Zone, except for six northwestern states (Baja California, Baja California Sur, Chihuahua, Sinaloa, Sonora, and *most of Nayarit) and one southeastern state (Quintana Roo).
The federal entities of Mexico that observe Central Time:


Aguascalientes
Campeche
Coahuila
Colima - except for the Revillagigedo Islands, in which the inner islands use Mountain Time and the outer island uses Pacific Time
Chiapas
Durango
Guanajuato
Guerrero
Hidalgo
Jalisco
Mexico City
Michoacán
Morelos
Nayarit - *only the municipality of Bahía de Banderas, rest of the state uses Mountain Time
Nuevo León
Oaxaca
Puebla
Querétaro
San Luis Potosí
State of Mexico
Tabasco
Tamaulipas
Tlaxcala
Veracruz
Yucatán
Zacatecas


Central America and Caribbean Islands[edit]
Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua , and Jamaica all use Central Standard Time year-round.
Eastern Pacific islands and other areas[edit]
The Galápagos Islands in Ecuador uses Central Standard Time all year-round; the remainder of Ecuador uses Eastern Standard Time. Both Easter Island and Salas y Gómez Island in Chile uses Central Standard Time during the Southern Hemisphere winter and Central Daylight Time during the Southern Hemisphere summer; the remainder of Chile uses Atlantic Standard Time and Atlantic Daylight Time.
Central Daylight Time[edit]
Daylight saving time (DST) is in effect in much of the Central time zone between mid-March and early November. The modified time is called Central Daylight Time (CDT) and is UTC−5. In Canada, Saskatchewan does not observe a time change. One reason that Saskatchewan does not take part in a time change is that, geographically, the entire province is closer to the Mountain Time Zone's meridian. The province elected to move onto "permanent" daylight saving by being part of the Central Time Zone. The only exception is the region immediately surrounding the Saskatchewan side of the biprovincial city of Lloydminster, which has chosen to use Mountain Time with DST, synchronizing its clocks with those of Alberta.
In those areas of the Canadian and American time zones that observe DST, beginning in 2007, the local time changes at 02:00 local standard time to 03:00 local daylight time on the second Sunday in March and returns at 02:00 local daylight time to 01:00 local standard time on the first Sunday in November. Mexico decided not to go along with this change and observes their horario de verano from the first Sunday in April to the last Sunday in October. In December 2009, the Mexican Congress allowed ten border cities, eight of which are in states that observe Central Time, to adopt the U.S. daylight time schedule effective in 2010.
Alphabetical list of major Central Time Zone metropolitan areas[edit]





Acapulco, Guerrero
Aguascalientes, Aguascalientes
Amarillo, Texas
Antigua Guatemala
Arlington, Texas
Austin, Texas
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Beaumont/Port Arthur, Texas
Birmingham, Alabama
Bismarck, North Dakota
Bloomington, Illinois
Bowling Green, Kentucky
Cedar Rapids, Iowa
Champaign, Illinois
Chicago, Illinois
Clarksville, Tennessee
Comarca Lagunera (Torreón, Gómez Palacio, Lerdo)
Columbia, Missouri
Cookeville, Tennessee
Cuernavaca, Morelos
Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas
Des Moines, Iowa
Enid, Oklahoma
Evansville, Indiana
Fargo, North Dakota
Fort Smith, Arkansas
Fort Walton Beach, Florida
Gary, Indiana
Grand Forks, North Dakota
Grand Rapids, Manitoba
Green Bay, Wisconsin
Guadalajara, Jalisco
Guatemala City, Guatemala
Hammond, Indiana




Houston, Texas
Huntsville, Alabama
Iowa City, Iowa
Iron Mountain, Michigan
Jackson, Mississippi
Jackson, Tennessee
Janesville, Wisconsin
Joplin, Missouri
Kansas City, Missouri-Kansas
Kenosha, Wisconsin
Lafayette, Louisiana
Lawton, Oklahoma
León, Guanajuato
Lincoln, Nebraska
Little Rock, Arkansas
Lubbock, Texas
Madison, Wisconsin
Managua, Nicaragua
Memphis, Tennessee
Mérida, Yucatán
Mexico City
Midland/Odessa, Texas
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota
Minot, North Dakota
Mobile, Alabama
Monterrey, Nuevo León
Montgomery, Alabama
Nashville, Tennessee
New Orleans
Normal, Illinois




Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Omaha, Nebraska
Panama City, Florida
Pensacola, Florida
Peoria, Illinois
Puebla City
Quad Cities, Iowa/Illinois
Racine, Wisconsin
Red Lake, Ontario
Regina, Saskatchewan
Rockford, Illinois
Sioux Falls, South Dakota
St. Louis, Missouri
San Antonio, Texas
San José, Costa Rica
San Luis Potosí City
San Pedro Sula, Honduras
San Salvador, El Salvador
Santiago de Querétaro, Querétaro
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
Shreveport–Bossier City, Louisiana
Springfield, Missouri
Tampico, Tamaulipas
Tegucigalpa, Honduras
Thompson, Manitoba
Toluca, Estado de México
Topeka, Kansas
Tulsa, Oklahoma
Waukegan, Illinois
Wheaton, Illinois
Wichita, Kansas
Wichita Falls, Texas
Winnipeg, Manitoba
Zacatecas, Zacatecas





See also[edit]

Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting

References[edit]



^ http://archive.decaturdaily.com/decaturdaily/news/060813/zones.shtml



External links[edit]

World time zone map
History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion
The official U.S. time for the Central Time Zone (dead link)
Cities in CST
Official times across Canada






v
t
e


Time zones in North America



Time zone
Hours from UTC: Standard time
Hours from UTC: Daylight saving time


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Hawaii)
–10
–10


Hawaii–Aleutian (in Alaska)
–10
–9


Alaska
–9
–8


Pacific
–8
–7


Mountain (Arizona and Sonora only)
–7
–7


Mountain (other states)
–7
–6


Central (Saskatchewan only)
–6
–6


Central (other states)
–6
–5


Eastern (Southampton Island, Atikokan and New Osnaburgh/Pickle Lake only)
–5
–5


Eastern (other states)
–5
–4


Atlantic (Natashquan River)
–4
–4


Atlantic (other states)
–4
–3


Newfoundland
–3:30
–2:30


Saint Pierre and Miquelon
and most of Greenland
–3
–2




See also
Time in Canada
Time in Denmark
Time in Mexico
Time in the United States









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_Time_Zone&oldid=818404910"					Categories: Time zonesTime in CanadaTime in MexicoTime zones in the United StatesHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing additional references from August 2014All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles with images not understandable by color blind users