This article is about the Crown dependencies. For the islands off Southern California, see Channel Islands (California). For the French Channel Islands, see Chausey.

Channel Islands

Îles Anglo-Normandes  (French)
Îles d'la Manche  (Norman)



Satellite photo of the Channel Islands in 2012




Location of the Channel Islands



Geography


Location
Western Europe


Coordinates
49°26′N 2°19′W﻿ / ﻿49.433°N 2.317°W﻿ / 49.433; -2.317Coordinates: 49°26′N 2°19′W﻿ / ﻿49.433°N 2.317°W﻿ / 49.433; -2.317


Adjacent bodies of water
English Channel


Total islands
8 inhabited


Major islands
Jersey and Guernsey


Area
198 km2 (76 sq mi)


Highest point
Les Platons


Administration



Bailiwick of Guernsey



Capital and largest settlement
Saint Peter Port, Guernsey


Area covered
78 km2 (30 sq mi; 7001394000000000000♠39.4%)



Bailiwick of Jersey



Capital and largest settlement
Saint Helier, Jersey


Area covered
118 km2 (46 sq mi; 7001596000000000000♠59.6%)


Demographics


Demonym
Channel Islander


Population
164,541[1] (2016)


Pop. density
844.6 /km2 (2,187.5 /sq mi)


Additional information


Time zone



GMT (UTC)





 • Summer (DST)



WEST (UTC+1)





The Channel Islands (Norman: Îles d'la Manche, French: Îles Anglo-Normandes or Îles de la Manche[note 1]) are an archipelago in the English Channel, off the French coast of Normandy. They include two Crown dependencies: the Bailiwick of Jersey, the largest of the islands; and the Bailiwick of Guernsey, consisting of Guernsey, Alderney, Sark and some smaller islands. They are considered the remnants of the Duchy of Normandy and, although they are not part of the United Kingdom,[2] it is responsible for the defence and international relations of the islands.[3] The Crown dependencies are not members of the Commonwealth of Nations or of the European Union. They have a total population of about 164,541, and the bailiwicks' capitals, Saint Helier and Saint Peter Port, have populations of 33,500 and 16,488, respectively. The total area of the islands is 198 km2.
The two bailiwicks have been administered separately since the late 13th century. Each has its own independent laws, elections, and representative bodies (although in modern times, politicians from the islands' legislatures are in regular contact). Any institution common to both is the exception rather than the rule. The Bailiwick of Guernsey is divided into three jurisdictions – Guernsey, Alderney and Sark – each with its own legislature.
The term "Channel Islands" began to be used around 1830, possibly first by the Royal Navy as a collective name for the islands.[4]:158



Contents


1 Geography

1.1 List of islands
1.2 Names
1.3 Waters
1.4 Highest point


2 History

2.1 Prehistory
2.2 From the Iron Age
2.3 From the Duchy of Normandy
2.4 From the seventeenth century
2.5 20th century

2.5.1 World War II
2.5.2 Post-1945




3 Politics
4 Economy
5 Transport and communications

5.1 Post
5.2 Transport

5.2.1 Road
5.2.2 Sea
5.2.3 Air
5.2.4 Rail


5.3 Media
5.4 Telephone
5.5 Internet


6 Culture

6.1 Faith and religious history


7 Other islands in the English Channel
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Bibliography
12 External links



Geography[edit]




The Channel Islands and adjacent coast of France.






Viewed from Jersey's north coast, Jethou, Herm and Sark are hazy outlines on the horizon.


The two major islands are Jersey and Guernsey. They make up 99% of the population and 92% of the area.
List of islands[edit]
The permanently inhabited islands of the Channel Islands and their population and area are:

Jersey 100,080 (118 km2)
Guernsey 63,026 (65 km2)
Alderney 2,000 (8 km2)
Sark 600 (5 km2)
Herm 60 (2 km2)
Jethou 3 (0.2 km2)
Brecqhou (Brechou) (0.3 km2)

There are also several uninhabited islets. Four are part of the Bailiwick of Jersey:

The Minquiers
Écréhous
Les Dirouilles
Les Pierres de Lecq (the Paternosters)

These lie off Alderney:

Burhou
Casquets
Ortac
Renonquet

These lie off Guernsey:

Caquorobert
Crevichon
Grande Amfroque
Les Houmets
Lihou (occupied for part of the year)

(See also List of islands of the Bailiwick of Guernsey)
Names[edit]
In general the larger islands have the -ey suffix, and the smaller ones have the -hou suffix; these are believed to be from the Old Norse ey and holmr, respectively which means island and islet.
The Chausey Islands south of Jersey are not generally included in the geographical definition of the Channel Islands but are occasionally described in English as 'French Channel Islands' in view of their French jurisdiction. They were historically linked to the Duchy of Normandy, but they are part of the French territory along with continental Normandy, and not part of the British Isles or of the Channel Islands in a political sense. They are an incorporated part of the commune of Granville (Manche). While they are popular with visitors from France, Channel Islanders rarely visit them as there are no direct transport links from the other islands.
In official Jersey French, the islands are called 'Îles de la Manche', while in France, the term 'Îles Anglo-normandes' (Anglo-Norman isles) is used to refer to the British 'Channel Islands' in contrast to other islands in the Channel. Chausey is referred to as an 'Île normande' (as opposed to anglo-normande). 'Îles Normandes' and 'Archipel Normand' have also, historically, been used in Channel Island French to refer to the islands as a whole.
Waters[edit]
The very large tidal variation provides an environmentally rich inter-tidal zone around the islands, and some islands such as Burhou, the Écréhous, and the Minquiers have been designated Ramsar sites.
The waters around the islands include the following:

The Swinge (between Alderney and Burhou)
The Little Swinge (between Burhou and Les Nannels)
La Déroute (between Jersey and Sark, and Jersey and the Cotentin)
Le Raz Blanchard, or Race of Alderney (between Alderney and the Cotentin)
The Great Russel (between Sark, Jéthou and Herm)
The Little Russel (between Guernsey, Herm and Jéthou)
Souachehouais (between Le Rigdon and L'Étacq, Jersey)
Le Gouliot (between Sark and Brecqhou)
La Percée (between Herm and Jéthou)

Highest point[edit]
The highest point in the islands is Les Platons in Jersey at 143 metres (469 ft) above sea level. The lowest point is the Atlantic Ocean (sea level).
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Jersey, History of Guernsey, and German occupation of the Channel Islands




La Gran'mère du Chimquière, Statue menhir, Saint Martin, Guernsey


Prehistory[edit]
The earliest evidence of human occupation of the Channel Islands has been dated to 250,000 years ago when they were attached to the landmass of continental Europe.[5] The islands became detached by rising sea levels in the Neolithic period. The numerous dolmens and other archaeological sites extant and recorded in history demonstrate the existence of a population large enough and organised enough to undertake constructions of considerable size and sophistication, such as the burial mound at La Hougue Bie[6] in Jersey or the statue menhirs of Guernsey.
From the Iron Age[edit]
Hoards of Armorican coins have been excavated, providing evidence of trade and contact in the Iron Age period. Evidence for Roman settlement is sparse, although evidently the islands were visited by Roman officials and traders. The Roman name for the Channel Islands was I. Lenuri (Lenur Islands) and is included in the Peutinger Table[7]:4 The traditional Latin names used for the islands (Caesarea for Jersey, Sarnia for Guernsey, Riduna for Alderney) derive (possibly mistakenly) from the Antonine Itinerary. Gallo-Roman culture was adopted to an unknown extent in the islands.[8]
In the sixth century, Christian missionaries visited the islands. Samson of Dol, Helier, Marculf and Magloire are among saints associated with the islands. In the sixth century, they were already included in the diocese of Coutances where they remained until reformation.
The islands were inhabited by Britons, who also inhabited Wales, south west England and nearby Brittany having moved away from invading Anglo-Saxons. From the beginning of the ninth century, Norse raiders appeared on the coasts. Norse settlement succeeded initial attacks, and it is from this period that many place names of Norse origin appear, including the modern names of the islands.
From the Duchy of Normandy[edit]
In 933, the islands were granted to William I Longsword by Raoul King of Western Francia[9] and annexed to the Duchy of Normandy. In 1066, William II of Normandy invaded and conquered England, becoming William I of England, also known as William the Conqueror. In the period 1204–1214, King John lost the Angevin lands in northern France, including mainland Normandy, to King Philip II of France, but managed to retain control of the Channel Islands. In 1259, his successor, Henry III of England, by the Treaty of Paris, officially surrendered his claim and title to the Duchy of Normandy, while the King of France gave up claim to the Channel Islands, which was based upon his position as feudal overlord of the Duke of Normandy. Since then, the Channel Islands have been governed as possessions of the Crown and were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England and its successor kingdoms of Great Britain and the United Kingdom.
The islands were invaded by the French in 1338, who held some territory until 1345. Edward III of England granted a Charter in July 1341 to Jersey, Guernsey, Sark and Alderney, confirming their customs and laws to secure allegiance to the English Crown.[10]:2–4 Owain Lawgoch, a mercenary leader of a Free Company in the service of the French Crown, attacked Jersey and Guernsey in 1372, and in 1373 Bertrand du Guesclin besieged Mont Orgueil.[11] The young King Richard II of England reconfirmed in 1378 the Charter rights granted by his grandfather, followed in 1394 with a second Charter granting, because of great loyalty shown to the Crown, exemption for ever, from English tolls, customs and duties.[10]:5–10 Jersey was occupied by the French in 1461 as part of an exchange of helping the Lancastrians fight against the Yorkists during The War of the Roses. It was retaken by the Yorkists in 1468. In 1483 a Papal bull decreed that the islands would be neutral during time of war. This privilege of neutrality enabled islanders to trade with both France and England and was respected until 1689 when it was abolished by Order in Council following the Glorious Revolution in Great Britain.[citation needed]
Various attempts to transfer the islands from the diocese of Coutances (to Nantes (1400), Salisbury (1496), and Winchester (1499)) had little effect until an Order in Council of 1569 brought the islands formally into the diocese of Winchester. Control by the bishop of Winchester was ineffectual as the islands had turned overwhelmingly Calvinist and the episcopacy was not restored until 1620 in Jersey and 1663 in Guernsey.[citation needed]
Sark in the 16th century was uninhabited until colonised from Jersey in the 1560s. The grant of seigneurship from Elizabeth I of England in 1565 forms the basis of Sark's constitution today.
From the seventeenth century[edit]
Main article: Channel Islands in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms
During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Jersey held out strongly for the Royalist cause, providing refuge for Charles, Prince of Wales in 1646 and 1649–1650, while the more strongly Presbyterian Guernsey more generally favoured the parliamentary cause (although Castle Cornet was held by Royalists and did not surrender until October 1651.[12][13][14]
The islands acquired commercial and political interests in the North American colonies. Islanders became involved with the Newfoundland fisheries in the seventeenth century. In recognition for all the help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America. Sir Edmund Andros of Guernsey was an early colonial governor in North America, and head of the short-lived Dominion of New England.[citation needed]
In the late eighteenth century, the Islands were dubbed "the French Isles". Wealthy French émigrés fleeing the Revolution sought residency in the islands. Many of the town domiciles existing today were built in that time. In Saint Peter Port, a large part of the harbour had been built by 1865.
20th century[edit]




German fortifications, built during the Second World War, are presently scattered throughout the landscape of the Channel Islands.


World War II[edit]
Main article: German occupation of the Channel Islands




During the German occupation of Jersey, a stonemason repairing the paving of the Royal Square incorporated a V for victory under the noses of the occupiers. This was later amended to refer to the Red Cross ship Vega. The addition of the date 1945 and a more recent frame has transformed it into a monument.


The islands were the only British territory to be occupied by the German Army during World War II.
The British Government demilitarised the islands in June 1940, and the lieutenant-governors were withdrawn on 21 June, leaving the insular administrations to continue government as best they could under impending military occupation.[15]
Before German troops landed, between 30 June and 4 July 1940, evacuation took place. Many young men had already left to join the Allied armed forces, as volunteers. 6,600 out of 50,000 left Jersey while 17,000 out of 42,000 left Guernsey.[16] Thousands of children were evacuated with their schools to England and Scotland.




Crowds cheer as the Channel Islands are liberated at Saint Peter Port in 1945


The population of Sark largely remained where they were;[15] but in Alderney, the entire population, save for six persons, left. In Alderney, the occupying Germans built four camps in which over 700 people out of a total worker population of about 6,000 died. Due to the destruction of documents, it is impossible to state how many forced workers died in the other islands.[15] Alderney had the only Nazi concentration camps on British soil.[17][18]
The Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time, particularly following the Invasion of Normandy in June 1944. There was considerable hunger and privation during the five years of German occupation, particularly in the final months when the population was close to starvation. Intense negotiations resulted in some humanitarian aid being sent via the Red Cross, leading to the arrival of Red Cross parcels in the supply ship SS Vega in December 1944.
The German occupation of 1940–45 was harsh: over 2,000 Islanders were deported by the Germans,[15] some Jews were sent to concentration camps; Partisan resistance and retribution, accusations of collaboration, and slave labour also occurred. Many Spaniards, initially refugees from the Spanish Civil War, were brought to the islands to build fortifications.[19][20] Later, Russians and Central Europeans[who?] continued the work.[20] Many land mines were laid, with 65,718 land mines laid in Jersey alone.[21]
There was no resistance movement in the Channel Islands on the scale of that in mainland France. This has been ascribed to a range of factors including the physical separation of the Islands, the density of troops (up to one German for every two Islanders), the small size of the Islands precluding any hiding places for resistance groups, and the absence of the Gestapo from the occupying forces. Moreover, much of the population of military age had joined the British Army already.
The end of the occupation came after VE-Day on 8 May 1945, Jersey and Guernsey being liberated on 9 May. The German garrison in Alderney was left until 16 May, and it was one of the last of the Nazi German remnants to surrender.[22] The first evacuees returned on the first sailing from Great Britain on 23 June,[15] but the people of Alderney were unable to start returning until December 1945. Many of the evacuees who returned home had difficulty reconnecting with their families after five years of separation.[16]
Post-1945[edit]
Following the liberation of 1945, reconstruction led to a transformation of the economies of the islands, attracting immigration and developing tourism. The legislatures were reformed and non-party governments embarked on social programmes, aided by the incomes from offshore finance, which grew rapidly from the 1960s.[23] The islands decided not to join the European Economic Community when the UK joined, and remain outside.[24] Since the 1990s declining profitability of agriculture and tourism has challenged the governments of the islands.[25]
Politics[edit]
Main articles: Crown dependencies, Politics of Jersey, Politics of Guernsey, and Politics of Alderney







Flag of Jersey









Flag of Guernsey









Flag of Alderney









Flag of Sark









Flag of Herm




The Channel Islands fall into two separate self-governing bailiwicks, the Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Bailiwick of Jersey. Both are British Crown dependencies, and neither is part of the United Kingdom. They have been part of the Duchy of Normandy since the tenth century, and Queen Elizabeth II is often referred to by her traditional and conventional title of Duke of Normandy. However, pursuant to the Treaty of Paris (1259), she governs in her right as The Queen (the "Crown in right of Jersey",[26] and the "Crown in right of the république of the Bailiwick of Guernsey"),[27] and not as the Duke. This notwithstanding, it is a matter of local pride for monarchists to treat the situation otherwise: the Loyal Toast at formal dinners is to 'The Queen, our Duke', rather than to 'Her Majesty, The Queen' as in the UK.[28]
A bailiwick is a territory administered by a bailiff. Although the words derive from a common root ('bail' = 'to give charge of') there is a vast difference between the meaning of the word 'bailiff' (English) and 'Bailiff' (CI). (The former is a court-appointed private debt-collector authorised to collect judgment debts, while the latter is the most important citizen within his Bailiwick.) The Bailiff in each bailiwick is the civil head, presiding officer of the States, and also head of the judiciary.
In the early part of the twenty-first century, the existence of governmental offices such as the bailiffs' which incorporate multiple roles straddling the different branches of Government came under increased scrutiny for their apparent contravention of the doctrine of separation of powers—most notably in the Guernsey case of McGonnell -v- United Kingdom (2000) 30 EHRR 289, which following final judgement at the European Court of Human Rights became part of the impetus for much recent constitutional change, particularly the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (2005 c.4) in the UK itself, including the separation of the roles of the Lord Chancellor, the abolition of the House of Lords' judicial role, and its replacement by the UK Supreme Court. The Islands' bailiffs, however, still retain their historic roles.
The systems of government in the Islands date from Norman times, which accounts for the names of the legislatures, the States, derived from the Norman 'États' or 'estates' (i.e. the Crown, the Church, and the people). The States have evolved over the centuries into democratic parliaments.




Entrance to the public gallery of the States Chamber in Jersey.


The UK Parliament has power to legislate for the Islands, but Acts of Parliament do not extend to the Islands automatically. Usually, the Act gives power to extend the application of the Act to the Islands by an Order in Council, after consultation. For the most part the Islands legislate for themselves.[29] Each island has its own primary legislature, known as the States of Guernsey and the States of Jersey, with Chief Pleas in Sark and the States of Alderney – the Channel Islands are not represented in the UK Parliament. Laws passed by the States are given Royal Assent by The Queen in Council, to whom the islands' governments are responsible.[30]
The islands are not part of the European Union and, thus, were not a party to the 2016 referendum on the EU membership, but are part of the Customs Territory of the European Community by virtue of Protocol Three to the Treaty on European Union. In September 2010, a Channel Islands Brussels Office was set up jointly by the two Bailiwicks to develop the Channel Islands' influence with the EU, to advise the Channel Islands' governments on European matters, and to promote economic links with the EU.[31]
Both bailiwicks are members of the British–Irish Council, and Jèrriais and Guernésiais are recognised regional languages of the Isles.
The legal courts are separate; separate courts of appeal have been in place since 1961. Among the legal heritage from Norman law is the Clameur de Haro. The basis of the legal systems of both Bailiwicks is Norman customary law (Coutume) rather than the English Common Law, although elements of the latter have become established over time.
Islanders are full British citizens, and therefore European citizens. Any British citizen who applies for a passport in Jersey or Guernsey receives a passport bearing the words "British Islands, Bailiwick of Jersey" or "British Islands, Bailiwick of Guernsey". Under the provisions of Protocol Three, Channel Islanders who do not have a close connection with the UK (no parent or grandparent from the UK, and have never been resident in the UK for a five-year period) do not automatically benefit from the EU provisions on free movement within the EU, and their passports receive an endorsement to that effect. This affects only a minority of islanders.
Under the UK Interpretation Act 1978, the Channel Islands are deemed to be part of the British Islands,[32] not to be confused with the British Isles. For the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1981, the “British Islands” include the United Kingdom (Great Britain and Northern Ireland), the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, taken together, unless the context otherwise requires.[33]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Jersey
See also: Guernsey pound and Jersey pound
Tourism is the major industry in the smaller islands (with some agriculture). However, Jersey and Guernsey have, since the 1960s, become major offshore financial centres on the scale of the Cayman Islands or Bermuda.[34] Guernsey's horticultural and greenhouse activities have been more significant than in Jersey, and Guernsey has maintained light industry as a higher proportion of its economy than Jersey. Jersey's economy since the 1980s has been substantially more reliant on finance.[citation needed] Both islands are now heavily dependent on the finance industry, this along with a high cost of living has resulted in a general widening between the rich and poor.
Both bailiwicks issue their own banknotes and coins, which circulate freely in all the islands alongside UK coinage and Bank of England and Scottish banknotes.[35] There are many exports, largely consisting of crafted goods and farmed produce.[citation needed]
Transport and communications[edit]
Post[edit]
Main articles: Jersey Post and Guernsey Post
Since 1969, Jersey and Guernsey have operated postal administrations independently of the UK's Royal Mail, with their own postage stamps, which can be used for postage only in their respective Bailiwicks. UK stamps are no longer valid, but mail to the islands, and to the Isle of Man, is charged at UK inland rates. It was not until the early 1990s that the islands joined the UK's postcode system, Jersey postcodes using the initials JE and Guernsey GY.
Transport[edit]
Main articles: Transport in Guernsey and Transport in Jersey
Road[edit]
Main article: Roads in Jersey
Each of the three largest islands has a distinct vehicle registration scheme:

Guernsey (GBG): a number of up to five digits;
Jersey (GBJ): J followed by up to six digits (JSY vanity plates are also issued);
Alderney (GBA): AY followed by up to five digits (four digits are the most that have been used, as redundant numbers are re-issued).

In Sark, where most motor traffic is prohibited, the few vehicles – nearly all tractors – do not display plates. Bicycles display tax discs.
Sea[edit]
In the 1960s, names used for the cross-Channel ferries plying the mail route between the islands and Weymouth, Dorset, were taken from the popular Latin names for the islands: Caesarea (Jersey), Sarnia (Guernsey) and Riduna (Alderney). Fifty years later, the ferry route between the Channel Islands and the UK is operated by Condor Ferries from both St Helier, Jersey and St Peter Port, Guernsey, using high-speed catamaran fast craft to Poole in the UK. A regular passenger ferry service on the Commodore Clipper goes from both Channel Island ports to Portsmouth daily, and carries both passengers and freight.
Ferry services to Normandy are operated by Manche Îles Express, and services between Jersey and Saint Malo are operated by Compagnie Corsaire and Condor Ferries.
The Isle of Sark Shipping Company operates small ferries to Sark.
On 20 August 2013, Huelin-Renouf, which had operated a "lift-on lift-off" container service for 80 years between the Port of Southampton and the Port of Jersey, ceased trading.[36] Senator Alan Maclean, a Jersey politician had previously tried to save the 90-odd jobs furnished by the company to no avail.[37] On 20 September, it was announced that Channel Island Lines would continue this service, and would purchase the MV Huelin Dispatch from Associated British Ports who in turn had purchased them from the receiver in the bankruptcy.[38] The new operator was to be funded by Rockayne Limited, a closely held association of Jersey businesspeople.[38]
Air[edit]
There are three airports in the Channel Islands; Alderney Airport, Guernsey Airport and Jersey Airport, which are directly connected to each other by services operated by Blue Islands and Aurigny.
Rail[edit]
Historically there have been railway networks on Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney, but all of the lines on Jersey and Guernsey have been closed and dismantled. Today there are three working railways in the Channel Islands, of which the Alderney Railway is the only one providing a regular timetabled passenger service. The other two are a 7 1⁄4 in (184 mm) gauge miniature railway, also on Alderney, and the heritage steam railway operated on Jersey as part of the Pallot Heritage Steam Museum.
Media[edit]
Regional television and radio broadcasts are available in the islands. These services are provided by BBC Radio Jersey, BBC Radio Guernsey, BBC Channel Islands, ITV Channel Television, Island FM, and Channel 103. Jubilee Hospital Radio provided Guernsey hospitals with a radio service, Radio Lions serves Jersey hospitals. Bailiwick Radio broadcasts two music services online, through Apple & Android apps and on TuneIn.
Television programmes are broadcast from the Frémont Point transmitting station. A local television service was called Channel Islands Live started transmitting in early 2016, from the studios at Dorset Street, St. Helier, Jersey, Channel Islands.
There are several local newspapers including the Guernsey Press and the Jersey Evening Post and magazines.
Telephone[edit]
Main article: Telecommunications in Jersey
Jersey always operated its own telephone services independently of Britain's national system, Guernsey established its own telephone service in 1968. Both islands still form part of the British telephone numbering plan, but Ofcom on the mainlines does not have responsibility for telecommunications regulatory and licensing issues on the islands. It is responsible for wireless telegraphy licensing throughout the islands, and by agreement, for broadcasting regulation in the two large islands only.
Internet[edit]
Modern broadband speeds are available in all the islands, including VDSL for home and business. Providers include Sure and JT.
The two Bailiwicks each have their own internet domain, .GG (Guernsey, Alderney, Sark) and .JE (Jersey), which are managed by channelisles.net.[39]
Culture[edit]
Main articles: Culture of Jersey and Culture of Guernsey
See also: Music of the Channel Islands




A sea festival advertised using Dgèrnésiais.


The Norman language predominated in the islands until the nineteenth century, when increasing influence from English-speaking settlers and easier transport links led to Anglicisation.[40] There are four main dialects/languages of Norman in the islands, Auregnais (Alderney, extinct in late twentieth century), Dgèrnésiais (Guernsey), Jèrriais (Jersey) and Sercquiais (Sark, an offshoot of Jèrriais).[41]
Victor Hugo spent many years in exile, first in Jersey and then in Guernsey, where he finished Les Misérables. Guernsey is the setting of Hugo's later novel, Les Travailleurs de la Mer (The Toilers of the Sea).[42] A "Guernsey-man" also makes an appearance in chapter 91 of Herman Melville's Moby-Dick.[43]
The annual "Muratti", the inter-island football match, is considered the sporting event of the year, although, due to broadcast coverage, it no longer attracts the crowds of spectators, travelling between the islands, that it did during the twentieth century.[44]
Cricket is popular in the Channel Islands. The Jersey cricket team and the Guernsey cricket team are both Associate members of the International Cricket Council. The teams have played each other in the Inter-insular match since 1957. In 2001 and 2002, the Channel Islands entered a team into the MCCA Knockout Trophy, the one-day tournament of the Minor counties of English and Welsh cricket.[45]
Channel Island sportsmen and women compete in the Commonwealth Games for their respective islands and the islands have also been enthusiastic supporters of the Island Games. Shooting is a popular sport, in which islanders have won Commonwealth medals.[46]
Guernsey's traditional colour for sporting and other purposes is green and Jersey's is red.[47]




This statue of a crapaud (toad) in St Helier represents the traditional nickname for Jersey people.


The main islanders have traditional animal nicknames:[48][49]

Guernsey: les ânes ("donkeys" in French and Norman): the steepness of St Peter Port streets required beasts of burden, but Guernsey people also claim it is a symbol of their strength of character – which Jersey people traditionally interpret as stubbornness.
Jersey: les crapauds ("toads" in French and Jèrriais): Jersey has toads and snakes, which Guernsey lacks.
Sark: les corbins ("crows" in Sercquiais, Dgèrnésiais and Jèrriais, les corbeaux in French): crows could be seen from the sea on the island's coast.
Alderney: les lapins ("rabbits" in French and Auregnais): the island is noted for its warrens.

Faith and religious history[edit]
Main article: List of churches, chapels and meeting halls in the Channel Islands
Christianity was brought to the islands around the sixth century; according to tradition, Jersey was evangelised by St Helier, Guernsey by St Samson of Dol, and the smaller islands were occupied at various times by monastic communities representing strands of Celtic Christianity. At the Reformation, the islands turned Calvinist under the influence of an influx of French-language pamphlets published in Geneva. Anglicanism was imposed in the seventeenth century, but the Non-Conformist tendency re-emerged with a strong adoption of Methodism. The presence of long-term Catholic communities from France and seasonal workers from Brittany and Normandy added to the mix of denominations.[citation needed] In late twentieth Century, a strong Roman Catholic presence re-emerged with the many Portuguese workers (both from Mainland Portugal and the Island of Madeira) coming to live in the islands, and more recently Polish Roman Catholics and other Eastern Europe worshipers. Today, more evangelical churches have been established. Services are held in a number of languages.
39% of the population are non-religious.[50][51]
Other islands in the English Channel[edit]
There are other islands in the English Channel which are not part of the Channel Islands. Among these are the French islands Bréhat, Île de Batz, Chausey, Tatihou and Îles Saint-Marcouf. The Isle of Wight, which is part of England, is between the Channel and the Solent.
See also[edit]


Channel Islands portal
Jersey portal
United Kingdom portal





Part of a series on the



History of the British Isles











Overview


United Kingdom

England

Isle of Wight
Isles of Scilly


Scotland

Shetland
Orkney
Inner Hebrides
Outer Hebrides


Wales

Anglesey


Northern Ireland


Ireland
Isle of Man (Mann)
Channel Islands

Jersey
Guernsey










Prehistoric period


Prehistoric Britain

Prehistoric England
Prehistoric Scotland

Prehistoric Shetland
Prehistoric Orkney


Prehistoric Wales


Prehistoric Ireland
Prehistoric Mann








Classical period


Roman Britain
Roman Scotland
Roman Wales
Protohistoric Ireland, Roman Ireland
Sub-Roman Britain








Medieval period


Medieval England

Early medieval England
High medieval England
Late medieval England


Medieval Scotland

Early medieval Scotland
High medieval Scotland
Late medieval Scotland


Medieval Wales

Early medieval Wales
High medieval Wales
Late medieval Wales


Medieval Ireland

Early medieval Ireland
High medieval Ireland
Late medieval Ireland


Medieval Mann








Early modern period


Early modern Britain
Early modern England
Early modern Scotland
Early modern Wales
Early modern Ireland
Early modern Mann








Late modern period


United Kingdom (since 1707)

Victorian period
Edwardian period
First World War
Interwar period
Second World War
Post-war period (political history)
Post-war period (social history)


Late modern Ireland
Late modern Mann









v
t
e






German occupation of the Channel Islands
List of Ramsar wetlands of international importance
List of churches, chapels and meeting halls in the Channel Islands
Places named after the Channel Islands

Notes[edit]



^ The term Îles de la Manche is the official French appellation in the islands themselves, whereas in France the usual term is Îles Anglo-Normandes.



References[edit]



^ "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ "Royal.gov.uk". Royal.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 21 September 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ Ministry of Justice. "Fact sheet on the UK's relationship with the Crown Dependencies" (PDF). GOV.UK. Retrieved 14 February 2016. HM Government is responsible for the defence and international relations of the Islands. 
^ Graham, Richard (2015). At their Majesties’ Service. Gateway Publishing. ISBN 9781902471129. 
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisjersey.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisjersey.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ Rule, Margaret. A Gallo-Roman Trading Vessel from Guernsey. Guernsey Museums & Galleries. ISBN 978-1871560039. 
^ Balleine's History of Jersey, Marguerite Syvret and Joan Stevens (1998) ISBN 1-86077-065-7
^ Stapleton, Thomas (1840). Magni rotuli scaccarii Normanniæ sub regibus Angliæ. p. lii. 
^ a b Thornton, Tim (2004). The Charters of Guernsey. Woodfield Publishing. ISBN 978-1903953655. 
^ Bertrand du Guesclin: The Black Dog of Brittany Thisisjersey.com, copyright 2010, accessed 31 October 2010.
^ Lemprière 1970, p. [page needed].
^ Moore 2005, p. 226.
^ Ellis 1937.
^ a b c d e The German Occupation of the Channel Islands, Cruikshank, Oxford 1975 ISBN 0-19-285087-3
^ a b "Guernsey Evacuees Oral History". Guernseyevacuees.wordpress.com. 30 May 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ Christine O'Keefe. "Appendix F: Concentration Camps: Endlösung – The Final Solution". Retrieved 6 June 2009 
^ Matisson Consultants. "Aurigny ; un camp de concentration nazi sur une île anglo-normande (English: Alderney, a Nazi concentration camp on an island Anglo-Norman)". Retrieved 6 June 2009  (in French)
^ Thisisjersey.com/
^ a b Ginns, Michael (2009). Jersey Occupied: The German Armed Forces in Jersey 1940–1945. Channel Island Publishing. ISBN 1905095295. 
^ German Fortifications in Jersey, Ginns & Bryans, Jersey 1975
^ Legacy Publishers. "Nazi Germany Surrenders: February 1945 – May 1945" 
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisjersey.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ Gov.je Archived 29 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisguernsey.com. 9 May 1945. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Public Hearing: Review of the Roles of the Crown Officers" (PDF). States of Jersey. 2 July 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010. 
^ "Review of the Roles of the Jersey Crown Officers" (PDF). States of Jersey. 30 March 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2010. 
^ "This is Jersey: History & Heritage". thisisjersey.com. Retrieved 27 November 2010. 
^ UK Supreme Court, R (on the application of Barclay and another) v. Secretary of State for Justice [2014] UKSC 54 [1]
^ "Background briefing on the Crown Dependencies: Jersey, Guernsey and the Isle of Man" (PDF). Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Guernsey and Jersey begin recruiting for senior Brussels positions" (PDF). Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ ""British Islands" means the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. (1889)". Statutelaw.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 7 May 2009. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "British Nationality Act 1981". Legislation, UK, Acts. Office of Public Sector Information. Archived from the original on 1 October 2009. Retrieved 14 September 2009. the Islands” means the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man; [...] the United Kingdom” means Great Britain, Northern Ireland and the Islands, taken together.  [Schedule 1., s. 50 (1)]
^ "The Global Financial Centres Index 8" (PDF). Z/Yen. 2010. 
^ "Other British Islands' Notes | Bank of England". www.bankofengland.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-07-28. 
^ bbc.co.uk: "Shipping company Huelin-Renouf stops trading" 20 Aug 2013
^ "Talks under way to save 90 jobs at Huelin-Renouf" 17 Aug 2013
^ a b "New Channel Island company offers freight service". BBC News. 20 September 2013. 
^ CHANNELISLES.NET
^ The Triumph of the Country, Kelleher, Jersey 1994, ISBN 0-9518162-4-1
^ La Grève de Lecq, Roger Jean Lebarbenchon, 1988 ISBN 2-905385-13-8
^ "Trail of the unexpected: Victor Hugo’s Guernsey", The Independent, 3 July 2010.
^ Herman Melville, Moby-Dick (St Botoph Society edition, 1892) pp. 381–384. Excerpts available at Google Books.
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisjersey.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Minor Counties Trophy Matches played by Channel Islands". Cricketarchive.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Thecgf.com". Thecgf.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "Non-FIFA National Teams Colours". Rsssf.com. 28 November 2006. Retrieved 21 August 2010. 
^ Dictionnaire Jersiais-Français, 1966
^ "Thisisjersey.com". Thisisguernsey.com. Retrieved 4 October 2012. 
^ "First ever Jersey official religion statistics show 39% of islanders are non-religious". humanism.org.uk. British Humanist Association. 2015-12-02. 
^ "Jersey Annual Social Survey 2015" (PDF). www.gov.je. States of Jersey. 2015-12-02. p. 8. 



Bibliography[edit]

Encyclopædia Britannica Vol. 5 (1951), Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago – London – Toronto
Ellis, F H (1937), "The Great Rebellion - Parliamentary invasion", Annual Bulletin of La Société Jersiaise  — Republished "This is the eighth part of a 54-page article". The Great Rebellion - Parliamentary invasion. 15 September 2014. 
Lemprière, Raoul (1970), Portrait of the Channel Islands, London: Hale, ISBN 0-7091-1541-5 
Moore, David W. (2005), The Other British Isles: A History of Shetland, Orkney, the Hebrides, Isle of Man, Anglesey, Scilly, Isle of Wight and the Channel Islands, McFarland, p. 226, ISBN 9780786489244 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutChannel Islandsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



 "Channel Islands". Encyclopædia Britannica. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. 
States of Alderney
States of Guernsey
States of Jersey
Government of Sark







v
t
e


The Channel Islands



Bailiwick of Guernsey




Guernsey



Herm
Lihou
Jethou
Les Hanois
Les Houmets
Crevichon
Bréhon





Alderney



Ortac
Burhou
Les Casquets





Sark



Brecqhou








Bailiwick of Jersey



Jersey
Les Écréhous
La Motte
Les Minquiers
Pierres de Lecq
Les Dirouilles






See also: Chausey








Links to related articles











v
t
e


British Isles






Terminology

Alba
Albion
Prydain
Britain
Éire
Hibernia


Naming dispute





Politics




Sovereign states



Ireland
United Kingdom (England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales)





Crown dependencies



Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man
Sark





Political cooperation



Ireland–United Kingdom relations
British–Irish Council
British–Irish Intergovernmental Conference
British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly
Common Travel Area








Geography




Island groups



Channel Islands
Islands of the Clyde
Great Britain
Hebrides

Inner
Outer


Ireland
Isle of Man
Northern Isles

Orkney
Shetland


Isles of Scilly





Lists of islands of



Bailiwick of Guernsey
Ireland
Bailiwick of Jersey
Isle of Man
United Kingdom

England
Scotland
Wales










History




Island groups



Ireland





Current states



Ireland
United Kingdom

England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales


Guernsey
Jersey
Isle of Man





Former states



Irish Free State
Kingdom of England

Principality of Wales


Kingdom of Great Britain
Kingdom of Ireland
Kingdom of Scotland
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland








Society




Modern languages




Germanic



English
Scots





Celtic



Cornish
Scottish Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Welsh





Romance



Auregnais
French
Guernésiais
Jèrriais
Sercquiais





Other



British Sign Language
Irish Sign Language
Northern Ireland Sign Language
Shelta








People



British
Cornish
English
English Gypsies
Irish
Irish Travellers
Kale
Manx
Northern Irish
Scottish
Ulster-Scots
Welsh















v
t
e


British people






Anglosphere
English language
English-speaking world
British diaspora








Anglo-Irish
Anguillans
Ascension Islanders
Bermudians
British Virgin Islanders
Caymanians
Chagossians (Îlois)
Channel Islanders
Cornish
English
Falkland Islanders
Gibraltarians
Hongkongers (British Nationals (Overseas))
Manx
Montserratians
Northern Irish
Orcadians
Pitcairn Islanders
Saint Helenians
Scots
Shetlanders
Tristan Islanders
Turks and Caicos Islanders
Ulster Protestants
Ulster Scots
Welsh












v
t
e


Guernsey articles






History
Geography
Geology





History



Archaeology
Braye du Valle
Fortifications of Guernsey

Bréhon Tower
Castle Cornet
Chateau des Marais
Doyle Monument
Fort Grey
Fort Hommet
Vale Castle


German occupation during World War II

Evacuation
Resistance
Relationships
Civilian life
Deportations
Fort Hommet 10.5cm
German fortification of Guernsey
Channel Islands Occupation Society (CIOS)


Jews in Guernsey
Royal Guernsey Light Infantry
Royal Guernsey Militia
Maritime history
Windmills
Witch trials








Subdivisions




Islands



Guernsey
Alderney
Sark
Herm
Jethou
Brecqhou
Lihou





Parishes



Castel
Forest
St Andrew
St Martin
St Peter Port
St Pierre du Bois
St Sampson
St Saviour
Torteval
Vale








Schools




State



Grammar Sch. & 6th Form Ctr.
La Mare de Carteret
Les Beaucamps HS
St Sampson's HS
St Anne's, Alderney
Sark
Herm





Independent



Blanchelande College
Elizabeth College
Ladies' College








Politics







Bailiff of Guernsey

list


Chief Minister
Courts of Guernsey
Duke of Normandy
Elections
Greffier
Laws
Law enforcement
Lieutenant Governor
Politics of Guernsey
States of Election
States Assembly








Economy







Banks
Guernsey Post
Guernsey pound

coins


Stock Exchange
Telecommunications
Transport

airport
rail
harbour


Emergency Services

Ambulance
Fire
Lifeboat
Police










Culture







Catholic Church
Cuisine

Bean Jar


Demographics
Languages

Guernésiais


Music
St James
Religion

Town Church
St Martin's Church
Vale Church
Chapel of St Apolline


Sport
Television





Symbols



Anthem
Coat of arms
Flag
Floral emblem












Outline
Index
Bibliography



Category
Portal
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Channel_Islands&oldid=818383777"					Categories: Channel IslandsBritish IslesSpecial territories of the European UnionHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2015Articles with inconsistent citation formatsArticles with French-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksUse British English from May 2011Use dmy dates from March 2015Articles containing French-language textArticles containing Norman-language textCoordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2010All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference