For healthcare professionals who practice in pharmacy, see Pharmacist. For other uses, see Chemist (disambiguation).




The Apothecary or The Chemist by Gabriël Metsu (c. 1651–67).


A chemist (from Greek chēm (ía) alchemy + -ist; replacing chymist from Medieval Latin alchimista[1]) is a scientist trained in the study of chemistry. Chemists study the composition of matter and its properties. Chemists carefully describe the properties they study in terms of quantities, with detail on the level of molecules and their component atoms. Chemists carefully measure substance proportions, reaction rates, and other chemical properties. The word 'chemist' is also used to address Pharmacists in Commonwealth English.
Chemists use this knowledge to learn the composition, and properties of unfamiliar substances, as well as to reproduce and synthesize large quantities of useful naturally occurring substances and create new artificial substances and useful processes. Chemists may specialize in any number of subdisciplines of chemistry. Materials scientists and metallurgists share much of the same education and skills with chemists. The work of chemists is often related to the work of chemical engineers, who are primarily concerned with the proper design, construction and evaluation of the most cost-effective large-scale chemical plants and work closely with industrial chemists on the development of new processes and methods for the commercial-scale manufacture of chemicals and related products.



Contents


1 History of chemistry
2 Education
3 Employment
4 Professional societies
5 Honors and awards
6 See also
7 References



History of chemistry[edit]
Main article: History of chemistry




Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev - author of the first modern periodic table of elements






Antoine Lavoisier (1743–94) is considered the "Father of Modern Chemistry".


The roots of chemistry can be traced to the phenomenon of burning. Fire was a mystical force that transformed one substance into another and thus was of primary interest to mankind. It was fire that led to the discovery of iron and glasses. After gold was discovered and became a precious metal, many people were interested to find a method that could convert other substances into gold. This led to the protoscience called alchemy. The word chemist is derived from the New Latin noun chimista, an abbreviation of alchimista (alchemist). Alchemists discovered many chemical processes that led to the development of modern chemistry. Chemistry as we know it today, was invented by Antoine Lavoisier with his law of conservation of mass in 1783. The discoveries of the chemical elements has a long history culminating in the creation of the periodic table by Dmitri Mendeleev. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry created in 1901 gives an excellent overview of chemical discovery since the start of the 20th century.
Education[edit]
Jobs for chemists usually require at least a bachelor's degree, but many positions, especially those in research, require a Master of Science or a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD.). Most undergraduate programs emphasize mathematics and physics as well as chemistry, partly because chemistry is also known as "the central science", thus chemists ought to have a well-rounded knowledge about science. At the Master's level and higher, students tend to specialize in a particular field. Fields of specialization include biochemistry, nuclear chemistry, organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, polymer chemistry, analytical chemistry, physical chemistry, theoretical chemistry, quantum chemistry, environmental chemistry, and thermochemistry. Postdoctoral experience may be required for certain positions.
Workers whose work involves chemistry, but not at a complexity requiring an education with a chemistry degree, are commonly referred to as chemical technicians. Such technicians commonly do such work as simpler, routine analyses for quality control or in clinical laboratories, having an associate degree. A Chemical Technologists has more education and/or experience than a chemical technician but less than a Chemist, often having a bachelor's degree in a different field of science with also an associate degree in chemistry (or many credits related to Chemistry) or having the same education as a Chemical technician but more experience. There are also degrees specific to become a Chemical Technologist, which are somewhat distinct from those required when a student is interested in becoming a professional Chemist. A Chemical technologist is more involved in the management and operation of the equipment and instrumentation necessary to perform chemical analyzes than a chemical technician. They are part of the team of a chemical laboratory in which the quality of the raw material, intermediate products and finished products is analyzed. They also perform functions in the areas of environmental quality control and the operational phase of a chemical plant.
In addition to all the training usually given to Chemical Technologists in their respective degree (or one given via an associate degree), a Chemist is also trained to understand more details related to chemical phenomena so that the chemist can be capable of more planning on the steps to achieve a distinct goal via a chemistry-related endeavor. The higher the competency level achieved in the field of Chemistry (as assessed via a combination of education, experience and personal achievements), the higher the responsibility given to that chemist and the more complicated the task might be. Chemistry, as a field, have so many applications that different tasks/objectives can be given to workers/scientists with these different levels of education and/or experience. The specific title of each job varies from position to position, depending on factors such as the kind of industry, the routine level of the task, the current needs of a particular enterprise, the size of the enterprise or hiring firm, the philosophy and management principles of the hiring firm, the visibility of the competency and individual achievements of the one seeking employment, economic factors such as recession or economic depression, among other factors, so this makes it difficult to categorize the exact roles of these chemistry-related workers as standard for that given level of education. Because of these factors affecting exact job titles with distinct responsibilities, some chemists might begin doing technician tasks while other chemists might begin doing more complicated tasks than those of a technician, such as tasks that also involve formal applied research, management, or supervision included within the responsibilities of that same job title. The level of supervision given to that chemist also varies in a similar manner, with factors similar to those that affect the tasks demanded for a particular chemist.




A chemist in a lab


It is important that those interested in a Chemistry degree understand the variety of roles available to them (on average), which vary depending on education and job experience. Those Chemists who hold a bachelor's degree are most commonly involved in positions related to either research assistance (working under the guidance of senior chemists in a research-oriented activity), or, alternatively, they may work on distinct (chemistry-related) aspects of a business/organization/enterprise, including aspects that involve quality control, quality assurance, manufacturing/production, formulation, inspection, method validation, visitation for troubleshooting of chemistry-related instruments, regulatory affairs, "on-demand" technical services, chemical analysis for non-research purposes (e.g. as a legal request, for testing purposes, or for government or non-profit agencies); chemists may also work in environmental evaluation & assessment. Other jobs/roles may include sales and marketing of chemical products and chemistry-related instruments, and/or technical writing. The more experience obtained, the more independence & leadership/management roles these chemists may perform in those organizations. Some chemists with relatively higher experience might change jobs or job position to become a manager of a chemistry-related enterprise, a supervisor, an entrepreneur or a chemistry consultant. Other chemists choose to combine their education and/or experience as a chemist with a distinct credential to provide different services (e.g. forensic chemists, chemistry-related software development, patent law specialists, environmental law firm staff, scientific news reporting staff, engineering design staff, etc.)... In comparison, Chemists who have obtained a Master of Science (M.S.) in Chemistry or in a very related discipline may find chemist roles that allow them to enjoy more independence, leadership and/or responsibility earlier in their careers (with less years of experience than those with a bachelor's degree as highest degree); Sometimes, M.S. chemists receive more complex tasks duties, in comparison with the roles/positions found by chemists with a bachelor's degree as their highest academic degree and with the same or close-to-same years of job experience. Although good chemists without a PhD. degree but with relatively many years of experience may be allowed some applied research positions, the general rule is that PhD. chemists are preferred for research positions and are typically the preferred choice for the highest administrative positions on big enterprises involved in Chemistry-related duties. Some positions, especially research oriented, will only allow those chemists who are PhD. holders. Jobs that involve intensive research and actively seek to lead the discovery of completely new chemical products under specifically assigned monetary funds & resources, or jobs that seek to develop new scientific theories, require a Ph.D. more often than not. Chemists with a PhD. as the highest academic degree are found typically on the R&D department of an enterprise, and can also hold university positionsΉ as professors. Some smaller colleges, as well as Community Colleges, usually hire chemists with M.S. as professors too (and rarely, some universities who need part-time or temporary instructors, or temporary staff), but when the positions are scarce and the applicants are many, they might prefer PhD. holders instead.
Employment[edit]
The three major employers of chemists are academic institutions, industry, especially the chemical industry and the pharmaceutical industry, and government laboratories.
Chemistry typically is divided into several major sub-disciplines. There are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry. There is a great deal of overlap between different branches of chemistry, as well as with other scientific fields such as biology, medicine, physics, radiology, and several engineering disciplines.

Analytical chemistry is the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure. Analytical chemistry incorporates standardized experimental methods in chemistry. These methods may be used in all subdisciplines of chemistry, excluding purely theoretical chemistry.
Biochemistry is the study of the chemicals, chemical reactions and chemical interactions that take place in living organisms. Biochemistry and organic chemistry are closely related, for example, in medicinal chemistry.



A chemist prepares a new fuel cell for testing.




A chemist pours from a round-bottom flask.



Inorganic chemistry is the study of the properties and reactions of inorganic compounds. The distinction between organic and inorganic disciplines is not absolute and there is much overlap, most importantly in the sub-discipline of organometallic chemistry. Inorganic chemistry is also the study of atomic and molecular structure and bonding.
Medicinal chemistry is the science involved with designing, synthesizing and developing pharmaceutical drugs. Medicinal chemistry involves the identification, synthesis and development of new chemical entities suitable for therapeutic use. It also includes the study of existing drugs, their biological properties, and their quantitative structure-activity relationships.
Organic chemistry is the study of the structure, properties, composition, mechanisms, and chemical reaction of carbon compounds.
Physical chemistry is the study of the physical fundamental basis of chemical systems and processes. In particular, the energetics and dynamics of such systems and processes are of interest to physical chemists. Important areas of study include chemical thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, electrochemistry, quantum chemistry, statistical mechanics, and spectroscopy. Physical chemistry has a large overlap with theoretical chemistry and molecular physics. Physical chemistry involves the use of calculus in deriving equations.
Theoretical chemistry is the study of chemistry via theoretical reasoning (usually within mathematics or physics). In particular the application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is called quantum chemistry. Since the end of the Second World War, the development of computers has allowed a systematic development of computational chemistry, which is the art of developing and applying computer programs for solving chemical problems. Theoretical chemistry has large overlap with condensed matter physics and molecular physics. See reductionism.

All the above major areas of chemistry employ chemists. Other fields where chemical degrees are useful include astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry), atmospheric chemistry, chemical engineering, chemo-informatics, electrochemistry, environmental science, forensic science, geochemistry, green chemistry, history of chemistry, materials science, medical science, molecular biology, molecular genetics, nanotechnology, nuclear chemistry, oenology, organometallic chemistry, petrochemistry, pharmacology, photochemistry, phytochemistry, polymer chemistry, supramolecular chemistry and surface chemistry.
Professional societies[edit]
Chemists may belong to professional societies that specialize in chemist members, such as the Royal Society of Chemistry in the United Kingdom, or the American Chemical Society (ACS) in the United States.
Honors and awards[edit]
The highest honor awarded to chemists is the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, awarded since 1901, by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.






v
t
e


Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry



1901–1925



1901 Jacobus van 't Hoff
1902 Emil Fischer
1903 Svante Arrhenius
1904 William Ramsay
1905 Adolf von Baeyer
1906 Henri Moissan
1907 Eduard Buchner
1908 Ernest Rutherford
1909 Wilhelm Ostwald
1910 Otto Wallach
1911 Marie Curie
1912 Victor Grignard / Paul Sabatier
1913 Alfred Werner
1914 Theodore Richards
1915 Richard Willstätter
1916
1917
1918 Fritz Haber
1919
1920 Walther Nernst
1921 Frederick Soddy
1922 Francis Aston
1923 Fritz Pregl
1924
1925 Richard Zsigmondy








1926–1950



1926 Theodor Svedberg
1927 Heinrich Wieland
1928 Adolf Windaus
1929 Arthur Harden / Hans von Euler-Chelpin
1930 Hans Fischer
1931 Carl Bosch / Friedrich Bergius
1932 Irving Langmuir
1933
1934 Harold Urey
1935 Frédéric Joliot-Curie / Irène Joliot-Curie
1936 Peter Debye
1937 Norman Haworth / Paul Karrer
1938 Richard Kuhn
1939 Adolf Butenandt / Leopold Ružička
1940
1941
1942
1943 George de Hevesy
1944 Otto Hahn
1945 Artturi Virtanen
1946 James B. Sumner / John Northrop / Wendell Meredith Stanley
1947 Robert Robinson
1948 Arne Tiselius
1949 William Giauque
1950 Otto Diels / Kurt Alder





1951–1975



1951 Edwin McMillan / Glenn T. Seaborg
1952 Archer Martin / Richard Synge
1953 Hermann Staudinger
1954 Linus Pauling
1955 Vincent du Vigneaud
1956 Cyril Hinshelwood / Nikolay Semyonov
1957 Alexander Todd
1958 Frederick Sanger
1959 Jaroslav Heyrovský
1960 Willard Libby
1961 Melvin Calvin
1962 Max Perutz / John Kendrew
1963 Karl Ziegler / Giulio Natta
1964 Dorothy Hodgkin
1965 Robert Woodward
1966 Robert S. Mulliken
1967 Manfred Eigen / Ronald Norrish / George Porter
1968 Lars Onsager
1969 Derek Barton / Odd Hassel
1970 Luis Federico Leloir
1971 Gerhard Herzberg
1972 Christian B. Anfinsen / Stanford Moore / William Stein
1973 Ernst Otto Fischer / Geoffrey Wilkinson
1974 Paul Flory
1975 John Cornforth / Vladimir Prelog





1976–2000



1976 William Lipscomb
1977 Ilya Prigogine
1978 Peter D. Mitchell
1979 Herbert C. Brown / Georg Wittig
1980 Paul Berg / Walter Gilbert / Frederick Sanger
1981 Kenichi Fukui / Roald Hoffmann
1982 Aaron Klug
1983 Henry Taube
1984 Robert Merrifield
1985 Herbert A. Hauptman / Jerome Karle
1986 Dudley R. Herschbach / Yuan T. Lee / John Polanyi
1987 Donald J. Cram / Jean-Marie Lehn / Charles J. Pedersen
1988 Johann Deisenhofer / Robert Huber / Hartmut Michel
1989 Sidney Altman / Thomas Cech
1990 Elias Corey
1991 Richard R. Ernst
1992 Rudolph A. Marcus
1993 Kary Mullis / Michael Smith
1994 George Olah
1995 Paul J. Crutzen / Mario J. Molina / Frank Rowland
1996 Robert Curl / Harold Kroto / Richard Smalley
1997 Paul D. Boyer / John E. Walker / Jens Christian Skou
1998 Walter Kohn / John Pople
1999 Ahmed Zewail
2000 Alan J. Heeger / Alan MacDiarmid / Hideki Shirakawa





2001–present



2001 William Knowles / Ryoji Noyori / K. Barry Sharpless
2002 John B. Fenn / Koichi Tanaka / Kurt Wüthrich
2003 Peter Agre / Roderick MacKinnon
2004 Aaron Ciechanover / Avram Hershko / Irwin Rose
2005 Robert H. Grubbs / Richard R. Schrock / Yves Chauvin
2006 Roger D. Kornberg
2007 Gerhard Ertl
2008 Osamu Shimomura / Martin Chalfie / Roger Y. Tsien
2009 Venkatraman Ramakrishnan / Thomas A. Steitz / Ada E. Yonath
2010 Richard F. Heck / Akira Suzuki / Ei-ichi Negishi
2011 Dan Shechtman
2012 Robert Lefkowitz / Brian Kobilka
2013 Martin Karplus / Michael Levitt / Arieh Warshel
2014 Eric Betzig / Stefan Hell / William E. Moerner
2015 Tomas Lindahl / Paul L. Modrich / Aziz Sancar
2016 Jean-Pierre Sauvage / Fraser Stoddart / Ben Feringa
2017 Jacques Dubochet / Joachim Frank / Richard Henderson






See also[edit]



Wikiversity has learning resources about Chemistry



Pharmacist
List of chemistry topics
List of chemists
List of Russian chemists
List of important publications in chemistry
List of scientific journals in chemistry
List of compounds
List of Chemistry Societies

References[edit]



^ http://www.dictionary.com/browse/chemist?s=t




American Chemical Society website
Chemical Abstracts Service indexes and abstracts the world's chemistry-related literature and patents
Chemists and Materials Scientists from the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Outlook Handbook
Royal Society of Chemistry website
History of Chemistry links for chemists
Luminaries of the Chemical Sciences accomplishments, biography, and publications from 44 of the most influential chemists
Selected Classic Papers from the History of Chemistry
Links for Chemists guide to web sites related to chemistry
ChemistryViews.org website







v
t
e


Branches of chemistry






Dictionary of chemical formulas
List of biomolecules
List of inorganic compounds
Periodic table





Physical



Chemical kinetics
Chemical physics
Nuclear chemistry
Electrochemistry
Femtochemistry
Geochemistry
Photochemistry
Quantum chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Spectroscopy
Surface science
Thermochemistry





Organic



Biochemistry
Bioorganic chemistry
Biophysical chemistry
Chemical biology
Clinical chemistry
Fullerene chemistry
Medicinal chemistry
Neurochemistry
Pharmacy
Physical organic chemistry
Polymer chemistry





Inorganic



Bioinorganic chemistry
Cluster chemistry
Coordination chemistry
Materials science
Organometallic chemistry





Others



Actinide chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Astrochemistry
Chemistry education
Clay chemistry
Click chemistry
Computational chemistry
Cosmochemistry
Environmental chemistry
Food chemistry
Forensic chemistry
Green chemistry
Post-mortem chemistry
Supramolecular chemistry
Theoretical chemistry
Wet chemistry








 Category
 Portal
 Commons
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4009836-9
NDL: 00564436











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemist&oldid=817362722"					Categories: ChemistsScience occupationsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers