

Part of a series on the


Chicago school
of economics




Movements


Libertarianism
Neoliberalism
Positive non-interventionism








Organizations


Cato Institute
George Mason University
Library of Economics and Liberty
Reason Foundation








Beliefs


Consequentialist libertarianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics








People
Associates shown in italics


Gary Becker
Ronald Coase
Robert Fogel
David Friedman
Milton Friedman
Rose Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
Frank Knight
Robert Lucas, Jr.
George Stigler









Theories



Comparative advantage
CPI
Economic growth
Economic rationalism
Efficient market
Friedman rule
k-percent rule
Game theory
GDP
Homo economicus
International economics, finance, trade
Laffer curve
Monetary theory
Public choice
Quantity of money
Rational agent, choice, expectations
Symmetrical inflation target









Ideas



Central banks
Denationalization
Deregulation
Economic freedom
Economic integration, interdependence
Economic liberalization
Exchange rate
Fiat currency
Foreign exchange reserves
Free markets
Free trade
Globalization
Inflation adjustment
Inflation targeting
Intellectual property
Laissez-faire
Marketization
Negative income tax
Open market operations
Private property
Privatization
School vouchers
Single market
Tax cuts
Tax reform









Related topics



Alter-globalization
Anti-capitalism
Anti-globalization
Perspectives on capitalism









 Business and economics portal
 Capitalism portal
 Libertarianism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e







Part of the Politics series on


Economic
liberalism







Origins


Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism








Ideas


Company and Corporation
Democracy
Denationalization
Deregulation
Economic freedom
Economic integration
Economic interdependence
Economic liberalization
Foreign direct investment
Free markets
Free trade (area)
Globalization
Harmonisation of law
Intellectual property
Intergovernmentalism
Liberalization
Marketization
Market economy
Negative income tax
Private finance initiative
Private property
Privatization
School vouchers
Single market
Supranationalism
Tax cuts
Tax reform








Theories


Comparative advantage
Economic growth
Gross domestic product
International economics
International finance
International trade
Laffer curve








Economics


Austrian School
Chicago School
Neoclassical
Trickle-down
Supply-side








Movements


Classical liberalism
Economic freedom
Free market
Free trade
Globalization
Libertarianism
Reaganomics
Rogernomics
Thatcherism








Governance



Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN)



Cato Institute
Devolution
European Union

Greater Arab Free
Trade Area (GAFTA)



International Monetary Fund
International organization

North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA)



Reason Foundation
World Bank








People


Adam Smith
David Ricardo
Friedrich Hayek
George Stigler
Ludwig Mises
Milton Friedman
Thomas Friedman
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Anti-globalization
Alter-globalization
Criticism of intellectual property
Anti-copyright
Perspectives on capitalism
Protectionism
Critique of capitalism








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





The Chicago school of economics is a neoclassical school of economic thought associated with the work of the faculty at the University of Chicago, some of whom have constructed and popularized its principles.
In the context of macroeconomics, it is connected to the "freshwater school" of macroeconomics, in contrast to the saltwater school based in coastal universities (notably Harvard University, MIT, and UC Berkeley). Chicago macroeconomic theory rejected Keynesianism in favor of monetarism until the mid-1970s, when it turned to new classical macroeconomics heavily based on the concept of rational expectations. The freshwater-saltwater distinction is largely antiquated today, as the two traditions have heavily incorporated ideas from each other. Specifically, New Keynesian economics was developed as a response to new classical economics, electing to incorporate the insight of rational expectations without giving up the traditional Keynesian focus on imperfect competition and sticky wages.
Chicago economists have also left their intellectual influence in other fields, notably in pioneering public choice theory and law and economics, which have led to revolutionary changes in the study of political science and law. Other economists affiliated with Chicago have made their impact in fields as diverse as social economics and economic history. Thus, there is not a clear delineation of the Chicago school of economics, a term that is more commonly used in the popular media than in academic circles.[citation needed] Nonetheless, Kaufman (2010) says that the School can be generally characterized by:[1]

A deep commitment to rigorous scholarship and open academic debate, an uncompromising belief in the usefulness and insight of neoclassical price theory, and a normative position that favors and promotes economic liberalism and free markets.

The University of Chicago Economics department, considered one of the world's foremost economics departments, has fielded 12 Nobel Prizes laureates in economics—more than any other university (as of January 2016, MIT is second at 6); and has also fielded more John Bates Clark medalists in economics than any other university.



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Scholars

2.1 Gary Becker
2.2 Ronald Coase
2.3 Eugene Fama
2.4 Robert Fogel
2.5 Milton Friedman
2.6 Lars Peter Hansen
2.7 Frank Knight
2.8 Robert E. Lucas
2.9 Richard Posner
2.10 Theodore Schultz and D. Gale Johnson
2.11 George Stigler


3 Criticisms
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Terminology[edit]
The term was coined in the 1950s to refer to economists teaching in the Economics Department at the University of Chicago, and closely related academic areas at the University such as the Booth School of Business and the Law School. They met together in frequent intense discussions that helped set a group outlook on economic issues, based on price theory. The 1950s saw the height of popularity of the Keynesian school of economics, so the members of the University of Chicago were considered outside the mainstream.
Besides what is popularly known as the "Chicago school", there is also an "Old Chicago" school of economics, consisting of an earlier generation of economists such as Frank Knight, Henry Simons, Paul Douglas Jacob Viner, Aaron Director and others.[2] This group had diverse interests and approaches, but Knight, Simons, and Director in particular advocated a focus on the role of incentives and the complexity of economic events rather than on general equilibrium. Outside of Chicago, these early leaders were important influences on the Virginia school of political economy.[3] Nonetheless, these scholars had an important influence on the thought of Milton Friedman and George Stigler, most notably in the development of price theory and transaction cost economics.[4] A third wave of Chicago economics is led by macroeconomists Robert Lucas, Jr. and Eugene Fama.[5]
A further significant branching of Chicago thought was dubbed by George Stigler as "Chicago political economy". Inspired by the Coasian view that institutions evolve to maximize Pareto-efficiency, Chicago political economy came to the surprising and controversial view that politics tends towards efficiency and that policy advice is irrelevant.
Scholars[edit]
Gary Becker[edit]
Main article: Gary Becker
Gary Becker (1930–2014) was a Nobel Prize-winner from 1992 and was known in his work for applying economic methods of thinking to other fields, such as crime, sexual relationships, slavery and drugs, assuming that people act rationally. His work was originally focused in labor economics. His work partly inspired the popular economics book Freakonomics. He is considered one of the founding fathers of Chicago political economy.[6]
Ronald Coase[edit]
Main articles: Ronald Coase and Law and economics
Ronald Coase (1910–2013) was the most prominent economic analyst of law and the 1991 Nobel Prize-winner. His first major article, "The Nature of the Firm" (1937), argued that the reason for the existence of firms (companies, partnerships, etc.) is the existence of transaction costs. Rational individuals trade through bilateral contracts on open markets until the costs of transactions mean that using corporations to produce things is more cost-effective.[7]
His second major article, "The Problem of Social Cost" (1960), argued that if we lived in a world without transaction costs, people would bargain with one another to create the same allocation of resources, regardless of the way a court might rule in property disputes. Coase used the example of an 1879 London legal case about nuisance named Sturges v Bridgman, in which a noisy sweetmaker and a quiet doctor were neighbours; the doctor went to court seeking an injunction against the noise produced by the sweetmaker.[7] Coase said that regardless of whether the judge ruled that the sweetmaker had to stop using his machinery, or that the doctor had to put up with it, they could strike a mutually beneficial bargain that reaches the same outcome of resource distribution. Only the existence of transaction costs may prevent this.[8]
So, the law ought to pre-empt what would happen, and be guided by the most efficient solution. The idea is that law and regulation are not as important or effective at helping people as lawyers and government planners believe.[9] Coase and others like him wanted a change of approach, to put the burden of proof for positive effects on a government that was intervening in the market, by analysing the costs of action.[10]
Eugene Fama[edit]
Main articles: Eugene Fama and Efficient-market hypothesis
Eugene Fama (born 1939) is an American financial economist who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2013 for his work on empirical asset pricing and is the seventh most highly cited economist of all time.[11] He has spent all of his teaching career at the University of Chicago and is the originator of the efficient-market hypothesis, first defined in his 1965 article as market where "at any point in time, the actual price of a security will be a good estimate of its intrinsic value". The notion was further explored in his 1970 article, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work", which brought the notion of efficient markets into the forefront of modern economic theory, and his 1991 article, "Efficient Markets II". Whilst his 1965 Ph.D. thesis, "The Behavior of Stock Market Prices", showed that stock prices can be approximated by a random walk in the short-term; in later work he showed that insofar as stock prices are predictable in the long-term, it is largely due to rational time-varying risk premia which can be modelled using the Fama–French three-factor model (1993, 1996) or their updated five-factor model (2014). His work showing that the value premium can persist despite rational forecasts of future earnings[12] and that the performance of actively managed funds is almost entirely due to chance or exposure to risk[13] are all supportive of an efficient-markets view of the world.
Robert Fogel[edit]
Main article: Robert Fogel
Robert Fogel (1926–2013), a co-winner of the Nobel Prize in 1993, is well known for his historical analysis and his introduction of New economic history,[14] and invention of cliometrics, a notation system for quantitative data.[15] In his tract, Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History, Fogel set out to rebut comprehensively the idea that railroads contributed to economic growth in the 19th century. Later, in Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery, he argued that slaves in the Southern states of America had a higher standard of living than the industrial proletariat of the Northern states before the American civil war.
Milton Friedman[edit]




The Nobel laureate Milton Friedman was affiliated with the University of Chicago for three decades; his ideas and his students made significant contributions to the development of Chicago School theory.


Main articles: Milton Friedman and Monetarism
Milton Friedman (1912–2006) stands as one of the most influential economists of the late twentieth century. A student of Frank Knight, he won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1976 for, among other things, A Monetary History of the United States (1963). Friedman argued that the Great Depression had been caused by the Federal Reserve's policies through the 1920s, and worsened in the 1930s. Friedman argued that laissez-faire government policy is more desirable than government intervention in the economy.

One of the great mistakes is to judge policies and programs by their intentions rather than their results.
— Milton Friedman Interview with Richard Heffner on The Open Mind (7 December 1975)

Governments should aim for a neutral monetary policy oriented toward long-run economic growth, by gradual expansion of the money supply. He advocated the quantity theory of money, that general prices are determined by money. Therefore, active monetary (e.g. easy credit) or fiscal (e.g. tax and spend) policy can have unintended negative effects. In Capitalism and Freedom (1967) Friedman wrote:[16]

There is likely to be a lag between the need for action and government recognition of the need; a further lag between recognition of the need for action and the taking of action; and a still further lag between the action and its effects.

The slogan that "money matters" has come to be associated with Friedman, but Friedman had also leveled harsh criticism of his ideological opponents. Referring to Thorstein Veblen's assertion that economics unrealistically models people as "lightning calculator[s] of pleasure and pain", Friedman wrote:[17]

Criticism of this type is largely beside the point unless supplemented by evidence that a hypothesis differing in one or another of these respects from the theory being criticized yields better predictions for as wide a range of phenomena.

Lars Peter Hansen[edit]
Main article: Lars Peter Hansen
Lars Peter Hansen (born 1952) is an American economist who won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2013 with Eugene Fama and Robert Shiller for their work on asset pricing. Hansen began teaching at the University of Chicago in 1981 and is the David Rockefeller Distinguished Service Professor of economics at the University of Chicago. Although best known for his work on the Generalized Method of Moments, he is also a distinguished macroeconomist, focusing on the linkages between the financial and real sectors of the economy.
Frank Knight[edit]
Main article: Frank Knight
Frank Knight (1885–1972) was an early member of the University of Chicago department. His most influential work was Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (1921) from which the term Knightian uncertainty was coined. Knight's perspective was iconoclastic, and markedly different from later Chicago school thinkers. He believed that while the free market could be inefficient, government programs were even less efficient. He drew from other economic schools of thought such as institutional economics to form his own nuanced perspective.
Robert E. Lucas[edit]
Main article: Robert Lucas, Jr.
Robert Lucas (born 1937), who won the Nobel Prize in 1995, has dedicated his life to unwinding Keynesianism. His major contribution is the argument that macroeconomics should not be seen as a separate mode of thought from microeconomics, and that analysis in both should be built on the same foundations. Lucas's works cover several topics in macroeconomics, included economic growth, asset pricing, and monetary Economics.
Richard Posner[edit]
Main article: Richard Posner




Richard Posner ran a blog with Gary Becker.


Richard Posner (born 1939) is known primarily for his work in law and economics, though Robert Solow describes Posner's grasp of certain economic ideas as "in some respects,... precarious".[18] A federal appellate judge rather than an economist, Posner's main work, Economic Analysis of Law attempts to apply rational choice models to areas of law. He has chapters on tort, contract, corporations, labor law, but also criminal law, discrimination and family law. Posner goes so far as to say that:[19]

[the central] meaning of justice, perhaps the most common is – efficiency… [because] in a world of scarce resources waste should be regarded as immoral.

Theodore Schultz and D. Gale Johnson[edit]
Main articles: Theodore Schultz and D. Gale Johnson
A group of agricultural economists led by Ted Schultz and D. Gale Johnson moved from Iowa State to the University of Chicago in the mid-1940s. Schultz served as the chair of economics from 1946 to 1961. He became president of the American Economic Association in 1960, retired in 1967, though he remained active at the University of Chicago until his death in 1998. Johnson served as department chair from 1971-1975 and 1980-1984 and was president of the American Economics Association in 1999. Their research in farm and agricultural economics was widely influential and attracted funding from the Rockefeller Foundation to the agricultural economics program at the University. Among the graduate students and faculty affiliated with the pair in the 1940s and 1950s were Clifford Hardin, Zvi Griliches, Marc Nerlove, and George S. Tolley.[20] In 1979, Schultz's was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics for his work in human capital theory and economic development.
George Stigler[edit]
Main article: George Stigler
George Stigler (1911–1991) was tutored for his thesis by Frank Knight and won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1982. He is best known for developing the Economic Theory of Regulation,[21] also known as regulatory capture, which says that interest groups and other political participants will use the regulatory and coercive powers of government to shape laws and regulations in a way that is beneficial to them. This theory is an important component of the Public Choice field of economics. He also carried out extensive research into the history of economic thought. His 1962 article "Information in the Labor Market"[22] developed the theory of search unemployment.
Criticisms[edit]
Paul Douglas, economist and Democratic senator from Illinois for 18 years, was uncomfortable with the environment he found at the university. He stated that, "…I was disconcerted to find that the economic and political conservatives had acquired almost complete dominance over my department and taught that market decisions were always right and profit values the supreme ones… The opinions of my colleagues would have confined government to the eighteenth-century functions of justice, police, and arms, which I thought had been insufficient even for that time and were certainly so for ours. These men would neither use statistical data to develop economic theory nor accept critical analysis of the economic system… (Frank) Knight was now openly hostile, and his disciples seemed to be everywhere. If I stayed, it would be in an unfriendly environment."[23]
While the efficacy of Eugene Fama's efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) was debated after the financial crisis of 2007–08, proponents emphasized that the EMH is consistent with the large decline in asset prices since the event was unpredictable.[24] Specifically, if market crashes never occurred, this would contradict the EMH since the average return of risky assets would be too large to justify the decreased risk of a large decline in prices; and if anything, the equity premium puzzle implies that market crashes do not happen enough to justify the high Sharpe ratio of US stocks and other risky assets.
Economist Brad DeLong of the University of California, Berkeley says the Chicago School has experienced an "intellectual collapse", while Nobel laureate Paul Krugman of Princeton University says that some recent comments from Chicago school economists are "the product of a Dark Age of macroeconomics in which hard-won knowledge has been forgotten", claiming that most peer-reviewed macroeconomic research since the mid-1960s has been wrong, preferring models developed in the 1930s.[25] Chicago finance economist John Cochrane countered that these criticisms were ad hominem, displayed a "deep and highly politicized ignorance of what economics and finance is really all about", and failed to disentangle bubbles from rational risk premiums and crying wolf too many times in a row, emphasizing that even if these criticisms were true, it would make a stronger argument against regulation and control.[26]
Finally, the school also has been criticized for training economists who advised the Chilean government (and to a lesser extent other South American governments) during the 1970s and 1980s. While they were credited with transforming Chile into Latin America's best performing economy (see Miracle of Chile) with GDP per capita increasing from US$693 at the start of 1975 (the year Milton Friedman met with Augusto Pinochet; 9th highest of 12 South American countries) to $14,528 by the end of 2014 (the 2nd highest in South America),[27] critics counter there was a corresponding increase in income inequality and that the reforms had a negative influence on the economic policies of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. In the years since the reforms were introduced, the economic system implemented by the "Chicago Boys" (a label given to this group of economists) have mostly remained in place.[28] A film titled Chicago Boys, which had a highly critical view of the economic reforms, was released in Chile in November 2015.[29]
See also[edit]

History of economic thought
Market monetarism
Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought

References[edit]


^ Bruce Kaufman in Ross B. Emmett, ed. The Elgar Companion to the Chicago School of Economics (2010) p. 133
^ Shils 1991, p538; Emmett 2001, p235
^ Emmett 2001, p235
^ Emmett 2010 p7; Emmett 2009, p147
^ Shils 1991 p538
^ Palda, Filip. A Better Kind of Violence: Chicago Political Economy, Public Choice, and the Quest for an Ultimately Theory of Power. Cooper-Wolfling Press. 2016.
^ a b Sturges v. Bridgman (1879) 11 Ch D 852
^ Coase (1960) IV, 7
^ Coase (1960) V, 9
^ Coase (1960) VIII, 23
^ Top 5% Authors
^ Fama and French (1995)
^ Fama and French (2012)
^ Fogel, Robert (December 1966). "The New Economic History. Its Findings and Methods". The Economic History Review. 19 (3): 642–656. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0289.1966.tb00994.x. JSTOR 2593168. The 'new economic history', sometimes called economic history or cliometrics, is not often practiced in Europe. However, it is fair to say that efforts to apply statistical and mathematical models currently occupy the centre of the stage in American economic history. 
^ Golden, Claudia (1995). "Cliometrics and the Nobel" (PDF). Journal of Economics Perspective. Retrieved January 15, 2016. 
^ Friedman (1967) p.
^ Friedman (1953) I,V,30
^ Solow, Robert M. (2009). "How to Understand the Disaster". The New York Review of Books. 56 (8). Retrieved 31 August 2012. 
^ Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (1998) p. 30
^ Sumner, Daniel A. Agricultural Economics at Chicago, in David Gale Johnson, John M. Antle. The Economics of Agriculture: Papers in honor of D. Gale Johnson. University of Chicago Press, 1996 p 14-29
^ "The Theory of Economic Regulation." (1971) Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science, no. 3, pp. 3–18.
^ See also, "The Economics of Information," (1961) Journal of Political Economy, June. (JSTOR)
^ Paul H. Douglas, In the Fullness of Time, 1972, pp. 127–128.
^ http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/01/11/100111fa_fact_cassidy
^ Krugman, Paul (2009-09-06). "How Did Economists Get It So Wrong?". The New York Times. Retrieved 2010-04-28. 
^ faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/ecaf_2077.pdf
^ "World Development Indicators". World Bank. 12 January 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2016. 
^ "The Boys Who Got to Remake an Economy". Slate. Retrieved 13 January 2016. 
^ "Chicago Boys (2015)". IMDb. Retrieved 13 January 2016. 


Further reading[edit]

Emmett, Ross B., ed. The Elgar Companion to the Chicago School of Economics (Edward Elgar, 2010), 350 pp.; ISBN 978-1-84064-874-4
Emmett, Ross B. (2008). "Chicago School (new perspectives)", The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.
Emmett, Ross B. (2009). Frank Knight and the Chicago school in American economics. Routledge
Friedman, Milton; Friedman, Rose (1998). Two Lucky People: Memoirs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-26414-9. 
Hammond, J. Daniel; Hammond, Claire H. (2006). Making Chicago Price Theory: Friedman-Stigler Correspondence, 1945–1957. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-70078-7. 
Hamowy, Ronald (2008). "Economics, Chicago School of". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 135–37. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n85. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Hovenkamp, Herbert (1985). "Antitrust Policy after Chicago". Michigan Law Review. Michigan Law Review, Vol. 84, No. 2. 84 (2): 213–284. doi:10.2307/1289065. JSTOR 1289065. 
Kasper, Sherryl (2002). The Revival of Laissez-Faire in American Macroeconomic Theory: A Case Study of Its Pioneers. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. ISBN 1-84064-606-3. 
Miller, H. Laurence, Jr. (1962). "On the 'Chicago School of Economics'". The Journal of Political Economy. 70 (1): 64–69. doi:10.1086/258588. 
Nelson, Robert H. (2001). Economics As Religion: From Samuelson to Chicago and Beyond. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State Univ. Press. ISBN 0-271-02095-4. 
Palda, Filip (2016). A Better Kind of Violence: Chicago Political Economy, Public Choice, and the Quest for an Ultimate Theory of Power. Kingston, ON: Cooper Wolfling Press. ISBN 978-0-9877880-7-8. 
Reder, Melvin W. (1982). "Chicago Economics: Permanence and Change". Journal of Economic Literature. 20 (1): 1–38.  Reprinted in John Cunningham Wood & R.N. Woods (1990), Milton Friedman: Critical Assessments, pp. 343–393.
Shils, Edward, ed. (1991). Remembering the University of Chicago: teachers, scientists, and scholars. University of Chicago Press.
Stigler, George J. (1988). Chicago Studies in Political Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-77437-6. 
Stigler, George J. (1988). Memoirs of an Unregulated Economist. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-04443-3.  Description & preview.
Valdes, Juan Gabriel (2008). Pinochet's Economists: The Chicago School of Economics in Chile (Historical Perspectives on Modern Economics). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-06440-6. 
Wahid, Abu N. M. (2002). Frontiers of Economics: Nobel Laureates of the Twentieth Century. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-32073-X. 

External links[edit]

Thomas Sowell
The University of Chicago Department of Economics
Commanding Heights, PBS Documentary, Chicago Against the Tide







v
t
e


University of Chicago



Academics




Schools



The College
Booth School of Business
Divinity School
Graham School of Continuing Liberal and Professional Studies
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
Law School
Pritzker School of Medicine
School of Social Service Administration





Other



Argonne National Laboratory
Becker Friedman Institute
Center for Decision Research
Center for Middle Eastern Studies
Center for Population Economics
Center for Research in Security Prices
Chicago school of economics
Committee on Social Thought
Comprehensive Cancer Center
Enrico Fermi Institute
Fermilab
James Franck Institute
Institute of Politics
Laboratory Schools
Marine Biological Laboratory
Medical Center
National Opinion Research Center
Obama Presidential Center
Oriental Institute
Paulson Institute
Sonia Shankman Orthogenic School
Toyota Technological Institute
University of Chicago Press
Yerkes Observatory








Residence halls



Burton–Judson Courts
Snell–Hitchcock
Housing at the University of Chicago





Campus



Bartlett Hall
George Herbert Jones Laboratory
Gerald Ratner Athletics Center
Henry Crown Fieldhouse
Hutchinson Commons
Ida Noyes Hall
Library

Joe and Rika Mansueto Library
John Crerar Library
Regenstein Library


Lorado Taft Midway Studios
Midway Plaisance
Quadrangle Club
Renaissance Society
Robie House
Rockefeller Chapel
Seminary Co-op
Smart Museum of Art
Stagg Field





History



Cannon v. University of Chicago
Chicago Pile-1

Nuclear Energy


Graduate Library School
University of Chicago sit-ins
Kenwood Astrophysical Observatory
Metallurgical Laboratory
Old University of Chicago





Sports and traditions



Maroons
Football
Men's basketball
Women's basketball
Latke–Hamantash Debate
Scavenger Hunt
University Athletic Association





Student organizations



Band
The Chicago Maroon
Chicago Review
Contemporary Chamber Players
Doc Films
Off-Off Campus
Poetry Club
Student Government
Voices in Your Head
WHPK





People



Alumni

School of Business


Faculty

School of Business


Nobel Laureates








Founded: 1890
Students: 15,726
Endowment: 7.550 billion












v
t
e


Chicago school of economics



Founders



Frank Knight
Henry Calvert Simons
Jacob Viner
Theodore Schultz
George Stigler





Monetarism



Milton Friedman
Anna J. Schwartz
Karl Brunner
Phillip D. Cagan
Harry G. Johnson
Allan H. Meltzer
David Laidler





New economic history



Douglass North
Robert Fogel
Robert M. Townsend





New social economics



Jacob Mincer
Gary Becker
James Heckman
Thomas Sowell
Sherwin Rosen
Kevin M. Murphy
John A. List
Sudhir Venkatesh
Steven Levitt
Roland Fryer





Public choice school



James M. Buchanan
Gordon Tullock
Randall Holcombe
Anthony Downs
William A. Niskanen
Bryan Caplan





Law and economics



Ronald Coase
Aaron Director
William Landes
Richard Posner
Richard Epstein
Robert Bork
Frank H. Easterbrook





Business and finance



Harry Markowitz
Myron Scholes
Merton Miller
Julian Lincoln Simon
Eugene Fama
Kenneth French












v
t
e


Schools of economic thought



Pre-modern



Ancient schools
Medieval Islamic
Scholasticism





Early modern



Cameralism
Mercantilism
Physiocrats
School of Salamanca





Modern



American (National)
Anarchist
Austrian
Birmingham
Classical
English historical
French
Georgism
German historical
Lausanne
Malthusian
Marginalism
Marxian
Mutualism
Neoclassical
Neomercantilism
Ricardian
Socialist





20th and 21st century



Behavioral
Buddhist
Capability approach
Carnegie
Chicago
Circuitism
Constitutional
Ecological
Evolutionary
Feminist
Freiburg
Institutional
Keynesian
Modern monetary theory
Monetarism (Neo-Monetarism)
Neo-Keynesian
Neo-Malthusian
Neo-Marxian
Neo-Ricardian
New classical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Organizational
Post-Keynesian
Public choice
Regulation
Saltwater/freshwater
Stockholm
Structuralist
Supply-side
Thermoeconomics
Virginia





Related



History of economic thought
History of macroeconomic thought
Economics
Mainstream economics
Heterodox economics
Post-autistic economics
Degrowth
World-systems theory
Economic systems












v
t
e


Economics






Economic theory
Econometrics
Applied economics





Macroeconomics



Adaptive expectations
Aggregate demand
Balance of payments
Business cycle
Capacity utilization
Capital flight
Central bank
Consumer confidence
Currency
Demand shock
Depression (Great Depression)
DSGE
Economic growth
Economic indicator
Economic rent
Effective demand
General Theory of Keynes
Hyperinflation
Inflation
Interest
Interest rate
Investment
IS–LM model
Microfoundations
Monetary policy
Money
NAIRU
National accounts
PPP
Rate of profit
Rational expectations
Recession
Saving
Shrinkflation
Stagflation
Supply shock
Unemployment
Macroeconomics publications





Microeconomics



Aggregation problem
Budget set
Consumer choice
Convexity
Cost–benefit analysis
Deadweight loss
Distribution
Duopoly
Economic equilibrium
Economic shortage
Economic surplus
Economies of scale
Economies of scope
Elasticity
Expected utility hypothesis
Externality
General equilibrium theory
Indifference curve
Intertemporal choice
Marginal cost
Market failure
Market structure
Monopoly
Monopsony
Non-convexity
Oligopoly
Opportunity cost
Preference
Production set
Profit
Public good
Returns to scale
Risk aversion
Scarcity
Social choice theory
Sunk costs
Supply and demand
Theory of the firm
Trade
Transaction cost
Value
Uncertainty
Utility
Microeconomics publications





Applied fields



Agricultural
Business
Demographic
Development
Economic history
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Financial
Health
Industrial organization
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law and economics
Monetary
Natural resource
Public
Service
Transportation
Urban
Welfare





Methodology



Behavioral economics
Computational economics
Econometrics
Economic systems
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Methodological publications





Economic thought



Ancient economic thought
Austrian school of economics
Chicago school of economics
Classical economics
Feminist economics
Heterodox economics
Institutional economics
Keynesian economics
Mainstream economics
Marxian economics
Neoclassical economics
Post-Keynesian economics
Schools overview






Notable economists and
thinkers within economics




Kenneth Arrow
Gary Becker
Francis Ysidro Edgeworth
Milton Friedman
Ragnar Frisch
Friedrich Hayek
Harold Hotelling
John Maynard Keynes
Tjalling Koopmans
Paul Krugman
Robert Lucas Jr.
Jacob Marschak
Alfred Marshall
Karl Marx
John von Neumann
Vilfredo Pareto
David Ricardo
Paul Samuelson
Joseph Schumpeter
Amartya Sen
Herbert A. Simon
Adam Smith
Robert Solow
Léon Walras
more





International organizations



Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Economic Cooperation Organization
European Free Trade Association
International Monetary Fund
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
World Bank
World Trade Organization








Category
Index
Lists
Outline
Publications
Business and economics portal









Authority control



GND: 4127089-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chicago_school_of_economics&oldid=814091121"					Categories: Conservatism in the United StatesLibertarianism in the United StatesSchools of economic thoughtUniversity of ChicagoChicago School economistsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2013Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers