For chickens as food, see Chicken (food). For the broader species of which chickens form a subspecies, see Red junglefowl. For other uses, see Chicken (disambiguation), Chooks (disambiguation), or Red junglefowl.


Chicken





A rooster or cock (left) and hen (right)



Conservation status




Domesticated



Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Phylum:
Chordata


Class:
Aves


Order:
Galliformes


Family:
Phasianidae


Genus:
Gallus


Species:
G. gallus


Subspecies:
G. g. domesticus


Trinomial name


Gallus gallus domesticus
(Linnaeus, 1758)


The chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) is a type of domesticated fowl, a subspecies of the red junglefowl. It is one of the most common and widespread domestic animals, with a total population of more than 19 billion as of 2011.[1] Humans commonly keep chickens as a source of food (consuming both their meat and eggs) and as pets.
Genetic studies have pointed to multiple maternal origins in Southeast Asia, East Asia,[2] and South Asia, but with the clade found in the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and Africa originating in the Indian subcontinent. From India, the domesticated chicken was imported to Lydia in western Asia Minor, and to Greece by the fifth century BC.[3] Fowl had been known in Egypt since the mid-15th century BC, with the "bird that gives birth every day" having come to Egypt from the land between Syria and Shinar, Babylonia, according to the annals of Thutmose III.[4][5][6]



Contents


1 Terminology
2 General biology and habitat

2.1 Behavior

2.1.1 Social behaviour
2.1.2 Courtship
2.1.3 Nesting and laying behaviour
2.1.4 Broodiness
2.1.5 Hatching and early life


2.2 Embryology


3 Breeding

3.1 Origins

3.1.1 South America




4 Farming

4.1 Reared for meat
4.2 Reared for eggs

4.2.1 Artificial incubation




5 As pets
6 Diseases and ailments
7 In religion and mythology
8 In history
9 As food

9.1 Eggs


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Terminology




Didactic model of a chicken.


In the UK and Ireland adult male chickens over the age of one year are primarily known as cocks, whereas in the United States, Australia and Canada they are more commonly called roosters. Males less than a year old are cockerels.[7] Castrated roosters are called capons (surgical and chemical castration are now illegal in some parts of the world). Females over a year old are known as hens and younger females as pullets[8] although in the egg-laying industry, a pullet becomes a hen when she begins to lay eggs, at 16 to 20 weeks of age. In Australia and New Zealand (also sometimes in Britain), there is a generic term chook /tʃʊk/ to describe all ages and both sexes.[9] The young are called chicks and the meat is called chicken.
"Chicken" originally referred to young domestic fowl.[10] The species as a whole was then called domestic fowl, or just fowl. This use of "chicken" survives in the phrase "Hen and Chickens", sometimes used as a British public house or theatre name, and to name groups of one large and many small rocks or islands in the sea (see for example Hen and Chicken Islands). The word "chicken" is sometimes erroneously construed to mean females exclusively, despite the term "hen" for females being in wide circulation.
In the Deep South of the United States chickens are also referred to by the slang term yardbird.[11]
General biology and habitat




Anatomy of a chicken.



In some breeds the adult rooster can be distinguished from the hen by his larger comb



Chickens are omnivores.[12] In the wild, they often scratch at the soil to search for seeds, insects and even animals as large as lizards, small snakes or young mice.[13]
Chickens may live for five to ten years, depending on the breed.[14] The world's oldest chicken was a hen which died of heart failure at the age of 16 according to Guinness World Records.[15]
Roosters can usually be differentiated from hens by their striking plumage of long flowing tails and shiny, pointed feathers on their necks (hackles) and backs (saddle), which are typically of brighter, bolder colours than those of females of the same breed. However, in some breeds, such as the Sebright chicken, the rooster has only slightly pointed neck feathers, the same colour as the hen's. The identification can be made by looking at the comb, or eventually from the development of spurs on the male's legs (in a few breeds and in certain hybrids, the male and female chicks may be differentiated by colour). Adult chickens have a fleshy crest on their heads called a comb, or cockscomb, and hanging flaps of skin either side under their beaks called wattles. Collectively, these and other fleshy protuberances on the head and throat are called caruncles. Both the adult male and female have wattles and combs, but in most breeds these are more prominent in males. A muff or beard is a mutation found in several chicken breeds which causes extra feathering under the chicken's face, giving the appearance of a beard. Domestic chickens are not capable of long distance flight, although lighter birds are generally capable of flying for short distances, such as over fences or into trees (where they would naturally roost). Chickens may occasionally fly briefly to explore their surroundings, but generally do so only to flee perceived danger.
Behavior
Social behaviour




Hen with chicks, India.






Hen with chicks, Portugal.


Chickens are gregarious birds and live together in flocks. They have a communal approach to the incubation of eggs and raising of young. Individual chickens in a flock will dominate others, establishing a "pecking order", with dominant individuals having priority for food access and nesting locations. Removing hens or roosters from a flock causes a temporary disruption to this social order until a new pecking order is established. Adding hens, especially younger birds, to an existing flock can lead to fighting and injury.[16] When a rooster finds food, he may call other chickens to eat first. He does this by clucking in a high pitch as well as picking up and dropping the food. This behaviour may also be observed in mother hens to call their chicks and encourage them to eat.
A rooster's crowing is a loud and sometimes shrill call and sends a territorial signal to other roosters.[citation needed] However, roosters may also crow in response to sudden disturbances within their surroundings. Hens cluck loudly after laying an egg, and also to call their chicks. Chickens also give a low "warning call" when they sense a predator approaching.[citation needed]
Courtship
To initiate courting, some roosters may dance in a circle around or near a hen ("a circle dance"), often lowering the wing which is closest to the hen.[17] The dance triggers a response in the hen[17] and when she responds to his "call", the rooster may mount the hen and proceed with the mating.
More specifically, mating typically involves the following sequence: 1. Male approaching the hen. 2. Male pre-copulatory waltzing. 3. Male Waltzing. 4. Female crouching (receptive posture) or stepping aside or running away (if unwilling to copulate). 5. Male Mounting. 6. Male treading with both feet on hen’s back. 7. Male tail bending (following successful copulation).[18]
Nesting and laying behaviour




Chicken eggs vary in colour depending on the hen, typically ranging from bright white to shades of brown and even blue, green, and recently reported purple (found in South Asia) (Araucana varieties).






Chicks before their first outing


Hens will often try to lay in nests that already contain eggs and have been known to move eggs from neighbouring nests into their own. The result of this behaviour is that a flock will use only a few preferred locations, rather than having a different nest for every bird. Hens will often express a preference to lay in the same location. It is not unknown for two (or more) hens to try to share the same nest at the same time. If the nest is small, or one of the hens is particularly determined, this may result in chickens trying to lay on top of each other. There is evidence that individual hens prefer to be either solitary or gregarious nesters.[19] Some farmers use fake eggs made from plastic or stone (or golf balls) to encourage hens to lay in a particular location.
Broodiness
Under natural conditions, most birds lay only until a clutch is complete, and they will then incubate all the eggs. Many domestic hens will also do this–and are then said to "go broody". The broody hen will stop laying and instead will focus on the incubation of the eggs (a full clutch is usually about 12 eggs). She will "sit" or "set" on the nest, protesting or pecking in defense if disturbed or removed, and she will rarely leave the nest to eat, drink, or dust-bathe. While brooding, the hen maintains the nest at a constant temperature and humidity, as well as turning the eggs regularly during the first part of the incubation. To stimulate broodiness, owners may place several artificial eggs in the nest. To discourage it, they may place the hen in an elevated cage with an open wire floor.




Skull of a three-week-old chicken. Here the opisthotic bone appears in the occipital region, as in the adult Chelonian. bo = Basi-occipital, bt = Basi-temporal, eo = Opisthotic, f = Frontal, fm = Foramen magnum, fo = Fontanella, oc = Occipital condyle, op = Opisthotic, p = Parietal, pf = Post-frontal, sc = Sinus canal in supra-occipital, so = Supra-occpital, sq = Squamosal, 8 = Exit of vagus nerve.


Modern egg-laying breeds rarely go broody, and those that do often stop part-way through the incubation. However, some "utility" (general purpose) breeds, such as the Cochin, Cornish and Silkie, do regularly go broody, and they make excellent mothers, not only for chicken eggs but also for those of other species—even those with much smaller or larger eggs and different incubation periods, such as quail, pheasants, turkeys or geese. Chicken eggs can also be hatched under a broody duck, with varied success.
Hatching and early life
Fertile chicken eggs hatch at the end of the incubation period, about 21 days.[17] Development of the chick starts only when incubation begins, so all chicks hatch within a day or two of each other, despite perhaps being laid over a period of two weeks or so. Before hatching, the hen can hear the chicks peeping inside the eggs, and will gently cluck to stimulate them to break out of their shells. The chick begins by "pipping"; pecking a breathing hole with its egg tooth towards the blunt end of the egg, usually on the upper side. The chick then rests for some hours, absorbing the remaining egg yolk and withdrawing the blood supply from the membrane beneath the shell (used earlier for breathing through the shell). The chick then enlarges the hole, gradually turning round as it goes, and eventually severing the blunt end of the shell completely to make a lid. The chick crawls out of the remaining shell, and the wet down dries out in the warmth of the nest.
Hens usually remain on the nest for about two days after the first chick hatches, and during this time the newly hatched chicks feed by absorbing the internal yolk sac. Some commercial breeds sometimes start eating cracked eggs, which can become habitual.[20] Hens fiercely guard their chicks, and brood them when necessary to keep them warm, at first often returning to the nest at night. She leads them to food and water and will call them toward edible items, but seldom feeds them directly. She continues to care for them until they are several weeks old.
Embryology


Play media


Earliest gestation stages and blood circulation of a chicken embryo


In 2006, scientists researching the ancestry of birds "turned on" a chicken recessive gene, talpid2, and found that the embryo jaws initiated formation of teeth, like those found in ancient bird fossils. John Fallon, the overseer of the project, stated that chickens have "...retained the ability to make teeth, under certain conditions... ."[21]
Breeding
Origins




Male red junglefowl.


The domestic chicken is descended primarily from the red junglefowl (Gallus gallus) and is scientifically classified as the same species.[22] As such it can and does freely interbreed with populations of red jungle fowl.[22] Recent genetic analysis has revealed that at least the gene for yellow skin was incorporated into domestic birds through hybridization with the grey junglefowl (G. sonneratii).[23]
The traditional poultry farming view is that chickens were first domesticated for cockfighting in Asia, Africa, and Europe, rather than for egg or meat production. In the last decade there have been a number of genetic studies to clarify the origins. According to one early study, a single domestication event which took place in what now is the country of Thailand gave rise to the modern chicken with minor transitions separating the modern breeds.[24] However, that study was later found to be based on incomplete data, and recent studies point to multiple maternal origins, with the clade found in the Americas, Europe, Middle East, and Africa, originating from the Indian subcontinent, where a large number of unique haplotypes occur.[25][26] It is postulated that the jungle fowl, known as the bamboo fowl in many Southeast Asian languages, is a special pheasant well adapted to take advantage of the large amounts of fruits that are produced during the end of the 50-year bamboo seeding cycle to boost its own reproduction.[27] In domesticating the chicken, humans took advantage of this predisposition for prolific reproduction of the jungle fowl when exposed to large amounts of food.[28]
It has been claimed (based on paleoclimatic assumptions) that chickens were domesticated in Southern China in 6000 BC.[29] However a recent study,[30] raises doubts as to whether those birds were the ancestors of chickens today. Instead, the origin could be the Harappan culture of the Indus Valley. Eventually, the chicken moved to the Tarim basin of central Asia. The chicken reached Europe (Romania, Turkey, Greece, Ukraine) about 3000 BC.[31] Introduction into Western Europe came far later, about the 1st millennium BC. Phoenicians spread chickens along the Mediterranean coasts as far as Iberia. Breeding increased under the Roman Empire, and was reduced in the Middle Ages.[31] Genetic sequencing of chicken bones from archaeological sites in Europe revealed that in the High Middle Ages chickens became less aggressive and began to lay eggs earlier in the breeding season.[32]
Middle East traces of chicken go back to a little earlier than 2000 BC, in Syria; chickens went southward only in the 1st millennium BC. They reached Egypt for purposes of cock fighting about 1400 BC, and became widely bred only in Ptolemaic Egypt (about 300 BC).[31] Little is known about the chicken's introduction into Africa. Three possible routes of introduction in about the early first millennium AD could have been through the Egyptian Nile Valley, the East Africa Roman-Greek or Indian trade, or from Carthage and the Berbers, across the Sahara. The earliest known remains are from Mali, Nubia, East Coast, and South Africa and date back to the middle of the first millennium AD.[31]
Domestic chicken in the Americas before Western conquest is still an ongoing discussion, but blue-egged chickens, found only in the Americas and Asia, suggest an Asian origin for early American chickens.[31]
A lack of data from Thailand, Russia, the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa makes it difficult to lay out a clear map of the spread of chickens in these areas; better description and genetic analysis of local breeds threatened by extinction may also help with research into this area.[31]
South America
An unusual variety of chicken that has its origins in South America is the araucana, bred in southern Chile by the Mapuche people. Araucanas, some of which are tailless and some of which have tufts of feathers around their ears, lay blue-green eggs. It has long been suggested that they pre-date the arrival of European chickens brought by the Spanish and are evidence of pre-Columbian trans-Pacific contacts between Asian or Pacific Oceanic peoples, particularly the Polynesians, and South America. In 2007, an international team of researchers reported the results of analysis of chicken bones found on the Arauco Peninsula in south-central Chile. Radiocarbon dating suggested that the chickens were Pre-Columbian, and DNA analysis showed that they were related to prehistoric populations of chickens in Polynesia.[33] These results appeared to confirm that the chickens came from Polynesia and that there were transpacific contacts between Polynesia and South America before Columbus's arrival in the Americas.[34]
However, a later report looking at the same specimens concluded:

A published, apparently pre-Columbian, Chilean specimen and six pre-European Polynesian specimens also cluster with the same European/Indian subcontinental/Southeast Asian sequences, providing no support for a Polynesian introduction of chickens to South America. In contrast, sequences from two archaeological sites on Easter Island group with an uncommon haplogroup from Indonesia, Japan, and China and may represent a genetic signature of an early Polynesian dispersal. Modeling of the potential marine carbon contribution to the Chilean archaeological specimen casts further doubt on claims for pre-Columbian chickens, and definitive proof will require further analyses of ancient DNA sequences and radiocarbon and stable isotope data from archaeological excavations within both Chile and Polynesia.[35]

Farming
Main article: Poultry farming




A former battery hen, five days after release. Note the pale comb - the comb may be a reliable indicator of health or vigor.[36]


More than 50 billion chickens are reared annually as a source of meat and eggs.[37] In the US alone, more than 8 billion chickens are slaughtered each year for meat,[38] and more than 300 million chickens are reared for egg production.[39]
The vast majority of poultry is raised in factory farms. According to the Worldwatch Institute, 74 percent of the world's poultry meat and 68 percent of eggs are produced this way.[40] One alternative to intensive poultry farming is free range farming.
Friction between these two main methods has led to long-term issues of ethical consumerism. Opponents of intensive farming argue that it harms the environment, creates human health risks and is inhumane.[41] Advocates of intensive farming say that their highly efficient systems save land and food resources owing to increased productivity, and that the animals are looked after in state-of-the-art environmentally controlled facilities.[42]
In part due to the conditions on intensive poultry farms and recent recalls of large quantities of eggs, there is a growing movement for small-scale micro-flocks or 'backyard chickens'. This involves keeping small numbers of hens (usually no more than a dozen) in suburban or urban residential areas to control bugs, to utilize chicken waste as fertilizer in small gardens, and for the high-quality eggs and meat that are produced.
Reared for meat
Main article: Broiler




A commercial chicken house with open sides raising broiler pullets for meat


Chickens farmed for meat are called broiler chickens. Chickens will naturally live for six or more years, but broilers typically take less than six weeks to reach slaughter size.[43] A free range or organic broiler will usually be slaughtered at about 14 weeks of age.
Reared for eggs
Chickens farmed primarily for eggs are called layer hens. In total, the UK alone consumes more than 34 million eggs per day.[44] Some hen breeds can produce over 300 eggs per year, with "the highest authenticated rate of egg laying being 371 eggs in 364 days".[45] After 12 months of laying, the commercial hen's egg-laying ability starts to decline to the point where the flock is commercially unviable. Hens, particularly from battery cage systems, are sometimes infirm or have lost a significant amount of their feathers, and their life expectancy has been reduced from around seven years to less than two years.[46] In the UK and Europe, laying hens are then slaughtered and used in processed foods or sold as "soup hens".[46] In some other countries, flocks are sometimes force moulted, rather than being slaughtered, to re-invigorate egg-laying. This involves complete withdrawal of food (and sometimes water) for 7–14 days[47] or sufficiently long to cause a body weight loss of 25 to 35%,[48] or up to 28 days under experimental conditions.[49] This stimulates the hen to lose her feathers, but also re-invigorates egg-production. Some flocks may be force-moulted several times. In 2003, more than 75% of all flocks were moulted in the US.[50]
Artificial incubation




An egg incubator


Incubation can successfully occur artificially in machines that provide the correct, controlled environment for the developing chick.[51][52] The average incubation period for chickens is 21 days but may depend on the temperature and humidity in the incubator. Temperature regulation is the most critical factor for a successful hatch. Variations of more than 1 °C (1.8 °F) from the optimum temperature of 37.5 °C (99.5 °F) will reduce hatch rates. Humidity is also important because the rate at which eggs lose water by evaporation depends on the ambient relative humidity. Evaporation can be assessed by candling, to view the size of the air sac, or by measuring weight loss. Relative humidity should be increased to around 70% in the last three days of incubation to keep the membrane around the hatching chick from drying out after the chick cracks the shell. Lower humidity is usual in the first 18 days to ensure adequate evaporation. The position of the eggs in the incubator can also influence hatch rates. For best results, eggs should be placed with the pointed ends down and turned regularly (at least three times per day) until one to three days before hatching. If the eggs aren't turned, the embryo inside may stick to the shell and may hatch with physical defects. Adequate ventilation is necessary to provide the embryo with oxygen. Older eggs require increased ventilation.
Many commercial incubators are industrial-sized with shelves holding tens of thousands of eggs at a time, with rotation of the eggs a fully automated process. Home incubators are boxes holding from 6 to 75 eggs; they are usually electrically powered, but in the past some were heated with an oil or paraffin lamp.
As pets
Main article: Chickens as pets
Some people find chickens' behaviour entertaining and educational[53] and may keep them as pets.[54] Chickens can be tamed by hand feeding,[55] although roosters can sometimes become aggressive and noisy. Aggression may be curbed with proper handling. Some have advised against keeping them around very young children[citation needed]. Certain breeds, such as silkies and many bantam varieties, are generally docile and are often recommended as good pets around children with disabilities.[56]
Diseases and ailments
Chickens are susceptible to several parasites, including lice, mites, ticks, fleas, and intestinal worms, as well as other diseases. Despite the name, they are not affected by chickenpox, which is generally restricted to humans.[57]
Some of the diseases that can affect chickens are shown below:


Name
Common name
Cause


Aspergillosis

Aspergillus fungi


Avian influenza
bird flu
virus


Histomoniasis
blackhead disease
Histomonas meleagridis


Botulism
paralysis
Clostridium botulinum toxin


Cage layer fatigue

mineral deficiency, lack of physical exercise


Campylobacteriosis

tissue injury in the gut


Coccidiosis

Coccidia


Colds

virus


Crop bound

improper feeding


Dermanyssus gallinae
red mite
parasite


Egg binding

oversized egg


Erysipelas

Streptococcus bacteria


Fatty liver hemorrhagic syndrome

high-energy food


Fowl cholera

Pasteurella multocida


Fowlpox

Fowlpox virus


Fowl typhoid

bacteria


Gallid herpesvirus 1
infectious laryngotracheitis
virus


Gapeworm
Syngamus trachea
worms


Infectious bronchitis

Infectious Bronchitis Virus


Infectious bursal disease
Gumboro
infectious bursal disease virus


Infectious coryza in chickens

Avibacterium paragallinarum


Lymphoid leukosis

Avian sarcoma leukosis virus


Marek's disease

Gallid herpesvirus 2


Moniliasis
yeast infection
or thrush
Candida fungi


Mycoplasma

bacteria


Newcastle disease

Avian avulavirus 1


Necrotic enteritis

bacteria


Omphalitis
Mushy chick disease[58]
bacteria


Peritonitis[59]

infection in abdomen from egg yolk


Psittacosis

Chlamydia psittaci


Pullorum
Salmonella
bacteria


Scaly leg

Cnemidocoptes mutans


Squamous cell carcinoma

cancer


Tibial dyschondroplasia
speed growing



Toxoplasmosis

Toxoplasma gondii


Ulcerative enteritis

bacteria


Ulcerative pododermatitis
bumblefoot
bacteria


In religion and mythology




Vatican Persian Cock — A 1919 print of a fabric square of a Persian cock or a Persian bird design belonging to the Vatican (Holy See) in Rome dating to 600 CE. Notice the halo denoting the status of being holy in that religious schema.


Since antiquity chickens have been, and still are, a sacred animal in some cultures[60] and deeply embedded within belief systems and religious worship. The term "Persian bird" for the rooster appears to have been given by the Greeks after Persian contact "because of his great importance and his religious use among the Persians".[61]
In Indonesia the chicken has great significance during the Hindu cremation ceremony. A chicken is considered a channel for evil spirits which may be present during the ceremony. A chicken is tethered by the leg and kept present at the ceremony for its duration to ensure that any evil spirits present go into the chicken and not the family members. The chicken is then taken home and returns to its normal life.
In ancient Greece, the chicken was not normally used for sacrifices, perhaps because it was still considered an exotic animal. Because of its valor, the cock is found as an attribute of Ares, Heracles, and Athena. The alleged last words of Socrates as he died from hemlock poisoning, as recounted by Plato, were "Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to pay the debt?", signifying that death was a cure for the illness of life.
The Greeks believed that even lions were afraid of roosters. Several of Aesop's Fables reference this belief.
In the New Testament, Jesus prophesied the betrayal by Peter: "Jesus answered, 'I tell you, Peter, before the rooster crows today, you will deny three times that you know me.'"[62] It happened,[63] and Peter cried bitterly. This made the rooster a symbol for both vigilance and betrayal.
Earlier, Jesus compares himself to a mother hen when talking about Jerusalem: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing."[64]
In the sixth century, Pope Gregory I declared the rooster the emblem of Christianity[65] and another Papal enactment of the ninth century by Pope Nicholas I[60] ordered the figure of the rooster to be placed on every church steeple.[66]
In many Central European folk tales, the devil is believed to flee at the first crowing of a rooster.
In traditional Jewish practice, a kosher animal is swung around the head and then slaughtered on the afternoon before Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, in a ritual called kapparos; it is now common practice to cradle the bird and move it around the head. A chicken or fish is typically used because it is commonly available (and small enough to hold). The sacrifice of the animal is to receive atonement, for the animal symbolically takes on all the person's sins in kapparos. The meat is then donated to the poor. A woman brings a hen for the ceremony, while a man brings a rooster. Although not a sacrifice in the biblical sense, the death of the animal reminds the penitent sinner that his or her life is in God's hands.
The Talmud speaks of learning "courtesy toward one's mate" from the rooster.[67] This might refer to the fact that when a rooster finds something good to eat, he calls his hens to eat first. A rooster might also come to the aid of a hen if she is attacked. The Talmud likewise provides us with the statement "Had the Torah not been given to us, we would have learned modesty from cats, honest toil from ants, chastity from doves and gallantry from cocks",[68][69] which may be further understood as to that of the gallantry of cocks being taken in the context of a religious instilling vessel of "a girt one of the loins" (Young's Literal Translation) that which is "stately in his stride" and "move with stately bearing" in the Book of Proverbs 30:29-31 as referenced by Michael V. Fox in his Proverbs 10-31 where Saʻadiah ben Yosef Gaon (Saadia Gaon) identifies the definitive trait of "A cock girded about the loins" in Proverbs 30:31 (Douay–Rheims Bible) as "the honesty of their behavior and their success",[70] identifying a spiritual purpose of a religious vessel within that religious instilling schema of purpose and use.
The chicken is one of the symbols of the Chinese Zodiac. In Chinese folk religion, a cooked chicken as a religious offering is usually limited to ancestor veneration and worship of village deities. Vegetarian deities such as the Buddha are not recipients of such offerings. Under some observations, an offering of chicken is presented with "serious" prayer (while roasted pork is offered during a joyous celebration). In Confucian Chinese weddings, a chicken can be used as a substitute for one who is seriously ill or not available (e.g., sudden death) to attend the ceremony. A red silk scarf is placed on the chicken's head and a close relative of the absent bride/groom holds the chicken so the ceremony may proceed. However, this practice is rare today.
A cockatrice was supposed to have been born from an egg laid by a rooster, as well as killed by a rooster's call.
In history




The red junglefowl


An early domestication of chickens in Southeast Asia is probable, since the word for domestic chicken (*manuk) is part of the reconstructed Proto-Austronesian language (see Austronesian languages). Chickens, together with dogs and pigs, were the domestic animals of the Lapita culture,[71] the first Neolithic culture of Oceania.[72]
The first pictures of chickens in Europe are found on Corinthian pottery of the 7th century BC.[73][74] The poet Cratinus (mid-5th century BC, according to the later Greek author Athenaeus) calls the chicken "the Persian alarm". In Aristophanes's comedy The Birds (414 BC) a chicken is called "the Median bird", which points to an introduction from the East. Pictures of chickens are found on Greek red figure and black-figure pottery.
In ancient Greece, chickens were still rare and were a rather prestigious food for symposia.[citation needed] Delos seems to have been a center of chicken breeding (Columella, De Re Rustica 8.3.4).
The Romans used chickens for oracles, both when flying ("ex avibus", Augury) and when feeding ("auspicium ex tripudiis", Alectryomancy). The hen ("gallina") gave a favourable omen ("auspicium ratum"), when appearing from the left (Cic., de Div. ii.26), like the crow and the owl.
For the oracle "ex tripudiis" according to Cicero (Cic. de Div. ii.34), any bird could be used in auspice, and shows at one point that any bird could perform the tripudium[75] but normally only chickens ("pulli") were consulted. The chickens were cared for by the pullarius, who opened their cage and fed them pulses or a special kind of soft cake when an augury was needed. If the chickens stayed in their cage, made noises ("occinerent"), beat their wings or flew away, the omen was bad; if they ate greedily, the omen was good.[76]
In 249 BC, the Roman general Publius Claudius Pulcher had his "sacred chickens" "[77] thrown overboard when they refused to feed before the battle of Drepana, saying "If they won't eat, perhaps they will drink." He promptly lost the battle against the Carthaginians and 93 Roman ships were sunk. Back in Rome, he was tried for impiety and heavily fined.[78]
In 162 BC, the Lex Faunia forbade fattening hens to conserve grain rations.[79][80] To get around this, the Romans castrated roosters (capon), which resulted in a doubling of size[81] despite the law that was passed in Rome that forbade the consumption of fattened chickens. It was renewed a number of times, but does not seem to have been successful. Fattening chickens with bread soaked in milk was thought to give especially delicious results. The Roman gourmet Apicius offers 17 recipes for chicken, mainly boiled chicken with a sauce. All parts of the animal are used: the recipes include the stomach, liver, testicles and even the pygostyle (the fatty "tail" of the chicken where the tail feathers attach).
The Roman author Columella gives advice on chicken breeding in the eighth book of his treatise, De Re Rustica (On Agriculture). He identified Tanagrian, Rhodic, Chalkidic and Median (commonly misidentified as Melian) breeds, which have an impressive appearance, a quarrelsome nature and were used for cockfighting by the Greeks (De Re Rustica 8.3.4). For farming, native (Roman) chickens are to be preferred, or a cross between native hens and Greek cocks (De Re Rustica 8.2.13). Dwarf chickens are nice to watch because of their size but have no other advantages.
According to Columella (De Re Rustica 8.2.7), the ideal flock consists of 200 birds, which can be supervised by one person if someone is watching for stray animals. White chickens should be avoided as they are not very fertile and are easily caught by eagles or goshawks. One cock should be kept for five hens. In the case of Rhodian and Median cocks that are very heavy and therefore not much inclined to sex, only three hens are kept per cock. The hens of heavy fowls are not much inclined to brood; therefore their eggs are best hatched by normal hens. A hen can hatch no more than 15-23 eggs, depending on the time of year, and supervise no more than 30 hatchlings. Eggs that are long and pointed give more male, rounded eggs mainly female hatchlings (De Re Rustica 8.5.11).
Columella also states that chicken coops should face southeast and lie adjacent to the kitchen, as smoke is beneficial for the animals and "poultry never thrive so well as in warmth and smoke" (De Re Rustica 8.3.1).[82] Coops should consist of three rooms and possess a hearth. Dry dust or ash should be provided for dust-baths.
According to Columella (De Re Rustica 8.4.1), chickens should be fed on barley groats, small chick-peas, millet and wheat bran, if they are cheap. Wheat itself should be avoided as it is harmful to the birds. Boiled ryegrass (Lolium sp.) and the leaves and seeds of alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) can be used as well. Grape marc can be used, but only when the hens stop laying eggs, that is, about the middle of November; otherwise eggs are small and few. When feeding grape marc, it should be supplemented with some bran. Hens start to lay eggs after the winter solstice, in warm places around the first of January, in colder areas in the middle of February. Parboiled barley increases their fertility; this should be mixed with alfalfa leaves and seeds, or vetches or millet if alfalfa is not at hand. Free-ranging chickens should receive two cups of barley daily.
Columella[citation needed] advises farmers to slaughter hens that are older than three years, because they no longer produce sufficient eggs.
According to Aldrovandi: Capons were produced by burning "the hind part of the bowels, or loins or spurs"[83] with a hot iron. The wound was treated with potter's chalk.
For the use of poultry and eggs in the kitchens of ancient Rome see Roman eating and drinking.
Chickens were spread by Polynesian seafarers and reached Easter Island in the 12th century AD, where they were the only domestic animal, with the possible exception of the Polynesian rat (Rattus exulans). They were housed in extremely solid chicken coops built from stone, which was first reported as such to Linton Palmer in 1868, who also "expressed his doubts about this".[84]
As food
Main article: Chicken as food
The meat of the chicken, also called "chicken", is a type of poultry meat. Because of its relatively low cost, chicken is one of the most used meats in the world. Nearly all parts of the bird can be used for food, and the meat can be cooked in many different ways. Popular chicken dishes include roasted chicken, fried chicken, chicken soup, Buffalo wings, tandoori chicken, butter chicken, and chicken rice. Chicken is also a staple of many fast food restaurants.
In the Caribbean there is a species of large frog known as a mountain chicken as it is large, and tastes like chicken. Consequently it is an endangered species.
Eggs
Main articles: Egg as food and List of egg dishes
In 2000, there were 50.4 million tons of eggs produced in the world (Executive guide to world poultry trends, 2001)[85] and an estimated 53.4 million tons of table eggs were produced during 2002.[86] In 2009, an estimated 62.1 million metric tons of eggs were produced worldwide from a total laying flock of approximately 6.4 billion hens.[87]
Chicken eggs are widely used in many types of dishes, both sweet and savory, including many baked goods. Eggs can be scrambled, fried, hard-boiled, soft-boiled, pickled, and poached. The albumen, or egg white, contains protein but little or no fat, and can be used in cooking separately from the yolk. Egg whites may be aerated or whipped to a light, fluffy consistency and are often used in desserts such as meringues and mousse. Ground egg shells are sometimes used as a food additive to deliver calcium. Hens do not need a male to produce eggs, only to fertilize them. A flock containing only females will still produce eggs; however, the eggs will all be infertile.
See also

Abnormal behaviour of birds in captivity
Battery Hen Welfare Trust, a UK charity for laying hens
Chicken eyeglasses
Chicken fat
Chicken hypnotism
Chicken or the egg
Chicken manure
Chook raffle – a type of raffle where the prize is a chicken.
Early feeding
Feral chicken
Gamebird hybrids – hybrids between chickens, peafowl, guineafowl and pheasants
Henopause
List of chicken breeds
Poularde
Rubber chicken
Symbolic chickens
Tastes like chicken
Unihemispheric slow-wave sleep
"Why did the chicken cross the road?"

References


^ UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation reported in the Economist: [1].
^ Xiang, H.; Gao, J.; Yu, B.; Zhou, H.; Cai, D.; Zhang, Y. & Zhao, X. (2014). "Early Holocene chicken domestication in northern China". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 111 (49): 17564–17569. doi:10.1073/pnas.1411882111. 
^ Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat, (Anthea Bell, translator) The History of Food, Ch. 11 "The History of Poultry", revised ed. 2009, p. 306.
^ Howard Carter, "An Ostracon Depicting a Red Jungle-Fowl (The Earliest Known Drawing of the Domestic Cock)" The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 9.1/2 (April 1923), pp. 1-4.
^ Pritchard, "The Asiatic Campaigns of Thutmose III" Ancient Near East Texts related to the Old Testament, p240.
^ Roehrig, Catharine H.; Dreyfus, Renée; Keller, Cathleen A. (2005). Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 268. ISBN 978-1-58839-173-5. 
^ "Cockerel – definitions from Dictionary.com". Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ "Pullet – definitions from Dictionary.com". Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ Definition of "chook" in Encarta. The vernacular use is said to be offensive in this dictionary but it may also be used as a term of jocular familiarity. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009. 
^ Dohner, Janet Vorwald (2001-01-01). The Encyclopedia of Historic and Endangered Livestock and Poultry Breeds. Yale University Press. ISBN 030013813X. 
^ Berhardt, Clyde E. B. (1986). I Remember: Eighty Years of Black Entertainment, Big Bands. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-8122-8018-0. OCLC 12805260. 
^ "Info on Chicken Care". ideas4pets. 2003. Retrieved August 13, 2008. 
^ Gerard P.Worrell AKA "Farmer Jerry". "Frequently asked questions about chickens & eggs". Ferry Landing Farm & Apiary. Retrieved August 13, 2008. 
^ "The Poultry Guide – A to Z and FAQs". Ruleworks.co.uk. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ Smith, Jamon. Tuscaloosanews.com "World’s oldest chicken starred in magic shows, was on 'Tonight Show’", Tuscaloosa News (Alabama, USA). August 6, 2006. Retrieved on February 26, 2008.
^ Stonehead. "Introducing new hens to a flock « Musings from a Stonehead". Stonehead.wordpress.com. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ a b c Grandin, Temple; Johnson, Catherine (2005). Animals in Translation. New York City: Scribner. pp. 69–71. ISBN 0-7432-4769-8. 
^ Cheng, Kimberly M. and Burns, Jeffrey T. (1988). "Dominance relationship and mating behavior of domestic cocks--a model to study mate-guarding and sperm competition in birds" (PDF). The Condor. 90: 697–704. 
^ Sherwin, C.M.; Nicol, C.J. (1993). "Factors influencing floor-laying by hens in modified cages". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 36: 211–222. doi:10.1016/0168-1591(93)90011-d. 
^ http://ps.oxfordjournals.org/content/64/5/789.short
^ Scientists Find Chickens Retain Ancient Ability to Grow Teeth Ammu Kannampilly, ABC News, February 27, 2006. Retrieved October 1, 2007.
^ a b Wong, GK; et al. (December 2004). "A genetic variation map for chicken with 2.8 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms". Nature. 432: 717–722. Bibcode:2004Natur.432..717B. doi:10.1038/nature03156. PMC 2263125 . PMID 15592405. 
^ Eriksson, J; Larson, G; Gunnarsson, U; Bed'hom, B; Tixier-Boichard, M; et al. (2008). "Identification of the Yellow Skin Gene Reveals a Hybrid Origin of the Domestic Chicken". PLoS Genet. 4: e1000010. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000010. PMC 2265484 . PMID 18454198. 
^ Fumihito, A; Miyake, T; Sumi, S; Takada, M; Ohno, S; Kondo, N (December 20, 1994), "One subspecies of the red junglefowl (Gallus gallus gallus) suffices as the matriarchic ancestor of all domestic breeds", PNAS, 91 (26): 12505–12509, Bibcode:1994PNAS...9112505F, doi:10.1073/pnas.91.26.12505 
^ Liu, Yi-Ping; Wu, Gui-Sheng; Yao, Yong-Gang; Miao, Yong-Wang; Luikart, Gordon; Baig, Mumtaz; Beja-Pereira, Albano; Ding, Zhao-Li; Palanichamy, Malliya Gounder; Zhang, Ya-Ping (2006), "Multiple maternal origins of chickens: Out of the Asian jungles", Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 38 (1): 12–19, doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2005.09.014, PMID 16275023 
^ Zeder; et al. (2006). "Documenting domestication: the intersection of genetics and archaeology". Trends in Genetics. 22 (3): 139–155. doi:10.1016/j.tig.2006.01.007. PMID 16458995. 
^ King, Rick (February 24, 2009), "Rat Attack", NOVA and National Geographic Television 
^ King, Rick (February 1, 2009), "Plant vs. Predator", NOVA 
^ West, B.; Zhou, B.X. (1988). "Did chickens go north? New evidence for domestication". J. Archaeol. Sci. 14: 515–533. 
^ Al-Nasser, A.; et al. (2007). "Overview of chicken taxonomy and domestication". World's Poultry Science Journal. 63: 285–300. doi:10.1017/S004393390700147X. 
^ a b c d e f CHOF : The Cambridge History of Food, 2000, Cambridge University Press, vol.1, pp496-499
^ Brown, Marley (Sep–Oct 2017). "Fast Food" (PDF). Archaeology. 70 (5): 18. ISSN 0003-8113. Retrieved 31 August 2017 – via EBSCO's Master File Complete (subscription required) 
^ DNA reveals how the chicken crossed the sea Brendan Borrell, Nature, June 5, 2007. Retrieved October 1, 2007.
^ A. A. Storey et al., "Radiocarbon and DNA evidence for a pre-Columbian introduction of Polynesian chickens to Chile", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0703993104; John Noble Wilford, "First Chickens in Americas were Brought from Polynesia, New York Times, June 5, 2007.
^ Gongora, Jaime; Rawlence, Nicolas J.; Mobegi, Victor A.; Jianlin, Han; Alcalde, Jose A.; Matus, Jose T.; Hanotte, Olivier; Moran, Chris; Austin, J.; Ulm, Sean; Anderson, Atholl J.; Larson, Greger; Cooper, Alan (2008). "Indo-European and Asian origins for Chilean and Pacific chickens revealed by mtDNA". PNAS. 105 (30): 10308–10313. Bibcode:2008PNAS..10510308G. doi:10.1073/pnas.0801991105. PMC 2492461 . PMID 18663216. 
^ Jones, E.K.M.; Prescott, N.B. (2000). "Visual cues used in the choice of mate by fowl and their potential importance for the breeder industry". World's Poultry Science Journal. 56: 127–138. doi:10.1079/WPS20000010. 
^ "About chickens | Compassion in World Farming". www.ciwf.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ Fereira, John. "Poultry Slaughter Annual Summary". usda.mannlib.cornell.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ Fereira, John. "Chickens and Eggs Annual Summary". usda.mannlib.cornell.edu. Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ "Towards Happier Meals In A Globalized World". World Watch Institute. 
^ Ilea, Ramona Cristina (2009-04-01). "Intensive Livestock Farming: Global Trends, Increased Environmental Concerns, and Ethical Solutions". Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics. 22 (2): 153–167. doi:10.1007/s10806-008-9136-3. ISSN 1187-7863. 
^ Tilman, David; Cassman, Kenneth G.; Matson, Pamela A.; Naylor, Rosamond; Polasky, Stephen (2002-08-08). "Agricultural sustainability and intensive production practices". Nature. 418 (6898): 671–677. doi:10.1038/nature01014. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 12167873. 
^ "Broiler Chickens Fact Sheet // Animals Australia". Animalsaustralia.org. Retrieved August 29, 2010. 
^ "UK Egg Industry Data | Official Egg Info". www.egginfo.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ Guinness World Records 2011 ed. by Craig Glenday – page 286
^ a b Browne, Anthony (March 10, 2002). "Ten weeks to live". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 28, 2010. 
^ Patwardhan, D.; King, A. (2011). "Review: feed withdrawal and non feed withdrawal moult". World's Poultry Science Journal. 67: 253–268. doi:10.1017/s0043933911000286. 
^ Webster, A.B. (2003). "Physiology and behavior of the hen during induced moult". Poultry Science. 82: 992–1002. doi:10.1093/ps/82.6.992. PMID 12817455. 
^ Molino, A.B.; Garcia, E.A.; Berto, D.A.; Pelícia, K.; Silva, A.P.; Vercese, F. (2009). "The Effects of Alternative Forced-Molting Methods on The Performance and Egg Quality of Commercial Layers". Brazilian Journal of Poultry Science. 11: 109–113. doi:10.1590/s1516-635x2009000200006. 
^ Yousaf, M.; Chaudhry, A.S. (2008). "History, changing scenarios and future strategies to induce moulting in laying hens". World's Poultry Science Journal. 64: 65–75. doi:10.1017/s0043933907001729. 
^ Joe G. Berry. "Artificial Incubation" (PDF). Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service, Oklahoma State University. Retrieved September 29, 2010. 
^ Phillip J. Clauer. "Incubating Eggs" (PDF). Virginia Cooperative Extension Service, Virginia State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 13, 2010. Retrieved October 1, 2010. 
^ United Poultry Concerns. "Providing a Good Home for Chickens". Retrieved May 4, 2009. 
^ Haitook, Theerachai (2006). Study on Chicken Meat Production for Small Scale Farmers in Northeast Thailand. kassel university press GmbH. ISBN 9783899582383. 
^ Sfetcu, Nicolae (2014-11-27). The Birds World. Nicolae Sfetcu. 
^ "Clucks and Chooks: A guide to keeping chickens". Archived from the original on July 30, 2009. 
^ White, T. M.; Gilden, D. H.; Mahalingam, R. (2001). "An animal model of varicella virus infection". Brain pathology (Zurich, Switzerland). 11 (4): 475–479. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2001.tb00416.x. PMID 11556693. 
^ "Overview of Omphalitis in Poultry". Merck Veterinary Manual. Retrieved 2017-01-10. 
^ "Clucks and Chooks: guide to keeping chickens". 
^ a b Adler, Jerry; Lawler, Andrew (June 2012). "How the Chicken Conquered the World". Smithsonian. 
^ Peters, John P. (1913). "The Cock". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 33: 381. JSTOR 592841. 
^ Luke 22:34
^ Luke 22:61
^ Matthew 23:37; also Luke 13:34. For a recent study of chickens in the New Testament, see Joshua N. Tilton "Chickens and the Cultural Context of the Gospels" www.jerusalemperspective.com.
^ The Antiquary: a magazine devoted to the study of the past, Volume 17 edited by Edward Walford, John Charles Cox, George Latimer Apperson – page 202
^ The Philadelphia Museum bulletin, Volumes 1-5, Pennsylvania Museum of Art, Pennsylvania Museum and School of Industrial Art, p 14, 1906
^ Eruvin 100b.
^ A Treasury of Jewish Quotations By Joseph L. Baron – 1985
^ Jonathan ben Nappaha. Talmud: Erubin 100b
^ PROVERBS 10-31, Volume 18, Michael V. Fox, Yale University Press 2009, 704 pages
^ [2] The Cambridge History of the Pacific Islanders By Donald Denoon, Malama Meleisea – Cambridge University Press, March 25, 2004 – page 56
^ [3] Anthropological Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications edited by Michael H. Crawford – Cambridge University Press, November 30, 2006 – page 411
^ [4] Regional Greek Cooking By Dean Karayanis, Catherine Karayanis – Hippocrene Books, March 1, 2008 – page 176
^ [5] Cooking With the Bible: Biblical Food, Feasts, And Lore By Anthony F. Chiffolo, Rayner W. Hesse – Greenwood Publishing Group, August 30, 2006 – page 207
^ [6] A classical and archaeological dictionary of the manners, customs, laws, institutions, arts, etc. of the celebrated nations of antiquity, and of the middle ages: To which is prefixed A synoptical and chronological view of ancient history – P. Austin Nuttall – Printed for Whittaker and co., 1840 – page 601
^ [7] Chambers's information for the people, ed. by W. and R. Chambers – Chambers W. and R., ltd – page 458
^ [8] A Cabinet of Roman Curiosities: Strange Tales and Surprising Facts from the World's Greatest Empire by J. C. McKeown – Oxford University Press, Jul 22, 2010 – page 131
^ Paul Sheridan (November 8, 2015). "The Sacred Chickens of Rome". anecdotesfromantiquity.net. Retrieved November 17, 2015. 
^ [9] A History of Food By Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat – John Wiley & Sons, March 25, 2009 – page 305
^ [A History of Food By Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat – John Wiley & Sons, March 25, 2009 – page 305]
^ Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat, (Anthea Bell, translator) The History of Food, Ch. 11 "The History of Poultry", revised ed. 2009, p. 305.
^ [10] The New England farmer, Volume 6 By Thomas Greene Fessenden – Thomas W. Shepard, 1828 – page 69
^ [11] The Wisdom of Birds: An Illustrated History of Ornithology By Tim Birkhead – Bloomsbury Publishing, March 7, 2011 – page 278
^ [12] The Enigmas of Easter Island By Paul Bahn, John Flenley – Oxford University Press, May 29, 2003 – page 96
^ [13] Poultry Genetics, Breeding and Biotechnology edited by W. M. Muir, S. E. Aggrey – CABI, September 4, 2003 – page 5
^ [14] International Egg Commission IEC London Egg Conference – Sep 9 to 13, 2012
^ [15] WATT Ag Net – Watt Publishing Co


Further reading

Green-Armytage, Stephen (October 2000). Extraordinary Chickens. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-3343-8. 
Smith, Page; Charles Daniel (April 2000). The Chicken Book. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-2213-X. 
Siddharth, Biswas (2014). "Gallus gallus domesticus Linnaeus, 1758: Keep safe your domestic fowl from your domestic foul". Ambient Science. 1 (1): 41–43. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. 
Andrew Lawler (2014). Why Did the Chicken Cross the World?: The Epic Saga of the Bird that Powers Civilization. Atria Books. ISBN 978-1476729893. 

External links

Find more aboutChickenat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Taxonomy from Wikispecies



Chickens at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Chicken at Encyclopædia Britannica
Video: Chick hatching from egg








v
t
e


Chicken






Rooster
Hen
Chick





As poultry



Chicken as food
Breeds
Capon
Poularde
Poussin
Pullet
Broiler





Husbandry



Battery cage
Free range
Furnished cages
Yarding
Chicken tractor
Poultry farming
Broiler industry
Beak trimming
Hatchery
Chick sexing
Chick culling
Candling
Abnormal behaviour of birds in captivity
European Union Council Directive 1999/74/EC





Dishes



List of chicken dishes
Airline chicken
Andong jjimdak
Arroz con pollo
Ayam bakar
Ayam goreng
Ayam kecap
Ayam masak merah
Ayam taliwang
Ballotine
Barbecue chicken
Barberton chicken
Bean sprouts chicken
Beer can chicken
Betutu
Bon bon chicken
Bourbon chicken
Brown stew chicken
Buffalo wings
Bubur ayam
Buldak
Butter chicken
Cafreal
Caldo tlalpeño
Caldo Xóchitl
Cashew chicken
Chargha
Chicken à la King
Chicken and duck blood soup
Chicken and dumplings
Chicken and waffles
Chicken balls
Chicken bog
Chicken Chettinad
Chicken curry
Chicken Divan
Chicken feet
Chicken French
Chicken inasal
Chicken karahi
Chicken Kiev
Chicken Lahori
Chicken lollipop
Chicken Marengo
Chicken marsala
Chicken Maryland
Chicken mull
Chicken paprikash
Chicken parmigiana
Chicken and mushroom pie
Chicken riggies
Chicken salad

Chinese
Olivier salad


Chicken sandwich
Chicken soup
Chicken tabaka
Chicken tatsuta
Chicken tikka
Chicken tikka masala
Chicken Vesuvio
Laziji
Chicken 65
Chimaek
Chikuzenni
Chilli chicken
Circassian chicken
Claypot chicken rice
Cock-a-leekie soup
Cơm gà rau thơm
Coq au vin
Cordon bleu
Coronation chicken
Country Captain
Coxinha
Dak-galbi
Dak-bokkeum-tang
Dakjuk
Dapanji
Dong'an chicken
Dragon tiger phoenix
Drunken chicken
Engagement Chicken
Escabeche oriental
Flying Jacob
Fried chicken

Chicken fingers
Chicken fries
Chicken nugget
Crispy
Hot chicken
Korean
Taiwan
Tongdak


Fujian red wine chicken
Galinha à africana
Galinha à portuguesa
Galinhada
Gallo en chicha
General Tso's chicken
Gribenes
Gulai Ayam
Hainanese chicken rice
Hawaiian haystack
Huli-huli chicken
Jerusalem mixed grill
Jerk chicken
Jubilee chicken
Jujeh kabab
Kai yang
Karaage
Kedjenou
King Ranch chicken
Kori rotti
Kung Pao chicken
Kurnik
Lemon chicken
Manok pansoh
Mie ayam
Moo goo gai pan
Murgh Musallam
Musakhan
Nasi liwet
Nasi tim
Olivier salad
Opor ayam
Orange chicken
Ostropel
Padak
Pastilla
Chicken Picasso
Piccata
Pinchitos
Pinikpikan
Plecing ayam
Pollo a la Brasa
Poulet à la Moambé
Poulet au fromage
Poule au riz
Pozharsky cutlet
Roast chicken
Rollatini
Rotisserie chicken
Sajji
Saltimbocca
Samgye-tang
Sanbeiji
Satay
Scaloppine
Sesame chicken
Shawarma
Sweet and sour chicken
Shish taouk‎
Soto ayam
Soy sauce chicken
Spice bag
Swiss wing
Tandoori chicken
Tavuk göğsü
Thalassery biryani
Chicken katsu
Tsukune
Waterzooi
White cut chicken
Yassa
Yakitori





Religion, mythology
and culture



Cockatrice
Cockfighting
Kapparos
Sarimanok





Diseases



Aspergillosis
Avian influenza
Avian sarcoma leukosis virus
Histomoniasis (blackhead disease)
Botulism
Campylobacteriosis
Candidiasis
Coccidiosis
Colds
Dermanyssus gallinae
Egg binding
Erysipelas
Fatty liver hemorrhagic syndrome
Fowlpox
Gallid herpesvirus 1
Gapeworm
Infectious bursal disease
Infectious coryza in chickens
Marek's disease
Mycoplasmas
Newcastle disease
Omphalitis
Psittacosis
Pullorum
Scaly leg
Squamous cell carcinoma
Tibial dyschondroplasia
Toxoplasmosis








 Category












v
t
e


Poultry



Species



Chicken
Duck
Goose
Guineafowl
Grey partridge
Pheasant
Domestic pigeon
Common quail
Japanese quail
Turkey





Breeds



Chicken breeds
Duck breeds
Turkey breeds
Goose breeds
Pigeon breeds





Poultry farming



Chicken coop
Chicken harvester
Free range
Free-range eggs
Pastured poultry
Organic egg production
Yarding
Hatchery
Battery cage
Furnished cages
Forced molting
Debeaking
Chick culling
Chick sexing
Hock burns
Blinders (poultry), aka Chicken eyeglasses
Poultry litter
Poultry farming in the United States












v
t
e


Birds in culture



Activities



Aviculture
Birdwatching
Bird conservation
Fletching
In sport

Cockfighting
Falconry
Pigeon racing
Vinkensport


In science

Model organism
Ornithology


In mythology and religion

Augury
Sacred ibis
Sky burial


In heraldry

Crow/Raven
Eagle
Martlet
Turul


In hunting

Cormorant fishing
Driven grouse shooting
Plume hunting
Wildfowling










Products



Chicken
Down
Egg
Feather
Guano
Poultry





In the arts



In art

Bird-and-flower painting
Feather tights
Joan Miró


In poetry

The Conference of the Birds
Ode to a Nightingale
To a Skylark
Crow


In prose

A History of British Birds
The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck
The Ugly Duckling


In theatre and ballet

The Birds
Swan Lake
The Firebird


In film

The Birds
Kes
Animated films
Chicken films
Horror films


in music
In fashion

Aigrette
Feather boa
Feather cloak


In dance

Cendrawasih







Species



Chicken
Cormorant
Crow
Cuckoo
Golden eagle
Goldfinch
Kingfisher
Parrot
Partridge
Peacock
Penguin
Pheasant
Pigeon/Dove
Raven

of the Tower of London


Sparrow
Swallow





People



Illustrators

John James Audubon (The Birds of America)
Thomas Bewick
John Gould
Lars Jonsson
John Gerrard Keulemans
Edward Lear
Richard Lewington
Roger Tory Peterson
Henry Constantine Richter
Joseph Smit
Archibald Thorburn
Joseph Wolf


Conservationists

Niels Krabbe
Peter Scott


Organisations

BirdLife International
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds
Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust







Related



Category:Birds and humans
Dinosaurs in culture
Living things in culture

Fish in culture
Insects in culture
Mammals in culture
Reptiles in culture


Zoomusicology









Authority control



GND: 4026126-8
NDL: 00568580











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chicken&oldid=818117055"					Categories: Domesticated animalsChickensBirds described in 1758JunglefowlsPoultryMagnetoreceptive animalsBirds by common nameHidden categories: Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse mdy dates from December 2015Articles with 'species' microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013Articles with DMOZ linksArticles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips