This article is about the organization and relationships between individual denominations. For the collective of all Christian believers in general, see Christian Church. For others, see Christian Church (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Son of God
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Patriology
Pneumatology
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Luther
Reformation
Radical Reformation









Related topics



Art
Holidays (list)
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









 Christianity portal





v
t
e









Christian Schisms and their Councils


A Christian denomination is a distinct religious body within Christianity, identified by traits such as a name, organisation, leadership and doctrine. Individual bodies, however, may use alternative terms to describe themselves, such as church or sometimes fellowship. Divisions between one group and another are defined by authority and doctrine; issues such as the nature of Jesus, the authority of apostolic succession, eschatology, and papal primacy may separate one denomination from another. Groups of denominations—often sharing broadly similar beliefs, practices, and historical ties—are sometimes known as "branches of Christianity".
Individual Christian groups vary widely in the degree to which they recognize one another. Several groups claim to be the direct and sole authentic successor of the church founded by Jesus Christ in the 1st century AD. Others, however, believe in denominationalism, where some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices. Because of this concept, some Christian bodies reject the term "denomination" to describe themselves, to avoid implying equivalency with other churches or denominations.
The Catholic Church which has 1.2 billion members — slightly over half of all Christians worldwide — does not view itself as a denomination, but as the original pre-denominational church,[1] a view rejected by other Christians. Protestant denominations account for approximately 37 percent of Christians worldwide.[2] Together, Catholicism and Protestantism (including Anglicanism, and other denominations sharing historical ties) comprise Western Christianity. Western Christian denominations prevail in Western, Northern, Central and Southern Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas and Oceania.[citation needed]
The Eastern Orthodox Church, with an estimated 225–300 million adherents,[3] is the second-largest Christian organization in the world and also considers itself the original pre-denominational church. Unlike the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church is itself a communion of fully independent autocephalous churches (or "jurisdictions") that mutually recognize each other to the exclusion of others. The Eastern Orthodox Church, together with Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East, constitutes Eastern Christianity. (There are also some smaller groups of Eastern Catholics which are in communion with the Bishop of Rome but have cultural and historical ties with other Eastern Christians.) Eastern Christian denominations are represented mostly in Eastern Europe, North Asia, the Middle East and Northeast Africa.
Christians have various doctrines about the Church (the body of the faithful that they believe Jesus Christ established) and about how the divine church corresponds to Christian denominations. Both Catholics and Eastern Orthodox hold that their own organizations faithfully represent the One Holy catholic and Apostolic Church to the exclusion of the other. Sixteenth-century Protestants separated from the Catholic Church because of theologies and practices that they considered to be in violation of their own interpretation. Generally, members of the various denominations acknowledge each other as Christians, at least to the extent that they have mutually recognized baptisms and acknowledge historically orthodox views including the Divinity of Jesus and doctrines of sin and salvation, even though doctrinal and ecclesiological obstacles hinder full communion between churches.
Since the reforms surrounding Vatican II of 1962-1965, the Catholic Church has referred to Protestant communities as "denominations", while reserving the term "church" for apostolic churches, including the Eastern Orthodox (see subsistit in and branch theory). But some non-denominational Christians[4] do not follow any particular branch, though sometimes regarded as Protestants.[not verified in body]



Contents


1 Terminology
2 Major branches

2.1 Denominationalism
2.2 Taxonomy


3 Historical schisms and divisions

3.1 Antiquity
3.2 Middle Ages
3.3 Protestant Reformation (16th century)
3.4 Old and Liberal Catholic Churches (19th-20th centuries)
3.5 Eastern churches
3.6 Western churches
3.7 Christians with Jewish roots


4 Modern history

4.1 Quakers
4.2 Latter Day Saint movement
4.3 Second Great Awakening
4.4 Russian sectarianism
4.5 Iglesia ni Cristo
4.6 New Thought Movement
4.7 The Christian Community
4.8 Other movements


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 External links



Terminology[edit]
See also: Christian Church § Related concepts
Each group uses different terminology to discuss their beliefs. This section will discuss the definitions of several terms used throughout the article, before discussing the beliefs themselves in detail in following sections.
A denomination within Christianity can be defined as a "recognized autonomous branch of the Christian Church"; major synonyms include "religious group, sect, Church," etc.[notes 1][5] "Church" as a synonym, refers to a "particular Christian organization with its own clergy, buildings, and distinctive doctrines";[6] "church" can also more broadly be defined as the entire body of Christians, the "Christian Church".
Some traditional and evangelical Protestants draw a distinction between membership in the universal church and fellowship within the local church. Becoming a believer in Christ makes one a member of the universal church; one then may join a fellowship of other local believers.[7] Some evangelical groups describe themselves as interdenominational fellowships, partnering with local churches to strengthen evangelical efforts, usually targeting a particular group with specialized needs, such as students or ethnic groups.[8] A related concept is denominationalism, the belief that some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices.[9] (Conversely, "denominationalism" can also refer to "emphasizing of denominational differences to the point of being narrowly exclusive", similar to sectarianism).[10]
Protestant leaders differ greatly from the views of the leaders of the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church, the two largest Christian denominations. Each church makes mutually exclusive claims for itself to be the direct continuation of the Church founded by Jesus Christ, from whom other denominations later broke away.[1] These churches, and a few others, reject denominationalism.
Major branches[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Christianity can be taxonomically divided into five main groups: the Church of the East, Oriental Orthodoxy, Eastern Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism. The latter is a broad umbrella term including many groups which do not share any ecclesiastical governance and have widely diverging beliefs and practices.
Christianity has denominational families (or movements) and also has individual denominations (or communions). The difference between a denomination and a denominational family is sometimes unclear to outsiders. Some denominational families can be considered major branches. Groups that are members of a branch, while sharing historical ties and similar doctrines, are not necessarily in communion with one another.
There were some movements considered heresies by the early church which do not exist today and are not generally referred to as denominations. Examples include the Gnostics (who had believed in an esoteric dualism called gnosis), the Ebionites (who denied the divinity of Jesus), and the Arians (who subordinated the Son to the Father by denying the pre-existence of Christ, thus placing Jesus as a created being), Bogumilism and Bosnian Church. The greatest divisions in Christianity today, however, are between the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox, Catholicism, and the various denominations formed during and after the Protestant Reformation. There also exists a number of non-Trinitarian groups. There also exist some non-traditional groups that the majority of other Christians view as apostate or heretical, and not as legitimate versions of Christianity.
Comparisons between denominational churches must be approached with caution. For example, in some churches, congregations are part of a larger church organization, while in other groups, each congregation is an independent autonomous organization. This issue is further complicated by the existence of groups of congregations with a common heritage that are officially nondenominational and have no centralized authority or records, but which are identified as denominations by non-adherents. Study of such churches in denominational terms is therefore a more complex proposition.
Some groups count membership based on adult believers and baptized children of believers, while others only count adult baptized believers. Others may count membership based on those adult believers who have formally affiliated themselves with the congregation. In addition, there may be political motives of advocates or opponents of a particular group to inflate or deflate membership numbers through propaganda or outright deception.
Denominationalism [edit]
Denominationalism is the belief that some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices.[9] The idea was first articulated by Independents within the Puritan movement. They argued that differences among Christians were inevitable, but that separation based on these differences was not necessarily schism. Christians are obligated to practice their beliefs rather than remain within a church with which they disagree, but they must also recognize their imperfect knowledge and not condemn other Christians as apostate over unimportant matters.[11]
Some Christians view denominationalism as a regrettable fact. As of 2011, divisions are becoming less sharp, and there is increasing cooperation between denominations.[citation needed] Theological denominationalism ultimately denies reality to any apparent doctrinal differences among the "denominations", reducing all differences to mere matters de nomina ("of names").[citation needed]
A denomination in this sense is created when part of a church no longer feel they can accept the leadership of that church as a spiritual leadership due to a different view of doctrine or what they see as immoral behaviour, but the schism does not in any way reflect either group leaving the Church as a theoretical whole.[citation needed]
This particular doctrine is rejected by Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and the Oriental Orthodoxy. In these churches, it is not possible to have a separation over doctrinal or leadership issues, and any such attempts automatically are a type of schism. Some Protestant groups reject denominationalism as well.[citation needed]
Taxonomy[edit]





A schematic of Christian denominational taxonomy.[12] Protestantism in general, as well as Restorationism in particular, claims a direct connection with Early Christianity.








Major branches and movements within Protestantism.



Historical schisms and divisions[edit]
Christianity has not been a monolithic faith since the first century or Apostolic Age, if ever, and today there exist a large variety of groups that share a common history and tradition within and without mainstream Christianity. Christianity is the largest religion in the world (making up approximately one-third of the population) and the various divisions have commonalities and differences in tradition, theology, church government, doctrine, and language.
The largest schism or division in many classification schemes is between the families of Eastern and Western Christianity. After these two larger families come distinct branches of Christianity. Most classification schemes list six (in order of size: Roman Catholicism, Protestantism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Church of the East, which was originally referred to as Nestorianism but in modern times is embodied by the Assyrian Church of the East).
Unlike Roman Catholicism, Protestantism is a general movement that has no universal governing authority. As such, diverse groups such as Adventists, Anabaptists, Baptists, Binitarians, Charismatics, Congregationalists, Evangelicals, Holiness churches, Methodists, Moravians, Pentecostals, Presbyterians, Reformed, and Unitarians (depending on one's classification scheme) are all a part of the same family but have distinct doctrinal variations within each group – Lutherans see themselves not to be a part of the rest of what they call "Reformed Protestantism" due to radical differences in sacramental theology and historical approach to the Reformation itself (both Reformed and Lutherans see their reformation in the sixteenth century to be a 'reforming' of the Catholic Church, not a rejection of it entirely). From these come denominations, which in the West, have independence from the others in their doctrine.
The Eastern and Roman Catholic churches, due to their hierarchical structures, are not said to be made up of denominations, rather, they include kinds of regional councils and individual congregations and church bodies, which do not officially differ from one another in doctrine.
Antiquity[edit]
The initial differences between the East and West traditions stem from socio-cultural and ethno-linguistic divisions in and between the Western Roman and Byzantine Empires. Since the West (that is, Western Europe) spoke Latin as its lingua franca and the East (Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and northern Africa) largely used Aramaic and Koine Greek to transmit writings, theological developments were difficult to translate from one branch to the other. In the course of ecumenical councils (large gatherings of Christian leaders), some church bodies split from the larger family of Christianity. Many earlier heretical groups either died off for lack of followers and/or suppression by the church at large (such as Apollinarians, Montanists, and Ebionites).
The first significant, lasting split in historic Christianity came from the Church of the East, who left following the Christological controversy over Nestorianism in 431 (the Assyrians in 1994 released a common Christological statement with the Roman Catholic Church). Today, the Assyrian and Roman Catholic Church view this schism as largely linguistic, due to problems of translating very delicate and precise terminology from Latin to Aramaic and vice versa (see Council of Ephesus).
Following the Council of Chalcedon in 451, the next large split came with the Syriac and Coptic churches dividing themselves, with the dissenting churches becoming today's Oriental Orthodoxy. In modern times, there have also been moves towards healing this split, with common Christological statements being made between Pope John Paul II and Syriac patriarch Ignatius Zakka I Iwas, as well as between representatives of both Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy.
There has been a claim that the Chalcedonian Creed restored Nestorianism, however this is refuted by maintaining the following distinctions associated with the person of Christ: two hypostases, two natures (Nestorian); one hypostasis, one nature (Monophysite); one hypostasis, two natures (Orthodox/Catholic).[13]
Middle Ages[edit]
Main article: East-West Schism
In Western Christianity, there were a handful of geographically isolated movements that preceded the spirit of the Protestant Reformation. The Cathars were a very strong movement in medieval southwestern France, but did not survive into modern times. In northern Italy and southeastern France, Peter Waldo founded the Waldensians in the 12th century. This movement has largely been absorbed by modern-day Protestant groups. In Bohemia, a movement in the early 15th century by Jan Hus called the Hussites defied Roman Catholic dogma and still exists to this day (alternately known as the Moravian Church).
Although the church as a whole did not experience any major divisions for centuries afterward, the Eastern and Western groups drifted until the point where patriarchs from both families excommunicated one another in about 1054 in what is known as the Great Schism. The political and theological reasons for the schism are complex, but one major controversy was the inclusion and acceptance in the West of the filioque clause into the Nicene Creed, which the East viewed as erroneous. Another was the definition of papal primacy.
Both West and East agreed that the patriarch of Rome was owed a "primacy of honour" by the other patriarchs (those of Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople and Jerusalem), but the West also contended that this primacy extended to jurisdiction, a position rejected by the Eastern patriarchs. Various attempts at dialogue between the two groups would occur, but it was only in the 1960s, under Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras, that significant steps began to be made to mend the relationship between the two.




Door of the Schlosskirche (castle church) in Wittenberg to which Luther is said to have nailed his 95 Theses on 31st October 1517, sparking the Reformation.


Protestant Reformation (16th century)[edit]
Main article: Protestant Reformation
The Protestant Reformation began with the posting of Martin Luther's Ninety-Five Theses in Saxony on October 31, 1517, written as a set of grievances to reform the pre-Reformation Western Church. Luther's writings, combined with the work of Swiss theologian Huldrych Zwingli and French theologian and politician John Calvin sought to reform existing problems in doctrine and practice. Due to the reactions of ecclesiastical office holders at the time of the reformers, these reformers separated from the Roman Catholic Church, instigating a rift in Western Christianity.
In England, Henry VIII of England declared himself to be supreme head of the Church of England with the Act of Supremacy in 1531, founding the Church of England, repressing both Lutheran reformers and those loyal to the pope. Thomas Cranmer as Archbishop of Canterbury introduced the Reformation, in a form compromising between the Calvinists and Lutherans.
Old and Liberal Catholic Churches (19th-20th centuries)[edit]
The Old Catholic Church split from the Roman Catholic Church in the 1870s because of the promulgation of the dogma of Papal Infallibility as promoted by the First Vatican Council of 1869–1870. The term 'Old Catholic' was first used in 1853 to describe the members of the See of Utrecht that were not under Papal authority. The Old Catholic movement grew in America but has not maintained ties with Utrecht, although talks are under way between independent Old Catholic bishops and Utrecht.
The Liberal Catholic Church started in 1916 via an Old Catholic bishop in London, bishop Matthew, who consecrated bishop James Wedgwood to the Episcopacy. This stream has in its relatively short existence known many splits, which operate worldwide under several names.
Eastern churches[edit]
In the Eastern world, the largest body of believers in modern times is the Eastern Orthodox Church, sometimes imprecisely called "Greek Orthodox" because from the time of Christ through the Byzantine empire, Greek was its common language. However, the term "Greek Orthodox" actually refers to only one portion of the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church believes itself to be the continuation of the original Christian Church established by Jesus Christ, and the Apostles. The Eastern Orthodox and the Roman Catholics have been separated since the 11th century, following the East–West Schism, with each of them claiming to represent the original pre-schism Church.
The Eastern Orthodox consider themselves to be spiritually one body, which is administratively grouped into several autocephalous jurisdictions (also commonly referred to as "Churches", despite being parts of one Church). They do not recognize any single bishop as universal church leader, but rather each bishop governs only his own diocese. The Patriarch of Constantinople is known as the Ecumenical Patriarch, and holds the title "first among equals", meaning only that if a great council is called, the Patriarch sits as president of the council. He has no more power than any other bishop. Currently, the largest synod with the most members is the Russian Orthodox Church. Others include the ancient Patriarchates of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, the Georgian, Romanian, Serbian and Bulgarian Orthodox Churches, and several smaller ones.
The second largest Eastern Christian communion is Oriental Orthodoxy, which is organized in a similar manner, with six national autocephalous groups and two autonomous bodies, although there are greater internal differences than among the Eastern Orthodox (especially in the diversity of rites being used). The six autocephalous Oriental Orthodox Churches are the Coptic (Egyptian), Syriac, Armenian, Malankara (Indian), Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox Churches. In the Aramaic-speaking areas of the Middle East, the Syriac Orthodox Church has long been dominant. Although the region of modern-day Ethiopia and Eritrea has had a strong body of believers since the infancy of Christianity, these regions only gained autocephaly in 1963 and 1994 respectively. The Oriental Orthodox are distinguished from the Eastern Orthodox by doctrinal differences concerning the union of human and divine natures in the person of Jesus Christ, and the two communions separated as a consequence of the Council of Chalcedon in the year 451, although there have been recent moves towards reconciliation.
Since these groups are relatively obscure in the West, literature on them has sometimes included the Assyrian Church of the East as a part of the Oriental Orthodox Communion, but the Assyrians, after adopting Christianity in the 1st century AD, have maintained theological, cultural, and ecclesiastical independence from all other Christian bodies since 431.
The Assyrian Church therefore represents a third Eastern Christian communion in its own right. It is administered in a hierarchical model not entirely unlike the Catholic Church, with the head of the church being the Patriarch Catholicos of the Assyrian Church of the East, since 1976 HH Mar Dinkha IV. Due to oppression, the church's headquarters is in Chicago, Illinois, rather than the ancient Assyrian homelands in northern Iraq, northeast Syria, southeast Turkey and northwest Iran, though the core of believers remain there. Even within the Assyrian Church, there were two splits, with a number of Assyrians breaking away in 1552 and later forming the Chaldean Catholic Church, and in the 1960s another group forming the Ancient Church of the East, with a rival Catholicos (Patriarch) in California.
There are also the Eastern Catholic Churches, which are counterparts of the various Churches listed above, in that they preserve the same theological and liturgical traditions as they do. But they differ from their Orthodox mother Churches (and Church of the East) in that they recognize the Bishop of Rome as the universal head of the Church. Though adherents of Eastern Catholicism are fully part of the Catholic communion, most do not to use the term "Roman Catholic" to describe themselves, associating that name instead with members of the Latin Church.[14] Rather, they prefer to use the name of whichever Church they belong to—Ukrainian Catholic, Coptic Catholic, Assyrian-Chaldean Catholic, etc.
Western churches[edit]


Christian denominations
in English-speaking world




International associations
Interdenominational associations

World Council of Churches
World Evangelical Alliance

Denominational associations

Friends World Committee for Consultation
Mennonite World Conference
Anglican Communion
Baptist World Alliance
World Convention of Churches of Christ
Eastern Orthodox Church
Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference
International Lutheran Council
Lutheran World Federation
World Methodist Council
Pentecostal World Conference
International Conference of Reformed Churches
Reformed Ecumenical Council
World Communion of Reformed Churches
World Reformed Fellowship

Regional associations

Africa 


All Africa Conference of Churches (AACC)
Association of Evangelicals of Africa (AEA)
All Africa Baptist Fellowship
Africa Lutheran Communion




Asia 


Christian Conference of Asia (CCA)
Evangelical Fellowship of Asia
Asia Pacific Baptist Federation
Asia Lutheran Communion




Caribbean 


Caribbean Conference of Churches (CCC)
Evangelical Association of the Caribbean
Caribbean Baptist Fellowship




Europe 


Conference of European Churches (CEC)
European Evangelical Alliance
European Baptist Federation
Pentecostal European Fellowship




Middle East 


Middle East Council of Churches (MECC)




Latin America 


Latin American Council of Churches (CLAI)
Latin American Evangelical Fellowship (FIDE)
Union of Baptists in Latin America




North America 


North American Baptist Fellowship
Standing Conference of Orthodox Bishops in America
North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council




Pacific 


Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC)
Evangelical Fellowship of the South Pacific (EFSP)
Asia Pacific Baptist Federation










Australia



Christian denominations in Australia




Australian interchurch


Australian Evangelical Alliance  •  website
National Council of Churches








Catholic and Anglican


Anglican Church of Australia
Roman Catholic Church








Holiness and Pietist


Christian and Missionary Alliance
Christian Outreach Centre
Church of the Nazarene
Salvation Army
Seventh-day Adventist Church








Historical Protestantism


Australian Friends
Australian Baptist Ministries
Open Brethren

Christian Reformed Churches of Australia

Churches of Christ
Fellowship of Congregational Churches
Lutheran Church of Australia
Presbyterian Church of Australia
Uniting Church in Australia
Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia








Orthodox


Antiochian Orthodox of Australia and New Z.
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia
Serbian Orthodox of Australia and New Z.


Non-Chalcedonic


Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia








Pentecostal and related


Australian Christian Churches (AOG)
Christian City Church Intl.
CRC Churches International
Revival Centres International
Vineyard Churches Australia
Worldwide Church of God








Other


LDS Church









v
t
e












Canada



Canadian Christian bodies


v
t
e







Canadian interchurch




Canadian Council of Churches
S. Conference of Orthodox Bishops in America
North Am. Presbyterian and Reformed Council






Anabaptist and Friends




Canadian Mennonite Brethren Churches
Canadian Yearly Meeting (Quakers)
Mennonite Church Canada






Baptist and Stone-Campbell





Baptist

Association of Regular Baptist Churches
Baptist General Conference of Canada
Canadian Baptist Ministries
Canadian Convention of Southern Baptists
Fellowship of Evgcl. Baptist Churches, Canada
North American Baptist Conference

Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement

Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)
Evangelical Christian Church in Canada






Catholic and Anglican




Anglican Church of Canada
Anglican Church in North America
Polish National Catholic Church
Roman Catholic Church
Ukrainian Catholic Archeparchy of Winnipeg






Holiness and Pietist




Christian and Missionary Alliance, Canada
Church of the Nazarene
Evangelical Free Church of Canada
The Salvation Army
Wesleyan Church






Lutheran




Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada
Lutheran Church–Canada
Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod






Methodist




British Methodist Episcopal Church
Free Methodist Church in Canada
United Church of Canada






Orthodox




Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese, N.Am.
Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Toronto (Canada)
Serbian Orthodox Eparchy of Canada
Orthodox Church in America
American-Canadian Macedonian Orthodox Diocese
Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia
Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada

Non-Chalcedonic

Armenian Apostolic Diocese of Am.
Coptic Orthodox Church in Canada

Syncretic

Evangelical Orthodox Church






Pentecostal




Apostolic Church of Pentecost
Canadian Assemblies of God
Church of God of Prophecy
Intl. Foursquare Gospel, Canada
Intl. Pentecostal Holiness Church
Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada
Pentecostal Church of God

Oneness Pentecostal

United Pentecostal Church Intl.






Presbyterian and Reformed




Canadian and American Reformed Churches
Christian Reformed Church in North America
L'Église réformée du Québec
Presbyterian Church in Canada
Presbyterian Church in America
Reformed Church in America
United Church of Canada






Other




Messianic Jewish Alliance of America
Plymouth Brethren
Seventh-day Adventist Church in Canada
LDS Church
Vineyard Canada
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Canada

Syncretic

Evangelical Orthodox Church















Ireland



Irish Christian bodies


v
t
e







Irish interchurch




Irish Council of Churches
Churches Together in Britain and Ireland
Evangelical Alliance, UK





Church of Ireland (Anglican)
Association of Baptist Churches
Roman Catholicism
Assemblies of God
Elim Pentecostal Church
Presbyterian Church in Ireland










Nigeria



Christian denominations in Nigeria




Nigerian interchurch




Christian Association of Nigeria
Fellowship of Churches of Christ in Nigeria






African initiated




Cherubim and Seraphim Society
Eternal Sacred Order of Cherubim and Seraphim
Church of God Mission International
Church of the Lord (Aladura)






Anglican




The African Church
Church of Nigeria






Baptist, Anabaptist, DC




Church of the Brethren in Nigeria
Churches of Christ in Nigeria
Mambila Baptist Convention of Nigeria
Nigerian Baptist Convention






Catholic




Roman Catholic Church






Holiness and Methodist




African Methodist Episcopal Church in Nigeria
Deeper Christian Life Ministry
Redeemed Christian Church of God
United Methodist Church of Nigeria






Lutheran




Lutheran Church of Christ in Nigeria
Lutheran Church of Nigeria






Pentecostal




The Apostolic Church Nigeria
Christ Apostolic Church
General Council of the Assemblies of God Nigeria
Gospel Faith Mission
International Church of the Foursquare Gospel
The Lord's Chosen Charismatic Revival Movement
New Apostolic Church in Nigeria
Winners' Chapel






Presbyterian and Reformed




Christian Reformed Church of Nigeria
Church of Christ in Nigeria
Church of Christ in the Sudan Among the Tiv
Evangelical Reformed Church of Christ
N.K.S.T
Presbyterian Church of Nigeria
Reformed Church of Christ in Nigeria






Other Protestant




Evangelical Church of West Africa
QIC-United Evangelical Church
Seventh-day Adventist Church in Nigeria
Word of Faith Ministries







v
t
e












South Africa



Christian denominations
in South Africa




South African interchurch


South African Council of Churches








Catholic and Anglican


Anglican Church
Reformed Evangelical Anglican Church
Roman Catholicism








Holiness and AIC


Die Heilsleër
Zion Christian Church








Pentecostal


Apostolic Faith Mission
[Assemblies of God]








Protestantism, Other


Baptist Union
Evangelical Lutheran Church
LDS Church
Methodist Church








Reformed


Dutch Reformed: NGK
Dutch Reformed: NHK
Evangelical Presbyterian Church
Presbyterian Church of Africa
Reformed Church in Africa
Reformed Churches: GKSA
United Congregational Church
Uniting Presbyterian Church
Uniting Reformed Church









v
t
e












United Kingdom



Christian denominations
in the United Kingdom


v
t
e







UK interchurch


Affinity (formerly British Evangelical Council)
Churches Together in Britain and Ireland
Evangelical Alliance, UK
Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches

Churches Together in England

Action of Churches Together, Scotland (ACTS)
Churches Together in Wales
Evangelical Movement of Wales








Anglican


Church of England
Church of Ireland
Scottish Episcopal Church
Church in Wales








Baptist


Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland
Baptist Union of Great Britain
Baptist Union of Scotland
Baptist Union of Wales








Catholic


Roman Catholicism




Roman Catholicism in England and Wales
Roman Catholicism in Ireland
Roman Catholicism in Scotland










Holiness and Pietist


Church of the Nazarene
Salvation Army
Seventh-day Adventist Church
Wesleyan Holiness Church








Lutheran


Lutheran Church in Great Britain








Methodist and Wesleyan


Methodist Church of Great Britain
Methodist Church in Ireland








New Church Movement


Newfrontiers
Pioneer Church








Orthodox


Greek Orthodox of G.B. (Eastern Orthodox)








Pentecostal


Assemblies of God
Church of God in Christ
Elim Pentecostal Church








Presbyterian and Reformed


Asso. Presbyterian Churches, Scotland
Church of Scotland
Congregational Federation
Evangelical Presbyterian Church
Presbyterian Church in Ireland
Presbyterian Church of Wales
United Free Church of Scotland
United Reformed Church








Other


LDS Church in England
LDS Church in Wales
LDS Church in Scotland
LDS Church in Ireland
Quakers/ Britain Yearly Meeting













United States



Christian denominations in the U.S.




U.S. interchurch


National Association of Evangelicals
National Council of Churches
Churches Uniting in Christ








Anabaptist and Friends


Church of the Brethren
Mennonite Church USA
Amish








Anglican


Anglican Church in North America
Episcopal Church








Baptist




Alliance of Baptists
American Baptist Association
American Baptist Churches
Baptist Bible Fellowship International
Baptist Missionary Association of America
Conservative Baptist Association of America
Converge
General Association of Regular Baptist Churches
National Association of Free Will Baptists
National Primitive Baptist Convention of the U.S.A.
North American Baptist Conference
Southern Baptist Convention
Independent Baptist Churches



African-American Baptist



National Baptist Convention of America
National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.
National Missionary Baptist Convention of America
Progressive National Baptist Convention










Catholic


Catholic Church in the United States








Eastern Christian




Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America
Orthodox Church in America
Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia
Serbian Orthodox Church



Non-Chalcedonian



Armenian Apostolic Diocese of Am.
Coptic Orthodox Church
Syriac Orthodox Church










Holiness and Pietist


Christian and Missionary Alliance
Church of God (Anderson, Indiana)
Evangelical Covenant Church
Evangelical Free Church of America
Church of the Nazarene
The Salvation Army
Seventh-day Adventist Church
Wesleyan Church








Lutheran


Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod
North American Lutheran Church
Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod








Methodist


African Methodist Episcopal Church
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church
Christian Methodist Episcopal Church
Free Methodist Church
United Methodist Church








Pentecostal


Assemblies of God
Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee)
Church of God in Christ
Church of God of Prophecy
Church on the Rock International
Full Gospel Fellowship
International Church of the Foursquare Gospel
International Pentecostal Holiness Church
Pentecostal Church of God

Oneness Pentecostal



Pentecostal Assemblies of the World
United Pentecostal Church Intl.










Presbyterian and Reformed


Christian Reformed Church in North America
Conservative Congregational Christian Conference
Cumberland Presbyterian Church
Evangelical Presbyterian Church
Korean Presbyterian Church in America
International Council of Community Churches
National Association of Congregational Christian Churches
Presbyterian Church (USA)
Presbyterian Church in America
Reformed Church in America
United Church of Christ








Stone-Campbell


Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)
Christian churches and churches of Christ
Churches of Christ
International Churches of Christ








Other


LDS Church
Community of Christ
Grace Gospel Fellowship
IFCA International
Jehovah's Witnesses
Messianic Jewish Alliance of America
Plymouth Brethren
Vineyard USA









v
t
e













v
t
e





The Latin portion of the Catholic Church, along with Anglicanism and Protestantism, comprise the three major divisions of Christianity in the Western world. Roman Catholics do not describe themselves as a denomination but rather as the original Holy and Universal Church; which all other branches broke off from in schism. The Baptist, Methodist, and Lutheran churches are generally considered to be Protestant denominations, although strictly speaking, of these three, only the Lutherans took part in the official Protestation at Speyer after the decree of the Second Diet of Speyer mandated the burning of Luther's works and the end of the Protestant Reformation.
Anglicanism was generally classified as Protestant, but since the "Tractarian" or Oxford Movement of the 19th century, led by John Henry Newman, Anglican writers emphasize a more catholic understanding of the church and characterize it as more properly understood as its own tradition—a via media ("middle way"), both Protestant and Catholic. The American province of the Anglican Communion, the Episcopal Church USA, describes itself as a modern via media church in this tradition. A case is sometimes also made to regard Lutheranism in a similar way, considering the catholic character of its foundational documents (the Augsburg Confession and other documents contained in the Book of Concord) and its existence prior to the Anglican, Anabaptist, and Reformed churches, from which nearly all other Protestant denominations derive.
One central tenet of Catholicism (which is a common point between Roman Catholic, Anglican, Eastern Orthodox, and some other Churches), is its practice of apostolic succession. "Apostle" means "one who is sent out". Jesus commissioned the first twelve apostles (see Biblical Figures for the list of the Twelve), and they, in turn laid hands on subsequent church leaders to ordain (commission) them for ministry. In this manner, Roman Catholics and Anglicans trace their ordained ministers all the way back to the original Twelve.
Roman Catholics believe that the Pope has authority which can be traced directly to the apostle Peter whom they hold to be the original head of and first Pope of the Church. There are smaller churches, such as the Old Catholic Church which rejected the definition of Papal Infallibility at the First Vatican Council, and Anglo-Catholics, Anglicans who believe that Anglicanism is a continuation of historical Catholicism and who incorporate many Catholic beliefs and practices. The Catholic Church refers to itself simply by the terms Catholic and Catholicism (which mean universal).
Sometimes, Catholics, based on a strict interpretation of extra ecclesiam nulla salus ("Outside the Church, there is no salvation"), rejected any notion those outside its communion could be regarded as part of any true Catholic Christian faith, an attitude rejected by the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965).[15] Catholicism has a hierarchical structure in which supreme authority for matters of faith and practice are the exclusive domain of the Pope, who sits on the Throne of Peter, and the bishops when acting in union with him. Most Catholics are unaware of the existence of Old Catholicism which represents a relatively recent split from the Catholic Church and is particularly vocal in rejecting their use of the term Catholic.
Each Protestant movement has developed freely, and many have split over theological issues. For instance, a number of movements grew out of spiritual revivals, like Methodism and Pentecostalism. Doctrinal issues and matters of conscience have also divided Protestants. The Anabaptist tradition, made up of the Amish, Hutterites, and Mennonites, rejected the Roman Catholic and Lutheran doctrines of infant baptism; this tradition is also noted for its belief in pacifism.
Many churches with roots in Restorationism reject being identified as Protestant or even as a denomination at all, as they use only the Bible and not creeds, and model the church after what they feel is the first-century church found in scripture; the Churches of Christ are one example; African Initiated Churches, like Kimbanguism, mostly fall within Protestantism, with varying degrees of syncretism. The measure of mutual acceptance between the denominations and movements varies, but is growing largely due to the ecumenical movement in the 20th century and overarching Christian bodies such as the World Council of Churches.
Christians with Jewish roots[edit]
Messianic Jews maintain a Jewish identity while accepting Jesus as the Messiah and the New Testament as authoritative. After the founding of the church, the disciples of Jesus generally retained their ethnic origins while accepting the Gospel message. The first church council was called in Jerusalem to address just this issue, and the deciding opinion was written by James the Just, the first bishop of Jerusalem and a pivotal figure in the Christian movement. The history of Messianic Judaism includes many movements and groups and defies any simple classification scheme.
The Nasrani or Syrian Malabar Nasrani community in Kerala, India is conscious of their Jewish origins. However, they have lost many of their Jewish traditions due to western influences. The Nasrani are also known as Syrian Christians or St. Thomas Christians. This is because they follow the traditions of Syriac Christianity and are descendants of the early converts by St. Thomas the Apostle. Today, they belong to various denominations of Christianity but they have kept their unique identity within each of these denominations.[16]
An existing community that still maintain their Jewish traditions is the Knanaya. They are an endogamous sub-ethnic group among the Syrian Malabar Nasrani and are the descendants of early Jewish Christian settlers who arrived in Kerala in A.D 345. Although affiliated with a variety of Roman Catholic and Oriental Orthodox denominations, they have remained a cohesive community, shunning intermarriage with outsiders (but not with fellow-Knanaya of other denominations).
Modern history[edit]
Quakers[edit]
Some denominations which arose alongside the Western Christian tradition consider themselves Christian, but neither Roman Catholic nor wholly Protestant, such as the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers). Quakerism began as an evangelical Christian movement in 17th century England, eschewing priests and all formal Anglican or Roman Catholic sacraments in their worship, including many of those practices that remained among the stridently Protestant Puritans such as baptism with water. They were known in America for helping with the Underground Railroad, and like the Mennonites, Quakers traditionally refrain from participation in war.
Latter Day Saint movement[edit]
Main articles: Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism
See also: List of sects in the Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism and Christianity
Most Latter Day Saint denominations are derived from the Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints) established by Joseph Smith in 1830. The largest worldwide denomination, and the one publicly recognized as Mormonism, is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, although there are various considerably smaller sects that broke from it after its relocation to the Rocky Mountains in the mid-1800s. Several of these broke away over the abandonment of practicing plural marriage after the 1890 Manifesto. Most of the "Prairie Saint" denominations (see below) were established after Smith's death by the remnants of the Latter Day Saints who did not go west with Brigham Young. Many of these opposed some of the 1840s theological developments in favor of 1830s theological understandings and practices. Other denominations are defined by either a belief in Joseph Smith as a prophet or acceptance of the Book of Mormon as scripture. Mormons generally consider themselves to be restorationist, believing that Smith, as prophet, seer, and revelator, restored the original and true Church of Christ to the earth. Some Latter Day Saint denominations are regarded by other Christians as being nontrinitarian or even non-Christian, but the Latter Day Saints are predominantly in disagreement with these claims. Mormons see themselves as believing in a Godhead comprising the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as separate personages united in purpose. Mormons regard traditional definitions of the Trinity as aberrations of true doctrine and emblematic of the Great Apostasy[17] but they do not accept certain trinitarian definitions in the post-apostolic creeds, such as the Athanasian Creed.
Second Great Awakening[edit]
Main articles: Second Great Awakening, Restorationism, and Restoration Movement
The Stone-Campbell Restoration Movement began on the American frontier during the Second Great Awakening (1790–1870) of the early 19th century. The movement sought to restore the church and "the unification of all Christians in a single body patterned after the church of the New Testament."[18]:54 Members do not identify as Protestant but simply as Christian.[19][20][21]:213
The Restoration Movement developed from several independent efforts to return to apostolic Christianity, but two groups, which independently developed similar approaches to the Christian faith, were particularly important.[22]:27–32 The first, led by Barton W. Stone, began at Cane Ridge, Kentucky and called themselves simply as "Christians". The second began in western Pennsylvania and Virginia (now West Virginia) and was led by Thomas Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell; they used the name "Disciples of Christ". Both groups sought to restore the whole Christian church on the pattern set forth in the New Testament, and both believed that creeds kept Christianity divided. In 1832 they joined in fellowship with a handshake.
Among other things, they were united in the belief that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; that Christians should celebrate the Lord's Supper on the first day of each week; and that baptism of adult believers by immersion in water is a necessary condition for salvation. Because the founders wanted to abandon all denominational labels, they used the biblical names for the followers of Jesus.[23]:27 Both groups promoted a return to the purposes of the 1st-century churches as described in the New Testament. One historian of the movement has argued that it was primarily a unity movement, with the restoration motif playing a subordinate role.[24]:8
The Restoration Movement has since divided into multiple separate groups. There are three main branches in the US: the Churches of Christ, the Christian churches and churches of Christ, and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ). Other U.S. based groups affiliated with the movement are the International Churches of Christ and the International Christian Churches. Non-U.S. groups include the Churches of Christ in Australia, the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada, the Churches of Christ in Europe. The Plymouth Brethren are a similar though historically unrelated group which originated in the United Kingdom. Some churches, such as Churches of Christ or the Plymouth Brethren reject formal ties with other churches within the movement.
Other groups originating during the Second Great Awakening include the Adventist movement, the Jehovah's Witnesses and Christian Science (which had roots in Congregationalism, but regarded itself as restorative). Each of these groups, founded within fifty years of one another, originally claimed to be an unprecedented, late restoration of the primitive Christian church. Some Baptist churches with Landmarkist views have similar beliefs concerning their connection with primitive Christianity.
Russian sectarianism[edit]
The Russian Orthodox Church has a long history of opposing heresies, beginning with Bogomilism and the Old Believers, a sect opposing the reforms introduced in Tsarist Russia under Patriarch Nikon in 1666.
In 18th to 19th century Imperial Russia, there arose a new type of denominational schism grouped as Spiritual Christianity (духовное христианство). Many heresies, nicknamed by the church or government, called themselves "spiritual Christians", such as: Dukhobors, Ikonobortsy ("Iconoclasts"), Khlysts, Molokans, Pryguny, Skoptsy, Shtundists, Subbotniki, etc. These sects often have radically divergent notions of spirituality. Their common denominator is that they sought God in "Spirit and Truth", (Gospel of John 4:24) rather than in the Church of official Orthodoxy or ancient rites of Old Believers. Rejecting the official church, they considered their religious organization as a homogeneous community, without division into laymen and clergy.
In the 1830s, Ivan Grigorev Kanygin founded religious communities with communal practices in the Novouzensk region. They called themselves Communists or Methodists, but from the 1870s became known as "Mormons", by comparison with the contemporaneous American movement. An unrelated community known as "Samara Mormons" developed near the Volga city of Samara. They avoided alcohol, tobacco, and swearing, cooperated in commercial enterprises, and governed themselves by "apostles" and "prophets".
A more recent charismatic movement in Russia is the "Church of the Last Testament", which established a substantial settlement in the Siberian Taiga in the 1990s.
Iglesia ni Cristo[edit]
Due to a number of similarities, some Protestant writers describe the doctrines of the Philippines originating Iglesia ni Cristo as restorationist in outlook and theme.[25] INC, however, does not consider itself to be part of the Restoration Movement. On the other hand, some Catholic leaders viewed Iglesia ni Cristo as an offshoot of the Roman Catholic Church, since the then first leader or Executive Minister (Felix Ysagun Manalo) was a former Catholic member. However, INC is working and functioning spiritually and financially on its own, thus, completely independent from any religious body and communion.
The church hierarchical administration (Filipino: Pamamahala),[26] centralized church governance, theological orientation, places of worship architectural design, adaptation to modern technology, very strong and strict discipline, and country of origin or establishment, are some of the INC features, polity and organizational structure that identify itself different from Restoration Movement, Protestantism, Catholicism and mainstream Christianity. Iglesia ni Cristo members are noted for bloc voting in political elections[27] which is unique to the church due to their doctrine on unity and a practice that cannot be found outside INC.
New Thought Movement[edit]
Main article: New Thought
See also: History of New Thought
Another group of churches are known under the banner of "New Thought". These churches share a spiritual, metaphysical and mystical predisposition and understanding of the Bible and were strongly influenced by the Transcendentalist movement—particularly the work of Emerson. Another antecedent of this movement was Swedenborgianism, founded in 1787 on the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, who claimed to have received a new revelation from Jesus Christ through continuous heavenly visions which he experienced over a period of at least twenty-five years.[28]
The New Thought concept was named by Emma Curtis Hopkins ("teacher of teachers") after Hopkins broke off from Mary Baker Eddy's Church of Christ, Scientist—the movement had been previously known as the Mental Sciences. The New Thought movement includes Religious Science founded by Ernest Holmes; Divine Science, founded by Malinda Cramer and the Brook sisters; and Unity founded by Charles Fillmore and Myrtle Fillmore. The founders of these denominations all studied with Emma Curtis Hopkins. Each of one these New Thought Churches has been influenced by a wide variety of ancient spiritual ideas.[29] Each of these churches identify to different degrees with Christianity, Unity and Divine Science being the most explicit in the use of the Bible.
The Christian Community[edit]
The Christian Community is a movement for religious renewal. It was founded in 1922 in Switzerland by the Lutheran theologian and minister Friedrich Rittlemeyer, inspired by Rudolf Steiner, the Austrian philosopher and founder of anthroposophy. Christian Community congregations exist as financially independent groups with regional and international administrative bodies overseeing their work. There are approximately 350 worldwide. The international headquarters are in Berlin, Germany.
The Christian Community does not require its members to conform to any specific teaching or behaviour.[30] Seven sacraments are celebrated within the Community: the Eucharist, generally called the Act of Consecration of Man, and six other sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation, Marriage, The Last Anointing, Sacramental Consultation (replacing Confession), and Ordination.[31]
Other movements[edit]
Protestant denominations have shown a strong tendency towards diversification and fragmentation, giving rise to numerous churches and movements, especially in Anglo-American religious history, where the process is cast in terms of a series of "Great Awakenings". The most recent wave of diversification, known as the Fourth Great Awakening took place during the 1960s to 1980s and resulted in phenomena such as the Charismatic Movement, the Jesus movement, and a great number of Parachurch organizations based in Evangelicalism.
Many independent churches and movements considered themselves to be non-denominational, but may vary greatly in doctrine. Many of these, like the local churches movement, reflect the core teachings of traditional Christianity. Others however, such as The Way International, have been denounced as cults by the Christian anti-cult movement.
Two movements, which are entirely unrelated in their founding, but share a common element of an additional Messiah (or incarnation of Christ) are the Unification Church and the Rastafari movement. These movements fall outside of traditional taxonomies of Christian groups, though both cite the Christian Bible as a basis for their beliefs.
Syncretism of Christian beliefs with local and tribal religions is a phenomenon that occurs throughout the world. An example of this is the Native American Church. The ceremonies of this group are strongly tied to the use of peyote. (Parallels may be drawn here with the Rastafari spiritual use of cannabis.) While traditions vary from tribe to tribe, they often include a belief in Jesus as a Native American cultural hero, an intercessor for man, or a spiritual guardian; belief in the Bible; and an association of Jesus with peyote.
There are also some Christians that reject organized religion altogether. Some Christian anarchists believe that the original teachings of Jesus were corrupted by Roman statism (compare Early Christianity and State church of the Roman Empire), and that earthly authority such as government, or indeed the established Church, do not and should not have power over them. Following "The Golden Rule", many oppose the use of physical force in any circumstance, and advocate nonviolence. The Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy wrote The Kingdom of God Is Within You,[32] and was a Christian anarchist.
See also[edit]


Christianity portal



Christian tradition
Great Church
List of Christian denominations
List of Christian denominations by number of members

Notes[edit]



^ The Oxford Dictionary's full list of synonyms for "denomination" includes: "religious group, sect, Church, cult, movement, faith community, body, persuasion, religious persuasion, communion, order, fraternity, brotherhood, sisterhood, school; faith, creed, belief, religious belief, religion. rare: sodality."



References[edit]


^ a b Olson, Roger E. (1999). The story of Christian theology: twenty centuries of tradition & reform. Downer's Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press (652 pages). p. 278
^ "Pewforum: Christianity (2010)" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-05-14. 
^ Fairchild, Mary. "Christianity:Basics:Eastern Orthodox Church Denomination". about.com. Retrieved 23 June 2014. 
^ "Nondenominational & Independent Congregations". Hartford Institute for Religion Research. Hartford Seminary, Hartford Institute for Religion Research. 2015. Archived from the original on 2016-04-23. Retrieved 2016-05-09. 
^ "Denomination". Oxford Dictionaries: English. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ "Church". Oxford Dictionaries:English. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ Gilbert, T. B. "Church Membership and Church Fellowship. Is there a difference?". Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ Hill, Alec (1 July 2003). "Church". Intervarsity Christian Fellowship. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ a b Jackson, Wayne. "Denominationalism – Permissible or Reprehensible?". Christian Courier. Retrieved 2 June 2015. 
^ "Denominationalism". Merriam Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 6 June 2015. 
^ Guenther, Bruce. "Life in a Muddy World: Reflections on Denominationalism". Fresno Pacific Biblical Seminary; first published in Fall/Winter 2008 edition of In Touch Magazine. For reprint permission contact the Director of Public Relations at 1-800-251-6227. Archived from the original on 2015-03-10. 
^ "Branches of Christianity". Waupun, WI: Waupun Area School District. Retrieved 27 March 2015. 
^ Chapman, J. (1911). Monophysites and Monophysitism. in The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved June 4, 2009
^ http://www.crisismagazine.com/2011/we-are-non-roman-catholics
^ «It remains true that all who have been justified by faith in Baptism are members of Christ's body, and have a right to be called Christian, and so are correctly accepted as brothers by the children of the Catholic Church.» Second Vatican Council, Decree on Ecumenism Unitatis Redintegratio, n.3 Archived March 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Thomas The Apostole Archived 2011-02-08 at the Wayback Machine.. Stthoma.com. Retrieved on 2010-11-03.
^ "Articles of Faith, no. 1". 
^ Rubel Shelly, I Just Want to Be a Christian, 20th Century Christian, Nashville, Tennessee 1984, ISBN 0-89098-021-7
^ "The church of Jesus Christ is non-denominational. It is neither Catholic, Jewish nor Protestant. It was not founded in 'protest' of any institution, and it is not the product of the 'Restoration' or 'Reformation.' It is the product of the seed of the kingdom (Luke 8:11ff) grown in the hearts of men." V. E. Howard, What Is the Church of Christ? 4th Edition (Revised), 1971, page 29
^ Batsell Barrett Baxter and Carroll Ellis, Neither Catholic, Protestant nor Jew, tract, Church of Christ (1960) ASIN: B00073CQPM. According to Richard Thomas Hughes in Reviving the Ancient Faith: The Story of Churches of Christ in America, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1996 (ISBN 0-8028-4086-8, ISBN 978-0-8028-4086-8), this is "arguably the most widely distributed tract ever published by the Churches of Christ or anyone associated with that tradition."
^ Samuel S. Hill, Charles H. Lippy, Charles Reagan Wilson, Encyclopedia of Religion in the South, Mercer University Press, 2005, (ISBN 0-86554-758-0, ISBN 978-0-86554-758-2) 854 pages
^ Monroe E. Hawley, Redigging the Wells: Seeking Undenominational Christianity, Quality Publications, Abilene, Texas, 1976, ISBN 0-89137-512-0 (paper), ISBN 0-89137-513-9 (cloth)
^ McAlister, Lester G. and Tucker, William E. (1975), Journey in Faith: A History of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), St. Louis, MO: Chalice Press, ISBN 978-0-8272-1703-4
^ Leroy Garrett, The Stone-Campbell Movement: The Story of the American Restoration Movement, College Press, 2002, ISBN 0-89900-909-3, ISBN 978-0-89900-909-4, 573 pages
^ Harper, Ann C. (2001). "The Iglesia ni Cristo and Evangelical Christianity" (PDF). Journal of Asian Mission. 3 (1): 101–119. Retrieved 2008-11-05. 
^ Katherine Adraneda (2009-09-02). "Iglesia ni Cristo leader Manalo passes away". The Philippine Star. Retrieved 2011-06-11. 
^ an article in Pasugo (Manila: Iglesia ni Cristo, 1986) cited by "Pepe" 'Iglesia ni Kristo - religion and politics in Philippine society'[dead link] Pepeslog (Berkeley: University of California, 21 February 2001). Retrieved July 3, 2005
^ William James, "The Varieties of Religious Experience"[permanent dead link]. pp.92-93. New York 1929
^ "New Thought. The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001-07" Archived June 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Tom Ravetz: Free From Dogma. Theological Reflections in The Christian Community. Edinburgh 2009
^ Evelyn Francis Capel and Tom Ravetz, Seven Sacraments in the Christian Community, Floris Books, 1999
^ Leo Tolstoy - The Kingdom of God is Within You Archived 2012-02-05 at the Wayback Machine.. Kingdomnow.org. Retrieved on 2010-11-03.


External links[edit]

Christian Denominations History, profiles and comparison charts of major Christian denominations
Denominational links from the Ecumenism in Canada site



Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Definitions
from Wiktionary
Source texts
from Wikisource
Learning resources
from Wikiversity
Data
from Wikidata










v
t
e


Christianity



Jesus



Christ
Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Son of God








Foundations



Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant





Bible



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
Ecclesiology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation






History and
tradition




Mary
Joseph
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early
Constantine
Ecumenical councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther






Denomi-
nations
and
traditions
(list)





Western



Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant





Eastern



Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Assyrian Church of the East ("Nestorian")
Eastern Catholic Churches





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Oneness Pentecostalism








Related topics



Art
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism








 Category
 Christianity portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_denomination&oldid=817193314"					Categories: Christian denominationsTypes of Christian organizationChristian terminologyReligious denominationsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from April 2009Articles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles needing additional references from June 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from March 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015Articles containing Russian-language text