





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Christian culture










Christian culture






Protestant culture
Holidays
Pop culture
Mormon culture
Cultural Christian












Art






Christian symbolism
Early art
Christian icons
Architecture












Literature






American Catholic literature
Bible fiction
Christian drama
Christian poetry
Christian novel
Christian science fiction
Spiritual autobiography












Music






CCM
Christmas music
Church music
Gospel music
Liturgical music












Science






Catholic Church and science
Quakers in science
Christian scientists
Catholic scientists
Christian Nobel laureates
Catholic cleric-scientists












History






Christianity in Civilization
Eastern Orthodox history
Christian influences in Islam







Christianity portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Son of God
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Patriology
Pneumatology
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Luther
Reformation
Radical Reformation









Related topics



Art
Holidays (list)
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









 Christianity portal





v
t
e





Christian music is music that has been written to express either personal or a communal belief regarding Christian life and faith. Common themes of Christian music include praise, worship, penitence, and lament, and its forms vary widely across the world.
Like other forms of music the creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of Christian music varies according to culture and social context. Christian music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or with a positive message as an entertainment product for the marketplace.



Contents


1 Worship services

1.1 Instrumental accompaniment
1.2 Instrumental music


2 Contemporary Christian music

2.1 Other languages
2.2 Industry
2.3 Media
2.4 Music festivals and conferences
2.5 Concerts


3 See also
4 References
5 Further reading
6 External links



Worship services[edit]
Main article: Church music




A church choir singing


Among the most prevalent uses of Christian music are in church worship or other gatherings. Most Christian music involves singing, whether by the whole congregation (assembly), or by a specialized subgroup—such as a soloist, duet, trio, quartet, madrigal, choir, or worship band— or both. It is frequently accompanied by instruments, but some denominations (such as some Exclusive Brethren, the Churches of Christ, the Primitive Baptists and the Free Church of Scotland) or congregations still prefer unaccompanied or a cappella singing. One of the earliest forms of worship music in the church was the Gregorian chant. Pope Gregory I, while not the inventor of chant, was acknowledged as the first person to order such music in the church, hinting the name “Gregorian” chant. The chant reform took place around 590–604 CE (reign of Pope Gregory I) (Kamien, pg. 65–67). The Gregorian chant was known for its very monophonic sound. Believing that complexity had a tendency to create cacophony, which ruined the music, Gregory I kept things very simple with the chant.[1]
Instrumental accompaniment[edit]




A page (leaf 12 recto) from Beethoven's manuscript. Catholic monks developed the first forms of modern Western musical notation in order to standardize liturgy throughout the worldwide Church,[2] and an enormous body of religious music has been composed for it through the ages. This led directly to the emergence and development of European classical music, and its many derivatives. The Baroque style, which encompassed music, art, and architecture, was particularly encouraged by the post-Reformation Catholic Church as such forms offered a means of religious expression that was stirring and emotional, intended to stimulate religious fervor.[3]


In the West, the majority of Christian denominations use instruments such as an organ, piano, electronic keyboard, guitar, or other accompaniment, and occasionally by a band or orchestra, to accompany the singing. But some churches have historically not used instruments, citing their absence from the New Testament. During the last century or so several of these groups have revised this stance.
The singing of the Eastern Orthodox is also generally unaccompanied, though in the United States organs are sometimes used as a result of Western influence.
Instrumental music[edit]
Some worship music may be unsung, simply instrumental. During the Baroque period in Europe, the chorale prelude (for organ) was widely used, generally composed by using a popular hymn tune thematically, and a wide corpus of other solo organ music began to develop across Europe. Some of the most well-known exponents of such organ compositions include Johann Sebastian Bach, Dieterich Buxtehude, George Frideric Handel, François Couperin, César Franck and Charles-Marie Widor to name a few. Up to the present time, various composers have written instrumental (often organ) music as acts of worship, including well known organ repertoire by composers like Olivier Messiaen, Louis Vierne, Maurice Duruflé, and Jean Langlais.
The church sonata (for orchestra and chamber group) and other sacred instrumental musical forms also developed from the Baroque period onwards.
Contemporary Christian music[edit]
Main article: Contemporary Christian music
From the latter half of the 20th century to the present day in Western Christendom—especially in the United States and in other countries with evangelical churches—various genres of music originally often related to pop rock, have been created under the label of Contemporary Christian Music ("CCM") for home-listening and concert use. It can be divided into several genres and subgenres, although the dividing lines and relationships between music genres are often subtle, sometimes open to individual interpretation, and occasionally controversial. These genres (sometimes referred to as "style") like other forms of music may be distinguished by the techniques, the styles, the context and the themes, or geographical origin. Specific subgenres of CCM may include (but are not limited to): Christian country music, Christian pop, Christian rock, Christian metal, Christian hardcore, Christian punk, Christian alternative rock and Christian hip hop.
Called Christian pop or gospel in a generalized form, this is a relatively new musical movement and has now evolved into a large number of musical genres by region that comes in a Christian context. This movement appeared as a form of evangelization for the young but the genre is best known and seen in the Evangelical or Protestant proselytizing movements, often using rhythms similar to those in secular music.
CCM is not a musical genre like the other genres. When a song is identified as "Christian" it takes into account the lyrics and the songwriters and performers, rather than musical style. Therefore, one can say that CCM is diverse and there are Christian songs that are sung to the rhythm of salsa, reggae, rock, folk, hip-hop or rap, ballads, pop, country, singer-songwriters and even extreme music such as punk or heavy metal.
In the 1980s and 1990s, contemporary Christian music played a significant role in Evangelical Christian worship.[4][5] A great variety of musical styles has developed traditional praise.[6]
Other languages[edit]
Similar developments took place in other language, for example the German Neues Geistliches Lied and Korean Contemporary Christian music.
Industry[edit]
Main article: Christian music industry
Christian music is supported by a segment of the general music industry which evolved as a parallel structure to the same. Beginning in the 1970s and developing out of the Jesus movement, the Christian music industry subsequently developed into a near-billion dollar enterprise. By the 1990s the genre had eclipsed classical, jazz, and new-age music, and artists began gaining acceptance in the general market.
Media[edit]
Main article: Christian media
Today, Christian music is available through most available media. Christian music is broadcast over the radio, television, or the Internet. Christian Albums and video recordings (CD, LP, digital download, DVD, etc.) have been increasingly more popular and have continued to increase in sales.[7]
Christian Musicals is another growing area, especially with the help of the internet. Church drama groups frequently enjoy performing musical dramas which can be downloaded on-line for free use.[8]
Music festivals and conferences[edit]
Main article: Christian music festival
In the US several Christian music festivals have been organized. They are common in the summertime and draw many different people, specifically those from organized groups such as church youth groups and campus groups. In addition to music festivals like those that are part of the Christian Festival Association, there are also many Christian conferences which focus more on speakers, but usually also have musical performances, especially for a Worship service.
The Ichthus Music Festival started in 1970. Today festivals are held annually around the world, and may draw upwards of 100,000 people.
New Zealand's Parachute Music Festival, the largest Christian music festival in the Southern Hemisphere, began in 1989 and is held annually at Mystery Creek Events Centre outside the city of Hamilton.
England's Big Church Day Out Festival began in 2009 and has annual attendance of approximately 20,000.[9]
Concerts[edit]
Like any musical group or act, many Christian musical artists perform concerts in concert halls, bars & clubs, or outdoor venues, as well as in Church-related venues. Sometimes it may be for pure entertainment, other times with the intention of witnessing (evangelizing by bearing witness of one's faith), and other times may be part worship as well.
See also[edit]


Christian music portal
Christian metal portal
Christianity portal




Byzantine music
Christian electronic dance music
Christian hip hop
Christian metal
Christian radio
Christian rock
Church music
Contemporary worship music
Gospel music
Gregorian chant
History of music in the biblical period
Hymn
Liturgical music
Mass (music)
Religious music
Worship presentation program


References[edit]


^ Kamien, Roger. Music: An Appreciation. 9th ed. New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. Print.
^ Hall, p. 100.
^ Murray, p. 45.
^ Suzel Ana Reily, Jonathan M. Dueck, The Oxford Handbook of Music and World Christianities, Oxford University Press, USA, 2016, p. 443
^ Mathew Guest, Evangelical Identity and Contemporary Culture: A Congregational Study in Innovation, Wipf and Stock Publishers, USA, 2007, p. 42
^ George Thomas Kurian, Mark A. Lamport, Encyclopedia of Christianity in the United States, Volume 5, Rowman & Littlefield, USA, 2016, p. 629
^ Steve Turner (2008-02-27). "Obituary: Larry Norman | Music". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 2011-09-27. 
^ "Christian Musicals". Gospel Musicals. Retrieved 29 September 2012. 
^ "Big Church Day Out". Big Church Day Out. Retrieved 17 August 2012. 


Further reading[edit]

Boyer, Horace Clarence, How Sweet the Sound: The Golden Age of Gospel Elliott and Clark, 1995, ISBN 0-252-06877-7.
Broughton, Viv, Too Close To Heaven – The Illustrated History Of Gospel Music, Midnight Books, 1996, ISBN 1-900516-00-4
Albert E Brumley & Sons, The Best of Albert E Brumley, Gospel Songs, 1966, ISBN na-paperback Amazing Grace
Darden, Robert, People Get Ready: A New History of Black Gospel Music Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005, ISBN 0-8264-1752-3.
Heilbut, Tony, The Gospel Sound: Good News and Bad Times Limelight Editions, 1997, ISBN 0-87910-034-6.
Zolten, Jerry, Great God A' Mighty!:The Dixie Hummingbirds – Celebrating The Rise Of Soul Gospel Music, Oxford University Press, 2003, ISBN 0-19-515272-7.
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Ecclesiastical Music". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
Enciclopedia Cecilia (in Spanish) Includes a Catholic Encyclopedia about music, wiki-style
Palackal, Joseph, Syriac Chant Traditions in South India

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Christian music





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Christian music.




Christian music at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Billboard Praise and Worship Charts
Billboard Christian Airplay Charts







v
t
e


Christian music



Roots and beginnings



Chorale
Hymn
Jesus music
Sacred Harp
Shape note
Spiritual












Modern genres



Contemporary Christian music
Contemporary worship music
Gospel music
Neues Geistliches Lied





Fusion genres



Christian alternative rock
Christian country music
Christian electronic dance music
Christian hardcore
Christian hip hop
Christian metal
Christian punk
Christian rock
Christian ska
Gospel blues
Latin Christian music
Progressive southern gospel
Southern gospel
Traditional black gospel
Urban contemporary gospel





Chant







v
t
e


Christian liturgical chant



Eastern



Armenian
Byzantine
Coptic
Ethiopian
Georgian
Obikhod

Bulgarian
Greek
Kievan


Prostopinije
Syrian
Znamenny





Western



Ambrosian
Anglican
Beneventan
Celtic
Gallican
Gelineau
Gregorian
Mozarabic
Old Roman








Lists



Anglican church composers
Christian bands and artists by genre
Christian country artists
Christian dance, electronic, and techno artists
Christian hardcore bands
Christian metal artists
Christian performers of hip hop and rap
Christian punk bands
Christian ska bands
Christian record labels
Christian vocal artists
Christian worship music artists
Gospel musicians





Related topics



Anglican church music
Christian media
Christian music festival
Christian music industry
Christianity
Church music
Contemporary Catholic liturgical music








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


Religious music






Buddhist
Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Native American
Rastafarian
Shinto
Sikh
Taoist
Zoroastrian









Authority control



NDL: 00567206











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_music&oldid=816275874"					Categories: Christian musicReligious musicHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceArticles with DMOZ links