This article is about the college of Oxford University. For the cathedral, see Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford.


Christ Church


Oxford






Blazon: Sable, on a cross engrailed argent, a lion passant gules, between four leopards' faces azure, on a chief or, a rose gules barbed and seeded proper, between two Cornish choughs sable, beaked and membered gules.






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 





Coordinates
51°45′01″N 1°15′21″W﻿ / ﻿51.750199°N 1.255853°W﻿ / 51.750199; -1.255853Coordinates: 51°45′01″N 1°15′21″W﻿ / ﻿51.750199°N 1.255853°W﻿ / 51.750199; -1.255853


Full name
The Dean, Chapter and Students of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Oxford of the Foundation of King Henry the Eighth


Established
1546


Named for
Jesus Christ


Sister college
Trinity College, Cambridge & Morse College


Dean
Martyn Percy


Undergraduates
431[1] (2011/2012)


Postgraduates
250


Website
www.chch.ox.ac.uk


Boat club
Boat Club


Map











Location in Oxford city centre






Christ Church (Latin: Ædes Christi, the temple or house, ædēs, of Christ, and thus sometimes known as "The House") is a constituent college of the University of Oxford in England. Christ Church is a joint foundation of the college and the Cathedral of the Oxford diocese (Christ Church Cathedral and its Cathedral School), which serves as the college chapel and whose dean is ex officio the college head.[2]
Founded in 1546 by King Henry VIII, it is one of the larger colleges of the University of Oxford with 629 students in 2016.[3] It is also the second wealthiest college (after St John's) with an endowment of £457m as of 2016[update].[2] Christ Church has a number of architecturally significant buildings including Tom Tower (designed by Sir Christopher Wren), Tom Quad (the largest quadrangle in Oxford), and the Great Dining Hall which was also the seat of the parliament assembled by King Charles I during the English Civil War. The buildings have inspired replicas throughout the world in addition to being featured in movies such as Harry Potter and The Golden Compass. This has helped Christ Church become the most popular Oxford college for tourists with almost half a million visitors annually.[4][5][6]
Christ Church has many notable alumni including thirteen British prime ministers (more than any other Oxbridge college), King Edward VII, King William II of the Netherlands, seventeen Archbishops, writers Lewis Carroll (Alice in Wonderland) and W.H. Auden, philosopher John Locke, and scientist Robert Hooke. Christ Church is also partly responsible for the creation of University College Reading, which later gained its own Royal Charter and became the University of Reading. The first female undergraduates matriculated at Christ Church in 1980.[7]



Contents


1 History
2 Organisation

2.1 Governing body


3 Buildings & Grounds

3.1 Influences


4 Cathedral choir
5 Picture gallery
6 Coat of arms

6.1 College arms
6.2 Cathedral arms


7 Graces
8 Student life
9 Christ Church references
10 People associated with the college

10.1 Deans
10.2 Alumni


11 Gallery
12 References
13 External links



History[edit]




Hall of Christ Church






Christ Church's library in the early 19th century






Hall of Christ Church






Tom Tower as seen from Tom Quad


In 1525, at the height of his power, Thomas Wolsey, Lord Chancellor of England and Cardinal Archbishop of York, suppressed the Priory of St Frideswide in Oxford and founded Cardinal College on its lands, using funds from the dissolution of Wallingford Priory and other minor priories. He planned the establishment on a magnificent scale, but fell from grace in 1529, with the buildings only three-quarters complete, as they were to remain for 140 years.
In 1531 the college was itself suppressed, but it was refounded in 1532 as King Henry VIII's College by Henry VIII, to whom Wolsey's property had escheated. Then in 1546 the King, who had broken from the Church of Rome and acquired great wealth through the dissolution of the monasteries in England, refounded the college as Christ Church as part of the reorganisation of the Church of England, making the partially demolished priory church the cathedral of the recently created Diocese of Oxford.
Christ Church's sister college in the University of Cambridge is Trinity College, Cambridge, founded the same year by Henry VIII. Since the time of Queen Elizabeth I the college has also been associated with Westminster School. The dean remains to this day an ex officio member of the school's governing body.[8][9]
Major additions have been made to the buildings through the centuries, and Wolsey's Great Quadrangle was crowned with the famous gate-tower designed by Sir Christopher Wren. To this day the bell in the tower, Great Tom, is rung 101 times at 9 pm at the former Oxford time (9:05 pm GMT/BST) every night, for the 100 original scholars of the college (plus one added in 1664). In former times this was done at midnight, signalling the close of all college gates throughout Oxford. Since it took 20 minutes to ring the 101, Christ Church gates, unlike those of other colleges, did not close until 12:20. When the ringing was moved back to 9:00 pm, Christ Church gates still remained open until 12.20, 20 minutes later than any other college. Although the clock itself now shows GMT/BST, Christ Church still follows Oxford time in the timings of services in the cathedral.
King Charles I made the Deanery his palace and held his Parliament in the Great Hall during the English Civil War.[10] In the evening of 29 May 1645, during the second siege of Oxford, a "bullet of IX lb. weight" shot from the Parliamentarians warning-piece at Marston fell against the wall of the north side of the Hall.[11]
Several of Christ Church's deans achieved high academic distinction, notably Aldrich and Fell in the Restoration period, Jackson and Gaisford in the early 19th century and Liddell in the high Victorian era. During the Commonwealth, John Owen attained considerable eminence.[clarification needed]
Organisation[edit]
Christ Church, formally titled "The Dean, Chapter and Students of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Oxford of the Foundation of King Henry the Eighth", is the only academic institution in the world which is also a cathedral, the seat (cathedra) of the Bishop of Oxford. The Visitor of Christ Church is the reigning British sovereign (currently Queen Elizabeth II), and the Bishop of Oxford is unique among English bishops in not being the Visitor of his own cathedral.[2]
The head of the college is the Dean of Christ Church, who is a clergyman appointed by the crown as dean of the cathedral church. There are a senior and a junior censor (formally titled the Censor Moralis Philosophiae and the Censor Naturalis Philosophiae) the former of whom is responsible for academic matters, the latter for undergraduate discipline. A Censor Theologiae is also appointed to act as the Dean's deputy.
The form "Christ Church College" is considered incorrect, in part because it ignores the cathedral, an integral part of the unique dual foundation.
Governing body[edit]
The governing body of Christ Church consists of the dean and chapter of the cathedral, together with the "Students of Christ Church", who are not junior members but rather the equivalent of the fellows of the other colleges. Until the later 19th century, the students differed from fellows in that they had no governing powers in their own college, these residing solely with the dean and chapter.
Buildings & Grounds[edit]




The Meadow Building


Christ Church sits in approximately 175 acres (71 hectares) of land.[12] This includes the Christ Church Meadow (including Merton Field and Boathouse Island), which is open to the public all year round. In addition Christ Church own Aston's Eyot (purchased from All Souls College in 1891)[13], Christ Church recreation ground (including the site of Liddell buildings), and School Field which has been leased to Madgalen College School since 1893[14]. The meadow itself is inhabited by English Longhorn cattle.[15] In October of 1783 James Sadler made the first hot air balloon ascent in Britain from the meadow.[16] The college gardens, quadrangles, and meadow are Grade I listed on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens.[17]
Christ Church has a number of architecturally significant buildings. These include:
Grade I listed:

Christ Church Library
Christ Church Cathedral
Peckwater Quadrangle
The Great Quadrangle or Tom Quad including:

Tom Tower
Great Hall
Mercury Fountain[18]


Canterbury Quadrangle
The Chapter House, Grade I listed 12th Century Chapter House[19][20]

Grade II* listed:

Blue Boar Quadrangle
Christ Church Picture Gallery

Others:

The Meadow Building (Grade II)
The Old Library
The Lee Building /. Anatomy School (Grade II)
Christ Church Kitchen & Scullery (Grade II)
Old Brew House (Grade II)
Liddel Buildings





The Meadow Building on a sunny autumn day






Christ Church cathedral


Influences[edit]
The college buildings and grounds are the setting for parts of Evelyn Waugh's Brideshead Revisited, as well as a small part of Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.[21][22] More recently it has been used in the filming of the movies of J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter series and also the film adaptation of Philip Pullman's novel Northern Lights (the film bearing the title of the American edition of the book, The Golden Compass). Distinctive features of the college's architecture have been used as models by a number of other academic institutions, including the NUI Galway, which reproduces Tom Quad. The University of Chicago, Cornell University, and Kneuterdijk Palace have reproductions of Christ Church's dining hall (in the forms of Hutchinson Hall, the dining hall of Risley Residential College, and the Gothic hall of Kneuterdijk Palace[23][24], respectively). ChristChurch Cathedral in New Zealand, after which the City of Christchurch is named, is itself named after Christ Church, Oxford. Stained glass windows in the cathedral and other buildings are by the Pre-Raphaelite William Morris group with designs by Edward Burne-Jones.[25][26]
Cathedral choir[edit]




Nave of Christ Church Cathedral looking to the altar






Choir and organ of Christ Church Cathedral


Christ Church is unique in that it has both a cathedral choir and a college choir. The cathedral choir comprises twelve men and sixteen boys. The men are made up of lay clerks and choral scholars, or academical clerks. The boys, whose ages range from eight to thirteen, are chosen for their musical ability and attend Christ Church Cathedral School. Aside from the director, there is also a sub-organist and two organ scholars. The college choir, however, is always a student run society, and sings Evensong once a week in term time. In vacations the services are sung by the Cathedral Singers of Christ Church - a choir drawn from semi-professional singers in and around Oxford. The cathedral also hosts visiting choirs from time to time during vacations.
Throughout its history, the cathedral choir has attracted many distinguished composers and organists - from its first director, John Taverner, appointed by Cardinal Wolsey in 1526, to William Walton. The present director of music (known as the organist), is Stephen Darlington. In recent years, the choir have commissioned recorded works by contemporary composers such as John Tavener, William Mathias and Howard Goodall, also patron of Christ Church Music Society.
The choir, which broadcasts regularly, have many recordings to their credit and were the subject of a Channel 4 television documentary Howard Goodall's Great Dates (2002). The documentary was nominated at the Montreux TV Festival in the arts programme category - and has since been seen internationally. The choir's collaboration with Goodall has also led to their singing his TV themes for Mr. Bean and Vicar of Dibley. They appeared in Howard Goodall's Big Bangs, broadcast in the United Kingdom on Channel 4 in March 2000. Treasures of Christ Church (2011) is an example of the choir's recording and debuted as the highest new entry in the UK Specialist Classical chart.[27] The disc featured on BBC Radio 3’s In Tune on 26 September 2011 and on Radio 3’s Breakfast Show on 27 September that year.




Christ Church Cathedral spire and associated buildings


Picture gallery[edit]
Main article: Christ Church Picture Gallery
Christ Church holds one of the most important[citation needed] private collections of drawings in the UK, including works by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael and Michelangelo. The collection is composed of approximately 300 paintings and 2,000 drawings, a rotated selection of which are available to the public for viewing in the purpose built Christ Church Picture Gallery. Many of the works were bequeathed by a former member of the college, General John Guise, enabling the creation of the first public art gallery in Britain.[28][29][30]
Coat of arms[edit]
College arms[edit]
The college arms are those of Cardinal Wolsey and were granted to him by the College of Arms on 4 August 1525.[31] They are blazoned: Sable, on a cross engrailed argent, between four leopards' faces azure a lion passant gules; on a chief or between two Cornish choughs proper a rose gules barbed vert and seeded or. The arms are depicted beneath a red cardinal's hat with fifteen tassels on either side, and sometimes in front of two crossed croziers.




Christ Church Cathedral arms


Cathedral arms[edit]
There are also arms in use by the cathedral, which were confirmed in a visitation of 1574. They are emblazoned: "Between quarterly, 1st & 4th, France modern (azure three fleurs-de-lys or), 2nd & 3rd, England (gules in pale three lions passant guardant or), on a cross argent an open Bible proper edged and bound with seven clasps or, inscribed with the words In principio erat Verbum, et Verbum erat apud Deum and imperially crowned or."
Graces[edit]
The college preprandial grace reads:


Latin
English


Nōs miserī hominēs et egēnī, prō cibīs quōs nōbis ad corporis subsidium benignē es largeītus, tibi, Deus omnipotēns, Pater cælestis, grātiās reverenter agimus; simul obsecrantēs, ut iīs sobriē, modestē atque grātē ūtāmur.
Īnsuper petimus, ut cibum angelōrum, vērum panem cælestem, verbum Deī æternum, Dominum nostrum Iēsum Christum, nōbis impertiāris; utque illō mēns nostra pascātur et per carnem et sanguinem eius fovēāmur, alāmur, et corrōborēmur. Āmen. [32]

"We unhappy and unworthy men do give thee most reverent thanks, Almighty God, our heavenly Father, for the victuals which thou hast bestowed on us for the sustenance of the body, at the same time beseeching thee that we may use them soberly, modestly and gratefully.
And above all we beseech thee to impart to us the food of angels, the true bread of heaven, the eternal Word of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, so that the mind of each of us may feed on him and that through his flesh and blood we may be sustained, nourished and strengthened. Amen."







Christ Church from the south- east across Christ Church Meadow






Christ Church Cathedral from the east across Christ Church Meadow


The first part of the grace is read by a scholar or exhibitioner of the House before formal Hall each evening, ending with the words Per Iēsum Christum Dominum nostrum ("Through Jesus Christ our Lord.") The remainder of the grace, replacing Per Iēsum Christum, etc., is usually only read on special occasions:
There is also a long postprandial grace intended for use after meals, but this is rarely used. When High Table rises (by which time the Hall is largely empty), the senior member on High Table simply says Benedictō benedīcātur ("Let the Blessed One be blessed", or "Let a blessing be given by the Blessed One"), instead of the college postprandial grace:

(The Bible clerk reads from the Greek Testament.)

:Omnipotens et misericors Deus, qui donis Tuis nos exsatiasti, effice ut quicquid per nos fieri aut prætermitti velis, diligenter observemus, mandata Tua universa prompto atque fideli obsequio obeuntes, per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Versicle: Domine, salvam fac Reginam.


Response: Et exaudi nos, quando invocamus Te.

:Deus in cuius manu sunt corda regum; qui es humilium consolator, fidelium fortitudo, protector omnium in Te sperantium, da Reginæ nostræ Elizabethæ populoque Christiano ut Te Regem regum, et dominantium Dominum, agnoscant semper et venerentur, et post hanc vitam regni Tui æterni fiant participes ; per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Deus, a quo derivatur omnis munificentia et bonitas, debitas Tibi gratias agimus, quod felicis memoriæ Regem Henricum eius nominis octavum, ad Ecclesiam hanc fundandam animaveris; et rogamus pro sancta Tua misericordia, ut cum nos hoc tanto beneficio adiuti, ad laudem Tui nominis profecerimus, una cum omnibus qui iam in Domino dormierunt, beatam resurrectionem, et æternæ felicitatis præmia consequamur, per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Student life[edit]
As well as rooms for accommodation, the buildings of Christ Church include the cathedral, one of the smallest in England, which also acts as the college chapel, a great hall, two libraries, two bars, and common rooms for dons, graduates and undergraduates. There are also gardens and a neighbouring sportsground and boat-house.
Accommodation is usually provided for all undergraduates, and for some graduates, although some accommodation is off-site. Accommodation is generally spacious with most rooms equipped with sinks and fridges. Many undergraduate rooms comprise 'sets' of bedrooms and living areas. Members are generally expected to dine in hall, where there are two sittings every evening, one informal and one formal (where gowns must be worn and Latin grace is read). The buttery next to the Hall serves drinks around dinner time. There is also a college bar (known as the Undercroft), as well as a Junior Common Room (JCR) and a Graduate Common Room (GCR).
There is a college lending library which supplements the university libraries (many of which are non-lending). Law students have the additional facility of the college law library, which has received large financial supplements from Christ Church law graduates. Most undergraduate tutorials are carried out in the college, though for some specialist subjects undergraduates may be sent to tutors in other colleges.
Croquet is played in the Masters' Garden in the summer. The sports ground is mainly used for cricket, tennis, rugby and football. Rowing and punting is carried out by the boat-house across Christ Church Meadow - the college is traditionally strong at rowing, having been Head of the River more times than any other. The college also owns its own punts which may be borrowed by students or dons.
The college beagle pack (Christ Church and Farley Hill Beagles), which was formerly one of several undergraduate packs in Oxford, is no longer formally connected with the college or the university, but continues to be staffed and followed by some Oxford undergraduates.
Christ Church references[edit]

"Midnight has come and the great Christ Church bell
And many a lesser bell sound through the room;
And it is All Souls' Night..."
— W B Yeats, All Souls' Night, Oxford (1920)


"The wind had dropped. There was even a glimpse of the moon riding behind the clouds. And now, a solemn and plangent token of Oxford's perpetuity, the first stroke of Great Tom sounded."
— Max Beerbohm, Chapter 21, Zuleika Dobson (1922)


"I must say my thoughts wandered, but I kept turning the pages and watching the light fade, which in Peckwater, my dear, is quite an experience – as darkness falls the stone seems positively to decay under one's eyes. I was reminded of some of those leprous façades in the vieux port at Marseille, until suddenly I was disturbed by such a bawling and caterwauling as you never heard, and there, down in the little piazza, I saw a mob of about twenty terrible young men, and do you know what they were chanting We want Blanche. We want Blanche! in a kind of litany."
— Evelyn Waugh, Brideshead Revisited (1945)


"Those twins / Of learning that he [Wolsey] raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue."
— William Shakespeare, Henry VIII (1613)


"By way of light entertainment, I should tell the Committee that it is well known that a match between an archer and a golfer can be fairly close. I spent many a happy evening in the centre of Peckwater Quadrangle at Christ Church, with a bow and arrow, trying to put an arrow over the Kilcannon building into the Mercury Pond in Tom Quad. On occasion, the golfer would win and, on occasion, I would win. Unfortunately, that had to stop when I put an arrow through the bowler hat of the head porter. Luckily, he was unhurt and bore me no ill will. From that time on he always sent me a Christmas card which was signed 'To Robin Hood from the Ancient Briton'"
— Lord Crawshaw, House of Lords, Hansard (Tuesday 8 July 1997)


"There is one oddity; Rudge. Determined to try for Oxford, Christ Church of all places! Might get into Loughborough, in a bad year."
— Alan Bennett, The History Boys (2004)

People associated with the college[edit]
Deans[edit]
Cardinal College

1525: John Hygdon

King Henry VIII's College

1532: John Hygdon
1533: John Oliver

Christ Church
Main article: Dean of Christ Church
Alumni[edit]
Main article: List of alumni of Christ Church, Oxford







Lewis Carroll









Anthony Eden









Edward VII









William Gladstone









John Locke









John Wesley




Notable former students of the college have included politicians, scientists, philosophers, entertainers and academics. Thirteen British Prime Ministers to have studied at the college including, Anthony Eden (Prime Minister 1955—1957), William Ewart Gladstone (1828–1831), Sir Robert Peel (1841–1846) and Archibald Primrose (1894–1895). Other former students include Charles Abbot (Speaker of the House of Commons 1802–1817), Frederick Curzon (Conservative Party statesman 1951–), Nicholas Lyell (Attorney General 1992–1997), Nigel Lawson (Chancellor of the Exchequer 1983–1989), Quintin Hogg (Lord Chancellor 1979–1987) and William Murray (Lord Chief Justice 1756—1788 and Chancellor of the Exchequer 1757). From outside the UK, politicians from Canada (Ted Jolliffe), Pakistan (Zulfikar Ali Bhutto) and the United States (Charles Cotesworth Pinckney) have attended the college.
Prominent philosophers including John Locke, John Rawls, A. J. Ayer, Gilbert Ryle, Michael Dummett, John Searle and Daniel Dennett studied at Christ Church.
There are numerous former students in the fields of academia and theology, including George Kitchin (the first Chancellor of the University of Durham 1908—1912 and Dean of Durham Cathedral 1894–1912), John Charles Ryle (first Bishop of Liverpool 1880–1900), John Wesley (leader of the Methodist movement), Rowan Williams (Archbishop of Canterbury 2002–2012), Richard William Jelf (Principal of King's College London 1843–1868), Ronald Montagu Burrows (Principal of King's College London 1913–1920) and William Stubbs (Bishop of Oxford 1889—1901 and historian).
In the sciences, polymath and natural philosopher Robert Hooke, developmental biologist John B. Gurdon (co-winner of the 2012 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine), physician Sir Archibald Edward Garrod, the Father of Modern Medicine Sir William Osler, biochemist Kenneth Callow, radio astronomer Sir Martin Ryle, psychologist Edward de Bono and epidemiologist Sir Richard Doll are all associated with the college. Albert Einstein was a visiting scholar.
In other fields, Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss, twins associated with the founding of Facebook, King Edward VII (1841–1910), King of the United Kingdom and Emperor of India, King William II of the Netherlands, rowing gold medallist Jonny Searle, entrepreneur and founder of Pennsylvania William Penn, broadcaster David Dimbleby, MP Louise Mensch, BBC composer Howard Goodall, the writer Lewis Carroll, are other notable students to have previously studied at Christ Church.
See also: Category: Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford and Category: Fellows of Christ Church, Oxford
Gallery[edit]







Christ Church Rooms









Christ Church Cathedral Ceiling









Christ Church Cathedral altar









Cathedral ceiling









Christ Church Cathedral









Christ Church Oxford Hall









Garden Perspective.




References[edit]


^ "Undergraduate numbers by college 2011-12". University of Oxford. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. 
^ a b c "Annual Report and Financial Statements" (PDF). Christ Church. 2016-07-31. p. 19. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Student numbers | University of Oxford". www.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Christ Church Meadow will get a visitor centre". Oxford Mail. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "The Meadow Building | Christ Church, Oxford University". www.chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Harry Potter fans boost Oxford Christ Church Cathedral". BBC News. 2012-03-25. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ http://www.chch.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Visitor_Information-gb.pdf
^ "The Governing Body - Westminster School". Westminster School. Retrieved 6 August 2017. 
^ "Westminster School Intranet". Intranet.westminster.org.uk. Archived from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2011. 
^ "A Brief History of Christ Church" (PDF). Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ Varley, Frederick John (1932). The Siege of Oxford: An Account of Oxford during the Civil War, 1642–1646. Oxford University Press. p. 128. 
^ "Location Plan for Planning Application 15/00760/FUL" (PDF). Oxford City Council. 2015-03-04. Retrieved 2017-09-01. Lay summary. 
^ "A Brief History". Friends of Aston's Eyot. 2014-12-24. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ Brockliss, Laurence (2016-07-28). Magdalen College School. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 45. ISBN 9781784421533. 
^ "The Meadow | Christ Church, Oxford University". www.chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Sadler inscription in Deadman's Walk". www.oxfordhistory.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ Historic England, "Christ Church (1000441)", National Heritage List for England (NHLE), retrieved 9 February 2016 
^ England, Historic. "CHRISTCHURCH, MERCURY FOUNTAIN, THE GREAT QUADRANGLE, Oxford - 1046740| Historic England". historicengland.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-09-01. 
^ England, Historic. "THE CHAPTER HOUSE AND DORTER RANGE TO SOUTH OF CATHEDRAL, Oxford - 1046739| Historic England". historicengland.org.uk. Retrieved 2017-09-01. 
^ "The Chapter House | Christ Church, Oxford University". www.chch.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-09-01. 
^ "The World Behind Alice in Wonderland in Oxford". Untapped Cities. 2012-12-04. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Alice in Wonderland Oxford | Experience Oxfordshire". Experience Oxfordshire. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "MNHA - Musée National d'Histoire et d'Art - Luxembourg - The patron, William II". www.mnha.lu. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ "Willem II: kunstkoning -". CODART. Retrieved 2017-08-31. 
^ Edward Burne-Jones Southgate Green Association "His work included both stained-glass windows for Christ Church in Oxford and the stained glass windows for Christ Church on Southgate Green."
^ PreRaphaelite Painting and Design Archived 14 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine. University of Texas
^ http://www.chchchoir.org/2011/03/treasures-of-christ-church/
^ Christ Church Picture Gallery, Christ Church, Oxford; 22 January 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2013. Archived here.
^ "Christ Church Matters, Issue 35" (PDF). pp. 12–15. Retrieved 25 August 2015. 
^ "Old Masters in an Oxford museum". Retrieved 25 August 2015. 
^ Curthoys, Judith (2012). The Cardinal's College: Christ Church, Chapter and Verse. Profile Press. pp. 4–5. ISBN 978 1 84668 617 7. 
^ Adams, Reginald (1992). The college graces of Oxford and Cambridge. Perpetua Press. pp. 62–64. ISBN 1-870882-06-7. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Christ Church, Oxford.



Official website
Oxford Cathedral
Christ Church Junior Common Room website
Christ Church Graduate Common Room website
Christ Church Boat Club
Official Virtual Tour of Christ Church
Christ Church Choir







v
t
e


University of Oxford



Leadership



Chancellor
The Lord Patten of Barnes
Vice-Chancellor
Louise Richardson
Registrar
Ewan McKendrick
List of Heads of Houses








Colleges



All Souls
Balliol
Brasenose
Christ Church
Corpus Christi
Exeter
Green Templeton
Harris Manchester
Hertford
Jesus
Keble
Kellogg
Lady Margaret Hall
Linacre
Lincoln
Magdalen
Mansfield
Merton
New College
Nuffield
Oriel
Pembroke
Queen's
St Anne's
St Antony's
St Catherine's
St Cross
St Edmund Hall
St Hilda's
St Hugh's
St John's
St Peter's
Somerville
Trinity
University
Wadham
Wolfson
Worcester





Permanent Private Halls



Blackfriars Hall
Campion Hall
Regent's Park College
St Benet's Hall
St Stephen's House
Wycliffe Hall





Departments




Humanities



American Institute
Classics
Drawing and Fine Art
History
Linguistics, Philology & Phonetics
Medieval and Modern Languages
Oriental Studies
Philosophy
Theology
etc.





Medical Sciences



Biochemistry
Human Genetics
Pathology
Medical School
etc.





Mathematical, Physical
and Life Sciences



Chemistry
Computer Science
Engineering Science
Materials
Mathematical Institute
Physics
Plant Sciences
Zoology
etc.





Social Sciences



Archaeology
Archaeology and the History of Art
Business School
Continuing Education
Enterprise and the Environment
Government
Social Policy and Intervention
International Development
Law
Oxford Martin School
etc.








Institutes and affiliates



University of Oxford Botanic Garden
Oxford University Press
Oxford Internet Institute
Oxford Science Park
Begbroke Science Park
Oxford-Man Institute
etc





Recognised Independent
Centres



Buddhist Studies
Energy Studies
Hebrew and Jewish Studies
Hindu Studies
Islamic Studies





Sport and student life



Sport

Australian Rules Football
Boxing
Cricket
Cycling
Dancesport
Darts
Football
Gliding
Handball
Ice Hockey
Mountaineering
Quidditch
Polo
Rowing
Rugby
Women's Football




Student life

Cherwell newspaper
The Mays
Oxford University Student Union
Oxford Union




Competitions

Cuppers
The Boat Race
Women's Boat Race
Henley Boat Races
The Varsity Polo Match
Rugby League Varsity Match
University Golf Match
Rugby Union Varsity Match







Related



In popular culture

fictional Oxford colleges
fictional Oxford people


Oxford University Gazette
The Oxford Magazine








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e


Royal palaces and residences in the United Kingdom



Occupied



Bagshot Park
Balmoral Castle, Birkhall & Craigowan Lodge
Buckingham Palace
Gatcombe Park
Highgrove House
Hillsborough Castle
Holyrood Palace
St James's Palace & Clarence House
Kensington Palace & Wren House
Llwynywermod
Sandringham House & Anmer Hall
Tamarisk (Isles of Scilly)
Thatched House Lodge
Windsor Castle & Royal Lodge, Windsor










Historical principal royal residences



St James's Palace
Hampton Court Palace
Tower of London
Windsor Castle





Historical



Abergeldie Castle
Albany (London)
Allerton Castle
Audley End House
Palace of Beaulieu
Barnwell Manor
Beaumont Palace
Fort Belvedere, Windsor
Bentley Priory
Berkhamsted Castle
Birch Hall, Surrey
Brantridge Park
Bridewell Palace
Brill Palace
Bushy House
Cadzow Castle
Caernarfon Castle
Cambridge Cottage, Kew
Cambridge House
Carisbrooke Castle
Carlton House
Castle Hill Lodge, Ealing
Castlewood House, Surrey
Chelsea Manor
Chesterfield House, Greenwich
Chevening
Chideock Manor
Chiswick House
Christ Church, Oxford
Claremont
Clarendon Palace
Cliveden
Coombe Abbey
Coppins
Crocker End House
Crosby Hall, London
Cumberland Cottage
Cumberland House
Cumberland Lodge
Delnadamph Lodge
Dolphin Square
Doune Castle
Dover House
Dublin Castle
Dunfermline Palace
Eastwell Park
Edinburgh Castle
Eltham Palace
Falkland Palace
Frogmore House
Gloucester House
Gloucester House, London
Gloucester Lodge
Gunnersbury Park
Hampton Court Palace
Hanworth Manor
Hatfield House
Havering Palace
Ingestre House
Kent House (Isle of Wight)
Kew House (Isle of Wight)
Kew Palace
Kingsbourne House
King's House, Winchester
Kings Langley Palace
Lancaster House
Leeds Castle
Leicester Square
Les Jolies Eaux
Linlithgow Palace
Tower of London
Marlborough House
Montagu House
Castle of Mey
Nether Lypiatt Manor
Nonsuch Palace
Norfolk House
Oak Grove House
Oatlands Palace
Oatlands Park
Osborne Cottage
Osborne House
Palace of Placentia
Queen Charlotte's Cottage, Kew
Queen's House
Ranger's House
Ribsden Holt
Richmond Palace & White Lodge
Romenda Lodge
Royal City of Dublin Hospital
Royal Pavilion, Aldershot
Royal Pavilion, Brighton
Sagana Lodge
Savile House
Savoy Palace
Schomberg House
Somerset House
Stirling Castle
Sunninghill Park
Sussex House
The More
Theobalds Palace
Walmer Castle
Palace of Westminster
Palace of Whitehall & the Banqueting House
Windlesham Moor
Witley Court
Woodstock Palace
York Cottage, Sandringham
York House, St James's Palace









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 140757625
LCCN: n83129422
ISNI: 0000 0001 2324 2350
GND: 1015074-2
SUDOC: 032246609
BNF: cb12531513w (data)
ULAN: 500309846
NLA: 35404491
NKC: ko2007396119











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christ_Church,_Oxford&oldid=813847261"					Categories: Christ Church, OxfordColleges of the University of OxfordEducational institutions established in the 1540sGrade I listed buildings in OxfordGrade I listed educational buildingsAugustinian monasteries in EnglandBuildings and structures of the University of Oxford1546 establishments in EnglandGrade I listed parks and gardens in OxfordshireHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from January 2015Use British English from January 2015Pages using deprecated image syntaxCoordinates not on WikidataArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers