For other uses, see Chronology (disambiguation). For specific lists of events, see Timeline.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Joseph Scaliger's De emendatione temporum (1583) began the modern science of chronology[1]


Chronology (from Latin chronologia, from Ancient Greek χρόνος, chrónos, "time"; and -λογία, -logia)[2] is the science of arranging events in their order of occurrence in time. Consider, for example, the use of a timeline or sequence of events. It is also "the determination of the actual temporal sequence of past events".[3]
Chronology is part of periodization. It is also part of the discipline of history, including earth history, the earth sciences, and study of the geologic time scale.



Contents


1 Related fields
2 Calendar and era

2.1 Ab Urbe condita era
2.2 Astronomical era


3 Prehistoric chronologies
4 Chronological synchronism
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading

8.1 Published in the 18th–19th centuries
8.2 Published in the 20th century
8.3 Published in the 21st century


9 External links



Related fields[edit]
Chronology is the science of locating historical events in time. It relies upon chronometry, which is also known as timekeeping, and historiography, which examines the writing of history and the use of historical methods. Radiocarbon dating estimates the age of formerly living things by measuring the proportion of carbon-14 isotope in their carbon content. Dendrochronology estimates the age of trees by correlation of the various growth rings in their wood to known year-by-year reference sequences in the region to reflect year-to-year climatic variation. Dendrochronology is used in turn as a calibration reference for radiocarbon dating curves.
Calendar and era[edit]






v
t
e


Calendars



Systems



Lunar
Lunisolar
Solar





In wide use



Astronomical
Bengali
Chinese
Ethiopian
Gregorian
Hebrew
Hindu
Iranian
Islamic
ISO
Unix time






In more
limited use








Akan
Armenian
Assyrian
Bahá'í (Badí‘)
Balinese pawukon
Balinese saka
Berber
Buddhist
Burmese
Chinese
Coptic
Gaelic
Germanic Heathen
Georgian
Hebrew
Hindu or Indian

Vikram Samvat
Saka


Igbo
Iranian

Jalali (medieval)
Hijri (modern)
Zoroastrian


Islamic

Fasli
Tabular


Jain
Japanese
Javanese
Korean

Juche


Kurdish
Lithuanian
Malayalam
Mongolian
Melanau
Nanakshahi
Nepal Sambat
Nisg̱a'a
Oromo
Romanian
Somali
Sesotho
Slavic

Slavic Native Faith


Tamil
Thai

lunar
solar


Tibetan
Vietnamese
Xhosa
Yoruba





Types



Runic
Mesoamerican

Long Count
Calendar round







Christian variants



Julian

Revised


Liturgical year

Eastern Orthodox


Saints








Historical



Attic
Aztec

Tonalpohualli
Xiuhpohualli


Babylonian
Bulgar
Byzantine
Celtic
Cham
Culāsakaraj
Egyptian
Florentine
French Republican
Germanic
Greek
Hindu
Inca
Macedonian
Maya

Haab'
Tzolk'in


Muisca
Pentecontad
Pisan
Rapa Nui
Roman calendar
Rumi
Soviet
Swedish
Turkmen





By specialty



Holocene (anthropological)
Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian (historiographical)
Darian (Martian)
Dreamspell (New Age)
Discordian / Pataphysical (surreal)





Proposals



Calendar reform
Hanke–Henry Permanent
International Fixed
Pax
Positivist
Symmetry454
Tranquility
World

New Earth Time







Fictional



Discworld
Greyhawk
Middle-earth
Stardate
Star Wars (Galactic Standard Calendar)






Displays and
applications




Electronic
Perpetual
Wall






Year naming
and
numbering





Terminology



Era
Epoch
Regnal name
Regnal year
Year zero





Systems



Ab urbe condita
Anno Domini/Common Era
Anno Mundi
Assyrian
Before Present
Chinese Imperial
Chinese Minguo
Human Era
Japanese
Korean
Seleucid
Spanish
Yugas

Satya
Treta
Dvapara
Kali


Vietnamese









List of calendars




Main article: Calendar
The familiar terms calendar and era (within the meaning of a coherent system of numbered calendar years) concern two complementary fundamental concepts of chronology. For example, during eight centuries the calendar belonging to the Christian era, which era was taken in use in the 8th century by Bede, was the Julian calendar, but after the year 1582 it was the Gregorian calendar. Dionysius Exiguus (about the year 500) was the founder of that era, which is nowadays the most widespread dating system on earth. An epoch is the date (year usually) when an era begins.
Ab Urbe condita era[edit]
Main article: Ab urbe condita
Ab Urbe condita is Latin for "from the founding of the City (Rome)",[4] traditionally set in 753 BC. It was used to identify the Roman year by a few Roman historians. Modern historians use it much more frequently than the Romans themselves did; the dominant method of identifying Roman years was to name the two consuls who held office that year. Before the advent of the modern critical edition of historical Roman works, AUC was indiscriminately added to them by earlier editors, making it appear more widely used than it actually was.
It was used systematically for the first time only about the year 400, by the Iberian historian Orosius. Pope Boniface IV, in about the year 600, seems to have been the first who made a connection between these this era and Anno Domini. (AD 1 = AUC 754.)
Astronomical era[edit]
Main article: Astronomical year numbering
Dionysius Exiguus’ Anno Domini era (which contains only calendar years AD) was extended by Bede to the complete Christian era (which contains, in addition all calendar years BC, but no year zero). Ten centuries after Bede, the French astronomers Philippe de la Hire (in the year 1702) and Jacques Cassini (in the year 1740), purely to simplify certain calculations, put the Julian Dating System (proposed in the year 1583 by Joseph Scaliger) and with it an astronomical era into use, which contains a leap year zero, which precedes the year 1 (AD).[5]
Prehistoric chronologies[edit]
While of critical importance to the historian, methods of determining chronology are used in most disciplines of science, especially astronomy, geology, paleontology and archaeology.
In the absence of written history, with its chronicles and king lists, late 19th century archaeologists found that they could develop relative chronologies based on pottery techniques and styles. In the field of Egyptology, William Flinders Petrie pioneered sequence dating to penetrate pre-dynastic Neolithic times, using groups of contemporary artefacts deposited together at a single time in graves and working backwards methodically from the earliest historical phases of Egypt. This method of dating is known as seriation.
Known wares discovered at strata in sometimes quite distant sites, the product of trade, helped extend the network of chronologies. Some cultures have retained the name applied to them in reference to characteristic forms, for lack of an idea of what they called themselves: "The Beaker People" in northern Europe during the 3rd millennium BCE, for example. The study of the means of placing pottery and other cultural artifacts into some kind of order proceeds in two phases, classification and typology: Classification creates categories for the purposes of description, and typology seeks to identify and analyse changes that allow artifacts to be placed into sequences.[6]
Laboratory techniques developed particularly after mid-20th century helped constantly revise and refine the chronologies developed for specific cultural areas. Unrelated dating methods help reinforce a chronology, an axiom of corroborative evidence. Ideally, archaeological materials used for dating a site should complement each other and provide a means of cross-checking. Conclusions drawn from just one unsupported technique are usually regarded as unreliable.
Chronological synchronism[edit]
The fundamental problem of chronology is to synchronize events. By synchronizing an event it becomes possible to relate it to the current time and to compare the event to other events. Among historians, a typical need to is to synchronize the reigns of kings and leaders in order to relate the history of one country or region to that of another. For example, the Chronicon of Eusebius (325 A.D.) is one of the major works of historical synchronism. This work has two sections. The first contains narrative chronicles of nine different kingdoms: Chaldean, Assyrian, Median, Lydian, Persian, Hebrew, Greek, Peloponnesian, Asian, and Roman. The second part is a long table synchronizing the events from each of the nine kingdoms in parallel columns. The image to the right shows two pages from the second section.
By comparing the parallel columns, the reader can determine which events were contemporaneous, or how many years separated two different events. To place all the events on the same time scale, Eusebius used an Anno Mundi (A.M.) era, meaning that events were dated from the supposed beginning of the world as computed from the Book of Genesis in the Hebrew Pentateuch. According to the computation Eusebius used, this occurred in 5199 B.C. The Chronicon of Eusebius was widely used in the medieval world to establish the dates and times of historical events. Subsequent chronographers, such as George Syncellus (died circa 811), analyzed and elaborated on the Chronicon by comparing with other chronologies. The last great chronographer was Joseph Justus Scaliger (1540-1609) who reconstructed the lost Chronicon and synchronized all of ancient history in his two major works, De emendatione temporum (1583) and Thesaurus temporum (1606). Much of modern historical datings and chronology of the ancient world ultimately derives from these two works.[7] Scaliger invented the concept of the Julian Day which is still used as the standard unified scale of time for both historians and astronomers.[citation needed]
In addition to the literary methods of synchronism used by traditional chronographers such as Eusebius, Syncellus and Scaliger, it is possible to synchronize events by archaeological or astronomical means. For example, the Eclipse of Thales, described in the first book of Herodotus can potentially be used to date the Lydian War because the eclipse took place during the middle of an important battle in that war. Likewise, various eclipses and other astronomical events described in ancient records can be used to astronomically synchronize historical events.[8] Another method to synchronize events is the use of archaeological findings, such as pottery, to do sequence dating.
See also[edit]





Examples


List of timelines – specific chronologies
Timeline of world history – overall historical chronology


Christian chronology


Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table
Easter
Lunar cycle
Millennium question
Paschal full moon
Solar cycle




General


French revolutionary era
Historiography


Fiction writing

Aspects and examples of non-chronological story-telling:

Flashback
Flashforward
Linearity (writing)
Reverse chronology





Notes[edit]



^ Richards, E. G. (1998). Mapping Time: The Calendar and History. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 12–13. ISBN 0-19-286205-7. 
^  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Chronology". Encyclopædia Britannica. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 305. 
^ Memidex/WordNet, "chronology," memidex.com (accessed September 25, 2010).
^ Literally translated as "From the city having been founded".
^ Richards 2013, pp. 591-592.
^ Greene, Kevin (November 2007). Archaeology : An Introduction. University of Newcastle Upon Tyne. Chapter 4. Retrieved 2008-01-04. 
^ Grafton, Anthony (1994). Joseph Scaliger: A Study in the History of Classical Scholarship. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
^ Kelley, David H. (2011). Exploring Ancient Skies: A Survey of Ancient and Cultural Astronomy. Springer. p. 614. ISBN 978-1441976239. 



References[edit]

Hegewisch, D. H., & Marsh, J. (1837). Introduction to historical chronology. Burlington [Vt.]: C. Goodrich.
B. E. Tumanian, “Measurement of Time in Ancient and Medieval Armenia,” Journal for the History of Astronomy 5, 1974, pp. 91–98.
Kazarian, K. A., “History of Chronology by B. E. Tumanian,” Journal for the History of Astronomy, 4, 1973, p. 137
Porter, T. M., "The Dynamics of Progress: Time, Method, and Measure". The American Historical Review, 1991.

Further reading[edit]
Published in the 18th–19th centuries[edit]

Weeks, J. E. (1701). The gentleman's hour glass; or, An introduction to chronology; being a plain and compendious analysis of time. Dublin: James Hoey.
Hodgson, J., Hinton, J., & Wallis, J. (1747). An introduction to chronology:: containing an account of time; also of the most remarkable cycles, epoch's, era's, periods, and moveable feasts. To which is added, a brief account of the several methods proposed for the alteration of the style, the reforming the calendar, and fixing the true time of the celebration of Easter. London: Printed for J. Hinton, at the King's Arms in St Paul's Church-yard.
Smith, T. (1818). An introduction to chronology. New York: Samuel Wood.

Published in the 20th century[edit]

Keller, H. R. (1934). The dictionary of dates. New York: The Macmillan company.
Poole, R. L., & Poole, A. L. (1934). Studies in chronology and history. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Langer, W. L., & Gatzke, H. W. (1963). An encyclopedia of world history, ancient, medieval and modern, chronologically arranged. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Momigliano, A. "Pagan and Christian Historiography in the Fourth Century A.D." in A. Momigliano, ed., The Conflict Between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century,The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1963, pp. 79–99
Williams, N., & Storey, R. L. (1966). Chronology of the modern world: 1763 to the present time. London: Barrie & Rockliffe.
Steinberg, S. H. (1967). Historical tables: 58 B.C.-A.D. 1965. London: Macmillan.
Freeman-Grenville, G. S. P. (1975). Chronology of world history: a calendar of principal events from 3000 BC to AD 1973. London: Collings.
Neugebauer, O. (1975). A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy Springer-Verlag.
Bickerman, E. J. (1980). The Chronology of the Ancient World. London: Thames and Hudson.
Whitrow, G. J. (1990). Time in history views of time from prehistory to the present day. Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford Univ. Press.
Aitken, M. (1990). Science-Based Dating in Archaeology. London: Thames and Hudson.
Richards, E. G. (1998). Mapping Time: The Calendar and History. Oxford University Press.

Published in the 21st century[edit]

Koselleck, R. "Time and History." The Practice of Conceptual History. Timing History, Spacing Concepts. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2002.
Ronald H. Fritze; et al. (2004). "Chronologies, Calendars, and Lists of Rulers". Reference Sources in History: An Introductory Guide (2nd ed.). ABC-CLIO. pp. 4+. ISBN 978-0-87436-883-3. 
Olena V. Smyntyna (2009). "Chronology". In H. James Birx. Encyclopedia of Time: Science, Philosophy, Theology, & Culture. Sage. ISBN 978-1-4129-4164-8. 
Daniel Rosenberg; Anthony Grafton (2009). Cartographies of Time: A History of the Timeline. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. ISBN 9781568987637{{inconsistent citations}} 

External links[edit]



Look up chronology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Dating the Past
Pragmatic Bayesians: a decade of integrating radiocarbon dates in chronological models from the University of Sheffield at the Internet Archive. Accessed 2008-01-04.
Open Library. Works related to chronology
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "General Chronology". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
Chattopadhyay, Subhasis. Chronicity and Temporality: A Revisionary Hermeneutics of Time in Prabuddha Bharata or Awakened India 120 (10):606-609 (2015). ISSN 0032-6178







v
t
e


Time



Key concepts



Past

history
deep time


Present
Future
Futures studies
Far future in religion
Far future in science fiction and popular culture
Timeline of the far future
Eternity
Eternity of the world





Measurement and
standards




Chronometry



UTC
UT
TAI
Unit of time
Planck time
Second
Minute
Hour
Day
Week
Month
Year
Decade
Century
Millennium
Tropical year
Sidereal year
Samvatsara





Measurement
systems



Time zone
Six-hour clock
12-hour clock
24-hour clock
Daylight saving time
Solar time
Sidereal time
Metric time
Decimal time
Hexadecimal time





Calendars



Gregorian
Julian
Hebrew
Islamic
Lunar
Solar Hijri
Mayan
Intercalation
Leap second
Leap year








Clocks



Horology
History of timekeeping devices
Main types

astrarium
atomic

quantum


marine
sundial
sundial markup schema
watch
water-based










Chronology
History






Astronomical chronology
Big History
Calendar era
Chronicle
Deep time
Periodization
Regnal year
Timeline








Religion
Mythology






Dreamtime
Kāla
Kalachakra
Prophecy
Time and fate deities
Wheel of time
Immortality





Philosophy of time



A-series and B-series
B-theory of time
Causality
Duration
Endurantism
Eternal return
Eternalism
Event
Multiple time dimensions
Perdurantism
Presentism
Static interpretation of time
Temporal finitism
Temporal parts
The Unreality of Time





Human experience
and use of time



Accounting period
Chronemics
Fiscal year
Generation time
Mental chronometry
Music
Procrastination
Punctuality
Temporal database
Term
Time discipline
Time management
Time perception

Specious present


Time-tracking software
Time-use research
Time-based currency (time banking)
Time value of money
Time clock
Timesheet
Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow





Time in




Geology



Geological time

age
chron
eon
epoch
era
period


Geochronology
Geological history of Earth





Physics



Absolute time and space
Arrow of time
Chronon
Coordinate time
Imaginary time
Planck epoch
Planck time
Proper time
Rate
Spacetime
Theory of relativity
Time dilation

gravitational


Time domain
Time translation symmetry
Time reversal symmetry





other subject
areas



Chronological dating
Chronobiology
Circadian rhythms
Dating methodologies in archaeology
Time geography








Related topics



Carpe diem
Clock position
Space
System time
Tempus fugit
Time capsule
Time complexity
Time signature
Time travel






 Time portal










v
t
e


Chronology



Key topics



Archaeology
Astronomy
Geology
History
Paleontology
Time








Eras
Epochs







Calendar eras



Human Era
Ab urbe condita
Anno Domini / Common Era
Anno Mundi
Byzantine era
Seleucid era
Spanish era
Before Present
Hijri
Egyptian
Sothic cycle
Hindu units of time (Yuga)
Mesoamerican

Long Count
Short Count
Tzolk'in
Haab'







Regnal year



Canon of Kings
Lists of kings
Limmu





Era names



Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Vietnamese








Calendars




Pre-Julian / Julian



Pre-Julian Roman
Original Julian
Proleptic Julian
Revised Julian





Gregorian



Gregorian
Proleptic Gregorian
Old Style and New Style dates
Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
Dual dating





Astronomical



Lunisolar
Solar
Lunar
Astronomical year numbering





Others



Chinese sexagenary cycle
Geologic Calendar
Hebrew
Iranian
Islamic
ISO week date
Mesoamerican

Maya
Aztec


Winter count (Plains Indians)








Astronomic time



Cosmic Calendar
Ephemeris
Galactic year
Metonic cycle
Milankovitch cycles





Geologic time




Concepts



Deep time
Geological history of Earth
Geological time units





Standards



Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP)





Methods



Chronostratigraphy
Geochronology
Isotope geochemistry
Law of superposition
Luminescence dating
Samarium–neodymium dating








Chronological
dating




Absolute dating



Amino acid racemisation
Archaeomagnetic dating
Dendrochronology
Ice core
Incremental dating
Lichenometry
Paleomagnetism
Radiometric dating

Radiocarbon
Uranium–lead
Potassium–argon


Tephrochronology
Luminescence dating
Thermoluminescence dating





Relative dating



Fluorine absorption
Nitrogen dating
Obsidian hydration
Seriation
Stratigraphy








Genetic methods



Molecular clock





Linguistic methods



Glottochronology





Related topics



Chronicle
New Chronology
Periodization
Synchronoptic view
Timeline
Year zero
Circa
Floruit
Terminus post quem
ASPRO chronology








 Portal








History portal
Time portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronology&oldid=810646087"					Categories: ChronologyTimeUnits of timeHidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles needing additional references from January 2008All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference