



Overview, including some physiological parameters, of the human circadian rhythm ("biological clock").




Time





Current time (update)


07:16, 4 January 2018 (UTC)




Major concepts


Past
Present
Future


Eternity

arguments for










Fields of study


Archaeology
Chronology
History
Horology
Paleontology
Futurology








Philosophy


Presentism
Eternalism
Event
Fatalism











Religion
Mythology





Creation
End time
Day of Judgement
Immortality
Afterlife
Reincarnation
Kalachakra











Measurement
Standards





Metric
Hexadecimal











Science
Naturalism





Chronobiology
Cosmogony
Evolution
Radiometric dating
Ultimate fate of the universe
Time in physics








Related topics


Motion
Space
Spacetime
Time travel









v
t
e





Chronobiology is a field of biology that examines periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms and their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms.[1] These cycles are known as biological rhythms. Chronobiology comes from the ancient Greek χρόνος (chrónos, meaning "time"), and biology, which pertains to the study, or science, of life. The related terms chronomics and chronome have been used in some cases to describe either the molecular mechanisms involved in chronobiological phenomena or the more quantitative aspects of chronobiology, particularly where comparison of cycles between organisms is required.
Chronobiological studies include but are not limited to comparative anatomy, physiology, genetics, molecular biology and behavior of organisms within biological rhythms mechanics.[1] Other aspects include epigenetics, development, reproduction, ecology and evolution.



Contents


1 Description
2 History
3 Recent developments
4 Other fields
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Description[edit]
The variations of the timing and duration of biological activity in living organisms occur for many essential biological processes. These occur (a) in animals (eating, sleeping, mating, hibernating, migration, cellular regeneration, etc.), (b) in plants (leaf movements, photosynthetic reactions, etc.), and in microbial organisms such as fungi and protozoa. They have even been found in bacteria, especially among the cyanobacteria (aka blue-green algae, see bacterial circadian rhythms). The most important rhythm in chronobiology is the circadian rhythm, a roughly 24-hour cycle shown by physiological processes in all these organisms. The term circadian comes from the Latin circa, meaning "around" and dies, "day", meaning "approximately a day." It is regulated by circadian clocks.
The circadian rhythm can further be broken down into routine cycles during the 24-hour day:[2]

Diurnal, which describes organisms active during daytime
Nocturnal, which describes organisms active in the night
Crepuscular, which describes animals primarily active during the dawn and dusk hours (ex: white-tailed deer, some bats)

While circadian rhythms are defined as endogenously regulated, other biological cycles may be regulated by exogenous signals. In some cases, multi-trophic systems may exhibit rhythms driven by the circadian clock of one of the members (which may also be influenced or reset by external factors). The endogenous plant cycles may regulate the activity of the bacterium by controlling availability of plant-produced photosynthate.
Many other important cycles are also studied, including:

Infradian rhythms, which are cycles longer than a day. Examples include circannual or annual cycles that govern migration or reproduction cycles in many plants and animals, or the human menstrual cycle.
Ultradian rhythms, which are cycles shorter than 24 hours, such as the 90-minute REM cycle, the 4-hour nasal cycle, or the 3-hour cycle of growth hormone production.
Tidal rhythms, commonly observed in marine life, which follow the roughly 12.4-hour transition from high to low tide and back.
Lunar rhythms, which follow the lunar month (29.5 days). They are relevant e.g. for marine life, as the level of the tides is modulated across the lunar cycle.
Gene oscillations – some genes are expressed more during certain hours of the day than during other hours.

Within each cycle, the time period during which the process is more active is called the acrophase.[3] When the process is less active, the cycle is in its bathyphase or trough phase. The particular moment of highest activity is the peak or maximum; the lowest point is the nadir. How high (or low) the process gets is measured by the amplitude.
History[edit]
A circadian cycle was first observed in the 18th century in the movement of plant leaves by the French scientist Jean-Jacques d'Ortous de Mairan.[4] In 1751 Swedish botanist and naturalist Carl Linnaeus (Carl von Linné) designed a flower clock using certain species of flowering plants. By arranging the selected species in a circular pattern, he designed a clock that indicated the time of day by the flowers that were open at each given hour. For example, among members of the daisy family, he used the hawk's beard plant which opened its flowers at 6:30 am and the hawkbit which did not open its flowers until 7 am.[5]
The 1960 symposium at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory laid the groundwork for the field of chronobiology.[6]
It was also in 1960 that Patricia DeCoursey invented the phase response curve, one of the major tools used in the field since.
Franz Halberg of the University of Minnesota, who coined the word circadian, is widely considered the "father of American chronobiology." However, it was Colin Pittendrigh and not Halberg who was elected to lead the Society for Research in Biological Rhythms in the 1970s. Halberg wanted more emphasis on the human and medical issues while Pittendrigh had his background more in evolution and ecology. With Pittendrigh as leader, the Society members did basic research on all types of organisms, plants as well as animals. More recently it has been difficult to get funding for such research on any other organisms than mice, rats, humans[7][8] and fruit flies.
Recent developments[edit]
More recently, light therapy and melatonin administration have been explored by Alfred J. Lewy (OHSU), Josephine Arendt (University of Surrey, UK) and other researchers as a means to reset animal and human circadian rhythms. Additionally, the presence of low-level light at night accelerates circadian re-entrainment of hamsters of all ages by 50%; this is thought to be related to simulation of moonlight.[9]
Humans can be morning people or evening people; these variations are called chronotypes for which there are various assessment tools and biological markers.[10]
In the second half of 20th century, substantial contributions and formalizations have been made by Europeans such as Jürgen Aschoff and Colin Pittendrigh, who pursued different but complementary views on the phenomenon of entrainment of the circadian system by light (parametric, continuous, tonic, gradual vs. nonparametric, discrete, phasic, instantaneous, respectively[11]).
There is also a food-entrainable biological clock, which is not confined to the suprachiasmatic nucleus. The location of this clock has been disputed. Working with mice, however, Fuller et al. concluded that the food-entrainable clock seems to be located in the dorsomedial hypothalamus. During restricted feeding, it takes over control of such functions as activity timing, increasing the chances of the animal successfully locating food resources.[12]
Other fields[edit]
Chronobiology is an interdisciplinary field of investigation. It interacts with medical and other research fields such as sleep medicine, endocrinology, geriatrics, sports medicine, space medicine and photoperiodism.[13][14][15]
In spite of the similarity of the name to legitimate biological rhythms, the theory and practice of biorhythms is a classic example of pseudoscience. It attempts to describe a set of cyclic variations in human behavior based on a person's birth date. It is not a part of chronobiology.[16]
See also[edit]

Alexander Chizhevsky
Bacterial circadian rhythms
Biological clock (aging)
Circannual cycle
Circaseptan, 7-day biological cycle
Hitoshi Okamura
Light effects on circadian rhythm
Michel Siffre
Sense of time
Suprachiasmatic nucleus

References[edit]



^ a b Patricia J. DeCoursey; Jay C. Dunlap; Jennifer J. Loros (2003). Chronobiology. Sinauer Associates Inc. ISBN 978-0-87893-149-1. 
^ Nelson RJ. 2005. An Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology. Sinauer Associates, Inc.: Massachusetts. Pg587.
^ Refinetti, Roberto (2006). Circadian Physiology. CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 0-8493-2233-2. Lay summary
^ for a description of circadian rhythms in plants by de Mairan, Linnaeus, and Darwin see [1]
^ http://www.linnean.org/Resources/LinneanSociety/Documents/Library-and-Archives/4-Floral%20Clock.pdf
^ Leon Kreitzman; Russell G. Foster (2004). Rhythms of life: the biological clocks that control the daily lives of every living thing. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-10969-5. 
^ Zivkovic, Bora (2006-07-03). "ClockTutorial #2a, Forty-Five Years of Pittendrigh's Empirical Generalizations". A Blog Around the Clock. ScienceBlogs. Retrieved 2007-12-23. 
^ Zivkovic, Bora (2006-05-17). "Clocks in Bacteria V". A Blog Around the Clock. ScienceBlogs. Retrieved 2007-12-23. 
^ Frank, D. W.; Evans, J. A.; Gorman, M. R. (2010). "Time-Dependent Effects of Dim Light at Night on Re-Entrainment and Masking of Hamster Activity Rhythms". Journal of Biological Rhythms. 25 (2): 103–112. doi:10.1177/0748730409360890. PMID 20348461. 
^ Breus, PHD, Michael (2016). The Power of When. Little Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-39126-9. 
^ see this historical article, subscription required
^ Fuller, Patrick M.; Jun Lu; Clifford B. Saper (2008-05-23). "Differential Rescue of Light- and Food-Entrainable Circadian Rhythms" (free abstract). Science. 320 (5879): 1074–1077. Bibcode:2008Sci...320.1074F. doi:10.1126/science.1153277. PMC 3489954 . PMID 18497298. Retrieved 2008-05-30. 
^ Postolache, Teodor T. (2005). Sports Chronobiology, An Issue of Clinics in Sports Medicine. Saunders. ISBN 978-1-4160-2769-0. 
^ Ernest Lawrence Rossi, David Lloyd (1992). Ultradian Rhythms in Life Processes: Inquiry into Fundamental Principles of Chronobiology and Psychobiology. Springer-Verlag Berlin and Heidelberg GmbH & Co. K. ISBN 978-3-540-19746-1. 
^ Hayes, D.K. (1990). Chronobiology: Its Role in Clinical Medicine, General Biology, and Agriculture. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-56802-5. 
^ "Effects of circadian rhythm phase alteration on physiological and psychological variables: Implications to pilot performance (including a partially annotated bibliography)". NASA-TM-81277. NASA. 1981-03-01. Retrieved 2011-05-25.  "No evidence exists to support the concept of biorhythms; in fact, scientific data refute their existence."



Further reading[edit]


Hastings, Michael, "The brain, circadian rhythms, and clock genes". Clinical review" BMJ 1998;317:1704-1707 19 December.
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, "Biological Rhythms: Implications for the Worker". U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1991. Washington, DC. OTA-BA-463. NTIS PB92-117589
Ashikari, M., Higuchi, S., Ishikawa, F., and Tsunetsugu, Y., "Interdisciplinary Symposium on 'Human Beings and Environments': Approaches from Biological Anthropology, Social Anthropology and Developmental Psychology". Sunday, 25 August 2002
"Biorhythm experiment management plan", NASA, Ames Research Center. Moffett Field, 1983.
"Biological Rhythms and Human Adaptation to the Environment". US Army Medical Research and Materiel Command (AMRMC), US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine.
Ebert, D., K.P. Ebmeier, T. Rechlin, and W.P. Kaschka, "Biological Rhythms and Behavior", Advances in Biological Psychiatry. ISSN 0378-7354
Horne, J.A. (Jim) & Östberg, Olov (1976). A Self-Assessment Questionnaire to determine Morningness-Eveningness in Human Circadian Rhythms. International Journal of Chronobiology, 4, 97–110.
Roenneberg, Till, Cologne (2010). Wie wir ticken – Die Bedeutung der Chronobiologie für unser Leben, Dumont, ISBN 978-3-8321-9520-5.
The Linnean Society of London


External links[edit]


Halberg Chronobiology Laboratory at the University of Minnesota, founded by Franz Halberg, the "Father of Chronobiology"
The University of Virginia offers an online tutorial on chronobiology.
See the Science Museum of Virginia publication Can plants tell time?
The University of Manchester has an informative Biological Clock Web Site
S Ertel's analysis of Chizhevsky's work








v
t
e


Biological rhythms



Internal rhythms



Circadian rhythm
Infradian rhythm
Ultradian rhythm
Lunar rhythm
Annual rhythm








External cycles



Diurnality

Diurnal cycle


Nocturnality
Cathemeral
Crepuscular

Matutinal
Vespertine


Seasonality
Photoperiodism
Vernalization





Fields



Behavioural ecology
Chronobiology
Ethology





See also



Chronotype
Diel vertical migration
Light pollution
Solunar theory
Parts of the day












v
t
e


Branches of life science and biology






Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biohistory
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biostatistics
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cytogenetics
Developmental biology
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Geobiology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Origin of life
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Quantum biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Zoology












v
t
e


Neuroscience




Outline of neuroscience



Basic
science



Behavioral epigenetics
Behavioral genetics
Cellular neuroscience
Computational neuroscience
Connectomics
Imaging genetics
Integrative neuroscience
Molecular neuroscience
Neural engineering
Neuroanatomy
Neurochemistry
Neuroendocrinology
Neurogenetics
Neuroinformatics
Neurometrics
Neuromorphology
Neurophysics
Neurophysiology








Clinical
neuroscience



Behavioral neurology
Clinical neurophysiology
Neurocardiology
Neuroepidemiology
Neurogastroenterology
Neuroimmunology
Neurointensive care
Neurology
Neurooncology
Neuro-ophthalmology
Neuropathology
Neuropharmacology
Neuroprosthetics
Neuropsychiatry
Neuroradiology
Neurorehabilitation
Neurosurgery
Neurotology
Neurovirology
Nutritional neuroscience
Psychiatry





Cognitive
neuroscience



Affective neuroscience
Behavioral neuroscience
Chronobiology
Molecular cellular cognition
Motor control
Neurolinguistics
Neuropsychology
Sensory neuroscience
Social neuroscience
Systems neuroscience





Interdisciplinary
fields



Consumer neuroscience
Cultural neuroscience
Educational neuroscience
Evolutionary neuroscience
Neuroanthropology
Neurobioengineering
Neurobiotics
Neurocriminology
Neuroeconomics
Neuroepistemology
Neuroesthetics
Neuroethics
Neuroethology
Neurohistory
Neurolaw
Neuromarketing
Neurophenomenology
Neurophilosophy
Neuropolitics
Neurorobotics
Neurosociology
Neurotheology
Paleoneurobiology





Concepts



Brain–computer interface
Neural development
Neural network (artificial)
Neural network (biological)
Detection theory
Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring
Neurochip
Neurodegeneration
Neurodevelopmental disorder
Neurodiversity
Neurogenesis
Neuroimaging
Neuroimmune system
Neuromanagement
Neuromodulation
Neuroplasticity
Neurotechnology
Neurotoxin








 Book
 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 Wikiproject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronobiology&oldid=803474273"					Categories: Biological processesCircadian rhythmChronobiologyNeuroscience