"C of E" redirects here. For other uses, see Council of Europe.


Church of England





Abbreviation
C of E


Orientation
Anglican


Polity
Episcopal


Supreme Governor
Queen Elizabeth II


Primate
Archbishop Justin Welby


Associations
Anglican Communion
Porvoo Communion


Region
England, Wales (cross-border parishes)
Isle of Man
Channel Islands
Continental Europe


Headquarters
Church House, Westminster, England, United Kingdom


Separated from
Roman Catholic Church
(1534)


Separations
English Dissenters
(1534 onwards)
Methodists (18th century)
Plymouth Brethren (1820s)
Free Church of England (1844)


Members
25 million[1][2]


Official website
churchofengland.org




Part of a series on


Anglicanism







Theology


Christian theology
Anglican doctrine
Thirty-nine Articles
Books of Homilies
Caroline Divines
Lambeth Quadrilateral
Episcopal polity
Sacraments
Mary








Ministry and worship


Ministry
Music
Eucharist
King James Version
Book of Common Prayer
Liturgical year
Churchmanship

High
Low
Central
Broad


Monasticism
Saints








Christianity


Jesus Christ
Paul
Christian Church
First seven Ecumenical Councils








Background and history


Celtic Christianity
Augustine of Canterbury
Bede
Medieval cathedral architecture
Henry VIII
English Reformation
Thomas Cranmer
Dissolution of Monasteries
Church of England
Edward VI
Elizabeth I
Parker
Hooker
James I
Charles I
Laud
Nonjuring schism
Anglo-Catholicism
Oxford Movement








Anglican Communion


Anglican Communion history
Archbishop of Canterbury
Anglican Communion Primates' Meetings
Lambeth Conference
Bishops
Anglican Consultative Council
Ecumenism
Ordination of women
Windsor Report








Continuing Anglicanism


Anglican realignment
Bartonville Agreement
Congress of St. Louis
North American Anglican Conference






 Anglicanism portal


The Church of England (C of E) is the state church of England.[3][4][5] The Archbishop of Canterbury (currently Justin Welby) is the most senior cleric, although the monarch is the supreme governor. The Church of England is also the mother church of the international Anglican Communion. It traces its history to the Christian church recorded as existing in the Roman province of Britain by the third century, and to the 6th-century Gregorian mission to Kent led by Augustine of Canterbury.[6][7][8]
The English church renounced papal authority when Henry VIII failed to secure an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon in 1534.[9] The English Reformation accelerated under Edward VI's regents, before a brief restoration of papal authority under Queen Mary I and King Philip. The Act of Supremacy 1558 renewed the breach and the Elizabethan Settlement charted a course enabling the English church to describe itself as both Catholic and Reformed:

Catholic in that it views itself as a part of the universal church of Jesus Christ in unbroken continuity with the early apostolic church. This is expressed in its emphasis on the teachings of the early Church Fathers, as formalised in the Apostles', Nicene, and Athanasian creeds.[10]
Reformed in that it has been shaped by some of the doctrinal principles of the 16th-century Protestant Reformation, in particular in the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion and the Book of Common Prayer.[10]

In the earlier phase of the English Reformation there were both Catholic martyrs and radical Protestant martyrs. The later phases saw the Penal Laws punish Roman Catholic and nonconforming Protestants. In the 17th century, political and religious disputes raised the Puritan and Presbyterian faction to control of the church, but this ended with the Restoration. Papal recognition of George III in 1766 led to greater religious tolerance.
Since the English Reformation, the Church of England has used a liturgy in English. The church contains several doctrinal strands, the main three known as Anglo-Catholic, Evangelical and Broad Church. Tensions between theological conservatives and progressives find expression in debates over the ordination of women and homosexuality. The church includes both liberal and conservative clergy and members.[11]
The governing structure of the church is based on dioceses, each presided over by a bishop. Within each diocese are local parishes. The General Synod of the Church of England is the legislative body for the church and comprises bishops, other clergy and laity. Its measures must be approved by both Houses of Parliament.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Early Christianity in England
1.2 Separation from Rome
1.3 Stuart period
1.4 19th century
1.5 Overseas developments
1.6 21st century

1.6.1 Deposition from holy orders overturned
1.6.2 Dwindling congregations
1.6.3 Low salaries




2 Doctrine and practice

2.1 Worship and liturgy
2.2 Women's ministry
2.3 Same-sex unions and LGBT clergy
2.4 Liberal theology
2.5 Bioethics issues


3 Poverty

3.1 Church Urban Fund

3.1.1 Child poverty


3.2 Action on hunger


4 Membership
5 Structure

5.1 Primates
5.2 Diocesan bishops
5.3 Representative bodies
5.4 House of Lords
5.5 Crown dependencies


6 Sex abuse
7 Financial situation
8 Online church directory
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of the Church of England
Early Christianity in England[edit]
Main articles: History of Christianity in England and Anglo-Saxon Christianity
According to tradition, Christianity arrived in Britain in the 1st or 2nd century, during which time southern Britain became part of the Roman Empire. The earliest historical evidence of Christianity among the native Britons is found in the writings of such early Christian Fathers as Tertullian and Origen in the first years of the 3rd century. Three Romano-British bishops, including Restitutus, are known to have been present at the Council of Arles in 314.[12] Others attended the Council of Sardica in 347 and that of Ariminum in 360, and a number of references to the church in Roman Britain are found in the writings of 4th century Christian fathers. Britain was the home of Pelagius, who opposed Augustine of Hippo's doctrine of original sin.[13]
While Christianity was long established as the religion of the Britons at the time of the Anglo-Saxon invasion, Christian Britons made little progress in converting the newcomers from their native paganism. Consequently, in 597, Pope Gregory I sent the prior of the Abbey of St Andrew's (later canonised as Augustine of Canterbury) from Rome to evangelise the Angles. This event is known as the Gregorian mission and is the date the Church of England generally marks as the beginning of its formal history. With the help of Christians already residing in Kent, Augustine established his church at Canterbury, the capital of the Kingdom of Kent, and became the first in the series of Archbishops of Canterbury in 598. A later archbishop, the Greek Theodore of Tarsus, also contributed to the organisation of Christianity in England. The Church of England has been in continuous existence since the days of St Augustine, with the Archbishop of Canterbury as its episcopal head. Despite the various disruptions of the Reformation and the English Civil War, the Church of England considers itself to be the same church which was more formally organised by Augustine.[6]
While some Celtic Christian practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby, the Christian in the British Isles was under papal authority from earliest times.[14] Queen Bertha of Kent was among the Christians in England who recognised papal authority before Augustine arrived,[15] and Celtic Christians were carrying out missionary work with papal approval long before the Synod of Whitby.




Hereford is one of the church's 43 cathedrals; many have histories stretching back centuries


The Synod of Whitby established the Roman date for Easter and the Roman style of monastic tonsure in England. This meeting of the ecclesiastics with Roman customs with local bishops was summoned in 664 at Saint Hilda's double monastery of Streonshalh (Streanæshalch), later called Whitby Abbey. It was presided over by King Oswiu, who did not engage in the debate but made the final ruling.
Separation from Rome[edit]
In 1534, King Henry VIII separated the English Church from Rome.[9] A theological separation had been foreshadowed by various movements within the English Church, such as Lollardy, but the English Reformation gained political support when Henry VIII wanted an annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne Boleyn. Pope Clement VII, considering that the earlier marriage had been entered under a papal dispensation and how Catherine's nephew, Emperor Charles V, might react to such a move, refused the annulment. Eventually, Henry, although theologically opposed to Protestantism, took the position of Supreme Head of the Church of England to ensure the annulment of his marriage. He was excommunicated by Pope Paul III.[16]
In 1536–40 Henry VIII engaged in the Dissolution of the Monasteries, which controlled much of the richest land. He disbanded monasteries, priories, convents and friaries in England, Wales and Ireland, appropriated their income, disposed of their assets, and provided pensions for the former residents. The properties were sold to pay for the wars. Bernard argues:

The dissolution of the monasteries in the late 1530s was one of the most revolutionary events in English history. There were nearly 900 religious houses in England, around 260 for monks, 300 for regular canons, 142 nunneries and 183 friaries; some 12,000 people in total, 4,000 monks, 3,000 canons, 3,000 friars and 2,000 nuns....one adult man in fifty was in religious orders.[17]

Henry maintained a strong preference for traditional Catholic practices and, during his reign, Protestant reformers were unable to make many changes to the practices of the Church of England. Indeed, this part of Henry's reign saw the trial for heresy of Protestants as well as Roman Catholics.
Under his son, King Edward VI, more Protestant-influenced forms of worship were adopted. Under the leadership of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, a more radical reformation proceeded. A new pattern of worship was set out in the Book of Common Prayer (1549 and 1552). These were based on the older liturgy but influenced by Protestant principles. The confession of the reformed Church of England was set out in the Forty-two Articles (later revised to thirty-nine). The reformation however was cut short by the death of the king. Queen Mary I, who succeeded him, returned England again to the authority of the papacy, thereby ending the first attempt at an independent Church of England. During her co-reign with her husband, King Philip, many leaders and common people were burnt for their refusal to recant of their reformed faith. These are known as the Marian martyrs and the persecution led to her nickname of "Bloody Mary".




Stained glass window in Rochester Cathedral, Kent


Mary also died childless and so it was left to the new regime of her half-sister Elizabeth to resolve the direction of the church. The settlement under Queen Elizabeth I (from 1558), known as the Elizabethan Settlement, developed the via media (middle way) character of the Church of England, a church moderately Reformed in doctrine, as expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles, but also emphasising continuity with the Catholic and Apostolic traditions of the Church Fathers. It was also an established church (constitutionally established by the state with the head of state as its supreme governor). The exact nature of the relationship between church and state would be a source of continued friction into the next century.
Stuart period[edit]
Further information: Stuart period
For the next century, through the reigns of James I, who ordered the creation of what became known as the King James Bible,[18] and Charles I, culminating in the English Civil War and the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, there were significant swings back and forth between two factions: the Puritans (and other radicals) who sought more far-reaching Protestant reforms, and the more conservative churchmen who aimed to keep closer to traditional beliefs and Catholic practices. The failure of political and ecclesiastical authorities to submit to Puritan demands for more extensive reform was one of the causes of open warfare. By Continental standards, the level of violence over religion was not high, but the casualties included King Charles I and the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud. Under the Commonwealth and the Protectorate of England from 1649 to 1660, the bishops were dethroned and former practices were outlawed, and Presbyterian ecclesiology was introduced in place of the episcopate. The 39 Articles were replaced by the Westminster Confession, the Book of Common Prayer by the Directory of Public Worship. Despite this, about one quarter of English clergy refused to conform to this form of State Presbyterianism.
With the Restoration of Charles II, Parliament restored the Church of England to a form not far removed from the Elizabethan version. One difference was that the ideal of encompassing all the people of England in one religious organisation, taken for granted by the Tudors, had to be abandoned. The religious landscape of England assumed its present form, with the Anglican established church occupying the middle ground, and those Puritans and Protestants who dissented from the Anglican establishment, and Roman Catholics, too strong to be suppressed altogether, having to continue their existence outside the national church rather than controlling it. Continuing official suspicion and legal restrictions continued well into the 19th century.
19th century[edit]
By the Fifth Article of the Union with Ireland 1800, the Church of England and Church of Ireland were united into "one Protestant Episcopal church, to be called, the United Church of England and Ireland".[19] Although this union was declared "an essential and fundamental Part of the Union",[20] the Irish Church Act 1869 separated the Irish part of the church again and disestablished it, the Act coming into effect on 1 January 1871.
Overseas developments[edit]




Captain John Smith's 1624 map of Bermuda, showing St Peter's at centre, left


Main article: Anglican Communion
Further information: Historical development of Church of England dioceses § Colonial dioceses
As the British Empire expanded, British colonists and colonial administrators took the established church doctrines and practices together with ordained ministry and formed overseas branches of the Church of England. As they developed or, beginning with the United States of America, became sovereign or independent states, many of their churches became separate organisationally but remained linked to the Church of England through the Anglican Communion.
In Bermuda, the oldest remaining English colony (now designated a British Overseas Territory), the first Church of England services were performed by the Reverend Richard Buck, one of the survivors of the 1609 wreck of the Sea Venture which initiated Bermuda's permanent settlement. The nine parishes of the Church of England in Bermuda, each with its own church and glebe land, rarely had more than a pair of ordained ministers to share between them until the Nineteenth Century. From 1825 to 1839, Bermuda's parishes were attached to the See of Nova Scotia. Bermuda was then grouped into the new Diocese of Newfoundland and Bermuda from 1839. In 1879, the Synod of the Church of England in Bermuda was formed. At the same time, a Diocese of Bermuda became separate from the Diocese of Newfoundland, but both continued to be grouped under the Bishop of Newfoundland and Bermuda until 1919, when Newfoundland and Bermuda each received its own Bishop.
The Church of England in Bermuda was renamed in 1978 as the Anglican Church of Bermuda, which is an extra-provincial diocese,[21] with both metropolitan and primatial authority coming directly from the Archbishop of Canterbury. Among its parish churches is St Peter's Church in the UNESCO World Heritage Site of St George's Town, which is both the oldest Anglican and the oldest non-Roman Catholic church in the New World.
21st century[edit]
Deposition from holy orders overturned[edit]
Under the guidance of Rowan Williams and with significant pressure from clergy union representatives, the ecclesiastical penalty for convicted felons to be defrocked was set aside from the Clergy Discipline Measure 2003. The clergy union argued that the penalty was unfair to victims of hypothetical miscarriages of criminal justice, because the ecclesiastical penalty is considered irreversible. Although clerics can still be banned for life from ministry, they remain ordained as priests.[22]
Dwindling congregations[edit]
The archbishops of Canterbury and York warned in January 2015 that the Church of England will no longer be able to carry on in its current form unless the downward spiral in membership is somehow reversed as typical Sunday attendances have halved to 800,000 in the last 40 years:[23]

The urgency of the challenge facing us is not in doubt. Attendance at Church of England services has declined at an average of one per cent per annum over recent decades and, in addition, the age profile of our membership has become significantly older than that of the population... Renewing and reforming aspects of our institutional life is a necessary but far from sufficient response to the challenges facing the Church of England... The age profile of our clergy has also been increasing. Around 40 per cent of parish clergy are due to retire over the next decade or so.

However, Sarah Mullally, the fourth woman chosen to become a bishop in the Church of England, insisted in June 2015 that declining numbers at services should not necessarily be a cause of despair for churches because people will still "encounter God" without ever taking their place in a pew, saying that people might hear the Christian message through social media sites such as Facebook or in a café run as a community project.[24] Additionally, the church's own statistics reveal that 9.7 million people visit an Anglican church every year and 1 million students are educated at Anglican schools.[25]
Low salaries[edit]
In 2015 the Church of England admitted that it was embarrassed to be paying staff under the living wage. The Church of England had previously campaigned for all employers to pay this minimum amount. The archbishop acknowledged it was not the only area where the church "fell short of its standards".[26]
Doctrine and practice[edit]
See also: Anglicanism and Anglican doctrine




Richard Hooker (1554–1600), one of the most influential figures in shaping Anglican theology and self-identity


The canon law of the Church of England identifies the Christian scriptures as the source of its doctrine. In addition, doctrine is also derived from the teachings of the Church Fathers and ecumenical councils (as well as the ecumenical creeds) in so far as these agree with scripture. This doctrine is expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion, the Book of Common Prayer, and the Ordinal containing the rites for the ordination of deacons, priests, and the consecration of bishops.[27] Unlike other traditions, the Church of England has no single theologian that it can look to as a founder. However, Richard Hooker's appeal to scripture, church tradition, and reason as sources of authority continue to inform Anglican identity.[28]




Canterbury Cathedral houses the cathedra or episcopal chair of the Archbishop of Canterbury and is the cathedral of the Diocese of Canterbury and the mother church of the Church of England as well as a focus for the Anglican Communion


The Church of England's doctrinal character today is largely the result of the Elizabethan Settlement, which sought to establish a comprehensive middle way between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism. The Church of England affirms the Protestant Reformation principle that scripture contains all things necessary to salvation and is the final arbiter in doctrinal matters. The Thirty-nine Articles are the church's only official confessional statement. Though not a complete system of doctrine, the articles highlight areas of agreement with Lutheran and Reformed positions, while differentiating Anglicanism from Roman Catholicism and Anabaptism.[28]
While embracing some themes of the Protestant Reformation, the Church of England also maintains Catholic traditions of the ancient church and teachings of the Church Fathers, unless these are considered contrary to scripture. It accepts the decisions of the first four ecumenical councils concerning the Trinity and the Incarnation. The Church of England also preserves Catholic order by adhering to episcopal polity, with ordained orders of bishops, priests and deacons. There are differences of opinion within the Church of England over the necessity of episcopacy. Some consider it essential, while others feel it is needed for the proper ordering of the church.[28]
The Church of England has, as one of its distinguishing marks, a breadth and "open-mindedness". This tolerance has allowed Anglicans who emphasise the Catholic tradition and others who emphasise the Reformed tradition to coexist. The three "parties" (see Churchmanship) in the Church of England are sometimes called high church (or Anglo-Catholic), low church (or evangelical Anglican) and broad church (or liberal). The high church party places importance on the Church of England's continuity with the pre-Reformation Catholic Church, adherence to ancient liturgical usages and the sacerdotal nature of the priesthood. As their name suggests, Anglo-Catholics maintain many traditional Catholic practices and liturgical forms.[29] The low church party is more Protestant in both ceremony and theology.[30] Historically, broad church has been used to describe those of middle-of-the-road ceremonial preferences who lean theologically towards liberal Protestantism.[31] The balance between these strands of churchmanship is not static: in 2013, 40% of Church of England worshippers attended evangelical churches (compared with 26% in 1989), and 83% of very large congregations were evangelical. Such churches were also reported to attract higher numbers of men and young adults than others.[32]
Worship and liturgy[edit]
The Church of England's official book of liturgy as established in English Law is the Book of Common Prayer. In addition to this book the General Synod has also legislated for a modern liturgical book, Common Worship, dating from 2000, which can be used as an alternative to the BCP. Like its predecessor, the 1980 Alternative Service Book, it differs from the Book of Common Prayer in providing a range of alternative services, mostly in modern language, although it does include some BCP-based forms as well, for example Order Two for Holy Communion. (This is a revision of the BCP service, altering some words and allowing the insertion of some other liturgical texts such as the Agnus Dei before communion.) The Order One rite follows the pattern of more modern liturgical scholarship.
The liturgies are organised according to the traditional liturgical year and the calendar of saints. The sacraments of baptism and the Eucharist are generally thought necessary to salvation. Infant baptism is practised. At a later age, individuals baptised as infants receive confirmation by a bishop, at which time they reaffirm the baptismal promises made by their parents or sponsors. The Eucharist, consecrated by a thanksgiving prayer including Christ's Words of Institution, is believed to be "a memorial of Christ's once-for-all redemptive acts in which Christ is objectively present and effectually received in faith".[33]
The use of hymns and music in the Church of England has changed dramatically over the centuries. Traditional Choral evensong is a staple of most cathedrals.[citation needed] The style of psalm chanting harks back to the Church of England's pre-reformation roots. During the 18th century, clergy such as Charles Wesley introduced their own styles of worship with poetic hymns.
In the latter half of the 20th century, the influence of the Charismatic Movement significantly altered the worship traditions of numerous Church of England parishes, primarily affecting those of evangelical persuasion. These churches now adopt a contemporary worship form of service, with minimal liturgical or ritual elements, and incorporating contemporary worship music.
Women's ministry[edit]
Women were appointed as deaconesses from 1861 but they could not function fully as deacons and were not considered ordained clergy. Women have been lay readers for a long time. During the First World War, some women were appointed as lay readers, known as "bishop's messengers", who also led missions and ran churches in the absence of men. After that no more lay readers were appointed until 1969.
Legislation authorising the ordination of women as deacons was passed in 1986 and they were first ordained in 1987. The ordination of women as priests was passed by the General Synod in 1992 and began in 1994. In 2010, for the first time in the history of the Church of England, more women than men were ordained as priests (290 women and 273 men).[34]
In July 2005, the synod voted to "set in train" the process of allowing the consecration of women as bishops. In February 2006, the synod voted overwhelmingly for the "further exploration" of possible arrangements for parishes that did not want to be directly under the authority of a bishop who is a woman.[35] On 7 July 2008, the synod voted to approve the ordination of women as bishops and rejected moves for alternative episcopal oversight for those who do not accept the ministry of bishops who are women.[36] Actual ordinations of women to the episcopate required further legislation, which was narrowly rejected in a vote at General Synod in November 2012.[37][38]
On 20 November 2013, the General Synod voted overwhelmingly in support of a plan to allow the ordination of women as bishops, with 378 in favour, 8 against and 25 abstentions.[39]
On 14 July 2014, the General Synod approved the ordination of women as bishops. The House of Bishops recorded 37 votes in favour, two against with one abstention. The House of Clergy had 162 in favour, 25 against and four abstentions. The House of Laity voted 152 for, 45 against with five abstentions.[40] This legislation had to be approved by the Ecclesiastical Committee of the Parliament before it could be finally implemented at the November 2014 synod.
In December 2014, Libby Lane was announced as the first woman to become a bishop in the Church of England. She was consecrated as a bishop in January 2015.[41] [42]
In July 2015, Rachel Treweek was the first woman to become a diocesan bishop in the Church of England when she became the Bishop of Gloucester.[43] She and Sarah Mullally, Bishop of Crediton, were the first women to be ordained as bishops at Canterbury Cathedral.[43] Treweek later made headlines by calling for gender-inclusive language, saying that "God is not to be seen as male. God is God."[44]
After the consecration of the first women as bishops, Women and the Church (WATCH), a group supporting the ministries of women in the Church of England, called for language referring to God as "Mother".[45] This call for more gender inclusive language has receive the outspoken support of the Rt Rev Alan Wilson, the Bishop of Buckingham.[46] In 2015, the Rev Jody Stowell, from WATCH, expressed her support for female images saying "we're not restricted to understanding God with one gender. I would encourage people to explore those kinds of images. They're wholly Biblical."[47]
Same-sex unions and LGBT clergy[edit]
See also: Same-sex marriage in the United Kingdom, LGBT rights in the United Kingdom, and Homosexuality and the Anglican Communion
The Church of England has been discussing same-sex marriages and LGBT clergy.[48] The church holds that marriage is a union of one man with one woman,[49] however "Same-sex relationships often embody genuine mutuality and fidelity."[50] The "Church of England does not conduct Civil Partnership Ceremonies or Same Sex Marriages but individual churches can conduct a service of thanksgiving after a ceremony."[51] Within guidelines, "the law prevents ministers of the Church of England from carrying out same-sex marriages. And although there are no authorised services for blessing a same-sex civil marriage, your local church can still support you with prayer."[52] The Archbishops' Council said that "clergy in the Church of England are permitted to offer prayers of support on a pastoral basis for people in same-sex relationships;"[53] As such, many Anglican churches, with clergy open to it, "already bless same-sex couples on an unofficial basis."[54][55]
Civil Partnerships for clergy have been allowed since 2005.[56][57] By 2010, the General Synod voted in favour of extending pensions and other employee rights to clergy in civil unions.[58] In a missive to clergy, the church communicated that "there was a need for committed same-sex couples to be given recognition and 'compassionate attention' from the Church, including special prayers."[59] Some congregations have published "Prayers for a Same Sex Commitment."[60] After same-sex marriage was legalised, the Archbishops' Council asked for the government to continue to offer civil unions saying "The Church of England recognises that same-sex relationships often embody fidelity and mutuality ... Civil partnerships enable these Christian virtues to be recognised socially and legally in a proper framework."[61]
In 2014, the Bishops released guidelines that permit "more informal kind of prayer" for couples.[62] Some congregations invite same-sex couples to receive "services of thanksgiving" after a civil marriage.[63] In the guidelines, "gay couples who get married will be able to ask for special prayers in the Church of England after their wedding, the bishops have agreed."[64] In 2016, The Bishop of Grantham, the Rt Rev Nicholas Chamberlain, announced he is gay, in a same-sex relationship and celibate; becoming the first bishop to do so in the church.[65] The church had decided in 2013 that gay clergy in civil partnerships could become bishops.[57][66] “The House [of Bishops] has confirmed that clergy in civil partnerships, and living in accordance with the teaching of the church on human sexuality, can be considered as candidates for the episcopate."[67]
In 2017, the House of Clergy voted against the motion to 'take note' of the Bishops' report defining marriage as between a man and a woman.[68] Due to passage in all three houses being required for passage, the motion was rejected.[69] After General Synod rejected the motion, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York called for "radical new Christian inclusion" that is "based on good, healthy, flourishing relationships, and in a proper 21st century understanding of being human and of being sexual."[70] The Diocese of Hereford approved a motion calling for the church "to create a set of formal services and prayers to bless those who have had a same-sex marriage or civil partnership."[71]
Regarding transgender issues, the 2017 General Synod voted in favour of a motion saying that transgender people should be “welcomed and affirmed in their parish church...”[72][73] The motion also asked the Bishops "to look into special services for transgender people."[74] The Diocese of Blackburn has already begun recognising the ceremony.[75] Since 2000, the church has allowed priests to undergo gender transition and remain in office.[76] The church has ordained openly transgender clergy since 2005.[77]
Liberal theology[edit]
See also: Liberal Christianity
Just as the Church of England has a large conservative or "traditionalist" wing, it also has many liberal members and clergy. Approximately one third of clergy "doubt or disbelieve in the physical resurrection".[78] Others, such as the Revd Giles Fraser, a contributor to The Guardian, have argued for an allegorical interpretation of the virgin birth of Jesus.[79] The Independent reported in 2014 that, according to a YouGov survey of Church of England clergy, "as many as 16 per cent are unclear about God and two per cent think it is no more than a human construct."[80][81] Moreover, many congregations are seeker-friendly environments. For example, one report from the Church Mission Society suggested that the church open up "a pagan church where Christianity [is] very much in the centre" to reach out to spiritual people.[82]
Bioethics issues[edit]
The Church of England is generally opposed to abortion but recognises that "there can be - strictly limited - conditions under which it may be morally preferable to any available alternative".[83] The church also opposes euthanasia. Its official stance is that "While acknowledging the complexity of the issues involved in assisted dying/suicide and voluntary euthanasia, the Church of England is opposed to any change in the law or in medical practice that would make assisted dying/suicide or voluntary euthanasia permissible in law or acceptable in practice." It also states that "Equally, the Church shares the desire to alleviate physical and psychological suffering, but believes that assisted dying/suicide and voluntary euthanasia are not acceptable means of achieving these laudable goals."[84] However, George Carey, a former Archbishop of Canterbury, announced that he had changed his stance on euthanasia in 2014 and now advocated legalising "assisted dying".[85] On embryonic stem-cell research, the church has announced "cautious acceptance to the proposal to produce cytoplasmic hybrid embryos for research".[86]
Poverty[edit]
Church Urban Fund[edit]
Main article: Church Urban Fund
The Church of England set up the Church Urban Fund in the 1980s to tackle poverty and deprivation. They see poverty as trapping individuals and communities with some people in urgent need. This leads to dependency, homelessness, hunger, isolation, low income, mental health problems, social exclusion and violence. They feel that poverty reduces confidence and life expectancy and that people born in poor conditions have difficulty escaping their disadvantaged circumstances.[87]
Child poverty[edit]
In parts of Liverpool, Manchester and Newcastle two-thirds of babies are born to poverty and have poorer life chances, also life expectancy 15 years lower than babies born in most fortunate communities. South Shore, Blackpool, has lowest life expectancy at 66 years for men.[88]

The deep-rooted unfairness in our society is highlighted by these stark statistics. Children being born in this country, just a few miles apart, couldn't witness a more wildly differing start to life. In child poverty terms, we live in one of the most unequal countries in the western world. We want people to understand where their own community sits alongside neighbouring communities. The disparity is often shocking but it's crucial that, through greater awareness, people from all backgrounds come together to think about what could be done to support those born into poverty. [Paul Hackwood, the Chair of Trustees at Church Urban Fund][89]

Action on hunger[edit]
Many prominent people in the Church of England have spoken out against poverty and welfare cuts in the United Kingdom. Twenty-seven bishops are among 43 Christian leaders who signed a letter which urged David Cameron to make sure people have enough to eat.

We often hear talk of hard choices. Surely few can be harder than that faced by the tens of thousands of older people who must 'heat or eat' each winter, harder than those faced by families whose wages have stayed flat while food prices have gone up 30% in just five years. Yet beyond even this we must, as a society, face up to the fact that over half of people using food banks have been put in that situation by cutbacks to and failures in the benefit system, whether it be payment delays or punitive sanctions.[90]

Benefit cuts, failures and "punitive sanctions" force thousands of UK citizens to use food banks. The campaign to end hunger considers this "truly shocking" and called for a national day of fasting on 4 April 2014.[90]
Membership[edit]
Official figures from 2005 showed there were 25 million baptised Anglicans in England and Wales.[91] Due to its status as the established church, in general, anyone may be married, have their children baptised or their funeral in their local parish church, regardless of whether they are baptised or regular churchgoers.[92]
Between 1890 and 2001, churchgoing in the United Kingdom declined steadily.[93] In the years 1968 to 1999, Anglican Sunday church attendances almost halved, from 3.5 per cent of the population to 1.9 per cent.[94] By the year 2014, Sunday church attendances had declined further to 1.4 per cent of the population.[95] One study published in 2008 suggested that if current trends were to continue, Sunday attendances could fall to 350,000 in 2030 and just 87,800 in 2050.[96]
In 2011, the Church of England published statistics showing 1.7 million people attending at least one of its services each month, a level maintained since the turn of the millennium; approximately one million participating each Sunday and three million taking part in a Church of England service on Christmas Day or Christmas Eve. The church also claimed that 30% attend Sunday worship at least once a year; more than 40% attend a wedding in their local church and still more attend a funeral there.[97] Nationally the Church of England baptises one child in ten (2011).[98] In 2015, the church's statistics showed that 2.6 million people attended a special Advent service, 2.4 million attended a Christmas service, 1.3 million attended an Easter service, and 980,000 attended service during an average week.[99] In 2016, 2.6 million people attended a Christmas service, 1.2 million attended an Easter service, 1.1 million people attended a service in the Church of England each month, an average of 930,000 people attended a weekly service, an additional 180,000 attended a service for school each week, and an average of 740,000 people attended Sunday service.[100]
The Church of England has 18,000 active ordained clergy and 10,000 licensed lay ministers.[101] In 2009, 491 people were recommended for ordination training, maintaining the level at the turn of the millennium, and 564 new clergy (266 women and 298 men) were ordained. More than half of those ordained (193 men and 116 women) were appointed to full-time paid ministry.[102] In 2011, 504 new clergy were ordained, including 264 to paid ministry, and 349 lay readers were admitted to ministry; and the mode age-range of those recommended for ordination training had remained 40–49 since 1999.[103]
Structure[edit]
See also: Anglican ministry and List of Church of England dioceses




Dioceses of the Church of England
  Province of Canterbury
  Province of York



Article XIX ('Of the Church') of the 39 Articles defines the church as follows:

The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached, and the sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.[104]

The British monarch has the constitutional title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England. The canon law of the Church of England states, "We acknowledge that the Queen's most excellent Majesty, acting according to the laws of the realm, is the highest power under God in this kingdom, and has supreme authority over all persons in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil."[105] In practice this power is often exercised through Parliament and the Prime Minister.
The Church of Ireland and the Church in Wales separated from the Church of England in 1869[106] and 1920[107] respectively and are autonomous churches in the Anglican Communion; Scotland's national church, the Church of Scotland, is Presbyterian but the Scottish Episcopal Church is in the Anglican Communion.[108]
In addition to England, the jurisdiction of the Church of England extends to the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and a few parishes in Flintshire, Monmouthshire, Powys and Radnorshire in Wales which voted to remain with the Church of England rather than joining the Church in Wales.[109] Expatriate congregations on the continent of Europe have become the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe.
The church is structured as follows (from the lowest level upwards):




The parish church of St Lawrence in Toot Baldon is typical of many small English village churches



Parish is the most local level, often consisting of one church building and community, although many parishes are joining forces in a variety of ways for financial reasons. The parish is looked after by a parish priest who for historical or legal reasons may be called by one of the following offices: vicar, rector, priest in charge, team rector, team vicar. The first, second, and fourth of these may also be known as the 'incumbent'. The running of the parish is the joint responsibility of the incumbent and the Parochial Church Council (PCC), which consists of the parish clergy and elected representatives from the congregation. The Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe is not formally divided into parishes.
There are a number of local churches that do not have a parish. In urban areas there are a number of proprietary chapels (mostly built in the 19th century to cope with urbanisation and growth in population). Also in more recent years there are increasingly church plants and fresh expressions of church, whereby new congregations are planted in locations such as schools or pubs to spread the Gospel of Christ in non-traditional ways.





Map showing the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe with the archdeaconries colour-coded



Deanery, e.g., Lewisham or Runnymede. This is the area for which a Rural Dean (or area dean) is responsible. It consists of a number of parishes in a particular district. The rural dean is usually the incumbent of one of the constituent parishes. The parishes each elect lay (non-ordained) representatives to the deanery synod. Deanery synod members each have a vote in the election of representatives to the diocesan synod.
Archdeaconry, e.g., the seven in the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe. This is the area under the jurisdiction of an archdeacon. It consists of a number of deaneries.
Diocese, e.g., Diocese of Durham, Diocese of Guildford, Diocese of St Albans. This is the area under the jurisdiction of a diocesan bishop, e.g., the Bishops of Durham, Guildford and St Albans, and will have a cathedral. There may be one or more assisting bishops, usually called suffragan bishops, within the diocese who assist the diocesan bishop in his ministry, e.g., in Guildford diocese, the Bishop of Dorking. In some very large dioceses a legal measure has been enacted to create "episcopal areas", where the diocesan bishop runs one such area himself and appoints "area bishops" to run the other areas as mini-dioceses, legally delegating many of his powers to the area bishops. Dioceses with episcopal areas include London, Chelmsford, Oxford, Chichester, Southwark, and Lichfield. The bishops work with an elected body of lay and ordained representatives, known as the Diocesan Synod, to run the diocese. A diocese is subdivided into a number of archdeaconries.
Province, i.e., Canterbury or York. This is the area under the jurisdiction of an archbishop, i.e. the Archbishops of Canterbury and York. Decision-making within the province is the responsibility of the General Synod (see also above). A province is subdivided into dioceses.
Primacy, i.e., Church of England. In addition to his specific authority in his own province, each archbishop is "Primate of All England" (Canterbury) or "Primate of England" (York) and has powers that extend over the whole country—for example his licence to marry without the banns (marriage licence).
Royal Peculiar, a small number of churches more closely associated with the Crown, and a very few with the law and are outside the usual church hierarchy though conforming to the rite. These are outside episcopal jurisdiction.

All rectors and vicars are appointed by patrons, who may be private individuals, corporate bodies such as cathedrals, colleges or trusts, or by the bishop or directly by the Crown. No clergy can be instituted and inducted into a parish without swearing the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty, and taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience "in all things lawful and honest" to the bishop. Usually they are instituted to the benefice by the bishop and then inducted by the archdeacon into the possession of the benefice property—church and parsonage. Curates (assistant clergy) are appointed by rectors and vicars, or if priests-in-charge by the bishop after consultation with the patron. Cathedral clergy (normally a dean and a varying number of residentiary canons who constitute the cathedral chapter) are appointed either by the Crown, the bishop, or by the dean and chapter themselves. Clergy officiate in a diocese either because they hold office as beneficed clergy or are licensed by the bishop when appointed, or simply with permission.
Primates[edit]




Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury


The most senior bishop of the Church of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who is the metropolitan of the southern province of England, the Province of Canterbury. He has the status of Primate of All England. He is the focus of unity for the worldwide Anglican Communion of independent national or regional churches. Justin Welby has been Archbishop of Canterbury since the confirmation of his election on 4 February 2013.[110]
The second most senior bishop is the Archbishop of York, who is the metropolitan of the northern province of England, the Province of York. For historical reasons (relating to the time of York's control by the Danes) he is referred to as the Primate of England. John Sentamu became Archbishop of York in 2005. The Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham and the Bishop of Winchester are ranked in the next three positions.
Diocesan bishops[edit]
The process of appointing diocesan bishops is complex, due to historical reasons balancing hierarchy against democracy, and is handled by the Crown Nominations Committee which submits names to the Prime Minister (acting on behalf of the Crown) for consideration.
Representative bodies[edit]
Main article: General Synod of the Church of England
The Church of England has a legislative body, the General Synod. Synod can create two types of legislation, measures and canons. Measures have to be approved but cannot be amended by the British Parliament before receiving the Royal Assent and becoming part of the law of England.[111] Although it is the established church in England only, its measures must be approved by both Houses of Parliament including the non-English members. Canons require Royal Licence and Royal Assent, but form the law of the church, rather than the law of the land.[112]
Another assembly is the Convocation of the English Clergy, which is older than the General Synod and its predecessor the Church Assembly. By the 1969 Synodical Government Measure almost all of the Convocations' functions were transferred to the General Synod. Additionally, there are Diocesan Synods and deanery synods, which are the governing bodies of the divisions of the Church.
House of Lords[edit]
Main article: Lords Spiritual
Of the 42 diocesan archbishops and bishops in the Church of England, 26 are permitted to sit in the House of Lords. The Archbishops of Canterbury and York automatically have seats, as do the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester. The remaining 21 seats are filled in order of seniority by consecration. It may take a diocesan bishop a number of years to reach the House of Lords, at which point he becomes a Lord Spiritual. The Bishop of Sodor and Man and the Bishop of Gibraltar in Europe are not eligible to sit in the House of Lords as their dioceses lie outside the United Kingdom.[113]
Crown dependencies[edit]
Although they are not part of England or the United Kingdom, the Church of England is also the Established Church in the Crown dependencies of the Isle of Man, the Bailiwick of Jersey and the Bailiwick of Guernsey. The Isle of Man has its own diocese of Sodor and Man, and the Bishop of Sodor and Man is an ex officio member of the Legislative Council of the Tynwald on the island.[114] The Channel Islands are part of the Diocese of Winchester, and in Jersey the Dean of Jersey is a non-voting member of the States of Jersey. In Guernsey the Church of England is the Established Church, although the Dean of Guernsey is not a member of the States of Guernsey.[115]
Sex abuse[edit]
See also: Anglican Communion sexual abuse cases
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, has taken strong action in an effort to prevent complaints of sex abuse cases being covered up. Independent investigators are examining files as far back as the 1950s and Welby hopes this independence will prevent any possibility of a cover-up.[116]

We will systematically bring those transparently and openly first of all working with the survivors where they are still alive and then seeing what they want. The rule is survivors come first, not our own interests, and however important the person was, however distinguished, however well-known, survivors come first. (Justin Welby)

The personal files of all Anglican clergy since the 1950s are being audited in an effort to ensure no cover-up. Welby emphasised repeatedly that no cover-up would be acceptable.[117]
Despite such assurances there is concern that not enough may be done and historic abuse may still sometimes be covered up. Keith Porteous Wood of the National Secular Society stated:

The problem wasn't that bishops weren't trained in such matters, it is the institutional culture of denial and the bullying of the abused and whistleblowers into silence. One report suggests that 13 bishops ignored letters written in the 1990s warning of abuse by Ball on behalf of a victim who later committed suicide. I have seen evidence that such bullying persists to this day. I hope that the Archbishop's review into the case of Peter Ball will deal with such bullying and what appears to be the undue influence exerted on the police and CPS by the Church in dealing with this case. The total failure of procedures, outlined by Ian Elliott, echoes that revealed in the totally damning Cahill Report about the conduct of the Archbishop Hope of York in respect of Robert Waddington. The current Archbishop of York has decided that this report should remain in printed form rather than be more widely available on the web.[118]

Bishop Peter Ball was convicted in October 2015 on several charges of indecent assault against young adult men.[119] There are allegations of large-scale earlier cover-ups involving many British establishment figures which prevented Ball's earlier prosecution. There have also been allegations of child sex abuse, for example Robert Waddington. A complainant, known only as "Joe", tried for decades to have action taken over sadistic sex abuse which Garth Moore perpetrated against him in 1976 when "Joe" was 15 years old. None of the high ranking clergy who "Joe" spoke to recall being told about the abuse, which "Joe" considers incredible.[120] A representative of the solicitors firm representing "Joe" said:

The Church of England wants to bury and discourage allegations of non-recent abuse. They know how difficult it is for survivors to come forward, and it appears from this case that the Church has a plan of making it hard for these vulnerable people to come forward. This survivor has had the courage to press his case. Most do not. Most harbour the psychological fallout in silence. We need to find a way to make the system more approachable for survivors.[121]

Financial situation[edit]
Main article: Properties and finances of the Church of England
Although an established church, the Church of England does not receive any direct government support. Donations comprise its largest source of income, and it also relies heavily on the income from its various historic endowments. In 2005, the Church of England had estimated total outgoings of around £900 million.[122]
The Church of England manages an investment portfolio which is worth more than £8000 million.[123]
Online church directory[edit]
The Church of England supports A Church Near You, an online directory of churches. A user-edited resource, it currently lists 16,400 churches and has 7,000 editors in 42 dioceses.[124] The directory enables parishes to maintain accurate location, contact and event information which is shared with other websites and mobile apps. In 2012, the directory formed the data backbone of Christmas Near You[125] and in 2014 was used to promote the church's Harvest Near You initiative.[126]
See also[edit]


Anglicanism portal
England portal



List of the largest Protestant bodies
Appointment of Church of England bishops
Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England
Church of England Newspaper
Church of England parish church
Mothers' Union
Historical development of Church of England dioceses
List of bishops in the Church of England
List of archdeacons in the Church of England
Ritualism in the Church of England
List of the first 32 women ordained as Church of England priests

References[edit]


^ "Church of England". oikoumene.org. World Council of Churches. Retrieved May 8, 2017. 
^ "Exactly how big is the Anglican Communion?". 13 November 2015. 
^ Eberle, Edward J. (2011). Church and State in Western Society. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-4094-0792-8. Retrieved 9 November 2012. The Church of England later became the official state Protestant church, with the monarch supervising church functions. 
^ Fox, Jonathan (2008). A World Survey of Religion and the State. Cambridge University Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-521-88131-9. Retrieved 9 November 2012. The Church of England (Anglican) and the Church of Scotland (Presbyterian) are the official religions of the UK. 
^ Ferrante, Joan (2010). Sociology: A Global Perspective. Cengage Learning. p. 408. ISBN 978-0-8400-3204-1. Retrieved 9 November 2012. the Church of England [Anglican], which remains the official state church 
^ a b "An Ancient Church - Detailed History". Church of England. 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2016. 
^ John E. Booty, Stephen Sykes, Jonathan Knight (1998). Study of Anglicanism. London: Fortress Books. p. 477. ISBN 0-281-05175-5. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Delaney, John P. (1980). Dictionary of Saints (Second ed.). Garden City, NY: Doubleday. pp. 67–68. ISBN 978-0-385-13594-8. 
^ a b The English Reformation by Professor Andrew Pettegree. Bbc.co.uk.
^ a b "Canons of the Church of England" (PDF). Church of England. p. 7. Retrieved 21 July 2014. 
^ Brown, Andrew (2014-07-13). "Liberalism increases as power shifts to the laity in the Church of England". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ Rahner, Karl (1975). Encyclopedia of theology: a concise Sacramentum mundi. Freiburg: Herder. pp. 301–302. ISBN 978-0-86012-006-3. 
^ Paula K. Byers; 1998, Encyclopedia of World Biography, Page 189 – Pelagius, ISBN 0-7876-2553-1
^ Marcus Holden and Andrew Pinsent, The Catholic Gift to Civilisation (London: CTS), p. 13ff
^ D. Attwater, "Ethelbert of Kent" in The Penguin Dictionary of Saints (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books), p.118
^ King Henry VIII (1491–1547). HistoryMole (18 September 2010).
^ G. W. Bernard, "The Dissolution of the Monasteries," History (2011) 96#324 p 390
^ The Diary Of Samuel Ward: A Translator Of The 1611 King James Bible, edited by John Wilson Cowart and M. M. Knappen
^ The Laws of England, p.104
^ Article Fifth of "An Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland" 1800. rahbarnes.co.uk Union pages
^ Office, Anglican Communion. "Member Churches". 
^ telegraph.co.uk: "Church of England could return to defrocking rogue priests after child abuse scandals", 13 July 2015
^ "Church of England cannot carry on as it is unless decline 'urgently' reversed – Welby and Sentamu", The Daily Telegraph, 12 January 2015.
^ "Empty pews not the end of the world, says Church of England's newest bishop", The Daily Telegraph, 9 June 2015.
^ "Facts and Stats of The Church of England". churchofengland.org. Church of England. Retrieved 8 April 2016. 
^ "Church of England: Justin Welby says low pay 'embarrassing'". BBC News. 
^ Canon A5. Canons of the Church of England.
^ a b c Massey H. Shepherd, Jr. and Dale B. Martin, "Anglicanism" in Encyclopedia of Religion, vol. 1, 2nd. ed., edited by Lindsay Jones (Detroit:Macmillan Reference USA, 2005), pp. 349–350.
^ "High Church", New Catholic Encyclopedia, 2nd ed., vol. 6 (Detroit: Gale, 2003), pp. 823–824.
^ "Low Church", New Catholic Encyclopedia, 2nd ed., vol. 8 (Detroit: Gale, 2003), p. 836.
^ E. McDermott, "Broad Church", New Catholic Encyclopedia, 2nd ed., vol. 2 (Detroit: Gale, 2003), pp. 624–625.
^ 'New Directions', May 2013
^ Shepherd, Jr. and Martin, "Anglicanism", p. 350.
^ "More new women priests than men for first time". The Daily Telegraph. 4 February 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2012. 
^ Church votes overwhelmingly for compromise on women bishops – news from. Ekklesia.
^ "Church will ordain women bishops". BBC News. 7 July 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2008. 
^ Pigott, Robert. (14 February 2009) Synod struggles on women bishops. BBC News.
^ "Church of England general synod votes against women bishops", BBC News, 20 November 2012.
^ "Church of England Synod votes overwhelmingly in support of women bishops". The Descrier. 20 November 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2013. 
^ "LIVE: Vote backs women bishops". BBC. 14 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. 
^ ITN News. "The Church of England names its first female bishop – Video Dailymotion". Dailymotion. 
^ "After turmoil, Church of England consecrates first woman bishop". Reuters. 
^ a b First female diocesan bishop in C of E consecrated. Anglicannews.org. Retrieved on 23 July 2015.
^ Sherwood, Harriet; correspondent, religion (2015-10-24). "'God is not a he or a she', says first female bishop to sit in House of Lords". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-04-30. 
^ "Calls to refer to God as a woman as female bishops take up posts". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ "'Jesa Christa': God is female too, say Church of England campaigners | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ reporter, Amelia Butterly Newsbeat. "God is neither 'she' nor 'he' say Anglican priests". Retrieved 2016-05-03. 
^ Editorial, Reuters. "Church of England proposes celebrating gay marriage". U.K. Retrieved 2017-10-01. 
^ https://www.churchofengland.org/media/1657614/ssmarriagebillbriefing.pdf
^ Bingham, John. "telegraph.co.uk". Church offers prayers after same-sex weddings - but bans gay priests from marrying. Telegraph. Retrieved April 25, 2016. 
^ "cc-shooters-hill". cc-shooters-hill. Retrieved 2017-09-27. 
^ "Information on marriage for same-sex couples". Retrieved 2016-06-24. 
^ "Church of England News: Secretary General responds to GAFCON UK". Church of England News. Retrieved 2017-05-02. 
^ "Christian attitudes to same-sex marriage". bbc.co.uk. BBC. Retrieved April 14, 2016. 
^ Bisset, By Chris Hastings, Fiona Govan and Susan. "Vicars bless hundreds of gay couples a year". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-05-31. 
^ "BBC NEWS | UK | England | Beds/Bucks/Herts | Gay cleric's 'wedding' to partner". news.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-03-27. 
^ a b Walker, Peter (2013-01-04). "Church of England rules gay men in civil partnerships can become bishops". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-10-24. 
^ Bates, Stephen (2010-02-11). "Church of England General Synod extends pension rights for gay partners". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 25 February 2016. 
^ "Church of England gives blessing to recognising civil partnerships". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-10-23. 
^ Bennett, John. "St Mary and St Nicolas - Prayers for Same Sex Couples". www.stmaryandstnicolas.org.uk. Retrieved 2016-06-28. 
^ "Church of England says civil partnerships should not be abolished following gay marriage legalisation | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2016-11-21. 
^ "Church of England News: House of Bishops Pastoral Guidance on Same Sex Marriage". Church of England News. Retrieved 2016-04-07. 
^ "Weddings". stjohnswaterloo.org. St John's at Waterloo. Retrieved 12 April 2016. 
^ "Church offers prayers after same-sex weddings - but bans gay priests from marrying". Retrieved 2016-09-05. 
^ correspondent, Harriet Sherwood Religion (2016-09-02). "Bishop of Grantham first C of E bishop to declare he is in gay relationship". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-09-02. 
^ CNN, By Ben Brumfield. "Priests in same-sex relationships may become Anglican Bishops - CNN.com". CNN. Retrieved 2017-06-01. 
^ Lyall, Sarah (2013). "Anglicans Open a Path to Bishopric for Gay Men". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-09-27. 
^ "Church Of England's Clergy Issue Shock Rebuke To Bishops' View On Sexuality | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2017-02-17. 
^ "Church takes step towards gay marriage after vote rejects controversial report". The Telegraph. Retrieved 2017-02-17. 
^ "Archbishops Call For 'Radical New Christian Inclusion' After Synod Blocks Sexuality Report | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2017-02-17. 
^ Religious Affairs Correspondent, Kaya Burgess (2017-10-20). "Landmark vote piles pressure on Anglicans over same-sex marriage". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 2017-10-22. 
^ correspondent, Harriet Sherwood Religion (2017-07-09). "Anglican church set to offer special services for transgender people". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-07-10. 
^ Metro.co.uk, Fiona Parker for (2017-07-09). "Church of England to hold special services for transgender people". Metro. Retrieved 2017-07-10. 
^ "Church of England votes to explore transgender services". BBC News. 2017-07-09. Retrieved 2017-07-10. 
^ "Diocese of Blackburn seeks new liturgy for trans service". www.churchtimes.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-28. 
^ "BBC News | UK | Sex-change vicar back in pulpit". news.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-12-01. 
^ "Transgender priest sings for change". Stuff. Retrieved 2016-04-30. 
^ Correspondent, By Jonathan Petre, Religion. "One third of clergy do not believe in the Resurrection". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ "The story of the virgin birth runs against the grain of Christianity". The Guardian. 2015-12-24. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ "Survey finds 2 per cent of Anglican priests are not believers". The Independent. 2014-10-27. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ "YouGov / University of Lancaster and Westminster Faith Debates" (PDF). YouGov. 2014-10-23. Retrieved 2016-05-02. 
^ "Church of England creating 'pagan church' to recruit members". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-05-01. 
^ "The Church of England's position on abortion". www.churchofengland.org. Retrieved 2016-05-14. 
^ "Assisted Dying/Suicide and Voluntary Euthanasia", Church of England official website.
^ Watt, Nicholas (2014-07-11). "Former archbishop lends his support to campaign to legalise right to die". the Guardian. Retrieved 2016-05-31. 
^ "The Church of England and human fertilisation & embryology". www.churchofengland.org. Retrieved 2016-05-31. 
^ About Church Urban Fund Archived 14 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Church Urban Fund finds 'poorest' in north-west England". BBC News. 
^ "Child poverty in the UK". Church of England News. 
^ a b Church of England bishops demand action over hunger
^ "Catholicism set to be UK's top religion". Metro News. 
^ See the pages linked from the Life Events page on the Church of England website
^ Peter J. Bowler, Reconciling science and religion: the debate in early-twentieth-century Britain (University of Chicago Press, 2001), page 194.
^ Robin Gill, The Empty Church Revisited, (Ashgate Publishing, 2003) page 161.
^ Church of England attendance plunges to record low 12 Jan 2016 The Telegraph
^ Christian Research, Religious Trends (2008), cited in Ruth Gledhill, "Churchgoing on its knees as Christianity falls out of favour", The Times, 8 May 2008.
^ Church of England website. Churchofengland.org.
^ 10 ways christening has changed 23 October 2013 BBC News
^ "Church of England weekly attendance falls below one million for first time | Christian News on Christian Today". www.christiantoday.com. Retrieved 2017-05-09. 
^ "Statistics for Mission 2016" (PDF). churchofengland.org. 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2017. 
^ Church of England Research & Statistics link page. Churchofengland.org (9 May 2012).
^ Facts and stats. Churchofengland.org.
^ Church of England Year Book, 2012
^ 39 Articles – 19–22. Church Society.
^ Canon A 7 "Of the Royal Supremacy"
^ "Irish Church Act 1869". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 10 October 2012. 
^ "Our Heritage: Facing Difficulties". Church in Wales website. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2012. 
^ "History: The Revolution". Scottish Episcopal Church website. Retrieved 10 October 2012. 
^ Cross, F. L. (ed.) (1957) Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church; p. 1436
^ "Justin Welby becomes Archbishop of Canterbury". BBC News. 
^ "Summary of Church Assembly and General Synod Measures". Church of England website. Archbishops' council of the Church of England. November 2007. 
^ "General Synod". Church of England website. Archbishops' council of the Church of England. 
^ House of Lords: alphabetical list of Members Archived 2 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 12 December 2008.
^ Gell, Sir James. "Gell on Manx Church". Isle Of Man Online. IOM Online. Retrieved 7 February 2017. 
^ "About". Guernsey Deanery. Church of England. 
^ "Inquiry into CofE cleric abuse claim set up", BBC.
^ "Church of England to examine 1950s records in child abuse investigation", The Guardian, 27 October 2014.
^ "Church cut contact with child abuse victim on order of insurers". 16 March 2016. 
^ Laville, Sandra (7 Oct 2015). "Bishop escaped abuse charges after MPs and a royal backed him, court told". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 Nov 2015. 
^ "Damning report reveals Church of England's failure to act on abuse", The Guardian, 26 March 2015.
^ "Survivor reaches settlement with diocese on historic abuse", Church Times, 4 December 2015.
^ outgoings. Cofe.anglican.org.
^ "Citing ethics, Anglicans sell stake in News Corp" by Eric Pfanner, The New York Times, 8 August 2012.
^ "A Church Near You Help". achurchnearyou.com. A Church Near You. Retrieved 25 December 2015. 
^ Christmas Near You Announcement Archived 7 August 2014 at Archive.is Accessed: 6 August 2014
^ Harvest Near You announcement, Accessed 6 August 2014.


Further reading[edit]

Garbett, Cyril, Abp. The Church of England Today. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1953. 128 p.
Hardwick, Joseph. An Anglican British world: The Church of England and the expansion of the settler empire, c. 1790–1860 (Manchester UP, 2014).
Hodges, J. P. The Nature of the Lion: Elizabeth I and Our Anglican Heritage. London: Faith Press, 1962. 153 pp.
Kirby, James. Historians and the Church of England: Religion and Historical Scholarship, 1870–1920 (2016) online at DOI:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198768159.001.0001
Lawson, Tom. God and War: The Church of England and Armed Conflict in the Twentieth Century (Routledge, 2016).
Maughan Steven S. Mighty England Do Good: Culture, Faith, Empire, and World in the Foreign Missions of the Church of England, 1850–1915 (2014)
Picton, Hervé. A Short History of the Church of England: From the Reformation to the Present Day. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2015. 180 p.
Rowlands, John Henry Lewis. Church, State, and Society, 1827–1845: the Attitudes of John Keble, Richard Hurrell Froude, and John Henry Newman. (1989). xi, 262 p. ISBN 1-85093-132-1
Tapsell, Grant. The later Stuart Church, 1660–1714 (2012).

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Church of England.



Official website
Historical resources on the Church of England
Church of England history in the West Indies
The History Files: Churches of the British Isles, a gallery of church photos and information.







v
t
e


Archbishop of Canterbury






Justin Welby
Primate of All England
List of Archbishops of Canterbury
Lambeth Palace
Province of Canterbury
Diocese of Canterbury
Canterbury Cathedral
Old Palace, Canterbury
Tim Thornton, Bishop at Lambeth, Bishop to the Forces and Bishop for the Falkland Islands (episcopal chief of staff)





Historic palaces
(Canterbury—Lambeth chain)



The Old Palace, Bekesbourne (16th–17th centuries)
Archbishop's Palace, Charing (8th–16th)
Archbishop's Palace, Maidstone (14th–16th)
Knole House (15th–16th)
Otford Palace (8th–16th)
Addington Palace (19th)
Croydon Palace (c. 10th–18th)












v
t
e


Anglicanism



Communions



Anglican Communion
Anglican realignment
Continuing Anglican movement
Personal ordinariate








History



History of Christianity in Britain

Celtic Christianity
Anglo-Saxon Christianity


Æthelberht
Edwin
Offa
Augustine of Canterbury
Paulinus
Hygeberht
Bede
Medieval Architecture
Henry VIII
English Reformation
Cranmer
Dissolution of Monasteries
Church of England
Church of Ireland
Edward VI
Elizabeth I
Parker
Hooker
James I
King James Version
Charles I
Laud
Caroline Divines
Nonjuring schism
Oxford Movement
Anglo-Catholicism
Modern Church





Theology



Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Thirty-nine Articles
Lambeth Quadrilateral
Affirmation of St. Louis
Sacraments
Eucharist
Mary
Saints





Liturgy and worship



Book of Common Prayer
Morning / Evening Prayer
Liturgical year
Biblical canon
Books of Homilies
High / Low / Broad church





Other topics



Converts to Anglicanism
Ministry
Monasticism
Music
Anglican prayer beads
Anglicanism of the Americas






 Portal










v
t
e


Anglican Communion



General



Supreme Governor of the Church of England
Episcopal polity

Archbishop of Canterbury
Anglican Communion Primates Meeting


Lambeth Conferences
Anglican Consultative Council
Homosexuality

Windsor Report


Ordination of women
Ecumenism








African provinces



Burundi
Central Africa
Congo
Indian Ocean
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Kenya
Nigeria
Rwanda
Southern Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
West Africa





American provinces



Brazil
Canada
Central America
Mexico
South America
United States of America
West Indies





Asian provinces



Bangladesh (United)
Hong Kong and Macao
Japan
Jerusalem and the Middle East
Korea
Myanmar (Burma)
North India (United)
Pakistan (United)
Philippines
South East Asia
South India (United)





European provinces



England
Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Oceanian provinces



Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
Australia
Melanesia
Papua New Guinea





Extra-provincial churches



Bermuda
Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
Cuba
Falkland Islands
Portugal
Spain





Churches in full communion



Mar Thoma Syrian Church
Malabar Syrian Church
Union of Utrecht
Philippine Independent Church
Porvoo Communion






 Anglicanism portal










v
t
e


Anglican dioceses in the United Kingdom and Ireland



 Church of England
(list of dioceses)




Province
of Canterbury



Bath and Wells
Birmingham
Bristol
Canterbury
Chelmsford
Chichester
Coventry
Derby
Ely
Europe
Exeter
Gloucester
Guildford
Hereford
Leicester
Lichfield
Lincoln
London
Norwich
Oxford
Peterborough
Portsmouth
Rochester
St Albans
St Edmundsbury and Ipswich
Salisbury
Southwark
Truro
Winchester
Worcester





Province
of York



Blackburn
Carlisle
Chester
Durham
Leeds
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle
Sheffield
Sodor and Man
Southwell and Nottingham
York








 Church in Wales



Bangor
Llandaff
Monmouth
St Asaph
St David's
Swansea and Brecon





 Scottish Episcopal Church



Aberdeen and Orkney
Argyll and The Isles
Brechin
Edinburgh
Glasgow and Galloway
Moray, Ross and Caithness
St Andrews, Dunkeld and Dunblane





 Church of Ireland




Province of Armagh



Armagh
Clogher
Connor
Derry and Raphoe
Down and Dromore
Kilmore, Elphin and Ardagh
Tuam, Killala and Achonry





Province of Dublin



Cashel and Ossory
Cork, Cloyne and Ross
Dublin and Glendalough
Limerick and Killaloe
Meath and Kildare















v
t
e


Anglican hierarchy in Great Britain and Ireland



 Church of England




Canterbury
Province




Diocesan
bishops



Archbishop of Canterbury
Bath & Wells
Birmingham
Bristol
Chelmsford
Chichester
Coventry
Derby
Ely
Exeter
Europe
Gloucester
Guildford
Hereford
Leicester
Lichfield
Lincoln
London
Norwich
Oxford
Peterborough
Portsmouth
Rochester
Saint Albans
St Edmundsbury & Ipswich
Salisbury
Southwark
Truro
Winchester
Worcester





Suffragan
bishops



Aston
Barking
Basingstoke
Bedford
Bradwell
Brixworth
Buckingham
Colchester
Crediton
Croydon
Dorchester
Dorking
Dover
Dudley
Dunwich
Ebbsfleet
Edmonton
Europe
Fulham
Grantham
Grimsby
Hertford
Horsham
Huntingdon
Kensington
Kingston-upon-Thames
Lewes
Loughborough
Ludlow
Lynn
Maidstone
Plymouth
Ramsbury
Reading
Repton
Richborough
Sherborne
Shrewsbury
Southampton
St Germans
Stafford
Stepney
Swindon
Taunton
Tewkesbury
Thetford
Tonbridge
Warwick
Willesden
Wolverhampton
Woolwich








York
Province




Diocesan
bishops



Archbishop of York
Blackburn
Carlisle
Chester
Durham
Leeds
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle
Sheffield
Sodor & Man
Southwell





Suffragan
bishops



Berwick
Beverley
Birkenhead
Bolton
Bradford
Burnley
Doncaster
Huddersfield
Hull
Jarrow
Lancaster
Middleton
Penrith
Richmond
Ripon
Selby
Sherwood
Stockport
Wakefield
Warrington
Whitby








Other



Bishop at Lambeth
Bishop to the Forces
Bishop to HM Prisons
Bishop for Urban Life and Faith
Bishop of the Falkland Islands
Chair of the CMDDP
Bishop for Higher and Further Education








 Church in Wales



Archbishop of Wales
Bangor
Llandaff
Monmouth
Saint Asaph
Saint David's
Swansea & Brecon





 Scottish Episcopal
Church



Primus of the Scottish Episcopal Church
Aberdeen and Orkney
Argyll & The Isles
Brechin
Edinburgh
Glasgow & Galloway
Moray, Ross & Caithness
St Andrews, Dunkeld & Dunblane





 Church of Ireland




Armagh
Province



Archbishop of Armagh
Clogher
Connor
Derry and Raphoe
Down & Dromore
Kilmore, Elphin & Ardagh
Tuam, Killala & Achonry





Dublin
Province



Archbishop of Dublin
Cashel & Ossory
Cork, Cloyne & Ross
Limerick & Killaloe
Meath & Kildare















v
t
e


Porvoo Communion



Anglican churches



Church of England
Church of Ireland
Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church
Scottish Episcopal Church
Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church
Church in Wales





Lutheran churches



Church of Denmark
Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland
Lutheran Church in Great Britain
Church of Iceland
Latvian Evangelical Lutheran Church Abroad
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Lithuania
Church of Norway
Church of Sweden





Observer churches



Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 135203514
LCCN: n79056234
ISNI: 0000 0004 1759 4124
GND: 1000922-X
SUDOC: 027257150
BNF: cb12045373h (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Church_of_England&oldid=817031754"					Categories: Church of EnglandAnglo-CatholicismAnglican Communion church bodiesAnglicanismMembers of the World Council of ChurchesChristian denominations founded in Great BritainHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template archiveis linksEngvarB from October 2015Use dmy dates from October 2015Use British English from August 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2010Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers