For other uses, see Cicero (disambiguation).


Cicero
(Marcus Tullius Cicero)



A first century AD bust of Cicero in the Capitoline Museums, Rome






Consul of the Roman Republic


In office
63 BC


Preceded by
Lucius Julius Caesar and Gaius Marcius Figulus


Succeeded by
Decimus Junius Silanus and Lucius Licinius Murena


Governor of the Roman Province of Cilicia


In office
51 BC – 50 BC


Praetor of the Roman Republic


In office
66 BC


Aedile of the Roman Republic


In office
69 BC


Quaestor of the Roman Republic in Western Sicily


In office
75 BC





Personal details


Born
3 January 106 BC
Arpinum, Roman Republic
(modern-day Arpino, Lazio, Italy)


Died
7 December 43 BC (aged 63)
Formia, Roman Republic


Nationality
Roman


Political party
Optimates


Occupation
statesman, lawyer, writer, orator




Cicero


Subject
Politics, law, philosophy, rhetoric


Literary movement
Golden Age Latin


Notable works
Orations: In Verrem, In Catilinam I-IV
Philosophy: De Oratore, De Re Publica, De Natura Deorum, De Officiis







Part of a series on


Ancient Rome and the fall of the Republic




Mark Antony
Cleopatra VII
Assassination of Julius Caesar
Pompey
Theatre of Pompey
Cicero
First Triumvirate
Roman Forum
Comitium
Rostra
Curia Julia
Curia Hostilia







v
t
e





Marcus Tullius Cicero[n 1] (/ˈsɪsɪroʊ/; Classical Latin: [ˈmaːr.kʊs ˈtʊl.lɪ.ʊs ˈkɪ.kɛ.roː]; 3 January 106 BC – 7 December 43 BC) was a Roman politician and lawyer, who served as consul in the year 63 BC. He came from a wealthy municipal family of the Roman equestrian order, and is considered one of Rome's greatest orators and prose stylists.[2][3]
His influence on the Latin language was so immense that the subsequent history of prose, not only in Latin but in European languages up to the 19th century, was said to be either a reaction against or a return to his style.[4] According to Michael Grant, "the influence of Cicero upon the history of European literature and ideas greatly exceeds that of any other prose writer in any language".[5] Cicero introduced the Romans to the chief schools of Greek philosophy and created a Latin philosophical vocabulary (with neologisms such as evidentia,[6] humanitas, qualitas, quantitas, and essentia)[7] distinguishing himself as a translator and philosopher.
Though he was an accomplished orator and successful lawyer, Cicero believed his political career was his most important achievement. It was during his consulship that the second Catilinarian conspiracy attempted to overthrow the government through an attack on the city by outside forces, and Cicero suppressed the revolt by executing five conspirators without due process. During the chaotic latter half of the 1st century BC marked by civil wars and the dictatorship of Gaius Julius Caesar, Cicero championed a return to the traditional republican government. Following Julius Caesar's death, Cicero became an enemy of Mark Antony in the ensuing power struggle, attacking him in a series of speeches. He was proscribed as an enemy of the state by the Second Triumvirate and consequently executed by soldiers operating on their behalf in 43 BC after having been intercepted during attempted flight from the Italian peninsula. His severed hands and head were then, as a final revenge of Mark Antony, displayed in the Roman Forum.
Petrarch's rediscovery of Cicero's letters is often credited for initiating the 14th-century Renaissance in public affairs, humanism, and classical Roman culture.[8] According to Polish historian Tadeusz Zieliński, "the Renaissance was above all things a revival of Cicero, and only after him and through him of the rest of Classical antiquity."[9] The peak of Cicero's authority and prestige came during the 18th-century Enlightenment,[10] and his impact on leading Enlightenment thinkers and political theorists such as John Locke, David Hume, Montesquieu and Edmund Burke was substantial.[11] His works rank among the most influential in European culture, and today still constitute one of the most important bodies of primary material for the writing and revision of Roman history, especially the last days of the Roman Republic.[12]



Contents


1 Personal life

1.1 Early life
1.2 Family


2 Public career

2.1 Early political career
2.2 Consul
2.3 Exile and return
2.4 Julius Caesar's civil war
2.5 Opposition to Mark Antony and death


3 Legacy
4 Works

4.1 Speeches
4.2 Philosophical dialogues and treatises
4.3 Letters


5 Notable fictional portrayals
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References

8.1 Citations
8.2 Bibliography


9 Further reading
10 External links



Personal life[edit]
Main article: Personal life of Marcus Tullius Cicero
Early life[edit]
Cicero was born in 106 BC in Arpinum, a hill town 100 kilometers (62 mi) southeast of Rome. His father was a well-to-do member of the equestrian order and possessed good connections in Rome. However, being a semi-invalid, he could not enter public life and studied extensively to compensate. Although little is known about Cicero's mother, Helvia, it was common for the wives of important Roman citizens to be responsible for the management of the household. Cicero's brother Quintus wrote in a letter that she was a thrifty housewife.[13]
Cicero's cognomen, or personal surname, comes from the Latin for chickpea, cicer. Plutarch explains that the name was originally given to one of Cicero's ancestors who had a cleft in the tip of his nose resembling a chickpea. However, it is more likely that Cicero's ancestors prospered through the cultivation and sale of chickpeas.[14] Romans often chose down-to-earth personal surnames. The famous family names of Fabius, Lentulus, and Piso come from the Latin names of beans, lentils, and peas, respectively. Plutarch writes that Cicero was urged to change this deprecatory name when he entered politics, but refused, saying that he would make Cicero more glorious than Scaurus ("Swollen-ankled") and Catulus ("Puppy").[15]




The Young Cicero Reading by Vincenzo Foppa (fresco, 1464), now at the Wallace Collection


During this period in Roman history, "cultured" meant being able to speak both Latin and Greek. Cicero was therefore educated in the teachings of the ancient Greek philosophers, poets and historians; he obtained much of his understanding of the theory and practice of rhetoric from the Greek poet Archias[16] and from the Greek rhetorician Apollonius.[17] Cicero used his knowledge of Greek to translate many of the theoretical concepts of Greek philosophy into Latin, thus translating Greek philosophical works for a larger audience. It was precisely his broad education that tied him to the traditional Roman elite.[18]
According to Plutarch, Cicero was an extremely talented student, whose learning attracted attention from all over Rome,[19] affording him the opportunity to study Roman law under Quintus Mucius Scaevola.[20] Cicero's fellow students were Gaius Marius Minor, Servius Sulpicius Rufus (who became a famous lawyer, one of the few whom Cicero considered superior to himself in legal matters), and Titus Pomponius. The latter two became Cicero's friends for life, and Pomponius (who later received the nickname "Atticus", and whose sister married Cicero's brother) would become, in Cicero's own words, "as a second brother", with both maintaining a lifelong correspondence.[21]
Cicero wanted to pursue a public career in politics along the steps of the Cursus honorum. In 90 BC–88 BC, he served both Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo and Lucius Cornelius Sulla as they campaigned in the Social War, though he had no taste for military life, being an intellectual first and foremost. Cicero started his career as a lawyer around 83–81 BC. His first major case, of which a written record is still extant, was his 80 BC defense of Sextus Roscius on the charge of patricide.[22] Taking this case was a courageous move for Cicero; patricide was considered an appalling crime, and the people whom Cicero accused of the murder, the most notorious being Chrysogonus, were favorites of Sulla. At this time it would have been easy for Sulla to have the unknown Cicero murdered. Cicero's defense was an indirect challenge to the dictator Sulla, and on the strength of his case, Roscius was acquitted.[23]
Cicero’s case was divided into three parts. The first part detailed exactly the charge brought by Ericius. Cicero explained how a rustic son of a farmer, who lives off the pleasures of his own land, would not have gained anything from committing patricide because he would have eventually inherited his father's land anyway. The second part concerned the boldness and greed of two of the accusers, Magnus and Capito. Cicero told the jury that they were the more likely perpetrators of murder because the two were greedy, both for conspiring together against a fellow kinsman and, in particular, Magnus, for his boldness and for being unashamed to appear in court to support the false charges. The third part explained that Chrysogonus had immense political power, and the accusation was successfully made due to that power. Even though Chrysogonus may not have been what Cicero said he was, through rhetoric Cicero successfully made him appear to be a foreign freed man who prospered by devious means in the aftermath of the civil war. Cicero surmised that it showed what kind of a person he was and that something like murder was not beneath him.[24]
Cicero's interest in philosophy figured heavily in his later career and led to him providing a comprehensive account of Greek philosophy for a Roman audience,[25] including creating a philosophical vocabulary in Latin.[26] In 87 BC, Philo of Larissa, the head of the Academy that was founded by Plato in Athens about 300 years earlier, arrived in Rome. Cicero, "inspired by an extraordinary zeal for philosophy",[27] sat enthusiastically at his feet and absorbed Plato's philosophy. Cicero said of Plato's Dialogues, that if Zeus were to speak, he would use their language.[28]
In 79 BC, Cicero left for Greece, Asia Minor and Rhodes. This was perhaps to avoid the potential wrath of Sulla,[29] though Cicero himself says it was to hone his skills and improve his physical fitness.[30] In Athens he studied philosophy with Antiochus of Ascalon, the 'Old Academic' and initiator of Middle Platonism.[31] In Asia Minor, he met the leading orators of the region and continued to study with them. Cicero then journeyed to Rhodes to meet his former teacher, Apollonius Molon, who had previously taught him in Rome. Molon helped Cicero hone the excesses in his style, as well as train his body and lungs for the demands of public speaking.[32] Charting a middle path between the competing Attic and Asiatic styles, Cicero would ultimately become considered second only to Demosthenes among history's orators.[33]
Family[edit]




Marcus Tullius Cicero


Cicero married Terentia probably at the age of 27, in 79 BC. According to the upper class mores of the day it was a marriage of convenience, but lasted harmoniously for nearly 30 years. Terentia's family was wealthy, probably the plebeian noble house of Terenti Varrones, thus meeting the needs of Cicero's political ambitions in both economic and social terms. She had a half-sister named Fabia, who as a child had become a Vestal Virgin, a very great honour. Terentia was a strong willed woman and (citing Plutarch) "she took more interest in her husband's political career than she allowed him to take in household affairs."[34]
In the 50s BC, Cicero's letters to Terentia became shorter and colder. He complained to his friends that Terentia had betrayed him but did not specify in which sense. Perhaps the marriage simply could not outlast the strain of the political upheaval in Rome, Cicero's involvement in it, and various other disputes between the two. The divorce appears to have taken place in 51 BC or shortly before.[35] In 46 or 45 BC,[36] Cicero married a young girl, Publilia, who had been his ward. It is thought that Cicero needed her money, particularly after having to repay the dowry of Terentia, who came from a wealthy family.[37] This marriage did not last long.
Although his marriage to Terentia was one of convenience, it is commonly known that Cicero held great love for his daughter Tullia.[38] When she suddenly became ill in February 45 BC and died after having seemingly recovered from giving birth to a son in January, Cicero was stunned. "I have lost the one thing that bound me to life" he wrote to Atticus.[39] Atticus told him to come for a visit during the first weeks of his bereavement, so that he could comfort him when his pain was at its greatest. In Atticus's large library, Cicero read everything that the Greek philosophers had written about overcoming grief, "but my sorrow defeats all consolation."[40] Caesar and Brutus as well as Servius Sulpicius Rufus sent him letters of condolence.[41][42]
Cicero hoped that his son Marcus would become a philosopher like him, but Marcus himself wished for a military career. He joined the army of Pompey in 49 BC and after Pompey's defeat at Pharsalus 48 BC, he was pardoned by Caesar. Cicero sent him to Athens to study as a disciple of the peripatetic philosopher Kratippos in 48 BC, but he used this absence from "his father's vigilant eye" to "eat, drink and be merry."[43] After Cicero's murder he joined the army of the Liberatores but was later pardoned by Augustus. Augustus's bad conscience for not having objected to Cicero's being put on the proscription list during the Second Triumvirate led him to aid considerably Marcus Minor's career. He became an augur, and was nominated consul in 30 BC together with Augustus. As such, he was responsible for revoking the honors of Mark Antony, who was responsible for the proscription, and could in this way take revenge. Later he was appointed proconsul of Syria and the province of Asia.[44]
Public career[edit]
Main article: Political career of Cicero
Early political career[edit]
His first office was as one of the twenty annual quaestors, a training post for serious public administration in a diversity of areas, but with a traditional emphasis on administration and rigorous accounting of public monies under the guidance of a senior magistrate or provincial commander. Cicero served as quaestor in western Sicily in 75 BC and demonstrated honesty and integrity in his dealings with the inhabitants. As a result, the grateful Sicilians asked Cicero to prosecute Gaius Verres, a governor of Sicily, who had badly plundered the province. His prosecution of Gaius Verres was a great forensic success[45] for Cicero. Governor Gaius Verres hired the prominent lawyer of a noble family Quintus Hortensius Hortalus. After a lengthy period in Sicily collecting testimonials and evidence and persuading witnesses to come forward, Cicero returned to Rome and won the case in a series of dramatic court battles. His unique style of oratory set him apart from the flamboyant Hortensius. On the conclusion of this case, Cicero came to be considered the greatest orator in Rome. The view that Cicero may have taken the case for reasons of his own is viable. Hortensius was, at this point, known as the best lawyer in Rome; to beat him would guarantee much success and the prestige that Cicero needed to start his career. Cicero's oratorical skill is shown in his character assassination of Verres and various other techniques of persuasion used on the jury. One such example is found in the speech Against Verres I, where he states "with you on this bench, gentlemen, with Marcus Acilius Glabrio as your president, I do not understand what Verres can hope to achieve".[46] Oratory was considered a great art in ancient Rome and an important tool for disseminating knowledge and promoting oneself in elections, in part because there were no regular newspapers or mass media. Cicero was neither a patrician nor a plebeian noble; his rise to political office despite his relatively humble origins has traditionally been attributed to his brilliance as an orator.[47]
Cicero grew up in a time of civil unrest and war. Sulla's victory in the first of a series of civil wars led to a new constitutional framework that undermined libertas (liberty), the fundamental value of the Roman Republic. Nonetheless, Sulla's reforms strengthened the position of the equestrian class, contributing to that class's growing political power. Cicero was both an Italian eques and a novus homo, but more importantly he was a Roman constitutionalist. His social class and loyalty to the Republic ensured that he would "command the support and confidence of the people as well as the Italian middle classes". The optimates faction never truly accepted Cicero; and this undermined his efforts to reform the Republic while preserving the constitution. Nevertheless, he successfully ascended the cursus honorum, holding each magistracy at or near the youngest possible age: quaestor in 75 BC (age 31), aedile in 69 BC (age 37), and praetor in 66 BC (age 40), when he served as president of the "Reclamation" (or extortion) Court. He was then elected consul at age 43.
Consul[edit]




Cicero Denounces Catiline, fresco by Cesare Maccari, 1882–88


Cicero was elected consul for the year 63 BC. His co-consul for the year, Gaius Antonius Hybrida, played a minor role. During his year in office, he thwarted a conspiracy centered on assassinating him and overthrowing the Roman Republic with the help of foreign armed forces, led by Lucius Sergius Catilina. Cicero procured a senatus consultum ultimum (a declaration of martial law) and drove Catiline from the city with four vehement speeches (the Catiline Orations), which to this day remain outstanding examples of his rhetorical style. The Orations listed Catiline and his followers' debaucheries, and denounced Catiline's senatorial sympathizers as roguish and dissolute debtors clinging to Catiline as a final and desperate hope. Cicero demanded that Catiline and his followers leave the city. At the conclusion of his first speech, Catiline hurriedly left the Senate, (which was being held in the Temple of Jupiter Stator). In his following speeches, Cicero did not directly address Catiline. He delivered the second and third orations before the people, and the last one again before the Senate. By these speeches, Cicero wanted to prepare the Senate for the worst possible case; he also delivered more evidence against Catiline.[48]
Catiline fled and left behind his followers to start the revolution from within while Catiline assaulted the city with an army of "moral bankrupts and honest fanatics". Catiline had attempted to involve the Allobroges, a tribe of Transalpine Gaul, in their plot, but Cicero, working with the Gauls, was able to seize letters that incriminated the five conspirators and forced them to confess in front of the Senate.[49]
The Senate then deliberated upon the conspirators' punishment. As it was the dominant advisory body to the various legislative assemblies rather than a judicial body, there were limits to its power; however, martial law was in effect, and it was feared that simple house arrest or exile – the standard options – would not remove the threat to the state. At first Decimus Silanus spoke for the "extreme penalty"; many were swayed by Julius Caesar, who decried the precedent it would set and argued in favor of life imprisonment in various Italian towns. Cato the Younger rose in defence of the death penalty and the entire Senate finally agreed on the matter. Cicero had the conspirators taken to the Tullianum, the notorious Roman prison, where they were strangled. Cicero himself accompanied the former consul Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, one of the conspirators, to the Tullianum. Cicero received the honorific "Pater Patriae" for his efforts to suppress the conspiracy, but lived thereafter in fear of trial or exile for having put Roman citizens to death without trial.
After the conspirators were put to death, Cicero was proud of his accomplishment. Some of his political enemies argued that though the act gained Cicero popularity, he exaggerated the extent of his success. He overestimated his popularity again several years later after being exiled from Italy and then allowed back from exile. At this time, he claimed that the Republic would be restored along with him.[50]
Exile and return[edit]
In 60 BC, Julius Caesar invited Cicero to be the fourth member of his existing partnership with Pompey and Marcus Licinius Crassus, an assembly that would eventually be called the First Triumvirate.[51] Cicero refused the invitation because he suspected it would undermine the Republic.[52]
In 58 BC, Publius Clodius Pulcher, the tribune of the plebs, introduced a law (the Leges Clodiae) threatening exile to anyone who executed a Roman citizen without a trial. Cicero, having executed members of the Catiline Conspiracy four years previously without formal trial, and having had a public falling out with Clodius, was clearly the intended target of the law. Cicero argued that the senatus consultum ultimum indemnified him from punishment, and he attempted to gain the support of the senators and consuls, especially of Pompey. When help was not forthcoming, he went into exile. He arrived at Thessalonica, on May 23, 58 BC.[53][54][55] Cicero's exile caused him to fall into depression. He wrote to Atticus: "Your pleas have prevented me from committing suicide. But what is there to live for? Don't blame me for complaining. My afflictions surpass any you ever heard of earlier".[56] After the intervention of recently elected tribune Titus Annius Milo, the senate voted in favor of recalling Cicero from exile. Clodius cast the single vote against the decree. Cicero returned to Italy on August 5, 57 BC, landing at Brundisium.[57] He was greeted by a cheering crowd, and, to his delight, his beloved daughter Tullia.[58]
Cicero tried to re-enter politics, but his attack on a bill of Caesar's proved unsuccessful. The conference at Luca in 56 BC forced Cicero to recant and support the triumvirate. After this, a cowed Cicero concentrated on his literary works. It is uncertain whether he was directly involved in politics for the following few years.[59] He reluctantly accepted a promagistracy in Cilicia for 51 BC, because there were few other eligible governors available as a result of a legislative requirement enacted by Pompey in 52 BC, specifying an interval of five years between a consulship or praetorship and a provincial command.[60] He served as proconsul of Cilicia from May 51 to November 50 BC. He was given instructions to keep nearby Cappadocia loyal to the King, Ariobarzanes III, which he achieved ‘satisfactorily without war.’ Rome’s defeat by the Parthians and an uprising in Syria caused disquiet in Cilicia. Cicero maintained calm through his mild government. He discovered that much of public property had been embezzled and restored it. This made the cities better off. He retained the civil rights of, and did not impose penalties on, the men who gave the property back. Cicero defeated some robbers who were based on Mount Amanus and his soldiers hailed him as imperator. On his way back to Rome he stopped in Rhodes. He then spent some time in Athens, where he caught up with an old friend from his previous stay there and met men of great learning.[61]
Julius Caesar's civil war[edit]
The struggle between Pompey and Julius Caesar grew more intense in 50 BC. Cicero favoured Pompey, seeing him as a defender of the senate and Republican tradition, but at that time avoided openly alienating Caesar.[62] When Caesar invaded Italy in 49 BC, Cicero fled Rome. Caesar, seeking the legitimacy of an endorsement by a senior senator, courted Cicero's favour, but even so Cicero slipped out of Italy and traveled to Dyrrachium (Epidamnos), Illyria, where Pompey's staff was situated.[63] Cicero traveled with the Pompeian forces to Pharsalus in 48 BC,[64] though he was quickly losing faith in the competence and righteousness of the Pompeian side. Eventually, he provoked the hostility of his fellow senator Cato, who told him that he would have been of more use to the cause of the optimates if he had stayed in Rome. After Caesar's victory at the Battle of Pharsalus on August 9, Cicero returned to Rome only very cautiously. Caesar pardoned him and Cicero tried to adjust to the situation and maintain his political work, hoping that Caesar might revive the Republic and its institutions.
In a letter to Varro on c. April 20, 46 BC, Cicero outlined his strategy under Caesar's dictatorship. Cicero, however, was taken completely by surprise when the Liberatores assassinated Caesar on the ides of March, 44 BC. Cicero was not included in the conspiracy, even though the conspirators were sure of his sympathy. Marcus Junius Brutus called out Cicero's name, asking him to restore the republic when he lifted his bloodstained dagger after the assassination.[65] A letter Cicero wrote in February 43 BC to Trebonius, one of the conspirators, began, "How I could wish that you had invited me to that most glorious banquet on the Ides of March"![66] Cicero became a popular leader during the period of instability following the assassination. He had no respect for Mark Antony, who was scheming to take revenge upon Caesar's murderers. In exchange for amnesty for the assassins, he arranged for the Senate to agree not to declare Caesar to have been a tyrant, which allowed the Caesarians to have lawful support and kept Caesar's reforms and policies intact.[67]
Opposition to Mark Antony and death[edit]




Cicero's death (France, 15th century)


Cicero and Antony now became the two leading men in Rome: Cicero as spokesman for the Senate; Antony as consul, leader of the Caesarian faction, and unofficial executor of Caesar's public will. Relations between the two, never friendly, worsened after Cicero claimed that Antony was taking liberties in interpreting Caesar's wishes and intentions. Octavian was Caesar's adopted son and heir; after he returned to Italy, Cicero began to play him against Antony. He praised Octavian, declaring he would not make the same mistakes as his father. He attacked Antony in a series of speeches he called the Philippics,[68] after Demosthenes's denunciations of Philip II of Macedon. At the time Cicero's popularity as a public figure was unrivalled.[69]
Cicero supported Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus as governor of Cisalpine Gaul (Gallia Cisalpina) and urged the Senate to name Antony an enemy of the state. The speech of Lucius Piso, Caesar's father-in-law, delayed proceedings against Antony. Antony was later declared an enemy of the state when he refused to lift the siege of Mutina, which was in the hands of Decimus Brutus. Cicero’s plan to drive out Antony failed. Antony and Octavian reconciled and allied with Lepidus to form the Second Triumvirate after the successive battles of Forum Gallorum and Mutina. The Triumvirate began proscribing their enemies and potential rivals immediately after legislating the alliance into official existence for a term of five years with consular imperium. Cicero and all of his contacts and supporters were numbered among the enemies of the state, and reportedly, Octavian argued for two days against Cicero being added to the list.[70]
Cicero was one of the most viciously and doggedly hunted among the proscribed. He was viewed with sympathy by a large segment of the public and many people refused to report that they had seen him. He was caught December 7, 43 BC leaving his villa in Formiae in a litter going to the seaside where he hoped to embark on a ship destined for Macedonia.[71] When his killers – Herennius (a centurion) and Popilius (a tribune) – arrived, Cicero's own slaves said they had not seen him, but he was given away by Philologus, a freed slave of his brother Quintus Cicero.[71]




Cicero about age 60, from a marble bust


Cicero's last words are said to have been, "There is nothing proper about what you are doing, soldier, but do try to kill me properly." He bowed to his captors, leaning his head out of the litter in a gladiatorial gesture to ease the task. By baring his neck and throat to the soldiers, he was indicating that he wouldn't resist. According to Plutarch, Herennius first slew him, then cut off his head. On Antony's instructions his hands, which had penned the Philippics against Antony, were cut off as well; these were nailed along with his head on the Rostra in the Forum Romanum according to the tradition of Marius and Sulla, both of whom had displayed the heads of their enemies in the Forum. Cicero was the only victim of the proscriptions who was displayed in that manner. According to Cassius Dio (in a story often mistakenly attributed to Plutarch),[72] Antony's wife Fulvia took Cicero's head, pulled out his tongue, and jabbed it repeatedly with her hairpin in final revenge against Cicero's power of speech.[73]
Cicero's son, Marcus Tullius Cicero Minor, during his year as a consul in 30 BC, avenged his father's death, to a certain extent, when he announced to the Senate Mark Antony's naval defeat at Actium in 31 BC by Octavian and his capable commander-in-chief, Agrippa.
Octavian is reported to have praised Cicero as a patriot and a scholar of meaning in later times, within the circle of his family.[74] However, it was Octavian's acquiescence that had allowed Cicero to be killed, as Cicero was proscribed by the new triumvirate.
Cicero's career as a statesman was marked by inconsistencies and a tendency to shift his position in response to changes in the political climate. His indecision may be attributed to his sensitive and impressionable personality; he was prone to overreaction in the face of political and private change. "Would that he had been able to endure prosperity with greater self-control, and adversity with more fortitude!" wrote C. Asinius Pollio, a contemporary Roman statesman and historian.[75][76]
Legacy[edit]


Part of the Politics series on


Republicanism




Central concepts


Anti-monarchism
Popular sovereignty
Republic
Res publica
Social contract








Schools


Classical republicanism
Neo-republicanism








Important thinkers


Hannah Arendt
Cicero
James Harrington
Thomas Jefferson
John Locke
James Madison
Montesquieu
Philip Pettit
Polybius
Jean Jacques Rousseau
Michael Sandel
Algernon Sidney
Quentin Skinner
Cass Sunstein
Mary Wollstonecraft








History


Roman Republic
Gaṇa sangha
Classical Athens
Republic of Venice
Republic of Genoa
Republic of Florence
Dutch Republic
American Revolution
French Revolution
Spanish American wars of independence
Trienio Liberal
French Revolution of 1848
5 October 1910 revolution
Xinhai Revolution
Russian Revolution
German Revolution of 1918–19
Turkish War of Independence
Mongolian Revolution of 1921
11 September 1922 Revolution
Spanish Civil War
Birth of the Italian Republic
Egyptian Revolution of 1952
14 July Revolution
North Yemen Civil War
Zanzibar Revolution
1969 Libyan coup d'état
Cambodian coup of 1970
Third Hellenic Republic
Iranian Revolution
1987 Fijian coups d'état
Nepalese Civil War








By country


Australia
Barbados
Canada
Ireland
Jamaica
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Related topics


Communitarianism
Liberalism
Monarchism






Politics portal





v
t
e









Henry VIII's childhood copy of De Officiis, bearing the inscription in his hand, "Thys boke is myne Prynce Henry".


Cicero has been traditionally considered the master of Latin prose, with Quintilian declaring that Cicero was "not the name of a man, but of eloquence itself."[77] The English words Ciceronian (meaning "eloquent") and cicerone (meaning "local guide") derive from his name.[78][79] He is credited with transforming Latin from a modest utilitarian language into a versatile literary medium capable of expressing abstract and complicated thoughts with clarity.[80] Julius Caesar praised Cicero's achievement by saying "it is more important to have greatly extended the frontiers of the Roman spirit (ingenium) than the frontiers of the Roman empire".[81] According to John William Mackail, "Cicero's unique and imperishable glory is that he created the language of the civilized world, and used that language to create a style which nineteen centuries have not replaced, and in some respects have hardly altered."[82]
Cicero was also an energetic writer with an interest in a wide variety of subjects, in keeping with the Hellenistic philosophical and rhetorical traditions in which he was trained. The quality and ready accessibility of Ciceronian texts favored very wide distribution and inclusion in teaching curricula, as suggested by a graffito at Pompeii, admonishing: "You will like Cicero, or you will be whipped".[83] Cicero was greatly admired by influential Church Fathers such as Augustine of Hippo, who credited Cicero's lost Hortensius for his eventual conversion to Christianity,[84] and St. Jerome, who had a feverish vision in which he was accused of being "follower of Cicero and not of Christ" before the judgment seat.[85] This influence further increased after the Early Middle Ages in Europe, which more of his writings survived than any other Latin author. Medieval philosophers were influenced by Cicero's writings on natural law and innate rights.[86][citation needed]
Petrarch's rediscovery of Cicero's letters provided the impetus for searches for ancient Greek and Latin writings scattered throughout European monasteries, and the subsequent rediscovery of classical antiquity led to the Renaissance. Subsequently, Cicero became synonymous with classical Latin to such an extent that a number of humanist scholars began to assert that no Latin word or phrase should be used unless it appeared in Cicero's works, a stance criticized by Erasmus.[87]
His voluminous correspondence, much of it addressed to his friend Atticus, has been especially influential, introducing the art of refined letter writing to European culture. Cornelius Nepos, the 1st century BC biographer of Atticus, remarked that Cicero's letters contained such a wealth of detail "concerning the inclinations of leading men, the faults of the generals, and the revolutions in the government" that their reader had little need for a history of the period.[88]
Among Cicero's admirers were Desiderius Erasmus, Martin Luther, and John Locke.[89] Following the invention of Johannes Gutenberg's printing press, De Officiis was the second book printed in Europe, after the Gutenberg Bible. Scholars note Cicero's influence on the rebirth of religious toleration in the 17th century.[90]
While Cicero the humanist deeply influenced the culture of the Renaissance, Cicero the republican inspired the Founding Fathers of the United States and the revolutionaries of the French Revolution.[91] John Adams said, "As all the ages of the world have not produced a greater statesman and philosopher united than Cicero, his authority should have great weight."[92] Jefferson names Cicero as one of a handful of major figures who contributed to a tradition “of public right” that informed his draft of the Declaration of Independence and shaped American understandings of "the common sense" basis for the right of revolution.[93] Camille Desmoulins said of the French republicans in 1789 that they were "mostly young people who, nourished by the reading of Cicero at school, had become passionate enthusiasts for liberty".[94]
Jim Powell starts his book on the history of liberty with the sentence: "Marcus Tullius Cicero expressed principles that became the bedrock of liberty in the modern world."[95]
Likewise, no other ancient personality has inspired as much venomous dislike as Cicero, especially in more modern times.[96] His commitment to the values of the Republic accommodated a hatred of the poor and persistent opposition to the advocates and mechanisms of popular representation.[97] Friedrich Engels referred to him as "the most contemptible scoundrel in history" for upholding republican "democracy" while at the same time denouncing land and class reforms.[98] Cicero has faced criticism for exaggerating the democratic qualities of republican Rome, and for defending the Roman oligarchy against the popular reforms of Caesar.[99] Michael Parenti admits Cicero's abilities as an orator, but finds him a vain, pompous and hypocritical personality who, when it suited him, could show public support for popular causes that he privately despised. Parenti presents Cicero's prosecution of the Catiline conspiracy as legally flawed at least, and possibly unlawful.[100]
Cicero also had an influence on modern astronomy. Nicolaus Copernicus, searching for ancient views on earth motion, said that he "first ... found in Cicero that Hicetas supposed the earth to move."[101]
Works[edit]




Marci Tullii Ciceronis Opera Omnia (1566)


Main article: Writings of Cicero
Cicero was declared a righteous pagan by the Early Church,[102] and therefore many of his works were deemed worthy of preservation. The Bogomils considered him a rare exception of a pagan saint.[103] Subsequent Roman and medieval Christian writers quoted liberally from his works De Re Publica (On the Commonwealth) and De Legibus (On the Laws), and much of his work has been recreated from these surviving fragments. Cicero also articulated an early, abstract conceptualization of rights, based on ancient law and custom. Of Cicero's books, six on rhetoric have survived, as well as parts of eight on philosophy. Of his speeches, 88 were recorded, but only 58 survive.
Speeches[edit]

(81 BC) Pro Quinctio (In Defense of Quinctius)
(80 BC) Pro Roscio Amerino (In Defense of Roscius of Ameria)
(70 BC) In Verrem (Against Verres)
(69 BC) Pro Fonteio (In Defense of Fonteius)
(69 BC) Pro Caecina (In Defense of Caecina)
(66 BC) Pro Cluentio (In Defense of Cluentius)
(66 BC) De Imperio Gnaei Pompei or De Lege Manilia (On the Command of Gnaeus Pompey)
(63 BC) De Lege Agraria (On the Agrarian Law proposed by Servilius Rullus)
(63 BC) In Catilinam (Against Catiline)
(63 BC) Pro Rabirio Perduellionis Reo (In Defense of Rabirius)
(62 BC) Pro Sulla (In Defense of Sulla)
(62 BC) Pro Archia Poeta (In Defense of Archias the Poet)
(59 BC) Pro Flacco (In Defense of Flaccus)
(57 BC) Post Reditum in Senatu (Speech to the Senate After His Return)
(57 BC) Post Reditum ad Quirites (Speech to the People After His Return)
(57 BC) De Domo Sua (On His House)
(57 BC) De Haruspicum Responsis (On the Response of the Haruspices)
(56 BC) Pro Sestio (In Defense of Sestius)
(56 BC) In Vatinium (Cross-examination of Vatinius)
(56 BC) Pro Caelio (In Defense of Caelius)
(56 BC) De Provinciis Consularibus (On the Consular Provinces)
(56 BC) Pro Balbo (In Defense of Balbus)
(55 BC) In Pisonem (Against Piso)
(54 BC) Pro Rabirio Postumo (In Defense of Rabirius Postumus)
(52 BC) Pro Milone (In Defense of Milo)
(46 BC) Pro Marcello (In Support of the Recall of Marcellus)
(46 BC) Pro Ligario (In Defense of Ligarius)
(45 BC) Pro Deiotaro (In Defense of King Deiotarus)
(44–43 BC) Philippicae (Philippics, against Mark Antony)[104]

Philosophical dialogues and treatises[edit]

(84 BC) De Inventione (About the composition of arguments)
(55 BC) De Oratore ad Quintum fratrem libri tres (On the Orator, three books for his brother Quintus)
(51 BC) De Re Publica (On the Commonwealth)
(?? BC) De Legibus (On the Laws)
(46 BC) Paradoxa Stoicorum (Stoic Paradoxes)
(46 BC) Brutus (Brutus)
(46 BC) Orator (Orator)
(45 BC) Hortensius (an exhortation to philosophy)
(45 BC) Consolatio (on grief and consolation)
(45 BC) Academica (On Academic Skepticism)
(45 BC) De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum (On the Ends of Good and Evil or On Moral Ends,[105] a book on ethics)[106]
(45 BC) Tusculanae Disputationes (Tusculan Disputations)
(45 BC) De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the Gods)
(44 BC) Topica
(44 BC) De Divinatione (On Divination)
(44 BC) De Fato (On Fate)
(44 BC) De Amicitia (On Friendship)
(44 BC) Cato Maior de Senectute (Cato the Elder on Old Age)
(44 BC) Laelius de Amicitia (Laelius on Friendship)
(44 BC) De Gloria (On Glory)
(44 BC) De Officiis (On Duties)

Letters[edit]
Cicero's letters to and from various public and private figures are considered some of the most reliable sources of information for the people and events surrounding the fall of the Roman Republic. While 37 books of his letters have survived into modern times, 35 more books were known to antiquity that have since been lost. These included letters to Caesar, to Pompey, to Octavian, and to his son Marcus.[107]

Epistulae ad Atticum (Letters to Atticus; 68–43 BC)
Epistulae ad Brutum (Letters to Brutus; 43 BC)
Epistulae ad Familiares (Letters to friends; 62–43 BC)
Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem (Letters to brother Quintus; 60/59–54 BC)

Notable fictional portrayals[edit]
Ben Jonson dramatised the conspiracy of Catiline in his play Catiline His Conspiracy, featuring Cicero as a character. Cicero also appears as a minor character in William Shakespeare's play Julius Caesar.
Cicero was portrayed on the motion picture screen by British actor Alan Napier in the 1953 film Julius Caesar, based on Shakespeare's play. He has also been played by such noted actors as Michael Hordern (in Cleopatra), and André Morell (in the 1970 Julius Caesar). Most recently, Cicero was portrayed by David Bamber in the HBO series Rome (2005–2007) and appeared in both seasons.
In the historical novel series Masters of Rome, Colleen McCullough presents an unflattering depiction of Cicero's career, showing him struggling with an inferiority complex and vanity, morally flexible and fatally indiscreet, while his rival Julius Caesar is shown in a more approving light.[citation needed] Cicero is portrayed as a hero in the novel A Pillar of Iron by Taylor Caldwell (1965). Robert Harris' novels Imperium, Lustrum (published under the name Conspirata in the United States) and Dictator is the three-part novel series based upon the life of Cicero. In these novels Cicero's character is depicted in a more balanced way than in those of McCullough, with his positive traits equaling or outweighing his weaknesses (while conversely Caesar is depicted as more sinister than in McCullough).[citation needed] Cicero is a major recurring character in the Roma Sub Rosa series of mystery novels by Steven Saylor. He also appears several times as a peripheral character in John Maddox Roberts' SPQR series. The protagonist, Decius Metellus, admires Cicero for his erudition, but is disappointed by his lack of real opposition to Caesar, as well as puzzled by his relentless fawning on the Optimates, who secretly despise Cicero as a parvenu.[citation needed]
See also[edit]


Ancient Rome portal




A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions
Caecilia Attica
Caecilia Metella (daughter of Metellus Celer)
Clausula (rhetoric)
Marcantonius Majoragio
Marcus Tullius Tiro
Otium
Paradoxa Stoicorum
Quintus Tullius Cicero
Servius Sulpicius Rufus
Titus Pomponius Atticus
Translation
Tullia (daughter of Cicero)


Notes[edit]



^ The name is infrequently anglicized as Tully[1] (/ˈtʌli/).



References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ E.g., in H. Jones, Master Tully: Cicero in Tudor England (Nieuwkoop: De Graaf, 1998).
^ Rawson, E.: Cicero, a portrait (1975) p.303
^ Haskell, H.J.: This was Cicero (1964)p.300–301
^ Merriam-Webster, Inc (January 1995). "Ciceronian period". Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia Of Literature. Merriam-Webster. p. 244. ISBN 978-0-87779-042-6. Retrieved 27 August 2013. 
^ Cicero, Selected Works, 1971, pp.24
^ Q. Acad. 2.17–18
^ Conte, G.B.: "Latin Literature: a history" (1987) p.199
^ Wootton, David (1 January 1996). Modern Political Thought: Readings from Machiavelli to Nietzsche. Hackett Publishing. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-87220-341-9. Retrieved 27 August 2013. 
^ Zieliński, Tadeusz. Cicero Im Wandel Der Jahrhunderte. Nabu Press. 
^ Wood, Neal (1991). Cicero's Social and Political Thought. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07427-9. 
^ Nicgorski, Walter. "Cicero and the Natural Law". Natural Law, Natural Rights, and American Constitutionalism. 
^ Griffin, Miriam; Boardman, John; Griffin, Jasper; Murray, Oswyn (15 January 2001). The Oxford Illustrated History of the Roman World. Oxford University Press. pp. 76ff. ISBN 978-0-19-285436-0. Retrieved 10 August 2011. 
^ Rawson, E.: Cicero, a portrait (1975) p.5–6; Cicero, Ad Familiares 16.26.2 (Quintus to Cicero)
^ Trollope, Anthony. The Life of Cicero Volume 1. p. 42
^ Plutarch, Cicero 1.3–5
^ Everitt, A.:"Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001) p.34
^ Plutarch. "Life of Caesar". University of Chicago. p. 447. After this, Sulla's power being now on the wane, and Caesar's friends at home inviting him to return, Caesar sailed to Rhodes to study under Apollonius the son of Molon, an illustrious rhetorician with the reputation of a worthy character, of whom Cicero also was a pupil. 
^ Everitt, A.:"Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001) p.35
^ Plutarch, Cicero 2.2
^ Plutarch, Cicero 3.2
^ Everitt, A.:"Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001) p. 35
^ Rawson, E.: "Cicero, a portrait" (1975) p.22
^ Everitt, A.:"Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001) p. 61
^ Vasaly, Ann. Representation: Images of the World in a Ciceronian Territory. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 158–68. ISBN 0520077555. Archived from the original on 2014-03-06. 
^ De Officiis, book 1, n. 1
^ Everitt, A.:"Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001) pp. 253–55
^ Rawson:"Cicero, a portrait" (1975) p.18
^ "Elpenor". 
^ Haskell, H.J.: "This was Cicero" (1940) p.83
^ Cicero, Brutus, 313–314
^ Cicero, Brutus, 315
^ Cicero, Brutus, 316–316
^ Gesine Manuwald, Cicero: Philippics 3–9, vol. 2, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2007, pp. 129f
^ Rawson, E.: "Cicero, a portrait" (1975) p.25
^ Susan Treggiari, Terentia, Tullia and Publilia: the women of Cicero's family, London: Routledge, 2007, pp. 76f.
^ Treggiari, op. cit., p. 133
^ Rawson, E.: Cicero p.225
^ Haskell H.J.: This was Cicero, p.95
^ Haskell, H.J.:"This was Cicero" (1964) p.249
^ Cicero, Letters to Atticus, 12.14. Rawson, E.: Cicero p. 225
^ Rawson, E.:Cicero p.226
^ Cicero, Samtliga brev/Collected letters
^ Haskell, H.J (1964). This was Cicero. pp. 103–04. 
^ Paavo Castren & L. Pietilä-Castren: Antiikin käsikirja/Encyclopedia of the Ancient World
^ The Oxford illustrated history of the Roman world. pp. 84ff. Retrieved 10 August 2011. 
^ Trans. Grant, Michael. Cicero: Selected Works. London: Penguin Books. 1960.
^ III. The First Oration Against Catiline by Cicero. Rome (218 BC–84 AD). Vol. II. Bryan, William Jennings, ed. 1906. The World's Famous Orations
^ Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Selected Works, Penguin Books Ltd, Great Britain, 1971
^ Cicero, In Catilinam 3.2[dead link] (at the Perseus Project); Sallust, Bellum Catilinae 40–45 (at Lacus Curtius); Plutarch, Cicero 18.4 (at Lacus Curtius).
^ Clayton, Edward. "Cicero (106–43 BC)". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ Yelegaonkar, Dr Shrikant (2009). Western Thinker's in Political Science. Lulu.com. ISBN 9781329082779. 
^ Rawson, E.: Cicero, 1984 106
^ Haskell, H.J.: This was Cicero, 1964 200
^ Haskell, H.J.: This was Cicero, 1964 p.201
^ Plutarch. Cicero 32
^ Haskell, H.J.: "This was Cicero" (1964) p.201
^ Cicero, Samtliga brev/Collected letters (in a Swedish translation)
^ Haskell. H.J.: This was Cicero, p.204
^ Grant, M: "Cicero: Selected Works", p67
^ Everitt, A. "Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician" (2001), pp. 186–88
^ Plutarch, The Life of Cicero, 36
^ Plutarch. "Life of Caesar". University of Chicago. p. 575. It was Cicero who proposed the first honours for [Caesar] in the senate, and their magnitude was, after all, not too great for a man; but others added excessive honours and vied with one another in proposing them, thus rendering Caesar odious and obnoxious even to the mildest citizens because of the pretension and extravagance of what was decreed for him. 
^ Everitt, Anthony: Cicero pp. 215.
^ Plutarch, Cicero 38.1
^ Cicero, Second Philippic Against Antony
^ Cicero, Ad Familiares 10.28
^ Cecil W. Wooten, "Cicero's Philippics and Their Demosthenic Model" University of North Carolina Press
^ "World History in Context - Document". ic.galegroup.com. Retrieved 2018-01-03. 
^ Appian, Civil Wars 4.19
^ Plutarch, Cicero 46.3–5
^ a b Haskell, H.J.: This was Cicero (1964) p.293
^ Cassius Dio, Roman History 47.8.4
^ Everitt, A.: Cicero, A turbulent life (2001)
^ Plutarch, Cicero, 49.5
^ Haskell, H.J.:"This was Cicero" (1964) p.296
^ Castren and Pietilä-Castren: "Antiikin käsikirja" /"Handbook of antiquity" (2000) p. 237
^ Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria 10.1.1 12
^ Harper, Douglas. "Ciceronian". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ Harper, Douglas. "cicerone". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of Literature, "Ciceronian period" (1995) p. 244
^ Pliny, Natural History, 7.117
^ Cicero, Seven orations, 1912
^ Hasan Niyazi, From Pompeii to Cyberspace – Transcending barriers with Twitter "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-11-14. Retrieved 2012-09-07. 
^ Augustine of Hippo, Confessions, 3:4
^ Jerome, Letter to Eustochium, XXII:30
^ Goodey, C. F. (2013-07-28). A History of Intelligence and 'Intellectual Disability': The Shaping of Psychology in Early Modern Europe. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 9781409482352. 
^ Erasmus, Ciceronianus
^ Cornelius Nepos, Atticus 16, trans. John Selby Watson.
^ Richards 2010, p.121
^ Gibson, William (2006). "John Marshall. John Locke, Toleration and Early Enlightenment Culture: Religious Toleration and Arguments for Religious Toleration in Early Modern and Early Enlightenment Europe". H-Albion. Retrieved 8 July 2012. 
^ De Burgh, W.G., "The legacy of the ancient world"
^ American republicanism: Roman Ideology in the United States Mortimer N. S. Sellers, NYU Press, 1994
^ Thomas Jefferson, “Letter to Henry Lee,” 8 May 1825, in The Political Thought of American Statesmen, eds. Morton Frisch and Richard Stevens (Itasca, Ill.: F. E. Peacock Publishers, 1973), 12.
^ Aulard, François-Alphonse (1901). Histoire politique de la Révolution française: Origines et Développement de la Démocratie et de la République (1789–1804). Librairie Armand Colin. p. 5. 
^ Powell, Jim (July 4, 2000). The Triumph of Liberty: A 2,000 Year History Told Through the Lives of Freedom's Greatest Champions. Free Press. pp. 2–10. ISBN 978-0684859675. 
^ Bailey, D.R.S. "Cicero's letters to Atticus" (1978) p.16
^ Letters to Atticus I & II
^ Noted in Michael Parenti, The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome, 2003:86. ISBN 1-56584-797-0
^ Cicero (44 BCE). "On Duties" (PDF).  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ Michael Parenti, The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome, 2003, pp. 107–111, 93. ISBN 1-56584-797-0
^ Spielvogel, Jackson (2011). Western Civilization since 1300. Cengage Learning. p. 492. ISBN 978-1-111-34219-7. 
^ Everitt, A., Cicero: The Life and Times of Rome's Greatest Politician (2003), p. 259
^ De Burgh, W.G.
^ "M. Tullius Cicero, Orations: The fourteen orations against Marcus Antonius (Philippics) (ed. C. D. Yonge)". Perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 2013-10-03. 
^ Cicero On Moral Ends. (De Finibus) Julia Annas – editor, Raphael Woolf – transltr Cambridge University Press, 2001
^ "E-Texts : De Finibus, Book I". Epicurus.info. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved 2013-10-03. 
^  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Cicero". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 




Library resources about
Cicero





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




By Cicero




Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




Bibliography[edit]


Badian, E: "Cicero and the Commission of 146 B.C.", Collection Latomus 101 (1969), 54–65.
Caldwell, Taylor (1965). A Pillar of Iron. New York: Doubleday & Company. ISBN 0-385-05303-7. 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Cicero’s letters to Atticus, Vol, I, II, IV, VI, Cambridge University Press, Great Britain, 1965
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Latin extracts of Cicero on Himself, translated by Charles Gordon Cooper, University of Queensland Press, Brisbane, 1963
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Selected Political Speeches, Penguin Books Ltd, Great Britain, 1969
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, De Officiis (On Duties), translated by Walter Miller. Harvard University Press, 1913, ISBN 978-0-674-99033-3, ISBN 0-674-99033-1
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Selected Works, Penguin Books Ltd, Great Britain, 1971
Cowell, F R: Cicero and the Roman Republic (Penguin Books, 1948; numerous later reprints)
Everitt, Anthony (2001). Cicero: the life and times of Rome's greatest politician. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-375-50746-9. 
Gruen, Erich S. (1974). The Last Generation of the Roman Republic. University of California Press. 
Haskell, H. J. (1942). This was Cicero. Alfred A. Knopf. 
March, Duane A. (1989). "Cicero and the 'Gang of Five'". Classical World. 82 (4): 225–34. doi:10.2307/4350381. 
Narducci, Emanuele (2009). Cicerone. La parola e la politica. Laterza. ISBN 88-420-7605-8. 
Plutarch Penguins Classics English translation by Rex Warner, Fall of the Roman Republic, Six Lives by Plutarch: Marius, Sulla, Crassus, Pompey, Caesar, Cicero (Penguin Books, 1958; with Introduction and notes by Robin Seager, 1972)
Rawson, Beryl: The Politics of Friendship: Pompey and Cicero (Sydney University Press, 1978)
Rawson, Elizabeth:

"Cicero the Historian and Cicero the Antiquarian", JRS 62 (1972), 33–45.
Cicero: A Portrait (Allen Lane, Penguin Books Ltd., 1975) ISBN 0-7139-0864-5. Revised edition: Bristol Classical Press, 1983. ISBN 0-86292-051-5. American edition of revised edition: Cornell University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-8014-1628-0 (hardcover); ISBN 0-8014-9256-4 (paperback).


Richards, Carl J. (2010). Why We're All Romans: The Roman Contribution to the Western World. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-6778-8. 
Scullard, H. H. From the Gracchi to Nero, University Paperbacks, Great Britain, 1968
Smith, R E: Cicero the Statesman (Cambridge University Press, 1966)
Stockton, David: Cicero: A Political Biography (Oxford University Press, 1971)
Strachan-Davidson, James Leigh (1936). "Cicero and the Fall of the Roman Republic". Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Taylor, H. (1918). "Cicero: A sketch of his life and works". Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co. 
Wistrand, M. (1979). Cicero Imperator: Studies in Cicero's Correspondence 51-47 B.C. Göteborg. 
Yates, Frances A. (1974). The Art of Memory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-95001-8. 


Further reading[edit]

Boissier, Gaston, Cicéron et ses amis. Étude sur la société romaine du temps de César (1884)
Hamza, Gabor, Ciceros Verhältnis zu seinen Quellen, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Darstellung der Staatslehre in De re publica. KLIO – Beiträge zur alten Geschichte 67 (1985) 492-497.
Hamza, Gabor, Cicero und der Idealtypus des iurisconsultus. HELIKON 22–27 (1982–1987) 281-296.
Everitt, Anthony (2001). Cicero. A turbulent life. London: John Murray Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7195-5493-3. 
Fuhrmann, Manfred (1992). Cicero and the Roman Republic. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-17879-1. 
Gildenhard, Ingo (2011). Creative Eloquence: The Construction of Reality in Cicero's Speeches. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Habicht, Christian (1990). Cicero the politician. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-3872-X. 
Macdonald, C. (1986). De imperio (Nachdr. d. Ausg. Basingstoke 1966. ed.). Bristol: Bristol Classical Press. ISBN 0-86292-182-1. 
Palmer, Tom G. (2008). "Cicero (106–43 B.C.)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. p. 63. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n42. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Parenti, Michael (2004). The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome. New York: The New Press. ISBN 1-56584-942-6. 
Powell, J.G.F., ed. (1995). Cicero the philosopher : twelve papers. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-814751-1. 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R. (1971). Cicero. London: Duckworth. ISBN 0-7156-0574-7. 
Sihler, Ernest G. (1914). Cicero of Arpinum: A Political and Literary Biography. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Hamza, Gabor, L’«optimus status civitatis» di Cicerone e la sua tradizione nel pensiero politico. In: Tradizione romanistica e Costituzione. « Cinquanta anni della Corte Costituzionale della Repubblica Italiana ». vol. II. Napoli, 2006. 1455-1468.
Treggiari, S. (2007). Terentia, Tullia and Publilia. The women of Cicero's family. London: Routledge
Hamza, Gabor, Il potere (lo Stato) nel pensiero di Cicerone e la sua attualità. Revista Internacional de Derecho Romano (RIDROM) 10 (2013) 1-25. http://www.ridrom.uclm.es
Hamza, Gabor, Zur Interpretation des Naturrechts in den Werken von Cicero. Pázmány Law Review 2 (2014) 5-15.

External links[edit]






This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marcus Tullius Cicero.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Cicero





Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Cicero





Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Marcus Tullius Cicero






Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Cicero.



Works by Cicero


Works by Cicero at Perseus Digital Library
Works by Marcus Tullius Cicero at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Cicero at Internet Archive
Works by Cicero at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
The Latin Library (Latin): Works of Cicero
Dickinson College Commentaries: Against Verres 2.1.53-86
Dickinson College Commentaries: On Pompey’s Command (De Imperio) 27-49


Biographies and descriptions of Cicero's time



At Project Gutenberg

Plutarch's biography of Cicero contained in the Parallel Lives
Life of Cicero by Anthony Trollope, Volume I – Volume II
Cicero by Rev. W. Lucas Collins (Ancient Classics for English Readers)
Roman life in the days of Cicero by Rev. Alfred J. Church
Social life at Rome in the Age of Cicero by W. Warde Fowler


At Heraklia website at the Wayback Machine (archived January 14, 2006)
Dryden's translation of Cicero from Plutarch's Parallel Lives
At Middlebury College website




Political offices


Preceded by
Lucius Julius Caesar and Gaius Marcius Figulus
Consul of the Roman Republic
with Gaius Antonius Hybrida
63 BC
Succeeded by
Decimus Junius Silanus and Lucius Licinius Murena








v
t
e


Marcus Tullius Cicero






Personal life
Political career
Writings





Treatises




Rhetoric
and politics



De Inventione
De Oratore

Book III


De Partitionibus Oratoriae
De Optimo Genere Oratorum
Brutus
Orator
De Legibus





Philosophical



Hortensius
Consolatio
De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum
Tusculanae Quaestiones
De Natura Deorum
De Divinatione
De Fato
Cato Maior de Senectute
Laelius de Amicitia
De Officiis
De Re Publica

Somnium Scipionis


Paradoxa Stoicorum













Orations




Political



De Imperio Cn. Pompei
In Catilinam I–IV
In Toga Candida
Pro Milone
Pro Marcello
Pro Ligario
Philippicae





Judicial



Pro Quinctio
Pro Roscio Amerino
Divinatio in Caecilium
In Verrem
Pro Tullio
Pro Caecina
Pro Cluentio
Pro Archia Poeta
Pro Caelio








Letters



Epistulae ad Atticum
Epistulae ad Brutum
Epistulae ad Familiares
Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem





Related



Summum bonum












v
t
e


Ancient Rome topics






Outline
Timeline





Epochs







Foundation
Kingdom

overthrow


Republic





Empire



Pax Romana
Principate
Dominate
Western Empire

fall
historiography of the fall


Byzantine Empire

decline
fall










Constitution



History
Kingdom
Republic
Empire
Late Empire
Senate
Legislative assemblies

Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian


Executive magistrates
SPQR





Government



Curia
Forum
Cursus honorum
Collegiality
Emperor
Legatus
Dux
Officium
Prefect
Vicarius
Vigintisexviri
Lictor
Magister militum
Imperator
Princeps senatus
Pontifex Maximus
Augustus
Caesar
Tetrarch
Optimates
Populares
Province





Magistrates




Ordinary



Tribune
Quaestor
Aedile
Praetor
Consul
Censor
Promagistrate
Governor





Extraordinary



Dictator
Magister Equitum
Decemviri
Consular Tribune
Triumvir
Rex
Interrex








Law



Twelve Tables
Mos maiorum
Citizenship
Auctoritas
Imperium
Status
Litigation





Military



Borders
Establishment
Structure
Campaigns
Political control
Strategy
Engineering
Frontiers and fortifications

castra


Technology
Army

Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines


Navy
Auxiliaries
Decorations and punishments
Hippika gymnasia





Economy



Agriculture
Deforestation
Commerce
Finance
Currency
Republican currency
Imperial currency





Technology



Abacus
Numerals
Civil engineering
Military engineering
Military technology
Aqueducts
Bridges
Circus
Concrete
Domes
Forum
Metallurgy
Roads
Sanitation
Thermae





Culture



Architecture
Art
Bathing
Calendar
Clothing
Cosmetics
Cuisine
Hairstyles
Education
Literature
Music
Mythology
Religion
Romanization
Sexuality
Theatre
Wine





Society



Patricians
Plebs
Conflict of the Orders
Secessio plebis
Equites
Gens
Tribes
Naming conventions
Demography
Women
Marriage
Adoption
Slavery
Bagaudae





Latin



History
Alphabet
Versions

Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
New
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical


Romance languages





Writers



Apuleius
Caesar
Catullus
Cicero
Ennius
Horace
Juvenal
Livy
Lucan
Lucretius
Martial
Ovid
Petronius
Phaedrus
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Propertius
Quintilian
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Sallust
Seneca
Statius
Suetonius
Tacitus
Terence
Tibullus
Marcus Terentius Varro
Virgil
Vitruvius





Major cities



Alexandria
Antioch
Aquileia
Berytus
Bononia
Carthage
Constantinopolis
Eboracum
Leptis Magna
Londinium
Lutetia
Mediolanum
Pompeii
Ravenna
Roma
Smyrna
Vindobona
Volubilis





Lists and other
topics



Wars and battles
Generals
Legions
Emperors
Geographers
Cities and towns
Institutions
Laws
Consuls
Tribunes
Distinguished women
Nomina
Gentes
Climate
Legacy


Fiction
Films












v
t
e


The works of Plutarch



Works



Parallel Lives
Moralia
Pseudo-Plutarch





Lives



Alcibiades and Coriolanus1
Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar
Aratus of Sicyon / Artaxerxes and Galba / Otho2
Aristides and Cato the Elder1
Crassus and Nicias1
Demetrius and Antony1
Demosthenes and Cicero1
Dion and Brutus1
Fabius and Pericles1
Lucullus and Cimon1
Lysander and Sulla1
Numa and Lycurgus1
Pelopidas and Marcellus1
Philopoemen and Flamininus1
Phocion and Cato the Younger
Pompey and Agesilaus1
Poplicola and Solon1
Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius
Romulus and Theseus1
Sertorius and Eumenes1
Agis / Cleomenes1 and Tiberius Gracchus / Gaius Gracchus
Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus1
Themistocles and Camillus





Translators and editors



Jacques Amyot
Arthur Hugh Clough
John Dryden
Philemon Holland
Thomas North








1 Comparison extant
2 Four unpaired Lives












v
t
e


Catholic virtue ethics




Great Commandment; "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." – Matthew 22:35-40



Cardinal virtues



Prudence (Prudentia)
Justice (Iustitia)
Fortitude (Fortitudo)
Temperance (Temperantia)


Sources: Plato

Republic, Book IV


Cicero
Ambrose
Augustine of Hippo
Thomas Aquinas
Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1805–1809










Theological virtues



Faith (Fides)
Hope (Spes)
Charity (Caritas)


Sources: Paul the Apostle

1 Corinthians 13


Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1812–1829





Seven heavenly virtues



Chastity (Castitas)
Temperance (Temperantia)
Charity (Caritas)
Diligence (Industria)
Patience (Patientia)
Kindness (Humanitas)
Humility (Humilitas)


Source: Church Fathers





Seven deadly sins



Lust (Luxuria)
Gluttony (Gula)
Greed (Avaritia)
Sloth (Acedia)
Wrath (Ira)
Envy (Invidia)
Pride (Superbia)


Source: Prudentius, Psychomachia


People: Evagrius Ponticus
John Cassian
Pope Gregory I
Dante Alighieri
Peter Binsfeld





Related concepts



Ten Commandments
Four last things
Sin

Christian views on sin
Original sin


Christian views on the Old Covenant
Hamartiology








(Latin names in bracketed italics)
Catholic philosophy
Catholic social teaching
 Catholicism portal
 Philosophy portal












v
t
e


Ethics



Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics





Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Free will
Good and evil
Happiness
Ideal
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...





Philosophers



Laozi
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...





Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology





Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Social philosophy








Portal
Category












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 78769600
LCCN: n79032166
ISNI: 0000 0001 3932 2910
GND: 118520814
SELIBR: 46187
SUDOC: 02665234X
BNF: cb11885977m (data)
BIBSYS: 90053491
ULAN: 500242756
NLA: 35028404
NDL: 00436023
NKC: jn19981000486
ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\006643
BNE: XX841248
IATH: w6tb1bsj











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cicero&oldid=818528597"					Categories: Cicero106 BC births43 BC deathsPeople from Arpino1st-century BC Romans1st-century BC writersAncient Roman rhetoriciansTranslation scholarsSenators of the Roman RepublicClassical humanistsExecuted Ancient Roman peopleExecuted writersGolden Age Latin writersLatin letter writersPeople executed by the Roman RepublicAncient Roman political theoristsPhilosophers of Roman ItalyRoman-era philosophersAncient Roman scholars of religionRoman Republican consulsRoman Republican praetorsAncient Roman juristsTulliiRoman-era students in Athens1st-century BC executionsAncient Roman exilesRecipients of ancient Roman pardonsTrope theoristsDeaths by blade weaponsMurdered philosophers1st-century BC philosophersExecuted philosophersAncient Roman equitesTranslators of Ancient Greek textsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2016CS1 errors: datesWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015Wikipedia external links cleanup from February 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from February 2015Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksWebarchive template wayback linksAC with 15 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SBN identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers