



A camera crew sets up for scenes to be filmed on the flight deck for the motion picture Stealth with the crew of the Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN 72).


A cinematographer or director of photography (sometimes shortened to DP or DOP) is the chief over the camera and light crews working on a film, television production or other live action piece and is responsible for making artistic and technical decisions related to the image. The study and practice of this field is referred to as cinematography.
The cinematographer selects the camera, film stock, lens, filters, etc., to realize the scene in accordance with the intentions of the director. Relations between the cinematographer and director vary; in some instances the director will allow the cinematographer complete independence; in others, the director allows little to none, even going so far as to specify exact camera placement and lens selection. Such a level of involvement is not common once the director and cinematographer have become comfortable with each other; the director will typically convey to the cinematographer what is wanted from a scene visually, and allow the cinematographer latitude in achieving that effect.
Several American cinematographers have become directors, including Barry Sonnenfeld, originally the Coen brothers' DP; Jan de Bont, cinematographer on films as Die Hard and Basic Instinct, directed Speed and Twister. In 2014, Wally Pfister, cinematographer on Christopher Nolan's three Batman films, made his directorial debut with Transcendence; whilst British cinematographers Jack Cardiff and Freddie Francis regularly moved between the two positions.



Contents


1 History
2 Societies and trade organizations
3 Noted cinematographers
4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]




A cinematographer on set


In the infancy of motion pictures, the cinematographer was usually also the director and the person physically handling the camera. As the art form and technology evolved, a separation between director and camera operator emerged. With the advent of artificial lighting and faster (more light sensitive) film stocks, in addition to technological advancements in optics, the technical aspects of cinematography necessitated a specialist in that area.
Cinematography was key during the silent movie era; with no sound apart from background music and no dialogue, the films depended on lighting, acting, and set.
In 1919 Hollywood, the then-new motion picture capital of the world, one of the first (and still existing) trade societies was formed: the American Society of Cinematographers (ASC), which stood to recognize the cinematographer's contribution to the art and science of motion picture making. Similar trade associations have been established in other countries too.
Societies and trade organizations[edit]
There are a number of national associations of cinematographers which represent members (irrespective of their official titles) and which are dedicated to the advancement of cinematography. These include:

the American Society of Cinematographers (A.S.C.)
the Canadian Society of Cinematographers (C.S.C.)
the British Society of Cinematographers (B.S.C.)
the Australian Cinematographers Society (A.C.S.)
the Cinematographers Guild of Korea (C.G.K.)
the Filipino Society of Cinematographers (F.S.C.)
the French Society of Cinematographers (A.F.C.)
the Italian Society of Cinematographers (A.I.C.)
the Indian Society of Cinematographers (I.S.C.)
the German Society of Cinematographers (BVK)
the Spanish Society of Cinematography Works (A.E.C)
the European Federation of Cinematographers / IMAGO

The A.S.C. defines cinematography as:

A creative and interpretive process that culminates in the authorship of an original work of art rather than the simple recording of a physical event. Cinematography is not a subcategory of photography. Rather, photography is but one craft that the cinematographer uses in addition to other physical, organizational, managerial, interpretive and image-manipulating techniques to effect one coherent process.[1]

Noted cinematographers[edit]

See Category:Cinematographers and Academy Award for Best Cinematography

See also[edit]

Camerimage
Cinematography
Cinematography Mailing List, a communication forum for cinematographers
Filmmaking
Glossary of motion picture terms
Indian cinematographers
List of film director and cinematographer collaborations
List of film formats
List of motion picture-related topics

References[edit]



^ Hora, John. "Anamorphic Cinematography". In Burum, Stephen H. The American Cinematographer Manual (9 ed.). ISBN 978-0935578317. 



External links[edit]

Cinematography.com
Cinematography Mailing List (CML)
International Cinematographers Guild
Burns, Paul The History of the Discovery of Cinematography
American Society of Cinematographers
The Guild of British Camera Technicians
British Society of Cinematographers
Indian Society of Cinematographers(ISC)
European Federation of Cinematographers / IMAGO
Australian Cinematographers Society (ACS)
German Society of Cinematography, BVK
Italian Society of Cinematography , AIC (Autori Italiani della Cinematografia)








v
t
e


Film crew (filmmaking)








Above the line






Actor

Leading actor
Movie star
Superstar
Character actor
Cameo actors


Film director
Screenwriter
Film producer

Executive producer
Line producer















Below the line







Pre-production



Unit production manager
Production coordinator
Production accountant
Assistant director
Script supervisor
Script coordinator
Casting director
Production assistant
Location manager




Storyboard



Storyboard artist








Production design



Production designer

Art director


Costume designer
Hairdresser
Make-up artist
Set decorator
Property master / mistress ("props")




Visual Art



Matte painter
Illustrator
Scenic design








Photography



Cinematographer / Director of photography
Camera operator

Focus puller
Clapper loader
Steadicam


Gaffer

Best boy (electrical)
Lighting technician


Key grip

Best boy (grip)
Grip
Dolly grip







Sound



Director of audiography
Production sound mixer
Boom operator
Utility sound technician
Dialogue editor
Re-recording mixer
Foley artist
Composer
Music supervisor
Music editor





Special effects



Special effects supervisor
Visual effects supervisor





Animation



Animator
Visual effects
Modeling
Rigging
Layout artist





Talent



Movement director
Choreographer
Extra
Talent agent
Actor (voice)
Cast member
Stand-in
Acting instructor
Stunt double
Stunt performer





Post-production



Film editor
Sound editor
Colorist
Animator
Technical director




Visual effects



Visual effects editor
Compositor
Computer-generated imagery
Rendering


















Authority control



GND: 4029412-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cinematographer&oldid=818120013"					Categories: Media occupationsCinematographersCinematographyFilmmaking occupationsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers