






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (June 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Journalism







News
Writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
News values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school
Index of journalism articles




Areas




Arts
Business
Data
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technology
Trade
Traffic
Weather
World




Genres




Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Comics-based
Community
Data
Database
Gonzo
Immersion
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
"New Journalism"
Non-profit
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Scientific
Sensor
Underground
Visual
Watchdog




Social impact




Fake news
Fourth Estate
Fifth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Press service
Propaganda model
Yellow journalism




News media




Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media




Roles




Journalists (reporters)
Columnist
Blogger
Editor
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Pundit / commentator






 Journalism portal
Category: Journalism







v
t
e





The concept of citizen journalism (also known as "public", "participatory", "democratic",[1] "guerrilla"[2] or "street" journalism[3]) is based upon public citizens "playing an active role in the process of collecting, reporting, analyzing, and disseminating news and information."[4] Similarly, Courtney C. Radsch defines citizen journalism "as an alternative and activist form of news gathering and reporting that functions outside mainstream media institutions, often as a response to shortcomings in the professional journalistic field, that uses similar journalistic practices but is driven by different objectives and ideals and relies on alternative sources of legitimacy than traditional or mainstream journalism".[5] Jay Rosen proposes a simpler definition: "When the people formerly known as the audience employ the press tools they have in their possession to inform one another."[6]
Citizen journalism is not to be confused with community journalism or civic journalism, both of which are practiced by professional journalists. Collaborative journalism is also a separate concept and is the practice of professional and non-professional journalists working together.[7] Similarly, social journalism is a separate concept denoting a digital publication with a hybrid of professional and non-professional journalism. Citizen journalism is a specific form of both citizen media and user-generated content. By juxtaposing the term "citizen", with its attendant qualities of civic-mindedness and social responsibility, with that of "journalism", which refers to a particular profession, Courtney C. Radsch argues that this term best describes this particular form of online and digital journalism conducted by amateurs, because it underscores the link between the practice of journalism and its relation to the political and public sphere.[8]
New media technology, such as social networking and media-sharing websites, in addition to the increasing prevalence of cellular telephones, have made citizen journalism more accessible to people worldwide. Recent advances in new media have started to have a profound political impact.[9] Due to the availability of technology, citizens often can report breaking news more quickly than traditional media reporters. Notable examples of citizen journalism reporting from major world events are, the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the Arab Spring, the Occupy Wall Street movement, the 2013 protests in Turkey, the Euromaidan events in Ukraine, and Syrian Civil War and the 2014 Ferguson unrest.
Critics of the phenomenon, including professional journalists[who?], claim that citizen journalism is unregulated, too subjective, amateur, and haphazard in quality and coverage.



Contents


1 Theory

1.1 Versus "grassroots media"
1.2 Theories of Citizenship


2 Relationship to local journalism
3 History
4 World Trade Organization (WTO)
5 Iran's Green Movement
6 Arab Spring
7 Occupy
8 Citizen journalists
9 Criticisms

9.1 Objectivity
9.2 Quality
9.3 Effects on traditional journalism
9.4 Legal repercussions


10 Past, Present and Future
11 Proponents and facilitators
12 See also
13 References
14 External links



Theory[edit]
Citizen journalism, as a form of alternative media, presents a "radical challenge to the professionalized and institutionalized practices of the mainstream media".[10]
According to Terry Flew, there have been three elements critical to the rise of citizen journalism: open publishing, collaborative editing, and distributed content.[11] Mark Glaser, a freelance journalist who frequently writes on new media issues, said in 2006:[12]

The idea behind citizen journalism is that people without professional journalism training can use the tools of modern technology and the global distribution of the Internet to create, augment or fact-check media on their own or in collaboration with others. For example, you might write about a city council meeting on your blog or in an online forum. Or you could fact-check a newspaper article from the mainstream media and point out factual errors or bias on your blog. Or you might snap a digital photo of a newsworthy event happening in your town and post it online. Or you might videotape a similar event and post it on a site such as YouTube.

The accessibility of online media has also enhanced the interest for journalism among youth and many websites, like 'Far and Wide' a publication focusing on travel and international culture,[13] as well as WorldWeekly a news blog covering a range of topics from world politics to science,[14] are founded and run by students.
In What is Participatory Journalism?,[15] J. D. Lasica classifies media for citizen journalism into the following types:

Audience participation (such as user comments attached to news stories, personal blogs, photographs or video footage captured from personal mobile cameras, or local news written by residents of a community)
Independent news and information Websites (Consumer Reports, the Drudge Report)
Full-fledged participatory news sites (one:convo, NowPublic, OhmyNews, DigitalJournal.com, GroundReport, 'Fair Observer'
Collaborative and contributory media sites (Slashdot, Kuro5hin, Newsvine)
Other kinds of "thin media" (mailing lists, email newsletters)
Personal broadcasting sites (video broadcast sites such as KenRadio)

The literature of citizen, alternative, and participatory journalism is most often situated in a democratic context and theorized as a response to corporate news media dominated by an economic logic. Some scholars have sought to extend the study of citizen journalism beyond the Western, developed world, including Sylvia Moretzsohn,[16] Courtney C. Radsch,[17] and Clemencia Rodríguez.[18] Radsch, for example, wrote that "Throughout the Arab world, citizen journalists have emerged as the vanguard of new social movements dedicated to promoting human rights and democratic values."[19]
Versus "grassroots media"[edit]
One criticism of the term "citizen journalism" to describe this concept is that the word "citizen" has a conterminous relation to the nation-state. The fact that many millions of people are considered stateless and often, are without citizenship (such as refugees or immigrants without papers) limits the concept to those recognised only by governments. Additionally, the global nature of many participatory media initiatives, such as the Independent Media Center, makes talking of journalism in relation to a particular nation-state largely redundant as its production and dissemination do not recognise national boundaries. Some additional names given to the concept based on this analysis are, "grassroots media," "people's media," or "participatory media."
Theories of Citizenship[edit]
According to Vincent Campbell, theories of citizenship can be categorized into two core groups: those that consider journalism for citizenship and those that consider journalism as citizenship. The classical model of citizenship is the base of the two theories of citizenship. The classical model is rooted in the ideology of informed citizens and places emphasis on the role of journalists rather than on citizens. The classical model has 4 main characteristics: journalists' role of informing citizens; citizens are assumed to be informed if they regularly attend to the news they are supplied with; more informed citizens are more likely to participate; and the more informed citizens participate, the more democratic a state is more likely to be.[20]
The first characteristic suggesting that the role of journalism is to inform citizens upholds the theory that journalism is for citizens. One of the main issues with this first theory is that there is a normative judgement surrounding the amount and nature of information that citizens should have as well as what the relationship between the two should be. One branch of journalism for citizens is the "monitorial citizen" coined by Michael Schudson. The "monitorial citizen" suggests that citizens appropriately and strategically select what news and information they consume. The "monitorial citizen" along with other forms of this ideology conceive individuals as those who do things with information to enact change and citizenship. However, this production of information does not equal to an act of citizenship, but instead an act of journalism. Therefore, citizens and journalists are portrayed as distinctive roles whereas journalism is used by citizens for citizenship and conversely, journalists serve citizens.[20]
The second theory considers journalism as citizenship. This theory focuses on the different aspects of citizen identity and activity and understands citizen journalism as directly constituting citizenship. The term "liquid citizenship" coined by Zizi Papacharissi depicts how the lifestyles that individuals engage in allow them to interact with other individuals and organizations, which thus remaps the conceptual periphery of civic, political, and social. This "liquid citizenship" allows the interactions and experiences that individuals face to become citizen journalism where they create their own forms of journalism. An alternative approach of journalism as citizenship rests between the distinction between "dutiful" citizens and "actualizing" citizens. "Dutiful" citizens engage in traditional citizenship practices, while "actualizing" citizens engage in non-traditional citizenship practices. This alternative approach suggests that "actualizing" citizens are less likely to use traditional media and more likely to use online and social media as sources of information, discussion, and participation. Thus, journalism in the form of online and social media practices become a form of citizenship for actualizing citizens.[20]
Relationship to local journalism[edit]
Criticisms have been made against citizen journalism, especially from among professionals in the field. Citizen journalists are often portrayed as unreliable, biased and untrained – as opposed to professionals who have "recognition, paid work, unionized labour and behaviour that is often politically neutral and unaffiliated, at least in the claim if not in the actuality".[21] Citizen journalists gather material by being on the streets. Their tools can be narrowed down to a camera, social media and an instinct to start recording whenever something seems newsworthy or out of order. Much of their knowledge regarding the issues that are raised are obtained through their experience as a part of the community.
However, some major news reporting agencies, threatened by the speed with which news is reported and delivered by citizen journalism, have launched campaigns to bring in readers and financial support. For example, Bill Johnson, president of Embarcadero Media, which publishes several northern California newspapers, issued an online statement asking readers to subscribe to local newspapers in order to keep them financially solvent. Johnson put special emphasis on the critical role played by local newspapers, which, he argues, "reflect the values of the residents and businesses, challenge assumptions, and shine a light on our imperfections and aspirations."[22]
History[edit]
The idea that every citizen can engage in acts of journalism has a long history in the United States. The contemporary citizen journalist movement emerged after journalists began to question the predictability of their coverage of events such as the 1988 U.S. presidential election. Those journalists became part of the public, or civic, journalism movement, which sought to counter the erosion of trust in the news media and the widespread disillusionment with politics and civic affairs.[23][24][25]
Initially, discussions of public journalism focused on promoting journalism that was "for the people" by changing the way professional reporters did their work. According to Leonard Witt, however, early public journalism efforts were "often part of 'special projects' that were expensive, time-consuming, and episodic. Too often these projects dealt with an issue and moved on. Professional journalists were driving the discussion. They would have the goal of doing a story on welfare-to-work (or the environment, or traffic problems, or the economy), and then they would recruit a cross-section of citizens and chronicle their points of view. Since not all reporters and editors bought into this form of public journalism, and some outright opposed it, reaching out to the people from the newsroom was never an easy task." By 2003, in fact, the movement seemed to be petering out, with the Pew Center for Civic Journalism closing its doors.
Traditionally, the term "citizen journalism" has had a history of struggle with deliberating on a concise and mutually agreed upon definition. Even today, the term lacks a clear form of conceptualization. Although the term lacks conceptualization, alternative names of the term are unable to comprehensively capture the phenomenon. For example, one of the interchangeable names with "citizen journalism" is "user-generated content" (UGC). However, the issue with this alternative term is that it eliminates the potential civic virtues of citizen journalism and considers it to be stunted and proprietorial.[26]
With today's technology the citizen journalist movement has found new life as the average person can capture news and distribute it globally. As Yochai Benkler has noted, "the capacity to make meaning – to encode and decode humanly meaningful statements – and the capacity to communicate one's meaning around the world, are held by, or readily available to, at least many hundreds of millions of users around the globe."[27] Professor Mary-Rose Papandrea, a constitutional law professor at Boston College, notes in her article, Citizen Journalism and the Reporter's Privilege, that:[28]



[i]n many ways, the definition of "journalist" has now come full circle. When the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution was adopted, "freedom of the press" referred quite literally to the freedom to publish using a printing press, rather than the freedom of organized entities engaged in the publishing business. The printers of 1775 did not exclusively publish newspapers; instead, in order to survive financially they dedicated most of their efforts printing materials for paying clients. The newspapers and pamphlets of the American Revolutionary era were predominantly partisan and became even more so through the turn of the century. They engaged in little news gathering and instead were predominantly vehicles for opinion.






The passage of the term "journalism" into common usage in the 1830s occurred at roughly the same time that newspapers, using high speed rotary steam presses, began mass circulation throughout the eastern United States. Using the printing press, newspapers could distribute exact copies to large numbers of readers at a low incremental cost. In addition, the rapidly increasing demand for advertising for brand-name products fueled the creation of publications subsidized, in large part, by advertising revenue. It was not until the late nineteenth century that the concept of the "press" metamorphized into a description of individuals and companies engaged in an often-competitive commercial media enterprise.



World Trade Organization (WTO)[edit]
In 1999, activists in Seattle created a response to the WTO meeting being held there. These activists understood the only way they could get into the corporate media was by blocking the streets. Then they realized that a scant 60 seconds of coverage would show them being carted off by the police, but without any context to explain why they were protesting. They knew they had to create an alternative media model.
Since then, the Indymedia movement has experienced exponential growth, and IMCs have been created in more than 200 cities all over the world.




NowPublic co-founder Michael Tippett.


Simultaneously, journalism "by the people" began to flourish, enabled by emerging internet and networking technologies, such as weblogs, chat rooms, message boards, wikis, and mobile computing. A relatively new development is the use of convergent polls, allowing editorials and opinions to be submitted and voted on. Over time, the poll converges on the most broadly accepted editorials and opinions. In South Korea, OhmyNews became popular and commercially successful with the motto, "Every Citizen is a Reporter." Founded by Oh Yeon-ho on February 22, 2000, it has a staff of 40 or more traditional reporters and editors who write about 20% of its content, with the rest coming from other freelance contributors who mostly are ordinary citizens. OhmyNews now has an estimated 50,000 contributors, and has been credited with transforming South Korea's conservative political environment.
In 2000, The Raven launched a Web television station aimed at participatory journalism, reporting on events in the Daytona Beach area.[29][30][31] In 2001, themeparkinsider.com became the first online publication to win a major journalism award for a feature that was reported and written entirely by readers, earning an Online Journalism Award from the Online News Association and Columbia Graduate School of Journalism for its "Accident Watch" section, where readers tracked injury accidents at theme parks and shared accident prevention tips.[citation needed]
During the 2004 U.S. presidential election, both the Democratic and Republican parties issued press credentials to citizen bloggers covering the convention, marking a new level of influence and credibility for nontraditional journalists. Some bloggers[who?] also began "watchdogging" the work of conventional journalists, monitoring their work for biases and inaccuracy.
A recent trend in citizen journalism has been the emergence of what blogger Jeff Jarvis terms hyperlocal journalism, as online news sites invite contributions from local residents of their subscription areas, who often report on topics that conventional newspapers tend to ignore.[32] "We are the traditional journalism model turned upside down," explains Mary Lou Fulton, the publisher of the Northwest Voice in Bakersfield, California. "Instead of being the gatekeeper, telling people that what's important to them 'isn't news', we're just opening up the gates and letting people come on in. We are a better community newspaper for having thousands of readers who serve as the eyes and ears for the Voice, rather than having everything filtered through the views of a small group of reporters and editors."[33]
Iran's Green Movement[edit]
In June 2009, hundreds of thousands of Iranians took to the streets of Tehran, to protest the election outcome. Through citizen journalism and technological developments, the internet and social media were considered to be large sparks of this movements, although there was a lack of real outcomes politically.[34]
Arab Spring[edit]
Citizen journalism played a role in the uprisings of the Arab Spring[35][36][37] A study of women cyber-activists in several Arab countries found that "a significant proportion of cyberactivism revolves around influencing the mainstream media agenda, as an increasingly symbiotic relationship between citizen and professional journalism has developed throughout the Arab Spring."[38]
Occupy[edit]
Occupy protests also were influenced by live interactive media coverage through citizen journalists such as Tim Pool,[39] Jerry Nelson[40] and The Citizen Journals on Facebook.
Citizen journalists[edit]
According to Jay Rosen, citizen journalists are "the people formerly known as the audience," who "were on the receiving end of a media system that ran one way, in a broadcasting pattern, with high entry fees and a few firms competing to speak very loudly while the rest of the population listened in isolation from one another— and who today are not in a situation like that at all. ... The people formerly known as the audience are simply the public made realer, less fictional, more able, less predictable."[41]
Abraham Zapruder, who filmed the assassination of President John Fitzgerald Kennedy with a home-movie camera, is sometimes presented as an ancestor to citizen journalists.[42] Egyptian citizen Wael Abbas was awarded several international reporting prizes for his blog Misr Digital (Digital Egypt) and a video he publicized of two policemen beating a bus driver helped lead to their conviction.[43]
Public Journalism is now being explored via new media, such as the use of mobile telephones. Mobile telephones have the potential to transform reporting and places the power of reporting in the hands of the public. Mobile telephony provides low-cost options for people to set up news operations.[citation needed]
During 9/11 many eyewitness accounts of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center came from citizen journalists. Images and stories from citizen journalists close to the World Trade Center offered content that played a major role in the story.[44][45]
In 2004, when the 9.1-magnitude underwater earthquake caused a huge tsunami in Banda Aceh Indonesia and across the Indian Ocean, a weblog-based virtual network of previously unrelated bloggers emerged that covered the news in real-time, and became a vital source for the traditional media for the first week after the tsunami.[46] A large amount of news footage from many people who experienced the tsunami was widely broadcast,[47](subscription required) as well as a good deal of "on the scene" citizen reporting and blogger analysis that was subsequently picked up by the major media outlets worldwide.[46] Subsequent to the citizen journalism coverage of the disaster and aftermath, researchers have suggested that citizen journalists may, in fact, play a critical role in the disaster warning system itself, potentially with higher reliability than the networks of tsunami warning equipment based on technology alone which then require interpretation by disinterested third parties.[48]
The microblog Twitter played an important role during the 2009 Iranian election protests, after foreign journalists had effectively been "barred from reporting". Twitter delayed scheduled maintenance during the protests that would have shut down coverage in Iran due to the role it played in public communication.[49]
Sometimes citizen journalists are, at the same time, bloggers and after some time they often become professional journalists, just as[when?] Paweł Rogaliński, a prized[by whom?] Polish blogger and journalist did.[citation needed]
Today, individually produced citizen journalism exists in the form of social media platforms such as blogs, YouTube, and Twitter. These social media platforms encourage and facilitate engagement with other citizens who participate in creating content through commenting, liking, linking, and sharing. This practice is considered to be the 21st century version of individualized citizen journalism. The first wave of this type of citizen journalism came about in the form of amateur news bloggers. These bloggers often created content and narrative that challenged and critiqued the mainstream news outlets. The majority of the content produced by these amateur news bloggers was not actually original content, but curated information that was primarily monitored and edited by these various bloggers. However, recently there has been a decline in the amateur news blogger due to social media platforms that are much easier to run and maintain. These social media platforms allow individuals to easily share and create and content.[26]
Criticisms[edit]
Objectivity[edit]
Citizen journalists also may be activists within the communities they write about. This has drawn some criticism from traditional media institutions such as The New York Times, which have accused proponents of public journalism of abandoning the traditional goal of objectivity. Many traditional journalists view citizen journalism with some skepticism, believing that only trained journalists can understand the exactitude and ethics involved in reporting news. See, e.g., Nicholas Lemann, Vincent Maher, and Tom Grubisich.
An academic paper by Vincent Maher, the head of the New Media Lab at Rhodes University, outlined several weaknesses in the claims made by citizen journalists, in terms of the "three deadly E's", referring to ethics, economics, and epistemology. The paper has been criticized in the press and blogosphere.[50]
An analysis by language and linguistics professor, Patricia Bou-Franch, found that some citizen journalists resorted to abuse-sustaining discourses naturalizing violence against women. She found that these discourses were then challenged by others who questioned the gendered ideologies of male violence against women.[51]
Quality[edit]
An article in 2005 by Tom Grubisich reviewed ten new citizen journalism sites and found many of them lacking in quality and content.[52] Grubisich followed up a year later with, "Potemkin Village Redux."[53] He found that the best sites had improved editorially and were even nearing profitability, but only by not expensing editorial costs. Also according to the article, the sites with the weakest editorial content were able to expand aggressively because they had stronger financial resources.
Another article published on Pressthink examined Backfence, a citizen journalism site with three initial locations in the D.C. area, which reveals that the site has only attracted limited citizen contributions.[54] The author concludes that, "in fact, clicking through Backfence's pages feels like frontier land -– remote, often lonely, zoned for people but not home to any. The site recently launched for Arlington, Virginia. However, without more settlers, Backfence may wind up creating more ghost towns."
David Simon, a former Baltimore Sun reporter and writer-producer of the popular television series, "The Wire," criticized the concept of citizen journalism—claiming that unpaid bloggers who write as a hobby cannot replace trained, professional, seasoned journalists.

"I am offended to think that anyone, anywhere believes American institutions as insulated, self-preserving and self-justifying as police departments, school systems, legislatures and chief executives can be held to gathered facts by amateurs pursuing the task without compensation, training or for that matter, sufficient standing to make public officials even care to whom it is they are lying to."

An editorial published by The Digital Journalist web magazine expressed a similar position, advocating to abolish the term "citizen journalist", and replacing it with "citizen news gatherer".

"Professional journalists cover fires, floods, crime, the legislature, and the White House every day. There is either a fire line or police line, or security, or the Secret Service who allow them to pass upon displaying credentials vetted by the departments or agencies concerned. A citizen journalist, an amateur, will always be on the outside of those lines. Imagine the White House throwing open its gates to admit everybody with a camera phone to a presidential event."[55]

While the fact that citizen journalists can report in real time and are not subject to oversight opens them to criticism about the accuracy of their reporting, news stories presented by mainstream media also misreport facts occasionally that are reported correctly by citizen journalists. As low as 32% of the American population have a fair amount of trust in the media.[56]
Effects on traditional journalism[edit]
Journalism has been affected significantly due to citizen journalism. This is because citizen journalism allows people to post as much content as they want, whenever they want. In order to stay competitive, traditional news sources are forcing their journalist to compete. This means that journalist now have to write, edit and add pictures into their content and they must do so at a rapid pace, as it is perceived by news companies that it's essential for journalist to produce content at the same rate that citizens can post content on the internet. This is hard though, as many news companies are facing budget cuts and cannot afford to pay journalists the proper amount for the amount of work they do. Despite the uncertainties of a job in journalism and rising tuition costs there has been a 35% increase in journalism majors throughout the past few years according to Astra Taylor in her book The People's Platform.[57]
Legal repercussions[edit]
Edward Greenberg, a New York City litigator,[58] notes higher vulnerability of unprofessional journalists in court compared to the professional ones:

"So-called shield laws, which protect reporters from revealing sources, vary from state to state. On occasion, the protection is dependent on whether the person [who] asserted the claim is in fact a journalist. There are many cases at both the state and federal levels where judges determine just who is/is not a journalist. Cases involving libel often hinge on whether the actor was or was not a member of the "press"."[55]

The view stated above does not mean that professional journalists are fully protected by shield laws. In the 1972 Branzburg v. Hayes case the Supreme Court of the United States invalidated the use of the First Amendment as a defense for reporters summoned to testify before a grand jury. In 2005, the reporter's privilege of Judith Miller and Matthew Cooper was rejected by the appellate court.
Past, Present and Future[edit]
Citizen journalism has largely increased during the last decade of the twentieth century and throughout the twenty-first century. This rise of participation can be associated with the creation of the internet which introduced new ways in communicating and engaging news. Due to this shift in technology, individuals were able to access more news than previously and at a much faster rate. This larger quantity also made it so there was a larger variety of sources which people were able to consume media and news.
Natalie Fenton[59] discusses the role of citizen journalism within the digital age and has three characteristics associated with the topic: speed and space, multiplicity and poly-centrality and interactivity and participation. These characteristics were due to the invention of the internet, which, made way for amateur and citizen journalist to make a name for themselves within the industry. This was happening throughout the 1990s, however, once the mid 2000s began, the introduction of technologies such as the smartphone increased the ability to access the internet and made it so that individuals were able to use it globally and on the go. With these technological advancements, individuals were able to participate in journalism, like never before. Pictures or videos could be uploaded online in a matter of minutes and this paved the way for social media to grow as a strong producer in the industry.
In 2017, there are a number of different social media platforms which, people can access for their news. Many large corporations have even started to shift their focus onto internet sites, such as Facebook or YouTube and this has also made it easier for the existence of Alternative Media groups to exist. This transition into a digital realm of media has created many new possibilities for people to participate in journalism and it is due to the technological advancements such as the internet and smartphones.
As society continues to move forward in a digital age new possibilities in the realm of technology emerge and can be associated with the journalism industry. New devices such as Virtual Reality, open new avenues, which media companies and people will be able to participate with journalism. As society continues to move towards embracing technology as part of their lives, citizen journalism should increase in accessibility and participation.
Proponents and facilitators[edit]
Dan Gillmor, the former technology columnist for the San Jose Mercury News, is one of the foremost proponents of citizen journalism and founded a nonprofit, the Center for Citizen Media,[60] to help promote it. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's French-language television network also has organized a weekly public affairs program called, "5 sur 5", which has been organizing and promoting citizen-based journalism since 2001. On the program, viewers submit questions on a wide variety of topics, and they, accompanied by staff journalists, get to interview experts to obtain answers to their questions.[citation needed]
Jay Rosen, a journalism professor at New York University, was one of public journalism's earliest proponents. From 1993 to 1997, he directed the Project on Public Life and the Press, funded by the Knight Foundation and housed at NYU. He also currently runs the PressThink weblog.
Professor Charles Nesson, William F. Weld Professor of Law at Harvard Law School and the founder of the Berkman Center for Internet & Society, chairs the Advisory Board for Jamaican citizen journalism startup On the Ground News Reports.[61]
One of the leading proponents for citizen journalism in Australia is Margo Kingston, author and former political journalist for the Sydney Morning Herald. Kingston launched one of the world's first mainstream citizen journalism platforms, Webdiary, in 2000, well before the New York Times, Washington Post and The Guardian. Kingston resigned from Webdiary in 2005 but the site continues and has been preserved in Pandora, Australia's National Web Archive. After a period of retirement, Kingston returned to citizen journalism in 2013 by co-publishing a new site No Fibs. It was on this site that Kingston published an exclusive story that the Australian Prime Minister, Tony Abbott, had inappropriately claimed expenses for promoting his book.[62]
In March 2014, blogger and novelist James Wesley Rawles launched a web site that provides free press credentials for citizen journalists called the Constitution First Amendment Press Association (CFAPA).[63][64] According to David Sheets of the Society for Professional Journalists, Rawles keeps no records on who gets these credentials.[63]
Maurice Ali, a citizen journalist from Canada, founded one of the first international citizen journalist associations called the International Association of Independent Journalists Inc. (IAIJ) in 2003. The association through its President (Maurice Ali) have published studies and articles on citizen journalism, attended and spoken at UNESCO[65] and United Nations events[66][67] as advocates of citizen journalism worldwide.
See also[edit]


Journalism portal




Citizen Kate
Collaborative journalism
Crowdsourcing
Democratic journalism
Demotix
DigitalJournal.com
Filemobile
Global Voices Online
GroundReport
Independent Media Center
List of journalists killed in Syria
Local news
Media democracy
Meporter
OhmyNews
On the Ground News Reports
Open source journalism
Participatory Media
Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently
Social news
SEEMO
Wiki journalism
Wikinews
Youth Ki Awaaz


References[edit]


^ Baase, S. "A Gift of Fire". Prentice Hall, 3rd edition, 2008.
^ Case, J. A. "Recovering the Radical: Biocybernetic Subversion in Guerrilla Video Primer." Paper presented at the NCA 93rd Annual Convention, Chicago, IL, November 14, 2007.
^ Tamara Witschge (27 March 2009). "Street journalists versus 'ailing journalists'?". openDemocracy - free thinking for the world. openDemocracy Ltd. Retrieved 21 May 2012. 
^ Bowman, S. and Willis, C. "We Media: How Audiences are Shaping the Future of News and Information." 2003, The Media Center at the American Press Institute.
^ Radsch, Courtney C. The Revolutions will be Blogged: Cyberactivism and the 4th Estate in Egypt. Doctoral Dissertation, American University, 2013.
^ Jay Rosen (14 July 2008). "A Most Useful Definition of Citizen Journalism". PressThink. Retrieved 21 May 2012. 
^ Novin, A., Secko, D. (November 25, 2012). "Debate Cited: A First Exploration of a Web Application to Enhance the Production of Science Journalism Students". Journalism Interest Group, CCA/Groupe d'intérêt en journalisme, ACC Conference Proceedings. 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2016. 
^ Deutsch Karlekar, Karin; Radsch, Courtney C. (July 1, 2012). "Adapting Concepts of Media Freedom to a Changing Media Environment: Incorporating New Media and Citizen Journalism into the Freedom of the Press Index". ESSACHESS Journal for Communication Studies. 5 (1, 2012) – via SSRN. 
^ Gilardi, F. (2016). Digital Democracy. How Digital Democracy is Changing Democracy And Its Study., 1-5.
^ Atton, Chris. 2003. What is "alternative journalism"? Journalism: Theory, Practice and Criticism 4, no. 3: 267-400.
^ Flew, Terry. 2005. New media: An introduction. South Melbourne, Vic. ; New York: Oxford University Press.
^ Mark Glaser (September 27, 2006). "Your Guide to Citizen Journalism". Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved March 22, 2009. 
^ "About — Far and Wide". Farandwide.org. Retrieved 2013-06-05. 
^ "About". WorldWeekly. Retrieved 2013-12-19. 
^ Lasica, J. D. "What is Participatory Journalism?" 2003-08-07, Online Journalism Review, August 7, 2003.
^ Moretzsohn, S. 2006. " Citizen journalism" and the myth of redemptive technology. Brazilian Journalism Research 2, no. 2.
^ Radsch, C. (2011). Arab bloggers as citizen journalists (Transnational). In J. Downing (Ed.), Encyclopedia of social movement media. (pp. 62-65). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. doi: 10.4135/9781412979313.n31
^ Rodríguez, Clemencia. 2001. Fissures in the mediascape : An international study of citizens' media. The Hampton Press Communication Series. Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press.
^ Radsch, C. (2011). Arab bloggers as citizen journalists (Transnational). In J. Downing (Ed.), Encyclopedia of social movement media. (pp. 62-65). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. P. 61
^ a b c Campbell, Vincent (2015). "Theorizing Citizenship in Citizen Journalism". Digital Journalism. 3: 704–719. 
^ Allan, edited by Stuart; Thorsen, Einar (2009). Citizen journalism : global perspectives (2009 ed.). New York: Peter Lang. p. 121. ISBN 9781433102950. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Bill Johnson. "Support Local Journalism". Embarcadero Media. Retrieved January 8, 2012. 
^ Merritt, D. "News Media must regain vigor, courage." September 29, 2004, PJNet Today.
^ Dvorkin, J. A. "Media Matters. Can Public Radio Journalism be Re-Invented?" January 27, 2005, National Public Radio.
^ Meyer, E. P. "Public Journalism and the Problem of Objectivity." 1995, Published on personal website.
^ a b Wall, Melissa (2015). "Citizen Journalism". Digital Journalism. 3: 797–813. 
^ "Part One: The Networked Information Economy". Retrieved 2007-01-05. 
^ Papandrea, Mary-Rose. "Citizen Journalism and the Reporter's Privilege." Boston College Law School (Minnesota Law Review, Vol. 91). 2007. Retrieved January 7, 2007.
^ J.D. Lasica, OJR Senior Editor Posted: 2003-08-07 (August 7, 2003). "Online Journalism Review, August 8, 2003". Ojr.org. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2013. 
^ J.D. Lasica, OJR Senior Editor Posted: 2003-08-07 (August 7, 2003). "2003 University of Southern California's Online Journalism Review". Ojr.org. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2013. 
^ 2005 Darknet: Hollywood's War Against the Digital Generation, chapter 8. Amazon.com. ISBN 0471683345. 
^ Walker, L. "On Local Sites, Everyone's A Journalist, December 9, 2004, Washington Post, E1.
^ Glaser, M. "The New Voices: Hyperlocal Citizen Media Sites Want You (to Write)!" November 17, 2004, Online Journalism Review.
^ Karagiannopoulos, Vasileios (2012-06-01). "The Role of the Internet in Political Struggles: Some Conclusions from Iran and Egypt". New Political Science. 34 (2): 151–171. doi:10.1080/07393148.2012.676394. ISSN 0739-3148. 
^ Editors Weblog (2011-06-10). "Arab spring invigorates newspapers and journalism in the region". Editors Weblog. Retrieved 2013-06-05. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Editors Weblog (2011-04-13). "Citizen journalism: Al Jazeera's key to successful reporting of Arab uprisings". Editors Weblog. Retrieved 2013-06-05. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Al Jazeera World. "Images of Revolution - Al Jazeera World". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved 2013-06-05. 
^ Courtney C. Radsch (May 2012). "Unveiling the Revolutionaries: Cyberactivism and the Role of Women in the Arab Uprisings". James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy, Rice University. Retrieved 2013-01-05. 
^ Townsend, Allie. "Watch: Occupy Wall Street, Broadcasting Live". Retrieved October 29, 2017 – via newsfeed.time.com. 
^ "JourneyAmerica". JourneyAmerica. 
^ Rosen, Jay "The People Formerly Known as the Audience," PressThink, June 27, 2006.
^ 19 décembre 2013 (2007-08-21). "(in french) La mort de JFK dans le viseur de Zapruder". Ecrans.fr. Retrieved 2013-12-19. 
^ Kjellman, Krista (2007-11-06). "Cell Phone Justice; Torture Video Leads to Police Convictions - ABC News". Abcnews.go.com. Retrieved 2013-06-05. 
^ jameselliott92 (1 November 2013). "Citizen Journalism – 9/11 Case Study". 
^ "MetaFilter and Citizen Journalism in the 9/11 Attacks". ucsddigitaljournalism.blogspot.com. UC San Diego students. 26 May 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. 
^ a b Dameron, Kirk (June 2007). Self-Organizing Social Behavior Occasioned By Low-Cost Communication Technology: The Indian Ocean Tsunami of 2004 (Master of Arts thesis). Colorado State University. SSRN 1004415 . Recent advances in information and communication technology have facilitated revolutionary change in the publishing technology available to individuals. Ubiquitous and low-cost access to the Internet has provided a means for a new type of news intermediary to emerge: citizen journalism using freely available weblog technology. A case study of the emergence of a self-organizing social entity - a dynamic virtual news network - following the 2004 South Asian tsunami is examined. 
^ Glocer, Tim (2006-03-07). "Old media must embrace the amateur". Financial Times. Retrieved 2013-03-08. 
^ Grabowski, Martha; Karlene Roberts (December 2011). "High reliability virtual organizations: Co-adaptive technology and organizational structures in tsunami warning systems". ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction. 18 (4). Retrieved 2013-03-08. Systems that combine the characteristics of highly reliable operations and distributed, virtual organizations are known as highly reliable virtual organizations (HRVOs)—distributed and electronically linked groups of organizations that excel in high-consequence settings. Tsunami warning systems (TWS) are one example of virtual organizations that operate under enormous expectations for reliability. Adaptive structuration theory suggests that, in complex systems, technology and organizational structures co-evolve, and users adapt technology to their needs, creating shared meaning about the role and utility of technology in various settings. 
^ Washington Taps Into a Potent New Force in Diplomacy The New York Times June 16, 2009
^ Maher, V. "Citizen Journalism is Dead." 2005, New Media Lab, School of Journalism & Media Studies, Rhodes University, South Africa.
^ Bou-Franch, Patricia (2013). "Domestic violence and public participation in the media: The case of citizen journalism". Gender and Language. Equinox. 7 (3): 275–302. doi:10.1558/genl.v7i3.275. 
^ Grubisich, T. "Grassroots journalism: Actual content vs. shining ideal." October 6, 2005, USC Annenberg, Online Journalism Review.
^ Grubisich, T. "Potemkin Village Redux." November 19, 2006, USC Annenberg, Online Journalism Review.
^ George, E. "Guest Writer Liz George of Baristanet Reviews Backfence.com Seven Months After Launch." November 30, 2005, Pressthink.
^ a b "Let's abolish the term 'Citizen Journalists'". December 2009. Retrieved 2010-08-17. 
^ Inc, Gallup. "Americans' Trust in Mass Media Sinks to New Low". Gallup.com. Retrieved 2016-09-15. 
^ Taylor, Astra (2014). The People's Platform: Taking Back Power and Culture in the Digital Age. New York, New York: Picador Paperback. 
^ Edward Greenberg. "About Ed". Retrieved 17 August 2010. 
^ "ProQuest Ebook Central". site.ebrary.com. Retrieved October 29, 2017. 
^ "Center for Citizen Media". Center for Citizen Media Blog. Retrieved 2013-06-05. 
^ "On the Ground News Reports (OGNR) the Citizen Powered News Network officially launched at Kingston BETA". Retrieved 2013-09-15. 
^ Kingston, Margo. "NoFibs". nofibs.com.au. Retrieved 9 January 2014. 
^ a b "Survivalist starts issuing his own press passes - A Society of Professional Journalists Blog". Net Worked. 
^ "Constitution First Amendment Press Association (CFAPA) Free Press Credentials (Free Press Pass) - An Independent Press Association". 
^ "'Citizen Journalism'" (PDF). UNESCO. February 27, 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2011. 
^ "'WSIS+10 United Nations General Assembly High-Level Meeting'". United Nations. July 2, 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 
^ "'Maurice Ali Speech: International Association of Independent Journalists Inc. WSIS+10-United Nations-July 2, 2015'" (PDF). United Nations. July 2, 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2016. 


External links[edit]



Wikiversity has learning resources about Video journalism



Find more aboutCitizen journalismat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity





Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: How To Run A Newspaper



South East Europe Media Organisation (SEEMO), an affiliate of the International Press Institute (IPI)
List of Participatory News Media sites at Curlie (based on DMOZ).








v
t
e


Journalism



Roles



Journalist
Reporter
Editor
Columnist
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Political commentator
Blogger





Profession



News
News writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
Values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school





Areas



Arts
Business
Data-driven
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Global
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technical
Trade
Traffic
Video games
Weather
World





Genres



Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Churnalism
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Community
Data
Database
Embedded
Gonzo
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
New Journalism
Non-profit journalism
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Presstitute
Scientific
Visual
Watchdog





Social impact



Fake news
Fourth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Yellow journalism





News media



Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media






List of journalism articles










v
t
e


Web syndication






History
Blogging
Podcasting
Video blogging
Web syndication technology





Types







Art
Bloggernacle
Classical music
Corporate
Dream diary
Edublog
Electronic journal
Fake
Family
Fashion
Food
Health
Law
Lifelog
Litblog
MP3
News
Photoblog
Police
Political
Prayer
Project
Reverse
Travel
Warblog








Technology




General



BitTorrent
Feed URI scheme





Features



Linkback
Permalink
Ping
Pingback
Reblogging
Refback
Rollback
Trackback





Mechanism



Conversation threading
Geotagging
RSS enclosure
Synchronization





Memetics



Atom feed
Data feed
Photofeed
Product feed
RDF feed
Web feed





RSS



GeoRSS
MRSS
RSS TV





Social



Livemark
Mashup
. pooling
Referencing
RSS editor
RSS tracking
Streaming media





Standard



OML
OPML
RSS Advisory Board—Usenet: .net
World Wide Web + (-let)
XBEL
XOXO








Form







Audio podcast
Enhanced podcast
Mobilecast
Narrowcasting
Peercasting
Screencast
Slidecasting
Videocast
Webcomic
Web series








Anonymous blogging
Collaborative blog
Columnist
Instant messaging
Liveblogging
Microblog
Mobile blogging
Roblog
Spam blog
Video blogging
Motovlogging








Media




Alternative media



Carnivals
Fiction
Journalism

Citizen
Database


Online diary
Search engines
Sideblog
Software
Web directory





Micromedia



Aggregation

News
Poll
Review
Search
Video


Atom
AtomPub
Broadcatching
Hashtag
NewsML

1
G2


Social communication
Social software
Web Slice





Related



Blogosphere
Escribitionist
Glossary of blogging
Pay per click
Posting style
Slashdot effect
Spam in blogs
Uses of podcasting














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Citizen_journalism&oldid=816723130"					Categories: Citizen journalismCitizen mediaOnline journalismTechnology in societyTypes of journalismHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with limited geographic scope from September 2011USA-centricWikipedia articles needing style editing from June 2009All articles needing style editingArticles with multiple maintenance issuesUse mdy dates from May 2012All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2010Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2010Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013Pages containing links to subscription-only contentAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from March 2013Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009Articles with DMOZ links