For other uses, see Clade (disambiguation).




Cladogram (family tree) of a biological group, showing the last common ancestor of the composite tree, which is the vertical line 'trunk' (stem) at the bottom, with all descendant branches shown above. The blue and red subgroups (at left and right) are clades, or monophyletic (complete) groups; each shows its common ancestor 'stem' at the bottom of the subgroup 'branch'. The green subgroup is not a clade; it is a paraphyletic group, which is incomplete here because it excludes the blue branch even though it is also descended from the common ancestor stem at the bottom of the green branch. The green subgroup together with the blue one forms a clade again.


A clade (from Ancient Greek: κλάδος, klados, "branch") is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants, and represents a single "branch" on the "tree of life".[1]
The common ancestor may be an individual, a population, a species (extinct or extant), and so on right up to a kingdom. Clades are nested, one in another, as each branch in turn splits into smaller branches. These splits reflect evolutionary history as populations diverged and evolved independently. Clades are termed monophyletic (Greek: "one clan") groups.
Over the last few decades, the cladistic approach has revolutionized biological classification and revealed surprising evolutionary relationships among organisms.[2] Increasingly, taxonomists try to avoid naming taxa that are not clades; that is, taxa that are not monophyletic. Some of the most interesting revelations on the relationships between organisms that the molecular biology arm of cladistics has revealed are that fungi are closer relatives to animals than they are to plants, archaea are now considered different from bacteria, and multicellular organisms may have evolved from archaea[3].



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History of nomenclature and taxonomy
3 Definitions
4 Clades and phylogenetic trees
5 Terminology
6 See also
7 In popular culture
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links



Etymology[edit]
The term "clade" was coined in 1957 by the biologist Julian Huxley to refer to the result of cladogenesis, a concept Huxley borrowed from Bernhard Rensch.[1][4]
Many commonly named groups are clades, for example, rodents or insects; because in each case, their name refers to a common ancestor with all its descendant branches. Rodents, for example, are a branch of mammals that split off after the end of the period when the clade Dinosauria stopped being the dominant terrestrial vertebrates 66 million years ago. The original population and all its descendants are a clade. The rodent clade corresponds to the order Rodentia, and insects to the class Insecta. These clades include smaller clades, such as chipmunk or ant, each of which consists of even smaller clades. The clade "rodent" is in turn included in the mammal, vertebrate and animal clades.
History of nomenclature and taxonomy[edit]




Early phylogenetic tree by Haeckel, 1866. Groups once thought to be more advanced, such as birds ("Aves"), are placed at the top.


The idea of a clade did not exist in pre-Darwinian Linnaean taxonomy, which was based by necessity only on internal or external morphological similarities between organisms – although as it happens, many of the better known animal groups in Linnaeus' original Systema Naturae (notably among the vertebrate groups) do represent clades. The phenomenon of convergent evolution is, however, responsible for many cases where there are misleading similarities in the morphology of groups that evolved from different lineages.
With the increasing realization in the first half of the 19th century that species had changed and split through the ages, classification increasingly came to be seen as branches on the evolutionary tree of life. The publication of Darwin's theory of evolution in 1859 gave this view increasing weight. Thomas Henry Huxley, an early advocate of evolutionary theory, proposed a revised taxonomy based on clades.[5] For example, he grouped birds with reptiles, based on fossil evidence.[5]
German biologist Emil Hans Willi Hennig (1913 – 1976) is considered to be the founder of cladistics.[6] He proposed a classification system that represented repeated branchings of the family tree, as opposed to the previous systems, which put organisms on a "ladder", with supposedly more "advanced" organisms at the top.[2][7]
Taxonomists have increasingly worked to make the taxonomic system reflect evolution.[7] When it comes to naming, however, this principle is not always compatible with the traditional rank-based nomenclature. In the latter, only taxa associated with a rank can be named, yet there are not enough ranks to name a long series of nested clades; also, taxon names cannot be defined in a way that guarantees them to refer to clades. For these and other reasons, phylogenetic nomenclature has been developed; it is still controversial.
Definitions[edit]




Gavialidae, Crocodylidae and Alligatoridae are clade names that are here applied to a phylogenetic tree of crocodylians.


A clade is by definition monophyletic, meaning that it contains one ancestor (which can be an organism, a population, or a species) and all its descendants.[note 1][8][9] The ancestor can be known or unknown; any and all members of a clade can be extant or extinct.
Clades and phylogenetic trees[edit]
Main article: Phylogenetics
Main article: Cladistics
The science that tries to reconstruct phylogenetic trees and thus discover clades is called phylogenetics or cladistics, the latter term coined by Ernst Mayr (1965), derived from "clade". The results of phylogenetic/cladistic analyses are tree-shaped diagrams called cladograms; they, and all their branches, are phylogenetic hypotheses.[10]
Three methods of defining clades are featured in phylogenetic nomenclature: node-, stem-, and apomorphy-based (see here for detailed definitions).
Terminology[edit]




Cladogram of modern primate groups; all tarsiers are haporhines, but not all halporhines are tarsiers; all apes are catyrrhines, but not all catyrrhines are apes; etc.


The relationship between clades can be described in several ways:

A clade located within a clade is said to be nested within that clade. In the diagram, the hominoid clade, i.e. the apes and humans, is nested within the primate clade.
Two clades are sisters if they have an immediate common ancestor. In the diagram, lemurs and lorises are sister clades, while humans and tarsiers are not.
A clade A is basal to a clade B if A branches off the lineage leading to B before the first branch leading only to members of B. In the adjacent diagram, the strepsirrhine clade, including the lemurs and lorises, is basal to the hominoids, the apes and humans. Some authors have used "basal" differently, using it to mean a clade that is "more primitive" or less species-rich than its sister clade; others consider this usage to be incorrect.[11]

See also[edit]

Adaptive radiation
Binomial nomenclature
Biological classification
Cladistics
Crown group
Monophyly
Paraphyly
Phylogenetic network
Phylogenetic nomenclature
Phylogenetics
Polyphyly

In popular culture[edit]
Clade is the title of a novel by James Bradley, who chose it both because of its biological meaning but also because of the larger implications of the word.[12]
An episode of Elementary was titled “Dead Clade Walking” and dealt with a case involving a rare fossil.
Notes[edit]


^ A semantic case has been made that the name should be "holophyletic", but this term has not acquired widespread use. For more information, see holophyly.


References[edit]



^ a b Dupuis, Claude (1984). "Willi Hennig's impact on taxonomic thought". Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 15: 1–24. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.15.110184.000245. 
^ a b Palmer, Douglas. Evolution: the story of life. University of California Press: Berkeley. 2009. p. 13
^ Pace, N.R. (May 18, 2006). "Time for a change". Nature. 441 (7091): 289. Bibcode:2006Natur.441..289P. PMID 16710401. doi:10.1038/441289a.
^ Huxley, J. S. (1957). "The three types of evolutionary process". Nature. 180: 454–455. doi:10.1038/180454a0. 
^ a b Huxley, T.H. (1876): Lectures on Evolution. New York Tribune. Extra. no 36. In Collected Essays IV: pp 46-138 original text w/ figures
^ Brower, Andrew V. Z. (2013). "Willi Hennig at 100". Cladistics. doi:10.1111/cla.12057. 
^ a b ”Evolution 101.” page 10. Understanding Evolution website. University of California, Berkeley. Retrieved 26 February 2016.
^ "International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature. Version 4c. Chapter I. Taxa". 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2012. 
^ Envall, Mats (2008). "On the difference between mono-, holo-, and paraphyletic groups: a consistent distinction of process and pattern". Biological Journal of the Linnean Society. 94: 217. doi:10.1111/j.1095-8312.2008.00984.x. 
^ Nixon, Kevin C.; Carpenter, James M. (1 September 2000). "On the Other "Phylogenetic Systematics"". Cladistics. 16 (3): 298–318. doi:10.1111/j.1096-0031.2000.tb00285.x. 
^ Krell, F.-T. & Cranston, P. (2004). "Which side of the tree is more basal?". Systematic Entomology. 29 (3): 279–281. doi:10.1111/j.0307-6970.2004.00262.x. 
^ "Choosing the Book title 'Clade'". Penguin Group Australia. 2015. Retrieved 20 January 2015. 



External links[edit]



Look up clade in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Evolving Thoughts: Clade
DM Hillis, D Zwickl & R Gutell. "Tree of life". An unrooted cladogram depicting around 3000 species.
Phylogenetic systematics, an introductory slide-show on evolutionary trees University of California, Berkeley







v
t
e


Topics in phylogenetics



Relevant fields



Computational phylogenetics
Molecular phylogenetics
Cladistics
Evolutionary taxonomy





Basic concepts



Phylogenetic tree
Phylogenetic network
Long branch attraction
Clade vs Grade
Ghost lineage
Ghost population





Inference methods



Maximum parsimony
Probabilistic methods

Maximum likelihood
Bayesian inference


Distance-matrix methods

Neighbor-joining
UPGMA
Least squares


Three-taxon analysis





Current topics



PhyloCode
DNA barcoding
Molecular phylogenetics
Phylogenetic comparative methods
Phylogenetic network
Phylogenetic niche conservatism
Phylogenetics software
Phylogenomics
Phylogeography





Group traits



Primitive

Plesiomorphy
Symplesiomorphy


Derived

Apomorphy
Synapomorphy
Autapomorphy







Group types



Monophyly
Paraphyly
Polyphyly








List of evolutionary biology topics
Evolutionary biology












v
t
e


Evolutionary biology






Evolutionary history of life
Index of evolutionary biology articles
Introduction
Outline of evolution
Timeline of evolution





Evolution



Abiogenesis
Adaptation
Adaptive radiation
Cladistics
Coevolution
Common descent
Cospeciation
Convergence
Divergence
Earliest known life forms
Evidence of common descent
Extinction

Event


Gene-centered view
Homology
Last universal common ancestor
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Origin of life
Panspermia
Parallel evolution
Prehistoric Autopsy
Speciation
Taxonomy





Population genetics



Biodiversity
Gene flow
Genetic drift
Mutation
Natural selection
Variation





Development



Canalisation
Evolutionary developmental biology
Inversion
Modularity
Phenotypic plasticity





Of taxa



Birds

origin


Brachiopods
Cephalopods
Dinosaurs
Fish
Fungi
Insects

butterflies


Life
Mammals

cats
dogs
dolphins and whales
horses
primates

humans
lemurs


sea cows
wolves


Molluscs
Plants
Reptiles
Spiders
Tetrapods
Viruses

influenza







Of organs



Cell
DNA
Flagella
Eukaryotes

symbiogenesis
chromosome
endomembrane system
mitochondria
nucleus
plastids


In animals

eye
hair
auditory ossicle
nervous system
brain







Of processes



Aging

Death
Programmed cell death


Avian flight
Biological complexity
Cooperation
Color vision

in primates


Emotion
Empathy
Ethics
Eusociality
Immune system
Metabolism
Monogamy
Morality
Mosaic evolution
Multicellularity
Sexual reproduction

Gamete differentiation/sexes
Life cycles/nuclear phases
Mating types
Sex-determination


Snake venom





Tempo and modes



Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism
Micromutation/Macromutation
Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism





Speciation



Allopatric
Anagenesis
Catagenesis
Cladogenesis
Ecological
Hybrid
Parapatric
Peripatric
Reinforcement
Sympatric





History



Renaissance and Enlightenment
Transmutation of species
Charles Darwin

On the Origin of Species


History of paleontology
Transitional fossil
Blending inheritance
Mendelian inheritance
The eclipse of Darwinism
Modern synthesis
History of molecular evolution
Extended evolutionary synthesis





Philosophy



Darwinism
Alternatives to evolution by natural selection

Catastrophism
Lamarckism
Orthogenesis
Mutationism
Saltationism
Structuralism

Spandrel


Theistic
Vitalism







Related



Biogeography
Ecological genetics
Molecular evolution
Phylogenetics

Tree


Polymorphism
Protocell
Systematics








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clade&oldid=816240066"					Categories: Unranked cladesBiology terminologyPhylogeneticsPhilosophy of biologyWords coined in the 1950sHidden categories: Use dmy dates from July 2012Articles containing Ancient Greek-language text