This article is about written Classical Latin. For spoken language, see Latin.


Classical Latin


LINGVA LATINA, lingua latina



Latin inscription in the Colosseum



Pronunciation
[laˈtiːnɪtaːs]


Native to
Roman Republic, Roman Empire


Region
Mare Nostrum region


Era
75 BC to AD 3rd century, when it developed into Late Latin



Language family


Indo-European

Italic

Latino-Faliscan

Latin

Classical Latin












Early form


Old Latin




Writing system

Classical Latin alphabet 


Official status



Official language in

Roman Republic, Roman Empire


Regulated by
Schools of grammar and rhetoric


Language codes


ISO 639-3
–



Linguist List

lat-cla


Glottolog
None


Linguasphere
51-AAB-aaa



The range of Latin, AD 60



Classical Latin is the modern term used to describe the form of the Latin language recognized as standard by writers of the late Roman Republic and the Roman Empire. In some later periods, it was regarded as "good" Latin, with later versions being viewed as debased or corrupt. The word Latin is now taken by default as meaning "Classical Latin", so that, for example, modern Latin textbooks describe Classical Latin. Marcus Tullius Cicero and his contemporaries of the late republic, while using lingua latina and sermo latinus to mean the Latin language as opposed to Greek or other languages, and sermo vulgaris or sermo vulgi to refer to the vernacular, referred to the speech they valued most and in which they wrote as latinitas,[1] "Latinity", with the implication of good. Sometimes it was called sermo familiaris, "speech of the good families", sermo urbanus, "speech of the city" or rarely sermo nobilis, "noble speech". But besides latinitas, it was mainly called latine (adverb), "in good Latin", or latinius (comparative degree of the adverb), "good Latin".
Latinitas was spoken as well as written, and it was the language taught in schools. Prescriptive rules therefore applied to it, and where a special subject was concerned, such as poetry or rhetoric, additional rules applied. Now that the spoken Latinitas has become extinct (in favor of various other registers later in date) the rules of the, for the most part, polished (politus) texts may give these the appearance of an artificial language, but Latinitas was a form of sermo, or spoken language, and as such retains spontaneity. No texts by Classical Latin authors are noted for the type of rigidity evidenced by stylized art, except possibly the repetitious abbreviations and stock phrases of inscriptions.



Contents


1 Philological constructs

1.1 Classical
1.2 Canonical
1.3 Ages of Latin


2 Authors of the Golden Age

2.1 Republican
2.2 Augustan


3 Authors of the Silver Age

3.1 Through the death of Trajan, 117 AD
3.2 Through the death of Marcus Aurelius, 180 AD


4 Stylistic shifts
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Bibliography
8 External links



Philological constructs[edit]
Classical[edit]
Good Latin in philology is "classical" Latin literature. The term refers to the canonicity of works of literature written in Latin in the late Roman Republic and the early to middle Roman Empire: "that is to say, that of belonging to an exclusive group of authors (or works) that were considered to be emblematic of a certain genre."[2] The term classicus (masculine plural classici) was devised by the Romans themselves to translate Greek ἐγκριθέντες (enkrithentes), "select", referring to authors who wrote in Greek that were considered model. Before then, classis, in addition to being a naval fleet, was a social class in one of the diachronic divisions of Roman society according to property ownership by the Roman constitution.[3] The word is a transliteration of Greek κλῆσις (klēsis) "calling", used to rank army draftees by property from first to fifth class.
Classicus is anything primae classis, "first class", such as the authors of the polished works of Latinitas, or sermo urbanus. It had nuances of the certified and the authentic: testis classicus, "reliable witness." It was in this sense that Marcus Cornelius Fronto (an African-Roman lawyer and language teacher) in the 2nd century AD used scriptores classici, "first-class" or "reliable authors" whose works could be relied upon as model of good Latin.[4] This is the first known reference, possibly innovated at this time, to classical applied to authors by virtue of the authentic language of their works.[5]
Canonical[edit]




David Ruhnken


In imitation of the Greek grammarians, the Roman ones, such as Quintilian, drew up lists termed indices or ordines on the model of the Greek lists, termed pinakes, considered classical: the recepti scriptores, "select writers." Aulus Gellius includes many authors, such as Plautus, who are currently considered writers of Old Latin and not strictly in the period of classical Latin. The classical Romans distinguished Old Latin as prisca Latinitas and not sermo vulgaris. Each author (and work) in the Roman lists was considered equivalent to one in the Greek; for example Ennius was the Latin Homer, the Aeneid was a new Iliad, and so on. The lists of classical authors were as far as the Roman grammarians went in developing a philology. The topic remained at that point while interest in the classici scriptores declined in the medieval period as the best Latin yielded to medieval Latin, somewhat less than the best by classical standards.
The Renaissance brought a revival of interest in restoring as much of Roman culture as could be restored and with it the return of the concept of classic, "the best." Thomas Sébillet in 1548 (Art Poétique) referred to "les bons et classiques poètes françois", meaning Jean de Meun and Alain Chartier, which was the first modern application of the word.[citation needed] According to Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, the term classical, from classicus, entered modern English in 1599, some 50 years after its re-introduction on the continent. Governor William Bradford in 1648 referred to synods of a separatist church as "classical meetings" in his Dialogue, a report of a meeting between New-England-born "young men" and "ancient men" from Holland and England.[6] In 1715 Laurence Echard's Classical Geographical Dictionary was published.[7] In 1736 Robert Ainsworth's Thesaurus Linguae Latinae Compendarius turned English words and expressions into "proper and classical Latin."[8] In 1768 David Ruhnken (Critical History of the Greek Orators) recast the mold of the view of the classical by applying the word canon to the pinakes of orators, after the Biblical canon or list of authentic books of the Bible. Ruhnken had a kind of secular catechism in mind.[9]
Ages of Latin[edit]




Wilhelm Sigismund Teuffel


In 1870 Wilhelm Sigismund Teuffel in Geschichte der Römischen Literatur (A History of Roman Literature) innovated the definitive philological classification of classical Latin based on the metaphoric uses of the ancient myth of the Ages of Man, a practice then universally current: a Golden Age and a Silver Age of classical Latin were to be presumed. The practice and Teuffel's classification, with modifications, are still in use. His work was translated into English as soon as published in German by Wilhelm Wagner, who corresponded with Teuffel. Wagner published the English translation in 1873. Teuffel divides the chronology of classical Latin authors into several periods according to political events, rather than by style. Regarding the style of the literary Latin of those periods he had but few comments.
Teuffel was to go on with other editions of his history, but meanwhile it had come out in English almost as soon as it did in German and found immediate favorable reception. In 1877 Charles Thomas Cruttwell produced the first English work along the same lines. In his Preface he refers to "Teuffel's admirable history, without which many chapters in the present work could not have attained completeness" and also gives credit to Wagner.
Cruttwell adopts the same periods with minor differences; however, where Teuffel's work is mainly historical, Cruttwell's work contains detailed analyses of style. Nevertheless, like Teuffel he encounters the same problem of trying to summarize the voluminous detail in a way that captures in brief the gist of a few phases of writing styles. Like Teuffel, he has trouble finding a name for the first of the three periods (the current Old Latin phase), calling it mainly "from Livius to Sulla." The language, he says, is "…marked by immaturity of art and language, by a vigorous but ill-disciplined imitation of Greek poetical models, and in prose by a dry sententiousness of style, gradually giving way to a clear and fluent strength…" These abstracts have little meaning to those not well-versed in Latin literature. In fact, Cruttwell admits "The ancients, indeed, saw a difference between Ennius, Pacuvius, and Accius, but it may be questioned whether the advance would be perceptible by us."
Some of Cruttwell's ideas have become established in Latin philology. While praising the application of rules to classical Latin, most intensely in the Golden Age, he says "In gaining accuracy, however, classical Latin suffered a grievous loss. It became cultivated as distinct from a natural language… Spontaneity, therefore, became impossible and soon invention also ceased… In a certain sense, therefore, Latin was studied as a dead language, while it was still a living."[10]
A second problem is the appropriateness of Teuffel's scheme to the concept of classical Latin, which Teuffel does not discuss. Cruttwell addresses the problem, however, altering the concept of the classical. As the best Latin is defined as golden Latin, the second of the three periods, the other two periods considered classical are left hanging. While on the one hand assigning to Old Latin the term pre-classical and by implication the term post-classical (or post-Augustan) to silver Latin Cruttwell realizes that this construct is not according to ancient usage and asserts "…the epithet classical is by many restricted to the authors who wrote in it [golden Latin]. It is best, however, not to narrow unnecessarily the sphere of classicity; to exclude Terence on the one hand or Tacitus and Pliny on the other, would savour of artificial restriction rather than that of a natural classification." (This from a scholar who had just been complaining that golden Latin was not a natural language.) The contradiction remains; Terence is and is not a classical author depending on context.[11]
Authors of the Golden Age[edit]




At Maecenas' Reception, oil, Stepan Bakalovich, 1890. An artist's view of the classical. Maecenas knew and entertained everyone literary in the Golden Age, especially Augustus.


After defining a "First Period" of inscriptional Latin and the literature of the earliest known authors and fragments, to which he assigns no definitive name (he does use the term "Old Roman" at one point), Teuffel presents "the second period", his major, "das goldene Zeitalter der römischen Literatur", the Golden Age of Roman Literature, dated 671–767 AUC or 83 BC – 14 AD according to his time reckoning, between the dictatorship of Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix and the death of the emperor Augustus.[12][13] Of it Wagner translating Teuffel writes

The golden age of the Roman literature is that period in which the climax was reached in the perfection of form, and in most respects also in the methodical treatment of the subject-matters. It may be subdivided between the generations, in the first of which (the Ciceronian Age) prose culminated, while poetry was principally developed in the Augustan Age.

The Ciceronian Age was dated 671–711 AUC (83 BC – 43 BC), ending just after the death of M. Tullius Cicero, and the Augustan 711–67 AUC (43 BC – 14 AD), ending with the death of Augustus. The Ciceronian Age is further divided by the consulship of Cicero in 691 AUC or 63 BC into a first and second half. Authors are assigned to these periods by years of principal achievements.
The Golden Age had already made an appearance in German philology but in a less systematic way. In Bielfeld's 1770 Elements of universal erudition the author says (in translation): "The Second Age of Latin began about the time of Caesar [his ages are different from Teuffel's], and ended with Tiberius. This is what is called the Augustan Age, which was perhaps of all others the most brilliant, a period at which it should seem as if the greatest men, and the immortal authors, had met together upon the earth, in order to write the Latin language in its utmost purity and perfection."[14] and of Tacitus "…his conceits and sententious style is not that of the golden age…".[15] Teuffel evidently received the ideas of a golden and silver Latin from an existing tradition and embedded them in a new system, transforming them as he thought best.
In Cruttwell's introduction, the Golden Age is dated 80 BC – 14 AD ("from Cicero to Ovid"), which is about the same as Teuffel's. Of this "Second Period" Cruttwell says that it "represents the highest excellence in prose and poetry," paraphrasing Teuffel. The Ciceronian Age is now "the Republican Period" and is dated 80–42 BC through the Battle of Philippi. Later in the book Cruttwell omits Teuffel's first half of the Ciceronian and starts the Golden Age at Cicero's consulship of 63 BC, an error perpetuated into Cruttwell's second edition as well. He must mean 80 BC as he includes Varro in Golden Latin. Teuffel's Augustan Age is Cruttwell's Augustan Epoch, 42 BC – 14 AD.
Republican[edit]




Marcus Tullius Cicero, after whom Teuffel named his Ciceronian period of the Golden Age






Julius Caesar


The literary histories list all authors canonical to the Ciceronian Age even though their works may be fragmentary or may not have survived at all. With the exception of a few major writers, such as Cicero, Caesar, Virgil and Catullus, ancient accounts of Republican literature are glowing accounts of jurists and orators who wrote prolifically but who now can't be read because their works have been lost, or analyses of language and style that appear insightful but can't be verified because there are no surviving instances. In that sense the pages of literary history are peopled with shadows: Aquilius Gallus, Quintus Hortensius Hortalus, Lucius Licinius Lucullus and many others who left a reputation but no readable works; they are to be presumed in the Golden Age by their associations. A list of some canonical authors of the period, whose works have survived in whole or in part (typically in part, some only short fragments) is as follows:

Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BC), highly influential grammarian
Titus Pomponius Atticus (112/109 – 35/32), publisher and correspondent of Cicero
Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BC), orator, philosopher, essayist, whose works define golden Latin prose and are used in Latin curricula beyond the elementary level
Servius Sulpicius Rufus (106–43 BC), jurist, poet
Decimus Laberius (105–43 BC), writer of mimes
Marcus Furius Bibaculus (1st century BC), writer of ludicra
Gaius Julius Caesar (103–44 BC), general, statesman, historian
Gaius Oppius (1st century BC), secretary to Julius Caesar, probable author under Caesar's name
Gaius Matius (1st century BC), public figure, correspondent with Cicero
Cornelius Nepos (100–24 BC), biographer
Publilius Syrus (1st century BC), writer of mimes and maxims
Quintus Cornificius (1st century BC), public figure and writer on rhetoric
Titus Lucretius Carus (Lucretius; 94–50 BC), poet, philosopher
Publius Nigidius Figulus (98–45 BC), public officer, grammarian
Aulus Hirtius (90–43 BC), public officer, military historian
Gaius Helvius Cinna (1st century BC), poet
Marcus Caelius Rufus (87–48 BC), orator, correspondent with Cicero
Gaius Sallustius Crispus (86–34 BC), historian
Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis (Cato the Younger; 95–46 BC), orator
Publius Valerius Cato (1st century BC), poet, grammarian
Gaius Valerius Catullus (Catullus; 84–54 BC), poet
Gaius Licinius Macer Calvus (82–47 BC), orator, poet

Augustan[edit]




Virgil's bust, on his tomb in Naples


Main article: Augustan literature (ancient Rome)
The Golden Age is divided by the assassination of Julius Caesar. In the wars that followed the Republican generation of literary men was lost, as most of them had taken the losing side; Marcus Tullius Cicero was beheaded in the street as he enquired from his litter what the disturbance was.[citation needed] They were replaced by a new generation that had grown up and been educated under the old and were now to make their mark under the watchful eye of the new emperor. As the demand for great orators was more or less over,[16] the talent shifted emphasis to poetry. Other than the historian Livy, the most remarkable writers of the period were the poets Virgil, Horace, and Ovid. Although Augustus evidenced some toleration to republican sympathizers, he exiled Ovid, and imperial tolerance ended with the continuance of the Julio-Claudian dynasty.
Augustan writers include:

Publius Vergilius Maro (Virgil, spelled also as Vergil; 70 – 19 BC),
Quintus Horatius Flaccus (Horace; 65 – 8 BC), known for lyric poetry and satires
Sextus Aurelius Propertius (50 – 15 BC), poet
Albius Tibullus (54–19 BC), elegiac poet
Publius Ovidius Naso (Ovid; 43 BC – AD 18), poet
Titus Livius (Livy; 64 BC – AD 12), historian
Grattius Faliscus (a contemporary of Ovid), poet
Marcus Manilius (1st century BC and AD), astrologer, poet
Gaius Julius Hyginus (64 BC – AD 17), librarian, poet, mythographer
Marcus Verrius Flaccus (55 BC – AD 20), grammarian, philologist, calendrist
Marcus Vitruvius Pollio (80-70 BC — after 15 BC), engineer, architect
Marcus Antistius Labeo (d. AD 10 or 11), jurist, philologist
Lucius Cestius Pius (1st century BC & AD), Latin educator
Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus (1st century BC), historian, naturalist
Marcus Porcius Latro (1st century BC), rhetorician
Gaius Valgius Rufus (consul 12 BC), poet

Authors of the Silver Age[edit]




The frowning second emperor, Tiberius, limited free speech, precipitating the rise of Silver Latin, with its emphasis on mannerism rather than on solid content, according to Teuffel's model


In his second volume, on the Imperial Period, Teuffel initiated a slight alteration in approach, making it clearer that his terms applied to the Latin and not just to the age, and also changing his dating scheme from years AUC to modern. Although he introduces das silberne Zeitalter der römischen Literatur, "the Silver Age of Roman Literature", 14–117 AD,[17] from the death of Augustus to the death of Trajan, he also mentions regarding a section of a work by Seneca the Elder a wenig Einfluss der silbernen Latinität, a "slight influence of silver Latin." It is clear that he had shifted in thought from golden and silver ages to golden and silver Latin, and not just Latin, but Latinitas, which must at this point be interpreted as classical Latin. He may have been influenced in that regard by one of his sources, E. Opitz, who in 1852 had published a title specimen lexilogiae argenteae latinitatis, mentioning silver Latinity.[18] Although Teuffel's First Period was equivalent to Old Latin and his Second Period was equal to the Golden Age, his Third Period, die römische Kaiserheit, encompasses both the Silver Age and the centuries now termed Late Latin, in which the forms seemed to break loose from their foundation and float freely; that is, literary men appeared uncertain as to what "good Latin" should mean. The last of the Classical Latin is the Silver Latin. The Silver Age is the first of the Imperial Period and is divided into die Zeit der julischen Dynastie, 14–68; die Zeit der flavischen Dynastie, 69–96; and die Zeit des Nerva und Trajan, 96–117. Subsequently, Teuffel goes over to a century scheme: 2nd, 3rd, etc., through 6th. His later editions (which came out in the rest of the late 19th century) divide the Imperial Age into parts: the 1st century (Silver Age), the 2nd century: Hadrian and the Antonines and the 3rd through the 6th Centuries. Of the Silver Age proper, pointing out that anything like freedom of speech had vanished with Tiberius, Teuffel says[19]

…the continual apprehension in which men lived caused a restless versatility… Simple or natural composition was considered insipid; the aim of language was to be brilliant… Hence it was dressed up with abundant tinsel of epigrams, rhetorical figures and poetical terms… Mannerism supplanted style, and bombastic pathos took the place of quiet power.

The content of new literary works was continually proscribed by the emperor (by executing or exiling the author), who also played the role of literary man (typically badly). The talent therefore went into a repertory of new and dazzling mannerisms, which Teuffel calls "utter unreality." Cruttwell picks up this theme:[20]

The foremost of these [characteristics] is unreality, arising from the extinction of freedom… Hence arose a declamatory tone, which strove by frigid and almost hysterical exaggeration to make up for the healthy stimulus afforded by daily contact with affairs. The vein of artificial rhetoric, antithesis and epigram… owes its origin to this forced contentment with an uncongenial sphere. With the decay of freedom, taste sank…





Marcus Aurelius, emperor over the last generation of classicists and himself a classicist.


In Cruttwell's view (which had not been expressed by Teuffel), Silver Latin was a "rank, weed-grown garden", a "decline."[21] Cruttwell had already decried what he saw as a loss of spontaneity in Golden Latin. That Teuffel should regard the Silver Age as a loss of natural language and therefore of spontaneity, implying that the Golden Age had it, is passed without comment. Instead, Tiberius brought about a "sudden collapse of letters." The idea of a decline had been dominant in English society since Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Once again, Cruttwell evidences some unease with his stock pronouncements: "The Natural History of Pliny shows how much remained to be done in fields of great interest." The idea of Pliny as a model is not consistent with any sort of decline; moreover, Pliny did his best work under emperors at least as tolerant as Augustus had been. To include some of the best writings of the Silver Age, Cruttwell found he had to extend the period through the death of Marcus Aurelius, 180 AD. The philosophic prose of that good emperor was in no way compatible with either Teuffel's view of unnatural language or Cruttwell's depiction of a decline. Having created these constructs, the two philologists found they could not entirely justify them; apparently, in the worst implications of their views, there was no classical Latin by the ancient definition at all and some of the very best writing of any period in world history was a stilted and degenerate unnatural language.
The Silver Age also furnishes the only two extant Latin novels: Apuleius's The Golden Ass and Petronius's Satyricon.
Perhaps history's best-known example of Classical Latin was written by Pontius Pilate on the placard placed above Jesus' Cross: IESVS NAZARENVS REX IVDAEORVM, which translates to Jesus the Nazarean the King of the Judeans (Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews).
Writers of the Silver Age include:
Through the death of Trajan, 117 AD[edit]




Germanicus Caesar






Ancient bust of Seneca, part of a double herm (Antikensammlung Berlin)



Aulus Cremutius Cordus (died AD 25), historian
Marcus Velleius Paterculus (19 BC – 31 AD), military officer, historian
Valerius Maximus (1st century AD), rhetorician
Masurius Sabinus (1st century AD), jurist
Phaedrus (15 BC – AD 50), fabulist
Germanicus Julius Caesar (15 BC – AD 19), royal family, imperial officer, translator
Aulus Cornelius Celsus (25 BC – AD 50), physician, encyclopedist
Quintus Curtius Rufus (1st century AD), historian
Cornelius Bocchus (1st century AD), natural historian
Pomponius Mela (d. AD 45), geographer
Lucius Annaeus Seneca (4 BC – AD 65), educator, imperial advisor, philosopher, man of letters
Titus Calpurnius Siculus (1st century AD or possibly later), poet
Marcus Valerius Probus (1st century AD), literary critic
Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus (10 BC – AD 54), emperor, man of letters, public officer
Gaius Suetonius Paulinus (1st century AD), general, natural historian
Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella (AD 2 – 70), military officer, agriculturalist
Quintus Asconius Pedianus (9 BC – 76 AD), historian, Latinist
Gaius Musonius Rufus (AD 20 – 101), stoic philosopher
Quintus Marcius Barea Soranus (1st century AD), imperial officer and public man
Gaius Plinius Secundus (AD 23 – 79), imperial officer and encyclopedist
Gaius Valerius Flaccus (1st century AD), epic poet
Tiberius Catius Silius Italicus (AD 28 – 103), epic poet
Gaius Licinius Mucianus (d. AD 76), general, man of letters
Lucilius Junior (1st century AD), poet
Aulus Persius Flaccus (34–62 AD), poet and satirist
Marcus Fabius Quintilianus (35–100 AD), rhetorician
Sextus Julius Frontinus (AD 40 – 103), engineer, writer
Marcus Annaeus Lucanus (AD 39 – 65), poet, historian
Publius Juventius Celsus Titus Aufidius Hoenius Severianus (1st and early 2nd centuries AD), imperial officer, jurist
Aemilius Asper (1st & 2nd centuries AD), grammarian, literary critic
Marcus Valerius Martialis (AD 40 – 104), poet, epigrammatist
Publius Papinius Statius (AD 45 – 96), poet
Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus (AD 62 – 114), attorney, magistrate, correspondent
Decimus Junius Juvenalis (1st & 2nd centuries AD), poet, satirist
Publius Annaeus Florus (1st & 2nd centuries AD), poet, rhetorician and probable author of the epitome of Livy
Velius Longus (1st & 2nd centuries AD), grammarian, literary critic
Flavius Caper (1st & 2nd centuries AD), grammarian
Publius or Gaius Cornelius Tacitus (AD 56 – 120), imperial officer, historian and in Teuffel's view "the last classic of Roman literature."

Through the death of Marcus Aurelius, 180 AD[edit]
Of the additional century granted by Cruttwell and others of his point of view to Silver Latin but not by Teuffel the latter says "The second century was a happy period for the Roman State, the happiest indeed during the whole Empire… But in the world of letters the lassitude and enervation, which told of Rome's decline, became unmistakeable… its forte is in imitation."[22] Teuffel, however, excepts the jurists; others find other "exceptions," recasting Teuffels's view.[clarification needed]




Sketch of Apuleius



Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus (70/75 – after 130 AD), biographer
Marcus Junianus Justinus (2nd century AD), historian
Lucius Octavius Cornelius Publius Salvius Julianus Aemilianus (AD 110 – 170), imperial officer, jurist
Sextus Pomponius (2nd century AD), jurist
Quintus Terentius Scaurus (2nd century AD), grammarian, literary critic
Aulus Gellius (125 – after 180 AD), grammarian, polymath
Lucius Apuleius Platonicus (123/125–180 AD), novelist
Marcus Cornelius Fronto (AD 100 – 170), advocate, grammarian
Gaius Sulpicius Apollinaris (2nd century AD), educator, literary commentator
Granius Licinianus (2nd century AD), writer
Lucius Ampelius (2nd century AD), educator
Gaius (AD 130 – 180), jurist
Lucius Volusius Maecianus (2nd century AD), educator, jurist
Marcus Minucius Felix (d. AD 250), apologist of Christianity, "the first Christian work in Latin" (Teuffel)
Sextus Julius Africanus (2nd century AD), Christian historian
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Augustus (121–180 AD, stoic philosopher, Emperor in Latin, essayist in ancient Greek, role model of the last generation of classicists (Cruttwell)

Stylistic shifts[edit]
The style of language refers to repeatable features of speech that are somewhat less general than the fundamental characteristics of the language. The latter give it a unity allowing it to be referenced under a single name. Thus Old Latin, Classical Latin, Vulgar Latin, etc., are not considered different languages, but are all referenced under the name of Latin. This is an ancient practice continued by moderns rather than a philological innovation of recent times. That Latin had case endings is a fundamental feature of the language. Whether a given form of speech prefers to use prepositions such as ad, ex, de for "to", "from" and "of" rather than simple case endings is a matter of style. Latin has a large number of styles. Each and every author has a style, which typically allows his prose or poetry to be identified by experienced Latinists. The problem of comparative literature has been to group styles finding similarities by period, in which case one may speak of Old Latin, Silver Latin, Late Latin as styles or a phase of styles.
The ancient authors themselves first defined style by recognizing different kinds of sermo, or "speech." In making the value judgement that classical Latin was "first class" and that it was better to write with Latinitas they were themselves selecting the literary and upper-class language of the city as a standard style and all sermo that differed from it was a different style; thus in rhetoric Cicero was able to define sublime, intermediate and low styles (within classical Latin) and St. Augustine to recommend the low style for sermons (from sermo).[23] Style, therefore, is to be defined by differences in speech from a standard. Teuffel defined that standard as Golden Latin.
John Edwin Sandys, for many decades an authority on Latin style, summarizes the differences between Golden and Silver Latin as follows.[24] Silver Latin is to be distinguished by

"an exaggerated conciseness and point"
"occasional archaic words and phrases derived from poetry"
"increase in the number of Greek words in ordinary use" (the Emperor Claudius in Suetonius refers to "both our languages", Latin and Greek[25])
"literary reminiscences"
"The literary use of words from the common dialect" (dictare and dictitare as well as classical dicere, "to say")

See also[edit]

Classic
Classical antiquity
Classics
Latin
Latin literature
Social class in ancient Rome

Notes[edit]


^ When rarely used in English, the term is capitalized: Latinitas. In Latin it was written all in uppercase: LATINITAS, as were all words in Latin.
^ Citroni 2006, p. 204.
^ Citroni 2006, p. 205.
^ Citroni 2006, p. 206, reported in Aulus Gellius, 9.8.15.
^ Citroni 2006, p. 207.
^ Bradford, William (1855) [1648]. "Gov. Bradford's Dialogue". In Morton, Nathaniel. New England's Memorial. Boston: Congregational Board of Publication. p. 330. 
^ Littlefield 1904, p. 301.
^ Ainsworth, Robert (January 1736). "Article XXX: Thesaurus Linguae Latinae Compendarius". The Present State of the Republic of Letters. London: W. Innys and R. Manby. XVII. 
^ Gorak, Jan (1991). The making of the modern canon: genesis and crisis of a literary idea. London: Athlone. p. 51. 
^ Cruttwell 1877, p. 3.
^ Cruttwell 1877, p. 142.
^ Teuffel 1870, p. 216.
^ Teuffel 1873, p. 226.
^ Bielfeld & Hooper 1770, p. 244.
^ Bielfeld & Hooper 1770, p. 345.
^ Teuffel 1873, p. 385, "Public life became extinct, all political business passed into the hands of the monarch..."
^ Teuffel (1870) p. 526.
^ Teuffel 1870, p. 530.
^ Teuffel & Schwabe 1892, pp. 4–5.
^ Cruttwell 1877, p. 6.
^ Cruttwell 1877, p. 341.
^ Teuffel & Schwabe 1892, p. 192.
^ Auerbach, Erich; Mannheim, Ralph (Translator) (1965) [1958]. Literary Language and its Public in Late Latin Antiquity and in the Middle Ages. Bollingen Series LXXIV. Pantheon Books. p. 33. 
^ Sandys, John Edwin (1921). A Companion to Latin Studies Edited for the Syndics of the University Press (3rd ed.). Cambridge: University Press. pp. 824–26. 
^ Suetonius, Claudius, 24.1.


Bibliography[edit]

Bielfeld, Baron (1770), The Elements of Universal Erudition, Containing an Analytical Abridgement of the Science, Polite Arts and Belles Lettres, III, Hooper, W (Trans.), London: G Scott 
Citroni, Mario (2006), "The Concept of the Classical and the Canons of Model Authors in Roman Literature", in Porter, James I, The Classical Tradition of Greece and Rome, Packham, RA (Trans.), Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 204–34 
Cruttwell, Charles Thomas (1877), A History of Roman Literature from the Earliest Period to the Death of Marcus Aurelius, London: Charles Griffin & Co 
Littlefield, George Emery (1904), Early Schools and School-books of New England, Boston: Club of Odd Volumes 
Settis, Salvatore (2006), The Future of the ‘Classical’, Cameron, Allan (Trans.), Cambridge, UK; Malden, MA: Polity Press 
Teuffel, Wilhelm Sigismund (1873), A History of Roman Literature, Wagner, Wilhelm (Trans.), London: George Bell & Sons 
Teuffel, Wilhelm Sigismund; Schwabe, Ludwig (1892), Teuffel's History of Roman Literature Revised and Enlarged, II, The Imperial Period, Warr, George CW (Trans.) (from the 5th German ed.), London: George Bell & Sons 

External links[edit]

Cruttwell, Charles Thomas (1877, 2005). "A History of Roman Literature from the Earliest Period to the Death of Marcus Aurelius". London: Charles Griffin and Company, Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 26 September 2009.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
Teuffel, W.S. (1870, 2001). "Geschichte der Römischen Literatur" (in German). Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, Internet Archive. Retrieved 25 September 2009.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
The Latin Library . The Latin Library
Latin Texts
Greek and Latin Texts
Classical Latin Texts
Latin Texts
A collection of Latin and Greek texts







v
t
e


Ages of Latin









until 75 BC
Old Latin




75 BC – 200 AD
Classical Latin




200–900
Late Latin




900–1300
Medieval Latin




1300–1500
Renaissance Latin




1500–present
New Latin




1900–present
Contemporary Latin











History of Latin
Latin literature
Vulgar Latin
Ecclesiastical Latin
Romance languages
Latino sine flexione
Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum
Hiberno-Latin
Judeo-Latin












v
t
e


Ancient Rome topics






Outline
Timeline





Epochs







Foundation
Kingdom

overthrow


Republic





Empire



Pax Romana
Principate
Dominate
Western Empire

fall
historiography of the fall


Byzantine Empire

decline
fall










Constitution



History
Kingdom
Republic
Empire
Late Empire
Senate
Legislative assemblies

Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian


Executive magistrates
SPQR





Government



Curia
Forum
Cursus honorum
Collegiality
Emperor
Legatus
Dux
Officium
Prefect
Vicarius
Vigintisexviri
Lictor
Magister militum
Imperator
Princeps senatus
Pontifex Maximus
Augustus
Caesar
Tetrarch
Optimates
Populares
Province





Magistrates




Ordinary



Tribune
Quaestor
Aedile
Praetor
Consul
Censor
Promagistrate
Governor





Extraordinary



Dictator
Magister Equitum
Decemviri
Consular Tribune
Triumvir
Rex
Interrex








Law



Twelve Tables
Mos maiorum
Citizenship
Auctoritas
Imperium
Status
Litigation





Military



Borders
Establishment
Structure
Campaigns
Political control
Strategy
Engineering
Frontiers and fortifications

castra


Technology
Army

Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines


Navy
Auxiliaries
Decorations and punishments
Hippika gymnasia





Economy



Agriculture
Deforestation
Commerce
Finance
Currency
Republican currency
Imperial currency





Technology



Abacus
Numerals
Civil engineering
Military engineering
Military technology
Aqueducts
Bridges
Circus
Concrete
Domes
Forum
Metallurgy
Roads
Sanitation
Thermae





Culture



Architecture
Art
Bathing
Calendar
Clothing
Cosmetics
Cuisine
Hairstyles
Education
Literature
Music
Mythology
Religion
Romanization
Sexuality
Theatre
Wine





Society



Patricians
Plebs
Conflict of the Orders
Secessio plebis
Equites
Gens
Tribes
Naming conventions
Demography
Women
Marriage
Adoption
Slavery
Bagaudae





Latin



History
Alphabet
Versions

Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
New
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical


Romance languages





Writers



Apuleius
Caesar
Catullus
Cicero
Ennius
Horace
Juvenal
Livy
Lucan
Lucretius
Martial
Ovid
Petronius
Phaedrus
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Propertius
Quintilian
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Sallust
Seneca
Statius
Suetonius
Tacitus
Terence
Tibullus
Marcus Terentius Varro
Virgil
Vitruvius





Major cities



Alexandria
Antioch
Aquileia
Berytus
Bononia
Carthage
Constantinopolis
Eboracum
Leptis Magna
Londinium
Lutetia
Mediolanum
Pompeii
Ravenna
Roma
Smyrna
Vindobona
Volubilis





Lists and other
topics



Wars and battles
Generals
Legions
Emperors
Geographers
Cities and towns
Institutions
Laws
Consuls
Tribunes
Distinguished women
Nomina
Gentes
Climate
Legacy


Fiction
Films








Languages portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_Latin&oldid=818167875"					Categories: Latin language in ancient RomeForms of LatinClassical languagesClassical Latin literatureLanguages attested from the 1st century BC1st-century BC establishments in the Roman RepublicLanguages extinct in the 3rd century3rd-century disestablishmentsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from November 2015Articles containing Latin-language textLanguages without Glottolog codeHistorical forms of languages with ISO codesLanguages without ISO 639-3 code but with Linguist List codeLanguages without ISO 639-3 code but with Linguasphere codeLanguage articles with unreferenced extinction dateAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2010Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2014CS1 errors: datesCS1 German-language sources (de)