This article is about the academic discipline. For other uses, see Classics (disambiguation).
"Classical literature" redirects here. For literature from the ancient world in general, see Ancient literature. For exemplary or noteworthy books, see Classic book.
"Classicist" redirects here. For the art movement, see Classicism.




Bust of Homer, the ancient Greek epic poet


Classics or classical studies is the study of classical antiquity. It encompasses the study of the Greco-Roman world, particularly of its languages and literature (Ancient Greek and Classical Latin) but also of Greco-Roman philosophy, history, and archaeology. Traditionally in the West, the study of the Greek and Roman classics was considered one of the cornerstones of the humanities and a necessary part of a rounded education. The study of Classics has been traditionally a cornerstone of a typical elite education.
Study encompasses specifically a time-period of history from the mid-2nd millennia BC to the 6th century AD. [1]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Middle Ages
2.2 Renaissance
2.3 Neoclassicism
2.4 19th century
2.5 20th century to present


3 Sub-disciplines

3.1 Philology
3.2 Archaeology
3.3 Art history
3.4 Ancient history
3.5 Philosophy
3.6 Reception studies


4 Classical Greece

4.1 Language
4.2 Literature
4.3 Mythology and religion
4.4 Philosophy


5 Classical Rome

5.1 Language
5.2 Literature
5.3 History


6 Legacy of the classical world
7 See also
8 References
9 Works cited
10 Further reading
11 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word Classics is derived from the Latin adjective classicus, meaning "belonging to the highest class of citizens". The word was originally used to describe the members of the highest class in ancient Rome. By the 2nd century AD the word was used in literary criticism to describe writers of the highest quality.[2] For example, Aulus Gellius, in his Attic Nights, contrasts "classicus" and "proletarius" writers.[3] By the 6th century AD, the word had acquired a second meaning, referring to pupils at a school.[2] Thus the two modern meanings of the word, referring both to literature considered to be of the highest quality, and to the standard texts used as part of a curriculum, both derive from Roman use.[2]
History[edit]
Middle Ages[edit]




The Roman poet Catullus was virtually unknown during the medieval period, in contrast to his modern popularity.


In the Middle Ages, classics and education were tightly intertwined; according to Jan Ziolkowski, there is no era in history in which the link was tighter.[4] Medieval education taught students to imitate earlier classical models,[5] and Latin continued to be the language of scholarship and culture, despite the increasing difference between literary Latin and the vernacular languages of Europe during the period.[5]
While Latin was hugely influential, however, Greek was barely studied, and Greek literature survived almost solely in Latin translation.[6] The works of even major Greek authors such as Hesiod, whose names continued to be known by educated Europeans, were unavailable in the Middle Ages.[6] Along with the unavailability of Greek authors, there were other differences between the classical canon known today and the works valued in the Middle Ages. Catullus, for instance, was almost entirely unknown in the medieval period.[6] The popularity of different authors also waxed and waned throughout the period: Lucretius, popular during the Carolingian period, was barely read in the twelfth century, while for Quintilian the reverse is true.[6]
Renaissance[edit]
The Renaissance led to the increasing study of both ancient literature and ancient history,[7] as well as a revival of classical styles of Latin.[8] From the 14th century, first in Italy and then increasingly across Europe, Renaissance Humanism, an intellectual movement that "advocated the study and imitation of classical antiquity",[7] developed. Humanism saw a reform in education in Europe, introducing a wider range of Latin authors as well as bringing back the study of Greek language and literature to Western Europe.[8] This reintroduction was initiated by Petrarch (1304–1374) and Boccaccio (1313–1375) who commissioned a Calabrian scholar to translate the Homeric poems.[9] This humanist educational reform spread from Italy, in Catholic countries as it was adopted by the Jesuits, and in countries that became Protestant such as England, Germany, and the Low Countries, in order to ensure that future clerics were able to study the New Testament in the original language.[10]
Neoclassicism[edit]
The late 17th and 18th centuries are the period in Western European literary history which is most associated with the classical tradition, as writers consciously adapted classical models.[11] Classical models were so highly prized that the plays of William Shakespeare were rewritten along neoclassical lines, and these "improved" versions were performed throughout the 18th century.[12]
From the beginning of the 18th century, the study of Greek became increasingly important relative to that of Latin.[13] In this period Johann Winckelmann's claims for the superiority of the Greek visual arts influenced a shift in aesthetic judgements, while in the literary sphere, G.E. Lessing "returned Homer to the centre of artistic achievement".[14] In the United Kingdom, the study of Greek in schools began in the late 18th century. The poet Walter Savage Landor claimed to have been one of the first English schoolboys to write in Greek during his time at Rugby School.[15]
19th century[edit]
The 19th century saw the influence of the classical world, and the value of a classical education, decline,[16] especially in the US, where the subject was often criticised for its elitism.[17] By the 19th century, little new literature was still being written in Latin – a practice which had continued as late as the 18th century – and a command of Latin declined in importance.[10] Correspondingly, classical education from the 19th century onwards began to increasingly de-emphasise the importance of the ability to write and speak Latin.[13] In the United Kingdom this process took longer than elsewhere. Composition continued to be the dominant classical skill in England until the 1870s, when new areas within the discipline began to increase in popularity.[18] In the same decade came the first challenges to the requirement of Greek at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, though it would not be finally abolished for another 50 years.[19]
Though the influence of classics as the dominant mode of education in Europe and North America was in decline in the 19th century, the discipline was rapidly evolving in the same period. Classical scholarship was becoming more systematic and scientific, especially with the "new philology" created at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century.[20] Its scope was also broadening: it was during the 19th century that ancient history and classical archaeology began to be seen as part of Classics, rather than separate disciplines.[18]
20th century to present[edit]
During the 20th century, the study of classics became less common. In England, for instance, Oxford and Cambridge universities stopped requiring students to have qualifications in Greek in 1920,[19] and in Latin at the end of the 1950s.[21] When the National Curriculum was introduced in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland in 1988, it did not mention the classics.[21] By 2003, only about 10% of state schools in Britain offered any classical subjects to their students at all.[22]
However, the study of classics has not declined as fast elsewhere in Europe. In 2009, a review of Meeting the Challenge, a collection of conference papers about the teaching of Latin in Europe, noted that though there is opposition to the teaching of Latin in Italy, it is nonetheless still compulsory in most secondary schools.[23] The same can be said in the case of France or Greece, too. Indeed, Ancient Greek is one of the compulsory subjects in Greek secondary education, whereas in France, Latin is one of the optional subjects that can be chosen in a majority of middle schools and high schools. Ancient Greek is also still being taught, but not as much as Latin.
Sub-disciplines[edit]
One of the most notable characteristics of the modern study of Classics is the diversity of the field. Although traditionally focused on ancient Greece and Rome, the study now encompasses the entire ancient Mediterranean world, thus expanding the studies to Northern Africa as well as parts of the Middle East.[citation needed]
Philology[edit]
Further information: Philology
For the journal, see Classical Philology (journal).




The eighteenth-century classicist Friedrich August Wolf was the author of Prolegomena to Homer, one of the first great works of classical philology.


Philology is the study of language preserved in written sources; classical philology is thus concerned with understanding any texts from the classical period written in the classical languages of Latin and Greek.[24] The roots of classical philology lie in the Renaissance, as humanist intellectuals attempted to return to the Latin of the classical period, especially of Cicero,[25] and as scholars attempted to produce more accurate editions of ancient texts.[26] Some of the principles of philology still used today developed during this period. For instance, the observation that if a manuscript could be shown to be a copy of an earlier extant manuscript, then it provides no further evidence of the original text, was made as early as 1489 by Angelo Poliziano.[27] Other philological tools took longer to be developed: the first statement, for instance, of the principle that a more difficult reading should be preferred over a simpler one, was in 1697 by Jean Le Clerc.[28]
The modern discipline of classical philology began in Germany at the turn of the nineteenth century.[20] It was during this period that scientific principles of philology began to be put together into a coherent whole,[29] in order to provide a set of rules by which scholars could determine which manuscripts were most accurate.[30] This "new philology", as it was known, centred around the construction of a genealogy of manuscripts, with which a hypothetical common ancestor, closer to the original text than any existing manuscript, could be reconstructed.[31]
Archaeology[edit]
Main article: Classical archaeology




Schliemann and Dörpfeld's excavation at Mycenae was one of the earliest excavations in the field of classical archaeology.


Classical archaeology is the oldest branch of archaeology,[32] with its roots going back to J.J. Winckelmann's work on Herculaneum in the 1760s.[33] It was not until the last decades of the 19th century, however, that classical archaeology became part of the tradition of Western classical scholarship.[33] It was included as part of Cambridge University's Classical Tripos for the first time after the reforms of the 1880s, though it did not become part of Oxford's Greats until much later.[19]
The second half of the 19th century saw Schliemann's excavations of Troy and Mycenae; the first excavations at Olympia and Delos; and Arthur Evans' work in Crete, particularly on Knossos.[34] This period also saw the foundation of important archaeological associations (e.g. the Archaeological Institute of America in 1879),[35] including many foreign archaeological institutes in Athens and Rome (the American School of Classical Studies at Athens in 1881, British School at Athens in 1886, American Academy in Rome in 1895, and British School at Rome in 1900).[36]
More recently, classical archaeology has taken little part in the theoretical changes in the rest of the discipline,[37] largely ignoring the popularity of "New Archaeology", which emphasised the development of general laws derived from studying material culture, in the 1960s.[38] New Archaeology is still criticized by traditional minded scholars of classical archaeology despite a wide acceptance of its basic techniques.[39]
Art history[edit]
Main article: Art history
Some art historians focus their study on the development of art in the classical world. Indeed, the art and architecture of Ancient Rome and Greece is very well regarded and remains at the heart of much of our art today. For example, Ancient Greek architecture gave us the Classical Orders: Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. The Parthenon is still the architectural symbol of the classical world.
Greek sculpture is well known and we know the names of several Ancient Greek artists: for example, Phidias.
Ancient history[edit]
With philology, archaeology, and art history, scholars seek understanding of the history and culture of a civilisation, through critical study of the extant literary and physical artefacts, in order to compose and establish a continual historic narrative of the Ancient World and its peoples. The task is difficult due to a dearth of physical evidence: for example, Sparta was a leading Greek city-state, yet little evidence of it survives to study, and what is available comes from Athens, Sparta's principal rival; likewise, the Roman Empire destroyed most evidence (cultural artefacts) of earlier, conquered civilizations, such as that of the Etruscans.
Philosophy[edit]
Main article: Ancient philosophy
The English word "philosophy" comes from the Greek word φιλοσοφία, meaning "love of wisdom", probably coined by Pythagoras. Along with the word itself, the discipline of philosophy as we know it today has its roots in ancient Greek thought, and according to Martin West "philosophy as we understand it is a Greek creation".[40] Ancient philosophy was traditionally divided into three branches: logic, physics, and ethics.[41] However, not all of the works of ancient philosophers fit neatly into one of these three branches. For instance, Aristotle's Rhetoric and Poetics have been traditionally classified in the West as "ethics", but in the Arabic world were grouped with logic; in reality, they do not fit neatly into either category.[41]
From the last decade of the eighteenth century, scholars of ancient philosophy began to study the discipline historically.[42] Previously, works on ancient philosophy had been unconcerned with chronological sequence and with reconstructing the reasoning of ancient thinkers; with what Wolfgang-Ranier Mann calls "New Philosophy", this changed.[43]
Reception studies[edit]
Main article: Classical reception studies
A relatively recent new discipline within the classics is "reception studies",[44] which developed in the 1960s at the University of Konstanz.[45] Reception studies is concerned with how students of classical texts have understood and interpreted them.[45] As such, reception studies is interested in a two-way interaction between reader and text,[46] taking place within a historical context.[47]
Though the idea of an "aesthetics of reception" was first put forward by Hans Robert Jauss in 1967, the principles of reception theory go back much earlier than this.[46] As early as 1920, T.S. Eliot wrote that "the past [is] altered by the present as much as the present is directed by the past";[48] Charles Martindale describes this as a "cardinal principle" for many versions of modern reception theory.[46]
Classical Greece[edit]
Main articles: Ancient Greece, Outline of ancient Greece, and Timeline of ancient Greece
Ancient Greece was the civilization belonging to the period of Greek history lasting from the Archaic period, beginning in the eighth century BC, to the Roman conquest of Greece after the Battle of Corinth in 146 BC. The Classical period, during the fifth and fourth centuries BC, has traditionally been considered the height of Greek civilisation.[49] The Classical period of Greek history is generally considered to have begun with the first and second Persian invasions of Greece at the start of the Greco-Persian wars,[50] and to have ended with the death of Alexander the Great.
Classical Greek culture had a powerful influence on the Roman Empire, which carried a version of it to many parts of the Mediterranean region and Europe; thus Classical Greece is generally considered to be the seminal culture which provided the foundation of Western civilization.
Language[edit]




Map showing the regional dialects of Greek during the Classical period


Main articles: Ancient Greek, Mycenaean Greek language, and Koine Greek
Ancient Greek is the historical stage in the development of the Greek language spanning the Archaic (c. 8th to 6th centuries BC), Classical (c. 5th to 4th centuries BC), and Hellenistic (c. 3rd century BC to 6th century AD) periods of ancient Greece and the ancient world. It is predated in the 2nd millennium BC by Mycenaean Greek. Its Hellenistic phase is known as Koine ("common") or Biblical Greek, and its late period mutates imperceptibly into Medieval Greek. Koine is regarded as a separate historical stage of its own, although in its earlier form it closely resembles Classical Greek. Prior to the Koine period, Greek of the classical and earlier periods included several regional dialects.
Ancient Greek was the language of Homer and of classical Athenian historians, playwrights, and philosophers. It has contributed many words to the vocabulary of English and many other European languages, and has been a standard subject of study in Western educational institutions since the Renaissance. Latinized forms of Ancient Greek roots are used in many of the scientific names of species and in other scientific terminology.
Literature[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek literature
The earliest surviving works of Greek literature are epic poetry. Homer's Iliad and Odyssey are the earliest to survive to us today, probably composed in the eighth century BC.[51] These early epics were oral compositions, created without the use of writing.[52] Around the same time that the Homeric epics were composed, the Greek alphabet was introduced; the earliest surviving inscriptions date from around 750 BC.[53]
European drama was invented in ancient Greece. Traditionally this was attributed to Thespis, around the middle of the sixth century BC,[54] though the earliest surviving work of Greek drama is Aeschylus' tragedy The Persians, which dates to 472 BC.[55] Early Greek tragedy was performed by a chorus and two actors, but by the end of Aeschylus' life, a third actor had been introduced, either by him or by Sophocles.[55] The last surviving Greek tragedies are the Bacchae of Euripides and Sophocles' Oedipus at Colonus, both from the end of the fifth century BC.[56]
Surviving Greek comedy begins later than tragedy; the earliest surviving work, Aristophanes' Acharnians, comes from 425 BC.[57] However, comedy dates back as early as 486 BC, when the Dionysia added a competition for comedy to the much earlier competition for tragedy.[57] The comedy of the fifth century is known as Old Comedy, and it comes down to us solely in the eleven surviving plays of Aristophanes, along with a few fragments.[57] Sixty years after the end of Aristophanes' career, the next author of comedies to have any substantial body of work survive is Menander, whose style is known as New Comedy.[58]
Two historians flourished during Greece's classical age: Herodotus and Thucydides. Herodotus is commonly called the father of history, and his "History" contains the first truly literary use of prose in Western literature. Of the two, Thucydides was the more careful historian. His critical use of sources, inclusion of documents, and laborious research made his History of the Peloponnesian War a significant influence on later generations of historians. The greatest achievement of the 4th century was in philosophy. There were many Greek philosophers, but three names tower above the rest: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. These have had a profound influence on Western society.
Mythology and religion[edit]
Main articles: Greek mythology and Religion in Ancient Greece
Greek mythology is the body of myths and legends belonging to the ancient Greeks concerning their gods and heroes, the nature of the world, and the origins and significance of their own cult and ritual practices. They were a part of religion in ancient Greece. Modern scholars refer to the myths and study them in an attempt to throw light on the religious and political institutions of Ancient Greece and its civilization, and to gain understanding of the nature of myth-making itself.
Greek religion encompassed the collection of beliefs and rituals practiced in ancient Greece in the form of both popular public religion and cult practices. These different groups varied enough for it to be possible to speak of Greek religions or "cults" in the plural, though most of them shared similarities. Also, the Greek religion extended out of Greece and out to neighbouring islands.
Many Greek people recognized the major gods and goddesses: Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, Apollo, Artemis, Aphrodite, Ares, Dionysus, Hephaestus, Athena, Hermes, Demeter, Hestia and Hera; though philosophies such as Stoicism and some forms of Platonism used language that seems to posit a transcendent single deity. Different cities often worshipped the same deities, sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified their local nature.
Philosophy[edit]
Main article: Ancient Greek philosophy




So influential was Socrates to classical philosophy that earlier philosophers are today known as pre-Socratics.


The earliest surviving philosophy from ancient Greece dates back to the 6th century BC, when according to Aristotle Thales of Miletus was considered to have been the first Greek philosopher.[59] Other influential pre-Socratic philosophers include Pythagoras and Heraclitus. The most famous and significant figures in classical Athenian philosophy, from the 5th to the 3rd centuries BC, are Socrates, his student Plato, and Aristotle, who studied at Plato's Academy before founding his own school, known as the Lyceum. Later Greek schools of philosophy, including the Cynics, Stoics, and Epicureans, continued to be influential after the Roman annexation of Greece, and into the post-Classical world.
Greek philosophy dealt with a wide variety of subjects, including political philosophy, ethics, metaphysics, ontology, and logic, as well as disciplines which are not today thought of as part of philosophy, such as biology and rhetoric.
Classical Rome[edit]
Main articles: Ancient Rome and Culture of Ancient Rome
Language[edit]
Main article: Latin




The Praeneste fibula is believed to bear the oldest known Latin inscription. The inscription means "Manius made me for Numerius".


The language of ancient Rome was Latin, a member of the Italic family of languages. The earliest surviving inscription in Latin comes from the 7th century BC, on a brooch from Palestrina. Latin from between this point and the early 1st century BC is known as Old Latin. Most surviving Latin literature is Classical Latin, from the 1st century BC to the 2nd century AD. Latin then evolved into Late Latin, in use during the late antique period. Late Latin survived long after the end of classical antiquity, and was finally replaced by written Romance languages around the 9th century AD. Along with literary forms of Latin, there existed various vernacular dialects, generally known as Vulgar Latin, in use throughout antiquity. These are mainly preserved in sources such as graffiti and the Vindolanda tablets.
Literature[edit]
Main article: Latin literature
The earliest surviving Latin authors, writing in Old Latin, include the playwrights Plautus and Terence. Much of the best known and most highly thought of Latin literature comes from the classical period, with poets such as Virgil, Horace, and Ovid; historians such as Julius Caesar and Tacitus; orators such as Cicero; and philosophers such as Seneca the Younger and Lucretius. Late Latin authors include many Christian writers such as Lactantius, Tertullian and Ambrose; non-Christian authors, such as the historian Ammianus Marcellinus, are also preserved.
History[edit]
Main article: Timeline of ancient Rome
According to legend, the city of Rome was founded in 753 BC;[60] in reality, there had been a settlement on the site since around 1000 BC, when the Palatine Hill was settled.[61] The city was originally ruled by kings, first Roman, and then Etruscan – according to Roman tradition, the first Etruscan king of Rome, Tarquinius Priscus, ruled from 616 BC.[62] Over the course of the 6th century BC, the city expanded its influence over the entirety of Latium.[63] Around the end of the 6th century – traditionally in 510 BC – the kings of Rome were driven out, and the city became a republic.[64]
Around 387 BC, Rome was sacked by the Gauls following the Battle of the Allia.[65] It soon recovered from this humiliating defeat, however, and in 381 the inhabitants of Tusculum in Latium were made Roman citizens. This was the first time Roman citizenship was extended in this way.[66] Rome went on to expand its area of influence, until by 269 the entirety of the Italian peninsula was under Roman rule.[67] Soon afterwards, in 264, the First Punic War began; it lasted until 241.[68] The Second Punic War began in 218, and by the end of that year, the Carthaginian general Hannibal had invaded Italy.[69] The war saw Rome's worst defeat to that point at Cannae; the largest army Rome had yet put into the field was wiped out, and one of the two consuls leading it was killed.[70] However, Rome continued to fight, annexing much of Spain[71] and eventually defeating Carthage, ending her position as a major power and securing Roman preeminence in the Western Mediterranean.[72]
Legacy of the classical world[edit]
The classical languages of the Ancient Mediterranean world influenced every European language, imparting to each a learned vocabulary of international application. Thus, Latin grew from a highly developed cultural product of the Golden and Silver eras of Latin literature to become the international lingua franca in matters diplomatic, scientific, philosophic and religious, until the 17th century. Long before this, Latin had evolved into the Romance languages and Ancient Greek into Modern Greek and its dialects. In the specialised science and technology vocabularies, the influence of Latin and Greek is notable. Ecclesiastical Latin, the Roman Catholic Church's official language, remains a living legacy of the classical world in the contemporary world.
Latin had an impact far beyond the classical world. It continued to be the pre-eminent language for serious writings in Europe long after the fall of the Roman empire.[73] The modern Romance languages – such as French, Spanish, and Italian – all derive from Latin.[74] Latin is still seen as a foundational aspect of European culture.[75]
The legacy of the classical world is not confined to the influence of classical languages. The Roman empire was taken as a model by later European empires, such as the Spanish and British empires.[76] Classical art has been taken as a model in later periods – medieval Romanesque architecture[77] and Enlightenment-era neoclassical literature[11] were both influenced by classical models, to take but two examples, while Joyce's Ulysses is one of the most influential works of twentieth century literature.[78]
See also[edit]


Classics portal



Classical tradition
Outline of classical studies
Outline of ancient Greece
Outline of ancient Rome

References[edit]


^ The British Library - Classics Accessed December 13th, 2017
^ a b c Ziolkowski 2007, p. 17
^ Aulus Gellius, Noctes Atticae, 19.8.15.
^ Ziolkowski 2007, p. 19
^ a b Ziolkowski 2007, p. 21
^ a b c d Ziolkowski 2007, p. 22
^ a b Kristeller 1978, p. 586
^ a b Kristeller 1978, p. 587
^ Pade, M. (2007). The Reception of Plutarch's Lives in Fifteenth-Century Italy. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum
^ a b Kristeller 1978, p. 590
^ a b Kaminski 2007, p. 57
^ Kaminski 2007, p. 65
^ a b Kristeller 1978, p. 591
^ Kaminski 2007, p. 69
^ Stray 1996, p. 79
^ Becker 2001, p. 309
^ Becker 2001, p. 313
^ a b Stray 1996, p. 81
^ a b c Stray 1996, p. 83
^ a b Rommel 2001, p. 169
^ a b Stray 1996, p. 85
^ Cook 2003
^ Balbo 2009
^ Mackay 1997
^ Shorey 1906, p. 179
^ Mann 1996, p. 172
^ Mann 1996, pp. 173–74
^ Mann 1996, p. 174
^ Mann 1996, pp. 174–75
^ Mann 1996, p. 173
^ Mann 1996, p. 175
^ Dyson 1993, p. 205
^ a b Renfrew 1980, p. 288
^ Renfrew 1980, p. 287
^ Stray 2010, p. 5
^ Stray 2010, pp. 4–5
^ Dyson 1993, p. 204
^ Dyson 1993, p. 196
^ Darvil, Timothy. "New Archaeology". Oxford Reference. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 2016-07-16. 
^ West 2001, p. 140
^ a b Mann 1996, p. 178
^ Mann 1996, p. 180
^ Mann 1996, pp. 180–81
^ Bulwer 2005, p. 13
^ a b Kallendorf 2007, p. 2
^ a b c Martindale 2007, p. 298
^ Martindale 2007, p. 301
^ Eliot 1920, p. 45
^ Shapiro 2007, p. 3
^ Shapiro 2007, p. 2
^ Kirk 1985, p. 47
^ Kirk 1985, p. 43
^ Kirk 1985, p. 45
^ Winnington-Ingram et al. 1985, p. 259
^ a b Winnington-Ingram et al. 1985, p. 258
^ Winnington-Ingram et al. 1985, pp. 339–40
^ a b c Handley 1985, p. 355
^ Handley 1985, p. 356
^ Aristotle, Metaphysics Alpha, 983b18.
^ Grant 1978, p. 11
^ Grant 1978, p. 10
^ Grant 1978, pp. 21–22
^ Grant 1978, p. 28
^ Grant 1978, p. 31
^ Grant 1978, p. 44
^ Grant 1978, p. 46
^ Grant 1978, p. 79
^ Grant 1978, pp. 83–85
^ Grant 1978, pp. 98–99
^ Grant 1978, p. 101
^ Grant 1978, p. 104
^ Grant 1978, p. 106
^ Ostler 2009, pp. xi–xii
^ Ostler 2009, p. 161
^ Ostler 2009, p. xiii
^ Ostler 2009, p. xii
^ Ziolkowski 2007, p. 26
^ Martindale 2007, p. 310


Works cited[edit]

Balbo, Andrea (2009). "Review of Bob Lister (ed.), Meeting the Challenge: International Perspectives on the Teaching of Latin". Bryn Mawr Classical Review. 
Becker, Trudy Harrington (2001). "Broadening Access to a Classical Education: State Universities in Virginia in the Nineteenth Century". The Classical Journal. 96 (3). 
Bulwer, John (2005). Teaching Classics in Europe: An Overview (PDF). Meeting the Challenge: European Perspectives on the Teaching of Latin. Cambridge. 
Cook, Stephen (2003-02-18). "Latin Types". 
Eliot, T. S. (1920). The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism. London: Methuen. 
Grant, Michael (1978). The History of Rome. London: Weidenfield and Nicholson. 
Handley, E. W. (1985). "Comedy". In Easterling, P. E.; Knox, Bernard M. W. The Cambridge History of Classical Literature. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kallendorf, Craig W. (2007). "Introduction". In Kallendorf, Craig W. A Companion to the Classical Tradition. Malden, Massachusetts; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell. 
Kaminski, Thomas (2007). "Neoclassicism". In Kallendorf, Craig W. A Companion to the Classical Tradition. Malden, Massachusetts; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell. 
Kirk, G. S. (1985). "Homer". In Easterling, P. E.; Knox, Bernard M. W. The Cambridge History of Classical Literature. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kristeller, Paul Oskar (1978). "Humanism". Minerva. 16 (4). 
Mackay, Christopher (1997). "Philology". 
Mann, Wolfgang-Ranier (1996). "The Modern Historiography of Ancient Philosophy". History and Theory. 35 (2). 
Martindale, Charles (2007). "Reception". In Kallendorf, Craig W. A Companion to the Classical Tradition. Malden, Massachusetts; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell. 
Ostler, Nicholas (2009). Ad Infinitum: A Biography of Latin and the World it Created. London: HarperPress. 
Renfrew, Colin (1980). "The Great Tradition versus the Great Divide: Archaeology as Anthropology". American Journal of Archaeology. 84 (3). 
Rommel, Georg (2001). "The Cradle of Titans: Classical Philology in Greifswald and its History from 1820". Illinois Classical Studies. 26. 
Shapiro, H. A. (2007). "Introduction". In Shapiro, H. A. The Cambridge Companion to Archaic Greece. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Shorey, Paul (1906). "Philology and Classical Philology". The Classical Journal. 1 (6). 
Stray, Christopher (1996). "Culture and Discipline: Classics and Society in Victorian England". International Journal of the Classical Tradition. 3 (1). 
Stray, Christopher (2010). "'Patriots and Professors': A Century of Roman Studies". Journal of Roman Studies. 
Trivedi, Harish (2007). "Western Classics, Indian Classics: Postcolonial Contestations". In Hardwick, Lorna; Gillespie, Carol. Classics in Post-Colonial Worlds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
West, Martin (2001). "Early Greek Philosophy". In Boardman, John; Griffin, Jasper; Murray, Oswyn. The Oxford History of Greece and the Hellenistic World. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Winnington-Ingram, R. P.; Gould, John; Easterling, P. E.; Knox, Bernard M. W. (1985). "Tragedy". In Easterling, P. E.; Knox, Bernard M. W. The Cambridge History of Classical Literature. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ziolkowski, Jan M. (2007). "Middle Ages". In Kallendorf, Craig W. A Companion to the Classical Tradition. Malden, Massachusetts; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria: Blackwell. 

Further reading[edit]



General




Beard, Mary; Henderson, John (2000). Classics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192853851. 
Hornblower, Simon; Spawforth, Anthony, eds. (2012). Oxford Classical Dictionary (4 ed.). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199545568. 




Philology




Chadwick, John (2014). The Decipherment of Linear B (2 ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107691766. 




Greek history




Osborne, Robin (2009). Greece in the Making 1200–479 BC (2 ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415469920. 
Hornblower, Simon (2011). The Greek World 479–323 BC (4 ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415602921. 
Shipley, Graham (2000). The Greek World After Alexander 323–30 BC. London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415046183. 




Roman history




Cornell, T. J. (1995). The Beginnings of Rome. London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415015967. 
Crawford, M. (1993). The Roman Republic (2 ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780006862505. 
Millar, F. (2002). Rome, the Greek World, and the East: The Roman Republic and the Augustan Revolution. 1. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 9780807849903. 
Brown, Peter (1989). The World of Late Antiquity 150–750. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 9780393958034. 




Literature




Whitmarsh, Tim (2004). Ancient Greek Literature. Cambridge: Polity Press. ISBN 9780745627915. 




Philosophy




Irwin, Terence (1988). Classical Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192891778. 
Shields, Christopher (2012). Ancient Philosophy: A Contemporary Introduction (2 ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 9780415896603. 
Julia, Annas (2000). Ancient Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192853578. 




Art and archaeology




Boardman, John (1996). Greek Art (4 ed.). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 9780500202920. 

External links[edit]



Wikiversity has learning resources about classics at
The School of Classics




Find more aboutClassicsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Classical Resources on Internet at the Department of Classical Philology, University of Tartu.
Electronic Resources for Classicists by the University of California, Irvine.
Illustrated History of the Roman Empire
The Perseus Digital Library
The Alpheios Project







v
t
e


Ancient Greece






Outline
Timeline













History
Geography










Periods



Cycladic civilization
Minoan civilization
Mycenaean civilization
Greek Dark Ages
Archaic period
Classical Greece
Hellenistic Greece
Roman Greece





Geography



Aegean Sea
Aeolis
Alexandria
Antioch
Cappadocia
Crete
Cyprus
Doris
Ephesus
Epirus
Hellespont
Ionia
Ionian Sea
Macedonia
Magna Graecia
Miletus
Peloponnesus
Pergamon
Pontus
Taurica
Ancient Greek colonies



















City states
Politics
Military










City states



Argos
Athens
Byzantion
Chalcis
Corinth
Eretria
Kerkyra
Larissa
Megalopolis
Megara
Rhodes
Samos
Sparta
Syracuse
Thebes





Politics







Boeotarch
Boule
Koinon
Proxeny
Strategos
Tagus
Tyrant
Amphictyonic League





Athenian



Agora
Areopagus
Ecclesia
Graphē paranómōn
Heliaia
Ostracism





Spartan



Apella
Ephor
Gerousia
Harmost





Macedon



Synedrion
Koinon








Military



Wars
Athenian military
Antigonid Macedonian army
Army of Macedon
Ballista
Cretan archers
Hellenistic armies
Hippeis
Hoplite
Hetairoi
Macedonian phalanx
Phalanx
Peltast
Pezhetairos
Sarissa
Sacred Band of Thebes
Sciritae
Seleucid army
Spartan army
Toxotai
Xiphos
Xyston
















People








List of ancient Greeks



Rulers



Kings of Argos
Archons of Athens
Kings of Athens
Kings of Commagene
Diadochi
Kings of Lydia
Kings of Macedonia
Kings of Paionia
Attalid kings of Pergamon
Kings of Pontus
Kings of Sparta
Tyrants of Syracuse





Philosophers



Anaxagoras
Anaximander
Anaximenes
Antisthenes
Aristotle
Democritus
Diogenes of Sinope
Empedocles
Epicurus
Gorgias
Heraclitus
Hypatia
Leucippus
Parmenides
Plato
Protagoras
Pythagoras
Socrates
Thales
Zeno





Authors



Aeschylus
Aesop
Alcaeus
Archilochus
Aristophanes
Bacchylides
Euripides
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hipponax
Homer
Ibycus
Lucian
Menander
Mimnermus
Panyassis
Philocles
Pindar
Plutarch
Polybius
Sappho
Simonides
Sophocles
Stesichorus
Theognis
Thucydides
Timocreon
Tyrtaeus
Xenophon





Others



Agesilaus II
Agis II
Alcibiades
Alexander the Great
Aratus
Archimedes
Aspasia
Demosthenes
Epaminondas
Euclid
Hipparchus
Hippocrates
Leonidas
Lycurgus
Lysander
Milo of Croton
Miltiades
Pausanias
Pericles
Philip of Macedon
Philopoemen
Praxiteles
Ptolemy
Pyrrhus
Solon
Themistocles





Groups



Philosophers
Playwrights
Poets
Tyrants





By culture



Ancient Greek tribes
Thracian Greeks
Ancient Macedonians



















Society
Culture










Society



Agriculture
Calendar
Clothing
Coinage
Cuisine
Economy
Education
Festivals
Funeral and burial practices
Homosexuality
Law
Olympic Games
Pederasty
Philosophy
Prostitution
Religion
Slavery
Warfare
Wedding customs
Wine





Arts and science



Architecture

Greek Revival architecture


Astronomy
Literature
Mathematics
Medicine
Music

Musical system


Pottery
Sculpture
Technology
Theatre





Religion







Funeral and burial practices
Mythology

mythological figures


Temple
Twelve Olympians
Underworld





Sacred places



Eleusis
Delphi
Delos
Dodona
Mount Olympus
Olympia








Structures







Athenian Treasury
Lion Gate
Long Walls
Philippeion
Theatre of Dionysus
Tunnel of Eupalinos





Temples



Aphaea
Artemis
Athena Nike
Erechtheion
Hephaestus
Hera, Olympia
Parthenon
Samothrace
Zeus, Olympia








Language



Proto-Greek
Mycenaean
Homeric
Dialects

Aeolic
Arcadocypriot
Attic
Doric
Ionic
Locrian
Macedonian
Pamphylian


Koine





Writing



Linear A
Linear B
Cypriot syllabary
Greek alphabet
Greek numerals
Attic numerals
















Lists






Cities

in Epirus


People
Place names
Stoae
Temples
Theatres











 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Ancient Rome topics






Outline
Timeline





Epochs







Foundation
Kingdom

overthrow


Republic





Empire



Pax Romana
Principate
Dominate
Western Empire

fall
historiography of the fall


Byzantine Empire

decline
fall










Constitution



History
Kingdom
Republic
Empire
Late Empire
Senate
Legislative assemblies

Curiate
Centuriate
Tribal
Plebeian


Executive magistrates
SPQR





Government



Curia
Forum
Cursus honorum
Collegiality
Emperor
Legatus
Dux
Officium
Prefect
Vicarius
Vigintisexviri
Lictor
Magister militum
Imperator
Princeps senatus
Pontifex Maximus
Augustus
Caesar
Tetrarch
Optimates
Populares
Province





Magistrates




Ordinary



Tribune
Quaestor
Aedile
Praetor
Consul
Censor
Promagistrate
Governor





Extraordinary



Dictator
Magister Equitum
Decemviri
Consular Tribune
Triumvir
Rex
Interrex








Law



Twelve Tables
Mos maiorum
Citizenship
Auctoritas
Imperium
Status
Litigation





Military



Borders
Establishment
Structure
Campaigns
Political control
Strategy
Engineering
Frontiers and fortifications

castra


Technology
Army

Legion
Infantry tactics
Personal equipment
Siege engines


Navy
Auxiliaries
Decorations and punishments
Hippika gymnasia





Economy



Agriculture
Deforestation
Commerce
Finance
Currency
Republican currency
Imperial currency





Technology



Abacus
Numerals
Civil engineering
Military engineering
Military technology
Aqueducts
Bridges
Circus
Concrete
Domes
Forum
Metallurgy
Roads
Sanitation
Thermae





Culture



Architecture
Art
Bathing
Calendar
Clothing
Cosmetics
Cuisine
Hairstyles
Education
Literature
Music
Mythology
Religion
Romanization
Sexuality
Theatre
Wine





Society



Patricians
Plebs
Conflict of the Orders
Secessio plebis
Equites
Gens
Tribes
Naming conventions
Demography
Women
Marriage
Adoption
Slavery
Bagaudae





Latin



History
Alphabet
Versions

Old
Classical
Vulgar
Late
Medieval
Renaissance
New
Contemporary
Ecclesiastical


Romance languages





Writers



Apuleius
Caesar
Catullus
Cicero
Ennius
Horace
Juvenal
Livy
Lucan
Lucretius
Martial
Ovid
Petronius
Phaedrus
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Propertius
Quintilian
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Sallust
Seneca
Statius
Suetonius
Tacitus
Terence
Tibullus
Marcus Terentius Varro
Virgil
Vitruvius





Major cities



Alexandria
Antioch
Aquileia
Berytus
Bononia
Carthage
Constantinopolis
Eboracum
Leptis Magna
Londinium
Lutetia
Mediolanum
Pompeii
Ravenna
Roma
Smyrna
Vindobona
Volubilis





Lists and other
topics



Wars and battles
Generals
Legions
Emperors
Geographers
Cities and towns
Institutions
Laws
Consuls
Tribunes
Distinguished women
Nomina
Gentes
Climate
Legacy


Fiction
Films









Authority control



GND: 4134281-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classics&oldid=817492537"					Categories: Ancient GreeceStudy of ancient RomeClassical studiesHumanitiesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers