For other uses, see Clay (disambiguation).




Gay Head cliffs in Martha's Vineyard consist almost entirely of clay.


Clay is a finely-grained natural rock or soil material that combines one or more clay minerals with traces of metal oxides and organic matter. Geologic clay deposits are mostly composed of phyllosilicate minerals containing variable amounts of water trapped in the mineral structure. Clays are plastic due to their water content and become hard, brittle and non–plastic upon drying or firing.[1][2][3] Depending on the soil's content in which it is found, clay can appear in various colours from white to dull grey or brown to deep orange-red.




Electron microscope photograph of smectite clay – magnification 23,500


Although many naturally occurring deposits include both silts and clay, clays are distinguished from other fine-grained soils by differences in size and mineralogy. Silts, which are fine-grained soils that do not include clay minerals, tend to have larger particle sizes than clays. There is, however, some overlap in particle size and other physical properties. The distinction between silt and clay varies by discipline. Geologists and soil scientists usually consider the separation to occur at a particle size of 2 µm (clays being finer than silts), sedimentologists often use 4–5 μm, and colloid chemists use 1 μm.[1] Geotechnical engineers distinguish between silts and clays based on the plasticity properties of the soil, as measured by the soils' Atterberg limits. ISO 14688 grades clay particles as being smaller than 2 μm and silt particles as being larger.




Quaternary clay in Estonia





Contents


1 Formation
2 Grouping
3 Historical and modern uses

3.1 Medicinal uses
3.2 As a building material


4 See also
5 Footnotes
6 References
7 External links



Formation[edit]




Deforestation for clay extraction in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The picture is of Morro da Covanca, Jacarepaguá.


Clay minerals typically form over long periods of time as a result of the gradual chemical weathering of rocks, usually silicate-bearing, by low concentrations of carbonic acid and other diluted solvents. These solvents, usually acidic, migrate through the weathering rock after leaching through upper weathered layers. In addition to the weathering process, some clay minerals are formed through hydrothermal activity. There are two types of clay deposits: primary and secondary. Primary clays form as residual deposits in soil and remain at the site of formation. Secondary clays are clays that have been transported from their original location by water erosion and deposited in a new sedimentary deposit.[4] Clay deposits are typically associated with very low energy depositional environments such as large lakes and marine basins.
Grouping[edit]
Depending on the academic source, there are three or four main groups of clays: kaolinite, montmorillonite-smectite, illite, and chlorite. Chlorites are not always considered to be a clay, sometimes being classified as a separate group within the phyllosilicates. There are approximately 30 different types of "pure" clays in these categories, but most "natural" clay deposits are mixtures of these different types, along with other weathered minerals.
Varve (or varved clay) is clay with visible annual layers, which are formed by seasonal deposition of those layers and are marked by differences in erosion and organic content. This type of deposit is common in former glacial lakes. When fine sediments are delivered into the calm waters of these glacial lake basins away from the shoreline, they settle to the lake bed. The resulting seasonal layering is preserved in an even distribution of clay sediment banding.[4]
Quick clay is a unique type of marine clay indigenous to the glaciated terrains of Norway, Canada, Northern Ireland, and Sweden. It is a highly sensitive clay, prone to liquefaction, which has been involved in several deadly landslides.
Historical and modern uses[edit]




Clay layers in a construction site. Dry clay is normally much more stable than sand with regard to excavations.


Clays exhibit plasticity when mixed with water in certain proportions. However, when dry, clay becomes firm and when fired in a kiln, permanent physical and chemical changes occur. These changes convert the clay into a ceramic material. Because of these properties, clay is used for making pottery, both utilitarian and decorative, and construction products, such as bricks, wall and floor tiles. Different types of clay, when used with different minerals and firing conditions, are used to produce earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain. Prehistoric humans discovered the useful properties of clay. Some of the earliest pottery shards recovered are from central Honshu, Japan. They are associated with the Jomon culture and deposits they were recovered from have been dated to around 14,000 BC.[5]




Bottle stopper made of clay, 14th century


Clay tablets were the first known writing medium.[6] Scribes wrote by inscribing them with cuneiform script using a blunt reed called a stylus. Purpose-made clay balls were also used as sling ammunition.
Clays sintered in fire were the first form of ceramic. Bricks, cooking pots, art objects, dishware, and even musical instruments such as the ocarina can all be shaped from clay before being fired. Clay is also used in many industrial processes, such as paper making, cement production, and chemical filtering. Clay is also often used in the manufacture of pipes for smoking tobacco. Until the late 20th century, bentonite clay was widely used as a mold binder in the manufacture of sand castings.
Clay, being relatively impermeable to water, is also used where natural seals are needed, such as in the cores of dams, or as a barrier in landfills against toxic seepage (lining the landfill, preferably in combination with geotextiles).[7] (See puddling.)
Studies in the early 21st century have investigated clay's absorption capacities in various applications, such as the removal of heavy metals from waste water and air purification.[8][9]
Medicinal uses[edit]
Traditional uses of clay as medicine go back to prehistoric times. An example is Armenian bole, which is used to soothe an upset stomach, similar to the way parrots (and later, humans) in South America originally used clay.[10] Kaolin clay and attapulgite have been used as anti-diarrheal medicines.
As a building material[edit]
Clay is one of the oldest building materials on Earth, among other ancient, naturally-occurring geologic materials such as stone and organic materials like wood.[11] Between one-half and two-thirds of the world's population, in both traditional societies as well as developed countries, still live or work in buildings made with clay, often baked into brick, as an essential part of its load-bearing structure. Also a primary ingredient in many natural building techniques, clay is used to create adobe, cob, cordwood, and rammed earth structures and building elements such as wattle and daub, clay plaster, clay render case, clay floors and clay paints and ceramic building material. Clay was used as a mortar in brick chimneys and stone walls where protected from water.
See also[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Clay







Argillaceous minerals
Clay (industrial plasticine)
Clay animation
Clay chemistry
Clay court
Clay pit
Geophagy
Graham Cairns-Smith




Expansive clay
London Clay
Modelling clay
Paperclay
Particle size
Plasticine
Vertisol





Footnotes[edit]



^ a b Guggenheim & Martin 1995, pp. 255–256
^ "University College London Geology on Campus: Clays". Earth Sciences department. University College London. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2016. 
^ "What is clay". Science Learning Hub. University of Waikato. Archived from the original on 3 January 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2016. 
^ a b "Environmental Characteristics of Clays and Clay Mineral Deposits". usgs.gov. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. 
^ Scarre, C. 2005. The Human Past, Thames and Hudson: London, p.238
^ Ebert, John David (31 August 2011). The New Media Invasion: Digital Technologies and the World They Unmake. McFarland. ISBN 9780786488186. Archived from the original on 24 December 2017. 
^ Koçkar, Mustafa K.; Akgün, Haluk; Aktürk, Özgür, Preliminary evaluation of a compacted bentonite / sand mixture as a landfill liner material (Abstract) Archived 4 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. Department of Geological Engineering, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
^ García-Sanchez, A.; Alvarez-Ayuso, E.; Rodriguez-Martin, F. (1 March 2002). "Sorption of As(V) by some oxyhydroxides and clay minerals. Application to its immobilization in two polluted mining soils". Clay Minerals. 37 (1): 187–194. doi:10.1180/0009855023710027. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. 
^ Churchman, G. J.; Gates, W. P.; Theng, B. K. G.; Yuan, G. (2006). Faïza Bergaya, Benny K. G. Theng and Gerhard Lagaly, ed. "Chapter 11.1 Clays and Clay Minerals for Pollution Control". Developments in Clay Science. Handbook of Clay Science. Elsevier. 1: 625–675. doi:10.1016/S1572-4352(05)01020-2. 
^ DIAMOND, JARED M. "Diamond on Geophagy". ucla.edu. Archived from the original on 28 May 2015. 
^ Grim, Ralph. "Clay mineral". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 9 December 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2016. 



References[edit]

Guggenheim, Stephen; Martin, R. T. (1995), "Definition of clay and clay mineral: Journal report of the AIPEA nomenclature and CMS nomenclature committees" (PDF), Clays and Clay Minerals, 43 (2): 255–256, Bibcode:1995CCM....43..255G, doi:10.1346/CCMN.1995.0430213 
Clay mineral nomenclature American Mineralogist.
Ehlers, Ernest G. and Blatt, Harvey (1982). 'Petrology, Igneous, Sedimentary, and Metamorphic' San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-1279-2.
Hillier S. (2003) "Clay Mineralogy." pp 139–142 In: Middleton G.V., Church M.J., Coniglio M., Hardie L.A. and Longstaffe F.J. (Editors) Encyclopedia of Sediments and Sedimentary Rocks. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

External links[edit]



Look up clay in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clay.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Clay.



Building the Phyllosilicates University of New Hampshire
The Clay Minerals Group of the Mineralogical Society
Information about clays used in the UK pottery industry
The Clay Minerals Society
Organic Matter in Clays







v
t
e


Soil classification



USDA soil taxonomy



Alfisols
Andisols
Aridisols
Entisols
Gelisols
Histosols
Inceptisols
Mollisols
Oxisols
Spodosols
Ultisols
Vertisols





World Reference Base
for Soil Resources (1998–)



Acrisols
Albeluvisols
Alisols
Andosols
Anthrosols
Arenosols
Calcisols
Cambisols
Chernozem
Cryosols
Durisols
Ferralsols
Fluvisols
Gleysols
Gypsisols
Histosol
Kastanozems
Leptosols
Lixisols
Luvisols
Nitisols
Phaeozems
Planosols
Plinthosols
Podzols
Regosols
Solonchaks
Solonetz
Stagnosol
Technosols
Umbrisols
Vertisols





Other systems



FAO soil classification (1974–98)
Unified Soil Classification System
AASHTO Soil Classification System
Référentiel pédologique (French classification system)
Canadian system of soil classification
Australian Soil Classification
Polish Soil Classification
1938 USDA soil taxonomy
List of U.S. state soils
List of vineyard soil types






 Types of soil










v
t
e


Geotechnical engineering






Exploration
Investigation
Testing







On-site



Cone penetration test
Standard penetration test
Monitoring well

piezometer


Borehole
Crosshole sonic logging
Nuclear densometer test
Static load testing





Laboratory



Atterberg limits
California bearing ratio
Direct shear test
Hydrometer
Proctor compaction test
R-value
Sieve analysis
Triaxial shear test
Hydraulic conductivity tests
Water content tests








Soil




Materials



Clay
Silt
Sand
Gravel
Peat
Permafrost
Loam
Loess





Properties



Soil classification
Hydraulic conductivity
Water content
Void ratio
Bulk density
Thixotropy
Reynolds' dilatancy
Angle of repose
Cohesion
Porosity
Permeability
Specific storage





Mechanics



Effective stress
Pore water pressure
Shear strength
Overburden pressure
Consolidation
Compaction
Shear wave
Lateral earth pressure








Foundations



Shallow
Deep
Bearing capacity
Dynamic load testing
Pile integrity test
Wave equation analysis
Statnamic load test





Retaining walls



Gabion
Ground freezing
Mechanically stabilized earth
Pressure grouting
Slurry wall
Soil nailing
Tieback





Stability



Slope

analysis
mass wasting
landslide


Deformation monitoring

automated







Earthquakes



Soil liquefaction
Response spectrum
Seismic hazard
Ground–structure interaction





Geosynthetics



Geotextile
Geomembrane
Geosynthetic clay liner
Cellular confinement





Numerical analysis



SEEP2D
STABL
SVFlux
SVSlope
UTEXAS









Authority control



NDL: 00568080











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clay&oldid=816950779"					Categories: Types of soilSculpture materialsNatural materialsSedimentologySedimentsPhyllosilicatesClaySoil-based building materialsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from April 2017