This page presents a general overview of Earth's climate system. An introduction to how Earth's climate can change is found at Climate change, and discussion of the current warming of the climate system is presented at global warming. For other uses of "climate", see Climate (disambiguation)

Atmospheric sciences





Atmospheric physics
Atmospheric dynamics (category)
Atmospheric chemistry (category)


Meteorology



Weather (category) · (portal)
Tropical cyclone (category)


Climatology



Climate (category)
Climate change (category)
Global warming (category) · (portal)





v
t
e







Part of the nature series


Weather


Calendar seasons




Winter
Spring
Summer
Autumn




Tropical seasons




Dry season
Wet season




Storms




Cloud
Cumulonimbus cloud
Arcus cloud
Downburst
Microburst
Heat burst
Dust storm
Simoom
Haboob
Monsoon
Gale
Sirocco
Firestorm
Lightning
Supercell
Thunderstorm
Severe thunderstorm
Thundersnow
Storm surge
Tornado
Cyclone
Mesocyclone
Anticyclone
Tropical cyclone (Hurricane)
Extratropical cyclone
European windstorm
Atlantic Hurricane
Typhoon
Derecho
Landspout
Dust devil
Fire whirl
Waterspout
Winter storm

Ice storm
Blizzard
Ground blizzard
Snowsquall






Precipitation




Drizzle (Freezing drizzle)
Graupel
Hail
Ice pellets (Diamond dust)
Rain (Freezing rain)
Cloudburst
Snow

Rain and snow mixed
Snow grains
Snow roller
Slush






Topics




Atmospheric river
Atmospheric convection
Air pollution
Climate
Cloud
Fog
Cold wave
Heat wave
Jet stream
Meteorology
Severe weather
Weather forecasting




 Weather portal





v
t
e





Climate is the statistics of weather over long periods of time.[1][2] It is measured by assessing the patterns of variation in temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind, precipitation, atmospheric particle count and other meteorological variables in a given region over long periods of time. Climate differs from weather, in that weather only describes the short-term conditions of these variables in a given region.
A region's climate is generated by the climate system, which has five components: atmosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere.[3]
The climate of a location is affected by its latitude, terrain, and altitude, as well as nearby water bodies and their currents. Climates can be classified according to the average and the typical ranges of different variables, most commonly temperature and precipitation. The most commonly used classification scheme was the Köppen climate classification. The Thornthwaite system,[4] in use since 1948, incorporates evapotranspiration along with temperature and precipitation information and is used in studying biological diversity and how climate change affects it. The Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic Classification systems focus on the origin of air masses that define the climate of a region.
Paleoclimatology is the study of ancient climates. Since direct observations of climate are not available before the 19th century, paleoclimates are inferred from proxy variables that include non-biotic evidence such as sediments found in lake beds and ice cores, and biotic evidence such as tree rings and coral. Climate models are mathematical models of past, present and future climates. Climate change may occur over long and short timescales from a variety of factors; recent warming is discussed in global warming. Global warming results in redistributions. For example, "a 3°C change in mean annual temperature corresponds to a shift in isotherms of approximately 300–400 km in latitude (in the temperate zone) or 500 m in elevation. Therefore, species are expected to move upwards in elevation or towards the poles in latitude in response to shifting climate zones".[5][6]



Contents


1 Definition
2 Climate classification

2.1 Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic
2.2 Köppen
2.3 Thornthwaite


3 Record

3.1 Modern
3.2 Paleoclimatology


4 Climate change

4.1 Climate models


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Definition[edit]
Climate (from Ancient Greek klima, meaning inclination) is commonly defined as the weather averaged over a long period.[7] The standard averaging period is 30 years,[8] but other periods may be used depending on the purpose. Climate also includes statistics other than the average, such as the magnitudes of day-to-day or year-to-year variations. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2001 glossary definition is as follows:

Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the "average weather," or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period is 30 years, as defined by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation, and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the climate system.[9]

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) describes climate "normals" as "reference points used by climatologists to compare current climatological trends to that of the past or what is considered 'normal'. A Normal is defined as the arithmetic average of a climate element (e.g. temperature) over a 30-year period. A 30 year period is used, as it is long enough to filter out any interannual variation or anomalies, but also short enough to be able to show longer climatic trends."[10] The WMO originated from the International Meteorological Organization which set up a technical commission for climatology in 1929. At its 1934 Wiesbaden meeting the technical commission designated the thirty-year period from 1901 to 1930 as the reference time frame for climatological standard normals. In 1982 the WMO agreed to update climate normals, and these were subsequently completed on the basis of climate data from 1 January 1961 to 31 December 1990.[11]
The difference between climate and weather is usefully summarized by the popular phrase "Climate is what you expect, weather is what you get."[12] Over historical time spans there are a number of nearly constant variables that determine climate, including latitude, altitude, proportion of land to water, and proximity to oceans and mountains. These change only over periods of millions of years due to processes such as plate tectonics. Other climate determinants are more dynamic: the thermohaline circulation of the ocean leads to a 5 °C (9 °F) warming of the northern Atlantic Ocean compared to other ocean basins.[13] Other ocean currents redistribute heat between land and water on a more regional scale. The density and type of vegetation coverage affects solar heat absorption,[14] water retention, and rainfall on a regional level. Alterations in the quantity of atmospheric greenhouse gases determines the amount of solar energy retained by the planet, leading to global warming or global cooling. The variables which determine climate are numerous and the interactions complex, but there is general agreement that the broad outlines are understood, at least insofar as the determinants of historical climate change are concerned.[15]
Climate classification[edit]




Worldwide climate classifications



There are several ways to classify climates into similar regimes. Originally, climes were defined in Ancient Greece to describe the weather depending upon a location's latitude. Modern climate classification methods can be broadly divided into genetic methods, which focus on the causes of climate, and empiric methods, which focus on the effects of climate. Examples of genetic classification include methods based on the relative frequency of different air mass types or locations within synoptic weather disturbances. Examples of empiric classifications include climate zones defined by plant hardiness,[16] evapotranspiration,[17] or more generally the Köppen climate classification which was originally designed to identify the climates associated with certain biomes. A common shortcoming of these classification schemes is that they produce distinct boundaries between the zones they define, rather than the gradual transition of climate properties more common in nature.
Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic[edit]
Main article: Air mass
The simplest classification is that involving air masses. The Bergeron classification is the most widely accepted form of air mass classification.[18] Air mass classification involves three letters. The first letter describes its moisture properties, with c used for continental air masses (dry) and m for maritime air masses (moist). The second letter describes the thermal characteristic of its source region: T for tropical, P for polar, A for Arctic or Antarctic, M for monsoon, E for equatorial, and S for superior air (dry air formed by significant downward motion in the atmosphere). The third letter is used to designate the stability of the atmosphere. If the air mass is colder than the ground below it, it is labeled k. If the air mass is warmer than the ground below it, it is labeled w.[19] While air mass identification was originally used in weather forecasting during the 1950s, climatologists began to establish synoptic climatologies based on this idea in 1973.[20]
Based upon the Bergeron classification scheme is the Spatial Synoptic Classification system (SSC). There are six categories within the SSC scheme: Dry Polar (similar to continental polar), Dry Moderate (similar to maritime superior), Dry Tropical (similar to continental tropical), Moist Polar (similar to maritime polar), Moist Moderate (a hybrid between maritime polar and maritime tropical), and Moist Tropical (similar to maritime tropical, maritime monsoon, or maritime equatorial).[21]
Köppen[edit]




Monthly average surface temperatures from 1961–1990. This is an example of how climate varies with location and season






Monthly global images from NASA Earth Observatory (interactive SVG)


Main article: Köppen climate classification
The Köppen classification depends on average monthly values of temperature and precipitation. The most commonly used form of the Köppen classification has five primary types labeled A through E. These primary types are A) tropical, B) dry, C) mild mid-latitude, D) cold mid-latitude, and E) polar. The five primary classifications can be further divided into secondary classifications such as rainforest, monsoon, tropical savanna, humid subtropical, humid continental, oceanic climate, Mediterranean climate, desert, steppe, subarctic climate, tundra, and polar ice cap.
Rainforests are characterized by high rainfall, with definitions setting minimum normal annual rainfall between 1,750 millimetres (69 in) and 2,000 millimetres (79 in). Mean monthly temperatures exceed 18 °C (64 °F) during all months of the year.[22]
A monsoon is a seasonal prevailing wind which lasts for several months, ushering in a region's rainy season.[23] Regions within North America, South America, Sub-Saharan Africa, Australia and East Asia are monsoon regimes.[24]




The world’s cloudy and sunny spots. NASA Earth Observatory map using data collected between July 2002 and April 2015.[25]


A tropical savanna is a grassland biome located in semiarid to semi-humid climate regions of subtropical and tropical latitudes, with average temperatures remain at or above 18 °C (64 °F) year round and rainfall between 750 millimetres (30 in) and 1,270 millimetres (50 in) a year. They are widespread on Africa, and are found in India, the northern parts of South America, Malaysia, and Australia.[26]




Cloud cover by month for 2014. NASA Earth Observatory[27][28]


The humid subtropical climate zone where winter rainfall (and sometimes snowfall) is associated with large storms that the westerlies steer from west to east. Most summer rainfall occurs during thunderstorms and from occasional tropical cyclones.[29] Humid subtropical climates lie on the east side of continents, roughly between latitudes 20° and 40° degrees away from the equator.[30]




Humid continental climate, worldwide



A humid continental climate is marked by variable weather patterns and a large seasonal temperature variance. Places with more than three months of average daily temperatures above 10 °C (50 °F) and a coldest month temperature below −3 °C (27 °F) and which do not meet the criteria for an arid or semiarid climate, are classified as continental.[31]
An oceanic climate is typically found along the west coasts at the middle latitudes of all the world's continents, and in southeastern Australia, and is accompanied by plentiful precipitation year-round.[32]
The Mediterranean climate regime resembles the climate of the lands in the Mediterranean Basin, parts of western North America, parts of Western and South Australia, in southwestern South Africa and in parts of central Chile. The climate is characterized by hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters.[33]
A steppe is a dry grassland with an annual temperature range in the summer of up to 40 °C (104 °F) and during the winter down to −40 °C (−40 °F).[34]
A subarctic climate has little precipitation,[35] and monthly temperatures which are above 10 °C (50 °F) for one to three months of the year, with permafrost in large parts of the area due to the cold winters. Winters within subarctic climates usually include up to six months of temperatures averaging below 0 °C (32 °F).[36]




Map of arctic tundra



Tundra occurs in the far Northern Hemisphere, north of the taiga belt, including vast areas of northern Russia and Canada.[37]
A polar ice cap, or polar ice sheet, is a high-latitude region of a planet or moon that is covered in ice. Ice caps form because high-latitude regions receive less energy as solar radiation from the sun than equatorial regions, resulting in lower surface temperatures.[38]
A desert is a landscape form or region that receives very little precipitation. Deserts usually have a large diurnal and seasonal temperature range, with high or low, depending on location daytime temperatures (in summer up to 45 °C or 113 °F), and low nighttime temperatures (in winter down to 0 °C or 32 °F) due to extremely low humidity. Many deserts are formed by rain shadows, as mountains block the path of moisture and precipitation to the desert.[39]
Thornthwaite[edit]
See also: Microthermal, Mesothermal, and Megathermal




Precipitation by month


Devised by the American climatologist and geographer C. W. Thornthwaite, this climate classification method monitors the soil water budget using evapotranspiration.[40] It monitors the portion of total precipitation used to nourish vegetation over a certain area.[41] It uses indices such as a humidity index and an aridity index to determine an area's moisture regime based upon its average temperature, average rainfall, and average vegetation type.[42] The lower the value of the index in any given area, the drier the area is.
The moisture classification includes climatic classes with descriptors such as hyperhumid, humid, subhumid, subarid, semi-arid (values of −20 to −40), and arid (values below −40).[43] Humid regions experience more precipitation than evaporation each year, while arid regions experience greater evaporation than precipitation on an annual basis. A total of 33 percent of the Earth's landmass is considered either arid or semi-arid, including southwest North America, southwest South America, most of northern and a small part of southern Africa, southwest and portions of eastern Asia, as well as much of Australia.[44] Studies suggest that precipitation effectiveness (PE) within the Thornthwaite moisture index is overestimated in the summer and underestimated in the winter.[45] This index can be effectively used to determine the number of herbivore and mammal species numbers within a given area.[46] The index is also used in studies of climate change.[45]
Thermal classifications within the Thornthwaite scheme include microthermal, mesothermal, and megathermal regimes. A microthermal climate is one of low annual mean temperatures, generally between 0 °C (32 °F) and 14 °C (57 °F) which experiences short summers and has a potential evaporation between 14 centimetres (5.5 in) and 43 centimetres (17 in).[47] A mesothermal climate lacks persistent heat or persistent cold, with potential evaporation between 57 centimetres (22 in) and 114 centimetres (45 in).[48] A megathermal climate is one with persistent high temperatures and abundant rainfall, with potential annual evaporation in excess of 114 centimetres (45 in).[49]
Record[edit]
Modern[edit]




Global mean surface temperature change since 1880. Source: NASA GISS


See also: Instrumental temperature record and Satellite temperature measurements
Details of the modern climate record are known through the taking of measurements from such weather instruments as thermometers, barometers, and anemometers during the past few centuries. The instruments used to study weather over the modern time scale, their known error, their immediate environment, and their exposure have changed over the years, which must be considered when studying the climate of centuries past.[50]
Paleoclimatology[edit]
Main article: Paleoclimatology
Paleoclimatology is the study of past climate over a great period of the Earth's history. It uses evidence from ice sheets, tree rings, sediments, coral, and rocks to determine the past state of the climate. It demonstrates periods of stability and periods of change and can indicate whether changes follow patterns such as regular cycles.[51]
Climate change[edit]




Variations in CO2, temperature and dust from the Vostok ice core over the past 450,000 years


See also: Climate change, Global warming, Temperature record, and Attribution of recent climate change
Climate change is the variation in global or regional climates over time. It reflects changes in the variability or average state of the atmosphere over time scales ranging from decades to millions of years. These changes can be caused by processes internal to the Earth, external forces (e.g. variations in sunlight intensity) or, more recently, human activities.[52][53]




2015 – Warmest Global Year on Record (since 1880) – Colors indicate temperature anomalies (NASA/NOAA; 20 January 2016).[54]



In recent usage, especially in the context of environmental policy, the term "climate change" often refers only to changes in modern climate, including the rise in average surface temperature known as global warming. In some cases, the term is also used with a presumption of human causation, as in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The UNFCCC uses "climate variability" for non-human caused variations.[55]
Earth has undergone periodic climate shifts in the past, including four major ice ages. These consisting of glacial periods where conditions are colder than normal, separated by interglacial periods. The accumulation of snow and ice during a glacial period increases the surface albedo, reflecting more of the Sun's energy into space and maintaining a lower atmospheric temperature. Increases in greenhouse gases, such as by volcanic activity, can increase the global temperature and produce an interglacial period. Suggested causes of ice age periods include the positions of the continents, variations in the Earth's orbit, changes in the solar output, and volcanism.[56]
Climate models[edit]
See also: Climate model and Climatology
Climate models use quantitative methods to simulate the interactions of the atmosphere,[57] oceans, land surface and ice. They are used for a variety of purposes; from the study of the dynamics of the weather and climate system, to projections of future climate. All climate models balance, or very nearly balance, incoming energy as short wave (including visible) electromagnetic radiation to the earth with outgoing energy as long wave (infrared) electromagnetic radiation from the earth. Any imbalance results in a change in the average temperature of the earth.
The most talked-about applications of these models in recent years have been their use to infer the consequences of increasing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, primarily carbon dioxide (see greenhouse gas). These models predict an upward trend in the global mean surface temperature, with the most rapid increase in temperature being projected for the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere.
Models can range from relatively simple to quite complex:

Simple radiant heat transfer model that treats the earth as a single point and averages outgoing energy
this can be expanded vertically (radiative-convective models), or horizontally
finally, (coupled) atmosphere–ocean–sea ice global climate models discretise and solve the full equations for mass and energy transfer and radiant exchange.[58]

Climate forecasting is a way by some scientists are using to predict climate change. In 1997 the prediction division of the International Research Institute for Climate and Society at Columbia University began generating seasonal climate forecasts on a real-time basis. To produce these forecasts an extensive suite of forecasting tools was developed, including a multimodel ensemble approach that required thorough validation of each model's accuracy level in simulating interannual climate variability.[59]
See also[edit]


Weather portal




Atmosphere
Climate graph
Climate inertia
Climate Prediction Center
Ecosystem
Effect of sun angle on climate
Global warming
Greenhouse effect
List of climate scientists
Microclimate
National Climatic Data Center
Outline of meteorology
Solar variation
Tectonic–climatic interaction
Temperature extreme
Tropical marine climate
Weather and climate


References[edit]


^ Planton, Serge (France; editor) (2013). "Annex III. Glossary: IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" (PDF). IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. p. 1450. Retrieved 25 July 2016. 
^ Shepherd, Dr. J. Marshall; Shindell, Drew; O'Carroll, Cynthia M. (1 February 2005). "What's the Difference Between Weather and Climate?". NASA. Retrieved 13 November 2015. 
^ AR4 SYR Synthesis Report Annexes. Ipcc.ch. Retrieved on 2011-06-28.
^ C. W. Thornthwaite (1948). "An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate" (PDF). Geographical Review. 38 (1): 55–94. doi:10.2307/210739. JSTOR 210739. 
^ Hughes, Lesley (2000). Biological consequences of globalwarming: is the signal already. p. 56. 
^ Hughes, Leslie (1 February 2000). "Biological consequences of global warming: is the signal already apparent?". Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 15 (2): 56–61. doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(99)01764-4. Retrieved November 17, 2016. 
^ "Climate". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-14. 
^ "Climate averages". Met Office. Archived from the original on 2008-07-06. Retrieved 2008-05-17. 
^ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Appendix I: Glossary. Archived 2017-01-26 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2007-06-01.
^ "Climate Data and Data Related Products". World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2015. 
^ "Commission For Climatology: Over Eighty Years of Service" (pdf). World Meteorological Organization. 2011. pp. 6, 8, 10, 21, 26. Retrieved 1 September 2015. 
^ National Weather Service Office Tucson, Arizona. Main page. Retrieved on 2007-06-01.
^ Stefan Rahmstorf The Thermohaline Ocean Circulation: A Brief Fact Sheet. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
^ Gertjan de Werk and Karel Mulder. Heat Absorption Cooling For Sustainable Air Conditioning of Households. Archived 2008-05-27 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
^ Ledley, T.S.; Sundquist, E. T.; Schwartz, S. E.; Hall, D. K.; Fellows, J. D.; Killeen, T. L. (1999). "Climate change and greenhouse gases". EOS. 80 (39): 453. Bibcode:1999EOSTr..80Q.453L. doi:10.1029/99EO00325. Retrieved 2008-05-17. 
^ United States National Arboretum. USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map. Retrieved on 2008-03-09
^ "Thornthwaite Moisture Index". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ Army, United States Dept of the (1969). Field behavior of chemical, biological, and radiological agents. Dept. of Defense] Depts. of the Army and the Air Force. 
^ "Airmass Classification". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-22. 
^ Schwartz, M.D. (1995). "Detecting Structural Climate Change: An Air Mass-Based Approach in the North Central United States, 1958–1992". Annals of the Association of American Geographers. 85 (3): 553–568. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8306.1995.tb01812.x. 
^ Robert E. Davis, L. Sitka, D. M. Hondula, S. Gawtry, D. Knight, T. Lee, and J. Stenger. J1.10 A preliminary back-trajectory and air mass climatology for the Shenandoah Valley (Formerly J3.16 for Applied Climatology). Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ Susan Woodward. Tropical Broadleaf Evergreen Forest: The Rainforest. Archived 2008-02-25 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-03-14.
^ "Monsoon". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-14. 
^ International Committee of the Third Workshop on Monsoons. The Global Monsoon System: Research and Forecast. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
^ Central, Brian. "The Bright Side of 13 Years of Clouds in 1 Map". Retrieved 2015-05-17. 
^ Susan Woodward. Tropical Savannas. Archived 2008-02-25 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
^ "Cloud Fraction (1 month – Terra/MODIS) – NASA". Cloud Fraction (1 month – Terra/MODIS) – NASA. Retrieved 2015-05-18. 
^ Central, Brian. "The Bright Side of 13 Years of Clouds in 1 Map". Retrieved 2015-05-18. 
^ "Humid subtropical climate". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 2008. Retrieved 2008-05-14. 
^ Michael Ritter. Humid Subtropical Climate. Archived October 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
^ Peel, M. C.; Finlayson B. L. & McMahon, T. A. (2007). "Updated world map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification". Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 11 (5): 1633–1644. doi:10.5194/hess-11-1633-2007. ISSN 1027-5606. 
^ Climate. Oceanic Climate. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
^ Michael Ritter. Mediterranean or Dry Summer Subtropical Climate. Archived 2009-08-05 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
^ Blue Planet Biomes. Steppe Climate. Retrieved on 2008-04-15.
^ Michael Ritter. Subarctic Climate. Archived 2008-05-25 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-04-16.
^ Susan Woodward. Taiga or Boreal Forest. Archived 2011-06-09 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-06-06.
^ "The Tundra Biome". The World's Biomes. Retrieved 2006-03-05. 
^ Michael Ritter. Ice Cap Climate. Archived 2008-05-16 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-03-16.
^ San Diego State University. Introduction to Arid Regions: A Self-Paced Tutorial. Retrieved on 2008-04-16. Archived June 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Glossary of Meteorology. Thornthwaite Moisture Index. Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ "Moisture Index". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ Eric Green. Foundations of Expansive Clay Soil. Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ Istituto Agronomico per l'Otremare. 3 Land Resources. Archived 2008-03-20 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ Fredlund, D.G.; Rahardjo, H. (1993). Soil Mechanics for Unsaturated Soils (PDF). Wiley-Interscience. ISBN 978-0-471-85008-3. OCLC 26543184. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ a b Gregory J. McCabe and David M. Wolock. Trends and temperature sensitivity of moisture conditions in the conterminous United States. Retrieved on 2008-05-21.
^ Hawkins, B.A.; Pausas, Juli G. (2004). "Does plant richness influence animal richness?: the mammals of Catalonia (NE Spain)". Diversity & Distributions. 10 (4): 247–252. doi:10.1111/j.1366-9516.2004.00085.x. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ "Microthermal Climate". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ "Mesothermal Climate". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ "Megathermal Climate". Glossary of Meteorology. American Meteorological Society. Retrieved 2008-05-21. 
^ Spencer Weart. The Modern Temperature Trend. Retrieved on 2007-06-01.
^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAA Paleoclimatology. Retrieved on 2007-06-01.
^ Arctic Climatology and Meteorology. Climate change. Archived 2010-01-18 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-05-19.
^ Gillis, Justin (28 November 2015). "Short Answers to Hard Questions About Climate Change". New York Times. Retrieved 29 November 2015. 
^ Brown, Dwayne; Cabbage, Michael; McCarthy, Leslie; Norton, Karen (20 January 2016). "NASA, NOAA Analyses Reveal Record-Shattering Global Warm Temperatures in 2015". NASA. Retrieved 21 January 2016. 
^ "Glossary". Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001-01-20. Archived from the original on 2017-01-26. Retrieved 2008-05-22. 
^ Illinois State Museum (2002). Ice Ages. Retrieved on 2007-05-15.
^ Eric Maisonnave. Climate Variability. Retrieved on 2008-05-02. Archived June 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Climateprediction.net. Modelling the climate. Archived 2009-02-04 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved on 2008-05-02.
^ http://portal.iri.columbia.edu/portal/server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_0_2476_580_1063_43/http%3B/iriportal3.ldeo.columbia.edu%3B7087/publishedcontent/publish/development/climate_activities/prediction/climate_forecasts/climate_forecasts_overview__introduction/cf_intro_learn_more.html[permanent dead link]


Further reading[edit]

The Study of Climate on Alien Worlds; Characterizing atmospheres beyond our Solar System is now within our reach Kevin Heng July–August 2012 American Scientist
Reumert, Johannes: "Vahls climatic divisions. An explanation" (Geografisk Tidsskrift, Band 48; 1946)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Climate.





Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article Climate.



NOAA Climate Services Portal
NOAA State of the Climate
NASA's Climate change and global warming portal
Climate Models and modeling groups
Climate Prediction Project
ESPERE Climate Encyclopaedia
Climate index and mode information – Arctic
A current view of the Bering Sea Ecosystem and Climate
Climate: Data and charts for world and US locations
MIL-HDBK-310, Global Climate Data U.S. Department of Defense – Aid to derive natural environmental design criteria
IPCC Data Distribution Centre – Climate data and guidance on use.
HistoricalClimatology.com – Past, present and future climates – 2013.
Globalclimatemonitor – Contains climatic information from 1901.
ClimateCharts – Webapplication to generate climate charts for recent and historical data.
International Disaster Database
Paris Climate Conference







v
t
e


Climate oscillations



Climate oscillations



8.2 kiloyear event
Antarctic Circumpolar Wave
Antarctic oscillation
Arctic dipole anomaly
Arctic oscillation
Atlantic Equatorial mode
Atlantic multidecadal oscillation
Earth's axial tilt
Bond event
Dansgaard–Oeschger event
Diurnal cycle
Diurnal temperature variation
El Niño–Southern Oscillation (El Niño - La Niña)
Equatorial Indian Ocean oscillation
Glacial cycles
Indian Ocean Dipole
Madden–Julian oscillation
Milankovitch cycles
Monsoon
North Atlantic oscillation
North Pacific Oscillation
Orbital forcing
Pacific decadal oscillation
Pacific–North American teleconnection pattern
Quasi-biennial oscillation
Seasonal lag
Seasons
Solar variability












v
t
e


Meteorological data and variables



General



Adiabatic processes
Advection
Buoyancy
Lapse rate
Lightning
Surface solar radiation
Surface weather analysis
Visibility
Vorticity
Wind
Wind shear





Condensation



Cloud
Cloud condensation nuclei (CCN)
Fog
Convective condensation level (CCL)
Lifted condensation level (LCL)
Precipitation
Water vapor





Convection



Convective available potential energy (CAPE)
Convective inhibition (CIN)
Convective instability
Convective momentum transport
Convective temperature (Tc)
Equilibrium level (EL)
Free convective layer (FCL)
Helicity
K Index
Level of free convection (LFC)
Lifted index (LI)
Maximum parcel level (MPL)
Bulk Richardson number (BRN)





Temperature



Dew point (Td)
Dew point depression
Dry-bulb temperature
Equivalent temperature (Te)
Forest fire weather index
Haines Index
Heat index
Humidex
Humidity
Relative humidity (RH)
Mixing ratio
Potential temperature (θ)
Equivalent potential temperature (θe)
Sea surface temperature (SST)
Thermodynamic temperature
Vapor pressure
Virtual temperature
Wet-bulb temperature
Wet-bulb potential temperature
Wind chill





Pressure



Atmospheric pressure
Baroclinity
Barotropicity
Pressure gradient
Pressure-gradient force (PGF)












v
t
e


Climate types under the Köppen climate classification



Class A



Tropical rainforest (Af)
Tropical monsoon (Am)
Tropical savanna (Aw, As)





Class B



Desert (BWh, BWk, BWn)
Semi-arid (BSh, BSk, BSn)





Class C



Humid subtropical (Cfa, Cwa)
Oceanic (Cfb, Cwb, Cfc, Cwc)
Mediterranean (Csa, Csb, Csc)





Class D



Humid continental (Dfa, Dwa, Dfb, Dwb, Dsa, Dsb)
Subarctic (Dfc, Dwc, Dfd, Dwd, Dsc, Dsd)





Class E



Tundra (ET)
Ice cap (EF)
Alpine (ET, EF)












v
t
e


Elements of nature



Universe



Space
Time
Energy
Matter
Change





Earth



Earth science
History (geological)
Structure
Geology
Plate tectonics
Oceans
Gaia hypothesis
Future





Weather



Meteorology
Atmosphere (Earth)
Climate
Clouds
Sunlight
Tides
Wind





Natural environment



Ecology
Ecosystem
Field
Radiation
Wilderness
Wildfires





Life







Origin (abiogenesis)
Evolutionary history
Biosphere
Hierarchy
Biology (astrobiology)








Organism
Eukaryota

flora

plants


fauna

animals


fungi
protista


Prokaryotes

archaea
bacteria


Viruses











 Category:Nature
 Portal:Science












v
t
e


Global warming and climate change








Temperatures






Brightness temperature
Effective temperature
Geologic record
Hiatus
Historical climatology
Instrumental record
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Proxy data
Record of the past 1,000 years
Satellite measurements













Causes







Anthropogenic



Attribution of recent climate change
Aviation
Biofuel
Black carbon
Carbon dioxide
Deforestation
Earth's energy budget
Earth's radiation balance
Ecocide
Fossil fuel
Global dimming
Global warming potential
Greenhouse effect
(Infrared window)
Greenhouse gases
(Halocarbons)
Land use, land-use change and forestry
Radiative forcing
Tropospheric ozone
Urban heat island





Natural



Albedo
Bond events
Climate oscillations
Climate sensitivity
Cloud forcing
Cosmic rays
Feedbacks
Glaciation
Global cooling
Milankovitch cycles
Ocean variability

AMO
ENSO
IOD
PDO


Orbital forcing
Solar variation
Volcanism





Models



Global climate model
















History






History of climate change science
Atmospheric thermodynamics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling













Opinion and climate change






Environmental ethics
Media coverage of climate change
Public opinion on climate change
(Popular culture)
Scientific opinion on climate change
Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment
Climate change denial
Global warming conspiracy theory
By country & region
(Africa
Arctic
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
China
Europe
European Union
Finland
Grenada
Japan
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Scotland
South Korea
Sweden
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
United States)













Politics










Clean Power Plan
Climate change denial
(Manufactured controversy)
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
March for Science
People's Climate March
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
Global climate regime
















Potential effects and issues







General



Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic dipole anomaly
Arctic haze
Arctic methane release
Climate change and agriculture
Climate change and ecosystems
Climate change and gender
Climate change and poverty
Current sea level rise
Drought
Economics of global warming
Effect on plant biodiversity
Effects on health
Effects on humans
Effects on marine mammals
Environmental migrant
Extinction risk from global warming
Fisheries and climate change
Forest dieback
Industry and society
Iris hypothesis
Megadrought
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Physical impacts
Polar stratospheric cloud
Regime shift
Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Runaway climate change
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation





By country



Australia
South Asia

India
Nepal


United States
















Mitigation







Kyoto Protocol



Clean Development Mechanism
Joint Implementation
Bali Road Map
2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference





Governmental



European Climate Change Programme
G8 Climate Change Roundtable
United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
Paris Agreement

United States withdrawal


Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
List of climate change initiatives





Emissions reduction



Carbon credit
Carbon-neutral fuel
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out





Carbon-free energy



Carbon capture and storage
Efficient energy use
Low-carbon economy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy





Personal



Individual action on climate change
Simple living





Other



Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon sink
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Individual and political action on climate change
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Urban reforestation
Climate Action Plan
Climate action
















Proposed adaptations







Strategies



Damming glacial lakes
Desalination
Drought tolerance
Irrigation investment
Rainwater storage
Sustainable development
Weather modification





Programmes



Avoiding dangerous climate change
Land allocation decision support system














Glossary of climate change
Index of climate change articles
Category:Climate change
Category:Global warming
Portal:Global warming












v
t
e


Climate of the World






Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestine
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Macedonia
Republic of the Congo
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
São Tomé and Príncipe
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe









Authority control



GND: 4031170-3
HDS: 7770
NDL: 00565788











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate&oldid=814423680"					Categories: ClimateBasic meteorological concepts and phenomenaClimatologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia pending changes protected pages (level 1)Good articlesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers