This article is about the fruit. For other uses of terms, see Coconut (disambiguation).
"Coconut Tree" redirects here. For the Mohombi song, see Coconut Tree (song).


Coconut
Temporal range: 55–0 Ma

PreЄ
Є
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N







Early Eocene – Recent





A coconut in cross-section


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Plantae


Clade:
Angiosperms


Clade:
Monocots


Clade:
Commelinids


Order:
Arecales


Family:
Arecaceae


Subfamily:
Arecoideae


Tribe:
Cocoseae


Genus:
Cocos
L.


Species:
C. nucifera


Binomial name


Cocos nucifera
L.






Coconut flowers


The coconut tree (Cocos nucifera) is a member of the family Arecaceae (palm family) and the only species of the genus Cocos.[1] The term coconut can refer to the whole coconut palm or the seed, or the fruit, which, botanically, is a drupe, not a nut. The spelling cocoanut is an archaic form of the word.[2] The term is derived from the 16th-century Portuguese and Spanish word coco meaning "head" or "skull", from the three indentations on the coconut shell that resemble facial features.[3]
Coconuts are known for their versatility ranging from food to cosmetics.[4] They form a regular part of the diets of many people in the tropics and subtropics. Coconuts are distinct from other fruits for their large quantity of water (also called "juice"), and when immature, may be harvested for their potable coconut water. When mature, they can be used as seed nuts or processed for oil, charcoal from the hard shell, and coir from the fibrous husk. When dried, the coconut flesh is called copra. The oil and milk derived from it are commonly used in cooking and frying, as well as in soaps and cosmetics. The husks and leaves can be used as material to make a variety of products for furnishing and decorating. The coconut also has cultural and religious significance in certain societies, particularly in India, where it is used in Hindu rituals.[5]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Description

3.1 Plant
3.2 Fruit
3.3 Roots
3.4 Inflorescence


4 Distribution

4.1 Origin
4.2 Domestication
4.3 Dispersal


5 Natural habitat

5.1 Diseases
5.2 Pests


6 Production and cultivation

6.1 Cultivation
6.2 Harvesting
6.3 India
6.4 Maldives
6.5 Middle East
6.6 Sri Lanka
6.7 United States
6.8 Australia
6.9 Bermuda
6.10 Substitutes for cooler climates


7 Uses

7.1 Cooking
7.2 Nutrition

7.2.1 Coconut water
7.2.2 Coconut milk
7.2.3 Coconut oil
7.2.4 Toddy and nectar
7.2.5 Heart of palm and coconut sprout


7.3 Indonesia
7.4 Philippines
7.5 Vietnam
7.6 India
7.7 Commercial, industrial, and household use

7.7.1 Cultivars
7.7.2 Coir
7.7.3 Coconut fronds
7.7.4 Copra
7.7.5 Husks and shells
7.7.6 Coconut trunk
7.7.7 Roots
7.7.8 Beauty products


7.8 Religion

7.8.1 Myths and legends


7.9 Other uses

7.9.1 Tool and shelter for animals




8 Allergies

8.1 Food allergies
8.2 Topical allergies


9 Varieties

9.1 Fruit types


10 In Sri Lanka

10.1 Varieties and forms of coconut found in Sri Lanka


11 See also
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Etymology[edit]




Dehusked coconut shells from Ivory Coast showing the face-like markings.


The name coconut derives from seafarers during the 16th and 17th century for its resemblance to a head.[6] 'Coco' and 'coconut' apparently came from 1521 encounters by Portuguese and Spanish explorers with Pacific islanders, with the coconut shell reminding them of a ghost or witch in Portuguese folklore called coco (also côca).[7][8]
The specific name nucifera is Latin for "nut-bearing".
History[edit]
One of the earliest mentions of the coconut dates back to the "One Thousand and One Nights" story of Sinbad the Sailor; he is known to have bought and sold coconut during his fifth voyage.[9] Thenga, its Malayalam and Tamil name, was used in the detailed description of coconut found in Itinerario by Ludovico di Varthema published in 1510 and also in the later Hortus Indicus Malabaricus.[10] Even earlier, it was called nux indica, a name used by Marco Polo in 1280 while in Sumatra, taken from the Arabs who called it jawz hindī, translating to "Indian nut".[11] In the earliest description of the coconut palm known, given by Cosmos of Alexandria in his Topographia Christiana written around 545, there is a reference to the argell tree and its drupe.[10][12]
In March 1521, a description of the coconut was given by Antonio Pigafetta writing in Italian and using the words "cocho"/"cochi", as recorded in his journal after the first European crossing of the Pacific Ocean during the Magellan circumnavigation and meeting the inhabitants of what would become known as Guam and the Philippines. He explained how at Guam "they eat coconuts" ("mangiano cochi") and that the natives there also "anoint the body and the hair with coconut and beniseed oil" ("ongieno el corpo et li capili co oleo de cocho et de giongioli").[13]
Description[edit]
Plant[edit]
Cocos nucifera is a large palm, growing up to 30 m (98 ft) tall, with pinnate leaves 4–6 m (13–20 ft) long, and pinnae 60–90 cm (2–3 ft) long; old leaves break away cleanly, leaving the trunk smooth. Coconuts are generally classified into two general types: tall and dwarf.[14] On fertile soil, a tall coconut palm tree can yield up to 75 fruits per year, but more often yields less than 30, mainly due to poor cultural practices.[15][16][17] Given proper care and growing conditions, coconut palms produce their first fruit in six to ten years, taking 15 to 20 years to reach peak production.[18]
Fruit[edit]
The endosperm is initially in its nuclear phase suspended within the coconut water. As development continues, cellular layers of endosperm deposit along the walls of the coconut, becoming the edible coconut "flesh". Botanically, the coconut fruit is a drupe, not a true nut.[19] Like other fruits, it has three layers: the exocarp, mesocarp, and endocarp. The exocarp and mesocarp make up the "husk" of the coconuts. Coconuts sold in the shops of nontropical countries often have had the exocarp (outermost layer) removed. The mesocarp is composed of a fiber, called coir, which has many traditional and commercial uses. The shell has three germination pores (micropyles) or "eyes" that are clearly visible on its outside surface once the husk is removed.
A full-sized coconut weighs about 1.44 kg (3.2 lb). It takes around 6,000 full-grown coconuts to produce one tonne of copra.[20]
Roots[edit]
Unlike some other plants, the palm tree has neither a tap root nor root hairs, but has a fibrous root system.[21]
The coconut palm root system[22] consists of an abundance of thin roots that grow outward from the plant near the surface. Only a few of the roots penetrate deep into the soil for stability. This type of root system is known as fibrous or adventitious, and is a characteristic of grass species. Other types of large trees produce a single downward-growing tap root with a number of feeder roots growing from it.
Coconut palms continue to produce roots from the base of the stem throughout their lives. The number of roots produced depends on the age of the tree and the environment, with more than 3,600 roots possible on a tree that is 60 to 70 years old.
Roots are usually less than about 75 mm (3 inches) in diameter and uniformly thick from the tree trunk to the root tip.
Inflorescence[edit]
The palm produces both the female and male flowers on the same inflorescence; thus, the palm is monoecious.[21] Other sources use the term polygamomonoecious.[23] The female flower is much larger than the male flower. Flowering occurs continuously. Coconut palms are believed to be largely cross-pollinated, although some[which?] dwarf varieties are self-pollinating.
Distribution[edit]
Origin[edit]




The range of the natural habitat of the coconut palm tree delineated by the red line (based on information in Werth (1933),[24] slightly modified by Niklas Jonsson)






Fossil Cocos zeylanica from the Miocene of New Zealand, 4 cm (1 1⁄2 in) long.


The origin of the plant is, after many decades, still the subject of debate.[25][26] It has generally been accepted that the coconut originated in the India–Indonesia region and float-distributed itself around the world by riding ocean currents.[26][22] The similarities of the local names in the Malaysia–Indonesia region is also cited as evidence that the plant originated in the region. For example, the Polynesian and Melanesian term niu and the Tagalog and Chamorro term niyog is said to be based on the Malay word nyiur or nyior.[27][28]
O. F. Cook was one of the earliest modern researchers to draw conclusions about the location of origin of Cocos nucifera based on its current-day worldwide distribution.[29][30] He hypothesized that the coconut originated in the Americas, based on his belief that American coconut populations predated European contact and because he considered pan-tropical distribution by ocean currents improbable. Thor Heyerdahl later used this as one part of his hypothesis to support his theory that the Pacific Islanders originated as two migration streams from the Canadian Pacific coast (themselves recent migrants from Asia) to Hawaii, and on to Tahiti and New Zealand in a series of hops, and another migration from South America via sailing balsa-wood rafts.[31]
However, the conventional scientific opinion supports an Indo-Pacific origin either around Melanesia and Malaysia or the Indian Ocean.[22][30]
The oldest fossils known of the modern coconut dating from the Eocene period from around 55 million to 37 million years ago were found in Australia and India,[30] but older palm fossils such as some of nipa fruit have been found in the Americas. A species with strawberry-sized nuts (Cocos zeylanica) lived in New Zealand in the Miocene. Since 1978, the work on tracing the probable origin and dispersal of Cocos nucifera[32] has only recently been augmented by a publication on the germination rate of the coconut seednut [33] and another on the importance of the coral atoll ecosystem.[34] Briefly, the coconut originated in the coral atoll ecosystem — without human intervention — and required a thick husk and slow germination to survive and disperse.
Domestication[edit]




Manual harvesting of coconuts


Coconuts could not reach inland locations without human intervention (to carry seednuts, plant seedlings, etc.) and early germination on the palm (vivipary) was important,[35] rather than increasing the number or size of the edible parts of a fruit that was already large enough. Human cultivation of the coconut selected, not for larger size, but for thinner husks and increased volume of endosperm, the solid “meat” or liquid “water” that provides the fruit its food value. Although these modifications for domestication would reduce the fruit’s ability to float, this ability would be irrelevant to a cultivated population.
Among modern C. nucifera, two major types or variants occur: a thick-husked, angular fruit and a thin-husked, spherical fruit with a higher proportion of endosperm reflect a trend of cultivation in C. nucifera. The first coconuts were of the niu kafa type, with thick husks to protect the seed, an angular, highly ridged shape to promote buoyancy during ocean dispersal, and a pointed base that allowed fruits to dig into the sand, preventing them from being washed away during germination on a new island. As early human communities began to harvest coconuts for eating and planting, they (perhaps unintentionally) selected for a larger endosperm-to-husk ratio and a broader, spherical base, which rendered the fruit useful as a cup or bowl, thus creating the niu vai type. The decreased buoyancy and increased fragility of this spherical, thin-husked fruit would not matter for a species that had started to be dispersed by humans and grown in plantations. Harries’ adoption of the Polynesian terms niu kafa and niu vai has now passed into general scientific discourse, and his hypothesis is generally accepted.[36][37]
Variants of C. nucifera are also categorized as tall (var. typica) or dwarf (var. nana).[38] The two groups are genetically distinct, with the dwarf variety showing a greater degree of artificial selection for ornamental traits and for early germination and fruiting.[32][39] The tall variety is outcrossing while dwarf palms are incrossing, which has led to a much greater degree of genetic diversity within the tall group. The dwarf subspecies is thought to have mutated from the tall group under human selection pressure.[40]
Dispersal[edit]




Coconut tree in Kannur Beach, India


Main article: Genomics of domestication






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



It is often stated that coconuts can travel 110 days, or 3,000 miles (4,800 km), by sea and still be able to germinate.[41] This figure has been questioned based on the extremely small sample size that forms the basis of the paper that makes this claim.[42] Thor Heyerdahl provides an alternative, and much shorter, estimate based on his first-hand experience crossing the Pacific Ocean on the raft Kon-Tiki:

"The nuts we had in baskets on deck remained edible and capable of germinating the whole way to Polynesia. But we had laid about half among the special provisions below deck, with the waves washing around them. Every single one of these was ruined by the sea water. And no coconut can float over the sea faster than a balsa raft moves with the wind behind it."[31]

He also notes that several of the nuts began to germinate by the time they had been ten weeks at sea, precluding an unassisted journey of 100 days or more. However, the coconut variety Heyerdahl chose for his long sea voyage likely was of the large, fleshy, spherical niu vai type, which Harries observed to have a significantly shorter germination type and worse buoyancy than the uncultivated niu kafa type.[32] Therefore, Heyerdahl’s observations cannot be considered conclusive when it comes to determining the independent dispersal ability of the uncultivated coconut.
Drift models based on wind and ocean currents have shown that coconuts could not have drifted across the Pacific unaided.[42] If they were naturally distributed and had been in the Pacific for a thousand years or so, then we would expect the eastern shore of Australia, with its own islands sheltered by the Great Barrier Reef, to have been thick with coconut palms: the currents were directly into, and down along this coast. However, both James Cook and William Bligh[43] (put adrift after the Bounty mutiny) found no sign of the nuts along this 2,000 km (1,200 mi) stretch when he needed water for his crew. Nor were there coconuts on the east side of the African coast until Vasco de Gama, nor in the Caribbean when first visited by Christopher Columbus. We know from early Spanish documents that they deliberately planted coconuts shortly after first contact,[citation needed] and some nuts would certainly have self-seeded when they floated ashore following shipwrecks. They were commonly carried by Spanish ships as a source of sweet water.
This provides substantial circumstantial evidence that deliberate voyagers were involved in carrying coconuts across the Pacific Ocean (possibly the Austronesian peoples) and that they could not have dispersed worldwide without human agency. More recently, genomic analysis of cultivated coconut (C. nucifera L.) has shed light on the movement. By examining 10 microsatellite loci, researchers found two genetically distinct subpopulations of coconut—one originating in the Indian Ocean, the other in the Pacific Ocean.[citation needed] However, admixture, the transfer of genetic material, evidently occurred between the two populations.
Given that coconuts are ideally suited for inter-island group ocean dispersal, obviously some natural distribution did take place. However, this should not be extrapolated to claims that one ocean's subgenera possibly could have floated to interbreed with the other.[citation needed] However, the locations of the admixture events are limited to Madagascar and coastal east Africa, and exclude the Seychelles. This pattern coincides with the known trade routes of Austronesian sailors. Additionally, a genetically distinct subpopulation of coconut on the Pacific coast of Latin America has undergone a genetic bottleneck resulting from a founder effect;[citation needed] however, its ancestral population is the Pacific coconut. This, together with their use of the South American sweet potato, suggests that Austronesian peoples may have sailed as far east as the Americas.[44]
The coconut has spread across much of the tropics, probably aided in many cases by seafaring people. Coconut fruit in the wild are light, buoyant, and highly water resistant. It is claimed that they evolved to disperse significant distances via marine currents.[45] However, it can also be argued that the placement of the vulnerable eye of the nut (down when floating), and the site of the coir cushion are better positioned to ensure that the water-filled nut does not fracture when dropping on rocky ground, rather than for flotation.
Specimens have been collected from the sea as far north as Norway (but it is not known where they entered the water).[46] In the Hawaiian Islands, the coconut is regarded as a Polynesian introduction, first brought to the islands by early Polynesian voyagers from their homelands in Oceania.[11] They have been found in the Caribbean and the Atlantic coasts of Africa and South America for less than 500 years (the Caribbean native inhabitants do not have a dialect term for them, but use the Portuguese name), but evidence of their presence on the Pacific coast of South America antedates Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Americas.[26] They are now almost ubiquitous between 26° N and 26° S except for the interiors of Africa and South America.




Coconut palm heavy with fruit.


Natural habitat[edit]




Coconut germinating on Punaluʻu Beach on the island of Hawaiʻi.


The coconut palm thrives on sandy soils and is highly tolerant of salinity. It prefers areas with abundant sunlight and regular rainfall (1,500–2,500 mm [59–98 in] annually), which makes colonizing shorelines of the tropics relatively straightforward.[47] Coconuts also need high humidity (at least 70–80%) for optimum growth, which is why they are rarely seen in areas with low humidity. However, they can be found in humid areas with low annual precipitation such as in Karachi, Pakistan, which receives only about 250 mm (9.8 in) of rainfall per year, but is consistently warm and humid.
Coconut palms require warm conditions for successful growth, and are intolerant of cold weather. Some seasonal variation is tolerated, with good growth where mean summer temperatures are between 28 and 37 °C (82 and 99 °F), and survival as long as winter temperatures are above 4–12 °C (39–54 °F); they will survive brief drops to 0 °C (32 °F). Severe frost is usually fatal, although they have been known to recover from temperatures of −4 °C (25 °F).[47] They may grow but not fruit properly in areas with insufficient warmth, such as Bermuda.
The conditions required for coconut trees to grow without any care are:

Mean daily temperature above 12–13 °C (54–55 °F) every day of the year
Mean annual rainfall above 1,000 mm (39 in)
No or very little overhead canopy, since even small trees require direct sun

The main limiting factor for most locations which satisfy the rainfall and temperature requirements is canopy growth, except those locations near coastlines, where the sandy soil and salt spray limit the growth of most other trees.
Diseases[edit]




Fallen immature nuts, Thrissur, Kerala, India


Main article: List of coconut palm diseases
Coconuts are susceptible to the phytoplasma disease, lethal yellowing. One recently selected cultivar, the 'Maypan', has been bred for resistance to this disease.[citation needed] Yellowing diseases affect plantations in Africa, India, Mexico, the Caribbean and the Pacific Region.[48]
Pests[edit]
The coconut palm is damaged by the larvae of many Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species which feed on it, including the African armyworm (Spodoptera exempta) and Batrachedra spp.: B. arenosella, B. atriloqua (feeds exclusively on C. nucifera), B. mathesoni (feeds exclusively on C. nucifera), and B. nuciferae.[49]
Brontispa longissima (coconut leaf beetle) feeds on young leaves, and damages both seedlings and mature coconut palms. In 2007, the Philippines imposed a quarantine in Metro Manila and 26 provinces to stop the spread of the pest and protect the Philippine coconut industry managed by some 3.5 million farmers.[50]
The fruit may also be damaged by eriophyid coconut mites (Eriophyes guerreronis). This mite infests coconut plantations, and is devastating; it can destroy up to 90% of coconut production. The immature seeds are infested and desapped by larvae staying in the portion covered by the perianth of the immature seed; the seeds then drop off or survive deformed. Spraying with wettable sulfur 0.4% or with Neem-based pesticides can give some relief, but is cumbersome and labor-intensive.
In Kerala, India, the main coconut pests are the coconut mite, the rhinoceros beetle, the red palm weevil, and the coconut leaf caterpillar. Research into countermeasures to these pests has as of 2009[update] yielded no results; researchers from the Kerala Agricultural University and the Central Plantation Crop Research Institute, Kasaragode, continue to work on countermeasures. The Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Kannur under Kerala Agricultural University has developed an innovative extension approach called the compact area group approach to combat coconut mites.
Production and cultivation[edit]


Coconut production, 2014[51]
(millions of tonnes)



Country
Production


 Indonesia
19.1


 Philippines
14.7


 India
11.1


 Brazil
2.9


 Sri Lanka
2.2



World

61.4


Coconut palms are grown in more than 90 countries of the world, with a total production of 61 million tonnes per year (table).[51] Most of the world production is in tropical Asia, with Indonesia, the Philippines, and India accounting collectively for 73% of the world total (table).
Cultivation[edit]
Coconut trees are hard to establish in dry climates, and cannot grow there without frequent irrigation; in drought conditions, the new leaves do not open well, and older leaves may become desiccated; fruit also tends to be shed.[47]
The extent of cultivation in the tropics is threatening a number of habitats, such as mangroves; an example of such damage to an ecoregion is in the Petenes mangroves of the Yucatán.[52]
Harvesting[edit]
In some parts of the world (Thailand and Malaysia), trained pig-tailed macaques are used to harvest coconuts. Thailand has been raising and training pig-tailed macaques to pick coconuts for around 400 years.[53]
Training schools for pig-tailed macaques still exist both in southern Thailand and in the Malaysian state of Kelantan.[54]
India[edit]




Coconuts being sold on a street in India






Coconut plucking in Kerala, India


Traditional areas of coconut cultivation in India are the states of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, West Bengal and, Gujarat and the islands of Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar. As per 2014–15 statistics from Coconut Development Board of Government of India, four southern states combined account for almost 90% of the total production in the country: Tamil Nadu (33.84%), Karnataka (25.15%), Kerala (23.96%), and Andhra Pradesh (7.16%).[55] Other states, such as Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, West Bengal, and those in the northeast (Tripura and Assam) account for the remaining productions. Though Kerala has the largest number of coconut trees, in terms of production per hectare, Tamil Nadu leads all other states. In Tamil Nadu, Coimbatore and Tirupur regions top the production list.[56]




Coconut trees are among the most common sights throughout Kerala


In Goa, the coconut tree has been reclassified by the government as a palm (like a grass), enabling farmers and real estate developers to clear land with fewer restrictions.[57] With this, it will no more be considered as a tree and no permission will be required by the forest department before cutting a coconut tree.[58]

Maldives[edit]




Green coconut fruit strands on the tree are featured on each Maldivian rufiyaa banknote


The coconut is the national tree of the Maldives and is considered the most important plant in the country. A coconut tree is also included in the country's national emblem and coat of arms. Coconut trees are grown on all the islands. Before modern construction methods were introduced, coconut leaves were used as roofing material for many houses in the islands, while coconut timber was used to build houses and boats.

Middle East[edit]
The main coconut-producing area in the Middle East is the Dhofar region of Oman, but they can be grown all along the Persian Gulf, Arabian Sea, and Red Sea coasts, because these seas are tropical and provide enough humidity (through seawater evaporation) for coconut trees to grow. The young coconut plants need to be nursed and irrigated with drip pipes until they are old enough (stem bulb development) to be irrigated with brackish water or seawater alone, after which they can be replanted on the beaches. In particular, the area around Salalah maintains large coconut plantations similar to those found across the Arabian Sea in Kerala. The reasons why coconut are cultivated only in Yemen's Al Mahrah and Hadramaut governorates and in the Sultanate of Oman, but not in other suitable areas in the Arabian Peninsula, may originate from the fact that Oman and Hadramaut had long dhow trade relations with Burma, Malaysia, Indonesia, East Africa, and Zanzibar, as well as southern India and China. Omani people needed the coir rope from the coconut fiber to stitch together their traditional seagoing dhow vessels in which nails were never used. The knowhow of coconut cultivation and necessary soil fixation and irrigation may have found its way into Omani, Hadrami and Al-Mahra culture by people who returned from those overseas areas.




Coconut trees line the beaches and corniches of Oman.


The coconut cultivars grown in Oman are generally of the drought-resistant Indian 'West Coast tall' variety. Unlike the UAE, which grows mostly non-native dwarf or hybrid coconut cultivars imported from Florida for ornamental purposes, the slender, tall Omani coconut cultivars are relatively well-adapted to the Middle East's hot dry seasons, but need longer to reach maturity. The Middle East's hot, dry climate favors the development of coconut mites, which cause immature seed dropping and may cause brownish-gray discoloration on the coconut's outer green fiber.
The ancient coconut groves of Dhofar were mentioned by the medieval Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta in his writings, known as Al Rihla.[59] The annual rainy season known locally as khareef or monsoon makes coconut cultivation easy on the Arabian east coast.
Coconut trees also are increasingly grown for decorative purposes along the coasts of the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia with the help of irrigation. The UAE has, however, imposed strict laws on mature coconut tree imports from other countries to reduce the spread of pests to other native palm trees, as the mixing of date and coconut trees poses a risk of cross-species palm pests, such as rhinoceros beetles and red palm weevils.[60] The artificial landscaping may have been the cause for lethal yellowing, a viral coconut palm disease that leads to the death of the tree. It is spread by host insects, that thrive on heavy turf grasses. Therefore, heavy turf grass environments (beach resorts and golf courses) also pose a major threat to local coconut trees. Traditionally, dessert banana plants and local wild beach flora such as Scaevola taccada and Ipomoea pes-caprae were used as humidity-supplying green undergrowth for coconut trees, mixed with sea almond and sea hibiscus. Due to growing sedentary lifestyles and heavy-handed landscaping, a decline in these traditional farming and soil-fixing techniques has occurred.
Sri Lanka[edit]
An early mention of the planting of coconuts is found in the Mahavamsa during the reign of Agrabodhi II around 589.[10] Coconuts are common in the Sri Lankan diet and the main source of dietary fat.[61]
United States[edit]




Paintings on coconut shells for Day of the Dead in the United States


In the United States, coconut palms can be grown and reproduced outdoors without irrigation in Hawaii, southern and central Florida,[62] and the territories of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
In Florida, coconut palms are cultivated along the Atlantic coast from Cocoa Beach southward into the Florida Keys, and along the Gulf of Mexico coast from Clearwater south to Naples.[citation needed]. Coconut palms are endemic and spread naturally across the Florida Keys and on the beaches of southwest and southeast Florida. Further north, coconut palms are cultivated across inland Florida and north to the Orlando area, however while the reach fruiting maturity, but can be damaged or killed by the infrequent winter freezes in central Florida.
In extreme coastal South Texas, coconut palms are cultivated in small numbers in favored microclimates around the coastal areas of the Rio Grande Valley near Brownsville.[citation needed] In some instances, coconut palms do well in areas near water sources such as oxbow lakes, commonly known as “resacas” to natives. Such specimens in the lower Rio Grande Valley need little to no irrigation during periods of minimal rain and hot temperatures. Coconut palms do not grow in California because of cool winters (extended periods below 10 °C (50 °F) in December through March). One specimen survived for about 20 years in Newport Beach; however, it died in 2014, without ever producing a fruit.[63]
Australia[edit]
Coconuts are commonly grown around the northern coast of Australia, and in some warmer parts of New South Wales.
Bermuda[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Most of the tall mature coconut trees found in Bermuda were shipped to the island as seedlings on the decks of ships. In more recent years, the importation of coconuts was prohibited; therefore, a large proportion of the younger trees have been propagated from locally grown coconuts.
In the winter, the growth rate of coconut trees declines due to cooler temperatures and people have commonly attributed this to the reduced yield of coconuts in comparison to tropical regions. However, whilst cooler winter temperatures may be a factor in reducing fruit production, the primary reason for the reduced yield is a lack of water. Bermuda's soil is generally very shallow (1 1⁄2 to 3 feet [46 to 91 cm]) and much of a coconut tree's root mass is found in the porous limestone underneath the soil. Due to the porosity of the limestone, Bermuda's coconut trees do not generally have a sufficient supply of water with which they are able to support a large number of fruit as rainwater quickly drains down through the limestone layer to the water table which is far too deep for a coconut's roots to reach. This typically leads to a reduction in fruit yield (sometimes as few as one or two mature fruits), as well as a reduced milk content inside the coconut that often causes the fruit to be infertile.
Conversely, trees growing in close proximity to the sea almost universally yield much more fruit, as they are able to tap directly into the seawater which permeates the limestone in such areas. Not only do these trees produce a significantly higher yield, but also the fruit itself tends to be far more fertile due to the higher milk content. Trees found growing in Bermuda's marshy inland areas enjoy a similar degree of success, as they are also able to tap directly into a constant supply of water.
Substitutes for cooler climates[edit]
In cooler climates (but not less than USDA Zone 9), a similar palm, the queen palm (Syagrus romanzoffiana), is used in landscaping. Its fruits are similar to the coconut, but smaller. The queen palm was originally classified in the genus Cocos along with the coconut, but was later reclassified in Syagrus. A recently discovered palm, Beccariophoenix alfredii from Madagascar, is nearly identical to the coconut, more so than the queen palm and can also be grown in slightly cooler climates than the coconut palm. Coconuts can only be grown in temperatures above 18 °C (64 °F) and need a daily temperature above 22 °C (72 °F) to produce fruit.
Uses[edit]




Coconut trees are used for landscaping along a coastal road in Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.


The coconut palm is grown throughout the tropics for decoration, as well as for its many culinary and nonculinary uses; virtually every part of the coconut palm can be used by humans in some manner and has significant economic value. Coconuts' versatility is sometimes noted in its naming. In Sanskrit, it is kalpa vriksha ("the tree which provides all the necessities of life"). In the Malay language, it is pokok seribu guna ("the tree of a thousand uses"). In the Philippines, the coconut is commonly called the "tree of life".[64]
Cooking[edit]




Green coconuts






Coconut water drink






An 1890 newspaper advertisement showing tin of dried coconut


The various parts of the coconut have a number of culinary uses. The seed provides oil for frying, cooking, and making margarine. The white, fleshy part of the seed, the coconut meat, is used fresh or dried in cooking, especially in confections and desserts such as macaroons. Desiccated coconut or coconut milk made from it is frequently added to curries and other savory dishes. Coconut flour has also been developed for use in baking, to combat malnutrition.[65] Coconut chips have been sold in the tourist regions of Hawaii and the Caribbean. Coconut butter is often used to describe solidified coconut oil, but has also been adopted as a name by certain specialty products made of coconut milk solids or puréed coconut meat and oil. Dried coconut is also used as the filling for many chocolate bars. Some dried coconut is purely coconut, but others are manufactured with other ingredients, such as sugar, propylene glycol, salt, and sodium metabisulfite.[66] Shredded or flaked coconut is used as a garnish on some foods.[66] Some countries in Southeast Asia use special coconut mutant called Kopyor coconut (Kopyor in Indonesia) or macapuno (in the Philippines) as dessert drinks.

Coconut meat, raw

Nutritional value per 100 g (3.5 oz)


Energy
354 kcal (1,480 kJ)






Carbohydrates


15.23 g



Sugars
6.23 g


Dietary fiber
9.0 g









Fat


33.49 g



Saturated
29.698 g


Monounsaturated
1.425 g


Polyunsaturated
0.366 g









Protein


3.33 g



Tryptophan
0.039 g


Threonine
0.121 g


Isoleucine
0.131 g


Leucine
0.247 g


Lysine
0.147 g


Methionine
0.062 g


Cystine
0.066 g


Phenylalanine
0.169 g


Tyrosine
0.103 g


Valine
0.202 g


Arginine
0.546 g


Histidine
0.077 g


Alanine
0.170 g


Aspartic acid
0.325 g


Glutamic acid
0.761 g


Glycine
0.158 g


Proline
0.138 g


Serine
0.172 g








Vitamins


Thiamine (B1)

(6%)
0.066 mg


Riboflavin (B2)

(2%)
0.020 mg


Niacin (B3)

(4%)
0.540 mg


Pantothenic acid (B5)

(6%)
0.300 mg


Vitamin B6

(4%)
0.054 mg


Folate (B9)

(7%)
26 μg


Vitamin C

(4%)
3.3 mg


Vitamin E

(2%)
0.24 mg


Vitamin K

(0%)
0.2 μg








Minerals


Calcium

(1%)
14 mg


Copper

(22%)
0.435 mg


Iron

(19%)
2.43 mg


Magnesium

(9%)
32 mg


Manganese

(71%)
1.500 mg


Phosphorus

(16%)
113 mg


Potassium

(8%)
356 mg


Selenium

(14%)
10.1 μg


Sodium

(1%)
20 mg


Zinc

(12%)
1.10 mg








Other constituents


Water
46.99 g







Link to USDA Database entry






Units
μg = micrograms • mg = milligrams
IU = International units





Percentages are roughly approximated using US recommendations for adults.
Source: USDA Nutrient Database


Nutrition[edit]
Per 100-gram serving with 354 calories, raw coconut meat supplies a high amount of total fat (33 grams), especially saturated fat (89% of total fat) and carbohydrates (24 g; see table). Micronutrients in significant content include the dietary minerals manganese, iron, phosphorus, and zinc.
Coconut water[edit]
Main article: Coconut water
Coconut water serves as a suspension for the endosperm of the coconut during its nuclear phase of development. Later, the endosperm matures and deposits onto the coconut rind during the cellular phase.[19] It is consumed throughout the humid tropics, and has been introduced into the retail market as a processed sports drink. Mature fruits have significantly less liquid than young, immature coconuts, barring spoilage. Coconut water can be fermented to produce coconut vinegar.
Per 100-gram serving, coconut water contains 19 calories and no significant content of essential nutrients.
Coconut milk[edit]
Main article: Coconut milk
See also: List of dishes using coconut milk




Coconut milk (kakang gata) from 15 coconuts (Philippines)


Coconut milk, not to be confused with coconut water, is obtained primarily by extracting juice by pressing the grated coconut white kernel or by passing hot water or milk through grated coconut, which extracts the oil and aromatic compounds. It has a total fat content of 24%, most of which (89%) is saturated fat, with lauric acid as a major fatty acid.[67] When refrigerated and left to set, coconut cream will rise to the top and separate from the milk. The milk can be used to produce virgin coconut oil by controlled heating and removal of the oil fraction.
A protein-rich powder can be processed from coconut milk following centrifugation, separation, and spray drying.[68]
Coconut oil[edit]
Main article: Coconut oil
Another product of the coconut is coconut oil. It is commonly used in cooking, especially for frying. It can be used in liquid form as would other vegetable oils, or in solid form as would butter or lard.
Toddy and nectar[edit]
The sap derived from incising the flower clusters of the coconut is drunk as neera, also known as toddy or tuba (Philippines), tuak (Indonesia and Malaysia) or karewe (fresh and not fermented, collected twice a day, for breakfast and dinner) in Kiribati. When left to ferment on its own, it becomes palm wine. Palm wine is distilled to produce arrack. In the Philippines, this alcoholic drink is called lambanog or "coconut vodka".[69]
The sap can be reduced by boiling to create a sweet syrup or candy such as te kamamai in Kiribati or dhiyaa hakuru and addu bondi in the Maldives. It can be reduced further to yield coconut sugar also referred to as palm sugar or jaggery. A young, well-maintained tree can produce around 300 litres (66 imp gal; 79 US gal) of toddy per year, while a 40-year-old tree may yield around 400 litres (88 imp gal; 110 US gal).[70]
Heart of palm and coconut sprout[edit]
Apical buds of adult plants are edible, and are known as "palm cabbage" or heart of palm. They are considered a rare delicacy, as harvesting the buds kills the palms. Hearts of palm are eaten in salads, sometimes called "millionaire's salad". Newly germinated coconuts contain an edible fluff of marshmallow-like consistency called coconut sprout, produced as the endosperm nourishes the developing embryo. Coconut haustorium, a spongy absorbent tissue formed from the distal portion of embryo during coconut germination, facilitates absorption of nutrients for the growing shoot and root.[71]
Indonesia[edit]
Coconut is an indispensable ingredient in Indonesian cuisine. Coconut meat, coconut milk, and coconut water are often used in main courses, desserts, and soups throughout the archipelago. On the island of Sumatra, the famous rendang, the traditional beef stew from West Sumatra, chunks of beef are cooked in coconut milk along with other spices for hours until thickened. In Jakarta, soto babat or beef tripe soup also uses coconut milk. On the island of Java, the sweet and savoury tempe bacem is made by cooking tempeh with coconut water, coconut sugar, and other spices until thickened. Klapertart is the famous Dutch-influenced dessert from Manado, North Sulawesi, that uses young coconut meat and coconut milk.
In 2010, Indonesia increased its coconut production. It is now the world's largest producer of coconuts. The gross production was 15 million tonnes.[72] A sprouting coconut seed is the logo for Gerakan Pramuka Indonesia, the Indonesian scouting organization. It can be seen on all the scouting paraphernalia that elementary (SMA) school children wear, as well as on the scouting pins and flags.
Philippines[edit]




Harvesting coconuts in the Philippines is done by workers who climb the trees using notches cut into the trunk.






From left to right: grated, fresh, mature coconut meat; seed interior; oil, rare two-eyed coconut shell; and more grated meat (Philippines)


The Philippines is the world's second-largest producer of coconuts; the production of coconuts plays an important role in the economy. Coconuts in the Philippines are usually used in making main dishes, refreshments, and desserts. Coconut juice is also a popular drink in the country. In the Philippines, particularly Cebu, rice is wrapped in coconut leaves for cooking and subsequent storage; these packets are called puso. Coconut milk, known as gata, and grated coconut flakes are used in the preparation of dishes such as laing, ginataan, bibingka, ube halaya, pitsi-pitsî, palitaw and buko pie. Coconut jam is made by mixing muscovado with coconut milk. Coconut sport fruits are also harvested. One such variety of coconut is known as macapuno. Its meat is sweetened, cut into strands, and sold in glass jars as coconut strings, sometimes labeled as "gelatinous mutant coconut". Coconut water can be fermented to make a different product—nata de coco (coconut gel).
Vietnam[edit]
In Vietnam, coconut is grown abundantly across central and southern Vietnam, and especially in Bến Tre Province, often called the "land of the coconut". It is used to make coconut candy, caramel, and jelly. Coconut juice and coconut milk are used, especially in Vietnam's southern style of cooking, including kho, chè, and curry (cà ri).
India[edit]




Patoleo (sweet rice cakes steamed in turmeric leaves consisting of a filling of freshly grated coconut and coconut sugar) prepared in Goan Catholic style.


In southern India, the most common way of cooking vegetables is to add grated coconut and then steam them with spices fried in oil. People from southern India also make chutney, which involves grinding the coconut with salt, chillies, and whole spices. Uruttu chammanthi (granulated chutney) is eaten with rice or kanji (rice gruel). It is also a main side dish served with idli, vadai, and dosai. Coconut ground with spices is mixed in sambar and other various lunch dishes for extra taste. Dishes garnished with grated coconut are generally referred to as poduthol in North Malabar and thoran in Kerala. Puttu is a culinary delicacy of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, in which layers of coconut alternate with layers of powdered rice, all of which fit into a bamboo stalk. Solkadhi, a drink made from coconut milk and kokum, is usually consumed after meals. Narali paak is another sweet dish, created with coconut and sugar. Coconut meat can be eaten as a snack sweetened with jaggery or molasses. In Karnataka, sweets are prepared using coconut and dry coconut copra.
Commercial, industrial, and household use[edit]




Coconuts drying before being processed into copra in the Solomon Islands


Cultivars[edit]
Coconut has a number of commercial and traditional cultivars. They can be sorted mainly into tall cultivars, dwarf cultivars, and hybrid cultivars (hybrids between talls and dwarfs). Some of the dwarf cultivars such as 'Malayan dwarf' have shown some promising resistance to lethal yellowing, while other cultivars such as 'Jamaican tall' are highly affected by the same plant disease. Some cultivars are more drought resistant such as 'West coast tall' (India) while others such as 'Hainan Tall' (China) are more cold tolerant. Other aspects such as seed size, shape and weight, and copra thickness are also important factors in the selection of new cultivars. Some cultivars such as 'Fiji dwarf' form a large bulb at the lower stem and others are cultivated to produce very sweet coconut water with orange-coloured husks (king coconut) used entirely in fruit stalls for drinking (Sri Lanka, India).
Coir[edit]




A wall made from coconut husks






Extracting the fiber from the husk (Sri Lanka)


Coir (the fiber from the husk of the coconut) is used in ropes, mats, doormats, brushes, and sacks, as caulking for boats, and as stuffing fiber for mattresses.[73] It is used in horticulture in potting compost, especially in orchid mix.
Coconut fronds[edit]




Toys from coconut leaves


The stiff midribs of coconut leaves are used for making brooms in India, Indonesia (sapu lidi), Malaysia, the Maldives, and the Philippines (walis tingting). The green of the leaves (lamina) is stripped away, leaving the veins (long, thin, woodlike strips) which are tied together to form a broom or brush. A long handle made from some other wood may be inserted into the base of the bundle and used as a two-handed broom. The leaves also provide material for baskets that can draw well water and for roofing thatch; they can be woven into mats, cooking skewers, and kindling arrows as well. Two leaves (especially the younger, yellowish shoots) woven into a tight shell the size of the palm are filled with rice and cooked to make ketupat.[74] Dried coconut leaves can be burned to ash, which can be harvested for lime. In India, the woven coconut leaves are used as pandals (temporary sheds) for marriage functions especially in the states of Kerala, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu.
Copra[edit]
Main articles: Copra and Coconut oil
Copra is the dried meat of the seed and after processing produces coconut oil and coconut meal. Coconut oil, aside from being used in cooking as an ingredient and for frying, is used in soaps, cosmetics, hair oil, and massage oil. Coconut oil is also a main ingredient in Ayurvedic oils. In Vanuatu, coconut palms for copra production are generally spaced 9 m (30 ft) apart, allowing a tree density of 100 to 160 per hectare (40 to 65 per acre).
Husks and shells[edit]
The husk and shells can be used for fuel and are a source of charcoal.[75] Activated carbon manufactured from coconut shell is considered extremely effective for the removal of impurities. The coconut's obscure origin in foreign lands led to the notion of using cups made from the shell to neutralise poisoned drinks. The cups were frequently engraved and decorated with precious metals.[76]
A dried half coconut shell with husk can be used to buff floors. It is known as a bunot in the Philippines and simply a "coconut brush" in Jamaica. The fresh husk of a brown coconut may serve as a dish sponge or body sponge. A coco chocolatero was a cup used to serve small quantities of beverages (such as chocolate drinks) between the 17th and 19th centuries in countries such as Mexico, Guatemala, and Venezuela.




Coconut buttons in Dongjiao Town, Hainan, China


In Asia, coconut shells are also used as bowls and in the manufacture of various handicrafts, including buttons carved from dried shell. Coconut buttons are often used for Hawaiian aloha shirts. Tempurung, as the shell is called in the Malay language, can be used as a soup bowl and—if fixed with a handle—a ladle. In Thailand, the coconut husk is used as a potting medium to produce healthy forest tree saplings. The process of husk extraction from the coir bypasses the retting process, using a custom-built coconut husk extractor designed by ASEAN–Canada Forest Tree Seed Centre in 1986. Fresh husks contain more tannin than old husks. Tannin produces negative effects on sapling growth.[77] In parts of South India, the shell and husk are burned for smoke to repel mosquitoes.
Half coconut shells are used in theatre Foley sound effects work, struck together to create the sound effect of a horse's hoofbeats. Dried half shells are used as the bodies of musical instruments, including the Chinese yehu and banhu, along with the Vietnamese đàn gáo and Arabo-Turkic rebab. In the Philippines, dried half shells are also used as a music instrument in a folk dance called maglalatik.
In World War II, coastwatcher scout Biuku Gasa was the first of two from the Solomon Islands to reach the shipwrecked and wounded crew of Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 commanded by future U.S. president John F. Kennedy. Gasa suggested, for lack of paper, delivering by dugout canoe a message inscribed on a husked coconut shell, reading “Nauru Isl commander / native knows posit / he can pilot / 11 alive need small boat / Kennedy.”[78] This coconut was later kept on the president's desk, and is now in the John F. Kennedy Library.[79]
Coconut trunk[edit]




The base of an old coconut palm






Coconut Palace, Manila, Philippines, built entirely out of coconut and local materials


Coconut trunks are used for building small bridges and huts; they are preferred for their straightness, strength, and salt resistance. In Kerala, coconut trunks are used for house construction. Coconut timber comes from the trunk, and is increasingly being used as an ecologically sound substitute for endangered hardwoods. It has applications in furniture and specialized construction, as notably demonstrated in Manila's Coconut Palace.
Hawaiians hollowed the trunk to form drums, containers, or small canoes. The "branches" (leaf petioles) are strong and flexible enough to make a switch. The use of coconut branches in corporal punishment was revived in the Gilbertese community on Choiseul in the Solomon Islands in 2005.[80]
Roots[edit]
The roots are used as a dye, a mouthwash, and a medicine for diarrhea and dysentery.[15] A frayed piece of root can also be used as a toothbrush.
Beauty products[edit]
Coconuts are used in the beauty industry in moisturizers and body butters.[citation needed] The coconut shell may also be ground down and added to products for exfoliation of dead skin.[citation needed] Coconut is also a source of lauric acid, which can be processed in a particular way to produce sodium lauryl sulfate, a detergent used in shower gels and shampoos.[citation needed]
Religion[edit]
See also: Coconut Religion






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In the Ilocos region of the northern Philippines, the Ilocano people fill two halved coconut shells with diket (cooked sweet rice), and place liningta nga itlog (halved boiled egg) on top of it. This ritual, known as niniyogan, is an offering made to the deceased and one's ancestors. This accompanies the palagip (prayer to the dead).
A coconut (Sanskrit: nalikera) is an essential element of rituals in Hindu tradition. Often it is decorated with bright metal foils and other symbols of auspiciousness. It is offered during worship to a Hindu god or goddess. Narali Purnima is celebrated on a full moon day which usually signifies the end of monsoon season in India. The word ‘Narali’ is derived from naral implying ‘coconut’ in Marathi. Fishermen give an offering of coconut to the sea to celebrate the beginning of a new fishing season.[81] Irrespective of their religious affiliations, fishermen of India often offer it to the rivers and seas in the hopes of having bountiful catches. Hindus often initiate the beginning of any new activity by breaking a coconut to ensure the blessings of the gods and successful completion of the activity. The Hindu goddess of well-being and wealth, Lakshmi, is often shown holding a coconut.[82] In the foothills of the temple town of Palani, before going to worship Murugan for the Ganesha, coconuts are broken at a place marked for the purpose. Every day, thousands of coconuts are broken, and some devotees break as many as 108 coconuts at a time as per the prayer. In tantric practices, coconuts are sometimes used as substitutes for human skulls.[citation needed]
In Hindu wedding ceremonies, a coconut is placed over the opening of a pot, representing a womb. Coconut flowers are auspicious symbols and are fixtures at Hindu and Buddhist weddings and other important occasions. In Kerala, coconut flowers must be present during a marriage ceremony. The flowers are inserted into a barrel of unhusked rice (paddy) and placed within sight of the wedding ceremony. Similarly in Sri Lanka, coconut flowers, standing in brass urns, are placed in prominent positions.
The Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club of New Orleans traditionally throws hand-decorated coconuts, the most valuable of Mardi Gras souvenirs, to parade revelers. The "Tramps" began the tradition circa 1901. In 1987, a "coconut law" was signed by Governor Edwin Edwards exempting from insurance liability any decorated coconut "handed" from a Zulu float.
The coconut is also used as a target and prize in the traditional British fairground game "coconut shy". The player buys some small balls which he throws as hard as he can at coconuts balanced on sticks. The aim is to knock a coconut off the stand and win it.
It was the main food of adherents of the now discontinued Vietnamese religion Đạo Dừa in Bến Tre.
Myths and legends[edit]
Some South Asian, Southeast Asian, and Pacific Ocean cultures have origin myths in which the coconut plays the main role. In the Hainuwele myth from Maluku, a girl emerges from the blossom of a coconut tree.[83] In Maldivian folklore, one of the main myths of origin reflects the dependence of the Maldivians on the coconut tree.[84]
According to an urban legend, more deaths are caused by falling coconuts than by sharks annually.
Other uses[edit]




Making a rug from coconut fiber


The leftover fiber from coconut oil and coconut milk production, coconut meal, is used as livestock feed. The dried calyx is used as fuel in wood-fired stoves. Coconut water is traditionally used as a growth supplement in plant tissue culture and micropropagation.[85] The smell of coconuts comes from the 6-pentyloxan-2-one molecule, known as δ-decalactone in the food and fragrance industries.[86]
Tool and shelter for animals[edit]
Researchers from the Melbourne Museum in Australia observed the octopus species Amphioctopus marginatus use tools, specifically coconut shells, for defense and shelter. The discovery of this behavior was observed in Bali and North Sulawesi in Indonesia between 1998 and 2008.[87][88][89] Amphioctopus marginatus is the first invertebrate known to be able to use tools.[88][90]
A coconut can be hollowed out and used as a home for a rodent or small birds. Halved, drained coconuts can also be hung up as bird feeders, and after the flesh has gone, can be filled with fat in winter to attract tits.
Allergies[edit]
Food allergies[edit]
Coconut oil is increasingly used in the food industry.[91] Proteins from coconut may cause food allergy, including anaphylaxis.[91]
In the United States, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration declared that coconut must be disclosed as an ingredient on package labels as a "tree nut" with potential allergenicity.[92]
Topical allergies[edit]
Cocamidopropyl betaine (CAPB) is a surfactant manufactured from coconut oil that is increasingly used as an ingredient in personal hygiene products and cosmetics, such as shampoos, liquid soaps, cleansers and antiseptics, among others.[93] CAPB may cause mild skin irritation,[93] but allergic reactions to CAPB are rare[94] and probably related to impurities rendered during the manufacturing process (which include amidoamine and dimethylaminopropylamine) rather than CAPB itself.[93]
Varieties[edit]




'West Coast Tall' (WCT) variety is a long lived and sturdy palm indigenous to the western coast of India.


Many varieties of coconuts C. nucifera are being cultivated in many countries. These vary by the taste of the coconut water and color of the fruit, as well as other genetic factors.[95]


Dwarf yellow coconut
Dwarf orange coconut
Golden Malay coconut
Dwarf green coconut
Fiji Dwarf (Niu Leka)
Green Malay coconut
King coconut
Makapuno coconut
Maypan coconut
Nawassi coconut
Yellow Malay coconut


Fruit types[edit]

Yellow coconut
Red coconut
Hybrid (red and green mix) and green coconuts

In Sri Lanka[edit]
Many cultivated coconut varieties are found in Sri Lanka. Most of them were introduced by the National Coconut Research Institute; they identified these varieties during a coconut germplasm exploration mission in the Southern Province.
Coconut in Sri Lanka is currently classified into 15 different forms grouped under three varieties, namely 'Typica', 'Nana', and 'Aurantiaca'. The visual morphological features of several new coconut morphotypes were characterized with the objective of including them in the taxonomic classification of coconut in Sri Lanka.[96]
Varieties and forms of coconut found in Sri Lanka[edit]




King Coconut in Sri Lanka




Common name
Variety/form
Features


Sri Lanka Tall
(Typical/Typica)
Tall stature, allogamous, heterogeneous, flowers in 6 –7
years, medium-sized nuts, 20–25 nuts per bunch, 60–80 nuts per palm per year



Gon Thembili
(Typica/Gon thembili)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Ivory colored nuts, petioles and
inflorescences



Nawasi
(Typica/Nawasi)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Soft mesocarp – edible in the
immature nut yields soft fiber when mature



Pora pol
(Typica/Pora pot)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Remarkably thick shelled nuts


Ran Thembii
(Typica/Ran thembili)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Pink coloured mesocarp in
immature fruit and a pink whorl under the perianth. Large nuts



Kamandala
(Typica/Kamandala)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Large sized nuts (largest among
local forms), and few nuts per bunch (2–5 nuts per bunch)



Bodiri
(Typica/Bodiri)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Small sized nuts and large
number per bunch (30–100 nuts per bunch). Seasonal nut production



Dikiri
(Typica/Dikiri)
Similar to Sri Lanka Tall. Some nuts contain a jelly-like
endosperm



King Coconut
(Aurantiaca/King coconut)
Intermediate stature, autogamous, homogeneous, fruits in 6–7 years, seasonal flower production, medium-sized nuts with orange epicarp and sweet nut water, 25–50 nuts per bunch


Nawasi Thembili
(Aurantiaca/Nawasi thembili)
Similar to King Coconut. Soft and edible mesocarp like
Nawasi



Rathran Thembili
(Aurantiaca/'Rathran thembili)
Similar to King Coconut. Pink coloured mesocarp and a
pink whorl under the perianth



Green Dwarf
(Nana/Green dwarf or pumila)
Dwarf stature, autogamous, homogeneous, fruits in 3–4
years, small sized nuts with green epicarp. low copra content, 80–150 nuts per palm per year



Yellow Dwarf
(Nana/Yellow dwarf or eburnea)
Similar to Green dwarf. Nuts with yellow epicarp


Red Dwarf
(Nana/Red dwarf or regia)
Similar to Green dwarf. Nuts with red epicarp


Brown Dwarf
(Nana/Brown dwarf or braune)
Similar to Green dwarf. Nuts with a brown epicarp


See also[edit]


Food portal




Central Plantation Crops Research Institute
Coconut production in Kerala
Coir Board of India
Death by coconut
List of coconut dishes
List of dishes made using coconut milk
Ravanahatha
Voanioala gerardii – forest coconut, the closest relative of the modern coconut


References[edit]


^ Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Cocos. World Checklist of Selected Plant Families.
^ J. Pearsall, ed. (1999). "Coconut". Concise Oxford Dictionary (10th ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-860287-1. 
^ Dalgado, Sebastião. "Glossário luso-asiático". google.com. p. 291. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. 
^ "Cocos nucifera L. (Source: James A. Duke. 1983. Handbook of Energy Crops; unpublished)". Purdue University, NewCROP – New Crop Resource. 1983. Archived from the original on June 3, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2015. 
^ Patil, Vimla. "Coconut – Fruit Of Lustre In Indian Culture". eSamskriti. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. 
^ "Coconut". Dictionary.com. 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2017. 
^ Losada, Fernando Díez. (2004). La tribuna del idioma. Editorial Tecnologica de CR. p. 481 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-9977-66-161-2. (in Spanish)
^ Figueiredo, Cândido. (1940). Pequeno Dicionário da Lingua Portuguesa. Livraria Bertrand. Lisboa. (in Portuguese)
^ "The Fifth Voyage of Sindbad the Seaman – The Arabian Nights – The Thousand and One Nights – Sir Richard Burton translator". Classiclit.about.com. November 2, 2009. Archived from the original on December 25, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2012. 
^ a b c Grimwood 1975, p. 1 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ a b Elzebroek, A.T.G. and Koop Wind (Eds.). (2008). Guide to Cultivated Plants. CABI. pp. 186–192 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-1-84593-356-2.
^ Rosengarten, Frederic Jr. (2004). The Book of Edible Nuts. Dover Publications. pp. 65–93 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-486-43499-5.
^ Antonio Pigafetta; translated by James Alexander Robertson (1906). Magellan's Voyage Around the World, Volume 1. Arthur H. Clark Company. pp. 64–100. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. 
^ T. Pradeepkumar, B. Sumajyothibhaskar, and K.N. Satheesan. (2008). Management of Horticultural Crops (Horticulture Science Series Vol.11, 2nd of 2 Parts). New India Publishing. pp. 539–587 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-81-89422-49-3.
^ a b Grimwood BE, Ashman F (1975). Coconut Palm Products: Their Processing in Developing Countries. United Nations, Food and Agriculture Organization. p. 1. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. 
^ Sarian, Zac B. (August 18, 2010). New coconut yields high Archived November 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.. The Manila Bulletin. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
^ Ravi, Rajesh. (March 16, 2009). Rise in coconut yield, farming area put India on top Archived May 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. The Financial Express. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
^ "How Long Does It Take for a Coconut Tree to Get Coconuts?". Home Guides – SF Gate. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. 
^ a b "Coconut botany". Agritech Portal, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University. December 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2017. 
^ Bourke, R. Michael and Tracy Harwood (Eds.). (2009). Food and Agriculture in Papua New Guinea. Australian National University. p. 327 Archived April 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-1-921536-60-1.
^ a b Thampan, P.K. (1981). Handbook on Coconut Palm. Oxford & IBH Publishing Co.
^ a b c Elevitch, C.R., ed. (April 2006). "Cocos nucifera (coconut), version 2.1" (PDF). In: Species Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry. Permanent Agriculture Resources, Hōlualoa, Hawai‘i. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved December 22, 2016. 
^ Willmer, Pat. (2011). Pollination and Floral Ecology. Princeton University Press. p. 57 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-691-12861-0.
^ Werth, E. (1933). Distribution, Origin and Cultivation of the Coconut Palm. Ber. Deutschen Bot. Ges., vol 51, pp. 301–304. (article translated into English by Dr. R. Child, Director, Coconut Research Scheme, Lunuwila, Sri Lanka).
^ Grimwood, Brian E., F. Ashman, D.A.V. Dendy, C.G. Jarman, E.C.S. Little, and W.H. Timmins. (1975). Coconut Palm Products – Their processing in developing countries. Rome: FAO. pp. 3–4 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-92-5-100853-9.
^ a b c Perera, Lalith, Suriya A.C.N. Perera, Champa K. Bandaranayake and Hugh C. Harries. (2009). "Chapter 12 – Coconut". In Johann Vollmann and Istvan Rajcan (Eds.). Oil Crops. Springer. pp. 370–372 Archived April 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.. ISBN 978-0-387-77593-7.
^ Ahuja, SC; Ahuja, Siddharta; Ahuja, Uma (2014). "Coconut – History, Uses, and Folklore" (PDF). Asian Agri-History. 18 (3): 223. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 10, 2017. Retrieved January 3, 2017. 
^ Abbott, edited by Craig R. Elevitch ; forewords by Isabella Aiona; Leakey, Roger R.B. (2006). Traditional trees of Pacific Islands : their culture, environment, and use (1st ed.). Hōlualoa, Hawaii: Permanent Agriculture Resources. ISBN 0970254458. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Cook, O.F. (1901) The Origin and Distribution of the Cocoa Palm. Washington: Government Printing Office. 37 p.
^ a b c Dowe JL, Smith LT (2002). "A Brief History of the Coconut Palm in Australia" (PDF). Palms. 46 (3). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 30, 2016. 
^ a b Heyerdahl, Thor. (1950) Kon-Tiki: Across the Pacific by Raft. Mattituck: Amereon House. 240 p.
^ a b c Harries, H. C. (1978). "The evolution, dissemination and classification of Cocos nucifera L". The Botanical Review. 44 (3): 265–319. doi:10.1007/bf02957852. 
^ Harries, H (2012). "Germination rate is the significant characteristic determining coconut palm diversity". AoB Plants. 2012: pls045. doi:10.1093/aobpla/pls045. PMC 3532018 . PMID 23275832. 
^ Harries, H.C.; Clement, C.R. (2013). "Long-distance dispersal of the coconut palm by migration within the coral atoll ecosystem". Annals of Botany. 113: 565–570. doi:10.1093/aob/mct293. PMC 3936586 . PMID 24368197. 
^ Harries, H (2012). "Germination rate is the significant characteristic determining coconut palm diversity". Annals of Botany. doi:10.1093/aobpla/pls04. 
^ Lebrun, P.; Seguin, M.; Grivet, L.; Baudouin, L. (1998). "Genetic diversity in coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) revealed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) markers". Euphytica. 101: 103–108. 
^ Shukla, A.; Mehrotra, R. C.; Guleria, J. S. (2012). "Cocos sahnii Kaul: A Cocos nucifera L.-like fruit from the Early Eocene rainforest of Rajasthan, western India". Journal of Biosciences. 37 (4): 769–776. doi:10.1007/s12038-012-9233-3. 
^ Santos, G.A., Batugal, P.A., Othman, A., Baudouin, L., and Labouisse J.P. 1996. Manual on standardised techniques in coconut breeding. IPGRI–COGENT publication. Stamford Press, Singapore. Accessed at http://www.bioversityinternational.org/fileadmin/bioversity/publications/Web_version/108/ch02.htm#Chapter%201%20BOTANY%20OF%20THE%20COCONUT%20PALM Archived December 12, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Huang, Y.-Y.; Matzke, A. J. M.; Matzke, M. (2013). "Complete sequence and comparative analysis of the chloroplast genome of coconut palm (Cocos nucifera)". PLOS ONE. 8 (8): e74736. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0074736. PMC 3758300 . PMID 24023703. 
^ Rivera, R.; Edwards, K. J.; Barker, J. H.; Arnold, G. M.; Ayad, G.; Hodgkin, T.; Karp, A. (1999). "Isolation and characterization of polymorphic microsatellites in Cocos nucifera L". Genome / National Research Council Canada = Genome / Conseil national de recherches Canada. 42 (4): 668–675. doi:10.1139/gen-42-4-668. PMID 10464790. 
^ Edmondson, C.H. (1941). "Viability of coconut seeds after floating in sea". Bernice P. Bishop Museum Occasional Papers. 16: 293–304. 
^ a b Ward, R. G.; Brookfield, M. (1992). "Special Paper: the dispersal of the coconut: did it float or was it carried to Panama?". Journal of Biogeography. 19 (5): 467–480. doi:10.2307/2845766. 
^ Wales, State Library of New South. "William Bligh's Logbook". Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2016. 
^ Gunn, Bee; Luc Baudouin; Kenneth M. Olsen (2011). "Independent Origins of Cultivated Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) in the Old World Tropics". PLoS ONE. 6 (6): e21143. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021143. PMC 3120816 . PMID 21731660. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved November 28, 2011. 
^ Foale, Mike. (2003). The Coconut Odyssey – the bounteous possibilities of the tree of life Archived March 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Archived March 18, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved May 30, 2009.
^ Ferguson, John. (1898). All about the "coconut palm" (Cocos nucifera) (2nd edition).
^ a b c Chan, Edward and Craig R. Elevitch. (April 2006). Cocos nucifera (coconut) Archived October 20, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. (version 2.1). In C.R. Elevitch (Ed.). Species Profiles for Pacific Island Agroforestry. Hōlualoa, Hawai‘i: Permanent Agriculture Resources (PAR).
^ Bourdeix, Ronald (December 9, 2016). "Clarion call for King Coconut". www.atimes.com. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. 
^ Yarro, J. G.; Otindo, B. L.; Gatehouse, A. G.; Lubega, M. C. (December 1981). "Dwarf variety of coconut, Cocos nucifera (Palmae), a hostplant for the African armyworm, Spodoptera exempta (Wlk.) (Lepidoptera, Noctuidae)". International Journal of Tropical Insect Science. 1 (4): 361–362. doi:10.1017/S1742758400000667. ISSN 0191-9040. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. 
^ "Report: 26 provinces quarantined for coconut pest". GMA News Online. September 28, 2007. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2016. 
^ a b "Coconuts, Production/Crops". Food And Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: Statistical Division (FAOSTAT). 2013. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved October 9, 2016. 
^ McGinley, Mark; Hogan, C Michael (April 19, 2011). "Petenes mangroves: types and severity of threats". The Encyclopedia of Earth. World Wildlife Fund, Washington, DC. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2016. 
^ Funny About The Business Of Monkeys Picking Coconuts? Archived December 30, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., NPR, October 19, 2015.
^ Bertrand, Mireille. (January 27, 1967). Training without Reward: Traditional Training of Pig-tailed Macaques as Coconut Harvesters. Science 155 (3761): 484–486.
^ Coconut Development Board; Government of India. (n.d.). "Coconut Cultivation". Archived from the original on December 10, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2015. 
^ Coconut Development Board; Government of India. (n.d.). "Coconut Cultivation". Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2015. 
^ "Indian state decides coconut trees are no longer trees but palms". The Guardian. January 20, 2016. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2016. 
^ "Coconut tree loses tree status in Goa – Times of India". The Times of India. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2017. 
^ Halsall, Paul. (Ed). (February 21, 2001). "Medieval Sourcebook: Ibn Battuta: Travels in Asia and Africa 1325–1354". Fordham University Center for Medieval Studies. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2011. 
^ Kaakeh, Walid, Fouad El-Ezaby, Mahmoud M. Aboul-Nour, and Ahmed A. Khamis (2001). "Management of the red palm weevil, Rhynchophorus ferrugineus Oliv., by a pheromone/food-based trapping system" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved December 6, 2009. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Kaunitz, H. (1986). "Medium chain triglycerides (MCT) in aging and arteriosclerosis". Journal of Environmental Pathology, Toxicology and Oncology : official organ of the International Society for Environmental Toxicology and Cancer. 6 (3–4): 115–121. PMID 3519928. 
^ "Cocos nucifera, Coconut palm". FloridaGardener.com. Florida Gardener. June 12, 2008. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2016. 
^ "Newport Beach coconut palm finally bites the dust". Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2016. 
^ Margolis, Jason. (December 13, 2006). Coconut fuel Archived August 31, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.. PRI's The World. Retrieved April 10, 2011.
^ Grimwood 1975, p. 182 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ a b Roehl, E. (1996). Whole Food Facts: The Complete Reference Guide. Inner Traditions/Bear. p. 115. ISBN 978-0-89281-635-4. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. 
^ "Full Report (All Nutrients): 12117, Nuts, coconut milk, raw (liquid expressed from grated meat and water)". US Department of Agriculture, National Nutrient Database, version SR-28. 2015. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. 
^ Naik A, Raghavendra SN, Raghavarao KS (2012). "Production of coconut protein powder from coconut wet processing waste and its characterization". Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 167 (5): 1290–302. doi:10.1007/s12010-012-9632-9. PMID 22434355. 
^ Porter, Jolene V. (2005). "Lambanog: A Philippine Drink". Washington, D.C.: American University. Archived from the original on February 22, 2011. Retrieved April 10, 2011. 
^ Grimwood 1975, p. 20 Archived April 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ Manivannan, A; Bhardwaj, R; Padmanabhan, S; Suneja, P; Hebbar, K. B; Kanade, S. R (2018). "Biochemical and nutritional characterization of coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) haustorium". Food Chemistry. 238: 153–159. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2016.10.127. PMID 28867086. 
^ FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS Archived February 9, 2012, at WebCite, FAO
^ Grimwood 1975, p. 22 Archived April 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ Grimwood 1975, p. 19 Archived April 21, 2016, at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Coconut Shell Lump Charcoal". Supreme Carbon Indonesia. Archived from the original on December 29, 2012. 
^ "Hans van Amsterdam: Coconut Cup with Cover (17.190.622ab) – Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History – The Metropolitan Museum of Art". metmuseum.org. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. 
^ Somyos Kijkar. "Handbook: Coconut husk as a potting medium". ASEAN-Canada Forest Tree Seed Centre Project 1991, Muak-Lek, Saraburi, Thailand. ISBN 974-361-277-1.
^ Edwards, Owen. "Remembering PT-109: A carved walking stick evokes ship commander John F. Kennedy's dramatic rescue at sea". Smithsonian.com. Retrieved 21 January 2017. 
^ "MO63.4852 Coconut shell paperweight with PT109 rescue message". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 21, 2017. 
^ Herming, George. (March 6, 2006). Wagina whips offenders Archived October 27, 2006, at the Wayback Machine.. Solomon Star.
^ "Narali Purnima". Maharashtra Tourism. 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. 
^ Dallapiccola, Anna. Dictionary of Hindu Lore and Legend. ISBN 0-500-51088-1.
^ "Hainuwele – Oxford Reference". oxfordreference.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. 
^ Romero-Frias, Xavier (2012) Folk tales of the Maldives, NIAS Press Archived May 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine., ISBN 978-87-7694-104-8, ISBN 978-87-7694-105-5
^ Yong, JW. Ge L. Ng YF. Tan SN. (2009). "The chemical composition and biological properties of coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) water". Molecules. 14 (12): 5144–64. doi:10.3390/molecules14125144. PMID 20032881. 
^ "Data sheet about delta-decalactone and its properties". Thegoodscentscompany.com. July 18, 2000. Archived from the original on February 19, 2012. Retrieved February 14, 2012. 
^ Finn, Julian K.; Tregenza, Tom; Norman, Mark D. (2009). "Defensive tool use in a coconut-carrying octopus". Curr. Biol. 19 (23): R1069–R1070. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.10.052. PMID 20064403. 
^ a b Gelineau, Kristen (December 15, 2009). "Aussie scientists find coconut-carrying octopus". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 18, 2009. Retrieved December 15, 2009. 
^ Harmon, Katherine (December 14, 2009). "A tool-wielding octopus? This invertebrate builds armor from coconut halves". Scientific American. Archived from the original on December 17, 2009. 
^ Henderson, Mark (December 15, 2009). "Indonesia's veined octopus 'stilt walks' to collect coconut shells". Times Online. Archived from the original on August 15, 2011. 
^ a b Michavila Gomez A, Amat Bou M, Gonzalez Cortés MV, Segura Navas L, Moreno Palanques MA, Bartolomé B (2015). "Coconut anaphylaxis: Case report and review" (PDF). Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) (Review. Letter. Case reports.). 43 (2): 219–20. doi:10.1016/j.aller.2013.09.004. PMID 24231149. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 25, 2016. 
^ "Guidance for Industry: A Food Labeling Guide (6. Ingredient Lists); Major Food Allergens (food source names and examples)". Food Labeling and Nutrition. US Food and Drug Administration. January 2013. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2016. 
^ a b c Jacob SE, Amini S (2008). "Cocamidopropyl betaine". Dermatitis (Review). 19 (3): 157–160. doi:10.2310/6620.2008.06043. PMID 18627690. 
^ Schnuch A, Lessmann H, Geier J, Uter W (2011). "Is cocamidopropyl betaine a contact allergen? Analysis of network data and short review of the literature". Contact Dermatitis (Review). 64 (4): 203–11. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0536.2010.01863.x. PMID 21392028. 
^ "Coconut Varieties". floridagardener.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2016. 
^ Ekanayake, G.K.; Perera, S. A. C. N.; Dassanayake, P. N.; Everard, J. M. D. T. (2010). "Varietal Classification of New Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) Forms Identified" (PDF). Coconut Research Institute of Sri Lanka. p. 10. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. 


Further reading[edit]

Adkins S.W., M. Foale and Y.M.S. Samosir (eds.) (2006). Coconut revival – new possibilities for the ‘tree of life’. Proceedings of the International Coconut Forum held in Cairns, Australia, November 22–24, 2005. ACIAR Proceedings No. 125. ISBN 1-86320-515-2
Batugal, P., V.R. Rao and J. Oliver (2005). Coconut Genetic Resources. Bioversity International. ISBN 978-92-9043-629-4. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Frison, E.A.; Putter, C.A.J.; Diekmann, M. (eds.). (1993). Coconut. ISBN 978-92-9043-156-5.
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (IPGRI). (1995). Descriptors for Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.). ISBN 978-92-9043-215-9.
Mathur, P.N.; Muralidharan, K.; Parthasarathy, V.A.; Batugal, P.; Bonnot, F. (2008). Data Analysis Manual for Coconut Researchers. ISBN 978-92-9043-736-9.
Salunkhe, D.K., J.K. Chavan, R.N. Adsule, and S.S. Kadam. (1992). World Oilseeds – Chemistry, Technology, and Utilization. Springer. ISBN 978-0-442-00112-4.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coconuts.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cocos nucifera.





Wikispecies has information related to Cocos nucifera








v
t
e


Coconut



Production



Brazil
India
Indonesia
Kerala
Mexico
Niue
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam








Products



Cadjan
Coir
Copra
Cream
Jam
Jewelry
Milk
Oil
Sugar
Timber
Water





Dishes



Boston bun
Buko pie
Coco bread
Espasol
Maja blanca
Pol sambola
Red curry
Serundeng
Sugar cake
Nasi uduk
Tempe bongkrèk
Urap
Watalappam
List of coconut dishes

List of dishes made using coconut milk







Diseases



Bipolaris incurvata
Botryosphaeria cocogena
Bursaphelenchus cocophilus
Cadang-cadang
Capnodium footii
Cephaleuros virescens
Corticium penicillatum
Cytospora palmarum
Marasmiellus cocophilus
Periconiella cocoes
Pestalotiopsis palmarum
Phaeochoropsis mucosa
Phyllosticta palmetto
Phytophthora palmivora
Pseudoepicoccum cocos
Ramularia necator
Stigmina palmivora





Organizations



Asian and Pacific Coconut Community
Coconut Development Board
Franklin Baker Company
KERAFED
Philippine Coconut Authority





Culture



August Engelhardt
Coconut Palace
Coconut pearl
Coconut Religion
Hainuwele









 Category













v
t
e


Traditional biodegradable culinary wrappings, beddings, layering & dishware



Latin America



Avocado leaf
Banana leaf
Corn husk
Hoja santa
Plantain leaf








Asia



Bamboo leaf
Banana leaf
Betel leaf
Canna leaf
Coconut leaf
Curry leaves
Grape leaf
Lotus leaf
Oak leaf (Kashiwa mochi)
Palm leaf
Pandan leaf
Phrynium placentarium leaf
Reed leaf
Taro leaf
Turmeric leaf





Africa



Banana leaf





As dishware



Patravali
Palm leaf wine (India)
Tapari












v
t
e


Nuts



True, or botanical nuts



Acorn
Beech

American beech
European beech


Breadnut
Candlenut
Chestnut

Sweet chestnut


Hazelnut

American hazel
Beaked hazel
European hazel
Filbert
Asian hazel


Johnstone River almond
Kola nut
Kurrajong
Malabar chestnut
Mongongo
Palm nut
Karuka

Planted karuka
Wild karuka


Red bopple nut
Yellow walnut





Drupes



Almond
Australian cashew nut
Betel nut
Borneo tallow nut
Breadfruit
Cashew
Chilean hazel
Coconut
Durian
Gabon nut
Hickory

Mockernut hickory
Pecan
Shagbark hickory
Shellbark hickory


Irvingia gabonensis
Jack nut
Panda oleosa
Pekea nut
Pili nut
Pistachio
Walnut

Black walnut
Butternut
English walnut
Heartnut







Gymnosperms



Cycad

Burrawang nut


Ginkgo nut
Araucaria spp.

Bunya nut
Monkey-puzzle nut


Pine nut

Chilgoza pine
Colorado pinyon
Korean pine
Mexican pinyon
Single-leaf pinyon
Stone pine







Angiosperms



Brazil nut
Macadamia

Macadamia nut
Queensland macadamia nut


Paradise nut
Peanut
Peanut tree
Soybean












v
t
e


Non-timber forest products



Animal products



Furs
Honey
Pine honey
Wild game











Berries
Tree fruit






Blackberry
Blueberry
Bilberry
Breadfruit
Cocoa bean
Coconut
Durian
Gambooge
Huckleberry
Jackfruit
Juniper berry
Lingonberry
Raspberry
Tamarind
Woodland strawberry





Edible plants / roots



Betel
Fiddlehead ferns
Mahuwa flowers
Sago palm

queen


Sassafras

filé powder
root beer


Saw palmetto
Wild ginseng





Mushrooms



Bare-toothed russula
Bay bolete
Birch bolete
Cep
Chanterelle
Honey mushroom
Lingzhi
Matsutake
Meadow mushroom
Morel
Oyster mushroom
Parasol mushroom
Red cap
Saffron milk cap
Slippery jack
Truffle
Yellow knight








Nuts
Spices






Allspice
Areca nut
Bay leaf
Black pepper
Brazil nut
Cinnamon
Clove
Hazelnut
Malva nut
Nutmeg
Pine nut
Vanilla








Oil
Waxes






Carnauba
Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus wightiana)
Cocoa butter
Eucalyptol
Eucalyptus
Japan wax
Kokum
Kusum
Mahuwa
Nagkesar
Palm (kernel)
Pongamia
Phulwara
Pilu
Sal-seed (Shorea robusta)
Sandalwood
Shea butter
Tea-seed
Tea-tree
Vateria indica





Resins



Benzoin
Birch tar
Camphor
Creosote
Frankincense
Gamboge
Kauri
Lacquer
Mastic
Myrrh
Pine tar
Pitch
Rosin
Turpentine
Varnish





Sap / Gum / etc.



Birch syrup
Chicle

chewing gum


Coconut sugar
Date sugar
Fruit syrup
Gum arabic
Gutta-percha
Kino
Latex
Maple sugar
Maple syrup
Palm sugar
Palm wine

akpeteshie
ogogoro


Rubber
Spruce gum





Other



Bamboo

edible
musical instruments
textiles


Birch bark
Birch beer
Cork
Ferns
Forage
Gambier
Moss
Natural dyes

henna


Peat
Quinine
Rattan
Shellac
Tanbark

tannin


Thatching
Tendu leaves
Willow bark





Related



Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry)
Forest farming / gardening
Honey hunting
Indian forest produce
Mushroom hunting
Naval stores
Permaforestry
Resin extraction
Rubber tapping
Wildcrafting








 Forestry portal
 Trees portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry









Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q13187
APDB: 33239
EoL: 1091712
FNA: 200027077
FoC: 200027077
GBIF: 2735117
GRIN: 11043
iNaturalist: 48865
IPNI: 666160-1
ITIS: 42451
NCBI: 13894
Plant List: kew-44645
PLANTS: CONU
Tropicos: 2400007
WCSP: 44645









Authority control



GND: 4125533-1
BNF: cb12121896b (data)
NDL: 00566308











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coconut&oldid=818360849"					Categories: CoconutsEdible palmsFlora of the MaldivesFlora of the Tubuai IslandsGarden plants of AsiaGarden plants of Central AmericaHalophytesIndomalaya ecozone floraMedicinal plantsNon-timber forest productsOrnamental treesPlants described in 1753Trees of BelizeTrees of HaitiTrees of IndiaTrees of Indo-ChinaTrees of MalesiaTrees of PakistanTrees of the CaribbeanTrees of the PacificTropical agricultureTropical fruitCropsExtant Eocene first appearancesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with Spanish-language external linksArticles with Portuguese-language external linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template webcite linksPages with listed invalid ISBNsUse mdy dates from July 2014Articles with 'species' microformatsAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2009Articles needing additional references from May 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2016Articles needing additional references from February 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles needing additional references from August 2016Articles containing Sanskrit-language textArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers