Not to be confused with combinatoriality.
Combinatorics is an area of mathematics primarily concerned with counting, both as a means and an end in obtaining results, and certain properties of finite structures. It is closely related to many other areas of mathematics and has many applications ranging from logic to statistical physics, from evolutionary biology to computer science, etc.
To fully understand the scope of combinatorics requires a great deal of further amplification, the details of which are not universally agreed upon.[1] According to H. J. Ryser, a definition of the subject is difficult because it crosses so many mathematical subdivisions.[2] In so far as an area can be described by the types of problems it addresses, combinatorics is involved with

the enumeration (counting) of specified structures, sometimes referred to as arrangements or configurations in a very general sense, associated with finite systems,
the existence of such structures that satisfy certain given criteria,
the construction of these structures, perhaps in many ways, and
optimization, finding the "best" structure or solution among several possibilities, be it the "largest", "smallest" or satisfying some other optimality criterion.

Leon Mirsky has said: "combinatorics is a range of linked studies which have something in common and yet diverge widely in their objectives, their methods, and the degree of coherence they have attained."[3] One way to define combinatorics is, perhaps, to describe its subdivisions with their problems and techniques. This is the approach that is used below. However, there are also purely historical reasons for including or not including some topics under the combinatorics umbrella.[4] Although primarily concerned with finite systems, some combinatorial questions and techniques can be extended to an infinite (specifically, countable) but discrete setting.
Combinatorics is well known for the breadth of the problems it tackles. Combinatorial problems arise in many areas of pure mathematics, notably in algebra, probability theory, topology, and geometry,[5] as well as in its many application areas. Many combinatorial questions have historically been considered in isolation, giving an ad hoc solution to a problem arising in some mathematical context. In the later twentieth century, however, powerful and general theoretical methods were developed, making combinatorics into an independent branch of mathematics in its own right.[6] One of the oldest and most accessible parts of combinatorics is graph theory, which by itself has numerous natural connections to other areas. Combinatorics is used frequently in computer science to obtain formulas and estimates in the analysis of algorithms.
A mathematician who studies combinatorics is called a combinatorialist.



Contents


1 History
2 Approaches and subfields of combinatorics

2.1 Enumerative combinatorics
2.2 Analytic combinatorics
2.3 Partition theory
2.4 Graph theory
2.5 Design theory
2.6 Finite geometry
2.7 Order theory
2.8 Matroid theory
2.9 Extremal combinatorics
2.10 Probabilistic combinatorics
2.11 Algebraic combinatorics
2.12 Combinatorics on words
2.13 Geometric combinatorics
2.14 Topological combinatorics
2.15 Arithmetic combinatorics
2.16 Infinitary combinatorics


3 Related fields

3.1 Combinatorial optimization
3.2 Coding theory
3.3 Discrete and computational geometry
3.4 Combinatorics and dynamical systems
3.5 Combinatorics and physics


4 See also
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links



History[edit]




An example of change ringing (with six bells), one of the earliest nontrivial results in Graph Theory.


Main article: History of combinatorics
Basic combinatorial concepts and enumerative results appeared throughout the ancient world. In the 6th century BCE, ancient Indian physician Sushruta asserts in Sushruta Samhita that 63 combinations can be made out of 6 different tastes, taken one at a time, two at a time, etc., thus computing all 26 − 1 possibilities. Greek historian Plutarch discusses an argument between Chrysippus (3rd century BCE) and Hipparchus (2nd century BCE) of a rather delicate enumerative problem, which was later shown to be related to Schröder–Hipparchus numbers.[7][8] In the Ostomachion, Archimedes (3rd century BCE) considers a tiling puzzle.
In the Middle Ages, combinatorics continued to be studied, largely outside of the European civilization. The Indian mathematician Mahāvīra (c. 850) provided formulae for the number of permutations and combinations,[9][10] and these formulas may have been familiar to Indian mathematicians as early as the 6th century CE.[11] The philosopher and astronomer Rabbi Abraham ibn Ezra (c. 1140) established the symmetry of binomial coefficients, while a closed formula was obtained later by the talmudist and mathematician Levi ben Gerson (better known as Gersonides), in 1321.[12] The arithmetical triangle— a graphical diagram showing relationships among the binomial coefficients— was presented by mathematicians in treatises dating as far back as the 10th century, and would eventually become known as Pascal's triangle. Later, in Medieval England, campanology provided examples of what is now known as Hamiltonian cycles in certain Cayley graphs on permutations.[13]
During the Renaissance, together with the rest of mathematics and the sciences, combinatorics enjoyed a rebirth. Works of Pascal, Newton, Jacob Bernoulli and Euler became foundational in the emerging field. In modern times, the works of J. J. Sylvester (late 19th century) and Percy MacMahon (early 20th century) helped lay the foundation for enumerative and algebraic combinatorics. Graph theory also enjoyed an explosion of interest at the same time, especially in connection with the four color problem.
In the second half of the 20th century, combinatorics enjoyed a rapid growth, which led to establishment of dozens of new journals and conferences in the subject.[14] In part, the growth was spurred by new connections and applications to other fields, ranging from algebra to probability, from functional analysis to number theory, etc. These connections shed the boundaries between combinatorics and parts of mathematics and theoretical computer science, but at the same time led to a partial fragmentation of the field.
Approaches and subfields of combinatorics[edit]
Enumerative combinatorics[edit]




Five binary trees on three vertices, an example of Catalan numbers.


Main article: Enumerative combinatorics
Enumerative combinatorics is the most classical area of combinatorics and concentrates on counting the number of certain combinatorial objects. Although counting the number of elements in a set is a rather broad mathematical problem, many of the problems that arise in applications have a relatively simple combinatorial description. Fibonacci numbers is the basic example of a problem in enumerative combinatorics. The twelvefold way provides a unified framework for counting permutations, combinations and partitions.
Analytic combinatorics[edit]
Main article: Analytic combinatorics
Analytic combinatorics concerns the enumeration of combinatorial structures using tools from complex analysis and probability theory. In contrast with enumerative combinatorics, which uses explicit combinatorial formulae and generating functions to describe the results, analytic combinatorics aims at obtaining asymptotic formulae.
Partition theory[edit]




A plane partition.


Main article: Partition theory
Partition theory studies various enumeration and asymptotic problems related to integer partitions, and is closely related to q-series, special functions and orthogonal polynomials. Originally a part of number theory and analysis, it is now considered a part of combinatorics or an independent field. It incorporates the bijective approach and various tools in analysis and analytic number theory, and has connections with statistical mechanics.
Graph theory[edit]




Petersen graph.


Main article: Graph theory
Graphs are basic objects in combinatorics. The questions range from counting (e.g., the number of graphs on n vertices with k edges) to structural (e.g., which graphs contain Hamiltonian cycles) to algebraic questions (e.g., given a graph G and two numbers x and y, does the Tutte polynomial TG(x,y) have a combinatorial interpretation?). Although there are very strong connections between graph theory and combinatorics, these two are sometimes thought of as separate subjects.[15] This is due to the fact that while combinatorial methods apply to many graph theory problems, the two are generally used to seek solutions to different problems.
Design theory[edit]
Main article: Combinatorial design
Design theory is a study of combinatorial designs, which are collections of subsets with certain intersection properties. Block designs are combinatorial designs of a special type. This area is one of the oldest parts of combinatorics, such as in Kirkman's schoolgirl problem proposed in 1850. The solution of the problem is a special case of a Steiner system, which systems play an important role in the classification of finite simple groups. The area has further connections to coding theory and geometric combinatorics.
Finite geometry[edit]
Main article: Finite geometry
Finite geometry is the study of geometric systems having only a finite number of points. Structures analogous to those found in continuous geometries (Euclidean plane, real projective space, etc.) but defined combinatorially are the main items studied. This area provides a rich source of examples for design theory. It should not be confused with discrete geometry (combinatorial geometry).
Order theory[edit]




Hasse diagram of the powerset of {x,y,z} ordered by inclusion.


Main article: Order theory
Order theory is the study of partially ordered sets, both finite and infinite. Various examples of partial orders appear in algebra, geometry, number theory and throughout combinatorics and graph theory. Notable classes and examples of partial orders include lattices and Boolean algebras.
Matroid theory[edit]
Main article: Matroid theory
Matroid theory abstracts part of geometry. It studies the properties of sets (usually, finite sets) of vectors in a vector space that do not depend on the particular coefficients in a linear dependence relation. Not only the structure but also enumerative properties belong to matroid theory. Matroid theory was introduced by Hassler Whitney and studied as a part of order theory. It is now an independent field of study with a number of connections with other parts of combinatorics.
Extremal combinatorics[edit]
Main article: Extremal combinatorics
Extremal combinatorics studies extremal questions on set systems. The types of questions addressed in this case are about the largest possible graph which satisfies certain properties. For example, the largest triangle-free graph on 2n vertices is a complete bipartite graph Kn,n. Often it is too hard even to find the extremal answer f(n) exactly and one can only give an asymptotic estimate.
Ramsey theory is another part of extremal combinatorics. It states that any sufficiently large configuration will contain some sort of order. It is an advanced generalization of the pigeonhole principle.
Probabilistic combinatorics[edit]




Self-avoiding walk in a square grid graph.


Main article: Probabilistic method
In probabilistic combinatorics, the questions are of the following type: what is the probability of a certain property for a random discrete object, such as a random graph? For instance, what is the average number of triangles in a random graph? Probabilistic methods are also used to determine the existence of combinatorial objects with certain prescribed properties (for which explicit examples might be difficult to find), simply by observing that the probability of randomly selecting an object with those properties is greater than 0. This approach (often referred to as the probabilistic method) proved highly effective in applications to extremal combinatorics and graph theory. A closely related area is the study of finite Markov chains, especially on combinatorial objects. Here again probabilistic tools are used to estimate the mixing time.
Often associated with Paul Erdős, who did the pioneering work on the subject, probabilistic combinatorics was traditionally viewed as a set of tools to study problems in other parts of combinatorics. However, with the growth of applications to analysis of algorithms in computer science, as well as classical probability, additive and probabilistic number theory, the area recently grew to become an independent field of combinatorics.
Algebraic combinatorics[edit]




Young diagram of a partition (5,4,1).


Main article: Algebraic combinatorics
Algebraic combinatorics is an area of mathematics that employs methods of abstract algebra, notably group theory and representation theory, in various combinatorial contexts and, conversely, applies combinatorial techniques to problems in algebra. Algebraic combinatorics is continuously expanding its scope, in both topics and techniques, and can be seen as the area of mathematics where the interaction of combinatorial and algebraic methods is particularly strong and significant.
Combinatorics on words[edit]




Construction of a Thue–Morse infinite word.


Main article: Combinatorics on words
Combinatorics on words deals with formal languages. It arose independently within several branches of mathematics, including number theory, group theory and probability. It has applications to enumerative combinatorics, fractal analysis, theoretical computer science, automata theory and linguistics. While many applications are new, the classical Chomsky–Schützenberger hierarchy of classes of formal grammars is perhaps the best-known result in the field.
Geometric combinatorics[edit]




An icosahedron.


Main article: Geometric combinatorics
Geometric combinatorics is related to convex and discrete geometry, in particular polyhedral combinatorics. It asks, for example, how many faces of each dimension a convex polytope can have. Metric properties of polytopes play an important role as well, e.g. the Cauchy theorem on the rigidity of convex polytopes. Special polytopes are also considered, such as permutohedra, associahedra and Birkhoff polytopes. We should note that combinatorial geometry is an old fashioned name for discrete geometry.
Topological combinatorics[edit]




Splitting a necklace with two cuts.


Main article: Topological combinatorics
Combinatorial analogs of concepts and methods in topology are used to study graph coloring, fair division, partitions, partially ordered sets, decision trees, necklace problems and discrete Morse theory. It should not be confused with combinatorial topology which is an older name for algebraic topology.
Arithmetic combinatorics[edit]
Main article: Arithmetic combinatorics
Arithmetic combinatorics arose out of the interplay between number theory, combinatorics, ergodic theory and harmonic analysis. It is about combinatorial estimates associated with arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division). Additive number theory (sometimes also called additive combinatorics) refers to the special case when only the operations of addition and subtraction are involved. One important technique in arithmetic combinatorics is the ergodic theory of dynamical systems.
Infinitary combinatorics[edit]
Main article: Infinitary combinatorics
Infinitary combinatorics, or combinatorial set theory, is an extension of ideas in combinatorics to infinite sets. It is a part of set theory, an area of mathematical logic, but uses tools and ideas from both set theory and extremal combinatorics.
Gian-Carlo Rota used the name continuous combinatorics[16] to describe geometric probability, since there are many analogies between counting and measure.
Related fields[edit]




Kissing spheres are connected to both coding theory and discrete geometry.


Combinatorial optimization[edit]
Combinatorial optimization is the study of optimization on discrete and combinatorial objects. It started as a part of combinatorics and graph theory, but is now viewed as a branch of applied mathematics and computer science, related to operations research, algorithm theory and computational complexity theory.
Coding theory[edit]
Coding theory started as a part of design theory with early combinatorial constructions of error-correcting codes. The main idea of the subject is to design efficient and reliable methods of data transmission. It is now a large field of study, part of information theory.
Discrete and computational geometry[edit]
Discrete geometry (also called combinatorial geometry) also began as a part of combinatorics, with early results on convex polytopes and kissing numbers. With the emergence of applications of discrete geometry to computational geometry, these two fields partially merged and became a separate field of study. There remain many connections with geometric and topological combinatorics, which themselves can be viewed as outgrowths of the early discrete geometry.
Combinatorics and dynamical systems[edit]
Combinatorial aspects of dynamical systems is another emerging field. Here dynamical systems can be defined on combinatorial objects. See for example graph dynamical system.
Combinatorics and physics[edit]
There are increasing interactions between combinatorics and physics, particularly statistical physics. Examples include an exact solution of the Ising model, and a connection between the Potts model on one hand, and the chromatic and Tutte polynomials on the other hand.
See also[edit]


Discrete mathematics portal



Combinatorial biology
Combinatorial chemistry
Combinatorial data analysis
Combinatorial game theory
Combinatorial group theory
List of combinatorics topics
Phylogenetics

Notes[edit]



^ Pak, Igor. "What is Combinatorics?". Retrieved 1 November 2017. 
^ Ryser 1963, p. 2
^ Mirsky, Leon (1979), "Book Review" (PDF), Bulletin (New Series) of the American Mathematical Society, 1: 380–388 
^ Rota, Gian Carlo (1969). Discrete Thoughts. Birkhaüser. p. 50. ... combinatorial theory has been the mother of several of the more active branches of today's mathematics, which have become independent ... . The typical ... case of this is algebraic topology (formerly known as combinatorial topology) 
^ Björner and Stanley, p. 2
^ Lovász, László (1979). Combinatorial Problems and Exercises. North-Holland. In my opinion, combinatorics is now growing out of this early stage. 
^ Stanley, Richard P.; "Hipparchus, Plutarch, Schröder, and Hough", American Mathematical Monthly 104 (1997), no. 4, 344–350.
^ Habsieger, Laurent; Kazarian, Maxim; and Lando, Sergei; "On the Second Number of Plutarch", American Mathematical Monthly 105 (1998), no. 5, 446.
^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Combinatorics", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .
^ Puttaswamy, Tumkur K. (2000), "The Mathematical Accomplishments of Ancient Indian Mathematicians", in Selin, Helaine, Mathematics Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Mathematics, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, p. 417, ISBN 978-1-4020-0260-1 
^ Biggs, Norman L. (1979). "The Roots of Combinatorics". Historia Mathematica. 6: 109–136. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(79)90074-0. 
^ Maistrov, L. E. (1974), Probability Theory: A Historical Sketch, Academic Press, p. 35, ISBN 9781483218632 . (Translation from 1967 Russian ed.)
^ White, Arthur T.; "Ringing the Cosets", American Mathematical Monthly, 94 (1987), no. 8, 721–746; White, Arthur T.; "Fabian Stedman: The First Group Theorist?", American Mathematical Monthly, 103 (1996), no. 9, 771–778.
^ See Journals in Combinatorics and Graph Theory
^ Sanders, Daniel P.; 2-Digit MSC Comparison Archived 2008-12-31 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Continuous and profinite combinatorics



References[edit]

Björner, Anders; and Stanley, Richard P.; (2010); A Combinatorial Miscellany
Bóna, Miklós; (2011); A Walk Through Combinatorics (3rd Edition). ISBN 978-981-4335-23-2, ISBN 978-981-4460-00-2(pbk)
Graham, Ronald L.; Groetschel, Martin; and Lovász, László; eds. (1996); Handbook of Combinatorics, Volumes 1 and 2. Amsterdam, NL, and Cambridge, MA: Elsevier (North-Holland) and MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-07169-X
Lindner, Charles C.; and Rodger, Christopher A.; eds. (1997); Design Theory, CRC-Press; 1st. edition (October 31, 1997). ISBN 0-8493-3986-3.
Riordan, John (2002) [1958], An Introduction to Combinatorial Analysis, Dover, ISBN 978-0-486-42536-8 
Ryser, Herbert John (1963), Combinatorial Mathematics, The Carus Mathematical Monographs(#14), The Mathematical Association of America 
Stanley, Richard P. (1997, 1999); Enumerative Combinatorics, Volumes 1 and 2, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-55309-1, ISBN 0-521-56069-1
van Lint, Jacobus H.; and Wilson, Richard M.; (2001); A Course in Combinatorics, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80340-3

External links[edit]

Find more aboutCombinatoricsat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote



Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001) [1994], "Combinatorial analysis", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer Science+Business Media B.V. / Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4 
Combinatorial Analysis – an article in Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition
Combinatorics, a MathWorld article with many references.
Combinatorics, from a MathPages.com portal.
The Hyperbook of Combinatorics, a collection of math articles links.
The Two Cultures of Mathematics by W. T. Gowers, article on problem solving vs theory building.
"Glossary of Terms in Combinatorics"
List of Combinatorics Software and Databases







v
t
e


Areas of mathematics






outline
topic lists





Branches




Arithmetic



History of mathematics
Philosophy of mathematics
Philosophy of mathematics education
Information theory
Lie theory
Order theory
Representation theory
Set theory
Category theory
Control theory
Graph theory
Computation





Algebra



Number theory
Elementary
Linear
Multilinear
Abstract
Combinatorics
Group theory





Calculus



Analysis
Differential equations / Dynamical systems
Numerical analysis
Optimization
Functional analysis





Geometry



Discrete
Algebraic
Analytic
Differential
Finite
Topology
Trigonometry





Applied



Probability
Mathematical physics
Mathematical statistics
Statistics
Computer
Game theory
Recreational mathematics
Mathematics and art
Mathematics education
Mathematical logic








Divisions



Pure
Applied
Discrete
Computational








 Category
 Portal
Commons
WikiProject












v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Combinatorics&oldid=808835904"					Categories: CombinatoricsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links