This article is about a genre of dramatic works. For other uses, see Comedy (disambiguation). For the popular meaning of the term "comedy", see Humour.




Thalia, muse of comedy, holding a comic mask - detail of "Muses Sarcophagus", the nine Muses and their attributes; marble, early second century AD, Via Ostiense - Louvre






Charlie Chaplin, a famous comedian


In a modern sense, comedy (from the Greek: κωμῳδία, kōmōidía) refers to any discourse or work generally intended to be humorous or amusing by inducing laughter, especially in theatre, television, film, stand-up comedy, or any other medium of entertainment. The origins of the term are found in Ancient Greece. In the Athenian democracy, the public opinion of voters was influenced by the political satire performed by the comic poets at the theaters.[1] The theatrical genre of Greek comedy can be described as a dramatic performance which pits two groups or societies against each other in an amusing agon or conflict. Northrop Frye depicted these two opposing sides as a "Society of Youth" and a "Society of the Old".[2] A revised view characterizes the essential agon of comedy as a struggle between a relatively powerless youth and the societal conventions that pose obstacles to his hopes. In this struggle, the youth is understood to be constrained by his lack of social authority, and is left with little choice but to take recourse in ruses which engender very dramatic irony which provokes laughter.[3]
Satire and political satire use comedy to portray persons or social institutions as ridiculous or corrupt, thus alienating their audience from the object of their humour. Parody subverts popular genres and forms, critiquing those forms without necessarily condemning them.
Other forms of comedy include screwball comedy, which derives its humour largely from bizarre, surprising (and improbable) situations or characters, and black comedy, which is characterized by a form of humor that includes darker aspects of human behavior or human nature. Similarly scatological humour, sexual humour, and race humour create comedy by violating social conventions or taboos in comic ways. A comedy of manners typically takes as its subject a particular part of society (usually upper class society) and uses humor to parody or satirize the behaviour and mannerisms of its members. Romantic comedy is a popular genre that depicts burgeoning romance in humorous terms and focuses on the foibles of those who are falling in love.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Dionysiac origins, Aristophanes and Aristotle
2.2 Classical Sanskrit Dramas, Plays, and Epics of Ancient India
2.3 Shakespearean and Elizabethan comedy
2.4 19th to early 20th century
2.5 20th century film and television


3 Studies on the theory of the comic
4 Forms
5 Performing arts

5.1 Historical forms
5.2 Plays
5.3 Opera
5.4 Improvisational comedy
5.5 Joke
5.6 Stand-up comedy


6 Events and awards
7 List of comedians
8 Mass media

8.1 Literature
8.2 Film
8.3 Television and radio

8.3.1 Comedy networks




9 See also
10 Footnotes
11 Notations
12 External links



Etymology[edit]




Tragic Comic Masks of Ancient Greek Theatre represented in the Hadrian's Villa mosaic.


The word "comedy" is derived from the Classical Greek κωμῳδία kōmōidía, which is a compound either of κῶμος kômos (revel) or κώμη kṓmē (village) and ᾠδή ōidḗ (singing); it is possible that κῶμος itself is derived from κώμη, and originally meant a village revel. The adjective "comic" (Greek κωμικός kōmikós), which strictly means that which relates to comedy is, in modern usage, generally confined to the sense of "laughter-provoking".[4] Of this, the word came into modern usage through the Latin comoedia and Italian commedia and has, over time, passed through various shades of meaning.[5]
The Greeks and Romans confined their use of the word "comedy" to descriptions of stage-plays with happy endings. Aristotle defined comedy as an imitation of men worse than the average (where tragedy was an imitation of men better than the average). However, the characters portrayed in comedies were not worse than average in every way, only insofar as they are Ridiculous, which is a species of the Ugly. The Ridiculous may be defined as a mistake or deformity not productive of pain or harm to others; the mask, for instance, that excites laughter, is something ugly and distorted without causing pain.[6] In the Middle Ages, the term expanded to include narrative poems with happy endings. It is in this sense that Dante used the term in the title of his poem, La Commedia.
As time progressed, the word came more and more to be associated with any sort of performance intended to cause laughter.[5] During the Middle Ages, the term "comedy" became synonymous with satire, and later with humour in general.
Aristotle's Poetics was translated into Arabic in the medieval Islamic world, where it was elaborated upon by Arabic writers and Islamic philosophers, such as Abu Bischr, and his pupils Al-Farabi, Avicenna, and Averroes. They disassociated comedy from Greek dramatic representation and instead identified it with Arabic poetic themes and forms, such as hija (satirical poetry). They viewed comedy as simply the "art of reprehension", and made no reference to light and cheerful events, or to the troubling beginnings and happy endings associated with classical Greek comedy.
After the Latin translations of the 12th century, the term "comedy" gained a more general meaning in medieval literature.[7]
In the late 20th century, many scholars preferred to use the term laughter to refer to the whole gamut of the comic, in order to avoid the use of ambiguous and problematically defined genres such as the grotesque, irony, and satire.[8][9]
History[edit]
Dionysiac origins, Aristophanes and Aristotle[edit]
See also: Old Comedy, Menander, and Ancient Greek comedy




Roman-era mosaic depicting a scene from Menander's comedy Samia ("The Woman from Samos")


Starting from 425 BCE, Aristophanes, a comic playwright and satirical author of the Ancient Greek Theater wrote 40 comedies, 11 of which survive. Aristophanes developed his type of comedy from the earlier satyr plays, which were often highly obscene.[10] Of the satyr plays the only surviving examples are by Euripides which are much later examples and not representative of the genre.[11] In ancient Greece, comedy originated in bawdy and ribald songs or recitations apropos of phallic processions and fertility festivals or gatherings.[12]
Around 335 BCE, Aristotle, in his work Poetics, stated that comedy originated in Phallic processions and the light treatment of the otherwise base and ugly. He also adds that the origins of comedy are obscure because it was not treated seriously from its inception.[13] However, comedy had its own Muse: Thalia.
Aristotle taught that comedy was generally a positive for society, since it brings forth happiness, which for Aristotle was the ideal state, the final goal in any activity. For Aristotle, a comedy did not need to involve sexual humor. A comedy is about the fortunate arise of a sympathetic character. Aristotle divides comedy into three categories or subgenres: farce, romantic comedy, and satire. On the contrary, Plato taught that comedy is a destruction to the self. He believed that it produces an emotion that overrides rational self-control and learning. In The Republic, he says that the Guardians of the state should avoid laughter, " 'for ordinarily when one abandons himself to violent laughter, his condition provokes a violent reaction.' " Plato says comedy should be tightly controlled if one wants to achieve the ideal state.
Also in Poetics, Aristotle defined Comedy as one of the original four genres of literature. The other three genres are tragedy, epic poetry, and lyric poetry. Literature in general is defined by Aristotle as a mimesis, or imitation of life. Comedy is the third form of literature, being the most divorced from a true mimesis. Tragedy is the truest mimesis, followed by epic poetry, comedy and lyric poetry. The genre of comedy is defined by a certain pattern according to Aristotle's definition. Comedies begin with low or base characters seeking insignificant aims, and end with some accomplishment of the aims which either lightens the initial baseness or reveals the insignificance of the aims.
Classical Sanskrit Dramas, Plays, and Epics of Ancient India[edit]
See also: Sanskrit Drama, Mahabharata, and Bhagavata Purana
By 200 BCE,[14] in ancient Sanskrit drama, Bharata Muni's Natya Shastra defined humour (hāsyam) as one of the nine nava rasas, or principle rasas (emotional responses), which can be inspired in the audience by bhavas, the imitations of emotions that the actors perform. Each rasa was associated with a specific bhavas portrayed on stage. In the case of humour, it was associated with mirth (hasya).
Shakespearean and Elizabethan comedy[edit]




Title page of the first quarto of Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream (1600)


"Comedy", in its Elizabethan usage, had a very different meaning from modern comedy. A Shakespearean comedy is one that has a happy ending, usually involving marriages between the unmarried characters, and a tone and style that is more light-hearted than Shakespeare's other plays.[15]
The Punch and Judy show has roots in the 16th-century Italian commedia dell'arte. The figure of Punch derives from the Neapolitan stock character of Pulcinella.[16] The figure who later became Mr. Punch made his first recorded appearance in England in 1662.[17] Punch and Judy are performed in the spirit of outrageous comedy — often provoking shocked laughter — and are dominated by the anarchic clowning of Mr. Punch.[18] Appearing at a significant period in British history, professor Glyn Edwards states: "[Pulcinella] went down particularly well with Restoration British audiences, fun-starved after years of Puritanism. We soon changed Punch's name, transformed him from a marionette to a hand puppet, and he became, really, a spirit of Britain - a subversive maverick who defies authority, a kind of puppet equivalent to our political cartoons."[17]
19th to early 20th century[edit]
In early 19th century England, pantomime acquired its present form which includes slapstick comedy and featured the first mainstream clown Joseph Grimaldi, while comedy routines also featured heavily in British music hall theatre which became popular in the 1850s.[19] British comedians who honed their skills in music hall sketches include Charlie Chaplin, Stan Laurel and Dan Leno.[20] English music hall comedian and theatre impresario Fred Karno developed a form of sketch comedy without dialogue in the 1890s, and Chaplin and Laurel were among the comedians who worked for his company.[20] Karno was a pioneer of slapstick, and in his biography Laurel stated, "Fred Karno didn't teach Charlie [Chaplin] and me all we know about comedy. He just taught us most of it".[21] Film producer Hal Roach stated: "Fred Karno is not only a genius, he is the man who originated slapstick comedy. We in Hollywood owe much to him."[22] American vaudeville emerged in the 1880s and remained popular until the 1930s, and featured comedians such as W. C. Fields, Buster Keaton and the Marx Brothers.
20th century film and television[edit]




Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis (ca. 1950)






Jim Carrey mugs for the camera






Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Bean






Jackie Chan at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival






Stand-up comedian Margaret Cho






Popov the Clown in 2009






Barry Humphries in character in London as "Dame Edna Everage" on the day of the 2011 Wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton






Jordan Peele at the Peabody awards.


The advent of cinema in the late 19th century, and later radio and television in the 20th century broadened the access of comedians to the general public. Charlie Chaplin, through silent film, became one of the best known faces on earth. The silent tradition lived on well in to the 20th century through mime artists like Marcel Marceau, and the physical comedy of artists like Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Bean. The tradition of the circus clown also continued, with such as Bozo the Clown in the United States and Oleg Popov in Russia. Radio provided new possibilities - with Britain producing the influential Goon Show after the Second World War. American cinema has produced a great number of globally renowned comedy artists, from Laurel and Hardy, the Three Stooges, Abbott and Costello, Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis, as well as Bob Hope during the mid-20th century, to performers like George Carlin, Robin Williams, and Eddie Murphy at the end of the century. Hollywood attracted many international talents like the British comics Peter Sellers, Dudley Moore and Sacha Baron Cohen, Canadian comics Dan Aykroyd, Jim Carrey, and Mike Myers, and the Australian comedian Paul Hogan, famous for Crocodile Dundee. Other centres of creative comic activity have been the cinema of Hong Kong, Bollywood, and French farce.
American television has also been an influential force in world comedy: with American series like M*A*S*H, Seinfeld and The Simpsons achieving large followings around the world. British television comedy also remains influential, with quintessential works including Fawlty Towers, Monty Python, Dad's Army, Blackadder, and The Office. Australian satirist Barry Humphries, whose comic creations include the housewife and "gigastar" Dame Edna Everage, For his delivery of Dadaist and absurdist humour to millions, was described by biographer Anne Pender in 2010 as not only "the most significant theatrical figure of our time ... [but] the most significant comedian to emerge since Charlie Chaplin".[23]
Studies on the theory of the comic[edit]
The phenomena connected with laughter and that which provokes it have been carefully investigated by psychologists. They agree the predominant characteristics are incongruity or contrast in the object and shock or emotional seizure on the part of the subject. It has also been held that the feeling of superiority is an essential factor: thus Thomas Hobbes speaks of laughter as a "sudden glory". Modern investigators have paid much attention to the origin both of laughter and of smiling, as well as the development of the "play instinct" and its emotional expression.
George Meredith said that "One excellent test of the civilization of a country ... I take to be the flourishing of the Comic idea and Comedy; and the test of true Comedy is that it shall awaken thoughtful laughter." Laughter is said to be the cure to being sick. Studies show that people who laugh more often get sick less.[24][25]
American literary theorist Kenneth Burke writes that the "comic frame" in rhetoric is "neither wholly euphemistic, nor wholly debunking—hence it provides the charitable attitude towards people that is required for purposes of persuasion and co-operation, but at the same time maintains our shrewdness concerning the simplicities of ‘cashing in.’" [26] The purpose of the comic frame is to satirize a given circumstance and promote change by doing so. The comic frame makes fun of situations and people, while simultaneously provoking thought.[27] The comic frame does not aim to vilify in its analysis, but rather, rebuke the stupidity and foolery of those involved in the circumstances.[28] For example, on The Daily Show, Jon Stewart uses the "comic frame" to intervene in political arguments, one such way is his sudden contrast of serious news with crude humor. In a segment on President Obama's trip to China Stewart remarks on America's debt to the Chinese government while also having a weak relationship with the country. After depicting this dismal situation, Stewart shifts to speak directly to President Obama, calling upon him to "shine that turd up."[29] For Stewart and his audience, introducing coarse language into what is otherwise a serious commentary on the state of foreign relations serves to frame the segment comically, creating a serious tone underlying the comedic agenda presented by Stewart.
Forms[edit]
Main article: Comedic genres
Comedy may be divided into multiple genres based on the source of humor, the method of delivery, and the context in which it is delivered. The different forms of comedy often overlap, and most comedy can fit into multiple genres. Some of the subgenres of comedy are farce, comedy of manners, burlesque, and satire.
Some comedy apes certain cultural forms: for instance, parody and satire often imitate the conventions of the genre they are parodying or satirizing. For example, in the United States, parodies of newspapers and television news include The Onion, and The Colbert Report; in Australia, shows such as Kath & Kim, Utopia, and Shaun Micallef's Mad As Hell perform the same role.
Self-deprecation is a technique of comedy used by many comedians who focus on their misfortunes and foibles in order to entertain.
Performing arts[edit]


Performing arts




Ballet
Circus skills
Clown
Dance
Magic


Mime
Music
Opera
Puppetry


Speech
Theatre
Ventriloquism







v
t
e





Main article: Comedy (drama)






This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (April 2008)



Historical forms[edit]

Ancient Greek comedy, as practiced by Aristophanes and Menander
Ancient Roman comedy, as practiced by Plautus and Terence
Burlesque, from Music hall and Vaudeville to Performance art
Citizen comedy, as practiced by Thomas Dekker, Thomas Middleton and Ben Jonson
Clowns such as Richard Tarlton, William Kempe, and Robert Armin
Comedy of humours, as practiced by Ben Jonson and George Chapman
Comedy of intrigue, as practiced by Niccolò Machiavelli and Lope de Vega
Comedy of manners, as practiced by Molière, William Wycherley and William Congreve
Comedy of menace, as practiced by David Campton and Harold Pinter
comédie larmoyante or 'tearful comedy', as practiced by Pierre-Claude Nivelle de La Chaussée and Louis-Sébastien Mercier
Commedia dell'arte, as practiced in the twentieth century by Dario Fo, Vsevolod Meyerhold, and Jacques Copeau
Farce, from Georges Feydeau to Joe Orton and Alan Ayckbourn
Jester
Laughing comedy, as practiced by Oliver Goldsmith and Richard Brinsley Sheridan
Restoration comedy, as practiced by George Etherege, Aphra Behn and John Vanbrugh
Sentimental comedy, as practiced by Colley Cibber and Richard Steele
Shakespearean comedy, as practiced by William Shakespeare
Stand-up comedy
Dadaist and Surrealist performance, usually in cabaret form
Theatre of the Absurd, used by some critics to describe Samuel Beckett, Harold Pinter, Jean Genet and Eugène Ionesco[30]
Sketch comedy

Plays[edit]

Comic theatre

Musical comedy and palace



Opera[edit]

Comic opera

Improvisational comedy[edit]

Improvisational theatre
Bouffon comedy
Clowns

Joke[edit]

One-liner joke
Blonde jokes
Shaggy-dog story
Paddy Irishman joke
Polish jokes
Light bulb jokes

Stand-up comedy[edit]
Stand-up comedy is a mode of comic performance in which the performer addresses the audience directly, usually speaking in their own person rather than as a dramatic character.

Impressionist (entertainment)
Alternative comedy
Comedy club
Comedy albums

Events and awards[edit]

American Comedy Awards
British Comedy Awards
Canadian Comedy Awards
Cat Laughs Comedy Festival
The Comedy Festival, in Aspen, formerly the HBO Comedy Arts Festival
Edinburgh Festival Fringe
Edinburgh Comedy Festival
Halifax Comedy Festival
Halloween Howls Comedy Festival
Just for Laughs festival, in Montreal
Leicester Comedy Festival
Mark Twain Prize for American Humor
Melbourne International Comedy Festival
New Zealand International Comedy Festival
New York Underground Comedy Festival
HK International Comedy Festival

List of comedians[edit]

List of stand-up comedians
List of musical comedians
List of Australian comedians
List of British comedians
List of Canadian comedians
List of Finnish comedians
List of German language comedians
List of Indian comedians
List of Italian comedians
List of Mexican comedians
List of Puerto Rican comedians
List of Filipino Comedian

Mass media[edit]


Literature





Major forms




Novel
Poem
Drama
Short story
Novella




Genres




Comedy
Drama
Epic
Erotic
Nonsense
Lyric
Mythopoeia
Romance
Satire
Tragedy
Tragicomedy




Media




Performance

play


Book




Techniques




Prose
Poetry




History and lists




History

modern




Outline
Glossary of terms


Books
Writers
Literary awards

poetry






Discussion




Criticism
Theory (critical theory)
Sociology
Magazines




 Literature portal





v
t
e











This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (April 2008)



Literature[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2010)




Comic novel
Light poetry

Film[edit]

Comedy film

Anarchic comedy film
Gross-out film
Parody film
Romantic comedy film
Screwball comedy film
Slapstick film



Television and radio[edit]

Television comedy

Situation comedy


Radio comedy

Comedy networks[edit]

British sitcom
British comedy
Comedy Central - A television channel devoted strictly to comedy.
Comedy Nights with Kapil - An Indian television program
German television comedy
List of British TV shows remade for the American market
Paramount Comedy (Spain).
Paramount Comedy 1 and 2.
TBS (TV network)
The Comedy Channel (Australia)
The Comedy Channel (UK)
The Comedy Channel (United States) – merged into Comedy Central.
HA! – merged into Comedy Central
The Comedy Network, a Canadian TV channel.
Gold

See also[edit]


Comedy portal



Lists of comedy films
List of comedy television series
List of genres
Women in comedy

Footnotes[edit]


^ Henderson, J. (1993) Comic Hero versus Political Elite pp. 307–19 in Sommerstein, A.H.; S. Halliwell; J. Henderson; B. Zimmerman, eds. (1993). Tragedy, Comedy and the Polis. Bari: Levante Editori. 
^ (Anatomy of Criticism, 1957)
^ Marteinson, 2006
^ Cornford (1934)[page needed]
^ a b Oxford English Dictionary
^ McKeon, Richard. The Basic Works Of Aristotle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2001, p. 1459.
^ Webber, Edwin J. (January 1958). "Comedy as Satire in Hispano-Arabic Spain". Hispanic Review. University of Pennsylvania Press. 26 (1): 1–11. doi:10.2307/470561. JSTOR 470561. 
^ Herman Braet, Guido Latré, Werner Verbeke (2003) Risus mediaevalis: laughter in medieval literature and art p.1 quotation:

The deliberate use by Menard of the term 'le rire' rather than 'l'humour' reflects accurately the current evidency to incorporate all instances of the comic in the analysis, while the classification in genres and fields such as grotesque, humour and even irony or satire always poses problems. The terms humour and laughter are therefore pragmatically used in recent historiography to cover the entire spectrum.


^ Ménard, Philippe (1988) Le rire et le sourire au Moyen Age dans la litterature et les arts. Essai de problématique in Bouché, T. and Charpentier H. (eds., 1988) Le rire au Moyen Âge, Actes du colloque international de Bordeaux, pp.7-30
^ Aristophanes (1996) Lysistrata, Introduction, p.ix, published by Nick Hern Books
^ Reckford, Kenneth J. (1987)Aristophanes' Old-and-new Comedy: Six essays in perspective p.105
^ Cornford, F.M. (1934) The Origin of Attic Comedy pp.3-4 quotation:

That Comedy sprang up and took shape in connection with Dionysiac or Phallic ritual has never been doubted.


^ "Aristotle, Poetics, lines beginning at 1449a". Perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 2012-06-30. 
^ Robert Barton, Annie McGregor. Theatre in Your Life. CengageBrain. p. 218. 
^ Regan, Richard. "Shakespearean comedy"
^  Wheeler, R. Mortimer (1911). "Punch (puppet)". In Chisholm, Hugh. Encyclopædia Britannica. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 648–649. 
^ a b "Punch and Judy around the world". The Telegraph. 11 June 2015. 
^ "Mr Punch celebrates 350 years of puppet anarchy". BBC. 11 June 2015. 
^ Jeffrey Richards (2014). "The Golden Age of Pantomime: Slapstick, Spectacle and Subversion in Victorian England". I.B.Tauris,
^ a b McCabe, John. "Comedy World of Stan Laurel". p. 143. London: Robson Books, 2005, First edition 1975
^ Burton, Alan (2000). Pimple, pranks & pratfalls: British film comedy before 1930. Flicks Books. p. 51. 
^ J. P. Gallagher (1971). "Fred Karno: master of mirth and tears". p. 165. Hale.
^ Meacham, Steve (2010-09-15). "Absurd moments: in the frocks of the dame". Brisbanetimes.com.au. Retrieved 2011-12-20. 
^ "An impolite interview with Lenny Bruce". The Realist (15): 3. February 1960. Retrieved 2011-12-30. 
^ Meredith, George (1987). "Essay on Comedy, Comic Spirit". Encyclopedia of the Self, by Mark Zimmerman. Retrieved 2011-12-30. 
^ http://newantichoicerhetoric.web.unc.edu/the-comedic-frame/
^ http://www.kbjournal.org/biebel
^ http://www.ithaca.edu/hs/history/journal/papers/sp02comedyandtragedy.html
^ Trischa Goodnow Knapp (2011). The Daily Show and Rhetoric: Arguments, Issues, and Strategies. p. 327. Lexington Books, 2011
^ This list was compiled with reference to The Cambridge Guide to Theatre (1998).


Notations[edit]


Aristotle. Poetics. 
Buckham, Philip Wentworth (1827). Theatre of the Greeks. 
Marteinson, Peter (2006). On the Problem of the Comic: A Philosophical Study on the Origins of Laughter. Ottawa: Legas Press.  http://french.chass.utoronto.ca/as-sa/editors/origins.html
Pickard-Cambridge, Sir Arthur Wallace

Dithyramb, Tragedy, and Comedy , 1927.
The Theatre of Dionysus in Athens, 1946.
The Dramatic Festivals of Athens, 1953.


Raskin, Victor (1985). The Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. Springer. ISBN 978-90-277-1821-1. 
Riu, Xavier (1999). Dionysism and Comedy. 
Sourvinou-Inwood, Christiane (2003). Tragedy and Athenian Religion. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0400-2. 
Trypanis, C.A. (1981). Greek Poetry from Homer to Seferis. University of Chicago Press. 
Wiles, David (1991). The Masked Menander: Sign and Meaning in Greek and Roman Performance. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-40135-7. 


External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Comedy.



 Learning materials related to Collaborative play writing at Wikiversity


Find more aboutComedyat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Comedy Documentary Films at All Documentaries
Comedy at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
A Vocabulary for Comedy from a professor at Dallas Baptist University
6 Elements of Comedy by comedian Bobby Schimmel







v
t
e


Comedy



Topics



Comedian
Comedic device
Comedy festival
Comic timing
Farce
Humorist
Humour
Impersonator
Impressionist
Irony
Joke
Prank call
Punch line
Satire
Visual gag
Wit
Word play





Film




Country



American
British
French
Italian





Genre



Horror
Parody
Remarriage
Romance
Science fiction
Screwball
Sex

Italian


Silent
Slapstick
Stoner








Theatre




Country




Europe



Ancient Greek comedy
Comédie-Française
Comédie-Italienne
Corral de comedias
Theatre of ancient Rome





Asia



China

Xiangsheng
Mo lei tau


Japan

Kyōgen
Manzai
Owarai
Rakugo
Sarugaku










Genre



Boulevard theatre
Comedy-drama
Comedy of errors
Comedy of humours
Comedy of manners
Comedy of menace
Commedia dell'arte
Double act
Farce
Improvisational
Macchietta
One-person show
Pantomime
Restoration comedy
Sentimental comedy

Comédie larmoyante


Shadow play
Shakespearean comedy
Sketch comedy
Spex
Stand-up comedy
Street theatre
Theatre of the Absurd
Tragicomedy
Vaudeville





Music &
dance



Ballad opera
Cabaret

Café-chantant
Café-théâtre


Comédie-ballet
Comedy club
Light music
Music hall
Musical theatre
Opéra bouffe
Opera buffa
Opéra comique
Operetta
Revue








Media



Music

Album
Rock


Novel
Radio
Television

Roast
Sitcom







Subgenres



Alternative
Black
Blue
Character
Christian
Cringe
Deadpan (dry humor)
Documentary
Gallows
High / low
Horror
Insult
Observational
Physical
Prop
Shock
Sick
Slapstick

Topics


Surreal
Zombie








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Theatre




Outline of theatre



History



Greek
Roman
Medieval
Commedia dell'arte
English Renaissance
Spanish Golden Age
French Classicism
Neoclassical
Restoration
Augustan
Weimar
Romanticism
Melodrama


Naturalism
Realism
Modernism
Postmodern


19th century
20th century

timeline







Types



Drama
Musical theatre
Comedy
Tragedy
Improvisation





Regions



Persia
India
China
Thailand
Japan
Africa





Stagecraft



Cue
Curtain Call
Rehearsal
Stage
Theatrical constraints
Theatrical superstitions
Technical rehearsal
Technical week
Performance
Lighting design
Sound design
Set construction
Theatrical property
Costume construction





Personnel




Performers



Actor
Dancer
Singer





Management



Stage management
Technical director
production management
house management
company management





Technical



Carpenter (theatre)
Electrician (theatre)
Fly crew
Make-up artist
Property master
Pyrotechnician
Running crew
Spotlight operator
Stagehand
Theatrical Technician
Technical crew
Wardrobe supervisor





Design



Costume Designer
Lighting designer
Scenic designer
Sound Designer
Sound engineer
Video design





Running crew



Call boy
Production manager
Stage manager
Stagehand
Technical director
Theatrical technician
Carpenter
Fly crew
Electrician
Light board operator
Lighting technician
Spotlight operator
A2
Sound operator
Property master
Dresser
Wardrobe supervisor





Musicians



Musical ensemble
Orchestra
Pit orchestra











 Category
 Commons
 Wiktionary
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4031952-0
NDL: 00565704











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comedy&oldid=817583278"					Categories: ComedyHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2011Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles containing Greek-language textArticles needing cleanup from April 2008All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from April 2008Articles to be expanded from April 2010All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers