





This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (August 2017)



For the album by Remedy Drive, see Commodity (album).


Business administration


Management of a business




Accounting


Management accounting
Financial accounting
Financial audit








Business entities


Cooperative
Corporation
Limited liability company
Partnership
Sole proprietorship
State-owned enterprise








Corporate governance


Annual general meeting
Board of directors
Supervisory board
Advisory board
Audit committee








Corporate law


Commercial law
Constitutional documents
Contract
Corporate crime
Corporate liability
Insolvency law
International trade law
Mergers and acquisitions








Economics


Commodity
Public economics
Labour economics
Development economics
International economics
Mixed economy
Planned economy
Econometrics
Environmental economics
Open economy
Market economy
Knowledge economy
Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Economic development
Economic statistics








Finance


Financial statement
Insurance
Factoring
Cash conversion cycle
Insider dealing
Capital budgeting
Commercial bank
Derivative
Financial statement analysis
Financial risk
Public finance
Corporate finance
Managerial finance
International finance
Liquidation
Stock market
Financial market
Tax
Financial institution
Working capital
Venture capital








Marketing


Marketing
Marketing research
Public relations
Sales








Types of management


Asset
Brand
Business intelligence
Business development
Capacity
Change

innovation


Commercial

marketing


Communications
Configuration
Conflict
Content
Customer relationship
Distributed
Earned value
Electronic business
Enterprise resource planning 

management information system


Financial
Human resource 

development


Incident
Integrated
Knowledge
Materials
Network
Office
Operations 

services


Performance
Power
Problem
Process
Product life-cycle
Product
Project
Quality
Records
Resource
Risk 

crisis


Sales
Security
Service
Strategic
Supply chain
Systems

administrator


Talent
Technology








The Organization


Architecture
Behavior
Communication
Culture
Conflict
Development
Engineering
Hierarchy
Patterns
Space
Structure








Trade


Business analysis
Business ethics
Business plan
Business judgment rule
Consumer behaviour
Business operations
International business
Business model
International trade
Business process
Business statistics








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





In economics, a commodity is an economic good or service that has full or substantial fungibility: that is, the market treats instances of the good as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced them.[1] The price of a commodity good is typically determined as a function of its market as a whole: well-established physical commodities have actively traded spot and derivative markets. Most commodities are raw materials, basic resources, or agricultural products, such as iron ore, sugar, or rice.












Yerba mate (left), coffee bean (middle) and tea (right), all used for caffeinated infusions, are commodity cash crops.





Contents


1 Etymology
2 Characteristics
3 Hard and soft commodities
4 Commoditization
5 Global commodities trading company
6 Commodity trade
7 Inventory data
8 Commodification of labor
9 See also
10 Notes
11 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word commodity came into use in English in the 15th century, from the French commodité, "amenity, convenience". Going further back, the French word derives from the Latin commoditas, meaning "suitability, convenience, advantage". The Latin word commodus (from which English gets other words including commodious and accommodate) meant variously "appropriate", "proper measure, time, or condition", and "advantage, benefit".
Characteristics[edit]
In economics, the term commodity is used specifically for economic goods or services that have full or partial but substantial fungibility; that is, the market treats their instances as equivalent or nearly so with no regard to who produced them.[2] Karl Marx described this property as follows: "From the taste of wheat, it is not possible to tell who produced it, a Russian serf, a French peasant or an English capitalist."[3] Petroleum and copper are examples of commodity goods:[4] their supply and demand are a part of one universal market.
Non-commodity items such as stereo systems have many aspects of product differentiation, such as the brand, the user interface and the perceived quality. The demand for one type of stereo may be much larger than demand for another.
The price of a commodity good is typically determined as a function of its market as a whole. Well-established physical commodities have actively traded spot and derivative markets.
Hard and soft commodities[edit]
Soft commodities are goods that are grown, such as wheat, or rice.
Hard commodities are mined. Examples include gold, helium, and oil.
Energy commodities include electricity, gas, coal and oil. Electricity has the particular characteristic that it is usually uneconomical to store, and must therefore be consumed as soon as it is processed.
Commoditization[edit]
Commoditization occurs as a goods or services market loses differentiation across its supply base, often by the diffusion of the intellectual capital necessary to acquire or produce it efficiently. As such, goods that formerly carried premium margins for market participants have become commodities, such as generic pharmaceuticals and DRAM chips. An article in The New York Times cites multivitamin supplements as an example of commoditization; a 50 mg tablet of calcium is of equal value to a consumer no matter what company produces and markets it, and as such, multivitamins are now sold in bulk and are available at any supermarket with little brand differentiation.[5] Following this trend, nanomaterials are emerging from carrying premium profit margins for market participants to a status of commodification.[6]
There is a spectrum of commoditization, rather than a binary distinction of "commodity versus differentiable product". Few products have complete undifferentiability and hence fungibility; even electricity can be differentiated in the market based on its method of generation (e.g., fossil fuel, wind, solar), in markets where energy choice lets a buyer opt (and pay more) for renewable methods if desired. Many products' degree of commoditization depends on the buyer's mentality and means. For example, milk, eggs, and notebook paper are not differentiated by many customers; for them, the product is fungible and lowest price is the main decisive factor in the purchasing choice. Other customers take into consideration other factors besides price, such as environmental sustainability and animal welfare. To these customers, distinctions such as "organic versus not" or "cage free versus not" count toward differentiating brands of milk or eggs, and percentage of recycled content or Forest Stewardship Council certification count toward differentiating brands of notebook paper.
Global commodities trading company[edit]
This is a list of companies trading globally in commodities, descending by size as of October 28, 2011.[7]

Vitol
Glencore International AG
Trafigura
Cargill
Salam Investment
Archer Daniels Midland
Gunvor (company)
Mercuria Energy Group
Noble Group
Louis Dreyfus Group
Bunge Limited
Wilmar International
Olam International

Commodity trade[edit]
Main articles: Futures exchange and Commodity market
In the original and simplified sense, commodities were things of value, of uniform quality, that were produced in large quantities by many different producers; the items from each different producer were considered equivalent. On a commodity exchange, it is the underlying standard stated in the contract that defines the commodity, not any quality inherent in a specific producer's product.
Commodities exchanges include:

Bourse Africa (formerly GBOT)
Bursa Malaysia Derivatives (MDEX)
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME)
Dalian Commodity Exchange (DCE)
Euronext.liffe (LIFFE)
Kansas City Board of Trade (KCBT)
London Metal Exchange (LME)
Marché à Terme International de France (MATIF)
Mercantile Exchange Nepal Limited (MEX)
Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX)
National Commodity and Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX)
National Commodity Exchange Limited (NCEL)
New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX)

Markets for trading commodities can be very efficient, particularly if the division into pools matches demand segments. These markets will quickly respond to changes in supply and demand to find an equilibrium price and quantity. In addition, investors can gain passive exposure to the commodity markets through a commodity price index.
In order to diversify their investments and mitigate the risks associated with inflationary debasement of currencies, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds allocate capital to non-listed assets such as a commodities and commodity-related infrastructure.[8]
Inventory data[edit]
The inventory of commodities, with low inventories typically leading to more volatile future prices and increasing the risk of a "stockout" (inventory exhaustion). According to economist theorists, companies receive a convenience yield by holding inventories of certain commodities. Data on inventories of commodities are not available from one common source, although data is available from various sources. Inventory data on 31 commodities was used in a 2006 study on the relationship between inventories and commodity futures risk premiums.[9]
Commodification of labor[edit]
See also: Labour is not a commodity
In classical political economy and especially in Karl Marx's critique of political economy, a commodity is an object or a good or service ("product" or "activity"[10]) produced by human labour.[11] Objects are external to man.[12] However, some objects attain "use value" to persons in this world, when they are found to be "necessary, useful or pleasant in life,"[13] "Use value" makes an object "an object of human wants,"[14] or is "a means of subsistence in the widest sense."[15]
As society developed, people found that they could trade goods and services for other goods and services. At this stage, these goods and services became "commodities." Commodities are defined as objects which are offered for sale or are "exchanged in a market."[16] In the marketplace, where commodities are sold, "use value" is not helpful in facilitating the sale of commodities. Accordingly, in addition to having use value, commodities must have an "exchange value"—a value that could be expressed in the market.[17]
Prior to Marx, many economists debated as to what elements made up exchange value. Adam Smith maintained that exchange value was made up of rent, profit, labour and the costs of wear and tear on the instruments of husbandry.[18] David Ricardo, a follower of Adam Smith, modified Smith's approach on this point by alleging that labour alone is the content of the exchange value of any good or service.[19] While maintaining that all exchange value in commodities was derived directly from the hands of the people that made the commodity, Ricardo noted that only part of the exchange value of the commodity was paid to the worker who made the commodity. The other part of the value of this particular commodity was labour that was not paid to the worker—unpaid labour. This unpaid labour was retained by the owner of the means of production. In capitalist society, the capitalist owns the means of production and therefore the unpaid labour is retained by the capitalist as rent or as profit. The means of production means the site where the commodity is made, the raw products that are used in the production and the instruments or machines that are used for the production of the commodity.
However, not all commodities are reproducible nor were all commodities originally intended to be sold in the market. These priced goods are also treated as commodities, e.g. human labour-power, works of art and natural resources ("earth itself is an instrument of labour"),[20] even though they may not be produced specifically for the market, or be non-reproducible goods.
Marx's analysis of the commodity is intended to help solve the problem of what establishes the economic value of goods, using the labor theory of value. This problem was extensively debated by Adam Smith, David Ricardo[21] and Karl Rodbertus-Jagetzow among others.
All three of the above-mentioned economists rejected the theory that labour composed 100% of the exchange value of any commodity. In varying degrees, these economists turned to supply and demand to establish the price of commodities. Marx held that the "price" and the "value" of a commodity were not synonymous. Price of any commodity would vary according to the imbalance of supply to demand at any one period of time. The "value" of the same commodity would be consistent and would reflect the amount of labour value used to produce that commodity.
Prior to Marx, economists noted that the problem with using the "quantity of labour" to establish the value of commodities was that the time spent by an unskilled worker would be longer than the time spent on the same commodity by a skilled worker. Thus, under this analysis, the commodity produced by an unskilled worker would be more valuable than the same commodity produced by the skilled worker. Marx pointed out, however, that in society at large, an average amount of time that was necessary to produce the commodity would arise. This average time necessary to produce the commodity Marx called the "socially necessary labour time"[22] Socially necessary labour time was the proper basis on which to base the "exchange value" of a given commodity.
Value and price are not equivalent terms in economics, and theorising the specific relationship of value to market price has been a challenge for both liberal and Marxist economists. However, Marx held that the value and price of any commodity would coincide only when demand and supply were equivalent to each other.
See also[edit]


2000s commodities boom
Commercial off-the-shelf or "commercially available off-the-shelf" (COTS)
Commodification
Commodity (Marxism)
Commodity currency
Commodity fetishism
Commodity market
Commodity money
Commodity price index
List of traded commodities
Standardization
Trade


Notes[edit]


^ "Learn What Commodities Are in These Examples!". 
^ "Learn What Commodities Are in These Examples!". 
^ Karl Marx, "A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29, p. 270.
^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Steven M. Sheffrin (2004). Economics: Principles in action. Pearson / Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-063085-3. 
^ Natasha Singer; Peter Lattman (15 March 2013). "Workout Supplement Challenged". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 March 2013. 
^ C. McGovern, ″Commoditization of nanomaterials″. Nanotechnology Perceptions 6 (2010) 155–178.
^ "Corrected: Commodity Traders: The trillion dollar club". Reuters. Oct 28, 2011. Retrieved 2008-06-12. 
^ M. Nicolas Firzli & Vincent Bazi (2011). "Infrastructure Investments in an Age of Austerity : The Pension and Sovereign Funds Perspective". Revue Analyse Financière, volume 41. . Archived from the original on 17 September 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2011. 
^ Gorton GB et al. (2008). The Fundamentals of Commodity Futures Returns. Yale ICF Working Paper No. 07-08.
^ Karl Marx, "Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 28, 80.
^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I (International Publishers: New York, 1967) p. 38 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35 (International Publishers: New York, 1996) p. 48.
^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I, p. 87 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35, p. 97.
^ Aristotle, Politica (Oxford, 1966) p. 1257.
^ Karl Marx, "Capital in General: The Commodity" contained in the Collected works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29 (International Publishers: New York, 1987) p. 269.
^ Karl Marx, "Capital in General: The Commodity" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 29, p. 269.
^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I p. 36 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35, p. 46.
^ Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Pelican Books: London, 1970) p. 131 and David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books: 1971, London) p. 55.
^ Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Pelican Books: London, 1970) p. 153.
^ David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books: London, 1971) pp. 56-58.
^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I, p. 179 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35, p. 189.
^ David Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (Pelican Books, London, 1971) pp. 56-58.
^ Karl Marx, Capital: Volume I, p. 39 and "Capital" as contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 35, p. 49.


External links[edit]



Look up commodity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Pricing in Electricity Markets: A Mean Reverting Jump Diffusion Model with Seasonality
Collection of current and historical commodities data from Quandl
United Nations Human Rights Council
Conceptual problems in commodity regulation







v
t
e


Commodities and commoditization



Soft commodities




General



Barley
Cocoa
Coffee
Corn
Cotton
Cottonseed oil
Flaxseed
Frozen orange juice
Lumber
Oat
Olive oil
Palm oil
Peanut oil
Potatoes
Rapeseed
Rice
Rye
Rubber
Soybean
Soybean oil
Sugar
Tea
Wheat





Animals
Animal products



Ambergris
Bristle
Butter
Cashmere
Civet
Feathers
Feeder cattle
Lean Hog
Live cattle
Goats
Hide (skin)
Horses
Ivory
Lard
Milk
Musk
Pork bellies

Pork belly futures


Sheep
Silk
Sponges
Tallow
Whalebone
Wool
Wool tops








Hard commodities




Energy



Coal
Compressed hydrogen
Crude oil
Ethanol
Heating oil
Natural gas
Propane
Thorium
Uranium





Industrial metals



Aluminium
Aluminium alloy
Cobalt
Copper
Lead
Molybdenum
Nickel
Steel
Tin
Zinc





Precious metals



Gold
Palladium
Platinum
Silver








Organizations



Commodity market
Futures contract
Futures exchange
List of commodities exchanges
List of futures exchanges





Laws



Commodity Exchange Act





Miscellaneous



Commodification
Commoditization
Commodification of nature
Commodification of the womb
Commodification of water
Commodity status of animals
Fictitious commodities
Heritage commodification
Economic value
Exchange value
Price
Use value/utility








List of traded commodities












v
t
e


Property



By owner



Common

Common land
Communal land
Community


Cooperative
Private
Public
State

Crown property
Crown land







By nature



Croft
Intangible
Intellectual

indigenous


Personal
Tangible

immovable
real







Common resources



Common-pool resource
Digital
Global
Information
Knowledge






Theory



Bundle of rights
Commodity

fictitious commodities


Common good (economics)
Excludability
First possession

appropriation
homestead principle


Free rider problem
Game theory
Georgism
Gift economy
Labor theory of property
Law of rent

rent-seeking


Legal plunder
Natural rights
Ownership

common
customary
self
state


Property rights

primogeniture
usufruct
women's


Right to property
Rivalry
Tragedy of the commons

anticommons







Applications







Acequia (watercourse)
Ejido (agrarian land)
Forest types
Inheritance
Land tenure
Property law

alienation
easement
restraint on alienation
real estate
title







Rights



Air
Fishing
Forest-dwelling (India)
Freedom to roam
Grazing

pannage


Hunting
Land

aboriginal
indigenous
squatting


Littoral
Mineral

Bergregal


Right of way
Water

prior-appropriation
riparian










Disposession/
redistribution



Bioprospecting
Collectivization
Eminent domain
Enclosure
Eviction
Expropriation
Farhud
Forced migration

population transfer


Illegal fishing
Illegal logging
Land reform
Legal plunder
Piracy
Poaching
Primitive accumulation
Privatization
Regulatory taking
Slavery

bride-buying
human trafficking
wage
wife selling


Tax

inheritance
poll
progressive
property


Theft





Scholars
(key work)



Frédéric Bastiat
Ronald Coase
Henry George
Garrett Hardin
David Harvey
John Locke

Two Treatises of Government


Karl Marx
Marcel Mauss

The Gift


John Stuart Mill
Elinor Ostrom
Karl Polanyi

The Great Transformation


Pierre-Joseph Proudhon

What Is Property?


David Ricardo
Murray N. Rothbard

The Ethics of Liberty


Jean-Jacques Rousseau

The Social Contract


Adam Smith

The Wealth of Nations










 Categories: Property
Property law

by country













						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commodity&oldid=816364736"					Categories: CommoditiesCommodities used as an investmentBusiness termsHidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2017All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify