For other uses, see Committee (disambiguation).




Committee room, designed 1901, in Halifax Town Hall


A committee (or "commission" ) is a body of one or more persons that is subordinate to a deliberative assembly. Usually, the assembly sends matters into a committee as a way to explore them more fully than would be possible if the assembly itself were considering them. Committees may have different functions and their type of work differ depending on the type of the organization and its needs.



Contents


1 Purpose

1.1 Functions
1.2 As a tactic for indecision
1.3 Power and authority


2 Procedures

2.1 Commit (motion)
2.2 Recommit
2.3 Variations for full assembly consideration
2.4 Discharge a committee


3 Executive committee
4 Conference committee

4.1 Different use of term


5 Standing committee

5.1 Legislatures
5.2 Examples in organizations


6 Nominating committee
7 Steering committee
8 Special committee
9 Subcommittee
10 Committee of the whole
11 Central Committee
12 See also
13 References



Purpose[edit]
A deliberative assembly may form a committee (or "commission") consisting of one or more persons to assist with the work of the assembly.[1] For larger organizations, much work is done in committees.[2] Committees can be a way to formally draw together people of relevant expertise from different parts of an organization who otherwise would not have a good way to share information and coordinate actions. They may have the advantage of widening viewpoints and sharing out responsibilities. They can also be appointed with experts to recommend actions in matters that require specialized knowledge or technical judgment.
Functions[edit]
Committees can serve several different functions:

Governance
In organizations considered too large for all the members to participate in decisions affecting the organization as a whole, a smaller body, such as a board of directors, is given the power to make decisions, spend money, or take actions. A governance committee is formed as a separate committee to review the performance of the board and board policy as well as nominate candidates for the board.[3]
 Coordination and administration
A large body may have smaller committees with more specialized functions. Examples are an audit committee, an elections committee, a finance committee, a fundraising committee, and a program committee. Large conventions or academic conferences are usually organized by a coordinating committee drawn from the membership of the organization.
 Research and recommendations
Committees may be formed to do research and make recommendations on a potential or planned project or change. For example, an organization considering a major capital investment might create a temporary working committee of several people to review options and make recommendations to upper management or the board of directors.
Discipline
A committee on discipline may be used to handle disciplinary procedures on members of the organization.[4]

As a tactic for indecision[edit]
As a means of public relations by sending sensitive, inconvenient, or irrelevant matters to committees, organizations may bypass, stall, or disacknowledge matters without declaring a formal policy of inaction or indifference. However, this could be considered a dilatory tactic.[5]
Power and authority[edit]
Generally, committees are required to report to their parent body. Committees do not usually have the power to act independently unless the body that created it gives it such power.[2]
Procedures[edit]
When a committee is formed, a chairman (or "chair" or "chairperson") is designated for the committee.[6] Sometimes a vice-chairman (or similar name) is also appointed.[7] It is common for the committee chairman to organize its meetings. Sometimes these meetings are held through videoconferencing or other means if committee members are not able to attend in person, as may be the case if they are in different parts of the country or the world.
The chairman is responsible for running meetings. Duties include keeping the discussion on the appropriate subject, recognizing members to speak, and confirming what the committee has decided (through voting or by unanimous consent). Using Roberts Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR), committees may follow informal procedures (such as not requiring motions if it's clear what is being discussed).[8] The level of formality depends on the size and type of committee, in which sometimes larger committees considering crucial issues may require more formal processes.
Minutes are a record of the decisions at meetings. They can be taken by a person designated as the secretary. For most organizations, committees are not required to keep formal minutes.[8] However, some bodies require that committees take minutes, especially if the committees are public ones subject to open meeting laws.
Committees may meet on a regular basis, such as weekly or more often, or meetings may be called irregularly as the need arises. The frequency of the meetings depend on the work of the committee and the needs of the parent body.
When the committee completes its work, it provides the results in a report to its parent body. The report may include the methods used, the facts uncovered, the conclusions reached, and any recommendations.[9] If the committee is not ready to report, it may provide a partial report or the assembly may discharge the committee of the matter so that the assembly can handle it. Also, if members of the committee are not performing their duties, they may be removed or replaced by the appointing power.[10] Whether the committee continues to exist after presenting its report depends on the type of committee. Generally, committees established by the bylaws or the organization's rules continue to exist, while committees formed for a particular purpose go out of existence after the final report.
Commit (motion)[edit]

Commit (RONR)

Class
Subsidiary motion


In order when another has the floor?
No


Requires second?
Yes


Debatable?
Yes, although debate on the motion must be confined to its merits only, and cannot go into the main question except as necessary for debate of the immediately pending question.


May be reconsidered?
Yes, if committee has not begun consideration of the question. A negative vote on this motion can be reconsidered only until such time as progress in business or debate has made it essentially a new question.


Amendable?
Yes


Vote required
Majority


In parliamentary procedure, the motion to commit (or refer) is used to refer another motion—usually a main motion—to a committee.
A motion to commit should specify to which committee the matter is to be referred, and if the committee is a special committee appointed specifically for purposes of the referred motion, it should also specify the number of committee members and the method of their selection, unless that is specified in the bylaws.[11]
Any proposed amendments to the main motion that are pending at the time the motion is referred to a committee go to the committee as well.[10]
Once referred, but before the committee reports its recommendations back to the assembly, the referred motion may be removed from the committee's consideration by the motion to discharge a committee.
Recommit[edit]
In the United States House of Representatives, a motion to recommit can be made with or without instructions. If the motion is made without instructions, the bill or resolution is simply sent back to the committee. If the motion is made with instructions and the motion is agreed to, the chairman of the committee in question will immediately report the bill or resolution back to the whole House with the new language. In this sense, a motion to recommit with instructions is effectively an amendment.
Variations for full assembly consideration[edit]
In Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR), the motion to commit has three variations which do not turn a question over to a smaller group, but simply permit the assembly's full meeting body to consider it with the greater freedom of debate that is allowed to committees. These forms are to go into a committee of the whole, to go into a quasi committee of the whole, and to consider informally. Passing any of these motions removes the limitations on the number of times a member can speak.[12] The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure has informal consideration, but does not have "committee of the whole" and "quasi committee of the whole".[13]
Discharge a committee[edit]

Discharge a committee (RONR)

Class
Motion that brings a question again before the assembly


In order when another has the floor?
No


Requires second?
Yes


Debatable?
Yes; debate can go into question in hands of the committee


May be reconsidered?
Negative vote only


Amendable?
Yes


In Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, the motion to discharge a committee is used to take a matter out of a committee's hands before the committee has made a final report on it. A committee can use this motion to discharge a subcommittee.[14]
The vote required is a majority vote if the committee has failed to report at the prescribed time or if the assembly is considering a partial report of the committee.[15] Otherwise, it requires a majority vote with previous notice; or a two-thirds vote; or a majority of the entire membership.[15]
Under The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, the assembly that has referred a motion or a matter to a committee may, by a majority vote, withdraw it at any time from the committee, refer it to another committee, or decide the question itself.[16]
Executive committee[edit]

Organizations with a large board of directors (such as international labor unions, large corporations with thousands of stock holders or national and international organizations) may have a smaller body of the board, called an executive committee, handle its business. The executive committee may function more like a board than an actual committee.[17][18] In any case, an executive committee can only be established through a specific provision in the charter or bylaws of the entity (i.e. a board cannot appoint an executive committee without authorization to do so).[17] Members of the executive committee may be elected by the overall franchised membership or by the board, depending on the rules of the organization. However formed, an executive committee only has such powers and authority that the governing documents of the organization give it. In some cases, it may be empowered to act on behalf of the board or organization, while in others, it may only be able to make recommendations.[17]
Conference committee[edit]
Governments at the national level may have a conference committee. A conference committee in a bicameral legislature is responsible for creating a compromise version of a particular bill when each house has passed a different version.
A conference committee in the United States Congress is a temporary panel of negotiators from the House of Representatives and the Senate. Unless one chamber decides to accept the other's original bill, the compromise version must pass both chambers after leaving the conference committee. The committee is usually composed of the senior members of the standing committees that originally considered the legislation in each chamber.
Other countries that use conference committees include France, Germany, Japan, and Switzerland.[19] In Canada, conference committees have been unused since 1947.[20]
Different use of term[edit]
In organizations, the term "conference committee" may have a different meaning. This meaning may be associated with the conferences, or conventions, that the organization puts together. The committees that are responsible for organizing such events may be called "conference committees".
Standing committee[edit]

A standing committee is a subunit of a political or deliberative body established in a permanent fashion to aid the parent assembly in accomplishing its duties. A standing committee is granted its scope and powers over a particular area of business by the governing documents.[21] Standing committees meet on a regular or irregular basis depending on their function, and retain any power or oversight originally given them until subsequent official actions of the governing body (through changes to law or by-laws) disbands the committee.
Legislatures[edit]
Most governmental legislative committees are standing committees. The phrase is used in the legislatures of the following countries:

Australia

Australian House of Representatives committees
Australian Senate committees


Canada

List of committees of the Canadian House of Commons
Standing committee (Canada)


China

Standing Committee of the National People's Congress


Iceland

List of standing committees of the Icelandic parliament


India

Standing committee (India)


Malaysia

Dewan Rakyat committees
Dewan Negara committees


United Kingdom

Public bill committee


United States

Standing committee (United States Congress)



Under the laws of the United States of America, a standing committee is a Congressional committee permanently authorized by United States House of Representatives and United States Senate rules. The Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 greatly reduced the number of committees, and set up the legislative committee structure still in use today, as modified by authorized changes via the orderly mechanism of rules changes.
Examples in organizations[edit]
Examples of standing committees in organizations are an audit committee, an elections committee, a finance committee, a fundraising committee, a governance committee, and a program committee. Typically, the standing committees perform their work throughout the year and present their reports at an annual meeting of the organization.[22] These committees continue to exist after presenting their reports, although the membership in the committees may change.
Nominating committee[edit]
A nominating committee (or nominations committee) is a group formed for the purpose of nominating candidates for office or the board in an organization.[23] It may consist of members from inside the organization. Sometimes a governance committee takes the role of a nominating committee. Depending on the organization, this committee may be empowered to actively seek out candidates or may only have the power to receive nominations from members and verify that the candidates are eligible.
A nominating committee works similarly to an electoral college, the main difference being that the available candidates, either nominated or "written in" outside of the committee's choices, are then voted into office by the membership. It is a part of governance methods often employed by corporate bodies, business entities, and social and sporting groups, especially clubs. The intention is that they be made up of qualified and knowledgeable people representing the best interests of the membership. In the case of business entities, their directors will often be brought in from outside, and receive a benefit for their expertise.
In the context of nominations for awards, a nominating committee can also be formed for the purpose of nominating persons or things held up for judgment by others as to their comparative quality or value, especially for the purpose of bestowing awards in the arts, or in application to industry's products and services. The objective being to update, set, and maintain high and possibly new standards.
Steering committee[edit]

A steering committee is a committee that provides guidance, direction and control to a project within an organization.[24] The term is derived from the steering mechanism that changes the steering angle of a vehicle's wheels.
Project steering committees are frequently used for guiding and monitoring IT projects in large organizations, as part of project governance. The functions of the committee might include building a business case for the project, planning, providing assistance and guidance, monitoring the progress, controlling the project scope and resolving conflicts.
As with other committees, the specific duties and role of the steering committee vary among organizations.
Special committee[edit]
See also: Select committee
A special committee (or working, select, or ad hoc committee) is established to accomplish a particular task or to oversee a specific area in need of control or oversight.[25] Many are research or coordination committees in type or purpose, and are temporary. Some are a sub-group of a larger society with a particular area of interest which are organized to meet and discuss matters pertaining to their interests. For example, a group of astronomers might be organized to discuss how to get the larger society to address near earth objects. A subgroup of engineers and scientists of a large project's development team could be organized to solve some particular issue with offsetting considerations and trade-offs. Once the committee makes its final report to its parent body, the special committee ceases to exist.[25]
Subcommittee[edit]
A committee that is a subset of a larger committee is called a subcommittee. Committees that have a large workload may form subcommittees to further divide the work. Subcommittees report to the parent committee and not to the general assembly.[8][26]
Committee of the whole[edit]
Main article: Committee of the whole
When the entire assembly meets as a committee to discuss or debate, this is called a "committee of the whole". This is not an actual committee but a procedural device that is more commonly used in legislative bodies.
Central Committee[edit]
Central Committee was the common designation of a standing administrative body of communist parties, analogous to a board of directors, whether ruling or non-ruling in the 20th century and of surviving communist states in the 21st century. In such party organizations the committee would typically be made up of delegates elected at a party congress. In those states where it constituted the state power, the Central Committee made decisions for the party between congresses, and usually was (at least nominally) responsible for electing the Politburo. In non-ruling Communist parties, the Central Committee is usually understood by the party membership to be the ultimate decision-making authority between Congresses once the process of democratic centralism has led to an agreed-upon position
See also[edit]

Caucus
List of Committees of the United Kingdom Parliament
List of IEC Technical Committees
List of the Czech Republic Senate committees
Standing Committees of the European Parliament
United States congressional committee
Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (Saudi Arabia)
Revolutionary committee (disambiguation)
Popular Committees (disambiguation)

References[edit]


^ Robert, Henry M.; et al. (2011). Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (11th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press. p. 489. ISBN 978-0-306-82020-5. 
^ a b Robert 2011, p. 490
^ Walker, Dick; Bauser, John (April 2012). "So You Need (to Improve) a Governance Committee?". guidestar.org. GuideStar. Retrieved 2015-12-17. 
^ Robert 2011, p. 669
^ Robert 2011, p. 172
^ Robert 2011, p. 175
^ Robert 2011, p. 176
^ a b c Robert III, Henry M.; et al. (2011). Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised In Brief (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-306-82019-9. Archived from the original on 2017-08-11. 
^ Robert III 2011, p. 164
^ a b Robert 2011, p. 177
^ Robert 2011, p. 171
^ Robert 2011, p. 168
^ Sturgis, Alice (2001). The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, 4th ed., p. 232, 233, 236
^ Robert 2011, pp. 310–311
^ a b Robert 2011, p. 312
^ Sturgis, Alice (2001). The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, 4th ed., p. 57
^ a b c Robert 2011, p. 485
^ Robert III 2011, p. 157
^ Tsebelis, George; Money, Jeannette (1997). Bicameralism. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 178–179. ISBN 9780521589727. 
^ Hays, Hon. Dan (Autumn 2008). "Reviving Conference Committees". revparl.ca. Canadian Parliamentary Review. Retrieved 2015-12-21. 
^ Robert 2011, p. 491
^ Robert 2011, p. 502
^ Robert 2011, p. 433
^ Mcleod (2008). Management Information Systems (10 ed.). Pearson Education. p. 201. ISBN 978-81-317-1949-7. 
^ a b Robert 2011, p. 492
^ Robert 2011, p. 497








v
t
e


Parliamentary procedure



Major concepts



History of parliamentary procedure
Principles of parliamentary procedure
Deliberative assembly
Committee
Session
Quorum
Chair
Floor
Recognition
Motion
Second
Debate
Main motion
Order of business
Minutes
Voting methods in deliberative assemblies
Majority
Unanimous consent





Subsidiary motions



Postpone indefinitely
Amend
Commit
Postpone to a certain time
Limit or extend limits of debate
Previous question
Cloture
Lay on the table





Privileged motions



Call for the orders of the day
Raise a question of privilege
Recess
Adjourn
Fix the time to which to adjourn





Incidental motions



Point of order
Appeal
Suspend the rules
Objection to the consideration of a question
Division of a question
Consideration by paragraph or seriatim
Division of the assembly
Motions relating to methods of voting and the polls
Motions relating to nominations
Request to be excused from a duty
Requests and inquiries (Parliamentary inquiry, Request for information, Request for permission to withdraw or modify a motion, Request to read papers, Request for any other privilege)





Motions that bring a question
again before the assembly



Take from the table
Rescind, repeal, annul or amend something previously adopted
Discharge a committee
Reconsider





Legislative procedures



Call of the house
Hoist
Motion to pass on
Recall of Parliament





Disciplinary procedures



Censure
Declare the chair vacant
Impeach
Naming





Parliamentary authorities



Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR)
The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure (TSC or Sturgis)
Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure
Riddick's Rules of Procedure
Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure
Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice
Bourinot's Rules of Order
Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms
Morin code









Authority control



GND: 4122855-8
NDL: 00564008











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Committee&oldid=813977041"					Categories: Subsidiary motionsMotions that bring a question again before the assemblyHuman communicationCommitteesLegislaturesMeetingsParliamentary procedurePolitical communicationLawHidden categories: Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers