For other uses, see Hardware.




PDP-11 CPU board


Computer hardware is the physical parts or components of a computer, such as the monitor, keyboard, computer data storage, graphic card, sound card and motherboard.[1] By contrast, software is instructions that can be stored and ran by hardware.
Hardware is directed by the software to execute any command or instruction. A combination of hardware and software forms a usable computing system.



Contents


1 Von Neumann architecture
2 Sales
3 Different systems

3.1 Personal computer

3.1.1 Case
3.1.2 Power supply
3.1.3 Motherboard
3.1.4 Expansion cards
3.1.5 Storage devices

3.1.5.1 Fixed media
3.1.5.2 Removable media


3.1.6 Input and output peripherals

3.1.6.1 Input
3.1.6.2 Output device




3.2 Mainframe computer
3.3 Departmental computing
3.4 Supercomputer


4 Hardware upgrade
5 Recycling

5.1 Toxic computer components
5.2 Environmental effects
5.3 National services


6 See also
7 Sources
8 External links



Von Neumann architecture[edit]
Main article: Von Neumann architecture




Von Neumann architecture scheme


The template for all modern computers is the Von Neumann architecture, detailed in a 1945 paper by Hungarian mathematician John von Neumann. This describes a design architecture for an electronic digital computer with subdivisions of a processing unit consisting of an arithmetic logic unit and processor registers, a control unit containing an instruction register and program counter, a memory to store both data and instructions, external mass storage, and input and output mechanisms.[2] The meaning of the term has evolved to mean a stored-program computer in which an instruction fetch and a data operation cannot occur at the same time because they share a common bus. This is referred to as the Von Neumann bottleneck and often limits the performance of the system.[3]
Sales[edit]
For the third consecutive year, U.S. business-to-business channel sales (sales through distributors and commercial resellers) increased, ending 2013 up nearly 6 percent at $61.7 billion. The impressive growth was the fastest sales increase since the end of the recession. Sales growth accelerated in the second half of the year peaking in fourth quarter with a 6.9 percent increase over the fourth quarter of 2012.[4]
Different systems[edit]
There are a number of different types of computer system in use today.
Personal computer[edit]




Basic hardware components of a modern personal computer, including a monitor, a motherboard, a CPU, a RAM, two expansion cards, a power supply, an optical disc drive, a hard disk drive, a keyboard and a mouse






Inside a custom-built computer: power supply at the bottom has its own cooling fan


The personal computer, also known as the PC, is one of the most common types of computer due to its versatility and relatively low price. Laptops are generally very similar, although they may use lower-power or reduced size components, thus lower performance.
Case[edit]
Main article: Computer case
The computer case encloses most of the components of the system. It provides mechanical support and protection for internal elements such as the motherboard, disk drives, and power supplies, and controls and directs the flow of cooling air over internal components. The case is also part of the system to control electromagnetic interference radiated by the computer, and protects internal parts from electrostatic discharge. Large tower cases provide extra internal space for multiple disk drives or other peripherals and usually stand on the floor, while desktop cases provide less expansion room. All-in-one style designs from Apple, namely the iMac, and similar types, include a video display built into the same case. Portable and laptop computers require cases that provide impact protection for the unit. A current development in laptop computers is a detachable keyboard, which allows the system to be configured as a touch-screen tablet. Hobbyists may decorate the cases with colored lights, paint, or other features, in an activity called case modding.
Power supply[edit]
Main article: Power supply unit (computer)
A power supply unit (PSU) converts alternating current (AC) electric power to low-voltage DC power for the internal components of the computer. Laptops are capable of running from a built-in battery, normally for a period of hours.[5]
Motherboard[edit]
Main article: Motherboard
The motherboard is the main component of a computer. It is a board with integrated circuitry that connects the other parts of the computer including the CPU, the RAM, the disk drives (CD, DVD, hard disk, or any others) as well as any peripherals connected via the ports or the expansion slots.
Components directly attached to or to part of the motherboard include:

The CPU (central processing unit), which performs most of the calculations which enable a computer to function, and is sometimes referred to as the brain of the computer. It is usually cooled by a heatsink and fan, or water-cooling system. Most newer CPUs include an on-die Graphics Processing Unit (GPU). The clock speed of CPUs governs how fast it executes instructions, and is measured in GHz; typical values lie between 1 GHz and 5 GHz. Many modern computers have the option to overclock the CPU which enhances performance at the expense of greater thermal output and thus a need for improved cooling.
The chipset, which includes the north bridge, mediates communication between the CPU and the other components of the system, including main memory.
Random-access memory (RAM), which stores the code and data that are being actively accessed by the CPU. For example, when a web browser is opened on the computer it takes up memory; this is stored in the RAM until the web browser is closed. RAM usually comes on DIMMs in the sizes 2GB, 4GB, and 8GB, but can be much larger.
Read-only memory (ROM), which stores the BIOS that runs when the computer is powered on or otherwise begins execution, a process known as Bootstrapping, or "booting" or "booting up". The BIOS (Basic Input Output System) includes boot firmware and power management firmware. Newer motherboards use Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) instead of BIOS.
Buses that connect the CPU to various internal components and to expand cards for graphics and sound.
The CMOS battery, which powers the memory for date and time in the BIOS chip. This battery is generally a watch battery.
The video card (also known as the graphics card), which processes computer graphics. More powerful graphics cards are better suited to handle strenuous tasks, such as playing intensive video games.

Expansion cards[edit]
Main article: Expansion card
An expansion card in computing is a printed circuit board that can be inserted into an expansion slot of a computer motherboard or backplane to add functionality to a computer system via the expansion bus. Expansions cards can be used to obtain or expand on features not offered by the motherboard.
Storage devices[edit]
Main article: Computer data storage
A storage device is any computing hardware and digital media that is used for storing, porting and extracting data files and objects. It can hold and store information both temporarily and permanently, and can be internal or external to a computer, server or any similar computing device. Data storage is a core function and fundamental component of computers.
Fixed media[edit]
Data is stored by a computer using a variety of media. Hard disk drives are found in virtually all older computers, due to their high capacity and low cost, but solid-state drives are faster and more power efficient, although currently more expensive than hard drives in terms of dollar per gigabyte,[6] so are often found in personal computers built post-2007.[7] Some systems may use a disk array controller for greater performance or reliability.
Removable media[edit]
To transfer data between computers, a USB flash drive or optical disc may be used. Their usefulness depends on being readable by other systems; the majority of machines have an optical disk drive, and virtually all have at least one USB port.
Input and output peripherals[edit]
Main article: Peripheral
Input and output devices are typically housed externally to the main computer chassis. The following are either standard or very common to many computer systems.
Input[edit]
Input devices allow the user to enter information into the system, or control its operation. Most personal computers have a mouse and keyboard, but laptop systems typically use a touchpad instead of a mouse. Other input devices include webcams, microphones, joysticks, and image scanners.
Output device[edit]
Output devices display information in a human readable form. Such devices could include printers, speakers, monitors or a Braille embosser.
Mainframe computer[edit]
Main article: Mainframe Computer
A mainframe computer is a much larger computer that typically fills a room and may cost many hundreds or thousands of times as much as a personal computer. They are designed to perform large numbers of calculations for governments and large enterprises.




An IBM System z9 mainframe


Departmental computing[edit]
Main article: Minicomputer
In the 1960s and 1970s, more and more departments started to use cheaper and dedicated systems for specific purposes like process control and laboratory automation.
Supercomputer[edit]
Main article: Supercomputer
A supercomputer is superficially similar to a mainframe, but is instead intended for extremely demanding computational tasks. As of June 2016[update], the fastest supercomputer in the world is the Sunway TaihuLight, in Jiangsu, China.[8]
The term supercomputer does not refer to a specific technology. Rather it indicates the fastest computations available at any given time. In mid 2011, the fastest supercomputers boasted speeds exceeding one petaflop, or 1 quadrillion (10^15 or 1,000 trillion) floating point operations per second. Super computers are fast but extremely costly so they are generally used by large organizations to execute computationally demanding tasks involving large data sets. Super computers typically run military and scientific applications. Although they cost millions of dollars, they are also being used for commercial applications where huge amounts of data must be analyzed. For example, large banks employ supercomputers to calculate the risks and returns of various investment strategies, and healthcare organizations use them to analyze giant databases of patient data to determine optimal treatments for various diseases and problems incurring to the country.
Hardware upgrade[edit]
When using computer hardware, an upgrade means adding new hardware to a computer that improves its performance, adds capacity or new features. For example, a user could perform a hardware upgrade to replace the hard drive with a SSD to get a boost in performance or increase the amount of files that may be stored. Also, the user could increase the RAM so the computer may run more smoothly. The user could add a USB 3.0 expansion card in order to fully use USB 3.0 devices, or could upgrade the GPU for extra rendering power. Performing such hardware upgrades may be necessary for older computers to meet a programs' system requirements.
Recycling[edit]







Because computer parts contain hazardous materials, there is a growing movement to recycle old and outdated parts.[9] Computer hardware contain dangerous chemicals such as: lead, mercury, nickel, and cadmium. According to the EPA these e-wastes have a harmful effect on the environment unless they are disposed of properly. Making hardware requires energy, and recycling parts will reduce air pollution, water pollution, as well as greenhouse gas emissions.[10] Disposing unauthorized computer equipment is in fact illegal. Legislation makes it mandatory to recycle computers through the government approved facilities. Recycling a computer can be made easier by taking out certain reusable parts. For example, the RAM, DVD drive, the graphics card, hard drive or SSD, and other similar removable parts can be reused.
Toxic computer components[edit]
The central processing unit contains many toxic materials. It contains lead and chromium in the metal plates. Resistors, semi-conductors, infrared detectors, stabilizers, cables, and wires contain cadmium. The circuit boards in a computer contain mercury, and chromium.[11] When these types of materials, and chemicals are disposed improperly will become hazardous for the environment.
Environmental effects[edit]
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency only around 15% of the e-waste actually is recycled. When e-waste byproducts leach into ground water are burned or get mishandled during recycling it causes harm. Health problems associated with such toxins include impaired mental development, cancer, and damage to the lungs, liver, and kidneys.[12] That's why even wires have to be recycled. Different companies have different techniques to recycle a wire. The most popular one is the grinder that separates the copper wires form the plastic/rubber casing. When the processes is done there are two different piles left; one containing the copper powder, and the other containing plastic/rubber pieces.[13] Computer monitors, mice, and keyboards all have a similar way of being recycled. For example, first each of the parts are taken apart then all of the inner parts get separated and placed into its own bin.[14]
National services[edit]
Recycling a computer is made easier by a few of the national services, such as Dell and Apple. Both companies will take back the computer of their make or any other make. Otherwise a computer can be donated to Computer Aid International which is an organization that recycles and refurbishes old computers for hospitals, schools, universities, etc.[15]
See also[edit]


Information technology portal



Computer architecture
Electronic hardware
Glossary of computer hardware terms
History of computing hardware
List of computer hardware manufacturers
Open-source computing hardware

Sources[edit]


^ "Parts of computer". Microsoft. Retrieved 5 December 2013. 
^ von Neumann, John (1945). "First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" (PDF). 
^ Markgraf, Joey D. (2007). "The Von Neumann bottleneck". Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 24 August 2011. 
^ "US B2B Channel sales reach nearly $62 Billion in 2013, According to The NPD Group". NPD Group. 4 February 2014. 
^ "How long should a laptop battery last?". Computer Hope. Retrieved 9 December 2013. 
^ Domingo, Joel. "SSD vs. HDD: What's the Difference?". PCMag. Retrieved 24 March 2017. 
^ Edwards, Benj. "Evolution of the Solid-State Drive". PCWorld. Retrieved 24 March 2017. 
^ Alba, Davey. "China's Tianhe-2 Caps Top 10 Supercomputers". IEEE. Retrieved 9 December 2013. 
^ "How to recycle your old computer". Digital Trends. 2016-12-18. Retrieved 2017-04-18. 
^ Inc, Chris Keenan - Newtech Recycling. "Newtech Recycling Specializes in Computer Disposal, Laptop Disposal, Desktop Disposal Mainframe Disposal and Server Disposal". www.newtechrecycling.com. Retrieved 2017-04-18. 
^ "The Toxic Components of Computers and Monitors". Retrieved 2017-04-26. 
^ "What's Going On with Electronic Waste? – Electronics TakeBack Coalition". Retrieved 2017-04-26. 
^ "Wire Recycling". All-Recycling-Facts.com. Retrieved 2017-05-05. 
^ "Computer equipment recycling – Essential Guide". ComputerWeekly. Retrieved 2017-05-08. 
^ Schofield, Jack (2015-02-19). "How can I safely recycle my old PCs?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2017-04-26. 


External links[edit]

 Media related to Computer hardware at Wikimedia Commons
 Learning materials related to Computer hardware at Wikiversity







v
t
e


Basic computer components



Input devices



Keyboard
Image scanner
Microphone
Pointing device

Graphics tablet
Joystick
Light pen
Mouse

Optical


Pointing stick
Touchpad
Touchscreen
Trackball


Webcam

Softcam


Refreshable braille display





Output devices



Monitor
Refreshable braille display
Printer
Speakers
Plotter





Removable
data storage



Optical disc

CD
DVD
Blu-ray


Disk pack
Floppy disk
Memory card
USB flash drive





Computer case



Central processing unit (CPU)
HDD / SSD / SSHD
Motherboard
Network interface controller
Power supply
Random-access memory (RAM)
Sound card
Video card
Fax modem
Expansion card





Ports



Ethernet
FireWire (IEEE 1394)
Parallel port
Serial port
PS/2 port
USB
Thunderbolt
HDMI / DVI / VGA
eSATA
Audio jack












v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons









Authority control



GND: 4023422-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_hardware&oldid=816846727"					Categories: Computer hardwareDigital electronicsHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers