

Software development


Core activities




Processes
Requirements
Design
Engineering
Construction
Testing
Debugging
Deployment
Maintenance




Paradigms and models




Agile
Cleanroom
Incremental
Prototyping
Spiral
Waterfall




Methodologies and frameworks




DevOps
DSDM
FDD
IID
Kanban
Lean SD
MDD
MSF
PSP
RAD
SAFe
Scrum
SEMAT
TSP
UP
V-Model
XP




Supporting disciplines




Configuration management
Documentation
Software quality assurance (SQA)
Project management
User experience




Practices




ATDD
BDD
CCO
CI
CD
DDD
PP
Stand-up
TDD




Tools




Compiler
Debugger
Profiler
GUI designer
Modeling
IDE
Build automation
Release automation
Infrastructure as Code
Testing




Standards and BOKs




CMMI
IEEE standards
ISO 9001
ISO/IEC standards
SWEBOK
PMBOK
BABOK







v
t
e





Computer programming (often shortened to programming) is a process that leads from an original formulation of a computing problem to executable computer programs. Programming involves activities such as analysis, developing understanding, generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation (commonly referred to as coding[1][2]) of algorithms in a target programming language. Source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate performing a specific task or solving a given problem. The process of programming thus often requires expertise in many different subjects, including knowledge of the application domain, specialized algorithms, and formal logic.
Related tasks include testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code, implementation of the build system, and management of derived artifacts such as machine code of computer programs. These might be considered part of the programming process, but often the term software development is used for this larger process with the term programming, implementation, or coding reserved for the actual writing of source code. Software engineering combines engineering techniques with software development practices.



Contents


1 History
2 Modern programming

2.1 Quality requirements
2.2 Readability of source code
2.3 Algorithmic complexity
2.4 Methodologies
2.5 Measuring language usage
2.6 Debugging


3 Programming languages
4 Programmers
5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



History[edit]
See also: History of programming languages




Ada Lovelace, whose notes added to the end of Luigi Menabrea's paper included the first algorithm designed for processing by an Analytical Engine. She is often recognized as history's first computer programmer.


Programmable devices have existed at least as far back as 1206 AD, when the automata of Al-Jazari were programmable, via pegs and cams, to play various rhythms and drum patterns;[3] and the 1801 Jacquard loom could produce entirely different weaves by changing the "program" - a series of pasteboard cards with holes punched in them.
However, the first computer program is generally dated to 1843, when mathematician Ada Lovelace published an algorithm to calculate a sequence of Bernoulli numbers, intended to be carried out by Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine.[4]




Data and instructions were once stored on external punched cards, which were kept in order and arranged in program decks.


In the 1880s Herman Hollerith invented the concept of storing data in machine-readable form.[5] Later a control panel (plugboard) added to his 1906 Type I Tabulator allowed it to be programmed for different jobs, and by the late 1940s, unit record equipment such as the IBM 602 and IBM 604, were programmed by control panels in a similar way; as were the first electronic computers. However, with the concept of the stored-program computers introduced in 1949, both programs and data were stored and manipulated in the same way in computer memory.






The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Women had a crucial role in computer programming from the beginning, the first computer programmers were women [quotation needed]. Computer programming was considered low-skilled and was low-waged, many assumed the coding process was trivial and mechanical, work that could be given to women. Soon, female coders became involved with the intellectual processes which was originally done by the male planners. In the 1960s, computer companies, like IBM, began to make low-cost computers. While these computers could be mass-produced, the software systems could not. Companies became in need of programmers, who had to solve varied and complex problems. This began a new appreciation for programmers, increased demand for their services went hand in hand with the rise of their salaries This boost of both the status and pay for computer programmers attracted a lot of men to computer programming.[6]
Machine code was the language of early programs, written in the instruction set of the particular machine, often in binary notation. Assembly languages were soon developed that let the programmer specify instruction in a text format, (e.g., ADD X, TOTAL), with abbreviations for each operation code and meaningful names for specifying addresses. However, because an assembly language is little more than a different notation for a machine language, any two machines with different instruction sets also have different assembly languages.




Wired control panel for an IBM 402 Accounting Machine.


High-level languages allow the programmer to write programs in terms that are more abstract, and less bound to the underlying hardware. They harness the power of computers to make programming easier[7] by allowing programmers to specify calculations by entering a formula directly (e.g., Y = X*2 + 5*X + 9). FORTRAN, the first widely used high-level language to have a functional implementation, came out in 1957[8] and many other languages were soon developed - in particular, COBOL aimed at commercial data processing, and Lisp for computer research.
Programs were mostly still entered using punched cards or paper tape. See computer programming in the punch card era. By the late 1960s, data storage devices and computer terminals became inexpensive enough that programs could be created by typing directly into the computers. Text editors were developed that allowed changes and corrections to be made much more easily than with punched cards.
Modern programming[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Quality requirements[edit]
Whatever the approach to development may be, the final program must satisfy some fundamental properties. The following properties are among the most important:

Reliability: how often the results of a program are correct. This depends on conceptual correctness of algorithms, and minimization of programming mistakes, such as mistakes in resource management (e.g., buffer overflows and race conditions) and logic errors (such as division by zero or off-by-one errors).
Robustness: how well a program anticipates problems due to errors (not bugs). This includes situations such as incorrect, inappropriate or corrupt data, unavailability of needed resources such as memory, operating system services and network connections, user error, and unexpected power outages.
Usability: the ergonomics of a program: the ease with which a person can use the program for its intended purpose or in some cases even unanticipated purposes. Such issues can make or break its success even regardless of other issues. This involves a wide range of textual, graphical and sometimes hardware elements that improve the clarity, intuitiveness, cohesiveness and completeness of a program's user interface.
Portability: the range of computer hardware and operating system platforms on which the source code of a program can be compiled/interpreted and run. This depends on differences in the programming facilities provided by the different platforms, including hardware and operating system resources, expected behavior of the hardware and operating system, and availability of platform specific compilers (and sometimes libraries) for the language of the source code.
Maintainability: the ease with which a program can be modified by its present or future developers in order to make improvements or customizations, fix bugs and security holes, or adapt it to new environments. Good practices[9] during initial development make the difference in this regard. This quality may not be directly apparent to the end user but it can significantly affect the fate of a program over the long term.
Efficiency/performance: Measure of system resources a program consumes (processor time, memory space, slow devices such as disks, network bandwidth and to some extent even user interaction): the less, the better. This also includes careful management of resources, for example cleaning up temporary files and eliminating memory leaks.

Readability of source code[edit]
In computer programming, readability refers to the ease with which a human reader can comprehend the purpose, control flow, and operation of source code. It affects the aspects of quality above, including portability, usability and most importantly maintainability.
Readability is important because programmers spend the majority of their time reading, trying to understand and modifying existing source code, rather than writing new source code. Unreadable code often leads to bugs, inefficiencies, and duplicated code. A study[10] found that a few simple readability transformations made code shorter and drastically reduced the time to understand it.
Following a consistent programming style often helps readability. However, readability is more than just programming style. Many factors, having little or nothing to do with the ability of the computer to efficiently compile and execute the code, contribute to readability.[11] Some of these factors include:

Different indent styles (whitespace)
Comments
Decomposition
Naming conventions for objects (such as variables, classes, procedures, etc.)

The presentation aspects of this (such as indents, line breaks, color highlighting, and so on) are often handled by the source code editor, but the content aspects reflect the programmer's talent and skills.
Various visual programming languages have also been developed with the intent to resolve readability concerns by adopting non-traditional approaches to code structure and display. Integrated development environments (IDEs) aim to integrate all such help. Techniques like Code refactoring can enhance readability.
Algorithmic complexity[edit]
The academic field and the engineering practice of computer programming are both largely concerned with discovering and implementing the most efficient algorithms for a given class of problem. For this purpose, algorithms are classified into orders using so-called Big O notation, which expresses resource use, such as execution time or memory consumption, in terms of the size of an input. Expert programmers are familiar with a variety of well-established algorithms and their respective complexities and use this knowledge to choose algorithms that are best suited to the circumstances.
Methodologies[edit]
The first step in most formal software development processes is requirements analysis, followed by testing to determine value modeling, implementation, and failure elimination (debugging). There exist a lot of differing approaches for each of those tasks. One approach popular for requirements analysis is Use Case analysis. Many programmers use forms of Agile software development where the various stages of formal software development are more integrated together into short cycles that take a few weeks rather than years. There are many approaches to the Software development process.
Popular modeling techniques include Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD) and Model-Driven Architecture (MDA). The Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a notation used for both the OOAD and MDA.
A similar technique used for database design is Entity-Relationship Modeling (ER Modeling).
Implementation techniques include imperative languages (object-oriented or procedural), functional languages, and logic languages.
Measuring language usage[edit]
Main article: Measuring programming language popularity
It is very difficult to determine what are the most popular of modern programming languages. Methods of measuring programming language popularity include: counting the number of job advertisements that mention the language,[12] the number of books sold and courses teaching the language (this overestimates the importance of newer languages), and estimates of the number of existing lines of code written in the language (this underestimates the number of users of business languages such as COBOL).
Some languages are very popular for particular kinds of applications, while some languages are regularly used to write many different kinds of applications. For example, COBOL is still strong in corporate data centers[13] often on large mainframe computers, Fortran in engineering applications, scripting languages in Web development, and C in embedded software. Many applications use a mix of several languages in their construction and use. New languages are generally designed around the syntax of a prior language with new functionality added, (for example C++ adds object-orientation to C, and Java adds memory management and bytecode to C++, but as a result, loses efficiency and the ability for low-level manipulation).
Debugging[edit]




The bug from 1947 which is at the origin of a popular (but incorrect) etymology for the common term for a software defect.


Main article: Debugging
Debugging is a very important task in the software development process since having defects in a program can have significant consequences for its users. Some languages are more prone to some kinds of faults because their specification does not require compilers to perform as much checking as other languages. Use of a static code analysis tool can help detect some possible problems. Normally the first step in debugging is to attempt to reproduce the problem. This can be a non-trivial task, for example as with parallel processes or some unusual software bugs. Also, specific user environment and usage history can make it difficult to reproduce the problem.
After the bug is reproduced, the input of the program may need to be simplified to make it easier to debug. For example, a bug in a compiler can make it crash when parsing some large source file. However, after simplification of the test case, only few lines from the original source file can be sufficient to reproduce the same crash. Such simplification can be done manually, using a divide-and-conquer approach. The programmer will try to remove some parts of original test case and check if the problem still exists. When debugging the problem in a GUI, the programmer can try to skip some user interaction from the original problem description and check if remaining actions are sufficient for bugs to appear.
Debugging is often done with IDEs like Eclipse, Visual Studio, Xcode, Kdevelop, NetBeans and Code::Blocks. Standalone debuggers like GDB are also used, and these often provide less of a visual environment, usually using a command line. Some text editors such as Emacs allow GDB to be invoked through them, to provide a visual environment.
Programming languages[edit]
Main articles: Programming language and List of programming languages
Different programming languages support different styles of programming (called programming paradigms). The choice of language used is subject to many considerations, such as company policy, suitability to task, availability of third-party packages, or individual preference. Ideally, the programming language best suited for the task at hand will be selected. Trade-offs from this ideal involve finding enough programmers who know the language to build a team, the availability of compilers for that language, and the efficiency with which programs written in a given language execute. Languages form an approximate spectrum from "low-level" to "high-level"; "low-level" languages are typically more machine-oriented and faster to execute, whereas "high-level" languages are more abstract and easier to use but execute less quickly. It is usually easier to code in "high-level" languages than in "low-level" ones.
Allen Downey, in his book How To Think Like A Computer Scientist, writes:

The details look different in different languages, but a few basic instructions appear in just about every language:

Input: Gather data from the keyboard, a file, or some other device.
Output: Display data on the screen or send data to a file or other device.
Arithmetic: Perform basic arithmetical operations like addition and multiplication.
Conditional Execution: Check for certain conditions and execute the appropriate sequence of statements.
Repetition: Perform some action repeatedly, usually with some variation.



Many computer languages provide a mechanism to call functions provided by shared libraries. Provided the functions in a library follow the appropriate run-time conventions (e.g., method of passing arguments), then these functions may be written in any other language.
Programmers[edit]
Main article: Programmer
See also: Software developer and Software engineer
Computer programmers are those who write computer software. Their jobs usually involve:


Coding
Debugging
Documentation
Integration
Maintenance
Requirements analysis
Software architecture
Software testing
Specification


See also[edit]


Computer Science portal
Computing portal
Computer networking portal
Computer programming portal


Main article: Outline of computer programming

ACCU
Association for Computing Machinery
Computer networking
Hello world program
Institution of Analysts and Programmers
National Coding Week
System programming
The Art of Computer Programming

References[edit]


^ Shaun Bebbington (2014). "What is coding". Retrieved 2014-03-03. 
^ Shaun Bebbington (2014). "What is programming". Retrieved 2014-03-03. 
^ Fowler, Charles B. (October 1967). "The Museum of Music: A History of Mechanical Instruments". Music Educators Journal. Music Educators Journal, Vol. 54, No. 2. 54 (2): 45–49. doi:10.2307/3391092. JSTOR 3391092. 
^ Fuegi, J.; Francis, J. (2003). "Lovelace & babbage and the creation of the 1843 'notes'". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 25 (4): 16. doi:10.1109/MAHC.2003.1253887. 
^ "Columbia University Computing History - Herman Hollerith". Columbia.edu. Retrieved 2010-04-25. 
^ Ensmenger, Nathan (2015). ""Beards, Sandals, and Other Signs of Rugged Individualism": Masculine Culture within the Computing Professions". Osiris. 30 (1): 38–65. doi:10.1086/682955. 
^ "Fortran creator John Backus dies". msnbc.com. Retrieved 19 November 2014. 
^ "Fortran creator John Backus dies - Tech and gadgets- msnbc.com". MSNBC. 2007-03-20. Retrieved 2010-04-25. 
^ "Programming 101: Tips to become a good programmer - Wisdom Geek". Wisdom Geek. 2016-05-19. Retrieved 2016-05-23. 
^ James L. Elshoff, Michael Marcotty, Improving computer program readability to aid modification, Communications of the ACM, v.25 n.8, p.512-521, Aug 1982.
^ Multiple (wiki). "Readability". Docforge. Retrieved 2010-01-30. 
^ Survey of Job advertisements mentioning a given language
^ Mitchell, Robert. "The Cobol Brain Drain". Computer World. Retrieved 9 May 2015. 


Further reading[edit]

A.K. Hartmann, Practical Guide to Computer Simulations, Singapore: World Scientific (2009)
A. Hunt, D. Thomas, and W. Cunningham, The Pragmatic Programmer. From Journeyman to Master, Amsterdam: Addison-Wesley Longman (1999)
Brian W. Kernighan, The Practice of Programming, Pearson (1999)
Weinberg, Gerald M., The Psychology of Computer Programming, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold (1971)
Edsger W. Dijkstra, A Discipline of Programming, Prentice-Hall (1976)
O.-J. Dahl, E.W.Dijkstra, C.A.R. Hoare, Structured Pogramming, Academic Press (1972)
David Gries, The Science of Programming, Springer-Verlag (1981)

External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Computer Programming





Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Windows Programming





Wikiversity has learning resources about Computer Programming




Library resources about
Computer programming





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





 Media related to Programming at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Programming at Wikiquote
Software engineering at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons












v
t
e


Software engineering



Fields



Computer programming
Requirements engineering
Software deployment
Software design
Software maintenance
Software testing
Systems analysis
Formal methods





Concepts



Data modeling
Enterprise architecture
Functional specification
Modeling language
Orthogonality
Programming paradigm
Software
Software archaeology
Software architecture
Software configuration management
Software development methodology
Software development process
Software quality
Software quality assurance
Software verification and validation
Structured analysis





Orientations



Agile
Aspect-oriented
Object orientation
Ontology
Service orientation
SDLC





Models




Developmental



Agile
EUP
Executable UML
Incremental model
Iterative model
Prototype model
RAD
UP
Scrum
Spiral model
V-Model
Waterfall model
XP





Other



SPICE
CMMI
Data model
ER model
Function model
Information model
Metamodeling
Object model
Systems model
View model





Languages



IDEF
UML
USL
SysML









Software
engineers




Victor Basili
Kent Beck
Grady Booch
Fred Brooks
Barry Boehm
Peter Chen
Danese Cooper
Ward Cunningham
Tom DeMarco
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Delores M. Etter
Martin Fowler
Adele Goldstine
Margaret Hamilton
C. A. R. Hoare
Lois Haibt
Mary Jean Harrold
Grace Hopper
Watts Humphrey
Michael A. Jackson
Ivar Jacobson
Alan Kay
Nancy Leveson
Stephen J. Mellor
Bertrand Meyer
David Parnas
Trygve Reenskaug
Winston W. Royce
James Rumbaugh
Mary Shaw
Peri Tarr
Elaine Weyuker
Niklaus Wirth
Edward Yourdon





Related fields



Computer science
Computer engineering
Project management
Risk management
Systems engineering








 Category
 Commons









Authority control



LCCN: sh85107310
GND: 4076370-5
BNF: cb11932648m (data)
NDL: 00569223











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_programming&oldid=816723192"					Categories: Computer programmingComputersHidden categories: NPOV disputes from December 2017All NPOV disputesArticles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from August 2010Commons category with local link different than on WikidataArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers