





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A computing platform is the environment in which a piece of software is executed. It may be the hardware or the operating system (OS), even a web browser or other underlying software, as long as the program code is executed in it. Computing platforms have different abstraction levels, including a computer architecture, an OS, or runtime libraries.[1] A computing platform is the stage on which computer programs can run.
A platform can be seen both as a constraint on the software development process, in that different platforms provide different functionality and restrictions; and as an assistance to the development process, in that they provide low-level functionality ready-made. For example, an OS may be a platform that abstracts the underlying differences in hardware and provides a generic command for saving files or accessing the network.



Contents


1 Components
2 Operating system examples

2.1 Desktop, laptop, server
2.2 Mobile


3 Software frameworks
4 Hardware examples
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Components[edit]
Platforms may also include:

Hardware alone, in the case of small embedded systems. Embedded systems can access hardware directly, without an OS; this is referred to as running on "bare metal".
A browser in the case of web-based software. The browser itself runs on a hardware+OS platform, but this is not relevant to software running within the browser.[2]
An application, such as a spreadsheet or word processor, which hosts software written in an application-specific scripting language, such as an Excel macro. This can be extended to writing fully-fledged applications with the Microsoft Office suite as a platform.[3]
Software frameworks that provide ready-made functionality.
Cloud computing and Platform as a Service. Extending the idea of a software framework, these allow application developers to build software out of components that are hosted not by the developer, but by the provider, with internet communication linking them together.[4] The social networking sites Twitter and facebook are also considered development platforms.[5][6]
A virtual machine (VM) such as the Java virtual machine or .NET CLR. Applications are compiled into a format similar to machine code, known as bytecode, which is then executed by the VM.
A virtualized version of a complete system, including virtualized hardware, OS, software and storage. These allow, for instance, a typical Windows program to run on what is physically a Mac.

Some architectures have multiple layers, with each layer acting as a platform to the one above it. In general, a component only has to be adapted to the layer immediately beneath it. For instance, a Java program has to be written to use the Java virtual machine (JVM) and associated libraries as a platform, but does not have to be adapted to run for the Windows, Linux or Macintosh OS platforms. However, the JVM, the layer beneath the application, does have to be built separately for each OS.[7]
Operating system examples[edit]
For more details on this topic, see List of operating systems.
Desktop, laptop, server[edit]

AmigaOS, AmigaOS 4
FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD
Linux
Microsoft Windows
OpenVMS
Classic Mac OS
macOS
OS/2
Solaris
Tru64 UNIX
VM
QNX

Mobile[edit]




Android, a popular mobile operating system



Android
Bada
BlackBerry OS
Firefox OS
iOS
Embedded Linux
Palm OS
Symbian
Tizen
WebOS
Windows Mobile
Windows Phone

Software frameworks[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Software framework.

Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless (BREW)
Cocoa
Cocoa Touch
Common Language Infrastructure (CLI)

Mono
.NET Framework
Silverlight


Flash

AIR


GNU
Java platform

Java ME
Java SE
Java EE
JavaFX
JavaFX Mobile


LiveCode
Microsoft XNA
Mozilla Prism, XUL and XULRunner
Open Web Platform
Oracle Database
Qt
SAP NetWeaver
Shockwave
Smartface
Universal Windows Platform

Windows Runtime


Vexi

Hardware examples[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Lists of computers.
Ordered roughly, from more common types to less common types:

Commodity computing platforms

Wintel, that is, Intel x86 or compatible personal computer hardware with Windows operating system
Macintosh, custom Apple Inc. hardware and Classic Mac OS and macOS operating systems, originally 68k-based, then PowerPC-based, now migrated to x86
ARM architecture based mobile devices

iPhone smartphones and iPad tablet computers devices running iOS, also from Apple
Gumstix or Raspberry Pi full function miniature computers with Linux
Newton devices running the Newton OS, also from Apple


x86 with Unix-like systems such as Linux or BSD variants
CP/M computers based on the S-100 bus, maybe the earliest microcomputer platform


Video game consoles, any variety (PlayStation, Xbox, Nintendo)

3DO Interactive Multiplayer, that was licensed to manufacturers
Apple Pippin, a multimedia player platform for video game console development


RISC processor based machines running Unix variants

SPARC architecture computers running Solaris or illumos operating systems
DEC Alpha cluster running OpenVMS or Tru64 UNIX


Midrange computers with their custom operating systems, such as IBM OS/400
Mainframe computers with their custom operating systems, such as IBM z/OS
Supercomputer architectures

See also[edit]

Cross-platform
Platform virtualization
Third platform

References[edit]



^ "platform". Free On-line Dictionary of Computing
^ Andrew Binstock (July 2, 2012). "Google's Redefinition of the Browser As Platform". Dr. Dobbs. 
^ Chip Wilson; Alan Josephson. "Microsoft Office as a Platform for Software + Services". Microsoft Developer Network. 
^ "What Is PAAS?". Interoute. 
^ "Twitter Development Platform - Twitter Developers". 
^ "Facebook Development Platform Launches.." August 15, 2006. 
^ "Platform independence in Java's Byte Code". Stack Overflow. 



External links[edit]



Wikidata has the property: platform (P400) (see uses)



Ryan Sarver: What is a platform?






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computing_platform&oldid=816403951"					Categories: Computing platformsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2010All articles needing additional references