





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







An example of computer animation which is produced in the "motion capture" technique


Computer animation is the process used for generating animated images. The more general term computer-generated imagery (CGI) encompasses both static scenes and dynamic images, while computer animation only refers to the moving images. Modern computer animation usually uses 3D computer graphics, although 2D computer graphics are still used for stylistic, low bandwidth, and faster real-time renderings. Sometimes, the target of the animation is the computer itself, but sometimes film as well.
Computer animation is essentially a digital successor to the stop motion techniques using 3D models, and traditional animation techniques using frame-by-frame animation of 2D illustrations. Computer-generated animations are more controllable than other more physically based processes, constructing miniatures for effects shots or hiring extras for crowd scenes, and because it allows the creation of images that would not be feasible using any other technology. It can also allow a single graphic artist to produce such content without the use of actors, expensive set pieces, or props. To create the illusion of movement, an image is displayed on the computer monitor and repeatedly replaced by a new image that is similar to it, but advanced slightly in time (usually at a rate of 24, 25 or 30 frames/second). This technique is identical to how the illusion of movement is achieved with television and motion pictures.
For 3D animations, objects (models) are built on the computer monitor (modeled) and 3D figures are rigged with a virtual skeleton. For 2D figure animations, separate objects (illustrations) and separate transparent layers are used with or without that virtual skeleton. Then the limbs, eyes, mouth, clothes, etc. of the figure are moved by the animator on key frames. The differences in appearance between key frames are automatically calculated by the computer in a process known as tweening or morphing. Finally, the animation is rendered.[1]
For 3D animations, all frames must be rendered after the modeling is complete. For 2D vector animations, the rendering process is the key frame illustration process, while tweened frames are rendered as needed. For pre-recorded presentations, the rendered frames are transferred to a different format or medium, like digital video. The frames may also be rendered in real time as they are presented to the end-user audience. Low bandwidth animations transmitted via the internet (e.g. Adobe Flash, X3D) often use software on the end-users computer to render in real time as an alternative to streaming or pre-loaded high bandwidth animations.



Contents


1 Explanation
2 History
3 Animation methods
4 Modeling
5 Equipment
6 Facial animation
7 Realism
8 Films
9 Animation studios
10 Web animations
11 Detailed examples and pseudocode
12 Computer-assisted vs. computer-generated
13 See also
14 References

14.1 Citations
14.2 Works cited


15 External links



Explanation[edit]
To trick the eye and the brain into thinking they are seeing a smoothly moving object, the pictures should be drawn at around 12 frames per second or faster.[2] (A frame is one complete image.) With rates above 75-120 frames per second, no improvement in realism or smoothness is perceivable due to the way the eye and the brain both process images. At rates below 12 frames per second, most people can detect jerkiness associated with the drawing of new images that detracts from the illusion of realistic movement.[3] Conventional hand-drawn cartoon animation often uses 15 frames per second in order to save on the number of drawings needed, but this is usually accepted because of the stylized nature of cartoons. To produce more realistic imagery, computer animation demands higher frame rates.
Films seen in theaters in the United States run at 24 frames per second, which is sufficient to create the illusion of continuous movement. For high resolution, adapters are used.
History[edit]
Main article: History of computer animation
See also: Timeline of computer animation in film and television
Early digital computer animation was developed at Bell Telephone Laboratories in the 1960s by Edward E. Zajac, Frank W. Sinden, Kenneth C. Knowlton, and A. Michael Noll.[4] Other digital animation was also practiced at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.[5]
In 1967, a computer animation named "Hummingbird" was created by Charles Csuri and James Shaffer [6].
In 1968, a computer animation was created, depicting a cat moving around [7].
In 1971, a computer animation called "Metadata" was created, showing various shapes [8].
An early step in the history of computer animation was the sequel to the 1973 film Westworld, a science-fiction film about a society in which robots live and work among humans.[9] The sequel, Futureworld (1976), used the 3D wire-frame imagery, which featured a computer-animated hand and face both created by University of Utah graduates Edwin Catmull and Fred Parke.[10] This imagery originally appeared in their student film A Computer Animated Hand, which they completed in 1972.[11][12]
Developments in CGI technologies are reported each year at SIGGRAPH,[13] an annual conference on computer graphics and interactive techniques that is attended by thousands of computer professionals each year.[14] Developers of computer games and 3D video cards strive to achieve the same visual quality on personal computers in real-time as is possible for CGI films and animation. With the rapid advancement of real-time rendering quality, artists began to use game engines to render non-interactive movies, which led to the art form Machinima.
The very first full length computer animated television series was ReBoot,[15] which debuted in September 1994; the series followed the adventures of characters who lived inside a computer.[16] The first feature-length computer animated film was Toy Story (1995), which was made by Pixar.[17][18][19] It followed an adventure centered around toys and their owners. This groundbreaking film was also the first of many fully computer-animated movies.[18]
Animation methods[edit]




In this .gif of a 2D Flash animation, each 'stick' of the figure is keyframed over time to create motion.


In most 3D computer animation systems, an animator creates a simplified representation of a character's anatomy, which is analogous to a skeleton or stick figure.[20] The position of each segment of the skeletal model is defined by animation variables, or Avars for short. In human and animal characters, many parts of the skeletal model correspond to the actual bones, but skeletal animation is also used to animate other things, with facial features (though other methods for facial animation exist).[21] The character "Woody" in Toy Story, for example, uses 700 Avars (100 in the face alone). The computer doesn't usually render the skeletal model directly (it is invisible), but it does use the skeletal model to compute the exact position and orientation of that certain character, which is eventually rendered into an image. Thus by changing the values of Avars over time, the animator creates motion by making the character move from frame to frame.
There are several methods for generating the Avar values to obtain realistic motion. Traditionally, animators manipulate the Avars directly.[22] Rather than set Avars for every frame, they usually set Avars at strategic points (frames) in time and let the computer interpolate or tween between them in a process called keyframing. Keyframing puts control in the hands of the animator and has roots in hand-drawn traditional animation.[23]
In contrast, a newer method called motion capture makes use of live action footage.[24] When computer animation is driven by motion capture, a real performer acts out the scene as if they were the character to be animated.[25] His/her motion is recorded to a computer using video cameras and markers and that performance is then applied to the animated character.[26]
Each method has its advantages and as of 2007, games and films are using either or both of these methods in productions. Keyframe animation can produce motions that would be difficult or impossible to act out, while motion capture can reproduce the subtleties of a particular actor.[27] For example, in the 2006 film Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, Bill Nighy provided the performance for the character Davy Jones. Even though Nighy doesn't appear in the movie himself, the movie benefited from his performance by recording the nuances of his body language, posture, facial expressions, etc. Thus motion capture is appropriate in situations where believable, realistic behavior and action is required, but the types of characters required exceed what can be done throughout the conventional costuming.
Modeling[edit]
3D computer animation combines 3D models of objects and programmed or hand "keyframed" movement. These models are constructed out of geometrical vertices, faces, and edges in a 3D coordinate system. Objects are sculpted much like real clay or plaster, working from general forms to specific details with various sculpting tools. Unless a 3D model is intended to be a solid color, it must be painted with "textures" for realism. A bone/joint animation system is set up to deform the CGI model (e.g., to make a humanoid model walk). In a process known as rigging, the virtual marionette is given various controllers and handles for controlling movement.[28] Animation data can be created using motion capture, or keyframing by a human animator, or a combination of the two.[29]
3D models rigged for animation may contain thousands of control points — for example, "Woody" from Toy Story uses 700 specialized animation controllers. Rhythm and Hues Studios labored for two years to create Aslan in the movie The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, which had about 1,851 controllers (742 in the face alone). In the 2004 film The Day After Tomorrow, designers had to design forces of extreme weather with the help of video references and accurate meteorological facts. For the 2005 remake of King Kong, actor Andy Serkis was used to help designers pinpoint the gorilla's prime location in the shots and used his expressions to model "human" characteristics onto the creature. Serkis had earlier provided the voice and performance for Gollum in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings trilogy.
Equipment[edit]




A ray-traced 3-D model of a jack inside a cube, and the jack alone below.


Computer animation can be created with a computer and an animation software. Some impressive animation can be achieved even with basic programs; however, the rendering can take a lot of time on an ordinary home computer.[30] Professional animators of movies, television and video games could make photorealistic animation with high detail. This level of quality for movie animation would take hundreds of years to create on a home computer. Instead, many powerful workstation computers are used.[31] Graphics workstation computers use two to four processors, and they are a lot more powerful than an actual home computer and are specialized for rendering. A large number of workstations (known as a "render farm") are networked together to effectively act as a giant computer.[32] The result is a computer-animated movie that can be completed in about one to five years (however, this process is not composed solely of rendering). A workstation typically costs $2,000-16,000 with the more expensive stations being able to render much faster due to the more technologically-advanced hardware that they contain. Professionals also use digital movie cameras, motion/performance capture, bluescreens, film editing software, props, and other tools used for movie animation.
Facial animation[edit]
Main article: Computer facial animation
The realistic modeling of human facial features is both one of the most challenging and sought after elements in computer-generated imagery. Computer facial animation is a highly complex field where models typically include a very large number of animation variables.[33] Historically speaking, the first SIGGRAPH tutorials on State of the art in Facial Animation in 1989 and 1990 proved to be a turning point in the field by bringing together and consolidating multiple research elements and sparked interest among a number of researchers.[34]
The Facial Action Coding System (with 46 "action units", "lip bite" or "squint"), which had been developed in 1976, became a popular basis for many systems.[35] As early as 2001, MPEG-4 included 68 Face Animation Parameters (FAPs) for lips, jaws, etc., and the field has made significant progress since then and the use of facial microexpression has increased.[35][36]
In some cases, an affective space, the PAD emotional state model, can be used to assign specific emotions to the faces of avatars.[37] In this approach, the PAD model is used as a high level emotional space and the lower level space is the MPEG-4 Facial Animation Parameters (FAP). A mid-level Partial Expression Parameters (PEP) space is then used to in a two-level structure – the PAD-PEP mapping and the PEP-FAP translation model.[38]
Realism[edit]
Realism in computer animation can mean making each frame look photorealistic, in the sense that the scene is rendered to resemble a photograph or make the characters' animation believable and lifelike.[39] Computer animation can also be realistic with or without the photorealistic rendering.[40]
One of the greatest challenges in computer animation has been creating human characters that look and move with the highest degree of realism. Part of the difficulty in making pleasing, realistic human characters is the uncanny valley, the concept where the human audience (up to a point) tends to have an increasingly negative, emotional response as a human replica looks and acts more and more human. Films that have attempted photorealistic human characters, such as The Polar Express,[41][42][43] Beowulf,[44] and A Christmas Carol[45][46] have been criticized as "creepy" and "disconcerting".
The goal of computer animation is not always to emulate live action as closely as possible, so many animated films instead feature characters who are anthropomorphic animals, fantasy creatures and characters, superheroes, or otherwise have non-realistic, cartoon-like proportions.[47] Computer animation can also be tailored to mimic or substitute for other kinds of animation, traditional stop-motion animation (as shown in Flushed Away or The Lego Movie). Some of the long-standing basic principles of animation, like squash & stretch, call for movement that is not strictly realistic, and such principles still see widespread application in computer animation.[48]
Films[edit]


Play media


CGI film made using Machinima


CGI short films have been produced as independent animation since 1976,[49] although the popularity of computer animation (especially in the field of special effects) skyrocketed during the modern era of U.S. animation.[50] The first completely computer-animated movie was Toy Story (1995), but VeggieTales is the first American fully 3D computer animated series sold directly (made in 1993), that started animation series such as ReBoot in 1994.
Animation studios[edit]
Main article: List of animation studios
Some notable producers of computer-animated feature films include:

Animal Logic - Films include Happy Feet (2006), Walking with Dinosaurs (2013) and The Lego Movie (2014)
Blue Sky Studios - Films include Ice Age (2002), Rio (2011), The Peanuts Movie (2015)
DreamWorks Animation - Films include Shrek (2001), Kung Fu Panda (2008), How to Train Your Dragon (2010)
Illumination Entertainment — Films include Despicable Me (2010), Minions (2015), The Secret Life of Pets (2016)
Industrial Light & Magic - Films include Rango (2011) and Strange Magic (2015)
Pixar - Films include Toy Story (1995), Finding Nemo (2003), Cars (2006)
Reel FX Animation Studios - Films include Free Birds (2013) and The Book of Life (2014)
Sony Pictures Animation - Films include Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs (2009), The Smurfs (2011), Hotel Transylvania (2012)
Sony Pictures Imageworks - Films include The Angry Birds Movie (2016)
Walt Disney Animation Studios - Films include Tangled (2010), Wreck-It Ralph (2012), Frozen (2013)
Warner Animation Group - Films include The Lego Movie (2014), and Storks (2016)
Triggerfish Animation Studios - Films include Zambezia (film) (2013), Khumba (2014)

Web animations[edit]
The popularity of websites that allow members to upload their own movies for others to view has created a growing community of amateur computer animators.[51] With utilities and programs often included free with modern operating systems, many users can make their own animated movies and shorts. Several free and open source animation software applications exist as well. The ease at which these animations can be distributed has attracted professional animation talent also. Companies such as PowToon and GoAnimate attempt to bridged the gap by giving amateurs access to professional animations as clip art.
The oldest (most backward compatible) web-based animations are in the animated GIF format, which can be uploaded and seen on the web easily.[52] However, the raster graphics format of GIF animations slows the download and frame rate, especially with larger screen sizes. The growing demand for higher quality web-based animations was met by a vector graphics alternative that relied on the use of a plugin. For decades, Flash animations were the most popular format, until the web development community abandoned support for the Flash player plugin. Web browsers on mobile devices and mobile operating systems never fully supported the Flash plugin.
By this time, internet bandwidth and download speeds increased, making raster graphic animations more convenient. Some of the more complex vector graphic animations had a slower frame rate due to complex rendering than some of the raster graphic alternatives. Many of the GIF and Flash animations were already converted to digital video formats, which were compatible with mobile devices and reduced file sizes via video compression technology. However, compatibility was still problematic as some of the popular video formats such as Apple's QuickTime and Microsoft Silverlight required plugins. YouTube, the most popular video viewing website, was also relying on the Flash plugin to deliver digital video in the Flash Video format.
The latest alternatives are HTML5 compatible animations. Technologies such as JavaScript and CSS animations made sequencing the movement of images in HTML5 web pages more convenient. SVG animations offered a vector graphic alternative to the original Flash graphic format, SmartSketch. YouTube offers an HTML5 alternative for digital video. APNG (Animated PNG) offered a raster graphic alternative to animated GIF files that enables multi-level transparency not available in GIFs
See also: Comparison of HTML5 and Flash
Detailed examples and pseudocode[edit]
In 2D computer animation, moving objects are often referred to as "sprites." A sprite is an image that has a location associated with it. The location of the sprite is changed slightly, between each displayed frame, to make the sprite appear to move.[53] The following pseudocode makes a sprite move from left to right:

var int x := 0, y := screenHeight / 2;
while x < screenWidth
drawBackground()
drawSpriteAtXY (x, y) // draw on top of the background
x := x + 5 // move to the right

Computer animation uses different techniques to produce animations. Most frequently, sophisticated mathematics is used to manipulate complex three-dimensional polygons, apply "textures", lighting and other effects to the polygons and finally rendering the complete image. A sophisticated graphical user interface may be used to create the animation and arrange its choreography. Another technique called constructive solid geometry defines objects by conducting boolean operations on regular shapes, and has the advantage that animations may be accurately produced at any resolution.
Computer-assisted vs. computer-generated[edit]
To animate means, figuratively, to "give life to". There are two basic methods that animators commonly use to accomplish this.
Computer-assisted animation is usually classed as two-dimensional (2D) animation. Creators drawings either hand drawn (pencil to paper) or interactively drawn(drawn on the computer) using different assisting appliances and are positioned into specific software packages. Within the software package the creator will place drawings into different key frames which fundamentally create an outline of the most important movements.[54] The computer will then fill in all the "in-between frames", commonly known as Tweening.[55] Computer-assisted animation is basically using new technologies to cut down the time scale that traditional animation could take, but still having the elements of traditional drawings of characters or objects.[56]
Three examples of films using computer-assisted animation are Beauty and the Beast, The Road to El Dorado and Tarzan.
Computer-generated animation is known as 3-dimensional (3D) animation. Creators will design an object or character with an X,Y and Z axis. Unlike the traditional way of animation no pencil to paper drawings create the way computer generated animation works. The object or character created will then be taken into a software, key framing and tweening are also carried out in computer generated animation but are also a lot of techniques used that do not relate to traditional animation. Animators can break physical laws by using mathematical algorithms to cheat, mass, force and gravity rulings. Fundamentally, time scale and quality could be said to be a preferred way to produce animation as they are two major things that are enhanced by using computer generated animation. Another positive aspect of CGA is the fact one can create a flock of creatures to act independently when created as a group. An animal's fur can be programmed to wave in the wind and lie flat when it rains instead of programming each strand of hair separately.[56]
A few examples of computer-generated animation movies are Tangled, Toy Story, Frozen, Inside Out, Shrek, Finding Nemo, Mr. Peabody & Sherman and Zootopia.
See also[edit]


Animation portal
Computer graphics portal




Animation
Animation database
Avar (animation variable)
Computer-generated imagery (CGI)
New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab
Computer representation of surfaces
Hand-Over
Humanoid animation
List of animation studios
List of computer-animated films
List of computer-animated television series
Medical animation
Morph target animation
Machinima (recording video from games and virtual worlds)
Motion capture
Procedural animation
Ray tracing
Rich Representation Language
Skeletal animation
Timeline of computer animation in film and television
Virtual artifact
Wire-frame model
12 basic principles of animation


References[edit]
Citations[edit]


^ Sito 2013, p. 232.
^ Masson 1999, p. 148.
^ Parent 2012, pp. 100–101, 255.
^ Masson 1999, pp. 390–394.
^ Sito 2013, pp. 69–75.
^ [1]
^ [2]
^ [3]
^ Masson 1999, p. 404.
^ Masson 1999, pp. 282–288.
^ Sito 2013, p. 64.
^ Means 2011.
^ Sito 2013, pp. 97–98.
^ Sito 2013, pp. 95–97.
^ Sito 2013, p. 188.
^ Masson 1999, p. 430.
^ Masson 1999, p. 432.
^ a b Masson 1999, p. 302.
^ "Our Story", Pixar, 1986-2013. Retrieved on 2013-02-15. "The Pixar Timeline, 1979 to Present". Pixar. 
^ Parent 2012, pp. 193–196.
^ Parent 2012, pp. 324–326.
^ Parent 2012, pp. 111–118.
^ Sito 2013, p. 132.
^ Masson 1999, p. 118.
^ Masson 1999, pp. 94–98.
^ Masson 1999, p. 226.
^ Masson 1999, p. 204.
^ Parent 2012, p. 289.
^ Beane 2012, p. 2-15.
^ Masson 1999, p. 158.
^ Sito 2013, p. 144.
^ Sito 2013, p. 195.
^ Masson 1999, pp. 110–116.
^ Parke & Waters 2008, p. xi.
^ a b Magnenat Thalmann & Thalmann 2004, p. 122.
^ Pereira & Ebrahimi 2002, p. 404.
^ Pereira & Ebrahimi 2002, pp. 60–61.
^ Paiva, Prada & Picard 2007, pp. 24–33.
^ Masson 1999, pp. 160–161.
^ Parent 2012, pp. 14–17.
^ Zacharek, Stephanie (2004-11-10). "The Polar Express". Salon. Retrieved 2015-06-08. 
^ Herman, Barbara (2013-10-30). "The 10 Scariest Movies and Why They Creep Us Out". Newsweek. Retrieved 2015-06-08. 
^ Clinton, Paul (2004-11-10). "Review: 'Polar Express' a creepy ride". CNN. Retrieved 2015-06-08. 
^ Digital Actors in ‘Beowulf’ Are Just Uncanny - New York Times, November 14, 2007
^ Neumaier, Joe (November 5, 2009). "Blah, humbug! 'A Christmas Carol's 3-D spin on Dickens well done in parts but lacks spirit". New York Daily News. Retrieved October 10, 2015. 
^ Williams, Mary Elizabeth (November 5, 2009). "Disney's 'A Christmas Carol': Bah, humbug!". Salon.com. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved October 10, 2015. 
^ Sito 2013, p. 7.
^ Sito 2013, p. 59.
^ Masson 1999, p. 58.
^ Masson 1999, p. 52.
^ Sito 2013, pp. 82, 89.
^ Kuperberg 2002, pp. 112–113.
^ Masson 1999, p. 123.
^ Masson 1999, p. 115.
^ Masson 1999, p. 284.
^ a b Roos, Dave (2013). "How Computer Animation Works". HowStuffWorks. Retrieved 2013-02-15. 


Works cited[edit]


Library resources about
Computer animation





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries






Beane, Andy (2012). 3D Animation Essentials. Indianapolis, Indiana: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-14748-1. 
Kuperberg, Marcia (2002). A Guide to Computer Animation: For TV, Games, Multimedia and Web. Focal Press. ISBN 0-240-51671-0. 
Magnenat Thalmann, Nadia; Thalmann, Daniel (2004). Handbook of Virtual Humans. Wiley Publishing. ISBN 0-470-02316-3. 
Masson, Terrence (1999). CG 101: A Computer Graphics Industry Reference. Digital Fauxtography Inc. ISBN 0-7357-0046-X. 
Means, Sean P. (December 28, 2011). "Pixar founder's Utah-made Hand added to National Film Registry". The Salt Lake Tribune. Retrieved January 8, 2012. 
Paiva, Ana; Prada, Rui; Picard, Rosalind W. (2007). "Facial Expression Synthesis using PAD Emotional Parameters for a Chinese Expressive Avatar". Affective computing and intelligent interaction. Springer Science+Business Media. ISBN 3-540-74888-1. 
Parent, Rick (2012). Computer Animation: Algorithms and Techniques. Ohio: Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-12-415842-9. 
Pereira, Fernando C. N.; Ebrahimi, Touradj (2002). The MPEG-4 Book. New Jersey: IMSC Press. ISBN 0-13-061621-4. 
Parke, Frederic I.; Waters, Keith (2008). Computer Facial Animation (2nd ed.). Massachusetts: A.K. Peters, Ltd. ISBN 1-56881-448-8. 
Sito, Tom (2013). Moving Innovation: A History of Computer Animation. Massachusetts: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-01909-5. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Computer animation.



Galería 3D, Half a century of 3D Computer Animations (1962-2002)







v
t
e


Animation topics



By country







Bangladesh
Bhutan
China
Czech Republic
Estonia
India
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Thailand
United States
Vietnam





History



Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Brazil
Canada
China
France
Hungary
Iran
Korea
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States








Industry



Animator

List


Animation department
Animation director
Story artist
Animation studios

List


Animation database
Biologist simulators
Animation film festivals

international
regional


Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends)
Outsourcing
International Animation Day





Works



Films

Based on cartoons
Computer-animated
Feature-length
Lost or unfinished
Package
Short
Short series
Stop-motion


Series

Direct-to-video
Internet
Television







Techniques




Traditional



Limited animation
Masking
Rotoscoping





Stop motion



Barrier grid
Clay

strata-cut


Cutout (silhouette)
Graphic
Model

go motion


Object
Pixilation
Puppetoon





Computer
(history, timeline)




2D



Flash
PowerPoint
SVG
CSS
Digital puppetry





3D



Cel shading
Crowd
Morph target
Motion capture
Non-photorealistic rendering
Procedural
Skeletal
Machinima
Digital puppetry
Virtual cinematography








Other methods



Blocking
Chuckimation
Drawn-on-film
Flip book
Inbetweening
Kinegram
Paint-on-glass
Pinscreen
Pixel art
Pose to pose
Rubber hose
Sand
Syncro-Vox
Zoetrope








Variants



Abstract animation (visual music)
Adult animation
Animated cartoon
Animated sitcom
Animated documentary
Cartoon pornography
Educational animation
Erotic animation
Independent animation
Instructional animation





Related topics



Animation music

Mickey Mousing


Character animation

model sheet
walk cycle
lip sync
off-model


Twelve principles
Motion comic
Films with live action and animation

highest grossing


Cartoon physics
Cartoon violence
Most expensive animated films








 Book
 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


Major fields of computer science




Note: This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System.



Hardware



Printed circuit board
Peripheral
Integrated circuit
Very-large-scale integration
Energy consumption
Electronic design automation





Computer systems
organization



Computer architecture
Embedded system
Real-time computing
Dependability





Networks



Network architecture
Network protocol
Network components
Network scheduler
Network performance evaluation
Network service





Software organization



Interpreter
Middleware
Virtual machine
Operating system
Software quality





Software notations
and tools



Programming paradigm
Programming language
Compiler
Domain-specific language
Modeling language
Software framework
Integrated development environment
Software configuration management
Software library
Software repository





Software development



Software development process
Requirements analysis
Software design
Software construction
Software deployment
Software maintenance
Programming team
Open-source model





Theory of computation



Model of computation
Formal language
Automata theory
Computational complexity theory
Logic
Semantics





Algorithms



Algorithm design
Analysis of algorithms
Randomized algorithm
Computational geometry





Mathematics
of computing



Discrete mathematics
Probability
Statistics
Mathematical software
Information theory
Mathematical analysis
Numerical analysis





Information
systems



Database management system
Information storage systems
Enterprise information system
Social information systems
Geographic information system
Decision support system
Process control system
Multimedia information system
Data mining
Digital library
Computing platform
Digital marketing
World Wide Web
Information retrieval





Security



Cryptography
Formal methods
Security services
Intrusion detection system
Hardware security
Network security
Information security
Application security





Human–computer
interaction



Interaction design
Social computing
Ubiquitous computing
Visualization
Accessibility





Concurrency



Concurrent computing
Parallel computing
Distributed computing
Multithreading
Multiprocessing





Artificial
intelligence



Natural language processing
Knowledge representation and reasoning
Computer vision
Automated planning and scheduling
Search methodology
Control method
Philosophy of artificial intelligence
Distributed artificial intelligence





Machine learning



Supervised learning
Unsupervised learning
Reinforcement learning
Multi-task learning
Cross-validation





Graphics



Animation
Rendering
Image manipulation
Graphics processing unit
Mixed reality
Virtual reality
Image compression
Solid modeling





Applied
computing



E-commerce
Enterprise software
Computational mathematics
Computational physics
Computational chemistry
Computational biology
Computational social science
Computational engineering
Computational healthcare
Digital art
Electronic publishing
Cyberwarfare
Electronic voting
Video game
Word processing
Operations research
Educational technology
Document management








 Book
 Category
 Portal
WikiProject
 Commons












v
t
e


Film genres



By style



Action

Arthouse
Heroic bloodshed
Hong Kong action


Adventure

Survival


Art
Biographical
Christian
Comedy

Black
Commedia all'italiana
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Bromantic
Dramedy
Gross out
Horror
Parody
Mo lei tau
Thriller
Remarriage
Romantic
Sex
Screwball
Silent
Slapstick


Documentary

Animated
Docudrama
Mockumentary
Mondo
Pseudo
Semi
Travel


Drama

Dramedy
Historical
Legal
Melodrama

Korean




Erotic

Commedia sexy all'italiana
Pink
Sexploitation
Thriller


Educational
Social guidance
Epic

Sword-and-sandal


Experimental
Exploitation

see Exploitation film template


Fantasy

Comic
Contemporary
Dark
Fairy tale
Fantastique
High
Historical
Magic realism
Science


Film noir

Bad girl
Neo-noir
Occult detective
Pulp noir
Tech noir


Gothic

Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban


Horror

Body
Cannibal
Comedy
Eco
Fantastique
Found footage
German underground
Ghost
Giallo
Holiday
Japanese
Korean
Lovecraftian
Mumblegore
Natural
New French Extremity
Occult detective
Psycho-biddy
Psychological
Religious
Science Fiction
Slasher
Splatter
Satanic


Mumblecore

Mumblegore


Musical

Backstage
Jukebox
Musicarello
Operetta
Sceneggiata


Mystery

Giallo
Occult detective


Pornographic

Hardcore pornography
Softcore pornography


Propaganda
Reality
Romantic

Comedy

Bromantic


Fantasy
Gothic
Paranormal
Thriller


Science fiction

Comic
Cyberpunk
Fantastique
Fantasy
Gothic
Horror
Military
Mundane
New Wave
Parallel universe
Planetary romance
Space opera
Steampunk
Western


Thriller

Comedy
Conspiracy
Erotic
Financial
Giallo
Legal
New French Extremity
Political
Psychological
Romantic
Techno


Transgressive

Cinema of Transgression
New French Extremity


Trick





By theme



Animals
Beach party
Blaxploitation
Body swap
Bourekas
Buddy

Buddy cop
Female


Cannibal
Chicano
Colonial
Coming-of-age
Concert
Crime

Gentleman thief
Gong'an
Heist
Hood
Gangster
Mafia
Mafia comedy
Poliziotteschi
Yakuza
Gokudō


Dance
Disaster

Apocalyptic


Drug

Psychedelic
Stoner


Dystopian
Economic
Ethnographic
Extraterrestrial
Food and drink
Funny animal
Gendai-geki
Ghost
Goona-goona epic
Gothic

Romance
Southern
Space
Suburban
Urban


Ecchi
Girls with guns
Harem
Hentai

Tentacle erotica


Lolicon
Kaitō
Magical girl
Mecha
Shotacon
Yaoi
Yuri
Homeland
Jidaigeki
LGBT
Luchador
Martial arts

Bruceploitation
Chopsocky
Girls with guns
Gun fu
Kung fu
Wuxia


Mecha
Mexploitation
Monster

Giant monster
Jiangshi
Kaiju
Vampire
Werewolf
Zombie


Mountain
Mouth of Garbage
Muslim social
Nature

Environmental issues


Opera
Outlaw biker
Ozploitation
Partisan film
Pirate
Prison

Women


Race
Rape and revenge
Road
Rubble
Rumberas
Samurai
Sexploitation

Bavarian porn
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Mexican sex comedy
Nazi exploitation
Pornochanchada
Nunsploitation
Sex report


Shomin-geki
Slavery
Slice of life
Snuff

Crush


South Seas
Sports
Spy

Eurospy


Superhero
Surfing
Swashbuckler
Sword-and-sandal
Sword and sorcery
Travel
Trial
Vigilante
War

Anti-war
Euro War
Submarine


Western

Acid
Florida
Meat pie
Northern
Ostern
revisionist
Space
Spaghetti
Weird


Zombie

Zombie comedy







By movement
or period



Absolute
Australian New Wave
Auteur films
Berlin School
Bourekas
Brighton School
British New Wave

Kitchen sink realism


Budapest school
Cannibal boom
Cinéma du look
Cinema Novo
Cinema of Transgression
Cinéma pur
Commedia all'italiana
Documentary Film Movement
Dogme 95
Erra Cinema
European art cinema
Film gris
Free Cinema
French New Wave
German Expressionist
German underground horror
Nigerian Golden Age
Grupo Cine Liberación
Heimatfilm
Hollywood on the Tiber
Hong Kong New Wave
Iranian New Wave
Italian futurist
Italian neorealist
Japanese New Wave
Kammerspielfilm
L.A. Rebellion
Lettrist
Mumblecore
Neorealist
New French Extremity
New German
New Generation
New Hollywood
New Nigerian
New Queer
No wave
Nuevo Cine Mexicano
Parallel cinema
Persian Film
Poetic realist
Polish Film School
Poliziotteschi
Praška filmska škola
Prussian film
Pure Film Movement
Remodernist
Romanian New Wave
Spaghetti Western
Socialist realist
Social realist

Kitchen sink realism


Soviet Parallel
Structural
Surrealist
Sword-and-sandal
Telefoni Bianchi
Third Cinema
Yugoslav Black Wave





By audience



Adult
Chick flick
Children's
Family
Guy-cry
Stag
Teen
Woman's





By format,
technique,
approach,
or production



3D
Actuality
Animation

anime
cartoon
computer
stop-motion
traditional


Anthology
Art
B movie
Black-and-white
Blockbuster
Bollywood
Cinéma vérité
Classical Hollywood cinema
Collage
Color
Compilation
Composite
Cult

midnight movie


Database cinema
Docufiction
Ethnofiction
Experimental

Abstract


Feature
Featurette
Film à clef
Film noir
Film-poem
Found footage
Grindhouse
Hyperlink cinema
Independent

Guerrilla filmmaking


Interstitial art
Live action

animation


Low-budget
Major studio
Making-of
Masala
Message picture
Meta-film
Mockbuster
Musical short
Mythopoeia
Neorealist
No budget
Paracinema
Participatory
Poetry
Postmodernist
Sceneggiata
Semidocumentary
Serial
Shinpa
Short
Silent
Socialist realist
Sound
Underground
Video nasty
Z movie









Authority control



GND: 4199710-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_animation&oldid=814985322"					Categories: Computer animationComputer graphicsAnimation techniquesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2009All articles needing additional referencesCommons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips