






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (October 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Conflict of laws and
private international law


Preliminaries




Characterisation


Incidental question


Renvoi
Choice of law


Conflict of laws in the United States


Public policy doctrine


Hague Conference




Definitional elements




Jurisdiction


Procedure


Forum non conveniens


Lex causae


Lex fori
Forum shopping


Lis alibi pendens




Connecting factors




Domicile
Lex domicilii


Habitual residence


Nationality
Lex patriae


Lex loci arbitri


Lex loci rei sitae


Lex loci contractus


Lex loci delicti commissi


Lex loci actus


Lex loci solutionis


Lex loci protectionis


Proper law


Lex loci celebrationis


Choice of law clause


Dépeçage


Forum selection clause




Substantive legal areas




Status
Capacity
Contract


Tort
Marriage


Divorce


Property


Forced heirship


Hague Trust Convention




Enforcement




Enforcement of foreign judgments


Anti-suit injunctions


Revenue rule







v
t
e





Conflict of laws or private international law (both terms are used interchangeably)[1] concerns relations across different legal jurisdictions between natural persons, and sometimes also companies, corporations and other legal entities.[2][3]



Contents


1 Choice of laws
2 Private international law on marriages and legal dissolution of marriages (divorce)
3 Private international law on unmarried persons
4 Contracts
5 Harmonization of laws
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Choice of laws[edit]
Courts faced with a choice of law issue have a two-stage process:

the court will apply the law of the forum (lex fori) to all procedural matters (including, self-evidently, the choice of law rules); and
it counts the factors that connect or link the legal issues to the laws of potentially relevant states and applies the laws that have the greatest connection, e.g. the law of nationality (lex patriae) or the law of habitual residence (lex domicilii). (In Latin, domicilium means home or residence.) (See also 'European Harmonization Provisions': "The concept of habitual residence is the civil law equivalent of the common law test of lex domicilii".) The court will determine the plaintiffs' legal status and capacity. The court will determine the law of the state in which land is situated (lex situs) that will be applied to determine all questions of title. The law of the place where a transaction physically takes place or of the occurrence that gave rise to the litigation (lex loci actus) will often be the controlling law selected when the matter is substantive, but the proper law has become a more common choice.[4]

Private international law on marriages and legal dissolution of marriages (divorce)[edit]
Main article: Conflict of marriage laws
In divorce cases, when a court is attempting to distribute marital property, if the divorcing couple is local and the property is local, then the court applies its domestic law lex fori. The case becomes more complicated if foreign elements are thrown into the mix, such as when the place of marriage is different from the territory where divorce was filed; when the parties' nationalities and residences do not match; when there is property in a foreign jurisdiction; or when the parties have changed residence several times during the marriage.
Whereas commercial agreements or prenuptial agreements generally do not require legal formalities to be observed, when married couples enter a property agreement (agreement for the division of property at the termination of the marriage), stringent requirements are imposed, including notarization, witnesses, special acknowledgment forms. In some countries, these must be filed (or docketed) with a domestic court, and the terms must be "so ordered" by a judge. This is done in order to ensure that no undue influence or oppression has been exerted by one spouse against the other. Upon presenting a property agreement between spouses to a court of divorce, that court will generally assure itself of the following factors: signatures, legal formalities, intent, later intent, free will, lack of oppression, reasonableness and fairness, consideration, performance, reliance, later repudiation in writing or by conduct, and whichever other concepts of contractual bargaining apply in the context.
Private international law on unmarried persons[edit]
Unlike marriage which has an international recognised legal status, there are no international treaties on recognition of unmarried couple's legal status. If an unmarried couple change residence to different countries, then the local law on where the couple is last domiciled is applied to them. This covers legal status of the relationship, rights, obligations, and all worldwide movable and immovable property. To otherwise interpret the law would mean if the unmarried couple had assets in several different countries, they would then need separate legal cases in each country to resolve all their movable and immovable property.[citation needed]
In the absence of a valid and enforceable agreement for an unmarried couple, here’s how the conflict of law rules work:

Full Mutability Doctrine – property relations between the unmarried couples are governed by their latest domicile, whether acquired before, during or after the relationship.

Contracts[edit]
Many contracts and other forms of legally binding agreement include a jurisdiction or arbitration clause specifying the parties' choice of venue for any litigation (called a forum selection clause). Then, choice of law clauses may specify which laws the court or tribunal should apply to each aspect of the dispute. This matches the substantive policy of freedom of contract. Judges have accepted that the principle of party autonomy allows the parties to select the law most appropriate to their transaction. This judicial acceptance of subjective intent excludes the traditional reliance on objective connecting factors;[citation needed] it also harms consumers as vendors often impose one-sided contractual terms selecting a venue far from the buyer's home or workplace.
Harmonization of laws[edit]
To apply one national legal system as against another may never be an entirely satisfactory approach. The parties' interests may always be better protected by applying a law conceived with international realities in mind. The Hague Conference on Private International Law is a treaty organization that oversees conventions designed to develop a uniform system. The deliberations of the conference have recently been the subject of controversy over the extent of cross-border jurisdiction on electronic commerce and defamation issues. There is a general recognition that there is a need for an international law of contracts: for example, many nations have ratified the Vienna Convention on the International Sale of Goods, the Rome Convention on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations offers less specialized uniformity, and there is support for the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts, a private restatement, all of which represent continuing efforts to produce international standards as the internet and other technologies encourage ever more interstate commerce. But other branches of the law are less well served and the dominant trend remains the role of the forum law rather than a supranational system for Conflict purposes. Even the EU, which has institutions capable of creating uniform rules with direct effect, has failed to produce a universal system for the common market. Nevertheless, the Treaty of Amsterdam does confer authority on the Community's institutions to legislate by Council Regulation in this area with supranational effect. Article 177 would give the Court of Justice jurisdiction to interpret and apply their principles so, if the political will arises, uniformity may gradually emerge in letter. Whether the domestic courts of the Member States would be consistent in applying those letters is speculative.[citation needed]
See also[edit]


Law portal



A. V. Dicey
Conflict of interest
Lex loci rei sitae
List of Hague Conventions on Private International Law
Place of the Relevant Intermediary Approach
Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola Inc.

Notes[edit]


^ Briggs (2008). The Conflict of Laws. pp. 2–3. 
Clarkson; Hill (2006). The Conflict of Laws. pp. 2–3. 
Collins (2006). Dicey, Morris and Collins on The Conflict of Laws. p. 36 (paras. 1-087 et seq.). 
Hay; Borchers; Symeonides (2010). Conflict of Laws. pp. 1–3. 
McClean; Beevers (2009). The Conflict of Laws. pp. 4–5 (para. 1-006). 
North; Fawcett (1999). Cheshire and North's Private International Law. pp. 13–14. 
Rogerson (2013). Collier's Conflicts of Laws. pp. 3–4. 
Symeonides (2008). American Private International Law. pp. 15–16 (para. 2). 
^ [1] Janet Forsyth, Careers Adviser, Careers Service, University of Edinburgh (made available by the University of Nottingham); International Opportunities in the Legal Field—a brief overview of options and links for further investigation; United Kingdom: Edinburgh, EH1, Scotland and Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, NG7, England, August 2006; pp. 1 & 2.
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-13. Retrieved 2013-10-10.  Janet Forsyth, Careers Adviser, Careers Service, University of Edinburgh (reproduced and re-edited by the Careers Service, University of Sheffield); Legal Brief (sponsored by DLA Piper): International opportunities in law ; United Kingdom: Edinburgh, EH1, Scotland and Sheffield, South Yorkshire, S10, England, August 2006 (reproduced and re-edited, August 2012); p. 1.
^ Dow Jones v Gutnick [2002] HCA 56


References[edit]

American Law Institute (ed.). Restatement of the Law, Second: Conflict of Laws. St. Paul. 
Briggs, Adrian (2008). The Conflict of Laws (Second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Born, Gary (2009). International Commercial Arbitration. Kluwer. 
Calliess, Gralf-Peter (2010). The Rome Regulations: Commentary on the European Rules of the Conflict of Laws. Kluwer. 
CILE Studies (Center for International Legal Education – University of Pittsburgh School of Law) Private Law, Private International Law, and Judicial cooperation in the EU-US Relationship
Clarkson, C.M.V.; Hill, Jonathan (2006). The Conflict of Laws (Third ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Collins, Lawrence, ed. (2012). Dicey Morris and Collins on The Conflict of Laws (Fifteenth ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell. 
Hay, Peter; Borchers, Patrick J.; Symeonides, Symeon C. (2010). Conflict of Laws (Fifth ed.). St. Paul, Minn.: West. 
McClean, David; Beevers, Kisch (2009). The Conflict of Laws (Seventh ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell. 
North, Peter; Fawcett, J.J. (1999). Cheshire and North's Private International Law (13th ed.). London: Butterworths. 
Reed, Alan (2003). Anglo-American Perspectives on Private International Law. Lewiston, N.Y.: E. Mellen Press. 
Rogerson, Pippa (2013). Collier's Conflicts of Laws (Fourth ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Symeonides, Symeon C. (2008). American Private International Law. Wolters Kluwer. 

External links[edit]

The European Institute for International Law and International Relations
CONFLICT OF LAWS .NET – News and Views in Private International Law
American Society of Comparative Law Official website
ASIL Guide to Electronic Resources for International Law
Hague Conference on Private International Law official website.
Max Planck Institute – for Comparative and International Private Law
British Institute of International and Comparative Law
International Chamber of Commerce
International Court of Arbitration
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law(UNIDROIT)
Private International Law, Research Guide, Peace Palace Library
United Nations Commission for International Trade Law
U.S. State Department Private International Law Database
Why the Hague Convention on jurisdiction threatens to strangle e-commerce and Internet free speech, by Chris Sprigman
EEC Rome convention 1980
International & Foreign Law Community
Republic of Argentina v NML Capital Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 41, regarding a hedge fund's enforcement of claim against Argentina







v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4027446-9
NDL: 00566436











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conflict_of_laws&oldid=800849256"					Categories: Conflict of lawsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles that may contain original research from October 2013All articles that may contain original researchArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2012Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers