





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





This article is part of a series on


Corporate law







By jurisdiction


Anguilla
Australia
BVI
Canada
Cayman Islands
India
South Africa
United States
Vietnam

European Union

France
Germany
United Kingdom










General corporate forms


Company
Conglomerate
Cooperative
Corporation
Holding company
Joint-stock
Partnership

General
Limited
Limited liability


Private limited
Sole proprietorship








Corporate forms
by jurisdiction



European Union




Societas (SE)
Societas cooperativa (SCE)
Societas privata (SPE)
Societas unius personae (SUP)
Economic interest grouping (EEIG)




UK / Ireland / Commonwealth




Charitable incorporated organisation (CIO)
Community interest company (CIC)
Industrial and provident society (IPS)

Limited company (Ltd.)

by guarantee
by shares
proprietary
public


Unlimited company




United States




Benefit corporation
C corporation
Limited liability company (LLC)

Low-profit LLC


Series LLC
Limited liability limited partnership (LLLP)
S corporation
Delaware corporation / statutory trust
Massachusetts business trust
Nevada corporation




Others




Aktiebolag (AB)
Aktiengesellschaft (AG)
Ansvarlig selskap (ANS)
Aktieselskab (A/S)
Aksjeselskap (AS)
Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (GmbH)
Kabushiki gaisha (K.K.)
Naamloze vennootschap (N.V.)
Osakeyhtiö (Oy)
S.A.
Société à responsabilité limitée (SARL)
more...











Doctrines


Business judgment rule
Corporate governance
De facto and estoppel corporations
Internal affairs doctrine
Limited liability
Piercing the corporate veil
Rochdale Principles
Ultra vires








Related areas


Civil procedure
Contract
Corporate registers








Company portal
Law portal







v
t
e







Business administration


Management of a business




Accounting


Management accounting
Financial accounting
Financial audit








Business entities


Cooperative
Corporation
Limited liability company
Partnership
Sole proprietorship
State-owned enterprise








Corporate governance


Annual general meeting
Board of directors
Supervisory board
Advisory board
Audit committee








Corporate law


Commercial law
Constitutional documents
Contract
Corporate crime
Corporate liability
Insolvency law
International trade law
Mergers and acquisitions








Economics


Commodity
Public economics
Labour economics
Development economics
International economics
Mixed economy
Planned economy
Econometrics
Environmental economics
Open economy
Market economy
Knowledge economy
Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Economic development
Economic statistics








Finance


Financial statement
Insurance
Factoring
Cash conversion cycle
Insider dealing
Capital budgeting
Commercial bank
Derivative
Financial statement analysis
Financial risk
Public finance
Corporate finance
Managerial finance
International finance
Liquidation
Stock market
Financial market
Tax
Financial institution
Working capital
Venture capital








Marketing


Marketing
Marketing research
Public relations
Sales








Types of management


Asset
Brand
Business intelligence
Business development
Capacity
Change

innovation


Commercial

marketing


Communications
Configuration
Conflict
Content
Customer relationship
Distributed
Earned value
Electronic business
Enterprise resource planning 

management information system


Financial
Human resource 

development


Incident
Integrated
Knowledge
Materials
Network
Office
Operations 

services


Performance
Power
Problem
Process
Product life-cycle
Product
Project
Quality
Records
Resource
Risk 

crisis


Sales
Security
Service
Strategic
Supply chain
Systems

administrator


Talent
Technology








The Organization


Architecture
Behavior
Communication
Culture
Conflict
Development
Engineering
Hierarchy
Patterns
Space
Structure








Trade


Business analysis
Business ethics
Business plan
Business judgment rule
Consumer behaviour
Business operations
International business
Business model
International trade
Business process
Business statistics








 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





A conglomerate is the combination of two or more corporations engaged in entirely different businesses that fall under one corporate group, usually involving a parent company and many subsidiaries. Often, a conglomerate is a multi-industry company. Conglomerates are often large and multinational.
Conglomerates were popular in the 1960s due to a combination of low interest rates and a repeating bear-bull market, which allowed the conglomerates to buy companies in leveraged buyouts, sometimes at temporarily deflated values. Famous examples from the 1960s include Ling-Temco-Vought,[1] ITT Corporation,[1] Litton Industries,[1] Textron,[1] Teledyne.[1] Because of low interest on the loans, the overall return on investment of the conglomerate appeared to grow. Also, the conglomerate had a better ability to borrow in the money market, or capital market, than the smaller firm at their community bank.[citation needed]
For many years this was enough to make the company's stock price rise, as companies were often valued largely on their return on investment. The aggressive nature of the conglomerators themselves was enough to make many investors, who saw a "powerful" and seemingly unstoppable force in business, buy their stock. High stock prices allowed them to raise more loans, based on the value of their stock, and thereby buy even more companies. This led to a chain reaction, which allowed them to grow very rapidly.
However, all of this growth was somewhat illusory and when interest rates rose to offset inflation, conglomerate profits fell. Investors noticed that the companies inside the conglomerate were growing no faster than before they were purchased, whereas the rationale for buying a company was that "synergies" would provide efficiency. By the late 1960s they were shunned by the market, and a major sell-off of their shares ensued. To keep the companies going, many conglomerates were forced to shed the industries they had recently purchased, and by the mid-1970s most had been reduced to shells.[2] The conglomerate fad was subsequently replaced by newer ideas like focusing on a company's core competency.
In other cases, conglomerates are formed for genuine interests of diversification rather than manipulation of paper return on investment. Companies with this orientation would only make acquisitions or start new branches in other sectors when they believed this would increase profitability or stability by sharing risks. Flush with cash during the 1980s, General Electric also moved into financing and financial services, which in 2005 accounted for about 45% of the company's net earnings. GE formerly owned a minority interest in NBCUniversal, which owns the NBC television network and several other cable networks. In some ways GE is the opposite of the "typical" 1960s conglomerate in that the company was not highly leveraged, and when interest rates went up they were able to turn this to their advantage. It was often less expensive to lease from GE than buy new equipment using loans. United Technologies has also proven to be a successful conglomerate.
With the spread of mutual funds (especially index funds since 1976), investors could more easily obtain diversification by owning a small slice of many companies in a fund rather than owning shares in a conglomerate. Another example of a successful conglomerate is Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway, a holding company which used surplus capital from its insurance subsidiaries to invest in a variety of manufacturing and service businesses.



Contents


1 International
2 Advantages and disadvantages of Conglomerates

2.1 Advantages
2.2 Disadvantages


3 Media conglomerates

3.1 Internet conglomerates


4 Food conglomerates
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Bibliography
8 External links



International[edit]
The end of the First World War caused a brief economic crisis in Weimar Germany, permitting entrepreneurs to buy businesses at rock-bottom prices. The most successful, Hugo Stinnes, established the most powerful private economic conglomerate in 1920s Europe – Stinnes Enterprises – which embraced sectors as diverse as manufacturing, mining, shipbuilding, hotels, newspapers, and other enterprises.
The best known British conglomerate was Hanson plc. It followed a rather different timescale than the U.S. examples mentioned above, as it was founded in 1964 and ceased to be a conglomerate when it split itself into four separate listed companies between 1995 and 1997.
In Hong Kong, some of the well-known conglomerates include Jardine Matheson (AD1824), Swire Group (AD1816), (British companies, one Scottish one English; companies that have a history of over 150 years and have business interests that span across four continents with a focus in Asia.) Ck Hutchison Whampoa, Sino Group, (both Asian-owned companies specialize business such as real estate and hospitality with a focus in Asia.)

Swire Group (AD1816)(or Swire Pacific) Started by Liverpool natives the Swire family, which controls a wide range of businesses, including property (Swire Properties), aviation (i.e. Cathay Pacific and Dragonair), beverages (bottler of Coca-Cola), shipping and trading.


Jardine Matheson (AD1824) operates businesses in the fields of property (Hongkong Land), finance (Jardine Lloyd Thompson), trading, retail (Dairy Farm) and hotels (i.e. Mandarin Oriental).


Ck Hutchison Whampoa: finance, logistics, telecommunication, real estate, hotels


Sino Group: Kerry Logistics, Universal Studios Singapore, Shangri-La

In Japan, a different model of conglomerate, the keiretsu, evolved. Whereas the Western model of conglomerate consists of a single corporation with multiple subsidiaries controlled by that corporation, the companies in a keiretsu are linked by interlocking shareholdings and a central role of a bank. Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Sumitomo are some of Japan's best known keiretsu, reaching from automobile manufacturing to the production of electronics such as televisions.
In China, many of the country's conglomerates are state-owned enterprises, but there is a substantial number of private conglomerates. Notable conglomerates include Legend Holdings, Dalian Wanda Group, China Poly Group, Beijing Enterprises, and Fosun International. Fosun is currently China's largest civilian-run conglomerate by revenue.[3]
In South Korea, the chaebol are a type of conglomerate owned and operated by a family. A chaebol is also inheritable, as most of current presidents of chaebols succeeded their fathers or grandfathers. Some of the largest and most well-known Korean chaebols are Samsung, LG, Hyundai Kia and SK.
The era of Licence Raj (1947–1990) in India created some of Asia's largest conglomerates, such as the Tata Group, Kirloskar Group, Larsen & Toubro, Mahindra Group, Sahara India, ITC Limited, Essar Group, Reliance ADA Group, Reliance Industries, Aditya Birla Group and the Bharti Enterprises.
In Brazil the most important conglomerates are J&F Investimentos, Odebrecht, Itaúsa, Camargo Corrêa, Votorantim Group, Andrade Gutierrez, Queiroz Galvão
In New Zealand, Fletcher Challenge was formed in 1981 from the merger of Fletcher Holdings, Challenge Corporation, and Tasman Pulp & Paper, in an attempt to create a New Zealand-based multi-national company. At the time, the newly merged company dealt in construction, building supplies, pulp and paper mills, forestry, and oil & gas. Following a series of bungled investments, the company demerged in the early 2000s to concentrate on building and construction.
In the Philippines the biggest conglomerate is The Ayala Corporation which focuses on Mall, Bank, Real Estate Development,and Telecommunication. The other big conglomerates in the Philippines are JG Summit Holding, Lopez Group of Companies, SM Prime Holding, Metro Pacific Investment Corporation and San Miguel Corporation
In United States, some of the examples are Walt Disney, Time Warner (see Below)
In Canada, one of the examples is Hudson's Bay Company
Advantages and disadvantages of Conglomerates[edit]






This section contains a pro and con list, which is sometimes inappropriate. Please help improve it by integrating both sides into a more neutral presentation, or remove this template if you feel that such a list is appropriate for this article. (March 2017)



Advantages[edit]

Diversification results in a reduction of investment risk. A downturn suffered by one subsidiary, for instance, can be counterbalanced by stability, or even expansion, in another division. For example, if Berkshire Hathaway's construction materials business has a good year, the profit might be offset by a bad year in its insurance business. This advantage is enhanced by the fact that the business cycle affects industries in different ways. Financial Conglomerates have very different compliance requirements from insurance or reinsurance solo entities or groups. There are very important opportunities that can be exploited, to increase shareholder value.
A conglomerate creates an internal capital market if the external one is not developed enough. Through the internal market, different parts of conglomerate allocate capital more effectively.
A conglomerate can show earnings growth, by acquiring companies whose shares are more discounted than its own. In fact, Teledyne, GE, and Berkshire Hathaway have delivered high earnings growth for a time.[4]

Disadvantages[edit]

The extra layers of management increase costs.[5]
Accounting disclosure is less useful information, many numbers are disclosed grouped, rather than separately for each business. The complexity of a conglomerate's accounts make them harder for managers, investors and regulators to analyze, and makes it easier for management to hide issues.
Conglomerates can trade at a discount to the overall individual value of their businesses because investors can achieve diversification on their own simply by purchasing multiple stocks. The whole is often worth less than the sum of its parts.
Culture clashes can destroy value.[6][7]
Inertia prevents development of innovation.[8]
Lack of focus, and inability to manage unrelated businesses equally well.[9]
Brand dilution where the brand loses its brand associations with a market segment, product area, or quality, price or cachet.
too big to fail

Some cite the decreased cost of conglomerate stock (a phenomenon known as conglomerate discount) as evidential of these disadvantages, while other traders believe this tendency to be a market inefficiency, which undervalues the true strength of these stocks.[10]
Media conglomerates[edit]
Further information: Media conglomerate and Concentration of media ownership
In her 1999 book No Logo, Naomi Klein provides several examples of mergers and acquisitions between media companies designed to create conglomerates for the purposes of creating synergy between them:

Time Warner included several tenuously linked businesses during the 1990s and 2000s, including Internet access, content, film, cable systems and television. Their diverse portfolio of assets allowed for cross-promotion and economies of scale. However, the company has sold or spun off many of these businesses – including Warner Music Group, Warner Books, AOL, Time Warner Cable, and Time Inc. – since 2004.
Clear Channel Communications, a public company, at one point owned a variety of TV and radio stations and billboard operations, together with a large number of concert venues across the U.S. and a diverse portfolio of assets in the UK and other countries around the world. The concentration of bargaining power in this one entity allowed it to gain better deals for all of its business units. For example, the promise of playlisting (allegedly, sometimes, coupled with the threat of blacklisting) on its radio stations was used to secure better deals from artists performing in events organized by the entertainment division. These policies have been attacked as unfair and even monopolistic, but are a clear advantage of the conglomerate strategy. On December 21, 2005, Clear Channel completed the divestiture of Live Nation, and in 2007 the company divested their television stations to other firms, some which Clear Channel holds a small interest in. Live Nation owns the events and concert venues previously owned by Clear Channel Communications.
Quebecor Media, a Canadian company controlling a subset of TV and radio stations, print magazines and newspaper, software company and a 4-play telecom company
Impact of Conglomerates on the Media: The six major media conglomerates in the United States are The Walt Disney Company, Comcast, News Corporation, Viacom, Time Warner and CBS. The Walt Disney Company is linked with ABC Television group, creating the largest media corporation, with revenue equal roughly thirty six billion dollars. Since Walt Disney owns ABC, it directly controls what shows and news is shown. When General Electric owned NBC, it did not allow any negative reporting against General Electric on air (NBCUniversal is now owned by Comcast). Viacom’s chief executive, Sumner Redstone, considers himself a “liberal democrat” and most of the programs shown have a primarily liberal perspective.[11]
Media Conglomerate Impact on Journalism: It leads to opinionated journalism versus traditional journalism. Opinionated journalism is a journalist adding his or her ideologies on a matter on top of reporting it to the public. The coverage that conglomerates have of issues, especially political, is not necessarily objective, and fails to report both sides of an issue, if not taking a neutral stance.[12] This is known as media bias. Media bias is ”the intentional or unintentional slanting of news reporting toward one side due political views or cultural beliefs of journalists, producers or owners of a media outlet.[11]”

Internet conglomerates[edit]
Although a relatively new development, Internet conglomerates, such as Alphabet, Google's parent company[13] belong to the modern media conglomerate group and play a major role within various industries, such as brand management. In most cases Internet conglomerates consist of corporations who own several medium-sized online or hybrid online-offline projects. In many cases, newly joined corporations get higher returns on investment, access to business contacts, and better rates on loans from various banks.[citation needed]
Food conglomerates[edit]
Similar to other industries there are many companies that can be termed as conglomerates.

The Phillip Morris group, which once was the parent company of Altria group, Phillip Morris International, and Kraft Foods had annual combined turnover of $80 bn.

See also[edit]


List of conglomerates
Media conglomerate
Consolidation (business)
Conglomerate discount
Holding company
Subsidiary
Associate company
Chaebol
Keiretsu
Zaibatsu
Concern (business)
Multi-divisional form
Mergers and acquisitions
ITT: The Management of Opportunity


Notes[edit]


^ a b c d e Holland 1989, pp. 57–64, 81–86.
^ [1] Hitachi, Ltd. - Company Profile, Information, Business Description, History, Background Information on Hitachi, Ltd.-Source-Reference for Business » Company History Index » Conglomerates
^ Tsui, Enid (24 June 2012). "China conglomerate Fosun to scour for deals with $1bn fund". Financial Times. 
^ [2] Conglomerates: Cash Cows or Corporate Chaos?
^ Dearbail Jordan and Robin Pagnamenta (September 25, 2007). "BP to strip out four layers of management". The Times. 
^ "Culture clash: The risks of mergers". BBC News. 17 January 2000. 
^ Michelle C. Bligh (2006). "Surviving Post-merger 'Culture Clash': Can Cultural Leadership Lessen the Casualties?". Leadership. 2 (4): 395–426. doi:10.1177/1742715006068937. 
^ "Innovation and Inertia". Stanford University's Entrepreneurship Center. 
^ [3] Definition of Conglomerate
^ [4] Conglomerate discount
^ a b "Do Media Conglomerates Influence Media Bias? (with images, tweets) · asiarenee91". Storify. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ "Media Conglomerates And It's Impact on Journalism | Comm455/History of Journalism". historyofjournalism.onmason.com. Retrieved 2016-12-02. 
^ http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2015/08/google-alphabet.html


Bibliography[edit]

Holland, Max (1989), When the Machine Stopped: A Cautionary Tale from Industrial America, Boston: Harvard Business School Press, ISBN 978-0-87584-208-0, OCLC 246343673. 
McDonald, Paul and Wasko, Janet (2010), The Contemporary Hollywood Film Industry, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-1-4051-3388-3

External links[edit]



Look up conglomerate in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



"Conglomerate". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 17 November 2007.
Conglomerate Monkeyshines, An example of how conglomerates were used in the 1960s to manufacture earnings growth







v
t
e


Business organizations



Types



Employers' organization
Chamber of commerce
Inter-professional association
Trade association

List of food industry trade associations
List of industry trade groups in the United States


Cooperative federation





Corporate groups



Chaebol (South Korea)
Conglomerate
Keiretsu (Japan)
Konzern (Germany)
Xi (China)
Zaibatsu (Japan)





Oppositional groups



Trade union
Consumer organization





See also



Bamboo network (Greater China) / (Southeast Asia)
Business network
Business networking
Cartel
Company registers
Real Estate Hegemony (Hong Kong)









Authority control



GND: 4140747-7
NDL: 00565717











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conglomerate_(company)&oldid=818195780"					Categories: Types of business entityConglomerate companiesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015Wikipedia articles needing style editing from March 2017Articles containing pro and con listsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2013Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers