

Connective tissue



Section of epididymis. Connective tissue (blue) is seen supporting the epithelium (purple)



Identifiers


FMA
9640


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



Connective tissue (CT) is one of the four basic types of animal tissue, along with epithelial tissue, muscle tissue, and nervous tissue. It develops from the mesoderm. Connective tissue is found in between other tissues everywhere in the body, including the nervous system. In the central nervous system, the three outer membranes (the meninges) that envelope the brain and spinal cord are composed of connective tissue. They support and protect the body. All connective tissue consists of three main components: fibers (elastic and collagenous fibers),[1] ground substance and cells. Not all authorities include blood[2] or lymph as connective tissue because they lack the fiber component. All are immersed in the body water.
The cells of connective tissue include fibroblasts, adipocytes, macrophages, mast cells and leucocytes.



Contents


1 Structure

1.1 Characteristics


2 Function
3 Clinical significance
4 Staining of connective tissue
5 See also
6 Notes and references
7 External links



Structure[edit]



Connective tissue can be broadly subdivided into connective tissue proper, and special connective tissue.[3][4] Connective tissue proper consists of loose connective tissue and dense connective tissue (which is further subdivided into dense regular and dense irregular connective tissues.)[5] Special connective tissue consists of reticular connective tissue, adipose tissue, cartilage, bone, and blood.[6] Other kinds of connective tissues include fibrous, elastic, and lymphoid connective tissues.[7] New vascularised connective tissue that forms in the process of wound healing is termed granulation tissue.[8] Fibroblasts are the cells responsible for the production of some CT.
Type I collagen is present in many forms of connective tissue, and makes up about 25% of the total protein content of the mammalian body.[9]



Characteristics[edit]
Characteristics of CT:

Cells are spread through an extracellular fluid.
Ground substance - A clear, colorless, and viscous fluid containing glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans to fix the body water and the collagen fibers in the intercellular spaces. Ground substance slows the spread of pathogens.
Fibers. Not all types of CT are fibrous. Examples of non-fibrous CT include adipose tissue and blood. Adipose tissue gives "mechanical cushioning" to the body, among other functions.[10][11] Although there is no dense collagen network in adipose tissue, groups of adipose cells are kept together by collagen fibers and collagen sheets in order to keep fat tissue under compression in place (for example, the sole of the foot). The matrix of blood is plasma.
Both the ground substance and proteins (fibers) create the matrix for CT. Connective tissues are derived from the mesenchyme.

Types of fibers:


Tissue
Purpose
Components
Location


Collagenous fibers
Bind bones and other tissues to each other
Alpha polypeptide chains
tendon, ligament, skin, cornea, cartilage, bone, blood vessels, gut, and intervertebral disc.


Elastic fibers
Allow organs like arteries and lungs to recoil
Elastic microfibril and elastin
extracellular matrix


Reticular fibers
Form a scaffolding for other cells
Type III collagen
liver, bone marrow, and lymphatic organs


Function[edit]
Connective tissue has a wide variety of functions that depend on the types of cells and the different classes of fibers involved. Loose and dense irregular connective tissue, formed mainly by fibroblasts and collagen fibers, have an important role in providing a medium for oxygen and nutrients to diffuse from capillaries to cells, and carbon dioxide and waste substances to diffuse from cells back into circulation. They also allow organs to resist stretching and tearing forces. Dense regular connective tissue, which forms organized structures, is a major functional component of tendons, ligaments and aponeuroses, and is also found in highly specialized organs such as the cornea.[12]:161 Elastic fibers, made from elastin and fibrillin, also provide resistance to stretch forces.[12]:171 They are found in the walls of large blood vessels and in certain ligaments, particularly in the ligamenta flava.[12]:173
In hematopoietic and lymphatic tissues, reticular fibers made by reticular cells provide the stroma—or structural support—for the parenchyma—or functional part—of the organ.[12]:171
Mesenchyme is a type of connective tissue found in developing organs of embryos that is capable of differentiation into all types of mature connective tissue.[13] Another type of relatively undifferentiated connective tissue is mucous connective tissue, found inside the umbilical cord.[12]:160
Various types of specialized tissues and cells are classified under the spectrum of connective tissue, and are as diverse as brown and white adipose tissue, blood, cartilage and bone.[12]:158 Cells of the immune system, such as macrophages, mast cells, plasma cells and eosinophils are found scattered in loose connective tissue, providing the ground for starting inflammatory and immune responses upon the detection of antigens.[12]:161
Clinical significance[edit]
Main articles: Connective tissue disease and Connective tissue neoplasm
It is estimated that 1 in 10 people have a connective tissue disorder.[14][better source needed] Diseases of connective tissue include:

Connective tissue neoplasms including sarcomas such as hemangiopericytoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in nervous tissue.
Congenital diseases include Marfan syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
Myxomatous degeneration – a pathological weakening of connective tissue.
Mixed connective tissue disease – a disease of the autoimmune system, also undifferentiated connective tissue disease.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) – a major autoimmune disease of connective tissue
Scurvy, caused by a deficiency of vitamin C which is necessary for the synthesis of collagen.

Staining of connective tissue[edit]
For microscopic viewing, most of the connective tissue staining-techniques, colour tissue fibers in contrasting shades. Collagen may be differentially stained by any of the following:

Van Gieson's stain
Masson's trichrome stain
Mallory's trichrome stain
Aniline blue stain
Eosin
Reticulin stain

See also[edit]

Connective tissue in skeletal muscle
Endometrium
Fascia
Parametrium

Notes and references[edit]


^ "Connective Tissue Study Guide". 2 January 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2014. 
^ Dorland, W. A. Newman (2012). Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (32nd ed.). Elsevier. p. 1931. ISBN 978-1-4160-6257-8. 
^ Shostak, Stanley. "Connective Tissues". Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ Carol Mattson Porth; Glenn Matfin (1 October 2010). Essentials of Pathophysiology: Concepts of Altered Health States. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp. 24–. ISBN 978-1-58255-724-3. Retrieved 11 May 2011. 
^ Potter, Hugh. "The Connective Tissues". Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ Caceci, Thomas. "Connective Tisues". Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ King, David. "Histology Intro". Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
^ "Granulation Tissue Definition". Memidex. Retrieved 7 May 2016. 
^ Di Lullo; G. A. (2002). "Mapping the Ligand-binding Sites and Disease-associated Mutations on the Most Abundant Protein in the Human, Type I Collagen". Journal of Biological Chemistry. 277 (6): 4223–31. doi:10.1074/jbc.M110709200. PMID 11704682. 
^ Xu, H.; et al. (2008). "Monitoring Tissue Engineering Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging". Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering. 106 (6): 515–527. doi:10.1263/jbb.106.515. PMID 19134545. 
^ Laclaustra, M.; et al. (2007). "Metabolic syndrome pathophysiology: The role of adiposetissue". Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases. 17 (2): 125–139. doi:10.1016/j.numecd.2006.10.005. PMID 17270403. 
^ a b c d e f g Ross M, Pawlina W (2011). Histology: A Text and Atlas (6th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp. 158–197. ISBN 978-0-7817-7200-6. 
^ Young B, Woodford P, O'Dowd G (2013). Wheater's Functional Histology: A Text and Colour Atlas (6th ed.). Elsevier. p. 65. ISBN 978-0702047473. 
^ EDS Awareness.com (2012). "EDS Awareness Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome." Acquired by (EDSawareness.com)


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Connective tissues.



Encyclopædia Britannica, Connective Tissue
Overview at kumc.edu
UIUC Histology Subject 230
Connective tissue atlas at uiowa.edu
Questions and Answers about Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue - US National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
Connective Tissue Photomicrographs







v
t
e


Biological tissues



Animals



Epithelial
Connective
Muscular
Nervous





Plants



Dermal tissue

Epidermis: Cuticle
Pavement cell
Guard cell
Subsidiary cell
Periderm: Phellem
Phelloderm




Vascular tissue

Phloem: Sieve tube
Companion cell
Phloem fiber
Phloem parenchyma
Xylem: Tracheid
Vessel element
Xylem fiber
Xylem parenchyma




Ground tissue

Parenchyma: Chlorenchyma
Aerenchyma
Collenchyma
Sclerenchyma: Sclereid
Fiber




Meristematic tissue

Primary: Protoderm
Procambium
Ground meristem
Secondary: Cork cambium
Vascular cambium














v
t
e


Connective tissue



Physiology



Soft tissue
Fibrosis
Scarring





Composition




Cells




Resident



Fibroblast
Fibrocyte
Reticular cell
Tendon cell
Adipocyte
Melanocyte





Wandering cells



Mast cell
Macrophage








Extracellular
matrix




Ground substance



Tissue fluid





Fibers



Collagen fibers
Reticular fibers

COL3A1


Elastic fibers

Elastin
Fibrillin
FBN1

FBN2
FBN3


EMILIN1
Elaunin













Classification




Proper




Loose



Reticular
Adipose

Brown
White







Dense



Dense irregular connective tissue

Submucosa
Dermis


Dense regular connective tissue

Ligament
Tendon
Aponeurosis










Embryonic



Mucoid
Mesenchymal





Specialized



Cartilage
Bone











Biology portal
Medicine portal
Neuroscience portal





Authority control



GND: 4006725-7
NDL: 00565679











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Connective_tissue&oldid=813889207"					Categories: Connective tissueHidden categories: All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from August 2015Commons category with local link different than on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersUse dmy dates from April 2017