For other uses, see Consecration (disambiguation).
"Consecrate" redirects here. For the 1995 hardcore album, see Consecrate (album).






This article needs attention from an expert in Religion. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Religion may be able to help recruit an expert. (November 2008)



Consecration is the solemn dedication to a special purpose or service, usually religious. The word consecration literally means "association with the sacred". Persons, places, or things can be consecrated, and the term is used in various ways by different groups. A synonym for to consecrate is to sanctify; a distinct antonym is to desecrate.



Contents


1 Buddhism
2 Christianity

2.1 Roman Catholic Church

2.1.1 Ordination of bishops
2.1.2 Consecrated life
2.1.3 Churches, altars, and other ritual objects
2.1.4 Eucharist


2.2 Eastern churches
2.3 Protestant churches
2.4 Restorationist Christianity


3 Hinduism
4 Jainism
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Bibliography
8 External links



Buddhism[edit]
Further information: Buddhābhiseka
Images of the Buddha and bodhisattvas are ceremonially consecrated in a broad range of Buddhist rituals that vary depending on the Buddhist traditions. Buddhābhiseka is a Pali and Sanskrit term referring to these consecration rituals.[1]
Christianity[edit]
Further information: Dedication § Dedication_of_churches
Roman Catholic Church[edit]




The Consecration of Deodat (1620, Claude Bassot).


"Consecration" is used in the Catholic Church as the setting apart for the service of God of both persons and objects.
Ordination of bishops[edit]
The ordination of a new bishop is also called a consecration. While the term "episcopal ordination" is now more common,[2] "consecration" was the preferred term from the Middle Ages through the period including the Second Vatican Council (11 October 1962 – 8 December 1965).[3]
The Vatican II document Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy n. 76 states,

Both the ceremonies and texts of the ordination rites are to be revised. The address given by the bishop at the beginning of each ordination or consecration may be in the mother tongue.


When a bishop is consecrated, the laying of hands may be done by all the bishops present.

The English text of Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition, 1997, under the heading "Episcopal ordination—fullness of the sacrament of Holy Orders", uses "episcopal consecration" as a synonymous term, using "episcopal ordination" and "episcopal consecration" interchangeably. (CCC nn. 1556–1558)
The Code of Canon Law Latin-English Edition, (1983), under "Title VI—Orders" uses the term sacrae ordinationis minister "minister of sacred ordination" and the term consecratione episcopali "episcopal consecration". (CCL cc. 1012, 1014)
Consecrated life[edit]




The consecration of Saint Genevieve, 1821 (Ste. Genevieve, Missouri).


The life of those who enter religious institutes and similar institutes is also described as Consecrated life.
The rite of consecration of virgins can be traced back at least to the fourth century.[4] By the time of the Second Vatican Council, the bestowal of the consecration was limited to cloistered nuns only.[5] The Council directed that this should be revised.[6] Two similar versions were prepared, one for women living in monastic orders, another for consecrated virgins living in the world. An English translation of the rite for those living in the world is available on the web site of the United States Association of Consecrated Virgins.
Churches, altars, and other ritual objects[edit]
Chrism, an anointing oil, is (usually scented) olive oil consecrated by a bishop.
Objects such as patens and chalices, used for the Sacrament of the Eucharist, are consecrated by a bishop, using sacred chrism. Before a new priest is ordained, the day before there is a vigil and a service or Mass at which the ordaining Bishop consecrates the ordinand's (the man or men who are transitional deacons, about to be ordained priests) paten(s) and chalice(s).
A more solemn rite exists for what used to be called the "consecration of an altar", either of the altar alone or as the central part of the rite for a church. The rite is now called the dedication.[7][8] Since it would be contradictory to dedicate to the service of God a mortgage-burdened building, the rite of dedication of a church is carried out only if the building is debt-free. Otherwise, it is only blessed.
Eucharist[edit]
See also: Anaphora (liturgy)
A very special act of consecration is that of the bread and wine used in the Eucharist, which according to Catholic belief involves their change into the Body and Blood of Christ, a change referred to as transubstantiation. To consecrate the bread and wine, the priest speaks the Words of Institution.
Eastern churches[edit]
Main article: Consecrations in Eastern Christianity
In the Eastern Orthodox Churches and the Eastern Catholic Churches, the term "consecration" can refer to either the Sacred Mystery (Sacrament) of Cheirotonea (Ordination through laying on of hands) of a Bishop, or the sanctification and solemn dedication of a church building. It can also (more rarely) be used to describe the change of the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ at the Divine Liturgy. The Chrism used at Chrismation and the Antimension placed on the Holy Table are also said to be consecrated.
Protestant churches[edit]
Church buildings, chapels and altars are consecrated to the purpose of religious worship, baptismal fonts and vessels are consecrated for the purpose of containing the Eucharistic elements, the bread and wine/the body and blood of Christ.
A person may be consecrated for a specific role within a religious hierarchy, or a person may consecrate his or her life in an act of devotion. In particular, the ordination of a bishop is often called a consecration. In churches that follow the doctrine of apostolic succession (the historical episcopate), the bishops who consecrate a new bishop are known as the consecrators and form an unbroken line of succession back to the Apostles. Those who take the vows of religious life are said to be living a consecrated life.
The Methodist Book of Worship for Church and Home (1965) contains a liturgies for "The Order for the Consecration of Bishops", "An Office for the Consecration of Deaconesses", "An Office for the Consecration of Directors of Christian Education and Directors of Music", as well as "An Office for the Opening or Consecrating of a Church Building" among others.[9] Among some religious groups there is a service of "deconsecration", to return a formerly consecrated place to secular purpose (for instance, if the building is to be sold or demolished). In the Church of England (Mother Church of the Anglican Communion), an order closing a church may remove the legal effects of consecration.
Restorationist Christianity[edit]
Mormon Christianity is replete with consecration doctrine, primarily Christ's title of "The Anointed One" signifying his official, authorized and unique role as the savior of mankind from sin and death, and secondarily each individual's opportunity and ultimate responsibility to accept Jesus' will for their life and consecrate themselves to living thereby wholeheartedly. Book of Mormon examples include "sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Heleman 3:35) and "come unto Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption . . . and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him, and continue in fasting and praying, and endure to the end; and as the Lord liveth ye will be saved." (Omni 1:26).
Other Restorationist denominations include consecration doctrine as a requirement or opportunity to secure special blessings. (expansion and citations needed)
Hinduism[edit]
Main article: Kumbhabhishekam
In most South Indian Hindu temples around the world, Kumbhabhishekam, or the temple's consecration ceremony, is done once every 12 years. It is usually done to purify the temple after a renovation or simply done to renew the purity of the temple. Hindus celebrate this event on the consecration date as the witnessing gives a good soul a thousand "punya", or good karma.[10]
Jainism[edit]
Main article: Panch Kalyanaka Pratishtha Mahotsava
Panch Kalyanaka Pratishtha is a traditional Jain ceremony that consecrates one or more Jain Tirthankara icons with celebration of Panch Kalyanaka (five auspicious events). The ceremony is generally held when new Jain temple is erected or new idols are installed in temples.[11] The consecration must be supervised by a religious authority, an Acharya or a Bhattaraka or a scholar authorized by them.
See also[edit]

Consecrated virgin
Cornerstone
Dedication
Nazirite
Vow

Notes[edit]


^ Jr, Robert E. Buswell; Jr, Donald S. Lopez (2013-11-24). The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism. Princeton University Press. ISBN 9781400848058. 
^ "By a margin of 5:1 on the Vatican website, e.g". Retrieved 31 October 2013. 
^ See, e.g., the Vatican II decree Christus Dominus on the Pastoral Office of Bishop, which exclusively uses the term "consecration", rather than "ordination", to refer to the act by which a priest becomes a bishop.
^ The Sacraments (Liturgical Press, 1987, ISBN 978-0-8146-1365-8), p. 211
^ Apostolic Constitution Sponsa Christi – AAS 43 (1951), 16
^ Sacrosanctum Concilium Archived February 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., 80
^ Caeremoniale Episcoporum. chapters IX-XI
^ Roman Missal, Ritual Masses for the Dedication of a Church and an Altar
^ The Book of Worship for Church and Home: With Orders of Worship, Services for the Administration of the Sacraments and Other Aids to Worship According to the Usages of the Methodist Church. Methodist Publishing House. 1964. pp. 53–354. Retrieved 25 March 2017. 
^ Details about Hindu temple consecration ceremony
^ Jaini, Padmanabh S. (1998) [1979], The Jaina Path of Purification, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 81-208-1578-5


Bibliography[edit]

Service Book of the Holy Orthodox-Catholic Apostolic Church, Isabel F. Hapgood (Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America, New York) 1975.
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A Concise Exposition, Protopresbyter Michael Pomazansky (Tr. Hieromonk Seraphim Rose, Saint Herman of Alaska Brotherhood, Platina CA) 1984.
The Law of God, Archpriest Seraphim Slobodskoy (Tr. Holy Trinity Monastery, Jordanville NY) 1996.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Consecration



Consecration article in Catholic Encyclopedia
Consecration of an Orthodox Church 6 pages of photos, Serbian Orthodox Church
Photos of Consecration of Altar and Antimens in the Russian Orthodox Church
The Sanctification of Holy Chrism by the Ecumenical Patriarchate
Virginity article in Catholic Encyclopedia discussing Consecration of a Virgin
Kumbhabhishekam by the Modern International Hindu Agamic Cultural Organisation







v
t
e


History of the Catholic Church



General



History of the Catholic Church

By country or region


History of the Papacy
Timeline of the Catholic Church
Catholic Ecumenical Councils
History of the Roman Curia
Catholic Church art
Religious institutes
Christian monasticism
Papal States
Role of Christianity in civilization








Church beginnings,
Great Church



Jesus
John the Baptist
Apostles

Peter
John
Paul


Saint Stephen
Great Commission
Council of Jerusalem
Apostolic Age
Apostolic Fathers
Ignatius of Antioch
Irenaeus
Pope Victor I
Tertullian






Constantine to
Pope Gregory I




Constantine the Great and Christianity
Arianism
Archbasilica of St. John Lateran
First Council of Nicaea
Pope Sylvester I
First Council of Constantinople
Biblical canon
Jerome
Vulgate
Council of Ephesus
Council of Chalcedon
Benedict of Nursia
Second Council of Constantinople
Pope Gregory I
Gregorian chant





Early Middle Ages



Third Council of Constantinople
Saint Boniface
Byzantine Iconoclasm
Second Council of Nicaea
Charlemagne
Pope Leo III
Fourth Council of Constantinople
East–West Schism





High Middle Ages



Pope Urban II
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
First Council of the Lateran
Second Council of the Lateran
Third Council of the Lateran
Pope Innocent III
Latin Empire
Francis of Assisi
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Inquisition
First Council of Lyon
Second Council of Lyon
Bernard of Clairvaux
Thomas Aquinas





Late Middle Ages



Pope Boniface VIII
Avignon Papacy
Pope Clement V
Council of Vienne
Knights Templar
Catherine of Siena
Pope Alexander VI






Reformation
Counter-Reformation




Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Thomas More
Pope Leo X
Society of Jesus
Ignatius of Loyola
Francis Xavier
Dissolution of the Monasteries
Council of Trent
Pope Pius V
Tridentine Mass
Teresa of Ávila
John of the Cross
Philip Neri
Robert Bellarmine






Baroque Period to the
French Revolution




Pope Innocent XI
Pope Benedict XIV
Suppression of the Society of Jesus
Anti-clericalism
Pope Pius VI
Shimabara Rebellion
Edict of Nantes
Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution





19th century



Pope Pius VII
Pope Pius IX
Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary
Our Lady of La Salette
Our Lady of Lourdes
First Vatican Council
Papal infallibility
Pope Leo XIII
Mary of the Divine Heart
Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart
Rerum novarum





20th century



Pope Pius X
Our Lady of Fátima
Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII
Pope Pius XII
Pope Pius XII Consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary
Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
Lateran Treaty
Pope John XXIII
Second Vatican Council
Pope Paul VI
Pope John Paul I
Pope John Paul II
World Youth Day

1995
2000







21st century



Catholic Church sexual abuse cases
Pope Benedict XVI
World Youth Day

2002
2005
2008
2011
2013
2016


Pope Francis








 Pope portal
 Vatican City portal
 Catholicism portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Consecration&oldid=818187714"					Categories: Religious behaviour and experienceChristian worship and liturgyChristian terminologyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameterArticles needing expert attention from November 2008All articles needing expert attentionReligion articles needing expert attention