This article is about conservatism as a political and social philosophy. For other uses, see Conservatism (disambiguation).


Part of a series on


Conservatism







Variants


Alternative right
Cultural
Fiscal
Feminist
Green
Liberal
Libertarian
National
Neo-
New Right
One-nation
Paleo-
Social
Traditionalist








Concepts


Familism
Free markets
Private property
Rule of law
Small government
Tradition








People


Vico
Möser
Burke
Maistre
Rivarol
Bonald
Gentz
Karamzin
Haller
Chateaubriand
Schlegel
Novalis
Coleridge
Metternich
Savigny
Müller
Calhoun
Pius IX
Alamán
Portales
Gerlach
Frederick William IV
Ranke
Leo
Newman
Prinsterer
Stahl
Brownson
Khomyakov
Disraeli
Kireyevsky
Tocqueville
Le Play
d'Aurevilly
Lincoln
Cortés
Balmes
Hübner
Veuillot
Macdonald
Saint-Bonnet
Bismarck
Katkov
Dostoyevsky
Danilevsky
Aksakov
Pobedonostsev
Taine
Leontiev
Miramón
La Tour du Pin
Pius X
Carp
Kuyper
Olazábal
Romea
Sardà y Salvany
Alexander III
Bloy
Mallock
Tikhomirov
Menéndez y Pelayo
Mella
Stolypin
Santayana
Daudet
Maurras
Purishkevich
Larumbe
Chesterton
W. Churchill
Maeztu
Van den Bruck
Spann
Bainville
Spengler
E. d'Ors
Ludovici
Ilyin
Hulme
Goerdeler
Massis
Schmitt
Eliot
R. A. Taft
Dawson
De Gaulle
Preto
Calvo Sotelo
E. J. Jung
Jünger
Paul VI
Lewis
Strauss
Voegelin
Oakeshott
M. J. Adler
Lefebvre
Latapie
Barzun
Oliveira
Kuehnelt-Leddihn
Abascal
Weaver
Reagan
Powell
Gómez Dávila
Begin
Nisbet
A. d'Ors
Viereck
Tejada y Spínola
Kirk
Solzhenitsyn
John Paul II
Molnar
Himmelfarb
Fraga Iribarne
Thatcher
Buckley
Bork
Benedict XVI
Huntington
Scalia
Howard
Weyrich
Scruton
Guzmán
W. Bush
Carvalho
Modi
Hitchens
Aznar
George








Organizations


International Democrat Union (IDU)
Democrat Union of Africa (DUA)
Asia Pacific Democrat Union (APDU)
Caribbean Democrat Union (CDU)
Union of Latin American Parties (UPLA)
European People's Party|EPP

Alliance of Conservatives
and Reformists in Europe (ACRE)

List of conservative parties








Religious conservatism


Christian right
Christian fundamentalism
Jewish right
Islamic fundamentalism
Hindutva
State Shinto
Traditionalist Catholic








National variants


Australia
Canada
China (PRC)
Colombia
Germany
Hong Kong
India
South Korea
Serbia
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States








Related topics


Agrarianism
Aristocracy
Capitalism
Carlism
Center-right
Corporatism
Conservative liberalism
Conservative Revolution
Counter-revolutionary
Fascism
Libertarian Republican
Monarchism
Neoliberalism
New Right
Old Right (United States)
Radical centrism
Radical right (Europe)
Reactionary
Reaganism
Right-wing politics
Small government
Social hierarchy
Thatcherism
Toryism








Conservatism portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





Conservatism is a political and social philosophy promoting traditional social institutions in the context of culture and civilization. The central tenets of conservatism include tradition, human imperfection, organic society, hierarchy and authority and property rights.[1] Conservatives seek to preserve a range of institutions such as monarchy, religion, parliamentary government and property rights with the aim of emphasizing social stability and continuity[2] while the more extreme elements called reactionaries oppose modernism and seek a return to "the way things were".[3][4]
The first established use of the term in a political context originated in 1818 with François-René de Chateaubriand[5] during the period of Bourbon restoration that sought to roll back the policies of the French Revolution. Historically associated with right-wing politics, the term has since been used to describe a wide range of views. There is no single set of policies regarded as conservative because the meaning of conservatism depends on what is considered traditional in a given place and time. Thus conservatives from different parts of the world—each upholding their respective traditions—may disagree on a wide range of issues. Edmund Burke, an 18th-century politician who opposed the French Revolution but supported the American Revolution, is credited as one of the main theorists of conservatism in Great Britain in the 1790s.[6]
According to Quintin Hogg, the chairman of the British Conservative Party in 1959: "Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of human nature itself".[7] In contrast to the tradition-based definition of conservatism, political theorists such as Corey Robin define conservatism primarily in terms of a general defense of social and economic inequality. From this perspective, conservatism is less an attempt to uphold traditional institutions and more "a meditation on—and theoretical rendition of—the felt experience of having power, seeing it threatened, and trying to win it back".[8][9]



Contents


1 Forms

1.1 Liberal conservatism
1.2 Conservative liberalism
1.3 Libertarian conservatism
1.4 Fiscal conservatism
1.5 National and traditional conservatism
1.6 Cultural and social conservatism
1.7 Religious conservatism
1.8 Progressive conservatism
1.9 Authoritarian conservatism


2 History

2.1 Development of Western conservatism

2.1.1 United Kingdom

2.1.1.1 Revival


2.1.2 Germany
2.1.3 United States
2.1.4 France


2.2 Historic conservatism in different countries

2.2.1 Belgium
2.2.2 Canada
2.2.3 Colombia
2.2.4 Denmark
2.2.5 Finland
2.2.6 France
2.2.7 Greece
2.2.8 Iceland
2.2.9 Italy
2.2.10 Luxembourg
2.2.11 Norway
2.2.12 Sweden
2.2.13 Switzerland
2.2.14 United Kingdom




3 Modern conservatism in different countries

3.1 Australia
3.2 Brazil
3.3 India
3.4 Russia
3.5 South Korea
3.6 United States


4 Characteristics of conservatism in France, Italy, Russia, Poland, United Kingdom, United States and Israel
5 Psychology
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Forms[edit]
Liberal conservatism[edit]
Main article: Liberal conservatism
Liberal conservatism incorporates the classical liberal view of minimal government intervention in the economy. Individuals should be free to participate in the market and generate wealth without government interference.[10] However, individuals cannot be thoroughly depended on to act responsibly in other spheres of life, therefore liberal conservatives believe that a strong state is necessary to ensure law and order and social institutions are needed to nurture a sense of duty and responsibility to the nation.[10] Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that is strongly influenced by liberal stances.[11]
As these latter two terms have had different meanings over time and across countries, liberal conservatism also has a wide variety of meanings. Historically, the term often referred to the combination of economic liberalism, which champions laissez-faire markets, with the classical conservatism concern for established tradition, respect for authority and religious values. It contrasted itself with classical liberalism, which supported freedom for the individual in both the economic and social spheres.
Over time, the general conservative ideology in many countries adopted economic liberal arguments and the term liberal conservatism was replaced with conservatism. This is also the case in countries where liberal economic ideas have been the tradition such as the United States and are thus considered conservative. In other countries where liberal conservative movements have entered the political mainstream, such as Italy and Spain, the terms liberal and conservative may be synonymous. The liberal conservative tradition in the United States combines the economic individualism of the classical liberals with a Burkean form of conservatism (which has also become part of the American conservative tradition, such as in the writings of Russell Kirk).
A secondary meaning for the term liberal conservatism that has developed in Europe is a combination of more modern conservative (less traditionalist) views with those of social liberalism. This has developed as an opposition to the more collectivist views of socialism. Often this involves stressing what are now conservative views of free market economics and belief in individual responsibility, with social liberal views on defence of civil rights, environmentalism and support for a limited welfare state. In continental Europe, this is sometimes also translated into English as social conservatism.
Conservative liberalism[edit]
Main article: Conservative liberalism
Conservative liberalism is a variant of liberalism that combines liberal values and policies with conservative stances, or more simply the right-wing of the liberal movement.[12][13][14] The roots of conservative liberalism are found at the beginning of the history of liberalism. Until the two World Wars, in most European countries the political class was formed by conservative liberals, from Germany to Italy. Events after World War I brought the more radical version of classical liberalism to a more conservative (i.e. more moderate) type of liberalism.[15]
Libertarian conservatism[edit]
Main article: Libertarian conservatism
Libertarian conservatism describes certain political ideologies within the United States and Canada which combine libertarian economic issues with aspects of conservatism. Its four main branches are constitutionalism, paleolibertarianism, small government conservatism and Christian libertarianism. They generally differ from paleoconservatives, in that they are in favor of more personal and economic freedom.
Agorists such as Samuel Edward Konkin III labeled libertarian conservatism right-libertarianism.[16][17]
In contrast to paleoconservatives, libertarian conservatives support strict laissez-faire policies such as free trade, opposition to any national bank and opposition to business regulations. They are vehemently opposed to environmental regulations, corporate welfare, subsidies and other areas of economic intervention.
Many conservatives, especially in the United States, believe that the government should not play a major role in regulating business and managing the economy. They typically oppose efforts to charge high tax rates and to redistribute income to assist the poor. Such efforts, they argue, do not properly reward people who have earned their money through hard work.
Fiscal conservatism[edit]
Main article: Fiscal conservatism




Taxpayer March on Washington, as conservative protesters walk down Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C., in 2009


Fiscal conservatism is the economic philosophy of prudence in government spending and debt.[18] In his Reflections on the Revolution in France, Edmund Burke argued that a government does not have the right to run up large debts and then throw the burden on the taxpayer:

[I]t is to the property of the citizen, and not to the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first and original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes of individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in virtue of a participation in the goods of some community, were no part of the creditor's security, expressed or implied...[T]he public, whether represented by a monarch or by a senate, can pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no public estate except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition upon the citizens at large.

National and traditional conservatism[edit]
Main articles: National conservatism and Traditional conservatism




Gianfranco Fini, former President of the Italian Chamber of Deputies, in 2004


National conservatism is a political term used primarily in Europe to describe a variant of conservatism which concentrates more on national interests than standard conservatism as well as upholding cultural and ethnic identity,[19] while not being outspokenly nationalist or supporting a far-right approach.[20][21] In Europe, national conservatives are usually eurosceptics.[22][23]
National conservatism is heavily oriented towards the traditional family and social stability as well as in favour of limiting immigration. As such, national conservatives can be distinguished from economic conservatives, for whom free market economic policies, deregulation and fiscal conservatism are the main priorities. Some commentators have identified a growing gap between national and economic conservatism: "[M]ost parties of the Right [today] are run by economic conservatives who, in varying degrees, have marginalized social, cultural, and national conservatives".[24] National conservatism is also related to traditionalist conservatism.
Traditionalist conservatism is a political philosophy emphasizing the need for the principles of natural law and transcendent moral order, tradition, hierarchy and organic unity, agrarianism, classicism and high culture as well as the intersecting spheres of loyalty.[25] Some traditionalists have embraced the labels "reactionary" and "counterrevolutionary", defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment. Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few Americans, defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.
Cultural and social conservatism[edit]
Main articles: Cultural conservatism and social conservatism
Cultural conservatives support the preservation of the heritage of one nation, or of a shared culture that is not defined by national boundaries.[26] The shared culture may be as divergent as Western culture or Chinese culture. In the United States, the term cultural conservative may imply a conservative position in the culture war. Cultural conservatives hold fast to traditional ways of thinking even in the face of monumental change. They believe strongly in traditional values and traditional politics and often have an urgent sense of nationalism.
Social conservatism is distinct from cultural conservatism, although there are some overlaps. Social conservatives may believe that society is built upon a fragile network of relationships which need to be upheld through duty, traditional values and established institutions;[27] and that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or behaviours. A social conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores, often by opposing what they consider radical policies or social engineering. Social change is generally regarded as suspect.
A second meaning of the term social conservatism developed in the Nordic countries and continental Europe, where it refers to liberal conservatives supporting modern European welfare states.
Social conservatives (in the first meaning of the word) in many countries generally favour the pro-life position in the abortion controversy and oppose human embryonic stem cell research (particularly if publicly funded); oppose both eugenics and human enhancement (transhumanism) while supporting bioconservatism;[28] support a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman; view the nuclear family model as society's foundational unit; oppose expansion of civil marriage and child adoption rights to couples in same-sex relationships; promote public morality and traditional family values; oppose atheism,[29] especially militant atheism, secularism and the separation of church and state;[30][31][32] support the prohibition of drugs, prostitution and euthanasia; and support the censorship of pornography and what they consider to be obscenity or indecency. Most conservatives in the United States support the death penalty.
Religious conservatism[edit]
See also: Christian right and Religious fundamentalism




March for Life in Paris, France in 2012


Religious conservatism principally apply the teachings of particular religions to politics, sometimes by merely proclaiming the value of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws.[33]
In most democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values. Religious conservatives typically oppose abortion, homosexual behavior, drug use and sexual activity outside of marriage. In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs and some conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life.[34]
Progressive conservatism[edit]
Main article: Centre-right politics
Progressive conservatism incorporates progressive policies alongside conservative policies. It stresses the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, support of limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation to regulate markets in the interests of both consumers and producers.[35] Progressive conservatism first arose as a distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's "One Nation" Toryism.[35][36]
There have been a variety of progressive conservative governments. In the United Kingdom, the Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, Harold Macmillan[37] and previous Prime Minister David Cameron are progressive conservatives.[38][39]
In the United States, the administration of President William Howard Taft was a progressive conservative and he described himself as "a believer in progressive conservatism"[40] and President Dwight D. Eisenhower declared himself an advocate of "progressive conservatism".[41] In Germany, Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a progressive conservative agenda called the "New Course".[42] In Canada, a variety of conservative governments have been progressive conservative, with Canada's major conservative movement being officially named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to 2003.[43] In Canada, the Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen, R. B. Bennett, John Diefenbaker, Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, Kim Campbell and Stephen Harper led progressive conservative federal governments.[43]
Authoritarian conservatism[edit]
Main article: Far-right politics
Authoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that center their ideology around conservative nationalism rather than ethnic nationalism, though certain racial components such as antisemitism may exist.[44] Authoritarian conservative movements show strong devotion towards religion, tradition and culture while also expressing fervent nationalism akin to other far-right nationalist movements. Examples of authoritarian conservative leaders include António de Oliveira Salazar[45] and Engelbert Dollfuss.[46] Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism, with which it sometimes clashed. Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism and materialism, there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary, palingenetic and populist nature of fascism—thus it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and National Socialist movements.[47] The hostility between the two ideologies is highlighted by the struggle for power for the National Socialists in Austria, which was marked by the assassination of Engelbert Dollfuss.
Sociologist Seymour Martin Lipset has examined the class basis of right wing extremist politics in the 1920–1960 era. He reports:

Conservative or rightist extremist movements have arisen at different periods in modern history, ranging from the Horthyites in Hungary, the Christian Social Party of Dollfuss in Austria, the Stahlhelm and other nationalists in pre-Hitler Germany, and Salazar in Portugal, to the pre-19S6 Gaullist movements and the monarchists in contemporary France and Italy. The right extremists are conservative, not revolutionary. They seek to change political institutions in order to preserve or restore cultural and economic ones, while extremists of the centre and left seek to use political means for cultural and social revolution. The ideal of the right extremist is not a totalitarian ruler, but a monarch, or a traditionalist who acts like one. Many such movements in Spain, Austria, Hungary, Germany, and Italy-have been explicitly monarchist....The supporters of these movements differ from those of the centrists, tending to be wealthier, and more religious, which is more important in terms of a potential for mass support.[48]

History[edit]
Development of Western conservatism[edit]
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in the United Kingdom


Part of the Politics series on


Toryism







Characteristics


Monarchism
Traditionalism
High Church Anglicanism
Traditional Catholicism
Loyalism
Royalism
Interventionism
Agrarianism/Self-sufficiency
Counterrevolution
Classicism
High culture
Noblesse oblige
Organic unity
Unionism








General topics


Cavaliers
Cavalier Parliament
Château Clique
Jacobitism
Divine right of kings
Corporatism
Family Compact (Canada)
Oxford Movement
Powellism








People


Robert Filmer
1st Earl of Clarendon
Roger L'Estrange
1st Earl of Rochester
1st Viscount Bolingbroke
3rd Earl of Bute
1st Duke of Wellington
Walter Scott
Stanley Baldwin
G. K. Chesterton
Winston Churchill
Enoch Powell
George Grant








Related topics


Conservatism
Distributists
Miguelism
Vendéens
Chouans
Legitimism
Carlism
Sanfedismo
Viva Maria
Cristeros
Reactionary
High Tory
Red Tory
Loyalist
Royalist
Veronese Easter
Tory corporatism
Tory socialism
Pink Tory
Ultra-Tories









v
t
e





In Great Britain, conservative ideas (though not yet called that) emerged in the Tory movement during the Restoration period (1660–1688). Toryism supported a hierarchical society with a monarch who ruled by divine right. Tories opposed the idea that sovereignty derived from the people and rejected the authority of parliament and freedom of religion. Robert Filmer's Patriarcha: or the Natural Power of Kings (published posthumously in 1680, but written before the English Civil War of 1642–1651) became accepted as the statement of their doctrine. However, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 destroyed this principle to some degree by establishing a constitutional government in England, leading to the hegemony of the Tory-opposed Whig ideology. Faced with defeat, the Tories reformed their movement, now holding that sovereignty was vested in the three estates of Crown, Lords and Commons[49] rather than solely in the Crown. Toryism became marginalized during the long period of Whig ascendancy in the 18th century.




Edmund Burke (1729–1797)


Conservatives typically see Richard Hooker (1554–1600) as the founding father of conservatism, along with the Marquess of Halifax (1633–1695), David Hume (1711–1776) and Edmund Burke (1729–1797). Halifax promoted pragmatism in government whilst Hume argued against political rationalism and utopianism.[50][51] Burke served as the private secretary to the Marquis of Rockingham and as official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of the Whig party.[52] Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the late 18th century United Kingdom.[53] Burke's views were a mixture of liberal and conservative. He supported the American Revolution of 1765–1783, but abhorred the violence of the French Revolution (1789–1799). He accepted the liberal ideals of private property and the economics of Adam Smith (1723–1790), but thought that economics should remain subordinate to the conservative social ethic, that capitalism should be subordinate to the medieval social tradition and that the business class should be subordinate to aristocracy. He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural leaders.[54] That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration.[55] Burke justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms.[56] Burke was a leading theorist in his day, finding extreme idealism (either Tory or Whig) an endangerment to broader liberties and (like Hume) rejecting abstract reason as an unsound guide for political theory. Despite their influence on future conservative thought, none of these early contributors were explicitly involved in Tory politics. Hooker lived in the 16th century, long before the advent of toryism, whilst Hume was an apolitical philosopher and Halifax similarly politically independent. Burke described himself as a Whig.
Revival[edit]
Shortly after Burke's death in 1797, conservatism revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions. This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke (1678–1751), who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke's sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in "Taxation No Tyranny"). In the first half of the 19th century, many newspapers, magazines and journals promoted loyalist or right-wing attitudes in religion, politics and international affairs. Burke was seldom mentioned, but William Pitt the Younger (1759–1806) became a conspicuous hero. The most prominent journals included The Quarterly Review, founded in 1809 as a counterweight to the Whigs' Edinburgh Review and the even more conservative Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine. Sack finds that the Quarterly Review promoted a balanced Canningite toryism as it was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist Dissent; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws; and it was "aggressively imperialist". The high-church clergy of the Church of England read the Orthodox Churchman's Magazine which was equally hostile to Jewish, Catholic, Jacobin, Methodist and Unitarian spokesmen. Anchoring the ultra Tories, Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine stood firmly against Catholic emancipation and favoured slavery, cheap money, mercantilism, the Navigation Acts and the Holy Alliance.[57]
Conservatism evolved after 1820, embracing free trade in 1846 and a commitment to democracy, especially under Disraeli. The effect was to significantly strengthen conservatism as a grassroots political force. Conservatism no longer was the philosophical defense of the landed aristocracy, but had been refreshed into redefining its commitment to the ideals of order, both secular and religious, expanding imperialism, strengthened monarchy and a more generous vision of the welfare state as opposed to the punitive vision of the Whigs and liberals.[58] As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy, while he described his fellow Tories as the only "really democratic party of England" and devoted to the interests of the whole people.[59] Nevertheless, inside the party there was a tension between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other.[60] The aristocracy gained strength as businessmen discovered they could use their wealth to buy a peerage and a country estate.
Although conservatives opposed attempts to allow greater representation of the middle class in parliament, they conceded that electoral reform could not be reversed and promised to support further reforms so long as they did not erode the institutions of church and state. These new principles were presented in the Tamworth Manifesto of 1834, which historians regard as the basic statement of the beliefs of the new Conservative Party.[61]




Robert Peel (1788–1850)


Some conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of noblesse oblige had promoted respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth.[62] They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing.[63] This viewpoint would later be called Tory democracy.[64] However, since Burke there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy business class.[65]
In 1834, Tory Prime Minister Robert Peel issued the Tamworth Manifesto in which he pledged to endorse moderate political reform. This marked the beginning of the transformation of British conservatism from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form based on "conservation". The party became known as the Conservative Party as a result, a name it has retained to this day. However, Peel would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (led by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli) and the "Peelites" (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen). The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade, which Peel supported, versus protectionism, supported by Derby. The majority of the party sided with Derby whilst about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party. Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852.




Margaret Thatcher (1925–2013)


In the second half of the 19th century, the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule. Leader William Gladstone (himself a former Peelite) sought to give Ireland a degree of autonomy, a move that elements in both the left and right-wings of his party opposed. These split off to become the Liberal Unionists (led by Joseph Chamberlain), forming a coalition with the Conservatives before merging with them in 1912. The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left as Conservative governments passing a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business and commerce.[66]
After a period of Liberal dominance before the First World War, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922. In the interwar period, conservatism was the major ideology in Britain[67][68][69] as the Liberal Party vied with the Labour Party for control of the left. After the Second World War, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare. The Conservatives generally accepted those policies until the 1980s. In the 1980s, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour's programmes.[70]
Other conservative political parties, such as the United Kingdom Independence Party (founded in 1993) and the Democratic Unionist Party (founded in 1971), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster (as of 2014[update], the DUP comprises the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly).
Germany[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in Germany
Conservative thought developed alongside nationalism in Germany, culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871 and the simultaneous rise of Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck's "balance of power" model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century. His "revolutionary conservatism" was a conservative state-building strategy designed to make ordinary Germans—not just the Junker elite—more loyal to state and emperor, he created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s. According to Kees van Kersbergen and Barbara Vis, his strategy was:

[G]ranting social rights to enhance the integration of a hierarchical society, to forge a bond between workers and the state so as to strengthen the latter, to maintain traditional relations of authority between social and status groups, and to provide a countervailing power against the modernist forces of liberalism and socialism.[71]

Bismarck also enacted universal male suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871.[72] He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890.[73]
With the rise of Nazism in 1933, agrarian movements faded and was supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration. Though Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists, prominent traditionalists openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide and attacks on organized religion, including Claus von Stauffenberg, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Henning von Tresckow, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen and the monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler.
More recently, the work of conservative Christian Democratic Union leader and Chancellor Helmut Kohl helped bring about German reunification, along with the closer integration of Europe in the form of the Maastricht Treaty.
Today, German conservatism is often associated with politicians such as Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure has been marked by attempts to save the common European currency (Euro) from demise. The German conservatives are divided under Merkel due to the refugee crisis in Germany and many conservatives oppose the refugee policies under Merkel.
United States[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in the United States
American conservatism is a broad system of political beliefs in the United States that is characterized by respect for American traditions, support for Judeo-Christian values, economic liberalism, anti-communism and a defense of Western culture. Liberty is a core value, with a particular emphasis on strengthening the free market, limiting the size and scope of government and opposition to high taxes and government or labor union encroachment on the entrepreneur. American conservatives consider individual liberty, within the bounds of conformity to American values, as the fundamental trait of democracy, which contrasts with modern American liberals, who generally place a greater value on social equity and social justice.[74][75]
France[edit]




Joseph de Maistre (1753–1821)


Another form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by men such as Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald. Latin conservatism was less pragmatic and more reactionary than the conservatism of Burke.[citation needed] Many continental or traditionalist conservatives do not support separation of church and state, with most supporting state recognition of and cooperation with the Catholic Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution.
Eventually, conservatives added patriotism and nationalism to the list of traditional values they support. Conservatives were the first to embrace nationalism, which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution in France.[76]
Historic conservatism in different countries[edit]
Further information: Right-wing politics and Political spectrum
Conservative political parties vary widely from country to country in the goals they wish to achieve. Both conservative and liberal parties tend to favor private ownership of property, in opposition to communist, socialist and green parties, which favor communal ownership or laws requiring social responsibility on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is primarily on social issues. Conservatives tend to reject behavior that does not conform to some social norm. Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their opposition to liberal or labor parties. The United States usage of the term "conservative" is unique to that country.[77]
According to Alan Ware, Belgium, Denmark, Iceland, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom retained viable conservative parties into the 1980s.[78] Ware said that Australia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Spain and the United States had no conservative parties, although they had either Christian democrats or liberals as major right-wing parties. Canada, Ireland and Portugal had right-wing political parties that defied categorization: the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada; Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael and Progressive Democrats in Ireland; and the Social Democratic Party of Portugal.[79] Since then, the Swiss People's Party has moved to the extreme right and is no longer considered to be conservative.[80]
Klaus von Beyme, who developed the method of party categorization, found that no modern Eastern European parties could be considered conservative, although the communist and communist-successor parties had strong similarities.[81]
In Italy, which was united by liberals and radicals (Risorgimento), liberals not conservatives emerged as the party of the right.[82] In the Netherlands, conservatives merged into a new Christian democratic party in 1980.[83] In Austria, Germany, Portugal and Spain, conservatism was transformed into and incorporated into fascism or the far-right.[84] In 1940, all Japanese parties were merged into a single fascist party. Following the war, Japanese conservatives briefly returned to politics, but were largely purged from public office.[85]
Louis Hartz explained the absence of conservatism in Australia or the United States as a result of their settlement as radical or liberal fragments of Great Britain. Although he said English Canada had a negligible conservative influence, subsequent writers claimed that loyalists opposed to the American Revolution brought a Tory ideology into Canada. Hartz explained conservatism in Quebec and Latin America as a result of their settlement as feudal societies.[86] The American conservative writer Russell Kirk provided the opinion that conservatism had been brought to the United States and interpreted the American Revolution as a "conservative revolution".[87]
Conservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly, this has been achieved through control of and support for civil institutions, the church and the armed forces, rather than through party politics. Typically, the church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where national conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government. However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved. Chile, Colombia and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur.[88] The Conservative Party of Venezuela disappeared following the Federal Wars of 1858–1863.[89] Chile's conservative party, the National Party, disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force following the subsequent return to democracy.[90]
Belgium[edit]
Having its roots in the conservative Catholic Party, the Christian People's Party, retained a conservative edge through the twentieth century, supporting the king in the Royal Question, supporting nuclear family as the cornerstone of society, defending Christian education and opposing euthanasia. The Christian People's Party dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party's support collapsed and it became the country's fifth largest party.[91][92][93] Currently, the N-VA (nieuw-vlaamse alliantie/New Flemish Alliance) is the largest party in Belgium.[94]
Canada[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in Canada
Canada's conservatives had their roots in the loyalists Tories who left America after the American Revolution. They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century and had the support of the business, professional and established Church (Anglican) elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the "Family Compact" in Ontario and the "Chateau Clique" in Quebec. John A. Macdonald's successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces and his subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century rested on his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant oligarchy and the ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a conservative coalition.[95]
The conservatives combined pro-market liberalism and Toryism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention in the marketplace and their policies were marked by noblesse oblige, a paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off.[96] From 1942, the party was known as the Progressive Conservatives until 2003, when the national party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party of Canada.[97]
The conservative Union Nationale governed the province of Quebec in periods from 1936 to 1960 and in a close alliance with English Canadian business elites and the Catholic Church. This period, known as the Great Darkness, ended with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline.[98]
Colombia[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in Colombia
The Colombian Conservative Party, founded in 1849, traces its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander's 1833–1837 administration. While the term "liberal" had been used to describe all political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as "conservative liberals" and their opponents as "red liberals". From the 1860s until the present, the party has supported strong central government; supported the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity of the family; and opposed separation of church and state. Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property and opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia's second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest.[99]
Denmark[edit]
Founded in 1915, the Conservative People's Party of Denmark. was the successor of Højre (literally "Right"). The conservative party led the government coalition from 1982 to 1993. The party was a junior partner in coalition with the Liberals from 2001 to 2011.[100] The party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU), today the youth movement of the party. The party suffered a major defeat in the parliamentary elections of September 2011 in which the party lost more than half of its seat and also lost governmental power. A liberal cultural policy dominated during the postwar period. However, by the 1990s disagreements regarding immigrants from entirely different cultures ignited a conservative backlash.[101]
Finland[edit]
The conservative party in Finland is the National Coalition Party (in Finnish Kansallinen Kokoomus, Kok). The party was founded in 1918 when several monarchist parties united. Although in the past the party was right-wing, today it is a moderate liberal conservative party. While the party advocates economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy.[102]
France[edit]




European People's Party Congress in Bucharest in 2012


Conservatism in France focused on the rejection of the French Revolution, support for the Catholic Church and the restoration of the monarchy. The monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because of disagreements on who would be king and what the national flag should be.[103] Religious tensions heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting the First World War.[104] An extreme form of conservatism characterized the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life and national direction of the economy.[105]
Following the Second World War, conservatives in France supported Gaullist groups and have been nationalistic and emphasized tradition, order and the regeneration of France.[106] Gaullists held divergent views on social issues. The number of conservative groups, their lack of stability and their tendency to be identified with local issues defy simple categorization. Conservatism has been the major political force in France since the Second World War.[107] Unusually, post-war French conservatism was formed around the personality of a leader, Charles de Gaulle; and did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartism tradition.[108] Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement).[109] The word "conservative" itself is a term of abuse in France.[110]
Greece[edit]
The main interwar conservative party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party. Both it and the Liberal party were suppressed by the authoritarian, arch-conservative and royalist 4th of August Regime of Ioannis Metaxas in 1936–1941. The PP was able to re-group after the Second World War as part of a United Nationalist Front which achieved power campaigning on a simple anticommunist, ultranationalist platform during the Greek Civil War (1946–1949). However, the vote received by the PP declined during the so-called "Centrist Interlude" in 1950–1952. In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces. The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963—after Papagos' death in 1955 reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis. Right-wing governments backed by the palace and the army overthrew the Centre Union government in 1965 and governed the country until the establishment of the far-right Regime of the Colonels (1967–1974). After the regime's collapse in August 1974, Karamanlis returned from exile to lead the government and founded the New Democracy party. The new conservative party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics.[111]
The Independent Greeks, a newly formed political party in Greece, has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism. The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people and the Greek Orthodox Church.[112]
Iceland[edit]
Founded in 1924 as the Conservative Party, Iceland's Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party. From the beginning, they have been the largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure and opposed class conflict. While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following.[113] After the financial crisis in 2008, the party has sunk to a lower support level around 20–25%.
Italy[edit]
After World War II, in Italy the conservative theories were mainly represented by the Christian Democracy (DC) party, which government form the foundation of the Republic until party's dissolution in 1994. Officially, DC refused the ideology of conservatism, but in many aspects, for example family values, it was a typical social conservative party.
In 1994, the media tycoon and entrepreneur Silvio Berlusconi founded the liberal conservative party Forza Italia (FI). Berlusconi won three elections in 1994, 2001 and 2008, governing the country for almost ten years as Prime Minister. Forza Italia formed a coalition with right-wing regional party Lega Nord while in government.
Besides FI, now the conservative ideas are mainly expressed by the New Centre-Right party led by Angelino Alfano, Berlusconi form a new party, which is the reborn Forza Italia founding a new conservative movement. Alfano is the current Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Luxembourg[edit]
Luxembourg's major Christian democratic conservative party, the Christian Social People's Party (CSV or PCS), was formed as the Party of the Right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest political party in Luxembourg and dominated politics throughout the 20th century.[114]
Norway[edit]
The Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: Høyre, literally "right") was formed by the old upper class of state officials and wealthy merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party, but lost power in 1884 when parliamentarian government was first practised. It formed its first government under parliamentarism in 1889 and continued to alternate in power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant political party. It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the responsibilities of the state and of economic liberalism. It first returned to power in the 1960s.[115] During Kåre Willoch's premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit and housing market and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education[116]
Sweden[edit]
Sweden's conservative party, the Moderate Party, was formed in 1904, two years after the founding of the liberal party.[117] The party emphasizes tax reductions, deregulation of private enterprise and privatization of schools, hospitals and kindergartens.[118]
Switzerland[edit]
There are a number of conservative parties in Switzerland's parliament, the Federal Assembly. These include the largest, the Swiss People's Party (SVP),[119] the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP)[120] and the Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland (BDP),[121] which is a splinter of the SVP created in the aftermath to the election of Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf as Federal Council.[121] The right-wing parties have a majority in the Federal Assembly.
The Swiss People's Party (SVP or UDC) was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens, formed in 1917 and the smaller Swiss Democratic Party, formed in 1942. The SVP emphasized agricultural policy and was strong among farmers in German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas.[122] The Anti-Defamation League, a non-Swiss lobby group based in the United States has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality and welfare benefits, awakening antisemitism and racism.[123] The Council of Europe has called the SVP "extreme right", although some scholars dispute this classification. For instance, Hans-Georg Betz describes it as "populist radical right".[124]
United Kingdom[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in the United Kingdom
According to historian James Sack, English conservatives celebrate Edmund Burke as their intellectual father.[125] Burke was affiliated with the Whig Party which eventually became the Liberal Party, but the modern Conservative Party is generally thought to derive from the Tory party and the MPs of the modern conservative party are still frequently referred to as Tories.
Modern conservatism in different countries[edit]
While conservatism has been seen as an appeal to traditional, hierarchical society, some writers such as Samuel P. Huntington see it as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as defending the established institutions of their time.[126]
Australia[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in Australia
The Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism.[127] It is liberal in the sense of economics. Other conservative parties are the National Party of Australia, a sister party of the Liberals, Family First Party, Democratic Labor Party, Shooters Party, Australian Conservatives and the Katter's Australian Party.
The second largest party in the country is the Australian Labor Party and its dominant faction is Labor Right, a socially conservative element. Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently, issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatization and deregulation are no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North America. Moser and Catley explain: "In America, 'liberal' means left-of-center, and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party".[128] Jupp points out that, "[the] decline in English influences on Australian reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert Menzies, which lasted until 1966".[129]
Brazil[edit]
Conservatism in Brazil originates from the cultural and historical tradition of Brazil, whose cultural roots are Luso-Iberian and Roman Catholic.[130] Brazilian conservatism from the 20th century on includes names such as Gerardo Melo Mourão and Otto Maria Carpeaux in literature; Oliveira Lima and Oliveira Torres in historiography; Sobral Pinto and Miguel Reale in law; Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira and Father Paulo Ricardo[131] in the Catholic Church; Roberto Campos and Mario Henrique Simonsen in economics; Carlos Lacerda[132] in the political arena; and Olavo de Carvalho in philosophy.[133] Brazilian Labour Renewal Party, Patriota, Progressistas and Social Christian Party are the conservative parties in Brazil.
India[edit]
In India, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) represents conservative politics nationally and is the largest right-wing conservative party.
Russia[edit]
Under Vladimir Putin, the dominant leader since 1999, Russia has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has attacked globalism and economic liberalism as well as scientific and technological progress.[134][135] Putin has promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by Aleksandr Prokhanov, stresses Russian nationalism, the restoration of Russia's historical greatness and systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies.[136] Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official, has been one of the key ideologists during Putin's presidency.[137]
In cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Church under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.[138] More broadly, The New York Times reports in September 2016 how that Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:

A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community or nation, the Russian Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism and women’s and gay rights.[139]

South Korea[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in South Korea
South Korea's major conservative party, the Saenuri Party (새누리당), has changed its form throughout its history. First it was the Democratic-Republican Party (1963–1980) and its head was Park Chung-hee, who seized power in a 1961 military coup d'état and ruled as an unelected military strongman until his formal election as President in 1963. He was President for 16 years until his assassination on 26 October 1979. The Democratic Justice Party inherited the same ideology as the Democratic-Republican Party. Its head, Chun Doo-hwan, also gained power through a coup and his followers called themselves the Hanahae. The Democratic Justice Party changed its form and acted to suppress the opposition party and to follow the people's demand for direct elections. The party's Roh Tae-woo became the first President who was elected through direct election. The next form of the major conservative party was the Democratic-Liberal Party and again through election its second leader, Kim Young-sam, became the fourteenth President of Korea. When the conservative party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed its form again to follow the party members' demand for reforms. It became the New Korean Party, but it changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the International Monetary Fund.[clarification needed] It changed its name to Grand National Party (GNP). Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had been the opposition party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007.
United States[edit]
Main article: Conservatism in the United States




President Ronald Reagan in 1982


The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word is used elsewhere. As Ribuffo (2011) notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism".[140] Since the 1950s, conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party. However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives and they played a key role in the Conservative coalition that largely controlled domestic policy in Congress from 1937 to 1963.[141]
Major priorities within American conservatism include support for tradition, law-and-order, Christianity, anti-communism and a defense of "Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments".[142] Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation and free enterprise. Some social conservatives see traditional social values threatened by secularism, so they support school prayer and oppose abortion and homosexuality.[143] Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals throughout the world and show a strong support for Israel.[144] Paleoconservatives, in opposition to multiculturalism, press for restrictions on immigration.[145] Most U.S. conservatives prefer Republicans over Democrats and most factions favor a strong foreign policy and a strong military. The conservative movement of the 1950s attempted to bring together these divergent strands, stressing the need for unity to prevent the spread of "Godless communism", which Reagan later labeled an "evil empire".[146] During the Reagan administration, conservatives also supported the so-called "Reagan Doctrine" under which the U.S. as part of a Cold War strategy provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that werefighting governments identified as socialist or communist.
Other modern conservative positions include opposition to world government and opposition to environmentalism.[147] On average, American conservatives desire tougher foreign policies than liberals do.[148]
Most recently, the Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, has proven a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals include rigorous adherence to the U.S. Constitution, lower taxes and opposition to a growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the U.S. House of Representatives in 2010.[149][150]
Characteristics of conservatism in France, Italy, Russia, Poland, United Kingdom, United States and Israel[edit]
This is a broad checklist of modern conservatism in seven countries.



 France
 Italy
 Russia
 Poland
 United Kingdom
 United States
 Israel


Main parties
Les Républicains, Arise the Republic, Movement for France, Front National
Forza Italia, Northern League, Brothers of Italy, New Centre-Right, Conservatives and Reformists
United Russia, Liberal Democratic Party
Law and Justice, Solidary Poland, Right Wing of the Republic, Poland Together
Conservative Party, UK Independence Party, Democratic Unionist Party, Ulster Unionist Party
Republican Party
Likud, The Jewish Home, Yisrael Beiteinu


Government
Strong defenders of republicanism. Opposed to federalism.
Proponents of presidentialism and federalism.
Strong defenders of historical Russian sphere of influence.
Celebratory of Russia's Tsarist and Soviet strong-man rule.
Proponents of presidentialism. Opposed to federalism.
Defends monarchism and unionism.
Rejects republicanism.
Supports unelected House of Lords chamber.
Defends first-past-the-post voting system.
Originally opposed to, but now accepting of Scottish Devolution and Welsh Devolution.
In favour of English Votes for English Laws and sympathetic to ideas of English devolution.
Supports federalism and republicanism.
Opposed to federalism. Proponents of presidentialism and Zionism.


State control
Bonapartism, Gaullism.
Small sized, but centralized state.
FI, LN: small decentralized state.
FdI, NCR and CR: small centralized state.
UR: statism. Strong, powerful, centralized state.
LDPR: strong, powerful, centralized imperialist state
Strong, centralized state.
Allegations of statism and authoritarianism.
Small centralized state.
Small, minimal, decentralized state particularly at federal level.
Strongly influenced by libertarianism.
Small, semi-central state.


Social views
Rule of law, traditionalism, authority, liberty, defence of traditional family, public healthcare.
Strongly supportive of French culture, Francophone and against Americanisation.
Generally critical of abortion.
Traditionalism, opposition to immigration, criticism of multiculturalism, individualism, cult of personality, law and order, against abortion, same-sex marriage, civil unions and euthanasia. Supportive of legal prostitution.
Critics of the Italian constitution and the Italian judiciary
Rule of law, authority, cult of personality, state unity, public unity, law and order, traditionalism.
Against modernism and Western culture.
Law and order, solidarism, national (non-liberal) democracy model, national unity, strong cult of cultural and historical heritage. Defence of catholic society, public morality and traditional family, opposes abortion, euthanasia, in-vitro, civil unions, same-sex marriage.
Anti-communism. Critics of Polish constitution and judiciary.
Hierarchy, rule of law, liberty, freedom, traditionalism, British stoicism, against abortion and same-sex marriage in Northern Ireland.
Individualism, traditionalism, law and order, gun ownership, defence of traditional family, against euthanasia, abortion, prostitution, pornography and same-sex marriage.
Strong supporters of a textualist interpretation of the American Constitution and the separation of powers.
Immensely anticommunist.
Law and order, traditionalism, nationalism, individualism, defenders of the nature of the Jewish state, opposition to non-Jewish immigration, supporters of West Bank settlements.


Religious views
Defends secularism.
Influenced by Catholic social teaching.
Critics of laicism, influenced by the Catholic Church
Strong adherents to the Russian Orthodox Church.
Strong adherents to the Catholic Church.
High Anglicanism.
Presbyterianism in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The 2012 Republican platform states: "We support the public display of the Ten Commandments as a reflection of our history and of our country’s Judeo-Christian heritage".[151] Heavily influenced by Evangelical Protestantism in southern and midwestern states and Mormonism in western states.
Influenced by secularism and Modern Orthodox Judaism. Critical of state assistance to followers of Haredi Judaism.


Economic views
LR, DLR and MPF: social market economy, distributism, nationalisation of major industries, loosely influenced by neoliberalism, moderate welfare system.
FN: nationalisation of major industries, protectionism and moderate re-distribution of wealth.
Neoliberalism, protectionism, low taxation, opposition to wealth taxes
Mixture of state regulation and market freedoms, nationalisation only of strategic industries, low taxation, moderate re-distribution of wealth, rejection of communism.
Social market economy, industrialization, nationalisation of strategic industries, moderate protectionism, economic nationalism and developmentalism, favours moderate-sized welfare state, broad pro-family policies and centralized, national health care system.
Neoliberalism, low taxation, privatisation, free trade, small welfare state, but unopposed to nationalized healthcare.
Neoliberalism, economic liberalism, free market, factions are variously free or fair trade, low taxation, minimal welfare state.
Opposes government-run healthcare.
Generally economic liberalism, privatisation, small welfare state, free trade, but with some more economically statist factions.


International government
LR: supportive of the United Nations and NATO. Supportive of the European Union.
FN, DLR and MPF: sceptical about the United Nations, NATO and the European Union.
FI, NCR and CR: supportive of NATO, various factions are moderately supportive or sceptical about the EU.
LN and FdI: sceptical about the EU and NATO.
Supportive of Commonwealth of Independent States and the Eurasian Economic Union.
Sceptical about the United Nations and the European Union and critical of NATO.
Atlanticism. Mostly supportive of NATO, various factions are soft- and strong-eurosceptic.
Supportive of the United Nations, NATO and the Commonwealth. Sceptical about the European Union.
Supportive of NATO and the so-called "regime change".
Critical of the United Nations.
Critical of the United Nations and sceptical of the European Union.


Military Issues
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Opposed to nuclear disarmament.
Favors conscription.


International affairs
LR: interventionist, favor closer ties with the United States.
FN, MPF and DLR: non-interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with the United States.
All support closer ties with Russia.
Factions are variously interventionist or non-interventionist. Support closer ties with the United States, Israel and Russia.
Interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with the United States, Georgia and Ukraine. Support strong relations with India, Syria, Iran and China.
Mostly interventionist, strong scepticism in relations with Russia and Germany, majority support strong relations with the United States.
Conservatives, UUP and DUP: interventionist, favour closer ties with Saudi Arabia and Ukraine.
UKIP: non-interventionist, favour closer ties with Russia.
All favour closer ties with the United States, other Anglosphere states and Israel.
Factions are variously interventionist or non-interventionist. Strong scepticism in relations with Iran. Favor close ties with Israel, the United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia.
Interventionist. strong scepticism in relations with Iran, Turkey, Palestine and the Arab League. Favors closer ties with the United States, India and Russia.


Psychology[edit]
See also: Biology and political orientation
Following the Second World War, psychologists conducted research into the different motives and tendencies that account for ideological differences between left and right. The early studies focused on conservatives, beginning with Theodor W. Adorno's The Authoritarian Personality (1950) based on the F-scale personality test. This book has been heavily criticized on theoretical and methodological grounds, but some of its findings have been confirmed by further empirical research.[152]
In 1973, British psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is "fear of uncertainty".[153] A meta-analysis of research literature by Jost, Glaser, Kruglanski and Sulloway in 2003 found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure, contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism.[152] A study by Kathleen Maclay stated these traits "might be associated with such generally valued characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty". The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, liberals are more tolerant of it.[154]
According to psychologist Bob Altemeyer, individuals who are politically conservative tend to rank high in right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) on his RWA scale.[155] This finding was echoed by Theodor Adorno. A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters.[156] However, a 2005 study by H. Michael Crowson and colleagues suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions: "The results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA".[157]
Psychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the idea that a high social dominance orientation (SDO) is strongly correlated with conservative political views and opposition to social engineering to promote equality,[158] though Pratto's findings have been highly controversial[citation needed] as Pratto and her colleagues found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures of prejudice. However, David J. Schneider argued for a more complex relationships between the three factors, writing "correlations between prejudice and political conservative are reduced virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted, suggesting that the conservatism–prejudice link is caused by SDO".[159] Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto's work, saying: "It is characteristic of the conservative temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often begin to value until we are already losing them. Radicalism often generates youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who have discovered what it is in life they most value".[160]
A 1996 study on the relationship between racism and conservatism found that the correlation was stronger among more educated individuals, though "anti-Black affect had essentially no relationship with political conservatism at any level of educational or intellectual sophistication". They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be entirely accounted for by their mutual relationship with social dominance orientation.[161]
A 2008 research report found that conservatives are happier than liberals and that—as income inequality increases—this difference in relative happiness increases because conservatives (more than liberals) possess an ideological buffer against the negative hedonic effects of economic inequality.[162]
Notes[edit]


^ Heywood 2012, p. 68.
^ Heywood 2012, p. 69.
^ Iain McLean and Alistair McMillan, "Conservatism", Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics, Third Edition, "Sometimes it (conservatism) has been outright opposition, based on an existing model of society that is considered right for all time. It can take a 'reactionary' form, harking back to, and attempting to reconstruct, forms of society which existed in an earlier period", Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5.
^ "Conservatism (political philosophy)". Britannica.com.  Retrieved on 1 November 2009.
^ Jerry Z. Muller (1997). Conservatism: An Anthology of Social and Political Thought from David Hume to the Present. Princeton U.P. p. 26. ISBN 0691037116. Terms related to 'conservative' first found their way into political discourse in the title of the French weekly journal, Le Conservateur, founded in 1818 by François-René de Chateaubriand with the aid of Louis de Bonald. 
^ Frank O'Gorman (2003). Edmund Burke: His Political Philosophy. Routledge. p. 171. ISBN 9780415326841. 
^ Quintin Hogg Baron Hailsham of St. Marylebone (1959). The Conservative Case. Penguin Books. 
^ Rooksby, Ed (15 July 2012). "What does conservatism stand for?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 23 December 2016. 
^ Robin, Corey (8 January 2012). "The Conservative Mind". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 23 December 2016. 
^ a b McAnulla 2006, p. 71.
^ Grigsby, Ellen (2008). Analyzing Politics. Cengage Learning. pp. 108–09, 112, 347. ISBN 978-0-495-50112-1. 
^ (in French) Ipolitique.fr Archived March 19, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "parties-and-elections.de". 
^ Gallagher, M.; Laver, M.; Mair, P. Representative Government in Europe. p. 221. 
^ Allen, R.T. Beyond Liberalism. p. 13. 
^ "New Libertarian Manifesto" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 23, 2012. 
^ "Interview With Samuel Edward Konkin III". 
^ Freeman, Robert M. (1999). Correctional Organization and Management: Public Policy Challenges, Behavior, and Structure. Elsevier. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-7506-9897-9. 
^ Mandal, V.C. (2007). Dictionary Of Public Administration. Sarup & Sons. p. 306. ISBN 978-81-7625-784-8. 
^ Wilson, Jason (August 23, 2016). "'A sense that white identity is under attack': making sense of the alt-right". The Guardian. Retrieved September 7, 2016.
^ Eliot, T.S. (1984). Notes Towards the Definition of Culture. Faber & Faber. ISBN 9780571265336. 
^ "parties-and-elections.de". 
^ Traynor, Ian (April 4, 2006). "The EU's weary travellers". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 7, 2006. 
^ National questions – conservatives fragmenting as liberals unite[dead link], National Review, June 30, 1997
^ Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson, ed. (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 870–75
^ Seaton, James (1996). Cultural Conservatism, Political Liberalism: From Criticism to Cultural Studies. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-10645-5. 
^ Heywood 2017, p. 69.
^ The Next Digital Divide (utne article)
^ "No, I don't know that atheists should be considered as citizens, nor should they be considered patriots. This is one nation under God." President George H. W. Bush, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2009-02-28. Retrieved 2009-02-27. 
^ The World & I.: Volume 1, Issue 5 (1986). The World & I.: Volume 1, Issue 5. Washington Times Corp. Retrieved 19 August 2011. militant atheism was incompatible with conservatism 
^ Peter Davies; Derek Lynch (2002). The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right. Psychology Press. ISBN 978-0-415-21494-0. Retrieved 19 August 2011. In addition, conservative Christians often endorsed far-right remines as the lesser of two evils, especially when confronted with militant atheism in the USSR. 
^ Peter L. Berger; Grace Davie; Effie Fokas (2008). Religious America, Secular Europe?: A Theme and Variations. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7546-6011-8. Retrieved 19 August 2011. If anything the reverse is true: moral conservatives continue to oppose secular liberals on a wide range of issues. 
^ Andersen, Margaret L., Taylor, Howard Francis. Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society Cengage Learning, 4th Ed. (2005), pp. 469–70. ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5
^ Petersen, David L. (2005). "Genesis and Family Values". Journal of Biblical Literature. 124 (1).
^ a b Patrick Dunleavy, Paul Joseph Kelly, Michael Moran. British Political Science: Fifty Years of Political Studies. Oxford, England, UK; Malden, Massachusetts, US: Wiley-Blackwell, 2000. pp. 107–08
^ Robert Blake. Disraeli. Second Edition. London, England, UK: Eyre & Spottiswoode (Publishers) Ltd, 1967. p. 524
^ Trevor Russel. The Tory Party: its policies, divisions and future. Penguin, 1978. p. 167
^ David Marr. "Power Trip: The Political Journey of Kevin Rudd", Issue 38 of Quarterly Essay Series. Black Inc., 2010. p. 126. (British Conservative Party leader David Cameron launched the Progressive Conservatism Project at Demos.)
^ Ruth Lister. Understanding Theories and Concepts in Social Policy. Bristol, England, UK; Portland, Oregon, US: The Policy Press, 2010. p. 53
^ Jonathan Lurie. William Howard Taft: The Travails of a Progressive Conservative. New York, New York, US: Cambridge University Press, 2012. p. ix
^ Günter Bischof. "Eisenhower, the Judiciary, and Desegregation" by Stanley I. Kutler, Eisenhower: a centenary assessment. p. 98
^ John Alden Nichols. Germany after Bismarck, the Caprivi era, 1890–1894: Issue 5. Harvard University Press, 1958. p. 260
^ a b Hugh Segal. The Right Balance. Victoria, British Columbia, Canada: Douglas & McIntyre, 2011. pp. 113–48
^ Michael H. Kater. Never Sang for Hitler: The Life and Times of Lotte Lehmann, 1888–1976. Cambridge University Press, 2008. p. 167
^ Howard J. Wiarda, Margaret MacLeish Mott. Catholic Roots and Democratic Flowers: Political Systems in Spain and Portugal. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. p. 49
^ Günter J. Bischof, Anton Pelinka, Alexander Lassner. The Dollfuss/Schuschnigg Era in Austria: A Reassessment. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2001. p. 26.
^ Cyprian Blamires. World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2006. p. 21
^ Seymour M. Lipset, "Social Stratification and 'Right-Wing Extremism'" British Journal of Sociology 10#4 (1959), pp. 346-382 on-line
^ Eccleshall 1990, pp. ix, 21
^ Muller, Jerry Z., ed. (1997). Conservatism: an anthology of social and political thought from David Hume to the present. Princeton University Press. 
^ Wolin, Sheldon S. (2 September 2013). "Hume and Conservatism". American Political Science Review. 48 (4): 999–1016. doi:10.2307/1951007. JSTOR 1951007. 
^ Stanlis, Peter J. (2009). Edmund Burke: selected writings and speeches. New York: Transaction Publishers. p. 18. 
^ M. Morton Auerbach. The Conservative Illusion. Columbia University Press (1959). p. 33. 
^ Auerbach (1959). The Conservative Illusion. pp. 37–40. 
^ Auerbach (1959). The Conservative Illusion. pp. 52–54. 
^ Auerbach (1959). The Conservative Illusion. p. 41. 
^ Sack, J. J. (1987). "The Memory of Burke and the Memory of Pitt: English Conservatism Confronts Its Past, 1806–1829". The Historical Journal. 30 (3): 623–40. JSTOR 2639162. 
^ Gregory Claeys, "Political Thought," in Chris Williams, ed., A Companion to 19th-Century Britain (2006). p. 195
^ Charles Richmond; Paul Smith (1998). The Self-Fashioning of Disraeli, 1818–1851. Cambridge UP. p. 162. ISBN 9780521497299. 
^ Auerbach (1959). The Conservative Illusion. pp. 39–40. 
^ Eccleshall 1990, pp. 79–80
^ Eccleshall 1990, p. 83
^ Eccleshall 1990, p. 90
^ Eccleshall 1990, p. 121
^ Eccleshall 1990, pp. 6–7
^ Feuchtwanger. p. 273.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Stuart Ball, "Baldwin, Stanley, first Earl Baldwin of Bewdley (1867–1947)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 2004.
^ Ross McKibbin, Parties and people: England, 1914–1951 (Oxford, 2010).
^ Garside, W.R.; Greaves, J.I. (1997). "Rationalisation and Britain's industrial Malaise: The interwar years revisited". Journal of European Economic History. 26 (1): 37–68.
^ McLean, Iain; McMillan, Laistair. Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics. Oxford University Press. p. 364. ISBN 978-0-19-920516-5. In the developed world neoliberalism is often coupled with Thatcherism [...]. 
^ Kersbergen, Kees van; Vis, Barbara (2013). Comparative Welfare State Politics: Development, Opportunities, and Reform. Cambridge UP. p. 38. ISBN 9781107652477. 
^ Moore, Robert Laurence; Vaudagna, Maurizio (2003). The American Century in Europe. Cornell University Press. p. 226. ISBN 0801440750. 
^ Frankel, Richard (2003). "From the Beer Halls to the Halls of Power: The Cult of Bismarck and the Legitimization of a New German Right, 1898–1945". German Studies Review. 26 (3): 543–60. doi:10.2307/1432746. JSTOR 1432746. 
^ Gregory L. Schneider, The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution "The label (conservatism) is in frequent use and has come to stand for a skepticism, at times an outright hostility, toward government social policies; a muscular foreign policy combined with a patriotic nationalism; a defense of traditional Christian religious values; and support for the free market economic system.", "Within the conservative disposition in America there are inherent contradictions between supporters of social order and tradition and supporters of individual freedom.", (2009) pp. 4–9, 136
^ Sherwood Thompson, Encyclopedia of Diversity and Social Justice p. 7: "Historically...social justice became associated with liberalism in which equality is the ideal.", Rowman & Littlefield, 2014, ISBN 978-1442216044.
^ ams, Ian Political Ideology Today (2nd edition), Manchester University Press, 2002, p. 46
^ Ware, Alan. Political Parties and Party Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2, pp. 31–33.
^ Ware, Alan. Political Parties and Party Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2
^ Ware, Alan. Political Parties and Party Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2, p. 44
^ Flecker, Jörg. Changing working life and the appeal of the extreme right. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2007 ISBN 978-0-7546-4915-1, p. 19.
^ Lewis, Paul G. Political parties in post-communist Eastern Europe. Routledge, 2000. ISBN 978-0-415-20182-7 pp. 54–55.
^ Smith, Denis Mack. Modern Italy: a political history. University of Michigan Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-472-10895-4 p. 31
^ Daalder, Hans and Irwin, Galen A. Politics in the Netherlands: how much change? Routledge, 1989. ISBN 0-7146-3361-5 pp. 154–57
^ Blinkhorn, Martin. Fascists and conservatives. Routledge, 1990. p. 7
^ Takemae, Eiji, and Ricketts, Robert. The allied occupation of Japan. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8264-1521-9 pp. 262–263.
^ Fierlbeck, Katherine. Political thought in Canada: an intellectual history. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006. ISBN 978-1-55111-711-9 pp. 87–88
^ Kirk, Russell. The Conservative Mind. Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing, 2001. ISBN 978-0-89526-171-7, 2001. ISBN 978-0-89526-171-7 pp. 6, 63.
^ Middlebrook, Kevin J. Conservative parties, the right, and democracy in Latin America. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000 ISBN 978-0-8018-6386-8 pp. 1–52.
^ Peeler, John A. Latin American Democracies: Colombia, Costa Rica, Venezuela. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1985. p. 79
^ Oppenheim, Lois Hecht. Politics in Chile: socialism, authoritarianism, and market democracy. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-8133-4227-6 pp. 151–152.
^ Annesley, Claire. A political and economic dictionary of Western Europe. London: Routledge, 2005. ISBN 978-1-85743-214-5, p. 124
^ Zig Layton-Henry, ed. Conservative Politics in Western Europe (St. Martin's Press, 1982)
^ Paul Lucardie and Hans-Martien Ten Napel, "Between confessionalism and liberal conservatism: the Christian Democratic parties of Belgium and the Netherlands." in David Hanley, ed. Christian Democracy in Europe: A Comparative Perspective (London: Pinter 1994) pp. 51–70
^ Philippe Siuberski (7 October 2014). "Belgium gets new government with Michel as PM". Yahoo News. AFP. Retrieved 7 November 2014. 
^ Kornberg, Allan and Mishler, William. Influence in Parliament, Canada. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1976. p. 38
^ Schultze, Rainer-Olaf; Sturm, Roland and Eberle, Dagmar. Conservative parties and right-wing politics in North America: reaping the benefits of an ideological victory?. Germany: VS Verlag, 2003. ISBN 978-3-8100-3812-8 p. 15
^ Panizza, Francisco. Populism and the mirror of democracy. London: Verso, 2005. ISBN 978-1-85984-489-2 p. 180
^ Conway, John Frederick. Debts to pay: the future of federalism in Quebec. Toronto: James Lorimer & Company, 2004. ISBN 978-1-55028-814-8 pp. 57, 77
^ Osterling, p. 180
^ Annesley, Claire. A political and economic dictionary of Western Europe. London: Routledge, 2005. ISBN 978-1-85743-214-5, p. 68
^ Kasper Støvring, "The Turn from Cultural Radicalism to National Conservatism: Cultural Policy in Denmark." Telos 2009.148 (2009) pp. 54–72
^ Siaroff, Alan. Comparative European party systems: an analysis of parliamentary elections since 1945. New York and London: Garland Publishing Inc., 2000. ISBN 978-0-8153-2930-5, p. 243
^ Roger Price (2005). A Concise History of France. Cambridge UP. p. 225. ISBN 9780521844802. 
^ Maurice Larkin, Religion, politics and preferment in France since 1890: La Belle Epoque and its legacy (Cambridge University Press, 2002)
^ Stanley Hoffmann, "The Vichy Circle of French Conservatives" in Hoffmann, Decline or Renewal? France since 1930s (1974) pp. 3–25
^ Richard Vinen, "The Parti républicain de la Liberté and the Reconstruction of French Conservatism, 1944–1951," French History (1993) 7#2 pp. 183–204
^ Viereck, Peter and Ryn, Claes G. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2005. ISBN 978-0-7658-0576-8 p. 205
^ Ware, Alan. Political Parties and Party Systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2, p. 32
^ Hauss, Charles. Comparative Politics: Domestic Responses to Global Challenges. Belmont, CA: Cengage Learning, 2008. ISBN 978-0-495-50109-1 p. 116
^ Knapp, Andrew and Wright, Vincent. The government and politics of France. New York: Routledge, 2006. ISBN 978-0-415-35733-3 p. 211
^ Penniman, Howard Rae. Greece at the polls: the national elections of 1974 and 1977. Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1981. ISBN 978-0-8447-3434-7 pp. 49–59
^ Founding Declaration of Independent Greeks
^ Grofman, Bernard and Lijpart, Arend, editors. The evolution of electoral and party systems in the Nordic countries. New York: Agathon Press, 2002. "The Icelandic electoral system 1844–1999" by Olafur Th. Hardarson ISBN 978-0-87586-138-8, pp. 107–08
^ Urwin, Derek W. A Dictionary of European History and Politics, 1945–1995. London: Pearson UK, 1996. ISBN 978-0-582-25874-7 p. 76
^ Heidar, Knut. Norway: elites on trial. Boulder Westview Press, 2001. ISBN 978-0-8133-3200-0, pp. 66–67
^ Francis Sejersted Høyrebølgen Store norske leksikon. Retrieved 18 December 2013 (in Norwegian)
^ Grofman, Bernard and Lijpart, Arend, editors. The evolution of electoral and party systems in the Nordic countries. New York: Agathon Press, 2002. "The Icelandic electoral system 1844–1999" by Olafur Th. Hardarson ISBN 978-0-87586-138-8, pp. 107–235
^ Thomas, Clive S. (editor). Political Parties and Interest Groups: Shaping Democratic Governance. Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 2001. ISBN 978-1-55587-978-5 "Sweden: Weakening Links Between Political Parties and Interest Organizations" by Anders Widfeldt
^ Ziebertz, Hans-Georg (2011). How Teachers in Europe Teach Religion: An International Empirical Study: An International Empirical Study in 16 Countries. Lit Verlag. p. 237. ISBN 978-3-643-10043-6. 
^ Juravich, Tom (2000). Ravenswood: The Steelworkers' Victory and the Revival of American Labor. Cornell University Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8014-8666-1. 
^ a b Schwok, René (2009). Switzerland – European Union: An Impossible Membership?. Peter Lang. p. 143. ISBN 978-90-5201-576-7. 
^ Siaroff, Alan Comparative European Party Systems. New York: Garland, 2000. ISBN 0-8153-2930-X p. 446
^ The Stephen Roth Institute. Anti-semitism worldwide Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2002 ISBN 0-8032-5943-3 p. 120
^ Hainsworth, pp. 44, 74
^ James J. Sack, "The Memory of Burke and the Memory of Pitt; English Conservatism Confronts its Past, 1806–1829" (1987) 623–40.
^ Winthrop and Lovell, pp. 163–66
^ Dennis Raphael (2012). Tackling Health Inequalities: Lessons from International Experiences. Canadian Scholars’ Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-55130-412-0. 
^ David Mosler; Robert Catley (1998). America and Americans in Australia. p. 83. ISBN 9780275962524. 
^ James Jupp (2004). The English in Australia. p. 172. ISBN 9780521542951. 
^ Freyre, Gilberto (1943). "Em Torno Do Problema De Uma Cultura Brasileira". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 4 (2): 167–171. doi:10.2307/2103064. 
^ "O mínimo que você precisa saber para não ser um idiota". Padre Paulo Ricardo (in Portuguese). Retrieved July 29, 2017. 
^ "Há 100 anos nascia Carlos Lacerda, o maior inimigo de Vargas". Terra (in Portuguese). April 29, 2017. Retrieved July 29, 2017. 
^ Garschagen, Bruno. "História e tradição do conservadorismo brasileiro". Gazeta do Povo (in Portuguese). Retrieved July 29, 2017. 
^ Goble, Paul A. (January 20, 2015). "Alfred Koch: Putin's rejection of science and fear of the educated destroying Russia's future". Euromaidan Press. Retrieved 13 June 2017. 
^ Sergei Prozorov, "Russian conservatism in the Putin presidency: The dispersion of a hegemonic discourse." Journal of Political Ideologies 10.2 (2005): 121–43.
^ Marlene Laruelle, "The Izborsky Club, or the New Conservative Avant‐Garde in Russia." Russian Review 75.4 (2016): 626–44.
^ Sirke Mäkinen, "Surkovian narrative on the future of Russia: making Russia a world leader." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27#2 (2011): 143–65.
^ Mark Woods, "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" Christian Today March 3, 2016
^ Andrew Higgins, "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower," New York Times Sept 13, 2016
^ Leo P. Ribuffo, "20 Suggestions for Studying the Right now that Studying the Right is Trendy," Historically Speaking Jan 2011 v.12#1 pp. 2–6, quote on p. 6
^ Kari Frederickson, The Dixicrat Revolt and the End of the Solid South, 1932–1968, p. 12, "...conservative southern Democrats viewed warily the potential of New Deal programs to threaten the region's economic dependence on cheap labor while stirring the democratic ambitions of the disfranchised and undermining white supremacy.", The University of North Carolina Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-8078-4910-1
^ Schneider, Gregory (2009). The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution. Rowman & Littlefield. p. xii. 
^ Cal Jillson (22 February 2011). Texas Politics: Governing the Lone Star State. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9780203829417. Retrieved 19 January 2012. Social conservatives focus on moral or values issues, such as abortion, marriage, school prayer, and judicial appointments. 
^ Bruce Frohnen, ed. American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia (2006) pp. ix–xiv
^ Michael Foley (25 October 2007). American credo: the place of ideas in US politics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191528330. Retrieved 18 January 2012. Against accusations of being pre-modern or even anti-modern in outlook, paleoconservatives press for restrictions on immigration, a rollback of multicultural programmes, the decentralization of the federal polity, the restoration of controls upon free trade, a greater emphasis upon economic nationalism and isolationism in the conduct of American foreign policy, and a generally revanchist outlook upon a social order in need of recovering old lines of distinction and in particular the assignment of roles in accordance with traditional categories of gender, ethnicity, and race. 
^ Paul Edward Gottfried, Conservatism in America: Making Sense of the American Right, p. 9, "Postwar conservatives set about creating their own synthesis of free-market capitalism, Christian morality, and the global struggle against Communism." (2009); Gottfried, Theologies and moral concern (1995) p. 12
^ Peter J. Jacques; Riley E. Dunlap; Mark Freeman, The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism, Environmental Politics. v12 m3 (2008), pp. 349–85
^ Peter Hays Gries, The Politics of American Foreign Policy: How Ideology Divides Liberals and Conservatives over Foreign Affairs (Stanford, 2014).
^ Theda Skocpol and Vanessa Williamson, The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism (2012) pp. 45–82
^ "Katie Couric Interviews Tea Party Leaders". 25 January 2010. 
^ See 2012 Republican NationalPlatform.
^ a b Jost, J.J, Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A.A., & Sulloway, F.J. (2003). Political conservatism as motivated social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 129:(3), pp. 339–75.
^ Wilson, G.D. (Ed.)(1973) The Psychology of Conservatism, London: Academic Press.
^ "Researchers help define what makes a political conservative". 2003. 
^ Altemeyer, B. (1981). Right-wing authoritarianism. Winnipeg, Canada: University of Manitoba Press.
^ Rubinstein, G. (1996). "Two Peoples in One Land: A Validation Study of Altemeyer's Right-Wing Authoritarianism Scale in the Palestinian and Jewish Societies in Israel". Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 27 (2): 216–230. doi:10.1177/0022022196272005. 
^ Crowson, H. Michael, Stephen J. Thoma, and Nita Hestevold. "Is political conservatism synonymous with authoritarianism?." The Journal of Social Psychology 145.5 (Oct 2005): 571(22). Expanded Academic ASAP. Gale. Remote Access. 20 May 2009 Galegroup.com.
^ Pratto, Felicia; Sidanius, Jim; Stallworth, Lisa M.; Malle, Bertram F. (1994). "Social dominance orientation: A personality variable predicting social and political attitudes". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 67 (4): 741–763. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.4.741. 
^ The psychology of stereotyping, David J. Schneider, Guilford Press, 2005 ISBN 978-1-59385-193-4 p. 275.
^ The Social science encyclopedia, Jessica Kuper, Taylor & Francis, 1985 ISBN 978-0-7102-0008-2 pp. 155–156.
^ Sidanius, J; Pratto, F; Bobo, L (1996). "Racism, conservatism, affirmative action, and intellectual sophistication: A matter of principled conservatism or group dominance?" (PDF). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 70 (3): 476–490. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.70.3.476. 
^ Napier, J. L.; Jost, J. T. (2008). "Why Are Conservatives Happier Than Liberals?". Psychological Science. 19 (6): 565–572. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02124.x. PMID 18578846. 


References[edit]


Adams, Ian (2001). Political Ideology Today. Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-71-906020-6. 
Eccleshall, Robert (1990). English Conservatism since the Restoration: An Introduction and Anthology. London: Unwin Hyman. ISBN 978-0-04-445346-8. 
Hainsworth, Paul. The extreme right in Western Europe, Abingdon, OXON: Routledge, 2008 ISBN 0-415-39682-4.
Heywood, Andrew (2015). Key Concepts in Politics and International Relations. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-13-749477-8. 
Heywood, Andrew (2012). Political Ideologies: An Introduction. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-23-036994-4. 
Heywood, Andrew (2017). Political Ideologies: An Introduction. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-137-60604-5. 
McAnulla, Stuart (2006). British Politics: A Critical Introduction. A&C Black. ISBN 0-826-46155-7. 
Osterling, Jorge P. Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla Warfare. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1989 ISBN 0887382290, ISBN 9780887382291.
Winthrop, Norman and Lovell, David W. "Varieties of Conservative Theory". In Winthrop, Norman. Liberal Democratic Theory and Its Critics. Beckenham, Kent: Croom Helm Ltd., 1983 ISBN 0-7099-2766-5, ISBN 9780709927662.


Further reading[edit]


Blee, Kathleen M. and Sandra McGee Deutsch, eds. Women of the Right: Comparisons and Interplay Across Borders (Penn State University Press; 2012) 312 pages; scholarly essays giving a global perspective on women in right-wing politics.
Blinkhorn, Martin. Fascists and Conservatives: The Radical Right and the Establishment in Twentieth-Century Europe. 1990.
Carey, George (2008). "Conservatism". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 93–95. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n61. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. 
Crowson, N. J. Facing Fascism: The Conservative Party and the European Dictators, 1935–1940. 1997.
Crunden, Robert Morse. The Superfluous Men: Critics of American Culture, 1900–1945. 1999.
Dalrymple, Theodore. Our Culture, What's Left of It: The Mandarins and the Masses. 2005.
Fryer, Russell G. Recent Conservative Political Thought: American Perspectives. 1979.
Gottfried, Paul E. The Conservative Movement. 1993.
Nugent, Neill. The British Right: Conservative and Right Wing Politics in Britain. 1977.
Sunic, Sunic and de Benoist, Alain. Against Democracy and Equality: The European New Right. 2011.
Honderich, Ted. Conservatism. 1990.
Kirl, Russell. The Conservative Mind. 2001.
Bacchetta, Paola.Right-Wing Women: From Conservatives to Extremists Around the World. 2002.
Nisbet, Robert. Conservatism: Dream and Reality. 2001.
O'Sullivan, Noel. Conservatism. 1976.
Scruton, Roger. The Meaning of Conservatism. 1980.
Schneider, Gregory L. Conservatism in America Since 1930: A Reader. 2003.
Witonski, Peter, The Wisdom of Conservatism. (4 vol. Arlington House; 1971). 2396 pages; worldwide sources.


External links[edit]

Conservatism an article by Encyclopædia Britannica.
Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Conservatism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Conservatism at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Conservatism. Kieron O'Hara. Reaktion Books. 2011 (reviewed in The Montreal Review).







v
t
e


Conservatism






Timeline





Schools




International



Corporatism
Cultural
Green
Liberal
National
Paternalistic
Progressive
Small-c
Social
Traditionalist





American



Alt-right
Compassionate
Fiscal
Fusionism

Libertarian
Traditionalist


Neoconservatism
Old Right
Paleoconservatism
Rockefeller Republicans
Social





British



Andism
High Tory
Hughliganism
One-nationism

Tory socialism
Wets


Powellism
Thatcherism

Dries







Canadian



Blue Tory
Nationalist
Pink Tory
Red Tory





French



Bonapartism
Gaullism
Legitimism
Neo-Bonapartism
Ultra-royalism
Orléanism





German



Revolutionary





Greek



Metaxism





Spanish



Carlism





Turkish



Democracy
Erdoğanism








Concepts



Tradition
Free markets
Laissez-faire
Family values
Social norm
Natural law
Social order
Social hierarchy
Private property
Protectionism





National variants



Australia
Canada
Colombia
Germany
India
Pakistan
People's Republic of China

Hong Kong


United States
United Kingdom
Turkey





Thinkers



Filmer
Vico
Hume
Burke
Herder
Bonald
de Maistre
Hegel
Chateaubriand
Müller
Tocqueville
Cortés
Taine
Leontiev
Santayana
Chesterton
Barrès
Schmitt
Jung
Strauss
Voegelin
Weaver
Oakeshott
Kirk
Solzhenitsyn
Aron
Viereck
Scruton





Politicians



Benjamin Disraeli
Klemens von Metternich
Abraham Lincoln
Napoléon III
Winston Churchill
Charles de Gaulle
Konrad Adenauer
Ronald Reagan
Margaret Thatcher





Organizations



Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists
Asia Pacific Democrat Union
European People's Party
International Democrat Union
List of conservative parties





Identity politics



Religious variants
Christian
Hindu
Jewish
Islamic
Racial and ethnic variants
Black
Jewish
Sexual orientation and gender identity variants
LGBT





Related topics



Aristocracy
Centre-right
Classical liberalism
Cobdenism
Cobhamites
Conservative liberalism
Corporatism
Counter-revolutionary
Enlightened moderation
Familialism
Foxite
Gladstonian liberalism
Grenvillite
Integralism
Loyalism
Neoliberalism
New Right
Radical centrism
Reactionary
Right-libertarianism
Right realism
Right-wing authoritarianism
Right-wing politics
Secular liberalism
Social Darwinism
Venizelism






Conservatism portal










v
t
e


Political ideologies






Left-wing politics
Centrism
Right-wing politics








Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Collectivism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force










Conservatism by continent











v
t
e


Conservatism in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Conservatism in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard












v
t
e


Conservatism in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands












v
t
e


Conservatism in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands













Conservatism portal
Current events portal
Social and political philosophy portal





Authority control



LCCN: sh85031272
GND: 4032187-3
HDS: 17458











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservatism&oldid=818542531"					Categories: ConservatismPolitical ideologiesSocial theoriesHidden categories: Articles with French-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from January 2016Pages with citations lacking titlesArticles with Norwegian-language external linksCS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt)Use American English from January 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2011Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2014Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers