This article is about consumers in social systems. For Consumers in science, see Consumers (food chain).
For other uses, see Consumer (disambiguation).




Consumers buying fruit in Nanjing, China


A consumer is a person or organization that uses economic services or commodities.[1]



Contents


1 Economics and marketing
2 Law and politics
3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Economics and marketing[edit]
The consumer is the one who pays something to consume goods and services produced. As such, consumers play a vital role in the economic system of a nation. Without consumer demand, producers would lack one of the key motivations to produce: to sell to consumers. The consumer also forms part of the chain of distribution.
Recently in marketing instead of marketers generating broad demographic profiles and Fisio-graphic profiles of market segments, marketers have started to engage in personalized marketing, permission marketing, and mass customization.[2]
Largely due the rise of the Internet, consumers are shifting more and more towards becoming "prosumers", consumers that are also producers (often of information and media on the social web) or influence the products created (e.g. by customization, crowdfunding or publishing their preferences) or actively participate in the production process or use interactive products.[3][4][5]
Law and politics[edit]
The law primarily uses a notion of the consumer in relation to consumer protection laws, and the definition of consumer is often restricted to living persons (i.e. not corporations or businesses) and excludes commercial users.[6] A typical legal rationale for protecting the consumer is based on the notion of policing market failures and inefficiencies, such as inequalities of bargaining power between a consumer and a business.[7] As of all potential voters are also consumers, consumer protection takes on a clear political significance.
Concern over the interests of consumers has also spawned consumer activism, where organized activists do research, education and advocacy to improve the offer of products and services. Also, consumer education has been incorporated into school curricula.[citation needed] There are also various non-profit publications, such as Which?, Consumer Reports and Choice Magazine, dedicated to assist in consumer education and decision making.
In India, the Consumer Protection Act 1986 differentiates the consummation of a commodity or service for personal use or to earn a livelihood. Only consumers are protected per this act and any person, entity or organization purchasing a commodity for commercial reasons are exempted from any benefits of this act.[8]
See also[edit]






This "see also" section may contain an excessive number of suggestions. Please ensure that only the most relevant links are given, that they are not red links, and that any links are not already in this article. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Alpha consumer
Consumer debt
Consumer leverage ratio
Consumer electronics
Consumer theory
Consumerism
Consumers' cooperative
Consumption
Consumtariat
Grey pound
Mental health consumer
Consumer reporting agency
Consumer protection
Consumer organization
Consumer Direct
Informed consumer
Perplexity consumer


References[edit]



^ "Consumer - Define Consumer at Dictionary.com". Dictionary.com. 
^ Cross, Robert G. (1997). Revenue management: hard-core tactics for market domination. Broadway Books. pp. 66–71. ISBN 978-0-553-06734-7. 
^ Gunelius, Susan (3 July 2010). "The Shift from CONsumers to PROsumers". Forbes. Retrieved 2 July 2016. 
^ Scammell, Margaret. "Citizen Consumers: towards a new marketing of politics?" (PDF). p. 6. Retrieved 2 July 2016. 
^ Prosumer Revisited. Retrieved 2 July 2016. 
^ Krohn, Lauren (1995). Consumer protection and the law: a dictionary. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-749-2. 
^ "An Institutional Analysis of Consumer Law". Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-29. 
^ "Consumer vs Customer". Consumerdaddy.com. Retrieved 2010-03-10. The consumer protection act 1986 of India, is a little more generous with the word 'Consumer'. According to this law, consumer is not only a person who uses the product for domestic personal use, but also one who uses the product to earn his daily livelyhood. 



External links[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Category:Consumer



U.S. Government National Consumer Protection Week







v
t
e


Consumerism




the philosophy of and activism for consumer protection



Concepts



Consumerism
Consumer
Anti-consumerism
Consumer capitalism
Consumer privacy
Consumer protection
Consumer revolution
Ethical consumerism
Informed consumer





Activism



Consumer activism
Consumer Bill of Rights
Consumer complaint
Consumer education
Consumer Movement
Collaborative consumption
United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection





Fields of study



Consumer math
Euthenics
Home economics





Key players



Consumer organizations

list


Consumers' Association
Ellen Swallow Richards
Ralph Nader
Esther Peterson









Authority control



GND: 4062632-5
NDL: 00572062











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Consumer&oldid=813604780"					Categories: ConsumerHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2010Articles with excessive see also sections from June 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers