

Conservation status
by IUCN Red List category






Extinct





Extinct (EX)
Extinct in the Wild (EW)






(list)
(list)





Threatened





Critically Endangered (CR)
Endangered (EN)
Vulnerable (VU)






(list)
(list)
(list)





Lower Risk





Near Threatened (NT)
Conservation Dependent (CD)
Least Concern (LC)






(list)
(list)







Other categories





Data Deficient (DD)
Not Evaluated (NE)






(list)







Related topics



International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN)

IUCN Red List
Lists of organisms by population














v
t
e





The conservation status of a group of organisms (for instance, a species) indicates whether the group still exists and how likely the group is to become extinct in the near future. Many factors are taken into account when assessing conservation status: not simply the number of individuals remaining, but the overall increase or decrease in the population over time, breeding success rates, and known threats. Various systems of conservation status exist and are in use at international, multi-country, national and local levels as well as for consumer use.



Contents


1 International systems

1.1 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
1.2 The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora


2 Multi-country systems
3 National systems
4 Consumer guides
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



International systems[edit]
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species[edit]
The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species is the best known worldwide conservation status listing and ranking system. Species are classified by the IUCN Red List into nine groups set through criteria such as rate of decline, population size, area of geographic distribution, and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.[1][2]
Also included are species that have gone extinct since 500 AD.[citation needed] When discussing the IUCN Red List, the official term "threatened" is a grouping of three categories: critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable.

Extinct (EX) – No known individuals remaining
Extinct in the wild (EW) – Known only to survive in captivity, or as a naturalized population outside its historic range
Critically endangered (CR) – Extremely high risk of extinction in the wild
Endangered (EN) – High risk of extinction in the wild
Vulnerable (VU) – High risk of endangerment in the wild
Near threatened (NT) – Likely to become endangered in the near future
Least concern (LC) – Lowest risk; does not qualify for a higher risk category. Widespread and abundant taxa are included in this category.
Data deficient (DD) – Not enough data to make an assessment of its risk of extinction
Not evaluated (NE) – Has not yet been evaluated against the criteria.

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora[edit]
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) aims to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten their survival. Many countries require CITES permits when importing plants and animals listed on CITES.
Multi-country systems[edit]
In the European Union (EU), the Birds and Habitats Directives are the legal instruments that evaluate the conservation status within the EU of species and habitats.
NatureServe conservation status focuses on Latin America, United States, Canada, and the Caribbean. It has been developed by scientists from NatureServe, The Nature Conservancy, and the network of natural heritage programs and data centers. It is increasingly integrated with the IUCN Red List system. Its categories for species include: presumed extinct (GX), possibly extinct (GH), critically imperiled (G1), imperiled (G2), vulnerable (G3), apparently secure (G4), and secure (G5).[3] The system also allows ambiguous or uncertain ranks including inexact numeric ranks (e.g. G2?), and range ranks (e.g. G2G3) for when the exact rank is uncertain. NatureServe adds a qualifier for captive or cultivated only (C), which has a similar meaning to the IUCN Red List extinct in the wild (EW) status.
The Red Data Book of the Russian Federation is used within the Russian Federation, and also accepted in parts of Africa.
National systems[edit]
In Australia, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) describes lists of threatened species, ecological communities and threatening processes. The categories resemble those of the 1994 IUCN Red List Categories & Criteria (version 2.3). Prior to the EPBC Act, a simpler classification system was used by the Endangered Species Protection Act 1992. Some state and territory governments also have their own systems for conservation status.[citation needed]
In Belgium, the Flemish Research Institute for Nature and Forest publishes an online set of more than 150 nature indicators in Dutch.[4]
In Canada, the Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada (COSEWIC) is a group of experts that assesses and designates which wild species are in some danger of disappearing from Canada.[5] Under the Species at Risk Act (SARA), it is up to the federal government, which is politically accountable, to legally protect species assessed by COSEWIC.
In China, the State, provinces and some counties have determined their key protected wildlife species. There is the China red data book.
In Finland, a large number of species are protected under the Nature Conservation Act, and through the EU Habitats Directive and EU Birds Directive.[6]
In Germany, the Federal Agency for Nature Conservation publishes "red lists of endangered species".
India has the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972, Amended 2003 and the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
In Japan, the Ministry of Environment publishes a Threatened Wildlife of Japan Red Data Book.[7]
In the Netherlands, the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality publishes a list of threatened species, and conservation is enforced by the Nature Conservation Act 1998. Species are also protected through the Wild Birds and Habitats Directives.
In New Zealand, the Department of Conservation publishes the New Zealand Threat Classification System lists. Under this system threatened species or subspecies are assigned one of seven categories: Nationally Critical, Nationally Endangered, Nationally Vulnerable, Serious Decline, Gradual Decline, Sparse, or Range Restricted. While the classification looks only at a national level, many species are unique to New Zealand, and species which are secure overseas are noted as such.
In Russia, the Red Book of Russian Federation came out in 2001, it contains categories defining preservation status for different species. In it there are 8 taxa of amphibians, 21 taxa of reptiles, 128 taxa of birds, and 74 taxa of mammals, in total 231. There are also more than 30 regional red books, for example the red book of the Altaic region which came out in 1994.
In South Africa, The South African National Biodiversity Institute, established under the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 2004,[8] is responsible for drawing up lists of affected species, and monitoring compliance with CITES decisions. It is envisaged that previously diverse Red lists would be more easily kept current, both technically and financially.
In Thailand, the Wild Animal Reservation and Protection Act of BE 2535 defines fifteen reserved animal species and two classes of protected species, of which hunting, breeding, possession, and trade are prohibited or restricted by law. The National Park, Wildlife and Plant Conservation Department of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment is responsible for the regulation of these activities.
In Ukraine, the Ministry of Environment Protection maintains list of endangered species (divided into seven categories from "0" - extinct to "VI" - rehabilitated) and publishes it in the Red Book of Ukraine.
In the United States of America, the Endangered Species Act created the Endangered Species List.
Consumer guides[edit]
Main article: Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification
Some consumer guides for seafood, such as Seafood Watch, divide fish and other sea creatures into three categories, analogous to conservation status categories:

Red ("say no" or "avoid")
Yellow or orange ("think twice", "good alternatives" or "some concerns")
Green ("best seafood choices")[9]

The categories do not simply reflect the imperilment of individual species, but also consider the environmental impacts of how and where they are fished, such as through bycatch or ocean bottom trawlers. Often groups of species are assessed rather than individual species (e.g. squid, prawns).
The Marine Conservation Society has five levels of ratings for seafood species, as displayed on their FishOnline website.[10]
See also[edit]

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals
Lazarus taxon
List of endangered species in North America
Listing priority number
Lists of extinct animals
Lists of organisms by population
Living Planet Index
Red List Index
Regional Red List
Reintroduction
List of organisms by populations

References[edit]



^ Categories and Criteria The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Retrieved 18 September 2015.
^ IUCN. (2012) IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria: Version 3.1 Archived 2016-01-28 at the Wayback Machine. Second edition. Gland, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK. ISBN 9782831714356.
^ "InfoNatura: About the Data: Conservation Status". NatureServe.org. 2007-04-10. Retrieved 2013-07-22. 
^ "Research Institute for Nature and Forest". Inbo.be. Retrieved 2013-07-22. 
^ "Cosewic". Government of Canada, Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Retrieved 2013-07-22. .
^ "Protecting species". Ymparisto.fi. Retrieved 2013-07-22. 
^ "Threatened Species". Biodic.go.jp. Retrieved 2013-07-22. 
^ "Welcome to the official South African government online site! - South African Government" (PDF). Info.gov.za. Retrieved 12 November 2017. 
^ "Seafood Recommendations: Our Seafood Ratings". Seafoodwatch.org. Retrieved 19 June 2014. 
^ "Fish ratings". FishOnline. Marine Conservation Society. Retrieved March 28, 2013. 



External links[edit]

Search the IUCN Red List
IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria Version 3.1
"Wildlife Conservation - Initiatives - WWF". World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved 12 November 2017. 







v
t
e


Threatened species




Template: Threatened species by region



IUCN Red List




Categories1




Extinct



Extinct (EX)
Extinct in the Wild (EW)





Threatened



Critically Endangered (CR)
Endangered (EN)
Vulnerable (VU)





Lower risk



Near Threatened (NT)
Least Concern (LC)
Lower Risk (LR)
Conservation Dependent (LR/cd)





Not fully assessed



Data Deficient (DD)
Not Evaluated (NE)








Species




Lists



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





 WP categories



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





CITES



Appendix I
Appendix II
Appendix III














By taxa



Endangered arthropods / spiders
Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista
The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates
The world's 100 most threatened species





Conservation



Biodiversity action plan
Biodiversity threats
Conservation biology
CITES
ARKive
Bird conservation
Conservation status
Conservation-reliant species
Ecoregion conservation status
Habitat destruction
Latent extinction risk
Rare species
Vulnerability and susceptibility






1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics.










v
t
e


Conservation of species



Conservation biology



Conservation behavior
Conservation dependent species
Conservation ethic
Conservation genetics
Conservation status
Ex-situ conservation
Extinction threshold
In-situ conservation
Latent extinction risk
Marine conservation
Species translocation
Threatened species








Conservation areas



Conservation designation
Conservation development
Conservation district
Conservation easement
Ecoregion conservation status
Environmental protection
Gap analysis
Habitat conservation
High conservation value area
Landscape-scale conservation
Marine protected area
National conservation area
Open space reserve
Riparian buffer
Roadless area conservation
Roadside conservation
Site-based conservation
Special Area of Conservation





Restoration



Assisted natural regeneration
Ecosystem restoration
Island restoration
Reforestation

afforestation


Rewilding





By taxa



Amphibians and reptiles
Birds

burrowing owls
raptors


Insects

bumblebees
butterflies


Land mammals

bats
bats 2
bears
cheetahs
cheetahs 2
gorillas
painted dogs
slow lorises
small cats
tigers
tigers 2
wolves


Marine

Antarctic seals
cetaceans
cetaceans 2
manatees
migratory sharks
salmon
sea otters
sea turtles
sturgeons


Plants

forests
fungi
orchids







By country



Australia
Belize
Brazil
Hong Kong
Iceland
India

Bhopal


Ireland
Italy
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States





Other



Biodiversity
Conservation agriculture
Conservation finance
Conservation grazing
Conservation management system
Conservation movement
Conservation officer
Conservation organisations
Conservation photography
Conservation psychology
Conservation refugee
Conspicuous conservation
De-extinction
Myth of superabundance
NatureServe conservation status
Planetary boundaries








Index of conservation articles
List of conservation issues
 Category








Environment portal
Ecology portal
Sustainable development portal
Extinct and endangered species portal
Biology portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation_status&oldid=813895338"					Categories: Biology terminologyBiota by conservation statusConservation biologyEnvironmental conservationEnvironmental terminologyNatureServeHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017