

Contemporary Christian music


Stylistic origins


Jesus music
Christian music
pop music
rock music




Cultural origins
Late 1960s, United States


Typical instruments


Vocals
guitar
drums
bass guitar
keyboards
piano
synthesizer




Derivative forms
Contemporary worship music


Subgenres




Christian rock
Christian hip hop
contemporary worship music




Fusion genres




Progressive Southern gospel
CEDM




Other topics




Gospel music
urban contemporary gospel






Part of a series on


Christian culture










Christian culture






Protestant culture
Holidays
Pop culture
Mormon culture
Cultural Christian












Art






Christian symbolism
Early art
Christian icons
Architecture












Literature






American Catholic literature
Bible fiction
Christian drama
Christian poetry
Christian novel
Christian science fiction
Spiritual autobiography












Music






CCM
Christmas music
Church music
Gospel music
Liturgical music












Science






Catholic Church and science
Quakers in science
Christian scientists
Catholic scientists
Christian Nobel laureates
Catholic cleric-scientists












History






Christianity in Civilization
Eastern Orthodox history
Christian influences in Islam







Christianity portal





v
t
e





Contemporary Christian music (or CCM—and occasionally "inspirational music") is a genre of modern popular music which is lyrically focused on matters concerned with the Christian faith. It formed as those affected by the 1960s Jesus movement revival began to express themselves in a more contemporary style of music than the hymns, Gospel and Southern Gospel music that was prevalent in the church at the time. Today, the term is typically used to refer to pop, rock, or praise & worship styles.
It has representation on several music charts including Billboard's Christian Albums, Christian Songs, Hot Christian AC (Adult Contemporary), Christian CHR, Soft AC/Inspirational, and Christian Digital Songs as well as the UK's Official Christian & Gospel Albums Chart. Top-selling CCM artists will also appear on the Billboard 200. In the iTunes Store, the genre is represented as part of the Christian and gospel genre.[1]



Contents


1 History
2 Style and artists
3 Controversy
4 Growth
5 See also
6 Notes
7 Further reading



History[edit]
The growing popularity in the styles of Rock 'n 'Roll music in the 1950s was initially dismissed by the church because it was believed to encourage sinfulness. Yet as evangelical churches adapted to appeal to more people, the musical styles used in worship changed as well by adopting the sounds of this popular style.[2]
The genre became known as contemporary Christian music as a result of the Jesus movement revival in the latter 1960s and early 1970s,[3][4] and was originally called Jesus music.[5] "About that time, many young people from the sixties' counterculture professed to believe in Jesus. Convinced of the bareness of a lifestyle based on drugs, free sex, and radical politics, 'hippies' became 'Jesus people'".[6] However, there were people who felt that Jesus was another "trip".[6] It was during the 1970s Jesus movement that Christian music started to become an industry within itself.[7] "Jesus Music" started by playing instruments and singing songs about love and peace, which then translated into love of God. Paul Wohlegemuth, who wrote the book Rethinking Church Music, said "[the] 1970s will see a marked acceptance of rock-influenced music in all levels of church music. The rock style will become more familiar to all people, its rhythmic excesses will become refined, and its earlier secular associations will be less remembered."[8]
Larry Norman is often remembered as the "father of Christian rock", because of his early contributions (before the Jesus movement) to the developing new genre that mixed rock rhythms with the Christian messages.[9] Though his style was not initially well received by many in the Christian community of the time, he continued throughout his career to create controversial hard-rock songs such as "Why Should the Devil Have All the Good Music?".[9] He is remembered as the artist "who first combined rock 'n' roll with Christian lyrics" in the Gospel Music Hall of Fame.[9] Though there were Christian albums in the 1960s that contained contemporary-sounding songs, there were two albums recorded in 1969 that are considered[by whom?] to be the first complete albums of "Jesus rock": Upon This Rock (1969) by Larry Norman initially released on Capitol Records,[10] and Mylon – We Believe by Mylon LeFevre, released by Cotillion, which was LeFevre's attempt at blending gospel music with southern rock.[11][12] Unlike traditional or southern gospel music, this new Jesus music was birthed out of rock and folk music.[13]
Pioneers of this movement also included Keith Green, 2nd Chapter of Acts, Barry McGuire, Andraé Crouch and the Disciples, Evie, Benny Hester,[14][15] and The Imperials, among others. The small Jesus music culture had expanded into a multimillion-dollar industry by the 1980s.[7][16][17] Many CCM artists such as Benny Hester,[18][19] Amy Grant,[20] DC Talk,[21] Michael W. Smith,[22] Stryper,[23] and Jars of Clay[24] found crossover success with Top 40 mainstream radio play.
The genre emerged and became prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s.[25] Beginning in July 1978, CCM Magazine began covering "Contemporary Christian Music" artists and a wide range of spiritual themes until it launched online publications in 2009.[26][27]
It has certain themes and messages behind the songs and their lyrics including Praise and worship, faith, encouragement, and prayer.[28] These songs also focus on themes of devotion, inspiration, redemption, reconciliation, and renewal.[3] Many people listen to contemporary Christian music for comfort through tough times. The lyrics and messages conveyed in CCM songs are aimed to evangelize and to worship Jesus.[25] One of the earliest goals of CCM was to spread the news of Jesus to non-Christians.[3] In addition, contemporary Christian music also strengthens the faith of believers.[3]
Style and artists[edit]
Contemporary Christian music has influences from folk, gospel, pop and rock music.[25] Genres of music such as soft rock, folk rock, alternative, hip-hop, etc. have played a large influence on CCM.[29]
Charismatic churches have had a large influence on contemporary Christian music and are one of the largest producers of CCM. Hillsong Church is one of the many prominent CCM artists.[30] Contemporary Christian music has also expanded into many subgenres.[25] Christian punk, Christian hardcore, Christian metal, and Christian hip hop, which, although not normally considered CCM, can also come under the genre's umbrella.[31] Contemporary worship music is also incorporated in modern CCM. Contemporary worship is both recorded and performed during church services.
Some prominent artists who assisted CCM to become popular include Amy Grant, Michael W. Smith, Phil Keaggy and John Elefante.[25] Several mainstream artists, such as The Byrds, Bob Dylan, Van Morrison, Elvis Presley, Creed, Lifehouse and U2, have dealt with Christian themes in their music, yet are not part of the CCM industry.[31] Other artists representing the genre include MercyMe, Casting Crowns, Jeremy Camp, Third Day, Matthew West, tobyMac, Chris Tomlin, Brandon Heath and Aaron Shust. Historically, Jars of Clay, dc Talk, Steven Curtis Chapman and Newsboys have also belonged to this genre.
Controversy[edit]
Contemporary Christian music has been a topic of controversy in various ways since its beginnings in the 1960s.[31] The Christian college Bob Jones University discourages its dormitory students from listening to CCM.[32] Others simply find the concept of Christian pop/rock music to be an unusual phenomenon, since rock music has historically been associated with themes such as sexual promiscuity, rebellion, drug and alcohol use, and other topics normally considered antithetical to the teachings of Christianity.[31] This controversy caused by evangelical pop music was explored by Gerald Clarke in his Time magazine article "New Lyrics for the Devil's Music".[33]
Some writers from the Reformed Presbyterian tradition assert that the inclusion of CCM in a worship service violates the second commandment and the Regulative Principle of Worship because it adds man-made inventions, lyrics and instrumental music to the biblically appointed way of worshipping God.[34]
Contemporary Christian musicians and listeners have sought to extend it into settings where religious music traditionally might not be heard.[vague] MercyMe's song "I Can Only Imagine" was a crossover success despite having a clear Christian message.[35]
Paul Baker, author of Contemporary Christian Music, addressed the question, "Is the music a ministry, or is it entertainment? The motives, on both sides, were nearly always sincere and well intentioned, rarely malicious."[36]
"The responsibility of the church is not to provide escape from reality," according to Donald Ellsworth, the author of Christian Music in Contemporary Witness, "but to give answers to contemporary problems through legitimate, biblical means."[37]
Many studies on church growth show that churches have grown in size after changing the style of music.[38] James Emery White, a consultant for preaching and worship within the Southern Baptist Convention, made a statement about how many churches that changed styles to using more contemporary Christian music, appeared to have a quicker growth.[39]







Chris Tomlin









Rebecca St. James









Michael W. Smith




Growth[edit]
The contemporary Christian music industry has grown over the years. Album sales have increased from 31 million in 1996 to 44 million sales in 2000. Since EMI's purchase of Sparrow Records, sales have increased 100 percent. However, the main goal of the label continues to be aspiring to make a positive impact on the world through contemporary Christian music. The company has given back money to the CCM community.[40]
See also[edit]

Christian alternative rock
Christian hip hop
Christian metal
Christian rock
Contemporary worship music
Hearitfirst.com
Korean Contemporary Christian music
Latin Christian music
Neues Geistliches Lied

Notes[edit]


^ In the US iTunes store, the section is entitled Christian & Gospel. In the UK iTunes store, it's Gospel. Canada's and Australia's iTunes section is entitled Inspirational.
^ McDowell, Amy D. "Contemporary Christian Music" – via Oxford Music and Art Online. 
^ a b c d Banjo, Omotayo O.; Williams, Kesha Morant (2011). "A House Divided? Christian Music in Black and White". Journal of Media & Religion. 10 (3): 115–137. doi:10.1080/15348423.2011.599640. 
^ "Who killed the contemporary Christian music industry?". 2016-02-17. Retrieved 2017-08-21. 
^ Forbes, Bruce David, and Jeffrey H. Mahan. Religion and Popular Culture in America Berkeley, Calif: University of California Press, 2000. eBook Collection (EBSCOhost). Web. February 8, 2014.
^ a b Frame, John M. Contemporary Worship Music. Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 1997.
^ a b Powell, Mark Allan (2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. p. 10. ISBN 1-56563-679-1. By the '80s, the special-interest network that Jesus music had spawned had developed into a multimillion-dollar industry. Contemporary Christian music had its own magazines, radio stations, and award shows. The Jesus movement revival was over. 
^ Baker, Paul. Page 140. Contemporary Christian Music: Where it came from What it is Where It's Going. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway Books, 1985. Print.
^ a b c Hevesi, Dennis. "Larry Norman, 60, Singer of Christian Rock Music." New York Times 4 Mar 2008: 1. Print. 3 Feb. 2016
^ John J. Thompson, Raised by Wolves: The Story of Christian Rock & Roll (2000):49.
^ Oord, Bill. "Mylon LeFevre Biography". Retrieved June 26, 2010. 
^ Powell, Mark Allan (2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. p. 520. ISBN 1-56563-679-1. Musically, the 1970 album Mylon (a.k.a. We Believe) is deservedly a Christian classic, a raw example of down-home southern rock. A dominant organ, spicy guitars, and generous use of female background vocals give the project a funky-and-gritty combination of R&B soul and roots rock. 
^ Di Sabatino, David (1999). The Jesus People Movement: an annotated bibliography and general resource. Lake Forest, CA: Jester Media. p. 136. 
^ "CCM Legends – Benny Hester". CBN.com. 
^ "CCMs 500 Best Albums – Benny Hester / Be A Receiver, 1978". CCMs500BestAlbums.WordPress.com. 
^ "It's a long way from 'Jesus music' to CCM industry". Canadianchristianity.com. Archived from the original on February 15, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ "News Digest". Pe.ag.org. March 16, 2003. Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ Billboard Top 50 Adult Contemporary Chart – Nov 7, 1981 – 'Nobody Knows Me Like You' Debuts No. 44 Mainstream. Billboard.com. 
^ "CCMs 500 Best Albums – Nobody Knows Me Like You". CCMs500BestAlbums.WordPress.com. 
^ "Amy Grant – Chart history". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2013. 
^ "dc Talk – Chart history". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2013. 
^ "Michael W. Smith – Chart history". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2013. 
^ "Stryper – Chart history". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2013. 
^ "Jars of Clay – Chart history". Billboard. Retrieved May 8, 2013. 
^ a b c d e Nantais, David (2007). "What Would Jesus Listen To?". America. 196 (18): 22–24. 
^ "CCM Magazine". TodaysChristianMusic.com. Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ "CCM Magazine Subscription Options". CCMMagazine.com. Retrieved January 26, 2013. 
^ Adedeji, Femi (2006). "Essentials of Christian Music in Contemporary Times: A Prognosis". Asia Journal of Theology. 20 (2): 230–240. 
^ Mumford, Lawrence R. "A variety of religious composition: the music we sing, in and out of church, is more varied and interesting than we've been led to believe." Christianity Today June 2011: 42+. Fine Arts and Music Collection. Web. February 8, 2014.
^ Evans, Mark. Studies in Popular Music : Open up the Doors : Music in the Modern Church. London: Equinox Publishing Ltd, 2006. eBook.
^ a b c d Powell, Mark Allan (2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music (First printing ed.). Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. ISBN 1-56563-679-1. 
^ "BJU ~ Residence Hall Life". Bob Jones University. Archived from the original on January 25, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2009. 
^ Clarke, Gerald (June 24, 2001). "New Lyrics for the Devil's Music". Time. 
^ Schwertley, Brian. "Musical Instruments in the Public Worship of God". 
^ Adams, Ramsay (July 6, 2003). "Christian Rock Crosses Over". Fox News. Retrieved October 6, 2010. 
^ Baker, Paul. Page 133. Contemporary Christian Music: Where it came from What it is Where It's Going. Westchester, Illinois: Crossway Books, 1985. Print.
^ Ellsworth, Donald. Christian Music in Contemporary Witness: Historical Antecedents and Contemporary Practices. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House, 1979. Print.
^ Fast Facts about American Religion. Hirr.hartsem.edu (May 6, 1998). Retrieved on 2013-09-04.
^ Miller, Steve. The Contemporary Christian Music Debate. Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale Publishers, 1993. Print. p.3
^ Black, Beau. "CCM's growing pains: a survey of labels finds the message—if not the creativity—is intact. (music)." Christianity Today March 11, 2002: 75+. Fine Arts and Music Collection. Web. February 8, 2014.


Further reading[edit]

Alfonso, Barry. The Billboard Guide . Billboard Books, 2002.
Beaujon, Andrew (2006). Body Piercing Saved My Life: Inside the Phenomenon of Christian Rock. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-81457-9. 
Di Sabatino, David (1999). The Jesus People Movement: An Annotated Bibliography and General Resource. Bibliographies and Indexes in Religious Studies, Number 49. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-30268-5. 
Du, Paul (2003). "Contemporary Christian Music". The Encyclopedia of Music. New York City: Billboard Books. pp. 422–423. ISBN 0-8230-7869-8. 
Granger, Thom (2001). CCM Presents: The 100 Greatest Albums in Christian Music. Nashville: CCM Books. 
Hendershot, Heather (2004). "Why Should the Devil Have all the Good Music? Christian Music and the Secular Marketplace". Shaking the World for Jesus: Media and Conservative Evangelical Culture. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-32679-9. 
Howard, Jay R (1999). Apostles of Rock: The Splintered World of Contemporary Christian Music. Lexington, 0-8131-9086-X: The University of Kentucky Press. 
Joseph, Mark (1999). The Rock and Roll Rebellion: Why People of Faith Abandoned Rock Music-- And Why They're Coming Back. Nashville: Broadman & Holman. 
Joseph, Mark (2003). Faith, God & Rock 'n' Roll. London: Sanctuary. 
Kyle, Richard (2006). "If You Can't Beat 'em Join 'em". Evangelicalism : an Americanized Christianity. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers. pp. 281–286. ISBN 0-7658-0324-0. 
Lucarini, Dan. Why I left the Contemporary Christian Music Movement. Evangelical Press. 
Miller, Steve (1993). The Contemporary Christian Music Debate. Tyndale House. 
Powell, Mark Allan (2002). Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers. ISBN 1-56563-679-1. 
Romanowski, William D. Eyes Wide Open: Looking for God in Popular Culture. Brazos Press, 2001.
Sears, Gordon E. Is Today's Christian Music Sacred? Coldwater, Mich.: [s.n., 199-?]. 32, [1] p. Without ISBN
Stowe, David W. (2013). No Sympathy for the Devil: Christian Pop Music and the Transformation of American Evangelicalism. University of North Carolina Press.
Young, Shawn David (2015). Gray Sabbath: Jesus People USA, the Evangelical Left, and the Evolution of Christian Rock. Columbia University Press.







v
t
e


Christian music



Roots and beginnings



Chorale
Hymn
Jesus music
Sacred Harp
Shape note
Spiritual












Modern genres



Contemporary Christian music
Contemporary worship music
Gospel music
Neues Geistliches Lied





Fusion genres



Christian alternative rock
Christian country music
Christian electronic dance music
Christian hardcore
Christian hip hop
Christian metal
Christian punk
Christian rock
Christian ska
Gospel blues
Latin Christian music
Progressive southern gospel
Southern gospel
Traditional black gospel
Urban contemporary gospel





Chant







v
t
e


Christian liturgical chant



Eastern



Armenian
Byzantine
Coptic
Ethiopian
Georgian
Obikhod

Bulgarian
Greek
Kievan


Prostopinije
Syrian
Znamenny





Western



Ambrosian
Anglican
Beneventan
Celtic
Gallican
Gelineau
Gregorian
Mozarabic
Old Roman








Lists



Anglican church composers
Christian bands and artists by genre
Christian country artists
Christian dance, electronic, and techno artists
Christian hardcore bands
Christian metal artists
Christian performers of hip hop and rap
Christian punk bands
Christian ska bands
Christian record labels
Christian vocal artists
Christian worship music artists
Gospel musicians





Related topics



Anglican church music
Christian media
Christian music festival
Christian music industry
Christianity
Church music
Contemporary Catholic liturgical music








 Category
 Commons
 Portal












v
t
e





Popular music
Pop music






General forms of
Western popular music



Adult contemporary
Avant-pop
Christmas music
Contemporary Christian music
Crossover music
Easy listening
Orchestral pop
Traditional




Major genres



Country
Folk (contemporary)
Hip hop
Jazz
R&B
Pop
Rock





Song types



Car song
Cover version
Illustrated song
Jingle
Novelty song
Pocket symphony
Sentimental ballad
Slow jam
Standard
Three-minute








Topics specific to
pop music style



Millennial whoop
New Pop
Pop music automation
Rockism and poptimism
Spanish Tinge




Subgenres
(by style)



Art
Baroque
Bedroom
Brill Building
Bubblegum
Chamber
Country
Dance
Dark
Downtempo
Dream
Electro
Emo
Experimental
Folk
Hypnagogic
Indie
J-pop
Jangle
K-pop
Noise
Operatic
Rap
Reggae
Rock
Soul
Power
Progressive
Psychedelic
Shibuya-kei
Sophisti-pop
Surf
Sunshine
Swamp
Synthesizer
Teen
Tropical
Twee
Wonky
Yé-yé








Cultural impact of ...



The Beach Boys
The Beatles
Madonna
Elvis Presley





Lists



Best-selling albums
Best-selling artists

Girl groups


Best-selling singles
Genres
Honorific nicknames
Glossary of terms





Other topics



50s progression
Boy band
Catchiness
Concept album
Earworm
Folk music
Girl group
Groove
Hook
Imperial phase
Lick
Microgenre
Record chart
Recording consciousness
Popular culture
Pop icon
Song structure
Stan
Tin Pan Alley
Vernacular music










Regional variants



Asia



Arabic
Assyrian
Chinese

Mandarin
Taiwanese
Cantopop
Hong Kong English pop


Indian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean

Global


Pakistani
Indonesian
Lao
Malaysian
Philippine
Thai
Vietnamese
Turkish





Africa



Africa

Afropop







America



American

Popular music
Pop music


Brazilian
Latin

Colombian
Mexican







Europe



Azerbaijani
British
Europop

Austropop
French
Greek
Hungarian
Italian
Nederpop
Serbian
Scandipop

Swedish




Russian
SFR Yugoslavia
Ukraine














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Contemporary_Christian_music&oldid=814090624"					Categories: 20th-century music genres21st-century music genresChristian music genresContemporary Christian musicEvangelicalism in the United StatesPopular musicRadio formatsHidden categories: Use mdy dates from March 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2010All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2013