
American Revolutionary War








Armed Forces


United States




Continental Army

→ Commander-in-Chief
→ Regional departments
→ Units (1775, 1776, 1777–1784)


Continental Navy
Continental Marines
State forces

→ List of militia units
→ List of state navies
→ Maritime units






Great Britain




List of British units




France




List of French units




Related topics




List of battles
Military leadership







v
t
e





The Continental Army was formed by the Second Continental Congress after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War by the colonies that became the United States of America. Established by a resolution of the Congress on June 14, 1775, it was created to coordinate the military efforts of the Thirteen Colonies in their revolt against the rule of Great Britain. The Continental Army was supplemented by local militias and troops that remained under control of the individual states or were otherwise independent. General George Washington was the commander-in-chief of the army throughout the war.
Most of the Continental Army was disbanded in 1783 after the Treaty of Paris ended the war. The 1st and 2nd Regiments went on to form the nucleus of the Legion of the United States in 1792 under General Anthony Wayne. This became the foundation of the United States Army in 1796.



Contents


1 Origins
2 Operations
3 Demobilization
4 Rank insignia
5 Major battles
6 See also
7 References

7.1 Bibliography
7.2 Further reading


8 External links



Origins[edit]
The Continental Army consisted of soldiers from all 13 colonies and, after 1776, from all 13 states. When the American Revolutionary War began at the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775, the colonial revolutionaries did not have an army. Previously, each colony had relied upon the militia, made up of part-time citizen-soldiers, for local defense, or the raising of temporary "provincial regiments" during specific crises such as the French and Indian War of 1754–63. As tensions with Great Britain increased in the years leading to the war, colonists began to reform their militias in preparation for the perceived potential conflict. Training of militiamen increased after the passage of the Intolerable Acts in 1774. Colonists such as Richard Henry Lee proposed forming a national militia force, but the First Continental Congress rejected the idea.[1]
On April 23, 1775, the Massachusetts Provincial Congress authorized the raising of a colonial army consisting of 26 company regiments. New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Connecticut soon raised similar but smaller forces. On June 14, 1775, the Second Continental Congress decided to proceed with the establishment of a Continental Army for purposes of common defense, adopting the forces already in place outside Boston (22,000 troops) and New York (5,000).[2] It also raised the first ten companies of Continental troops on a one-year enlistment, riflemen from Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware and Virginia to be used as light infantry,[2] who became the 1st Continental Regiment in 1776.
On June 15, 1775, the Congress elected by unanimous vote George Washington as Commander-in-Chief, who accepted and served throughout the war without any compensation except for reimbursement of expenses.[3][4][5][6]
On July 18, 1775, the Congress requested all colonies form militia companies from "all able bodied effective men, between sixteen and fifty years of age." It was not uncommon for men younger than sixteen to enlist as most colonies had no requirement of parental consent for those under twenty-one (adulthood).[7]
Four major-generals (Artemas Ward, Charles Lee, Philip Schuyler, and Israel Putnam) and eight brigadier-generals (Seth Pomeroy, Richard Montgomery, David Wooster, William Heath, Joseph Spencer, John Thomas, John Sullivan, and Nathanael Greene) were appointed by the Second Continental Congress in the course of a few days.[8][9][10] After Pomeroy did not accept, John Thomas was appointed in his place.[11]




General George Washington was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army on June 15, 1775.


As the Continental Congress increasingly adopted the responsibilities and posture of a legislature for a sovereign state, the role of the Continental Army became the subject of considerable debate. Some Americans had a general aversion to maintaining a standing army; but on the other hand the requirements of the war against the British required the discipline and organization of a modern military. As a result, the army went through several distinct phases, characterized by official dissolution and reorganization of units.
Soldiers in the Continental Army were citizens who had volunteered to serve in the army (but were paid), and at various times during the war, standard enlistment periods lasted from one to three years. Early in the war the enlistment periods were short, as the Continental Congress feared the possibility of the Continental Army evolving into a permanent army. The army never numbered more than 17,000 men. Turnover proved a constant problem, particularly in the winter of 1776–77, and longer enlistments were approved. Broadly speaking, Continental forces consisted of several successive armies, or establishments:

The Continental Army of 1775, comprising the initial New England Army, organized by Washington into three divisions, six brigades, and 38 regiments. Major General Philip Schuyler's ten regiments in New York were sent to invade Canada.
The Continental Army of 1776, reorganized after the initial enlistment period of the soldiers in the 1775 army had expired. Washington had submitted recommendations to the Continental Congress almost immediately after he had accepted the position of Commander-in-Chief, but the Congress took time to consider and implement these. Despite attempts to broaden the recruiting base beyond New England, the 1776 army remained skewed toward the Northeast both in terms of its composition and of its geographical focus. This army consisted of 36 regiments, most standardized to a single battalion of 768 men strong and formed into eight companies, with a rank-and-file strength of 640.
The Continental Army of 1777–80 evolved out of several critical reforms and political decisions that came about when it became apparent that the British were sending massive forces to put an end to the American Revolution. The Continental Congress passed the "Eighty-eight Battalion Resolve", ordering each state to contribute one-battalion regiments in proportion to their population, and Washington subsequently received authority to raise an additional 16 battalions. Enlistment terms extended to three years or to "the length of the war" to avoid the year-end crises that depleted forces (including the notable near-collapse of the army at the end of 1776, which could have ended the war in a Continental, or American, loss by forfeit).
The Continental Army of 1781–82 saw the greatest crisis on the American side in the war. Congress was bankrupt, making it very difficult to replenish the soldiers whose three-year terms had expired. Popular support for the war reached an all-time low, and Washington had to put down mutinies both in the Pennsylvania Line and in the New Jersey Line. Congress voted to cut funding for the Army, but Washington managed nevertheless to secure important strategic victories.
The Continental Army of 1783–84 was succeeded by the United States Army, which persists to this day. As peace was restored with the British, most of the regiments were disbanded in an orderly fashion, though several had already been diminished.

In addition to the Continental Army regulars, local militia units, raised and funded by individual colonies/states, participated in battles throughout the war. Sometimes the militia units operated independently of the Continental Army, but often local militias were called out to support and augment the Continental Army regulars during campaigns. (The militia troops developed a reputation for being prone to premature retreats, a fact that Brigadier-General Daniel Morgan integrated into his strategy at the Battle of Cowpens in 1781.)
The financial responsibility for providing pay, food, shelter, clothing, arms, and other equipment to specific units was assigned to states as part of the establishment of these units. States differed in how well they lived up to these obligations. There were constant funding issues and morale problems as the war continued. This led to the army offering low pay, often rotten food, hard work, cold, heat, poor clothing and shelter, harsh discipline, and a high chance of becoming a casualty.
Operations[edit]




Infantry of the Continental Army.






1778 drawing showing a Stockbridge Mahican Indian, Patriot soldier, of the Stockbridge Militia, in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, from the Revolutionary War diary of Hessian officer, Johann Von Ewald






1781 drawing of American soldiers from the Yorktown campaign showing a black infantryman, on the far left, from the 1st Rhode Island Regiment, one of the few regiments in the Continental Army having the largest majority of black patriot soldiers


At the time of the Siege of Boston, the Continental Army at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in June 1775, is estimated to have numbered from 14–16,000 men from New England (though the actual number may have been as low as 11,000 because of desertions). Until Washington's arrival, it remained under the command of Artemas Ward, while John Thomas acted as executive officer and Richard Gridley commanded the artillery corps and was chief engineer.
The British force in Boston was increasing by fresh arrivals. It numbered then about 10,000 men. Major Generals Howe, Clinton, and Burgoyne, had arrived late in May and joined General Gage in forming and executing plans for dispersing the rebels. Feeling strong with these veteran officers and soldiers around him—and the presence of several Men-of-War under Admiral Graves—the governor issued a proclamation, declaring martial law, branding the entire Continental Army and supporters as "rebels" and "parricides of the Constitution." Amnesty was offered to those who gave up their allegiance to the Continental Army and Congress in favor of the British authorities, though Samuel Adams and John Hancock were still wanted for high treason. This proclamation only served to strengthen the resolve of the Congress and Army.
After the British evacuation of Boston (prompted by the placement of Continental artillery overlooking the city in March 1776), the Continental Army relocated to New York. For the next five years, the main bodies of the Continental and British armies campaigned against one another in New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. These campaigns included the notable battles of Trenton, Princeton, Brandywine, Germantown, and Morristown, among many others.
The Continental Army was racially integrated, a condition the United States Army would not see again until Truman ordered the desegregation of the military in 1948. African American slaves were promised freedom in exchange for military service in New England, and made up one fifth of the Northern Continental Army.[12]
Throughout its existence, the Army was troubled by poor logistics, inadequate training, short-term enlistments, interstate rivalries, and Congress's inability to compel the states to provide food, money or supplies. In the beginning, soldiers enlisted for a year, largely motivated by patriotism; but as the war dragged on, bounties and other incentives became more commonplace. Two major mutinies late in the war drastically diminished the reliability of two of the main units, and there were constant discipline problems.
The army increased its effectiveness and success rate through a series of trials and errors, often at great human cost. General Washington and other distinguished officers were instrumental leaders in preserving unity, learning and adapting, and ensuring discipline throughout the eight years of war. In the winter of 1777–1778, with the addition of Baron von Steuben, of Prussian origin, the training and discipline of the Continental Army began to vastly improve. (This was the infamous winter at Valley Forge.) Washington always viewed the Army as a temporary measure and strove to maintain civilian control of the military, as did the Continental Congress, though there were minor disagreements about how this was carried out.
Near the end of the war, the Continental Army was augmented by a French expeditionary force (under General Rochambeau) and a squadron of the French navy (under the Comte de Barras), and in the late summer of 1781 the main body of the army travelled south to Virginia to rendezvous with the French West Indies fleet under Admiral Comte de Grasse. This resulted in the Siege of Yorktown, the decisive Battle of the Chesapeake, and the surrender of the British southern army. This essentially marked the end of the land war in America, although the Continental Army returned to blockade the British northern army in New York until the peace treaty went into effect two years later, and battles took place elsewhere between British forces and those of France and its allies.
Demobilization[edit]
See also: Newburgh Conspiracy
A small residual force remained at West Point and some frontier outposts until Congress created the United States Army by their resolution of June 3, 1784.
Planning for the transition to a peacetime force had begun in April 1783 at the request of a congressional committee chaired by Alexander Hamilton. The commander-in-chief discussed the problem with key officers before submitting the army's official views on 2 May. Significantly, there was a broad consensus of the basic framework among the officers. Washington's proposal called for four components: a small regular army, a uniformly trained and organized militia, a system of arsenals, and a military academy to train the army's artillery and engineer officers. He wanted four infantry regiments, each assigned to a specific sector of the frontier, plus an artillery regiment. His proposed regimental organizations followed Continental Army patterns but had a provision for increased strength in the event of war. Washington expected the militia primarily to provide security for the country at the start of a war until the regular army could expand—the same role it had carried out in 1775 and 1776. Steuben and Duportail submitted their own proposals to Congress for consideration.
Although Congress declined on May 12 to make a decision on the peace establishment, it did address the need for some troops to remain on duty until the British evacuated New York City and several frontier posts. The delegates told Washington to use men enlisted for fixed terms as temporary garrisons. A detachment of those men from West Point reoccupied New York without incident on November 25. When Steuben's effort in July to negotiate a transfer of frontier forts with Major General Frederick Haldimand collapsed, however, the British maintained control over them, as they would into the 1790s. That failure and the realization that most of the remaining infantrymen's enlistments were due to expire by June 1784 led Washington to order Knox, his choice as the commander of the peacetime army, to discharge all but 500 infantry and 100 artillerymen before winter set in. The former regrouped as Jackson's Continental Regiment under Colonel Henry Jackson of Massachusetts. The single artillery company, New Yorkers under John Doughty, came from remnants of the 2nd Continental Artillery Regiment.
Congress issued a proclamation on October 18, 1783, which approved Washington's reductions. On November 2, Washington then released his Farewell Order to the Philadelphia newspapers for nationwide distribution to the furloughed men. In the message he thanked the officers and men for their assistance and reminded them that "the singular interpositions of Providence in our feeble condition were such, as could scarcely escape the attention of the most unobserving; while the unparalleled perseverance of the Armies of the United States, through almost every possible suffering and discouragement for the space of eight long years, was little short of a standing miracle."




Continental Army Plaza, Williamsburg, Brooklyn


Washington believed that the blending of persons from every colony into "one patriotic band of Brothers" had been a major accomplishment, and he urged the veterans to continue this devotion in civilian life.
Washington said farewell to his remaining officers on December 4 at Fraunces Tavern in New York City. On December 23 he appeared in Congress, then sitting at Annapolis, and returned his commission as commander-in-chief: "Having now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theatre of Action; and bidding an Affectionate farewell to this August body under whose orders I have so long acted, I here offer my Commission, and take my leave of all the employments of public life." Congress ended the War of American Independence on January 14, 1784, by ratifying the definitive peace treaty that had been signed in Paris on September 3.
Congress had again rejected Washington's concept for a peacetime force in October 1783. When moderate delegates then offered an alternative in April 1784 which scaled the projected army down to 900 men in one artillery and three infantry battalions, Congress rejected it as well, in part because New York feared that men retained from Massachusetts might take sides in a land dispute between the two states. Another proposal to retain 350 men and raise 700 new recruits also failed. On June 2 Congress ordered the discharge of all remaining men except twenty-five caretakers at Fort Pitt and fifty-five at West Point. The next day it created a peace establishment acceptable to all interests.
The plan required four states to raise 700 men for one year's service. Congress instructed the Secretary at War to form the troops into eight infantry and two artillery companies. Pennsylvania, with a quota of 260 men, had the power to nominate a lieutenant colonel, who would be the senior officer. New York and Connecticut each were to raise 165 men and nominate a major; the remaining 110 men came from New Jersey. Economy was the watchword of this proposal, for each major served as a company commander, and line officers performed all staff duties except those of chaplain, surgeon, and surgeon's mate. Under Josiah Harmar, the First American Regiment slowly organized and achieved permanent status as an infantry regiment of the new Regular Army. The lineage of the First American Regiment is carried on by the 3rd United States Infantry Regiment (The Old Guard).
However the United States military realized it needed a well-trained standing army following St. Clair's Defeat on November 4, 1791, when a force led by General Arthur St. Clair was almost entirely wiped out by the Western Confederacy near Fort Recovery, Ohio. The plans, which were supported by U.S. President George Washington and Henry Knox, Secretary of War, led to the disbandment of the Continental Army and the creation of the Legion of the United States. The command would be based on the 18th-century military works of Henry Bouquet, a professional Swiss soldier who served as a colonel in the British army, and French Marshal Maurice de Saxe. In 1792 Anthony Wayne, a renowned hero of the American Revolutionary War, was encouraged to leave retirement and return to active service as Commander-in-Chief of the Legion with the rank of Major General.
The legion was recruited and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. It was formed into four sub-legions. These were created from elements of the 1st and 2nd Regiments from the Continental Army. These units then became the First and Second Sub-Legions. The Third and Fourth Sub-Legions were raised from further recruits. From June 1792 to November 1792, the Legion remained cantoned at Fort LaFayette in Pittsburgh. Throughout the winter of 1792–93, existing troops along with new recruits were drilled in military skills, tactics and discipline at Legionville on the banks of the Ohio River near present-day Baden, Pennsylvania. The following Spring the newly named Legion of the United States left Legionville for the Northwest Indian War, a struggle between American Indian tribes affiliated with the Western Confederacy in the area south of the Ohio River. The overwhelmingly successful campaign was concluded with the decisive victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers on August 20, 1794, Maj. Gen. Anthony Wayne applied the techniques of wilderness operations perfected by Sullivan's 1779 expedition against the Iroquois. The training the troops received at Legionville was also seen as an instrumental to this overwhelming victory.
Nevertheless, Steuben's Blue Book remained the official manual for the legion, as well as for the militia of most states, until Winfield Scott in 1835. In 1796, the United States Army was raised following the discontinuation with the legion of the United States. This preceded the graduation of the first cadets from United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, which was established in 1802.
Rank insignia[edit]




Ribands as rank insignia: Aide-de-camp, commander-in-chief, brigadier-general.


During the American Revolutionary War, the Continental Army initially wore ribbons, cockades and epaulettes of various colors as an ad hoc form of rank insignia, as General George Washington wrote in 1775:

"As the Continental Army has unfortunately no uniforms, and consequently many inconveniences must arise from not being able to distinguish the commissioned officers from the privates, it is desired that some badge of distinction be immediately provided; for instance that the field officers may have red or pink colored cockades in their hats, the captains yellow or buff, and the subalterns green."

In 1776 captains were to have buff or white cockades.


Rank insignia of the Continental Army 1775 [13]


Ribands across the breast
Cockades in the hats
Epaulettes or stripes on the right shoulder


General
and
commander-in-chief
Major general
Brigadier general
Aide-de-camp
Colonel,
Lieutenant colonel,
Major
Captain
Lieutenant, Ensign
Sergeant
Corporal


Later on in the war, the Continental Army established its own uniform with a black cockade (as used in much of the British Army) among all ranks and the following insignia:


Ranks and insignia of the Continental Army 1780[14]


General and
Commander-in-Chief
Major general
Brigadier general
Colonel
Lieutenant colonel
Aide-de-camp
Major
Captain
Subaltern
Lieutenant
Ensign
Sergeant major
Sergeant
Corporal
Private





Gold epaulets
Jacket with gold trim
Silver epaulets
Gold epaulets
Hat with green cockade
Gold epaulets
Gold epaulet
(Right shoulder)
Gold epaulet
(Left shoulder)
No epaulets
Red epaulets
Red epaulet
(Right shoulder)
Green epaulet
(Right shoulder)
No epaulets


















































Major battles[edit]

Siege of Boston
Battle of Long Island
Battle of Harlem Heights
Battle of Trenton
Battle of Princeton
Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of Saratoga
Battle of Monmouth
Siege of Charleston
Battle of Camden
Battle of Cowpens
Battle of Guilford Court House
Siege of Yorktown

See also[edit]


American Revolutionary War portal
United States Army portal



Departments of the Continental Army
Continental Navy
Pluckemin Continental Artillery Cantonment Site
History of the United States Army
Peter Francisco, Revolutionary War soldier and hero
Middlebrook encampment in Middlebrook, New Jersey, winter of 1776–77 and winter of 1778–79
Valley Forge in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, winter of 1777–78
Jockey Hollow, near Morristown, New Jersey, winter of 1779–80
New Jersey Brigade Encampment Site, adjacent to Jockey Hollow, winter of 1779–80

References[edit]


^ Wright, 1983, pp. 10-11
^ a b Cont'l Cong., Formation of the Continental Army, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 89–90 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 96-7 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 100-1 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Resolution Changing "United Colonies" to "United States", in 5 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 747 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Acceptance of Appointment by General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 91–92 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Rosen, David M. (2015). Child Soldiers in the Western Imagination: From Patriots to Victims. Rutgers University Press. 
^ Cont'l Cong., Commissions for Generals Ward and Lee, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 97 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commissions for Generals Schuyler and Putnam, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 99 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commissions for Generals Pomeroy, Montgomery, Wooster, Heath, Spencer, Thomas, Sullivan, and Greene, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 103 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Thomas, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 191 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905).
^ Liberty! The American Revolution (Documentary) Episode II: Blows Must Decide: 1774–1776. Twin Cities Public Television, 1997. ISBN 1-4157-0217-9
^ Steven A. Bingaman (2013), The History of American Ranks and Rank Insignia, p. 11.
^ Mollo, John (1975). Uniforms of the American Revolution in Color. New York: MacMillian. p. 34-36,164-166,167-169. these are plate numbers, but there isn't a wiki reference tag for that. Needs one. 


Bibliography[edit]

Wright, Robert K. (1983). The Continental Army. Center of Military History, U.S. Army. , 451 pages, eBook

Further reading[edit]

Carp, E. Wayne. To Starve the Army at Pleasure: Continental Army Administration and American Political Culture, 1775–1783. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1984. ISBN 0-8078-1587-X.
Cox, Caroline. Boy Soldiers of the American Revolution. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2016.
Gillett, Mary C. The Army Medical Department, 1775–1818. Washington: Center of Military History, U.S. Army, 1981.
Lengel, Edward G. General George Washington: A Military Life. New York: Random House, 2005. ISBN 1-4000-6081-8.
Martin, James Kirby, and Mark Edward Lender. A Respectable Army: The Military Origins of the Republic, 1763–1789. 2nd ed. Wheeling, Illinois: Harlan Davidson, 2006. ISBN 0-88295-239-0.
Mayer, Holly A. Belonging to the Army: Camp Followers and Community during the American Revolution. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1999. ISBN 1-57003-339-0; ISBN 1-57003-108-8.
Risch, Erna (1981). Supplying Washington's Army. Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History. 
Royster, Charles. A Revolutionary People at War: The Continental Army and American Character, 1775–1783. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1979. ISBN 0-8078-1385-0.


Reference materials


RevWar75.com provides "an online cross-referenced index of all surviving orderly books of the Continental Army".
Wright, Robert K. The Continental Army. Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History 1983. Available, in part, online from the CMH website
Bibliography of the Continental Army compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History


Primary Sources


Wright Jr., Robert K.; MacGregor Jr., Morris J. "Resolutions of the Continental Congress Adopting the Continental Army and other Sources from the Revolution". Soldier-Statesmen of the Constitution. E302.5.W85 1987. Washington D.C: United States Army Center of Military History. CMH Pub 71-25. 

External links[edit]

"Von Steuben's Continentals" (video)







v
t
e


United States Army



Leadership



Secretary of the Army
Under Secretary of the Army
Chief of Staff
Vice Chief of Staff
4-star generals
Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer
Sergeant Major of the Army
House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)
Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces)





Components
and
commands



Regular Army
Army Reserve
Army National Guard
Active Units
Reorganization plan of United States Army




Army commands



Forces
Training and Doctrine
Materiel





Service components



Africa
Central
Europe
Pacific
North
South
Special Operations
Surface Deployment and Distribution
Space and Missile Defense
Cyber Command





Direct reporting
units



Second Army
Medical
Intelligence and Security
Criminal Investigation
Corps of Engineers
Military District of Washington
Test and Evaluation
Military Academy
Reserve
Acquisition Support Center
Installation Management
War College





Field armies



First
Second
Third
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh
Eighth
Ninth





Branches



Acquisition Corps
Adjutant General's Corps
Air Defense Artillery Branch
Armor Branch
Aviation Branch
Army Band
Chaplain Corps
Chemical Corps
Civil Affairs Corps
Corps of Engineers
Dental Corps
Field Artillery Branch
Finance Corps
Infantry Branch
Inspector General's Corps
Judge Advocate General's Corps
Logistics Branch
Medical Corps
Medical Service Corps
Medical Specialist Corps
Military Intelligence Corps
Military Police Corps
Nurse Corps
Ordnance Corps
Psychological Operations
Quartermaster Corps
Signal Corps
Special Forces
Transportation Corps
Veterinary Corps








Installations



United States and Overseas
Germany
Kosovo
Kuwait
South Korea





Training



Basic Training
BOLC
ROTC (ECP)
OCS
WOBC
WOCS
Military Academy (West Point)
MOS





Uniforms and
insignia



Awards and decorations
Badges
Branch
Officer
Warrant
Enlisted

World War I
World War II


Uniforms





Equipment



Individual weapons
Crew-served weapons
Vehicles





Premier
ensembles



Army Field Band
Army Band
Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps
West Point Band





History and
traditions



History
Continental Army
Union Army
National Army
Army of the United States
Center of Military History
Institute of Heraldry
America's Army
Army Art Program
Flag
National Museum
West Point Museum
Rangers
U.S. Army Regimental System
Soldier's Creed
"The Army Goes Rolling Along"
Division nicknames
Draft
Service numbers








 Category
 Portal












v
t
e


The Continental Army of the American Revolutionary War




Departments



Units




By State



Connecticut
Delaware
Georgia
Maryland
Massachusetts
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
North Carolina
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Virginia





By Year



1775
1776
1777–1784





Extra



Extra Continental regiments and Additional Continental regiments
Other units

1st Canadian
2nd Canadian
Ottendorf's Corps


Militia units that participated alongside





Other



Cavalry Units

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
Armand's
Pulaski's


Artillery Regiments

Knox's
1st
2nd
3rd
4th










Events



Conway Cabal
Newburgh Conspiracy
Pennsylvania Line Mutiny
Pompton Mutiny
Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783












v
t
e


George Washington






1st President of the United States, 1789–1797
Senior Officer of the Army, 1798–1799
Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army, 1775–1783
Second Continental Congress, 1775
First Continental Congress, 1774





Military career
Revolutionary War



Military career
French and Indian War

Jumonville Glen
Battle of Fort Necessity
Forbes Expedition


Washington and the American Revolution
Commander-in-chief, Continental Army
Aides-de-Camp
Washington's headquarters
Boston campaign

Siege of Boston


New York and New Jersey campaign

Delaware River crossing
Battle of Trenton


Philadelphia campaign

Battle of Brandywine
Battle of Germantown
Battle of White Marsh
Valley Forge
Battle of Monmouth


Battles of Saratoga
Sullivan Expedition
Yorktown campaign

Siege of Yorktown


Culper spy ring
Newburgh Conspiracy

Newburgh letter


Badge of Military Merit

Purple Heart


Washington Before Boston Medal
Horses: Nelson and Blueskin





Other U.S.
founding events



1769 Virginia Association

Continental Association


1774 Fairfax Resolves
Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture
1785 Mount Vernon Conference
Chairman, 1787 Constitutional Convention





Presidency



United States presidential election, 1788–89
1792
First inauguration

inaugural bible


Second inauguration
Title of "Mr. President"
Cabinet of the United States

Secretary of State
Attorney General
Secretary of the Treasury
Secretary of War


Judiciary Act of 1789
Nonintercourse Act
Whiskey Rebellion

Militia Acts of 1792


Coinage Act of 1792

United States Mint


Proclamation of Neutrality

Neutrality Act of 1794


Jay Treaty
Pinckney's Treaty
Slave Trade Act of 1794
Residence Act
Thanksgiving Proclamation
Farewell Address
State of the Union Address 1790
1791
1792
1793
1796
Cabinet
Federal judicial appointments





Views and
public image



Presidential library
The Washington Papers
Religious views
Washington and slavery
Town Destroyer
Legacy





Life and homes



Early life
Birthplace
Ferry Farm boyhood home
Mount Vernon

Gristmill
Woodlawn Plantation


Samuel Osgood House, First Presidential Mansion
Alexander Macomb House, Second Presidential Mansion
President's House, Philadelphia
Germantown White House
Custis estate
Potomac Company
James River and Kanawha Canal
Mountain Road Lottery
Congressional Gold Medal
Thanks of Congress
President-General of the Society of the Cincinnati
Washington College
Washington and Lee University
Electoral history of George Washington





Memorials and
depictions



Washington, D.C.
Washington state
Washington Monument
Mount Rushmore
Washington's Birthday
Purple Heart
The Apotheosis of Washington
George Washington (Houdon)
George Washington (Ceracchi)
George Washington (Trumbull)
Washington Crossing the Delaware
General George Washington at Trenton
Washington at Verplanck's Point
Unfinished portrait
Lansdowne portrait
The Washington Family portrait
Washington at Princeton painting
Point of View sculpture
George Washington University
Washington University
Washington Masonic National Memorial
George Washington Memorial Parkway
George Washington Bridge
Washington and Jefferson National Forests
Washington Monument, Baltimore
Washington, D.C. statue
List of memorials
U.S. Postage stamps

Washington-Franklin Issues
1932 bicentennial


Currency

Washington quarter
Washington dollar


Cultural depictions
George Washington (1984 miniseries
1986 sequel)





Related



Bibliography
Founding Fathers of the United States
Republicanism
Federalist Party

Federalist Era


Virginia dynasty
Coat of arms
Cherry-tree anecdote
River Farm
Washington's Crossing
1751 Barbados trip
Category
Syng inkstand
General of the Armies
American Philosophical Society
American Revolution

patriots


Mount Vernon Ladies' Association





Ancestry
and family



Martha Washington (wife)
John Parke Custis (stepson)
George Washington Parke Custis (step-grandson, adopted son)
Eleanor Parke Custis (step-granddaughter, adopted daughter)
Augustine Washington (father)
Mary Ball (mother)
Lawrence Washington (half-brother)
Augustine Washington Jr. (half-brother)
Betty Washington Lewis (sister)
Samuel Washington (brother)
John A. Washington (brother)
Charles Washington (brother)
Lawrence Washington (grandfather)
John Washington (great-grandfather)
Bushrod Washington (nephew)








John Adams →


 Category












v
t
e


Government of the United States under the Articles of Confederation



Congresses



1st Continental Congress
2nd Continental Congress
The US in Congress Assembled
Delegates
Committee of the States





Congressional Officers



President
Secretary





Civil Offices/Officers



Postmaster General
Superintendent of Finance/Agent of the Marine
Secretary at War
Secretary of Foreign Affairs
Court of Appeals





Military



Board of War
Continental Army
Commander in Chief
Continental Navy
Continental Marines









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 154702713
LCCN: n79045178
ISNI: 0000 0001 2298 3907
SUDOC: 027474771
BNF: cb11950721s (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continental_Army&oldid=815295484"					Categories: Continental ArmyDisbanded armiesHistory of the United States Army18th-century military history of the United States1775 establishments in the Thirteen ColoniesHidden categories: Use mdy dates from November 2013Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers