For the influence of continental climates on viticulture, see continental climate (wine).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







World Köppen map


Continental climates are defined in the Köppen climate classification as having a coldest month mean temperature below -3 °C (26.6 °F) or 0 °C depending on which isotherm used for the coldest month and four months above 10 °C. In the Köppen climate system, Continental climates are bordered to the south by Temperate climates or C climates (coldest month above 0 °C, but below 18 °C) and to the north by Boreal climate or E climates (only 1 to 3 months with a mean temperature of 10 °C or 50 °F). Köppen also defined continental climates as having more than 30 days with continuous snowcover on the ground.
Continental climates often have a significant annual variation in temperature (hot summers and cold winters).[specify] They tend to occur in the middle latitudes (40 to 55 north), where prevailing winds come from over land, and temperatures are not moderated by bodies of water such as oceans or seas. Continental climates occur mostly in the Northern Hemisphere which has the large landmasses required for this type of climate to develop. Most of northern and northeastern China, eastern and southeastern Europe, central and southeastern Canada, and the central and upper eastern United States have this type of climate.[1]
In Continental climates, Precipitation tends to be moderate in amount, concentrated mostly in the warmer months. Only a few areas, in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest of North America and in Iran, northern Iraq, adjacent Turkey, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Central Asia show a winter maximum in precipitation. A portion of the annual precipitation falls as snowfall, and snow often remains on the ground for more than a month. Summers in continental climates can feature thunderstorms and frequent cool temperatures, however summer weather is more stable than winter weather.



Contents


1 Spring and autumn
2 Köppen climate classification
3 Climatology
4 Neighbouring climates
5 List of locations with a continental climate

5.1 North America
5.2 South America
5.3 Europe
5.4 Africa
5.5 Middle East
5.6 Asia
5.7 Oceania


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Spring and autumn[edit]
The timing of intermediate spring-like or autumn-like temperatures in this zone vary depending on latitude and/or elevation. For example, spring may arrive as soon as early March in the southern parts of this zone, or as late as May in the north. Annual precipitation in this zone is usually between 600 millimetres (24 in) and 1,200 millimetres (47 in), most of it in the form of snow during winter. It also has cold winters and warm summers.
Köppen climate classification[edit]
Most such areas fit Köppen classifications of Dfa, Dwa (cold winters, hot summers; "w" indicating very dry winters characteristic especially of China) or Dfb or Dwb (cold winters, warm summers, same distinction for winter dryness). Dry summer continental climates (Dsa and Dsb) exist in high altitude areas near Mediterranean climates. In some cases, the semi-arid climate classification of BSk can also be considered to be continental as long it has cold winter. The definition of this climate regarding temperature is as follows: the mean temperature of the coldest month must be below −3 °C (26.6 °F) and there must be at least four months whose mean temperatures are at or above 10 °C (50 °F). Some climatologists use the 0 °C isotherm instead for the coldest month.
Climatology[edit]
Continental climates exist where cold air masses infiltrate during the winter and warm air masses form in summer under conditions of high sun and long days. Places with continental climates are as a rule either far from any moderating effects of oceans (examples: Omaha, Nebraska and Kazan, Russia) or are so situated that prevailing winds tend to head offshore (example: Boston, USA). Such regions get quite warm in the summer, achieving temperatures characteristic of tropical climates but are colder than any other climates of similar latitude in the winter.
Neighbouring climates[edit]
These climates grade off toward subtropical climates equator-ward where winters are less severe and semiarid climates where precipitation becomes inadequate for tall-grass prairies. In Europe these climates may grade off into oceanic climates in which the influence of cool oceanic air masses is more marked toward the west. The subarctic climate (Köppen: Dfc), with very cold, long and dry winters, but with at least one month above 10 °C (50 °F), might be considered a sub-type of the continental climate.
List of locations with a continental climate[edit]
North America[edit]




Ice skaters on the frozen Rideau Canal, looking south from Laurier Avenue Bridge in Ottawa



Canada: Throughout much of southern Canada from the Rocky Mountains to Atlantic Canada. Major cities: Whistler; Prince George; Kamloops; Calgary; Edmonton; Fort McMurray; Saskatoon; Regina; Winnipeg; Kenora; Thunder Bay; Sault Ste. Marie; Greater Sudbury; North Bay, Ontario; Timmins; Sarnia; London, Ontario; Kitchener, Ontario; Toronto; Niagara Falls; Kingston; Ottawa; Val-d'Or; Montreal; Sherbrooke; Trois-Rivières; Quebec City; Saguenay; Sept-Îles; Fredericton, New Brunswick; Moncton, New Brunswick; Halifax; Sydney, Nova Scotia; Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island; St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador








A statue of Ilanaaq, mascot of the 2010 Olympics, located on Whistler Mountain









North Saskatchewan River valley in Edmonton









The Forks, with St. Boniface Cathedral in the background in Winnipeg









Toronto skyline taken from Colonel Samuel Smith Park in Etobicoke.









Downtown Calgary from Southern Alberta Institute of Technology (SAIT) campus









Olympic Stadium in Montreal









Québec City shore









Halifax as seen from the Dartmouth waterfront









Duckworth Street in St. John's








The Chicago River, with the Near North Side and Streeterville on the right, the Chicago Loop, Lakeshore East, and Illinois Center on the left, and Trump Tower at the jog in the river in the center. This view is looking west from Lake Shore Drive's Outer Drive Bridge.



United States: Throughout much of northern US, including parts of Alaska, and farther south at high elevations in Oregon, California, and Arizona, and along the Appalachian Mountains: Major cities: Spokane; South Lake Tahoe; Carson City; Flagstaff; Idaho Falls; Wallace; Billings; Cheyenne; Salt Lake City; Aspen; Denver; Fargo; Sioux Falls; Omaha; Kansas City; Des Moines; Minneapolis; Green Bay, Wisconsin; Madison, Wisconsin; Milwaukee; Chicago; Indianapolis; Detroit; Cincinnati; Cleveland; Youngstown; Pittsburgh; Erie; Scranton; Wheeling; Charleston, West Virginia; Oakland, Maryland; Boone, North Carolina; Buffalo; Rochester; Syracuse; Albany; Montpelier; Concord; Hartford; Worcester; Boston; Portland, Maine; Augusta, Maine; Juneau, Alaska.








Rainbow Bridge and the American Falls in Niagara Falls









Downtown Pittsburgh from Station Square









Boone, NC as seen from Howard's Knob









Mixed forest in Vermont during autumn









Boston's skyline in the background, with fall foliage in the foreground









San Francisco Peaks from Flagstaff, AZ




South America[edit]




Puente del Inca, Argentina in July



Argentina: Puente del Inca, Mendoza Province
Chile: Balmaceda

Europe[edit]




Aker Brygge in Oslo






Spassky Cathedral in Moscow



United Kingdom: In some areas with high elevations in Scotland: Major cities: Braemar, Altnaharra, Dalwhinnie, Leadhills[clarification needed]
France: Chamonix
Belgium: Bertrix
Italy: Bruneck, Cortina d'Ampezzo
Austria: Vienna (bordering an oceanic climate and a humid subtropical climate), Innsbruck, Salzburg (bordering an oceanic climate)
Switzerland: Zürich (bordering an oceanic climate), Lausanne, Bern
Germany: Berlin (bordering an oceanic climate), Munich, Garmisch-Partenkirchen
Denmark: Copenhagen (bordering an oceanic climate)
Norway: Oslo, Trondheim, Lillehammer
Sweden: Stockholm, Gothenburg
Finland: Helsinki, Turku
Estonia: Tallinn
Latvia: Riga
Lithuania: Vilnius
Belarus: Minsk, Grodno
Ukraine: Kiev, Kharkiv, Lviv
Czech Republic: Prague
Poland: Warsaw, Wrocław, Szczecin
Slovakia: Bratislava
Bulgaria: Sofia, Pleven
Croatia: Zagreb
Romania: Bucharest
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Sarajevo, Banja Luka (bordering a humid subtropical climate)
Bulgaria: Sofia
Moldova: Chișinău
Serbia: Belgrade
Russia: throughout much of southern Russia except coastal Black Sea. Major cities: Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Kazan, Novosibirsk, Ulan-Ude, Abakan, Vladivostok

Africa[edit]




View from Jbel Oukaïmeden in Morocco



Morocco: Oukaimeden, Khenifra, Imilchil, and Azilal

Middle East[edit]




Palandöken in August 2009, as seen from downtown Erzurum.



Turkey: Hakkâri, Muş, Erzurum, Ardahan, Sivas, Yüksekova, Van, Kayseri, Bolu
Iran: Sanandaj, Saqqez, Arak, Ardabil, Tabriz
Georgia: Gori
Armenia: Yerevan, Gyumri
Azerbaijan: Nakhchivan

Asia[edit]




Headquarter of Harbin Bank in Harbin






The snowy city of Sapporo



Kazakhstan: Astana, Almaty, Oskemen, Oral
Kyrgyzstan: Bishkek, Naryn
Afghanistan: Kabul
Uzbekistan: Nukus, Andijan
Pakistan: Skardu
India: Leh, Dras
Mongolia: Ulaanbaatar, Ulaangom
China: Ürümqi, Turpan, Shijiazhuang, Lhasa, Beijing, Harbin, Tianjin, Changchun, Heihe, Qiqihar, Xining
North Korea: Pyongyang, Nampo
South Korea: Seoul, Pyeongchang County
Japan: Mostly found in the Hokkaido region as well as high elevations in Mainland Japan: Major cities: Sapporo, Asahikawa, Nayoro, Kushiro, Obihiro, Kitami, Abashiri, Wakkanai, and Nemuro.

Oceania[edit]




Looking through Charlotte Pass towards the main range in winter.






Cabramurra Community Hall in winter



Australia: High elevations such as the Victorian Alps between Victoria and New South Wales and in Tasmania: Major cities: Mount Buller (bordering a subartic climate), Perisher Ski Resort (bordering a subpolar oceanic climate), Kiandra, Cabramurra, Charlotte Pass and Hotham Alpine Resort (both bordering a subarctic climate)

See also[edit]

Hemiboreal climate
Humid continental climate
Microthermal climate

References[edit]



^ "Continental Climate". Encyclopedia of the Atmospheric Environment. Manchester Metropolitan University. Archived from the original on 2009-04-27. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Continental climate.








v
t
e


Climate types under the Köppen climate classification



Class A



Tropical rainforest (Af)
Tropical monsoon (Am)
Tropical savanna (Aw, As)





Class B



Desert (BWh, BWk, BWn)
Semi-arid (BSh, BSk, BSn)





Class C



Humid subtropical (Cfa, Cwa)
Oceanic (Cfb, Cwb, Cfc, Cwc)
Mediterranean (Csa, Csb, Csc)





Class D



Humid continental (Dfa, Dwa, Dfb, Dwb, Dsa, Dsb)
Subarctic (Dfc, Dwc, Dfd, Dwd, Dsc, Dsd)





Class E



Tundra (ET)
Ice cap (EF)
Alpine (ET, EF)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continental_climate&oldid=816386047"					Categories: ClimateClimate of EuropeKöppen climate classificationsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from November 2007All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing more detailed referencesWikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2016