For the personality trait, see Cooperativeness.
"Co-op" redirects here. For other uses, see Co-op (disambiguation).


This article is part of a series on


Corporate law







By jurisdiction


Anguilla
Australia
BVI
Canada
Cayman Islands
India
South Africa
United States
Vietnam

European Union

France
Germany
United Kingdom










General corporate forms


Company
Conglomerate
Cooperative
Corporation
Holding company
Joint-stock
Partnership

General
Limited
Limited liability


Private limited
Sole proprietorship








Corporate forms
by jurisdiction



European Union




Societas (SE)
Societas cooperativa (SCE)
Societas privata (SPE)
Societas unius personae (SUP)
Economic interest grouping (EEIG)




UK / Ireland / Commonwealth




Charitable incorporated organisation (CIO)
Community interest company (CIC)
Industrial and provident society (IPS)

Limited company (Ltd.)

by guarantee
by shares
proprietary
public


Unlimited company




United States




Benefit corporation
C corporation
Limited liability company (LLC)

Low-profit LLC


Series LLC
Limited liability limited partnership (LLLP)
S corporation
Delaware corporation / statutory trust
Massachusetts business trust
Nevada corporation




Others




Aktiebolag (AB)
Aktiengesellschaft (AG)
Ansvarlig selskap (ANS)
Aktieselskab (A/S)
Aksjeselskap (AS)
Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung (GmbH)
Kabushiki gaisha (K.K.)
Naamloze vennootschap (N.V.)
Osakeyhtiö (Oy)
S.A.
Société à responsabilité limitée (SARL)
more...











Doctrines


Business judgment rule
Corporate governance
De facto and estoppel corporations
Internal affairs doctrine
Limited liability
Piercing the corporate veil
Rochdale Principles
Ultra vires








Related areas


Civil procedure
Contract
Corporate registers








Company portal
Law portal







v
t
e









The volunteer board of a retail consumers' cooperative, such as the former Oxford, Swindon & Gloucester Co-op, is held to account at an annual general meeting of members


A cooperative (also known as co-operative, co-op, or coop) is "an autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly-owned and democratically-controlled enterprise".[1] Cooperatives may include:

non-profit community organizations
businesses owned and managed by the people who use their services (a consumer cooperative)
organisations managed by the people who work there (worker cooperatives)
organisations managed by the people to whom they provide accommodation (housing cooperatives)
hybrids such as worker cooperatives that are also consumer cooperatives or credit unions
multi-stakeholder cooperatives such as those that bring together civil society and local actors to deliver community needs
second- and third-tier cooperatives whose members are other cooperatives

Research published by the Worldwatch Institute found that in 2012 approximately one billion people in 96 countries had become members of at least one cooperative.[2] The turnover of the largest three hundred cooperatives in the world reached $2.2 trillion – which, if they were to be a country, it would make them the seventh largest.[3][need quotation to verify]
One dictionary defines a cooperative as "a jointly owned enterprise engaging in the production or distribution of goods or the supplying of services, operated by its members for their mutual benefit, typically organized by consumers or farmers".[4] Cooperative businesses are typically more economically resilient than many other forms of enterprise, with twice the number of co-operatives (80%) surviving their first five years compared with other business ownership models (41%).[5] Cooperatives frequently have social goals which they aim to accomplish by investing a proportion of trading profits back into their communities. As an example of this, in 2013, retail co-operatives in the UK invested 6.9% of their pre-tax profits in the communities in which they trade as compared with 2.4% for other rival supermarkets.[6]
The International Co-operative Alliance was the first international association formed (1895) by the cooperative movement.[citation needed] It includes the World Council of Credit Unions. A second organization formed later in Germany: the International Raiffeisen Union. In the United States, the National Cooperative Business Association (NCBA) serves as the sector's oldest national membership association. It is dedicated to ensuring that cooperative businesses have the same opportunities as other businesses operating in the country and that consumers have access to cooperatives in the marketplace. A U.S. National Cooperative Bank formed in the 1970s.[7] By 2004 a new association focused on worker co-ops was founded, the United States Federation of Worker Cooperatives.
Since 2002 cooperatives and credit unions could be distinguished on the Internet by use of a .coop domain. Since 2014, following International Cooperative Alliance's introduction of the Cooperative Marque, ICA cooperatives and WOCCU credit unions can also be identified by a coop ethical consumerism label.



Contents


1 Origins
2 Social economy
3 Organizational and ideological roots
4 Meaning

4.1 Cooperatives as legal entities
4.2 Identity

4.2.1 Coop Marque and domain
4.2.2 Coop principles and values
4.2.3 Legal




5 Economic stability

5.1 In the United Kingdom
5.2 Other countries in Europe
5.3 In Canada
5.4 In the United States of America


6 Types of cooperatives

6.1 Non-monetary cooperative
6.2 Retailers' cooperative
6.3 Worker cooperative
6.4 Volunteer cooperative
6.5 Social cooperative
6.6 Consumers' cooperative
6.7 Business and employment cooperative
6.8 New generation cooperative


7 Types and number of cooperatives

7.1 Housing cooperative
7.2 Utility cooperative
7.3 Agricultural cooperative
7.4 Credit unions, cooperative banking and co-operative insurance
7.5 Federal or secondary cooperatives

7.5.1 Cooperative wholesale society
7.5.2 Cooperative union
7.5.3 Cooperative political movements

7.5.3.1 UK
7.5.3.2 Philippines






8 Women in cooperatives
9 Cooperatives in popular culture
10 See also
11 References
12 Bibliography
13 External links



Origins[edit]
Main article: History of the cooperative movement
Cooperation dates back as far as human beings have been organizing for mutual benefit. Tribes were organized as cooperative structures, allocating jobs and resources among each other, only trading with the external communities.[citation needed] In alpine environments, trade could only be maintained in organized cooperatives to achieve a useful condition of artificial roads such as Viamala in 1472.[8] Pre-industrial Europe is home to the first cooperatives from an industrial context.[9]




Robert Owen (1771–1858) was a social reformer and a pioneer of the cooperative movement.


In 1761, the Fenwick Weavers' Society was formed in Fenwick, East Ayrshire, Scotland to sell discounted oatmeal to local workers.[10] Its services expanded to include assistance with savings and loans, emigration and education. In 1810, Welsh social reformer Robert Owen, from Newtown in mid-Wales, and his partners purchased New Lanark mill from Owen's father-in-law David Dale and proceeded to introduce better labour standards including discounted retail shops where profits were passed on to his employees. Owen left New Lanark to pursue other forms of cooperative organization and develop coop ideas through writing and lecture. Cooperative communities were set up in Glasgow, Indiana and Hampshire, although ultimately unsuccessful. In 1828, William King set up a newspaper, The Cooperator, to promote Owen's thinking, having already set up a cooperative store in Brighton.[11][12]
The Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers, (RCEP) founded in 1844, is usually considered the first successful cooperative enterprise, used as a model for modern coops, following the 'Rochdale Principles'. A group of 28 weavers and other artisans in Rochdale, England set up the society to open their own store selling food items they could not otherwise afford. Within ten years there were over a thousand cooperative societies in the United Kingdom.[citation needed]
Other events such as the founding of a friendly society by the Tolpuddle Martyrs in 1832 were key occasions in the creation of organized labor and consumer movements.[13]
Social economy[edit]
Cooperatives traditionally combine social benefit interests with capitalistic property-right interests. Cooperatives achieve a mix of social and capital purposes by democratically governing distribution questions by and between equal by not controlling members. Democratic oversight of decisions to equitably distribute assets and other benefits means capital ownership is arranged in a way for social benefit inside the organization. External societal benefit is also encouraged by incorporating the operating-principle of cooperation between co-operatives. In the final year of the 20th century, cooperatives banded together to establish a number of social enterprise agencies which have moved to adopt the multi-stakeholder cooperative model. In the years 1994–2009 the EU and its member nations gradually revised national accounting systems to "make visible" the increasing contribution of social economy organizations.[14]
Organizational and ideological roots[edit]
The roots of the cooperative movement can be traced to multiple influences and extend worldwide. In the English-speaking world, post-feudal forms of cooperation between workers and owners that are expressed today as "profit-sharing" and "surplus sharing" arrangements, existed as far back as 1795.[15] The key ideological influence on the Anglosphere branch of the cooperative movement, however, was a rejection of the charity principles that underpinned welfare reforms when the British government radically revised its Poor Laws in 1834. As both state and church institutions began to routinely distinguish between the 'deserving' and 'undeserving' poor, a movement of friendly societies grew throughout the British Empire based on the principle of mutuality, committed to self-help in the welfare of working people.[citation needed]
Friendly Societies established forums through which one member, one vote was practiced in organisation decision-making. The principles challenged the idea that a person should be an owner of property before being granted a political voice. Throughout the second half of the nineteenth century (and then repeatedly every twenty years or so) there was a surge in the number of cooperative organisations, both in commercial practice and civil society, operating to advance democracy and universal suffrage as a political principle.[16] Friendly Societies and consumer cooperatives became the dominant form of organization amongst working people in Anglosphere industrial societies prior to the rise of trade unions and industrial factories. Weinbren reports that by the end of the 19th century, over 80% of British working age men and 90% of Australian working age men were members of one or more Friendly Society.[17]
From the mid-nineteenth century, mutual organisations embraced these ideas in economic enterprises, firstly amongst tradespeople, and later in cooperative stores, educational institutes, financial institutions and industrial enterprises. The common thread (enacted in different ways, and subject to the constraints of various systems of national law) is the principle that an enterprise or association should be owned and controlled by the people it serves, and share any surpluses on the basis of each member's cooperative contribution (as a producer, labourer or consumer) rather than their capacity to invest financial capital.[18]
The cooperative movement has been fueled globally by ideas of economic democracy. Economic democracy is a socioeconomic philosophy that suggests an expansion of decision-making power from a small minority of corporate shareholders to a larger majority of public stakeholders. There are many different approaches to thinking about and building economic democracy. Anarchists are committed to libertarian socialism and have focused on local organization, including locally managed cooperatives, linked through confederations of unions, cooperatives and communities. Marxists, who as socialists have likewise held and worked for the goal of democratizing productive and reproductive relationships, often placed a greater strategic emphasis on confronting the larger scales of human organization. As they viewed the capitalist class to be politically, militarily and culturally mobilized for the purpose of maintaining an exploitable working class, they fought in the early 20th century to appropriate from the capitalist class the society's collective political capacity in the form of the state, either through democratic socialism, or through what came to be known as Leninism. Though they regard the state as an unnecessarily oppressive institution, Marxists considered appropriating national and international-scale capitalist institutions and resources (such as the state) to be an important first pillar in creating conditions favorable to solidaristic economies.[19][20] With the declining influence of the USSR after the 1960s, socialist strategies pluralized, though economic democratizers have not as yet established a fundamental challenge to the hegemony of global neoliberal capitalism.
Meaning[edit]
Cooperatives as legal entities[edit]
A cooperative is a legal entity owned and democratically controlled by its members. Members often have a close association with the enterprise as producers or consumers of its products or services, or as its employees.[21]
There are specific forms of incorporation for cooperatives in some countries, e.g. Finland[22] and Australia.[23] Cooperatives may take the form of companies limited by shares or by guarantee, partnerships or unincorporated associations. In the UK they may also use the industrial and provident society structure. In the US, cooperatives are often organized as non-capital stock corporations under state-specific cooperative laws. However, they may also be unincorporated associations or business corporations such as limited liability companies or partnerships; such forms are useful when the members want to allow[citation needed]:

some members to have a greater share of the control, or
some investors to have a return on their capital that exceeds fixed interest,

neither of which may be allowed under local laws for cooperatives. Cooperatives often share their earnings with the membership as dividends, which are divided among the members according to their participation in the enterprise, such as patronage, instead of according to the value of their capital shareholdings (as is done by a joint stock company).
 Identity[edit]
Coop Marque and domain[edit]
Since 2002, ICA cooperatives and WOCCU credit unions could be distinguished by use of a .coop domain. In 2014, ICA introduced the Global Cooperative Marque[24] for use by ICA's[25] Cooperative members and by WOCCU's Credit Union members so they can be further identified[26] by their coop ethical consumerism label. The marque is used today by thousands of cooperatives in more than a hundred countries.[27]
The .coop domain and Co-operative Marque were designed as a new symbol of the global cooperative movement and its collective identity in the digital age. The domain and coop marque differentiates coop products and e-services offerings of the Movement from all other forms of business, both investor-owned and privately owned businesses. It specifically recognises its rapidly changing role in society, marked by the emergence of the digital cooperative. The .coop (dot coop) domain and a global Co-operative Marque are open for use within all types of ICA cooperatives and WOCCU credit unions on their products or digital services, in combination with individual cooperative's own labels.
The Co-operative Marque and domain is reserved just for co-operatives, credit unions and organisations that support co-operatives; is distinguished by its ethical badge that subscribes to the seven ICA Cooperative Principles and Co-op Values. Co-ops can be identified on the Internet through the use of the .coop suffix of internet addresses. Organizations using .coop domain names must adhere to the basic co-op values.
Coop principles and values[edit]
Cooperative principles are the seven guidelines by which coops put their values into practice, often called the seven Rochdale Principles:[28]

Voluntary and open membership
Democratic member control
Economic participation by members
Autonomy and independence
Education, training and information
Cooperation among cooperatives
Concern for community

Cooperatives values, in the tradition of its founders, are based on "self-help, self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity and solidarity." Co-operative members believe in the ethical values of honesty, openness, social responsibility and caring for others.
Legal[edit]
Such legal entities have a range of social characteristics. Membership is open, meaning that anyone who satisfies certain non-discriminatory conditions may join. Economic benefits are distributed proportionally to each member's level of participation in the cooperative, for instance, by a dividend on sales or purchases, rather than according to capital invested.[29] Cooperatives may be classified as either worker, consumer, producer, purchasing or housing cooperatives.[30] They are distinguished from other forms of incorporation in that profit-making or economic stability are balanced by the interests of the community.[29]
The United Nations declared 2012 to be the International Year of Cooperatives (IYC).[31]
Economic stability[edit]
Main article: Economic stability
Capital and the Debt Trap reports that "cooperatives tend to have a longer life than other types of enterprise, and thus a higher level of entrepreneurial sustainability". This resilience has been attributed to how cooperatives share risks and rewards between members, how they harness the ideas of many and how members have a tangible ownership stake in the business. Additionally, "cooperative banks build up counter-cyclical buffers that function well in case of a crisis," and are less likely to lead members and clients towards a debt trap (p. 216). This is explained by their more democratic governance that reduces perverse incentives and subsequent contributions to economic bubbles.
In the United Kingdom[edit]
A 2013 report published by the UK Office for National Statistics showed that in the UK the rate of survival of cooperatives after five years was 80 percent compared with only 41 percent for all other enterprises.[5] A further study found that after ten years 44 percent of cooperatives were still in operation, compared with only 20 percent for all enterprises" (p. 109).
Other countries in Europe[edit]
A 2012 report published by The European Confederation of cooperatives and worker-owned enterprises active in industry and services showed that in France and Spain, worker cooperatives and social cooperatives “have been more resilient than conventional enterprises during the economic crisis”.[32]
In Canada[edit]
A 2010 report by the Ministry of Economic Development, Innovation and Export in Québec found that the five year survival rate and 10 year survival rate of cooperatives in Québec to be 62% and 44% respectively compared to 35% and 20% for conventional firms.[33] Another report by the BC-Alberta Social economy Research Alliance found that the three year survival rate of cooperatives in Alberta to be 81.5% in comparison to 48% for traditional firms.[34] Another report by the aforementioned Research Alliance found that in British-Columbia, the 5 year survival rates for cooperatives between 2000 and 2010 to be 66.6% in comparison to conventional businesses that had 43% and 39% in the years 1984 and 1993 respectively[34]
In the United States of America[edit]
In a 2007 study by the World Council of Credit Unions, the 5 year survival rate of cooperatives in the United States was found to be 90% in comparison to 3-5% for traditional businesses.[35]
Types of cooperatives[edit]
Non-monetary cooperative[edit]
A non-monetary cooperative provides a service based on entirely voluntary labour in the maintenance and provision of a particular service or good, working in the identical manner of a library. These co-ops are locally owned and operated and provides the free rental of equipments of all kinds (bicycles, sports, gear). This idea has been said to reduce general human consumption of goods, a key subject in sustainable development.[citation needed]
Retailers' cooperative[edit]
Main article: Retailers' cooperative
A retailers' cooperative (known as a secondary or marketing cooperative in some countries) is an organization which employs economies of scale on behalf of its members to receive discounts from manufacturers and to pool marketing. It is common for locally owned grocery stores, hardware stores and pharmacies. In this case, the members of the cooperative are businesses rather than individuals.
The Best Western international hotel chain is actually a retailers' cooperative, whose members are hotel operators, although it refers to itself as a "nonprofit membership association." It gave up on the "cooperative" label after some courts insisted on enforcing regulatory requirements for franchisors despite its member-controlled status.
Worker cooperative[edit]
Main article: Worker cooperative
A worker cooperative or producer cooperative is a cooperative, that is owned and democratically controlled by its "worker-owners". There are no outside owners in a "pure" workers' cooperative, only the workers own shares of the business, though hybrid forms exist in which consumers, community members or capitalist investors also own some shares. In practice, control by worker-owners may be exercised through individual, collective or majority ownership by the workforce, or the retention of individual, collective or majority voting rights (exercised on a one-member one-vote basis). A worker cooperative, therefore, has the characteristic that the majority of its workforce owns shares, and the majority of shares are owned by the workforce. Membership is not always compulsory for employees, but generally only employees can become members either directly (as shareholders) or indirectly through membership of a trust that owns the company.
The impact of political ideology on practice constrains the development of cooperatives in different countries. In India, there is a form of workers' cooperative which insists on compulsory membership for all employees and compulsory employment for all members. That is the form of the Indian Coffee Houses. This system was advocated by the Indian communist leader A. K. Gopalan. In places like the UK, common ownership (indivisible collective ownership) was popular in the 1970s. Cooperative Societies only became legal in Britain after the passing of Slaney's Act in 1852. In 1865 there were 651 registered societies with a total membership of well over 200,000. There are now more than 400 worker cooperatives in the UK, Suma Wholefoods being the largest example with a turnover of £24 million.
Volunteer cooperative[edit]
A volunteer cooperative is a cooperative that is run by and for a network of volunteers, for the benefit of a defined membership or the general public, to achieve some goal. Depending on the structure, it may be a collective or mutual organization, which is operated according to the principles of cooperative governance. The most basic form of volunteer-run cooperative is a voluntary association. A lodge or social club may be organized on this basis. A volunteer-run co-op is distinguished from a worker cooperative in that the latter is by definition employee-owned, whereas the volunteer cooperative is typically a non-stock corporation, volunteer-run consumer co-op or service organization, in which workers and beneficiaries jointly participate in management decisions and receive discounts on the basis of sweat equity.
Social cooperative[edit]
Main article: Social cooperative
A particularly successful form of multi-stakeholder cooperative is the Italian "social cooperative", of which some 11,000 exist.[36] "Type A" social cooperatives bring together providers and beneficiaries of a social service as members. "Type B" social cooperatives bring together permanent workers and previously unemployed people who wish to integrate into the labor market. They are legally defined as follows:

no more than 80% of profits may be distributed, interest is limited to the bond rate and dissolution is altruistic (assets may not be distributed)
the cooperative has legal personality and limited liability
the objective is the general benefit of the community and the social integration of citizens
those of type B integrate disadvantaged people into the labour market. The categories of disadvantage they target may include physical and mental disability, drug and alcohol addiction, developmental disorders and problems with the law. They do not include other factors of disadvantage such as unemployment, race, sexual orientation or abuse.
type A cooperatives provide health, social or educational services
various categories of stakeholder may become members, including paid employees, beneficiaries, volunteers (up to 50% of members), financial investors and public institutions. In type B cooperatives at least 30% of the members must be from the disadvantaged target groups
voting is one person one vote

Consumers' cooperative[edit]
Main article: Consumers' cooperative
A consumers' cooperative is a business owned by its customers. Employees can also generally become members. Members vote on major decisions and elect the board of directors from among their own number. The first of these was set up in 1844 in the North-West of England by 28 weavers who wanted to sell food at a lower price than the local shops.
The world's largest consumers' cooperative is the Co-operative Group in the United Kingdom, which offers a variety of retail and financial services. The UK also has a number of autonomous consumers' cooperative societies, such as the East of England Co-operative Society and Midcounties Co-operative. In fact, the Co-operative Group is something of a hybrid, having both corporate members (mostly other consumers' cooperatives, as a result of its origins as a wholesale society), and individual retail consumer members.[citation needed]
Business and employment cooperative[edit]
Main article: Business and employment co-operative
Business and employment cooperatives (BECs) are a subset of worker cooperatives that represent a new approach to providing support to the creation of new businesses.
Like other business creation support schemes, BEC's enable budding entrepreneurs to experiment with their business idea while benefiting from a secure income. The innovation BECs introduce is that once the business is established the entrepreneur is not forced to leave and set up independently, but can stay and become a full member of the cooperative. The micro-enterprises then combine to form one multi-activity enterprise whose members provide a mutually supportive environment for each other.
BECs thus provide budding business people with an easy transition from inactivity to self-employment, but in a collective framework. They open up new horizons for people who have ambition but who lack the skills or confidence needed to set off entirely on their own – or who simply want to carry on an independent economic activity but within a supportive group context.
New generation cooperative[edit]
New generation cooperatives (NGCs) are an adaptation of traditional cooperative structures to modern, capital intensive industries. They are sometimes described as a hybrid between traditional co-ops and limited liability companies or public benefit corporations. They were first developed in California and spread and flourished in the US Mid-West in the 1990s.[37] They are now common in Canada where they operate primarily in agriculture and food services, where their primary purpose is to add value to primary products. For example, producing ethanol from corn, pasta from durum wheat, or gourmet cheese from goat’s milk. A representative example of an operating NGC is the Fourth Estate (association), a multi-stakeholder NGC journalism association.
Types and number of cooperatives[edit]




Co-op City in The Bronx, New York City is the largest cooperative housing development in the world, with 55,000 people.[38]






The two largest supermarkets chains in Switzerland, Migros and Coop, are cooperatives. The third largest bank, Raiffeisen, is a cooperative as well.


The top 300 largest cooperatives were listed in 2007 by the International Co-operative Alliance. 80% were involved in either agriculture, finance, or retail and more than half were in the United States, Italy, or France. In the United States, cooperatives, particularly those in the Midwest, are analyzed at the University of Wisconsin Center for Cooperatives.
Housing cooperative[edit]
Main articles: Housing cooperative and Building cooperative
A housing cooperative is a legal mechanism for ownership of housing where residents either own shares (share capital co-op) reflecting their equity in the cooperative's real estate, or have membership and occupancy rights in a not-for-profit cooperative (non-share capital co-op), and they underwrite their housing through paying subscriptions or rent.
Housing cooperatives come in three basic equity structures

In market-rate housing cooperatives, members may sell their shares in the cooperative whenever they like for whatever price the market will bear, much like any other residential property. Market-rate co-ops are very common in New York City.
Limited equity housing cooperatives, which are often used by affordable housing developers, allow members to own some equity in their home, but limit the sale price of their membership share to that which they paid.
Group equity or zero-equity housing cooperatives do not allow members to own equity in their residences and often have rental agreements well below market rates.

Members of a building cooperative (in Britain known as a self-build housing cooperative) pool resources to build housing, normally using a high proportion of their own labor. When the building is finished, each member is the sole owner of a homestead, and the cooperative may be dissolved.
This collective effort was at the origin of many of Britain's building societies, which however, developed into "permanent" mutual savings and loan organisations, a term which persisted in some of their names (such as the former Leeds Permanent). Nowadays such self-building may be financed using a step-by-step mortgage which is released in stages as the building is completed. The term may also refer to worker cooperatives in the building trade.
Utility cooperative[edit]
Main article: Utility cooperative
A utility cooperative is a type of consumers' cooperative that is tasked with the delivery of a public utility such as electricity, water or telecommunications services to its members. Profits are either reinvested into infrastructure or distributed to members in the form of "patronage" or "capital credits", which are essentially dividends paid on a member's investment into the cooperative. In the United States, many cooperatives were formed to provide rural electrical and telephone service as part of the New Deal. See Rural Utilities Service.
In the case of electricity, cooperatives are generally either generation and transmission (G&T) co-ops that create and send power via the transmission grid or local distribution co-ops that gather electricity from a variety of sources and send it along to homes and businesses.
In Tanzania, it has been proven that the cooperative method is helpful in water distribution. When the people are involved with their own water, they care more because the quality of their work has a direct effect on the quality of their water.
Agricultural cooperative[edit]




Grain elevators are used by agricultural cooperatives in the storage and shipping of grains.


Main article: Agricultural cooperative
Agricultural cooperatives or farmers' cooperatives are cooperatives where farmers pool their resources for mutual economic benefit. Agricultural cooperatives are broadly divided into agricultural service cooperatives, which provide various services to their individual farming members, and agricultural production cooperatives, where production resources such as land or machinery are pooled and members farm jointly.[39] Known examples of agricultural production cooperatives are the cranberry-and-grapefruit cooperative Ocean Spray, collective farms in socialist states and the kibbutzim in Israel.
Agricultural supply cooperatives aggregate purchases, storage, and distribution of farm inputs for their members. By taking advantage of volume discounts and utilizing other economies of scale, supply cooperatives bring down members' costs. Supply cooperatives may provide seeds, fertilizers, chemicals, fuel, and farm machinery. Some supply cooperatives also operate machinery pools that provide mechanical field services (e.g., plowing, harvesting) to their members.
Agricultural marketing cooperatives provide the services involved in moving a product from the point of production to the point of consumption. Agricultural marketing includes a series of interconnected activities involving planning production, growing and harvesting, grading, packing, transport, storage, food processing, distribution and sale. Agricultural marketing cooperatives are often formed to promote specific commodities.
Commercially successful cooperatives include India's Amul (dairy products), Dairy Farmers of America (dairy products) in the United States, and Malaysia's FELDA (palm oil).
Credit unions, cooperative banking and co-operative insurance[edit]
Main articles: Cooperative banking and Credit union




The Co-operative Bank's head office in Manchester. The statue in front is of Robert Owen, a pioneer in the cooperative movement.


Credit unions are cooperative financial institutions that are owned and controlled by their members. Credit unions provide the same financial services as banks but are considered not-for-profit organizations and adhere to cooperative principles.
Credit unions originated in mid-19th-century Germany through the efforts of pioneers Franz Herman Schulze'Delitzsch and Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen. The concept of financial cooperatives crossed the Atlantic at the turn of the 20th century, when the caisse populaire movement was started by Alphonse Desjardins in Quebec, Canada. In 1900, from his home in Lévis, he opened North America's first credit union, marking the beginning of the Mouvement Desjardins. Eight years later, Desjardins provided guidance for the first credit union in the United States, where there are now about 7,950 active status federally insured credit unions, with almost 90 million members and more than $679 billion on deposit.
Cooperative banking networks, which were nationalized in Eastern Europe, work now as real cooperative institutions. In Poland, the SKOK (Spółdzielcze Kasy Oszczędnościowo-Kredytowe) network has grown to serve over 1 million members via 13,000 branches, and is larger than the country’s largest conventional bank.
In Scandinavia, there is a clear distinction between mutual savings banks (Sparbank) and true credit unions (Andelsbank).
The oldest cooperative banks in Europe, based on the ideas of Friedrich Raiffeisen, are joined together in the 'Urgenossen'.
Federal or secondary cooperatives[edit]
Main article: Cooperative Federation
In some cases, cooperative societies find it advantageous to form cooperative federations in which all of the members are themselves cooperatives. Historically, these have predominantly come in the form of cooperative wholesale societies, and cooperative unions. Cooperative federations are a means through which cooperative societies can fulfill the sixth Rochdale Principle, cooperation among cooperatives, with the ICA noting that "Cooperatives serve their members most effectively and strengthen the cooperative movement by working together through local, regional and international structures."
See also: List of Co-operative Federations
Cooperative wholesale society[edit]
Main article: Cooperative wholesale society
According to cooperative economist Charles Gide, the aim of a cooperative wholesale society is to arrange "bulk purchases, and, if possible, organise production." The best historical example of this was the English CWS and the Scottish CWS, which were the forerunners to the modern Co-operative Group. Today, its national buying programme, the Co-operative Retail Trading Group performs a similar function.
Cooperative union[edit]
A second common form of cooperative federation is a cooperative union, whose objective (according to Gide) is "to develop the spirit of solidarity among societies and... in a word, to exercise the functions of a government whose authority, it is needless to say, is purely moral." Co-operatives UK and the International Cooperative Alliance are examples of such arrangements.
Cooperative political movements[edit]
 In some countries with a strong cooperative sector, such as the UK, cooperatives may find it advantageous to form political groupings to represent their interests. The British Cooperative Party, the Canadian Cooperative Commonwealth Federation and United Farmers of Alberta are prime examples of such arrangements.
UK[edit]
The British cooperative movement formed the Cooperative Party in the early 20th century to represent members of consumers' cooperatives in Parliament, which was the first of its kind. The Cooperative Party now has a permanent electoral pact with the Labour Party meaning someone cannot be a member if they support a party other than Labour. Plaid Cymru also run a credit union that is constituted as a co-operative, called the 'Plaid Cymru Credit Union.'[40] UK cooperatives retain a strong market share in food retail, insurance, banking, funeral services, and the travel industry in many parts of the country, although this is still significantly lower than other business models.[41]
Philippines[edit]
The Cooperative NATCCO Party (Coop-NATCCO) is a party-list in the Philippines which serves as the electoral wing of the National Confederation of Cooperatives (NATCCO). Coop-NATCCO has represented the Philippine co-operative sector in the Philippine 11th Congress since 1998.
Women in cooperatives[edit]
Main article: Women in cooperatives
Since cooperatives are based on values like self-help, democracy, equality, equity, and solidarity, they can play a particularly strong role in empowering women, especially in developing countries.[42] Cooperatives allow women who might have been isolated and working individually to band together and create economies of scale as well as increase their own bargaining power in the market. In statements in advance of International Women's Day in early 2013, President of the International Cooperative Alliance, Dame Pauline Green, said, "Cooperative businesses have done so much to help women onto the ladder of economic activity. With that comes community respect, political legitimacy and influence."
However, despite the supposed democratic structure of cooperatives and the values and benefits shared by members, due to gender norms on the traditional role of women, and other instilled cultural practices that sidestep attempted legal protections, women suffer a disproportionately low representation in cooperative membership around the world. Representation of women through active membership (showing up to meetings and voting), as well as in leadership and managerial positions is even lower.[43]
Cooperatives in popular culture[edit]
As of 2012[update], the number of memberships in cooperatives reached one billion,[44] and so the organizational structure and movement has seeped into popular culture.
In the HBO drama television series The Wire, several drug dealers create a democratic alliance called the New Day Co-Op with the interests of cutting back on violence and increasing business.
Co-opoly: The Game of Cooperatives is a popular board game played around the world that challenges players to work together to start and run a cooperative and overcome major hurdles.[45][46]
My So-Called Housing Cooperative is a web series focusing on the humorous side of living in a housing co-op.[47]
U.S. co-ops provide over 850 thousand jobs and create more than $74 billion in annual wages with revenue of nearly $500 billion.[48]
See also[edit]


Artist cooperative
Cooperative economics
Co-operative living arrangements
Collective
Collective ownership
Common ownership
Commune (intentional community)
Corporatism
Cost the limit of price
Danish cooperative movement
Democratic socialism
Employee-owned corporation
Employee stock ownership plan
FC Barcelona (the world's first cooperative-based football club)
Friendly society
History of the cooperative movement
Industrial and provident society
List of co-operative federations
List of cooperatives
Microfinance / microcredit
Mondragón Cooperative Corporation
Mutual aid
Mutual organization
Mutual Ownership Defense Housing Division
Mutualism (economic theory)
Neo-capitalism
Online media cooperative
Participatory democracy
Participatory economics
Polytechnic University of the Philippines College of Cooperatives and Social Development
Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen
Rochdale Principles
Social corporatism
Social economy
Social enterprise
Social ownership
Syndicalism
Socialism


References[edit]


^ Statement on the Cooperative Identity. Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine. International Cooperative Alliance.
^ "Membership in Co-operative Businesses Reaches 1 Billion - Worldwatch Institute". Membership in co-operative businesses has grown to 1 billion people across 96 countries, according to new research published by the Worldwatch Institute for its Vital Signs Online publication. 
^ "The World Co-operative Monitor". monitor.coop. 
^ "Dictionary.com - Find the Meanings and Definitions of Words at Dictionary.com". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 2017-06-11. 
^ a b http://www.uk.coop/sites/default/files/uploads/attachments/co-op_economy_2015.pdf
^ "Community investment index: giving back to neighbourhoods". thenews.coop. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. 
^ "Community Impact - National Cooperative Bank". National Cooperative Bank, N.A. 2017. Retrieved 2017-06-11. Chartered by Congress in 1978 and privatized in 1981 as a cooperatively owned financial institution, NCB was created to address the financial needs of an underserved market: cooperative owned organizations that operate for the benefit of their members, not outside investors. 
^ "1473 letter of intent to build a road, in (old) german" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. 
^ Europe, CICOPA. "About Us". 
^ Carrell, Severin. Strike Rochdale from the record books. The Co-op began in Scotland., The Guardian, 7 August 2007.
^ "Full text of "Dr. William King and the Co-operator, 1828-1830"". archive.org. 
^ "Dr. William King and the Co-operator, 1828-1830, T. W. MERCER, OL6459685M
^ Marlow, Joyce, The Tolpuddle Martyrs, London :History Book Club, (1971) & Grafton Books, (1985) ISBN 0-586-03832-9
^ Monzon, J. L. & Chaves, R. (2008) "The European Social Economy: Concept and Dimensions of the Third Sector", Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 79(3/4): 549-577.
^ Gates, J. (1998) The Ownership Solution, London: Penguin.
^ Rothschild, J., Allen-Whitt, J. (1986) The Cooperative Workplace, Cambridge University Press
^ Weinbren, D. & James, B. (2005) "Getting a Grip: the Roles of Friendly Societies in Australia and Britain Reappraised", Labour History, Vol. 88.
^ Ridley-Duff, R. J. (2008) "Social Enterprise as a Socially Rational Business", International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research, 14(5): 291-312.
^ Rothschild, J., Allen-Whitt, J. (1986) The cooperative workplace, Cambridge University Press, Chapter 1.
^ Cliff, T., Cluckstein, D. (1988) The Labour Party: A Marxist History, London: Bookmarks.
^ "What is a co-operative - Co-operatives UK". 
^ Osuuskuntalaki (421/2013, Cooperatives act).§2: "Osuuskunta on jäsenistään erillinen oikeushenkilö, joka syntyy rekisteröimisellä." This translates as, "A cooperative is a legal person separate from its persons, born by registration." Finlex database. Retrieved 2015-12-04. (in Finnish)
^ "Australian Co-operative Glossary". 
^ "Coop Marque". Coop Identity. International Cooperative Alliance. 
^ "Co-operatives, adopt the Co-operative Marque". Co-op Marque. International Co-operative Alliance. 
^ "Coop Identity". Coop Marque. International Cooperative Alliance. 
^ "Coop Marque Register". Domains.Coop. International Cooperative Alliance. 
^ "Co-operative identity, values & principles". ICA. International Cooperative Alliance. 
^ a b International Cooperative Alliance.Statement on the Cooperative Identity Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved on: 2011-07-31.
^ Andrew McLeod (December 2006). Types of Cooperatives. Northwest Cooperative Development Centre. Retrieved on: 2011-07-31.
^ "UN's official website". Retrieved 25 February 2012. 
^ http://www.cecop.coop/IMG/pdf/report_cecop_2012_en_web.pdf
^ http://www.ontario.coop/cms/documents/212/2008_Quebec_Co-op_Survival_Report_Summary.pdf
^ a b "A11 Report - Alberta Co-op Survival (PDF)" (PDF). 
^ "10 Facts About Cooperative Enterprise - Grassroots Economic Organizing". www.geo.coop. 
^ In 2011 the official total was 11,264: ISTAT, 9° Censimento dell’industria e dei servizi (Roma, 2011)
^ "New Generation Cooperatives - 10 Things You Need to Know". Government of Alberta: Agriculture and Rural Development. Retrieved 25 December 2011. 
^ Whitsett, Ross. Urban Mass: A Look at Co-op City. The Cooperator. December 2006.
^ Cobia, David, editor, Cooperatives in Agriculture, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1989), p. 50.
^ "Plaid Cymru Credit Union website". ucpccu.org. 
^ Ian Clarke, (2000) "Retail power, competition and local consumer choice in the UK grocery sector", European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 34 Iss: 8, pp.975 - 1002
^ "What is a Cooperative?". un.org. 
^ Nippierd, A. (2002). "Gender issues in cooperatives." Geneva, Switzerland: International Labour Organization
^ "Membership in Co-operative Businesses Reaches 1 Billion," WorldWatch Institute
^ "Co-opoly: The Game of Co-operatives". The Toolbox for Education and Social Action. 
^ "Teach Your Children Well: Don't Play Monopoly", Truthout.org
^ My So-Called Housing Cooperative. youtube.com. 
^ admin (6 April 2012). "Co-op FAQs and Facts". 


Bibliography[edit]


Neoliberal Co-optation of Leading Co-op Organizations, and a Socialist Counter-Politics of Cooperation (February 2015), Carl Ratner, Monthly Review, Volume 66, Number 9
Cooperatives On the Path to Socialism? (February 2015), Peter Marcuse, Monthly Review, Volume 66, Number 9
Japanese Consumers' Co-operative Union (2003). "co.op, 2003 Facts and Figures" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2005. 
Isao Takamura (1995). "Japan: Consumer Co-op Movement in Japan". 
Armitage, S. (1991) 'Consequences of Mutual Ownership for Building Societies', The Service Industries Journal, October, Vol.11(4): pp. 458–480 (p. 471).
Birchall, Johnston. "The International Co-operative Movement", 1997
Brazda, Johann and Schediwy, Robert (eds.) "Consumer Co-operatives in a Changing World"(ICA), 1989
Bernardi A., Monni S., eds., (2016), "The Co-operative firm – Keywords, Roma: RomaTrE-Press."
Cooperative League of America. Co-operation 1921-1947
Cornforth, C. J. et al. Developing Successful Worker Co-ops, London: Sage Publications, 1988.
Curl, John. "For All The People: Uncovering the Hidden History of Cooperation, Cooperative Movements, and Communalism in America," PM Press, 2009
Dana, Leo Paul 2010, "Nunavik, Arctic Quebec: Where Co-operatives Supplement Entrepreneurship," Global Business and Economics Review 12 (1/2), January 2010, pp. 42–71.
Derr, Jascha. The cooperative movement of Brazil and South Africa, 2013
Emerson, John. "Consider the Collective: More than business as usual" 2005. Article on graphic design and printing cooperatives.
Gide, Charles. Consumers' Co-operative Societies, 1922
Holyoake, George Jacob. The History of Co-operation, 1908
Llewellyn, D. and Holmes, M. (1991) 'In Defence of Mutuality: A Redress to an Emerging Conventional Wisdom', Annals of Public and Co-operative Economics, Vol.62(3): pp. 319–354 (p. 327).
Masulis, R. (1987) 'Changes in Ownership Structure: Conversions of Mutual Savings and Loans to Stock Charter', Journal of Financial economics, Vol.18: pp. 29–59 (p. 32).
Paton, R. Reluctant Entrepreneurs, Open University Press, 1989.
Rasmusen, E. (1988) 'Mutual banks and stock banks', Journal of Law and Economics, October, Vol.31: pp. 395–421 (p. 412).
Van Deusen, David. (2006) Co-ops: The Changing Face of Employment in the Green Mountains, Z Magazine.
Vicari S., (2015), "2014 Annual Report on FAO’s projects and activities in support of producer organizations and cooperatives"
Vieta, Marco (ed.) "The New Cooperativism" in Affinities: A Journal of Radical Theory, Culture, and Action, Vol. 4, Issue 1, 2010
Warbasse, James Peter. Cooperative Peace, 1950
Warbasse, James Peter. Problems Of Cooperation, 1941
Whyte, W. F. and Whyte, K. K. Making Mondragon, New York: ILR Press/Itchaca, 1991.
Zeuli, Kimebrly A. and Cropp, Robert. Cooperatives: Principles and practices in the 21st century, 2004
Understanding Cooperatives, a curriculum on cooperative business for secondary school students.
India: Re-inventing cooperatives by increasing youth involvement


External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Co-operation.


 Media related to Cooperatives at Wikimedia Commons

Venezuela's Cooperative Revolution from Dollars & Sense magazine
United Nations 2012 International Year of Cooperatives (IYC) official website







v
t
e


Cooperatives and mutual organizations








Types of cooperatives







By governance




Consumer



Cooperative federation

list


Cooperative wholesale society





Worker (list)



Employee ownership
Workers' self-management
Workers' control
Workplace democracy
Business and employment co-operative





Purchasing



Retailers' cooperative





Other



Social cooperative
Agent-owned company








By purpose




Banking



Credit union
Mutual savings bank
Savings and loan association
Building society





Housing



Building
Cohousing
Student housing
Housing society (egalitarian)
Intentional community





Agricultural



Collective farming
Reforestation
Winemaking
Wheat pool





Utility (list)



Community wind energy
Electric
Telephone





Mutual education



Anarchistic free school
Homeschool
Democratic education
Learning by teaching





Mutual insurance



Health insurance cooperative





Other



Food

list


Recycling



















Topics







Identity



Rochdale Principles
ICA Statement on the Cooperative Identity






Political and
economic theories




Co-operative economics
Cooperative federalism
Distributism
Economic democracy
Mutualism
Neo-Capitalism
Owenism
Social enterprise
Socialism
Socially responsible investing
Solidarity economy





Key theorists



G. D. H. Cole
Charles Gide
David Griffiths
William King
Robert Owen
Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen
David Schweickart
Rochdale Pioneers
Beatrice Webb





By region



Canada
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States





Organizations



List of cooperatives

worker
energy
federations


International Co-operative Alliance
Co-operative Party














History of the cooperative movement
.coop












v
t
e


Socialism



Variants



Agrarian socialism
Communism
Democratic socialism
Eco-socialism
Ethical socialism
Guild socialism
Liberal socialism
Libertarian socialism
Market socialism
Mutualism
Marxist socialism
Revolutionary socialism
Scientific socialism
Social democracy
Socialist feminism
Socialism of the 21st century
Social anarchism
State socialism
Syndicalism
Utopian socialism








Key topics and issues



Types of socialism
History of socialism
Economics
State
Criticism





Concepts



Economic planning
Free association
Equal opportunity
Direct democracy
Adhocracy
Technocracy
Self-management
Industrial democracy
Economic democracy
Public ownership
Common ownership
Cooperative ownership
Social dividend
Basic income
Production for use
Calculation in kind
Labour voucher
Workplace democracy





People



Charles Hall
Henri de Saint-Simon
François-Noël Babeuf
Robert Owen
Charles Fourier
William Thompson
Thomas Hodgskin
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Louis Blanc
Mikhail Bakunin
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Ferdinand Lassalle
William Morris
Mary Harris Jones
Peter Kropotkin
Eduard Bernstein
Errico Malatesta
Fred M. Taylor
Eugene Debs
Georgi Plekhanov
John Dewey
Enrico Barone
W. E. B. Du Bois
Emma Goldman
Rosa Luxemburg
Léon Blum
Antonie Pannekoek
Bertrand Russell
Luis Emilio Recabarren
Albert Einstein
Clement Attlee
Karl Polanyi
Nestor Makhno
G. D. H. Cole
Imre Nagy
Einar Gerhardsen
George Orwell
Léopold Sédar Senghor
Salvador Allende
François Mitterrand
Nelson Mandela
Gamal Abdel Nasser
Murray Bookchin
Alexander Dubček
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Martin Luther King Jr.
Mikhail Gorbachev
Bernie Sanders
Tariq Ali
Abdullah Öcalan
Slavoj Žižek
Jeremy Corbyn
Cornel West
Jack Layton
Hugo Chávez
Chris Hedges
Yanis Varoufakis
Pablo Iglesias





Organizations



First International (International Workingmen's Association)
Second International
Third International (Comintern)
Fourth International
Fifth International
Socialist International
Foro de São Paulo
World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY)
International Union of Socialist Youth (IUSY)
World Socialist Movement
International League of Religious Socialists
International Marxist Tendency





Religious socialism



Buddhist socialism
Christian socialism
Islamic socialism
Jewish left





Regional socialism



African socialism
Arab socialism
Bolivarianism
Gandhian socialism
Indian socialism
Labor Zionism
Marhaenism
Naxalism
Socialism in One Country
Socialist nationalism
Third World Socialism





Related topics



Criticism of capitalism
Class struggle
Democracy
Dictatorship of the proletariat
Egalitarianism
Equality of outcome
Impossibilism
Internationalism
State-owned enterprise
Left-wing politics
Marxism
Mixed economy
Nanosocialism
Nationalization
Socialisation of production
Planned economy
Proletarian revolution
Reformism
Socialism in One Country
Socialist market economy
Post-capitalism
Trade union
Mode of production





Anthem



"The Internationale"








Politics portal
Socialism portal












v
t
e


Anarchism



Schools
of thought



Agorist
Black
Capitalist
Christian
Collectivist
Communist
Egoist
Existentialist
Feminist
Green
Individualist
Insurrectionary
Leftist
Magonist
Market
Mutualist
Nationalist
Naturist
Pacifist
Philosophical
Platformist
Post-anarchist
Postcolonial
Post-left
Primitivist
Queer
Social
Syndicalist
Synthesist
Voluntaryism
Without adjectives





Theory
and practice



Anarchy
Anarchist Black Cross
Anationalism
Anti-authoritarianism
Anti-militarism
Affinity group
Black bloc
Classless society
Class struggle
Communes
Consensus democracy
Conscientious objector
Counter-economics
Decentralization
Deep ecology
Direct action
Direct democracy
Dual power
Especifismo
Expropriative anarchism
Free association
Free love
Free school
Freethought
Horizontalidad
Illegalism
Individualism
Individual reclamation
Isocracy
Law
Non-Aggression Principle
Participatory politics
Permanent autonomous zone
Prefigurative politics
Proletarian internationalism
Propaganda of the deed
Revolution
Rewilding
Social center
Social ecology
Social insertion
Somatherapy
Spontaneous order
Squatting
Temporary Autonomous Zone
Union of egoists





People



Sylvain Maréchal
William Godwin
Max Stirner
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Josiah Warren
Henry David Thoreau
Mikhail Bakunin
Lysander Spooner
Eugène Pottier
Louise Michel
Élisée Reclus
Leo Tolstoy
Ravachol
Johann Most
Giovanni Passannante
Peter Kropotkin
Francisco Ferrer Guardia
Leon Czolgosz
Errico Malatesta
Gustav Landauer
Benjamin Tucker
Ricardo Flores Magón
Alexander Berkman
Franz Kafka
Emma Goldman
Max Nettlau
Erich Mühsam
Nestor Makhno
Volin
Rudolf Rocker
Buenaventura Durruti
Albert Camus
Daniel Guérin
Federica Montseny
Jacques Ellul
Léo Ferré
Murray Rothbard
Abbie Hoffman
Murray Bookchin
Ivan Illich
Kurt Vonnegut
Howard Zinn
Noam Chomsky
Alfredo M. Bonanno
John Zerzan
Subcomandante Marcos
Derrick Jensen
David Graeber
Banksy





Issues



Anarcho-capitalism
Crypto-anarchism
Animal rights
Arts
Capitalism
Education
Criticisms
Islam
Marxism
Nationalism
Orthodox Judaism
Religion
Love and sex
Violence





History



Paris Commune
Cantonal rebellion
Hague Congress
International Conference of Rome
Trial of the Thirty
Haymarket affair
May Day
Anarchist Exclusion Act
Congress of Amsterdam
Tragic Week
High Treason Incident
Manifesto of the Sixteen
1919 United States bombings
Biennio Rosso
German Revolution of 1918–19
Bavarian Soviet Republic
Kronstadt rebellion
Third Russian Revolution
Free Territory
Amakasu incident
Escuela Moderna
Individualist anarchism in Europe (in France)
Spanish Revolution
Barcelona May Days
Labadie Collection
May 1968
Provo
LIP
Kate Sharpley Library
Australian Anarchist Centenary
Carnival Against Capital
1999 WTO Conference protest
Occupy movement





Culture



Films
Anarchist Bookfair
Anarcho-punk
Culture jamming
DIY culture
Freeganism
Independent Media Center
Infoshop
"The Internationale"
Jewish anarchism
"Land and liberty"
Lifestylism
"No gods, no masters"
Popular education
"Property is theft!"
Radical cheerleading
Radical environmentalism
Squatting
Symbolism
Glossary
A las Barricadas





Economics



Communization
Co-operatives
Cost the limit of price
Counter-economics
Economic democracy
Economic secession
Free store
Gift economy
Laissez-faire
Market abolitionism
Mass strike
Mutual aid
Participatory economics
Really Really Free Market
Social ownership
Wage slavery
Refusal of work
Workers' self-management





By region



Africa
Argentina
Australia
Azerbaijan
Brazil
Canada
China
Cuba
Ecuador
Egypt
France
Germany
Greece
India
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Monaco
New Zealand
Poland
Romania
Russia
South Africa
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Vietnam





Lists



Anarcho-punk bands
Communities
Fictional characters
Jewish anarchists
Love and sex
Musicians
Organizations
Periodicals
Poets
Russian anarchists





Related topics



Anti-statism
Anti-war
Non-aggression principle
Libertarianism
Classical liberalism
Spontaneous order
Anti-corporatism
Anti-capitalism
Anti-consumerism
Anti-fascism
Anti-globalization
Autarchism
Autonomism
Labour movement
Left communism
Libertarian socialism
Neozapatismo
Situationist International








Anarchism portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal








Cooperatives portal
Organized labour portal





Authority control



LCCN: sh85032217
GND: 4020160-0
SUDOC: 027466418
BNF: cb119501005 (data)
HDS: 8970
NDL: 00567111
BNE: XX526635











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cooperative&oldid=817748012"					Categories: Business modelsCooperativesMarket socialismMutualism (movement)Types of business entityTypes of organizationHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with Finnish-language external linksUse dmy dates from July 2013Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers