"Coptic Church" redirects here. For the architectural style, see Coptic architecture. For church buildings, see List of Coptic churches.



Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria


Ϯⲉⲕ̀ⲕⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ ̀ⲛⲣⲉⲙ̀ⲛⲭⲏⲙⲓ ⲛⲟⲣⲑⲟⲇⲟⲝⲟⲥ



Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral, Cairo, Egypt



Classification
Oriental Orthodox


Orientation
Coptic


Theology
Miaphysitism


Polity
Episcopal


Head
Pope Tawadros II


Region
Egypt, Libya, Sudan, South Sudan, Middle East, and Coptic diaspora


Liturgy
Alexandrian Rite


Headquarters
Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral, Cairo, Egypt


Founder
St Mark the Evangelist (Traditional)


Origin
AD 42, Alexandria, Egypt


Separations
British Orthodox Church (2015)


Members
~ 18–22 million total: About 9-15 million in Egypt, 500,000 in Sudan, 60,000 Libya, 1–2 million in Coptic diaspora


Official website
Official website of Pope Tawadros II


The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria is an Oriental Orthodox Christian church based in Egypt, Northeast Africa and the Middle East.[a] The head of the Church and the See of Alexandria is the Patriarch of Alexandria on the Holy See of Saint Mark, who also carries the title of Coptic Pope. The See of Alexandria is titular, and today the Coptic Pope presides from Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in the Abbassia District in Cairo. With 18–22 million members worldwide, whereof about 10 to 15 million are in Egypt (see Demographics section below), it is the country's largest Christian church.
The Coptic Orthodox Church belongs to the Oriental Orthodox family of Churches, which has been a distinct Christian body since the schism following the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, when it took a different position over Christology from that of the rest of the Christian Church (which would split 600 years later into the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church). The precise Christological differences that caused the split with the Coptic Christians are still disputed, highly technical, and mainly concerned with the nature of Christ. The foundational roots of the Coptic Church are based in Egypt, but it has a worldwide following. The church follows the Alexandrian Rite for its liturgy, prayer and devotional patrimony.
According to its tradition, the Coptic Church was established by Saint Mark, an apostle and evangelist, in the middle of the 1st century (approximately AD 42).[1]



Contents


1 History

1.1 Apostolic foundation
1.2 Contributions to Christianity

1.2.1 Catechetical School of Alexandria
1.2.2 Cradle of monasticism and its missionary work


1.3 Role and participation in the Ecumenical Councils

1.3.1 Council of Nicaea
1.3.2 Council of Constantinople
1.3.3 Council of Ephesus
1.3.4 Council of Chalcedon


1.4 From Chalcedon to the Arab conquest of Egypt
1.5 Muslim conquest of Egypt
1.6 Under Islamic rule (640–1800)
1.7 From the 19th century to the 1952 revolution


2 Present day
3 Demographics
4 Persecution
5 Jurisdiction outside Egypt
6 Daughter churches

6.1 Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
6.2 Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church


7 Coptic Orthodox churches around the world
8 Official titles of the Patriarch of Alexandria

8.1 Episcopal titles
8.2 Honorary titles
8.3 Historical evolution of the ecclesiastical title


9 Administration
10 Cathedrals
11 Monasteries
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Bibliography
16 External links



History[edit]


Part of a series on


Oriental Orthodoxy





Oriental Orthodox churches





Coptic
Ethiopian
Armenian
Syriac
Eritrean
Indian (Malankara)







Subdivisions


Autonomous churches grouped by tradition:
Coptic: French
Armenian: Cilicia, Constantinople, Jerusalem
Syriac: British, Malankara Jacobite








History and theology



Coptic history
Tewahedo history
Syriac history
Saint Thomas Christians



Ecumenical Councils:



First
Second
Third



Historical topics and events:



Peshitta
Tur Abdin
Miaphysitism
Monophysitism
2nd Council of Ephesus
Council of Dvin
Council of Capharthutha
Coonan Cross Oath









Liturgy and practices



Apostolic Church-Ordinance
Armenian calendar
Coptic calendar
Coptic fasting
Coptic monasticism
Coptic saints
Debtera
Ethiopian chant
Fast of Nineveh
Holy Qurbana
Tabot
Timkat









Major figures



Abgar V
Nine Saints of Ethiopia
Gregory the Illuminator
Tiridates III
Mar Awgin
Ezana of Axum
Frumentius
Shenoute
Dioscorus of Alexandria
Severus of Antioch
Abraham of Farshut
Yared
Simon the Tanner
Gregory of Narek
Nerses IV
Michael the Syrian
Bar Hebraeus
Tekle Haymanot
Giyorgis of Segla
Mar Thoma I
Gregorios Abdal Jaleel
Geevarghese Gregorios
Geevarghese Dionysius









Other topics



Abuna
Catholicos
Coptic cross
Cross of St. Thomas
Ethiopian titles
Maphrian
Tewahedo biblical canon







 Oriental Orthodoxy portal





v
t
e







Part of the series on


Copts











Culture




Architecture
Art
Calendar
Coptology
Cross
Encyclopedia
Fasting
Flag
History
Identity
Literature
Music
Monasticism
Nationalism
Persecution




Regions




Egypt
Sudan
Libya
United States (Churches)
Canada (Churches)
Australia (Churches)
Africa
Asia
Europe
South America
Coptic Diaspora




Religions




Orthodoxy
Catholicism
Evangelicals
Other Protestants




Language




Egyptian language
Coptic language




Writing Systems




Hieroglyphs
Hieratic
Demotic
Coptic







v
t
e





Apostolic foundation[edit]
Egypt is identified in the Bible as the place of refuge that the Holy Family sought in its flight from Judea:

When he [Joseph] arose, he took the young Child and His mother by night and departed for Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod the Great, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt I called My Son (Matthew 2:12–23).[2]

The Egyptian Church is traditionally believed to be founded by St Mark at around AD 42, regards itself as the subject of many prophecies in the Old Testament. Isaiah the prophet, in Chapter 19, Verse 19 says "In that day there will be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to the LORD at its border."[1]
The first Christians in Egypt were common people who spoke Egyptian Coptic.[3] There were also Alexandrian Jewish people such as Theophilus, whom Saint Luke the Evangelist addresses in the introductory chapter of his gospel. When the church was founded by Saint Mark during the reign of the Roman emperor Nero, a great multitude of native Egyptians (as opposed to Greeks or Jews) embraced the Christian faith.[3][4]
Christianity spread throughout Egypt within half a century of Saint Mark's arrival in Alexandria, as is clear from the New Testament writings found in Bahnasa, in Middle Egypt, which date around the year AD 200, and a fragment of the Gospel of John, written in Coptic, which was found in Upper Egypt and can be dated to the first half of the 2nd century. In the 2nd century, Christianity began to spread to the rural areas, and scriptures were translated into the local languages, namely Coptic.
Contributions to Christianity[edit]
Catechetical School of Alexandria[edit]
The Catechetical School of Alexandria is the oldest catechetical school in the world. St. Jerome records that the Christian School of Alexandria was founded by Saint Mark himself.[5] Around AD 190 under the leadership of the scholar Pantanaeus, the school of Alexandria became an important institution of religious learning, where students were taught by scholars such as Athenagoras, Clement, Didymus, and the native Egyptian Origen, who was considered the father of theology and who was also active in the field of commentary and comparative Biblical studies. Origen wrote over 6,000 commentaries of the Bible in addition to his famous Hexapla.
Many scholars such as Jerome visited the school of Alexandria to exchange ideas and to communicate directly with its scholars. The scope of this school was not limited to theological subjects; science, mathematics and humanities were also taught there. The question-and-answer method of commentary began there, and 15 centuries before Braille, wood-carving techniques were in use there by blind scholars to read and write.
The Theological college of the catechetical school was re-established in 1893. The new school currently has campuses in Ireland, Cairo, New Jersey, and Los Angeles, where Coptic priests-to-be and other qualified men and women are taught among other subjects Christian theology, history, the Coptic language and art – including chanting, music, iconography, and tapestry.
Cradle of monasticism and its missionary work[edit]
Main article: Coptic monasticism
Many Egyptian Christians went to the desert during the 3rd century, and remained there to pray and work and dedicate their lives to seclusion and worship of God. This was the beginning of the monastic movement, which was organized by Anthony the Great, Saint Paul of Thebes, the world's first anchorite, Saint Macarius the Great and Saint Pachomius the Cenobite in the 4th century.
Christian monasticism was born in Egypt and was instrumental in the formation of the Coptic Orthodox Church character of submission, simplicity and humility, thanks to the teachings and writings of the Great Fathers of Egypt's Deserts. By the end of the 5th century, there were hundreds of monasteries, and thousands of cells and caves scattered throughout the Egyptian desert. A great number of these monasteries are still flourishing and have new vocations to this day.
All Christian monasticism stems, either directly or indirectly, from the Egyptian example: Saint Basil the Great Archbishop of Caesaria of Cappadocia, founder and organizer of the monastic movement in Asia Minor, visited Egypt around AD 357 and his rule is followed by the Eastern Orthodox Churches; Saint Jerome who translated the Bible into Latin, came to Egypt, while en route to Jerusalem, around AD 400 and left details of his experiences in his letters; Benedict founded the Benedictine Order in the 6th century on the model of Saint Pachomius, but in a stricter form. Countless pilgrims have visited the "Desert Fathers" to emulate their spiritual, disciplined lives.
Role and participation in the Ecumenical Councils[edit]
Council of Nicaea[edit]
Main article: First Council of Nicaea
In the 4th century, an Alexandrian presbyter named Arius began a theological dispute about the nature of Christ that spread throughout the Christian world and is now known as Arianism. The Ecumenical Council of Nicea AD 325 was convened by Constantine under the presidency of Saint Hosius of Cordova and Pope Saint Alexander I of Alexandria to resolve the dispute and eventually led to the formulation of the Symbol of Faith, also known as the Nicene Creed. The Creed, which is now recited throughout the Christian world, was based largely on the teaching put forth by a man who eventually would become Pope Saint Athanasius of Alexandria, the chief opponent of Arius.
Council of Constantinople[edit]
Main article: First Council of Constantinople
In the year AD 381, Pope Timothy I of Alexandria presided over the second ecumenical council known as the Ecumenical Council of Constantinople, to judge Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Spirit. This council completed the Nicene Creed with this confirmation of the divinity of the Holy Spirit:

We believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father, who with the Father through the Son is worshiped and glorified who spoke by the Prophets and in One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic church. We confess one Baptism for the remission of sins and we look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the coming age, Amen.

Council of Ephesus[edit]
Main article: Council of Ephesus




Coptic Icon in the Coptic Altar of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem


Another theological dispute in the 5th century occurred over the teachings of Nestorius, the Patriarch of Constantinople who taught that God the Word was not hypostatically joined with human nature, but rather dwelt in the man Jesus. As a consequence of this, he denied the title "Mother of God" (Theotokos) to the Virgin Mary, declaring her instead to be "Mother of Christ" Christotokos.
When reports of this reached the Apostolic Throne of Saint Mark, Pope Saint Cyril I of Alexandria acted quickly to correct this breach with orthodoxy, requesting that Nestorius repent. When he would not, the Synod of Alexandria met in an emergency session and a unanimous agreement was reached. Pope Cyril I of Alexandria, supported by the entire See, sent a letter to Nestorius known as "The Third Epistle of Saint Cyril to Nestorius." This epistle drew heavily on the established Patristic Constitutions and contained the most famous article of Alexandrian Orthodoxy: "The Twelve Anathemas of Saint Cyril." In these anathemas, Cyril excommunicated anyone who followed the teachings of Nestorius. For example, "Anyone who dares to deny the Holy Virgin the title Theotokos is Anathema!" Nestorius however, still would not repent and so this led to the convening of the First Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431), over which Cyril presided.
The Council confirmed the teachings of Saint Athanasius and confirmed the title of Mary as "Mother of God". It also clearly stated that anyone who separated Christ into two hypostases was anathema, as Cyril had said that there is "One Nature [and One Hypostasis] for God the Word Incarnate" (Mia Physis tou Theou Logou Sesarkōmenē). Also, the introduction to the creed was formulated as follows:

We magnify you O Mother of the True Light and we glorify you O saint and Mother of God (Theotokos) for you have borne unto us the Saviour of the world. Glory to you O our Master and King: Christ, the pride of the Apostles, the crown of the martyrs, the rejoicing of the righteous, firmness of the churches and the forgiveness of sins. We proclaim the Holy Trinity in One Godhead: we worship Him, we glorify Him, Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy, Lord bless us, Amen. [not dissimilar to the "Axion Estin" Chant still used in Orthodoxy]

Council of Chalcedon[edit]
Main article: Council of Chalcedon




St. Mark Coptic Cathedral in Alexandria


When in AD 451, Emperor Marcianus attempted to heal divisions in the Church, the response of Pope Dioscorus – the Pope of Alexandria who was later exiled – was that the emperor should not intervene in the affairs of the Church. It was at Chalcedon that the emperor, through the Imperial delegates, enforced harsh disciplinary measures against Pope Dioscorus in response to his boldness. In 449, Pope Dioscorus headed the 2nd Council of Ephesus, called the "Robber Council" by Chalcedonian historians. It held to the Miaphysite formula which upheld the Christology of "One Incarnate Nature of God the Word" (Greek: μία φύσις Θεοῦ Λόγου σεσαρκωμένη (mia physis Theou Logou sesarkōmenē)),[6] and upheld the heretic Eutyches claiming he was orthodox.
The Council of Chalcedon summoned Dioscorus three times to appear at the council, after which he was deposed. The Council of Chalcedon further deposed him for his support of Eutyches, but not necessarily for Eutychian Monophysitism. Dioscorus appealed to the conciliar fathers to allow for a more Miaphysite interpretation of Christology at the council, but was denied. Following his being deposed, the Coptic Church and its faithful felt unfairly underrepresented at the council and oppressed politically by the Byzantine Empire. After the Byzantines appointed Proterius of Alexandria as Patriarch to represent the Chalcedonian Church, the Coptic Church appointed their own Patriarch Timothy Aelurus and broke from the Chalcedonian communion.
The Council of Chalcedon, from the perspective of the Alexandrine Christology, has deviated from the approved Cyrillian terminology and declared that Christ was one hypostasis in two natures. However, in the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, "Christ was conceived of the Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary," thus the foundation of the definition according to the Non-Chalcedonian adherents, according to the Christology of Cyril of Alexandria is valid. There is a change in the Non-Chalcedonian definition here, as the Nicene creed clearly uses the terms "of", rather than "in."
In terms of Christology, the Oriental Orthodox (Non-Chalcedonians) understanding is that Christ is "One Nature—the Logos Incarnate," of the full humanity and full divinity. The Chalcedonians' understanding is that Christ is recognized in two natures, full humanity and full divinity. Oriental Orthodoxy contends that such a formulation is no different from what the Nestorians teach.[7] This is the doctrinal perception that makes the apparent difference which separated the Oriental Orthodox from the Eastern Orthodox.
The Council's findings were rejected by many of the Christians on the fringes of the Byzantine Empire, including Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians, and others.
From that point onward, Alexandria would have two patriarchs: the non-Chalcedonian native Egyptian one, now known as the Coptic Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy Apostolic See of St. Mark and the "Melkite" or Imperial Patriarch, now known as the Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria.[8]
Almost the entire Egyptian population rejected the terms of the Council of Chalcedon and remained faithful to the native Egyptian Church (now known as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria).[9] Those who supported the Chalcedonian definition remained in communion with the other leading imperial churches of Rome and Constantinople. The non-Chalcedonian party became what is today called the Oriental Orthodox Church.
The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria regards itself as having been misunderstood at the Council of Chalcedon. There was an opinion in the Church that viewed that perhaps the Council understood the Church of Alexandria correctly, but wanted to curtail the existing power of the Alexandrine Hierarch, especially after the events that happened several years before at Constantinople from Pope Theophilus of Alexandria towards Patriarch John Chrysostom and the unfortunate turnouts of the Second Council of Ephesus in AD 449, where Eutichus misled Pope Dioscorus and the Council in confessing the Orthodox Faith in writing and then renouncing it after the Council, which in turn, had upset Rome, especially that the Tome which was sent was not read during the Council sessions.
To make things even worse, the Tome of Pope Leo of Rome was, according to the Alexandria School of Theology, particularly in regards to the definition of Christology, considered influenced by Nestorian heretical teachings. So, due to the above-mentioned, especially in the consecutive sequences of events, the Hierarchs of Alexandria were considered holding too much of power from one hand, and on the other hand, due to the conflict of the Schools of Theology, there would be an impasse and a scapegoat, i.e. Pope Dioscorus. The Tome of Leo has been widely criticized (surprisingly by Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox scholars) in the past 50 years as a much less than perfect orthodox theological doctrine.
It is also to be noted that by anathemizing Pope Leo because of the tone and content of his tome, as per Alexandrine Theology perception, Pope Dioscorus was found guilty of doing so without due process; in other words, the Tome of Leo was not a subject of heresy in the first place, but it was a question of questioning the reasons behind not having it either acknowledged or read at the Second Council of Ephesus in AD 449. Pope Dioscorus of Alexandria was never labeled as heretic by the council's canons.
Copts also believe that the Pope of Alexandria was forcibly prevented from attending the third congregation of the council from which he was ousted, apparently the result of a conspiracy tailored by the Roman delegates.[10]
Before the current positive era of Eastern and Oriental Orthodox dialogues, Chalcedonians sometimes used to call the non-Chalcedonians "Monophysites", though the Coptic Orthodox Church in reality regards Monophysitism as a heresy. The Chalcedonian doctrine in turn came to be known as "Dyophysite".
A term that comes closer to Coptic Orthodoxy is Miaphysite, which refers to a conjoined nature for Christ, both human and divine, united indivisibly in the Incarnate Logos. The Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria believes that Christ is perfect in His divinity, and He is perfect in His humanity, but His divinity and His humanity were united in one nature called "the nature of the incarnate word", which was reiterated by Saint Cyril of Alexandria.
Copts, thus, believe in two natures "human" and "divine" that are united in one hypostasis "without mingling, without confusion, and without alteration". These two natures "did not separate for a moment or the twinkling of an eye" (Coptic Liturgy of Saint Basil of Caesarea).
From Chalcedon to the Arab conquest of Egypt[edit]
Prior to Chalcedon, the Imperial Church's main division stemmed from Nestorianism, eventually leading the Church of the East to declare its independence in 424. After the Council of Chalcedon in 451, the Coptic Church and its hierarchy felt suspicious of what they believed were Nestorian elements within the Chalcedonian Church. As a result, the anti-Chalcedon partisan, Timotheos Aelurus, consigned himself to depose the Chalcedonian Pope of Alexandria, Proterius of Alexandria, and to set himself up as the Pope of Alexandria in opposition to the entire Chalcedonian Church of the Byzantine Empire. Copts suffered under the rule of the Byzantine Eastern Roman Empire. The Melkite Patriarchs, appointed by the emperors as both spiritual leaders and civil governors, massacred those Egyptians they considered heretics. Many were tortured and martyred in attempts to force their acceptance of the Chalcedonian terms, but the Egyptians remained loyal to the Cyrillian Miaphysitism. One of the most renowned Egyptian saints of the period is Saint Samuel the Confessor.
Muslim conquest of Egypt[edit]
The Muslim invasion of Egypt took place in AD 639. Despite the political upheaval, the Egyptian population remained mainly Christian. However, gradual conversions to Islam over the centuries had changed Egypt from a Christian to a largely Muslim country by the end of the 12th century.[11] Egypt's Umayyad rulers taxed Christians at a higher rate than Muslims, driving merchants towards Islam and undermining the economic base of the Coptic Church.[12] Although the Coptic Church did not disappear, the Umayyad tax policies made it difficult for the church to retain the Egyptian elites.[13]
Under Islamic rule (640–1800)[edit]
The Church suffered greatly under the many regimes of Islamic rule. Sometime during the 2nd Millennium AD, the leadership of the Church, including the Pope, moved from Alexandria to Cairo.[citation needed]
From the 19th century to the 1952 revolution[edit]




Coptic monks, between 1898 and 1914


The position of Copts began to improve early in the 19th century under the stability and tolerance of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty. The Coptic community ceased to be regarded by the state as an administrative unit. In 1855 the jizya tax was abolished. Shortly thereafter, the Copts started to serve in the Egyptian army.[14]
Towards the end of the 19th century, the Coptic Church underwent phases of new development. In 1853, Pope Cyril IV established the first modern Coptic schools, including the first Egyptian school for girls. He also founded a printing press, which was only the second national press in the country. The Pope established very friendly relations with other denominations, to the extent that when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time, he left his Church under the guidance of the Coptic Patriarch.[14]
The Theological College of the School of Alexandria was reestablished in 1893. It began its new history with five students, one of whom was later to become its dean. Today it has campuses in Alexandria and Cairo, and in various dioceses throughout Egypt, as well as outside Egypt. It has campuses in New Jersey, Los Angeles, Sydney, Melbourne, and London, where potential clergymen and other qualified men and women study many subjects, including theology, church history, missionary studies, and the Coptic language.[14]
Present day[edit]


Religion in Egypt





Religions in Egypt





Islam

Sunni
Shia




Christianity

Coptic Orthodoxy
Greek Orthodox
Catholicism
Protestantism




Judaism





Religious institutions




Al-Azhar University
Dar al-Ifta al-Misriyyah
Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria




Religious Organizations




Al-Azhar
Salafist Call
Muslim Brotherhood
al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya
Catechetical School of Alexandria
General Congregation Council




Unrecognized religions
& denominations




Ahmadiyya
Bahá'í Faith
Hinduism




Other topics




Irreligion in Egypt
Secularism in Egypt
Freedom of religion in Egypt






 Egypt portal
 Religion portal







v
t
e









A modern Coptic cathedral in Aswan.


On 17 March 2012, the Coptic Orthodox Pope, Pope Shenouda III died, leaving many Copts mourning and worrying as tensions rose with Muslims. Pope Shenouda III constantly met with Muslim leaders in order to create peace. Many were worried about Muslims controlling Egypt as the Muslim Brotherhood won 70% of the parliamentary elections.[15][16]
On 4 November 2012, Bishop Tawadros was chosen as the 118th Pope. In a ritual filled with prayer, chants and incense at Abbasiya cathedral in Cairo, the 60-year-old bishop's name was picked by a blindfolded child from a glass bowl in which the names of two other candidates had also been placed. The enthronement was scheduled on 18 November 2012.
In 1959, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church was granted its first own Patriarch by Pope Cyril VI. Furthermore, the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church similarly became independent of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church in 1994, when four bishops were consecrated by Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria to form the basis of a local Holy Synod of the Eritrean Church. In 1998, the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church gained its autocephelacy from the Coptic Orthodox Church when its first Patriarch was enthroned by Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria.
These three churches remain in full communion with each other and with the other Oriental Orthodox churches. The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church do acknowledge the Honorary Supremacy of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria, since the Church of Alexandria is technically their Mother Church. Upon their selection, both Patriarchs (Ethiopian & Eritrean) must receive the approval and communion from the Holy Synod of the Apostolic See of Alexandria before their enthronement.
Since the 1980s theologians from the Oriental (non-Chalcedonian) Orthodox and Eastern (Chalcedonian) Orthodox churches have been meeting in a bid to resolve theological differences, and have concluded that many of the differences are caused by the two groups using different terminology to describe the same thing (see Agreed Official Statements on Christology with the Eastern Orthodox Churches).
In the summer of 2001, the Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox Patriarchates of Alexandria agreed[17] to mutually recognize baptisms performed in each other's churches, making re-baptisms unnecessary, and to recognize the sacrament of marriage as celebrated by the other. Previously, if a Coptic Orthodox and Greek Orthodox wanted to get married, the marriage had to be performed twice, once in each church, for it to be recognized by both. Now it can be done in only one church and be recognized by both.
According to Christian Tradition and Canon Law, the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria only ordains men to the priesthood and episcopate, and if they wish to be married, they must be married before they are ordained. In this respect they follow the same practices as the Eastern Orthodox Church and Syrian Orthodox Church.
Traditionally, the Coptic language was used in church services, and the scriptures were written in the Coptic alphabet. However, due to the Arabisation of Egypt, service in churches started to witness increased use of Arabic, while preaching is done entirely in Arabic. Native languages are used, in conjunction with Coptic, during services outside Egypt.
The liturgical calendar of the Coptic Orthodox Church is the Coptic calendar (also called the Alexandrian Calendar). This calendar is based on the Egyptian calendar of Ancient Egypt. Coptic Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on 29 Koiak, which corresponds to 7 January in the Gregorian Calendar and 25 December in the Julian Calendar. Coptic Christmas was adopted as an official national holiday in Egypt in 2002.
In Tahrir Square, Cairo, on Wednesday 2 February 2011, Coptic Christians joined hands to provide a protective cordon around their Muslim neighbors during salat (prayers) in the midst of the 2011 Egyptian Revolution.[18]
Demographics[edit]




Pope Tawadros II of Alexandria of the Coptic Orthodox Church revived Ignatius Aphrem II Patriarch of Antioch and All East of the Syriac Orthodox Church Aram I Catholicose of Cilicia of the Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church in Lebanon.


There are about 20 million Coptic Orthodox Christians in the world. Between 15 and 18 million of them are found in Egypt under the jurisdiction of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.[19][20][21] Since Egypt does not have an official government census on religion, estimates of the size of Egypt's Christian population vary from the estimated low previous government figures of 6 to 7 million to the 12 million reported by some Christian leaders in 2008. The actual numbers may be in the 11 to 13 million range, out of an Egyptian population of more than 90 million.[22][23][24][25][26][27] However, in 2011, the Pew Research Center announced that Copts in Egypt constitute 4.5% of the population, while the Catholic Holy See puts Copts at 6 to 8%.[27] Then in 2017 government owned news Al Ahram estimated the percentage of Copts at 10% to 15%.[28] However, in 2012 after the Egyptian revolution the Muslim Brotherhood was drafting new constitution then Major-General Abu Bakr al-Guindi claimed that the lower figures support a downward trend in the percentage of Copts in Egypt, as recorded in consecutive estimated Egyptian censuses since a 1927 high where Egyptian Christians formed 8.3% of the population.[29] This decline has been explained by Major-General Abu Bakr al-Guindi, head of Egypt's Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics, as being the result of Copts having the highest emigration rate, the lowest birthrate and the highest income level in the country. Although many Copts rejected this statement and population count by Abu Barker al-Guindi claiming they have been undercounted as most Copts reside in Upper Egypt.[22][30]
There are also significant numbers in the diaspora outside Africa in countries such as the United States, Canada, Australia, France, and Germany. The number of Coptic Orthodox Christians in the diaspora is roughly 2 million.[31]
In addition, there are between 350,000 and 400,000 native African adherents in East, Central and South Africa, most in Sudan, whose population is less than 200,000.[32][33] Although under the jurisdiction of the Coptic Orthodox Church, these adherents are not considered Copts, since they are not ethnic Egyptians.
Some accounts regard members of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church (roughly 45 million),[34] the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church (roughly 2.5 million), as members of the Coptic Orthodox Church. This is however a misnomer, since both the Ethiopian and the Eritrean Churches, although daughter churches of the Church of Alexandria, are currently autocephalous churches.
Persecution[edit]
Main article: Persecution of Copts
While Copts have cited instances of persecution throughout their history, Human Rights Watch has noted "growing religious intolerance" and sectarian violence against Coptic Christians in recent years, and a failure by the Egyptian government to effectively investigate properly and prosecute those responsible.[35][36] Over a hundred Egyptian copts have been killed in sectarian clashes from 2011 to 2017, and many homes and businesses destroyed. In just one province (Minya), 77 cases of sectarian attacks on Copts between 2011 and 2016 have been documented by the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights.[37] The abduction and disappearance of Coptic Christian women and girls also remains a serious ongoing problem.[38][39]
Jurisdiction outside Egypt[edit]


Jesus Christ in a Coptic icon


Besides Egypt, the Church of Alexandria has jurisdiction over Pentapolis, Libya, Nubia, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea and all Africa.
Both the Patriarchate of Addis Ababa and all Ethiopia, and the Patriarchate of Asmara and all Eritrea do acknowledge the supremacy of honor and dignity of the Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria on the basis that both Patriarchates were established by the Throne of Alexandria and that they have their roots in the Apostolic Church of Alexandria, and acknowledge that Saint Mark the Apostlic is the founder of their Churches through the heritage and Apostolic evangelization of the Fathers of Alexandria.
In other words, the Patriarchates of Ethiopia and Eritrea are daughter Churches of the Holy Apostolic Patriarchate of Alexandria.
In addition to the above, the countries of Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe, the Congo, Cameroon, Nigeria, Ghana, Botswana, Malawi, Angola, Namibia and South Africa are under the jurisdiction and the evangelization of the Throne of Alexandria. It is still expanding in the continent of Africa.
Daughter churches[edit]
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church[edit]
Ethiopia received Christianity next to Jerusalem, through Jesus's own apostle, only a year after Jesus was crucified (Acts 8: 26–39). Christianity became a national religion of Ethiopia, under the dominion of the Church of Alexandria, in the 4th century. The first bishop of Ethiopia, Saint Frumentius, was consecrated as Bishop of Axum by Pope Athanasius of Alexandria in AD 328. From then on, until 1959, the Pope of Alexandria, as Patriarch of All Africa, always named an Egyptian (a Copt) to be the Archbishop of the Ethiopian Church. On 13 July 1948, the Coptic Church of Alexandria and the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church reached an agreement concerning the relationship between the two churches. In 1950, the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church was granted autocephaly by Pope Joseph II of Alexandria, head of the Coptic Orthodox Church. Five Ethiopian bishops were immediately consecrated by the Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa, and were empowered to elect a new Patriarch for their church. This promotion was completed when Joseph II consecrated the first Ethiopian-born Archbishop, Abuna Basilios, as head of the Ethiopian Church on 14 January 1951. In 1959, Pope Cyril VI of Alexandria crowned Abuna Basilios as the first Patriarch of Ethiopia.
Patriarch Basilios died in 1971, and was succeeded on the same year by Abuna Theophilos. With the fall of Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia in 1974, the new Marxist government arrested Abuna Theophilos and secretly executed him in 1979. The Ethiopian government then ordered the Ethiopian Church to elect Abuna Takla Haymanot as Patriarch of Ethiopia. The Coptic Orthodox Church refused to recognize the election and enthronement of Abuna Takla Haymanot on the grounds that the Synod of the Ethiopian Church had not removed Abuna Theophilos, and that the Ethiopian government had not publicly acknowledged his death, and he was thus still legitimate Patriarch of Ethiopia. Formal relations between the two churches were halted, although they remained in communion with each other.
After the death of Abuna Takla Haymanot in 1988, Abune Merkorios who had close ties to the Derg (Communist) government was elected Patriarch of Ethiopia. Following the fall of the Derg regime in 1991, Abune Merkorios abdicated under public and governmental pressure and went to exile in the United States. The newly elected Patriarch, Abune Paulos was officially recognized by the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in 1992 as the legitimate Patriarch of Ethiopia. Formal relations between the Coptic Church of Alexandria and the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church were resumed on 13 July 2007. Abune Paulos died in August 2012.
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church[edit]
Following the independence of Eritrea from Ethiopia in 1993, the newly independent Eritrean government appealed to Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria for Eritrean Orthodox autocephaly. In 1994, Pope Shenouda ordained Abune Phillipos as first Archbishop of Eritrea. The Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church obtained autocephaly on 7 May 1998, and Abune Phillipos was subsequently consecrated as first Patriarch of Eritrea. The two churches remain in full communion with each other and with the other Oriental Orthodox Churches, although the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, along with the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church does not recognize the deposition of the third Patriarch of Eritrea, Abune Antonios.
Coptic Orthodox churches around the world[edit]




St. Mark Coptic Orthodox Church in Bellaire, Texas






St Mark's Coptic Orthodox Church in London, England.


There are several Coptic Orthodox churches and institutions outside Egypt, including churches and institutions in:

Africa: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Africa
Asia: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Asia
Australia and Oceania: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia
Europe: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Europe

Britain:see Coptic Orthodox Church in the United Kingdom
France: see French Coptic Orthodox Church (autonomous)


North America: see Coptic Orthodox Church in North America

United States: see Coptic Orthodox Church in the United States
Canada: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Canada
Mexico: see Coptic Orthodox Church in Mexico


South America see Coptic Orthodox Church in South America

Official titles of the Patriarch of Alexandria[edit]
Episcopal titles[edit]




Pope Shenouda III, the 117th Patriarch of Alexandria on the Holy Apostolic See of Saint Mark the Evangelist (1971–2012).


Main article: Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria

The leader of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, is known as Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of all Africa on the Holy See of St. Mark the Apostle.
His full title is Patriarch and Lord Archbishop of the Great City of Alexandria on the Holy Orthodox and Apostolic Throne of Saint Mark the Evangelist and Holy Apostle that is, in Egypt, Pentapolis, Libya, Nubia, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea and all Africa.
The Successor of St. Mark the Evangelist, Holy Apostle and Martyr, on the Holy Apostolic Throne of the Great City of Alexandria.
Pope of Alexandria, being the Diocesan Bishop of the Great and Ancient Metropolis of Alexandria, that is in Alexandria and the metropolitan province of Greater Cairo.
Elder Metropolitan Archbishop of the Egyptian Province.
Primate of Egypt, Pentapolis, Libya, Nubia and Sudan.
Father of Fathers.
Shepherd of Shepherds.
Hierarch of all Hierarchs.

Honorary titles[edit]

The Dean of the Great Catechetical School of Theology of Alexandria.
The Ecumenical (Universal) Judge (Arbitrator) of the Holy Apostolic and Catholic (Universal) Church.
The 13th among the Holy Apostles.
The Pillar and Defender of the Holy, Catholic (Universal), Apostolic Church and of the Orthodox Doctrine.

Historical evolution of the ecclesiastical title[edit]
The patriarch of Alexandria was originally known merely as bishop of Alexandria. However, this title continued to evolve as the Church grew under Theophilus and his nephew and successor Cyril (a.d. 376–444), and especially in the 5th century when the Church developed its hierarchy.
The bishop of Alexandria, being the successor of the first bishop in Roman Egypt consecrated by Saint Mark, was honored by the other bishops as first among equals primus inter pares. Under the sixth canon of the Council of Nicaea, Cyril was raised to prelate or chief bishop at the head of the episcopates of Egypt, Libya, and the Pentapolis without the existence of intermediate archbishops as existed in other ecclesiastic provinces.[40] He had the privilege of choosing and consecrating bishops.[40]
The title of "pope" has been attributed to the Patriarch of Alexandria since the episcopate of Heraclas, the 13th Patriarch of Alexandria. All the clergy of Alexandria and Lower Egypt honored him with the title papas, which means "father" as the archbishop and metropolitan having authority over all bishops, within the Egyptian province, who are under his jurisdiction. Alexandria, while the ecclesiastical and provincial capital, also had the distinction as being the place where Saint Mark was martyred.
The title "Patriarch" originally referred to a clan leader or head of a familial lineage. Ecclesiastically it means a bishop of high rank and was originally used as a title for the bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria. For the Coptic patriarch, this title was "Patriarch of Alexandria and all Africa on the Holy Apostolic Throne of Saint Mark the Evangelist," that is "of Egypt". The title of "Patriarch" was first used around the time of the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus, convened in AD 431, and ratified at Chalcedon in AD 451.
It is to be noted that only the Patriarch of Alexandria has the double title of "Pope" and "Patriarch" among the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox ecumenical church heads.
Administration[edit]




Coptic icon of Saint Mark the Evangelist, the apostolic founder of the Church of Alexandria


Main article: The Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria
The Coptic Orthodox patriarchate of Alexandria is governed by its Holy Synod, which is headed by the Patriarch of Alexandria. Under his authority are the metropolitan archbishops, metropolitan bishops, diocesan bishops, patriarchal exarchs, missionary bishops, auxiliary bishops, suffragan bishops, assistant bishops, chorbishops and the patriarchal vicars for the Church of Alexandria. They are organized as follows:

11 metropolitanates, out of which 8 metropolitanates are in Egypt, 1 metropolitanate in the Near East, 1 in Europe, 1 in the USA; served by 2 metropolitan archbishops and 9 metropolitan bishops; out of the 11 hierarchs, 1 metropolitan archbishop is in the Near East, 1 metropolitan archbishop in Egypt, while 7 metropolitan bishops are in Egypt, 1 metropolitan bishops are in Europe, and 1 metropolitan bishop in the USA.
65 dioceses with 46 diocesan bishops are in Egypt, 9 diocesan bishops are in Europe, 4 diocesan bishops are in North America, 2 diocesan bishops are in South America, 2 diocesan bishops are in Sudan, and finally 2 diocesan bishops are in Australia.
3 suffragan dioceses, with 1 suffragan bishop in Europe and 2 suffragan bishops in North America.
5 auxiliary bishops, with 3 auxiliary bishops for dioceses in Egypt and 2 auxiliary bishops in North America.
11 assistant bishops in Egypt for 11 suffragan dioceses within an archdiocese under the Patriarch's jurisdiction;
8 patriarchal exarchates, with 2 patriarchal exarchs in Africa, 2 patriarchal exarchs in North America, 1 patriarchal exarchs in Europe and 3 patriarchal exarchs in Egypt.
13 bishop abbots for 11 patriarchal monasteries in Egypt, 1 patriarchal monastery in Australia and 1 patriarchal monastery in Germany
2 general bishops, patriarchal emissary at large in Egypt and abroad.
4 general bishops, administrators of patriarchal institutions in Egypt.
1 hegumen in the capacity of grand economos, patriarchal vicar for Alexandria.
1 hegumen as administrative patriarchal vicar for Cairo.

Cathedrals[edit]

Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral, Alexandria
Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral, Abbassia, Cairo
Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral, Azbakeya, Cairo
Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral Markham, Ontario, Canada

Monasteries[edit]
Main article: Coptic monasticism

Monastery of Saint Anthony (Red Sea)
Monastery of Saint Fana
Monastery of Saint Macarius the Great
Monastery of the Martyrs
Monastery of Saint Matthew the Potter
Monastery of Saint Mina
Paromeos Monastery
Monastery of Saint Paul the Anchorite
Monastery of Saint Pishoy
Red Monastery
Syrian Monastery
White Monastery
Monastery of Saint Antony (California)[41]

See also[edit]


Oriental Orthodoxy portal
Egypt portal



Pope of Alexandria
Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria

List of Coptic Orthodox Popes of Alexandria
Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria
Patriarch of Alexandria


The Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Church

Coptic Orthodox Church in Africa
Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia
Coptic Orthodox Church in North America

Coptic Orthodox Church in the United States
Coptic Orthodox Church in Canada
Coptic Orthodox Church in Mexico


Coptic Orthodox Church in Europe
Coptic Orthodox Church in South America


General Congregation Council
Copts
Coptic atheists
Coptic saints
The Catechetical School of Alexandria
Coptic Orthodox churches
Institute of Coptic Studies
Coptic Orphans
Oriental Orthodoxy
Christianity in Africa
Holy Family in Egypt
Zabbaleen
2011 Alexandria bombing

Notes[edit]



^ Coptic: Ϯⲉⲕ̀ⲕⲗⲏⲥⲓⲁ ̀ⲛⲣⲉⲙ̀ⲛⲭⲏⲙⲓ ̀ⲛⲟⲣⲑⲟⲇⲟⲝⲟⲥ ti.eklyseya en.remenkimi en.orthodoxos, literally: the Egyptian Orthodox Church.



References[edit]


^ a b Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of Ecclesiastical History in the 4th century, states that Saint Mark came to Egypt in the first or third year of the reign of Emperor Claudius, i.e. 41 or 43 A.D. "Two Thousand years of Coptic Christianity" Otto F. A. Meinardus p28.
^ "Holy Family in Egypt". Orthodoxwiki.org. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2011. 
^ a b Early church missionary
^ "The Church of Alexandria". New Advent. Retrieved 17 March 2012. 
^ "The School of Alexandria – Part I – An Introduction to the School of Alexandria". Copticchurch.net. Retrieved 2 January 2011. 
^ Apollinaris of Laodicea (1904). "Πρὸς Ἰοβιανόν". In Lietzmann, Hans. Apollinaris von Laodicea und seine Schule: Texte und Untersuchungen (in German and Greek). Mohr Siebeck Verlag. p. 251. 
^ "Split of the Byzantine and Oriental Churches". Webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 26 October 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2011. 
^ Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria.
^ "Egypt". Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs. Retrieved 14 December 2011.  See drop-down essay on "Islamic Conquest and the Ottoman Empire"
^ Romanides, John S. Leo of Rome's Support of Theodoret.
^ Kamil, Jill (1997). Coptic Egypt: History and Guide. Cairo: American University in Cairo.
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchange in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 93.
^ Jerry Bentley, Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Encounters and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 93.
^ a b c "Saint George Coptic Church". Suscopts.org. Retrieved 2014-04-03. 
^ Fahim, Kareem (20 March 2012). "Coptic Pope Shenouda III's Death Adds to Fears in Egypt". The New York Times. 
^ "Muslim Brotherhood Sweeps Up Over One-Third Of Votes In Egyptian Elections". Huffington Post. 4 December 2011. 
^ Official Statements on Christology.
^ Christians protect Muslims during prayer in Cairo's dangerous Tahrir square, Nevine Zaki, 3 February 2011, accessed 9 February 2011
^ "Egypt". The World Factbook. American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). 30 March 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ Abaza, Khairi; Nakhla, Mark (25 October 2005). "The Copts and Their Political Implications in Egypt". Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ Morrow, Adam (24 April 2006). "Egypt: Attacks Raise Fear of Religious Discord". Inter Press Service. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ a b Youssef, Abdel Rahman (30 September 2012). "Egyptian Copts: It's All in the Number". Al-Akhbar English. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ "Egyptian Copts reject population estimate". Ahram Online. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ "The Coptic Orthodox Church in action – Al-Ahram Weekly". weekly.ahram.org.eg. Retrieved 2016-05-06. 
^ Cairo, Jared Malsin in (2015-02-20). "'We want our sons back': fears grow for Egyptians missing in Libya". the Guardian. Retrieved 2016-05-06. 
^ "Egypt must help its poor in response to Libya beheadings, economists say". america.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 2016-05-06. 
^ a b Abdel Rahman Youssef (30 September 2012). "Egyptian Copts: It's All in the Number". Al-Akhbar English. Retrieved 8 March 2015. 
^ "Egypt's Sisi meets world Evangelical churches delegation in Cairo - Politics - Egypt - Ahram Online". english.ahram.org.eg. Retrieved 2017-12-26. 
^ Elizabeth Harrington (19 December 2011). "Number of Coptic Christians in Egypt Is Far Less Than Media Estimates, Report Says". Cybercast News Service. Retrieved 8 March 2015. 
^ "Egyptian Copts reject population estimate – Politics – Egypt – Ahram Online". english.ahram.org.eg. Retrieved 2015-12-23. 
^ El-Hennawy, Noha (24 June 2008). "EGYPT: Coptic diaspora spreads the word". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ Hassan, Abdel Salaam (1995). "The Copts". In Verney, Peter. Sudan: Conflict and minorities (PDF). Minority Rights Group International. p. 26. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ "The Copts: Passive Survivors under Threat" (PDF). Africa Watch. 5 (3): 1. 10 February 1993. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ WCC official visit to Ethiopia World Council of Churches – News Release. 21 September 2005. Retrieved 25 November 2006.
^ Egypt and Libya: A Year of Serious Abuses, hrw.org, January 24, 2010
^ Zaki, Moheb (May 18, 2010). "Egypt's Persecuted Christians". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved June 4, 2010. 
^ Eltahawy, Mona (22 December 2016). "Egypt's Cruelty to Christians". New York Times. Retrieved 22 December 2016. 
^ United States. Congress. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (July 18, 2012). Escalating Violence Against Coptic Women and Girls: Will the New Egypt be More Dangerous than the Old? : Hearing before the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, Second Session, July 18, 2012. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Retrieved 8 March 2015. 
^ "Masress : Sectarian tensions rise in wake of crime boss death". Masress. Retrieved 2 January 2016. 
^ a b Cannuyer, 2001, p. 40.
^ "Saint Antony Coptic Orthodox Monastery". www.stantonymonastery.org. Retrieved 2015-09-06. 


Bibliography[edit]

Christian Cannuyer, Coptic Egypt: The Christians of the Nile, Abrams Discoveries series, trans. Sophie Hawkes. NY: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 2001.
The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu: Translated from Zotenberg's Ethiopic Text. R. H. Charles (translator). Evolution Publishing. 28 February 2007. ISBN 978-1-889758-87-9. 
Meinardus, Otto (1 October 2002). Two Thousand Years of Coptic Christianity. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 977-424-757-4. Archived from the original on 20 May 2008. 
Partrick, Theodore (June 1996). Traditional Egyptian Christianity: A History of the Coptic Orthodox Church. Greensboro, NC: Fisher Park Press. ISBN 0-9652396-0-8. 
Butcher, E. L. (1897). Story of the Church of Egypt (in Arabic) (text file ed.). London: Smith, Elder & Co. ISBN 0-8370-7610-2. 
Iskandar, Adel; Hakem Rustom (January 2006). "From Paris to Cairo: Resistance of the Unacculturated". The Ambassadors Online Magazine. Retrieved 9 June 2007. 
Wolfgang Kosack, Novum Testamentum Coptice. Neues Testament, Bohairisch, ediert von Wolfgang Kosack. Novum Testamentum, Bohairice, curavit Wolfgang Kosack. / Wolfgang Kosack. neue Ausgabe, Christoph Brunner, Basel 2014. ISBN 978-3-906206-04-2.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coptic Orthodox Church.



The Official Site of the Coptic Orthodox Pope
Coptic Orthodox Electronic Publishing, has various e-books and resources covering many areas and topics
An oversight of Coptic Orthodoxy
Video archive of Coptic Hymns for Learning
More Information on the Coptic Church, its Beliefs, Practices, and Liturgical Life
Downloadable Coptic hymns, chants, songs, liturgies, live webcasts, and forum
HisVine – Coptic Orthodox Church Directory for Australia
St. Mina (Menas) Coptic Orthodox Monastery in Mariut, near Alexandria, Egypt
Coptic Church History at www.St-Takla.org
CoptNet – The Christian Coptic Orthodox Church Of Egypt
History of the Patriarchs of the Coptic Church of Alexandria – to 849 A.D.
Agpeya: Coptic Book of Hours – also see Canonical hours
Severus of Al'Ashmunein (=Hermopolis), History of the Patriarchs of the Coptic church of Alexandria
Article on Coptic Orthodox Church by Ronald Roberson on CNEWA website
(in French) Coptipedia.com
(in French) France-copte.net
Common Declaration of Pope Paul VI and Pope Alexandria Shenouda III, 1973







v
t
e


 Copts



Christian
denominations




Oriental Orthodox



Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria





Eastern Catholic



Coptic Catholic Church





Protestant



Evangelical Church of Egypt











Traditional areas



Egypt
Libya
Sudan





Diaspora



Australia
Canada
United States
Africa
Asia
Europe
South America





Culture



Architecture
Art
Calendar
Coptology
Cross
Encyclopedia
Fasting
Flag
History
Identity
Literature
Music
Monasticism
Nationalism
Persecution





Language



Egyptian language
Coptic language





Writing systems



Hieroglyphs
Hieratic
Demotic
Coptic












v
t
e


Pentarchy







   


Pope of Rome
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Alexandria
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Antioch
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Constantinople
(4th century)




Patriarch of Jerusalem
(5th century*)











(* =Apostolic sees)
 Christianity portal
 Eastern Christianity portal
 Oriental Orthodoxy portal












v
t
e


Autocephalous and autonomous churches of Oriental Orthodoxy



Autocephalous
churches



Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Armenian Apostolic Church
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Syriac Orthodox Church
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church





Autonomous
churches



Coptic Orthodox:
French Coptic Orthodox Church


Armenian Apostolic:
Holy See of Cilicia
Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople
Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem


Syriac Orthodox:
Malankara Jacobite


Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church:
Brahmavar (Goan) Orthodox Church












v
t
e


Orthodoxy in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)













v
t
e


Orthodoxy in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Popes and Patriarchs of Alexandria of the See of Saint Mark



Patriarchs prior to the
Chalcedonian schism
(43–451)



Mark I the Evangelist (founder)
Anianus
Avilius
Kedronos
Primus
Justus
Eumenius
Markianos*
Celadion
Agrippinus
Julian
Demetrius I
Heraclas
Dionysius
Maximus
Theonas
Peter I
Achillas
Alexander I
Athanasius I
Peter II
Timothy I
Theophilus I
Cyril I
Dioscorus I








Coptic Orthodox
Popes and Patriarchs
(451–present)



Timothy II
Peter III
Athanasius II
John I
John II
Dioscorus II
Timothy III
Theodosius I
Peter IV
Damian
Anastasius
Andronicus
Benjamin I
Agathon
John III
Isaac
Simeon I
Alexander II
Cosmas I
Theodore I
Michael I
Mina I
John IV
Mark II
James
Simeon II
Joseph I
Michael II
Cosmas II
Shenouda I
Michael III
Gabriel I
Cosmas III
Macarius I
Theophilus II (AKA Theophanes)
Mina II
Abraham
Philotheos
Zacharias
Shenouda II
Christodolos
Cyril II
Michael IV
Macarius II
Gabriel II
Michael V
John V
Mark III
John VI
Cyril III
Athanasius III
John VII
Gabriel III
John VII
Theodosius III
John VIII
John IX
Benjamin II
Peter V
Mark IV
John X
Gabriel IV
Matthew I
Gabriel V
John XI
Matthew II
Gabriel VI
Michael VI
John XII
John XIII
Gabriel VII
John XIV
Gabriel VIII
Mark V
John XV
Matthew III
Mark VI
Matthew IV
John XVI
Peter VI
John XVII
Mark VII
John XVIII
Mark VIII
Peter VII
Cyril IV
Demetrius II
Cyril V
John XIX
Macarius III
Joseph II
Cyril VI
Shenouda III
Tawadros II (current)





Greek Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs
(451–present)



Proterius
Timothy II
Timothy III
John I
Peter III
Athanasius II
John II
John III
Dioscorus II
Timothy IV
Theodosius I
Gainas
Paul
Zoilus
Apollinarius
John IV
Eulogius
Theodore I
John V
George I
Cyrus
Peter IV
Peter V
Peter VI
Cosmas I
Politianus
Eustatius
Christopher I
Sophronius I
Michael I
Michael II
Christodoulos
Eutychius
Sophronius II
Isaac
Job
Elias I
Arsenius
Theophilus II
George II
Leontius
Alexander II
John VI
Cyril II
Sabbas
Sophronius III
Elias II
Eleutherius
Mark III*
Nicholas I
Gregory I
Nicholas II
Athanasius III
Gregory II
Gregory III
Niphon
Mark IV
Nicholas III
Gregory IV
Nicholas IV
Athanasius IV
Mark V
Philotheus
Mark VI
Gregory V
Joachim I
Silvester
Meletius I Pegas
Cyril III
Gerasimus I
Metrophanes
Nicephorus
Joannicius
Paisius
Parthenius I
Gerasimus II
Samuel
Cosmas II
Cosmas III
Matthew
Cyprian
Gerasimus III
Parthenius II
Theophilus III
Hierotheus I
Artemius
Hierotheus II
Callinicus
Jacob
Nicanor
Sophronius IV
Photius
Meletius II
Nicholas V
Christopher II
Nicholas VI
Parthenius III
Peter VII
Theodore II (current)





Latin Catholic Patriarchs
(1276 –1954 )



Atanasio (Athanasius)
Egidio da Ferrara (Giles)
 ?Humbert II, Dauphin of Vienne
Juan (John)
Guillaume de Chanac
Arnaud Bernard du Pouget (Arnaldo Bernardi)
uncanonical Jean de Cardaillac
Pietro Amely di Brunac
 ? Johannes Walteri von Sinten
uncanonical Simon of Cramaud
Pietro Amely di Brunac
Leonardo Dolfin
Ugo Roberti
Pietro Amaury di Lordat
Lancelotus de Navarra
Giovanni Contarini
Pietro
Vitalis di Mauléon
Giovanni Vitelleschi
Marco Condulmer
Jean d’Harcourt
Arnaldo Rogerii de Palas
Pedro de Urrea
Pedro González de Mendoza
Diego Hurtado de Mendoza
Alonso de Fonseca y Acevedo
Bernardino Carafa
Cesare Riario
Guido Ascanio Sforza di Santa Fiora
Ottaviano Maria Sforza
Julius Gonzaga
Cristoforo Guidalotti Ciocchi del Monte
Jacques Cortès
Tommaso
Alessandro Riario
Enrico Caetani
Giovanni Battista Albani
Camillo Caetani
Séraphin Olivier-Razali
Alessandro di Sangro
Honoratus Caetani
Federico Borromeo
Allesandro Crescenzi
Aloysius Bevilacqua
Pietro Draghi Bartoli
Gregorio Giuseppe Gaetani de Aragonia
Carlo Ambrosio Mezzabarba
Filippo Carlo Spada
Girolamo Crispi
Giuseppe Antonio Davanzati
Lodovico Agnello Anastasi
Francisco Mattei
Augustus Foscolo
Paolo Angelo Ballerini
Domenico Marinangeli
Paolo de Huyn
Luca Ermenegildo Pasetto





Melkite Catholic Titular Patriarchs
(1724–present)



Cyril VI Tanas
Athanasius IV Jawhar
Maximos II Hakim
Theodosius V Dahan
Athanasius IV Jawhar
Cyril VII Siaj
Agapius II Matar
Ignatius IV Sarrouf
Athanasius V Matar
Macarius IV Tawil
Ignatius V Qattan
Maximos III Mazloum
Clement Bahouth
Gregory II Youssef-Sayur
Peter IV Jaraijiry
Cyril VIII Geha
Demetrius I Qadi
Cyril IX Moghabghab
Maximos IV Sayegh
Maximos V Hakim
Gregory III Laham
Youssef I Absi





Coptic Catholic Patriarchs
(1824–present)



Maximos Jouwed
Kyrillos Makarios
Stéphanos I Sidarouss
Stéphanos II Ghattas
Antonios I Naguib
Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak








*Markianos is considered Mark II on the Greek side of the subsequent schism, hence this numbering of Mark III.
Category
Commons









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 153154758
LCCN: n79107736
ISNI: 0000 0001 2271 3608
GND: 5057170-9
SUDOC: 085646970
BNF: cb12377183w (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coptic_Orthodox_Church_of_Alexandria&oldid=818188744"					Categories: All Africa Conference of ChurchesApostolic seesChristianity in EgyptCoptic Orthodox ChurchMembers of the World Council of ChurchesNational churchesHidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Greek-language sources (el)Use dmy dates from February 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2017CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar)Articles with French-language external linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers