For other uses, see Cornwall (disambiguation).


Cornwall
Kernow  (Cornish)


County



NASA photograph of Cornwall from space









Flag





Motto:
Onen hag oll (Cornish)
One and all



Cornwall in England


Coordinates: 50.2660° N, 5.0527° W


Sovereign state
 United Kingdom


Country
 England


Region
South West England


Established
Ancient


Ceremonial county



Lord Lieutenant
Colonel Edward Bolitho OBE


High Sheriff
Sarah Elizabeth Coryton


Area
3,562 km2 (1,375 sq mi)


 • Ranked
12th of 48


Population (mid-2016 est.)
556,000


 • Ranked
40th of 48


Density
156/km2 (400/sq mi)


Ethnicity
99.7% White British, 0.3% Other





Unitary authority



Council
Cornwall Council


Executive
Liberal Democrat / Independent


Admin HQ
Truro


Area
3,546 km2 (1,369 sq mi)


 • Ranked
2nd of 326


Population
553,700


 • Ranked
4th of 326


Density
156/km2 (400/sq mi)


ISO 3166-2
GB-CON


ONS code
00HE


GSS code
E06000052


NUTS
UKK30


Website
www.cornwall.gov.uk








Districts


Cornwall (unitary)
Isles of Scilly (sui generis unitary)







Members of Parliament


6

George Eustice (Con)
Derek Thomas (Con)
Steve Double (Con)
Sheryll Murray (Con)
Sarah Newton (Con)
Scott Mann (Con)





Police
Devon and Cornwall Police


Time zone
Greenwich Mean Time (UTC)


 • Summer (DST)
British Summer Time (UTC+1)


Cornwall (/ˈkɔːrnwɔːl, -wəl/,[1] Cornish: Kernow [ˈkɛrnɔʊ]) is a county and duchy in South West England in the United Kingdom. The county is bordered to the north and west by the Celtic Sea,[2] to the south by the English Channel, and to the east by the county of Devon, over the River Tamar which forms most of the border between them. Cornwall forms the westernmost part of the South West Peninsula of the island of Great Britain. The furthest southwestern point of the island is Land's End; the southernmost point is Lizard Point. Cornwall has a population of 556,000 and covers an area of 3,563 km2 (1,376 sq mi).[3][4][5][6] The administrative county is administered by the unitary authority Cornwall Council. The ceremonial county of Cornwall also includes the Isles of Scilly, which are administered separately. The administrative centre of Cornwall, and only city in the county, is Truro.
Cornwall is the homeland of the Cornish people and the cultural and ethnic origin of the Cornish diaspora. It retains a distinct cultural identity that reflects its unique history, and is recognised as one of the Celtic nations with a rich cultural heritage.[7]
It was formerly a Brythonic kingdom and subsequently a royal duchy. The Cornish nationalist movement contests the present constitutional status of Cornwall and seeks greater autonomy within the United Kingdom in the form of a devolved legislative Cornish Assembly and powers similar to those in Wales and Scotland.[8][9]
Cornwall has been a unitary authority since the 2009 structural changes to local government in England. In 2014, Cornish people were granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities,[10] giving Cornish people recognition as a distinct ethnic group.[11][12]
First inhabited in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods, Cornwall continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then Bronze Age peoples, and later (in the Iron Age) by Brythons with strong trade and cultural links to Wales and Brittany. Few Roman remains have been found in Cornwall and there is little evidence that the Romans settled or had much military presence there.[citation needed]
After the collapse of the Roman Empire, Cornwall was ruled by chieftains of the Cornovii which may have included semi-historical or legendary figures such as King Mark of Cornwall and King Arthur, evidenced by folklore traditions derived from the Historia Regum Britanniae. The Cornovii division of the Dumnonii tribe were separated from the Brythons of Wales after the Battle of Deorham and often came into conflict with the expanding kingdom of Wessex. King Athelstan in AD 936 set the boundary between English and Cornish at the high water mark of the eastern bank of the River Tamar.[13]
From the early Middle Ages, language and culture were shared by Brythons trading across both sides of the Channel, resulting in the corresponding high medieval Breton kingdoms of Domnonée and Cornouaille and the Celtic Christianity common to both areas.
Historically tin mining was important in the Cornish economy, becoming increasingly significant during the High Middle Ages and expanding greatly during the 19th century when rich copper mines were also in production. In the mid-19th century, however, the tin and copper mines entered a period of decline. Subsequently, china clay extraction became more important and metal mining had virtually ended by the 1990s. Traditionally, fishing (particularly of pilchards) and agriculture (notably dairy products and vegetables) were the other important sectors of the economy. Railways led to a growth of tourism in the 20th century; however, Cornwall's economy struggled after the decline of the mining and fishing industries.[citation needed]
Cornwall is noted for its geology, a large part of the Cornubian batholith is within Cornwall. The north coast has many cliffs where exposed geological formations are studied. The area is noted for its wild moorland landscapes, its long and varied coastline, its attractive villages, its many place-names derived from the Cornish language, and its very mild climate. Extensive stretches of Cornwall's coastline, and Bodmin Moor, are protected as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Name and emblems

1.1 Flag
1.2 Heraldry


2 Physical geography

2.1 Coastal areas
2.2 Inland areas
2.3 The Lizard Peninsula
2.4 Hills and high points


3 Settlements and transport
4 Ecology

4.1 Flora and fauna
4.2 Climate


5 Culture

5.1 Languages

5.1.1 Cornish language
5.1.2 English dialect


5.2 Arts
5.3 Music
5.4 Literature

5.4.1 Fiction
5.4.2 Poetry
5.4.3 Other literary works


5.5 Sports

5.5.1 Rugby
5.5.2 Surfing and watersports
5.5.3 Fencing


5.6 Cuisine


6 History

6.1 Prehistory, Roman and post-Roman periods
6.2 Conflict with Wessex
6.3 Breton–Norman period
6.4 Later medieval administration and society

6.4.1 Stannary parliaments
6.4.2 Piracy and smuggling




7 Politics and administration

7.1 Cornish national identity
7.2 Local politics
7.3 Parliament and national politics
7.4 Devolution movement


8 Economy

8.1 Tourism
8.2 Internet
8.3 Fishing
8.4 Agriculture
8.5 Mining
8.6 Aerospace


9 Demographics

9.1 Education system


10 See also
11 Notes
12 References

12.1 Sources


13 Further reading
14 External links



Name and emblems[edit]




"Cornweallas" shown on an early 19th-century map of "Saxon England" (and Wales) based on the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.






Cliffs at Land's End


The modern English name Cornwall is a compound of two ancient demonyms coming from two different language groups:

Corn- originates from the Brythonic tribe, the Cornovii ("peninsula people"). The Celtic word "kernou" ("horn" or "headland") is cognate with the English word "horn" (both deriving from the Proto-Indo-European *ker-).[14][15][16][17][a]


-wall derives from the Old English exonym w(e)alh, meaning "foreigner" or "Roman" (i.e. a Welshman).

In the Cornish language, Cornwall is known as Kernow which stems from a similar linguistic background.
Flag[edit]
Main article: Saint Piran's Flag




Souvenir flags outside a Cornish café


Saint Piran's Flag is the national flag and ancient banner of Cornwall,[19][20][21] and an emblem of the Cornish people. It is regarded as the county flag by Cornwall Council. The banner of Saint Piran is a white cross on a black background (in terms of heraldry 'sable, a cross argent'). According to legend Saint Piran adopted these colours from seeing the white tin in the black coals and ashes during his discovery of tin. [19] [22] The Cornish flag is an exact reverse of the former Breton national flag (black cross) and is known by the same name "Kroaz Du".[23][24]
Heraldry[edit]
Main articles: Cornish heraldry and Cornish corporate heraldry
In later times, Cornwall was known to the Anglo-Saxons as "West Wales" to distinguish it from "North Wales" (the modern nation of Wales).[25] The name appears in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle in 891 as On Corn walum. In the Domesday Book it was referred to as Cornualia and in c. 1198 as Cornwal.[26][b] Other names for the county include a latinisation of the name as Cornubia (first appears in a mid-9th-century deed purporting to be a copy of one dating from c. 705), and as Cornugallia in 1086.
Physical geography[edit]
Main articles: Geography of Cornwall and Geology of Cornwall




Satellite image of Cornwall


Cornwall forms the tip of the south-west peninsula of the island of Great Britain, and is therefore exposed to the full force of the prevailing winds that blow in from the Atlantic Ocean. The coastline is composed mainly of resistant rocks that give rise in many places to tall cliffs. Cornwall has a border with only one other county, Devon, which is formed almost entirely by the River Tamar, and the remainder (to the north) by the Marsland Valley.
Coastal areas[edit]
The north and south coasts have different characteristics. The north coast on the Celtic Sea, part of the Atlantic Ocean, is more exposed and therefore has a wilder nature. The prosaically named High Cliff, between Boscastle and St Gennys, is the highest sheer-drop cliff in Cornwall at 223 metres (732 ft).[28] However, there are also many extensive stretches of fine golden sand which form the beaches that are so important to the tourist industry, such as those at Bude, Polzeath, Watergate Bay, Perranporth, Porthtowan, Fistral Beach, Newquay, St Agnes, St Ives, and on the south coast Gyllyngvase beach in Falmouth and the large beach at Praa Sands further to the south west. There are two river estuaries on the north coast: Hayle Estuary and the estuary of the River Camel, which provides Padstow and Rock with a safe harbour. The seaside town of Newlyn is a popular holiday destination, as it is one of the last remaining traditional Cornish fishing ports, with views reaching over Mount's Bay.




St Michael's Mount in Marazion


The south coast, dubbed the "Cornish Riviera", is more sheltered and there are several broad estuaries offering safe anchorages, such as at Falmouth and Fowey. Beaches on the south coast usually consist of coarser sand and shingle, interspersed with rocky sections of wave-cut platform. Also on the south coast, the picturesque fishing village of Polperro, at the mouth of the Pol River, and the fishing port of Looe on the River Looe are both popular with tourists.
Inland areas[edit]
The interior of the county consists of a roughly east–west spine of infertile and exposed upland, with a series of granite intrusions, such as Bodmin Moor, which contains the highest land within Cornwall. From east to west, and with approximately descending altitude, these are Bodmin Moor, Hensbarrow north of St Austell, Carnmenellis to the south of Camborne, and the Penwith or Land's End peninsula. These intrusions are the central part of the granite outcrops that form the exposed parts of the Cornubian batholith of south-west Britain, which also includes Dartmoor to the east in Devon and the Isles of Scilly to the west, the latter now being partially submerged.




Cornwall is known for its beaches (Porthcurno beach illustrated) and rugged coastline


The intrusion of the granite into the surrounding sedimentary rocks gave rise to extensive metamorphism and mineralisation, and this led to Cornwall being one of the most important mining areas in Europe until the early 20th century. It is thought tin was mined here as early as the Bronze Age, and copper, lead, zinc and silver have all been mined in Cornwall. Alteration of the granite also gave rise to extensive deposits of China Clay, especially in the area to the north of St Austell, and the extraction of this remains an important industry.
The uplands are surrounded by more fertile, mainly pastoral farmland. Near the south coast, deep wooded valleys provide sheltered conditions for flora that like shade and a moist, mild climate. These areas lie mainly on Devonian sandstone and slate. The north east of Cornwall lies on Carboniferous rocks known as the Culm Measures. In places these have been subjected to severe folding, as can be seen on the north coast near Crackington Haven and in several other locations.
The Lizard Peninsula[edit]
Main article: Lizard complex
The geology of the Lizard peninsula is unusual, in that it is mainland Britain's only example of an ophiolite, a section of oceanic crust now found on land.[c] Much of the peninsula consists of the dark green and red Precambrian serpentinite, which forms spectacular cliffs, notably at Kynance Cove, and carved and polished serpentine ornaments are sold in local gift shops. This ultramafic rock also forms a very infertile soil which covers the flat and marshy heaths of the interior of the peninsula. This is home to rare plants, such as the Cornish Heath, which has been adopted as the county flower.[29]
Hills and high points[edit]
Main article: List of hills of Cornwall
Settlements and transport[edit]
See also: List of settlements in Cornwall by population and Transport in Cornwall




Truro, Cornwall's administrative centre and only city.


Cornwall's only city, and the home of the council headquarters, is Truro. Nearby Falmouth is notable as a port. St Just in Penwith is the westernmost town in England, though the same claim has been made for Penzance, which is larger. St Ives and Padstow are today small vessel ports with a major tourism and leisure sector in their economies. Newquay on the north coast is another major urban settlement which is famous for its beaches and is a popular surfing destination, as is Bude further north, but Newquay is now also becoming important for its aviation-related industries. St Austell is the county's largest town and more populous than the capital Truro; it was the centre of the china clay industry in Cornwall. Redruth and Camborne form the largest urban area in Cornwall, and both towns were significant as centres of the global tin mining industry in the 19th century (nearby copper mines were also very productive during that period),
Cornwall borders the county of Devon at the River Tamar. Major roads between Cornwall and the rest of Great Britain are the A38 which crosses the Tamar at Plymouth via the Tamar Bridge and the town of Saltash, the A39 road (Atlantic Highway) from Barnstaple, passing through North Cornwall to end in Falmouth, and the A30 which crosses the border south of Launceston crosses Bodmin Moor and connects Bodmin and Truro. Torpoint Ferry links Plymouth with Torpoint on the opposite side of the Hamoaze. A rail bridge, the Royal Albert Bridge, built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1859) provides the only other land transport link. The city of Plymouth, a large urban centre in south west Devon, is an important location for services such as hospitals, department stores, road and rail transport, and cultural venues, particularly for people living in east Cornwall.
Cardiff and Swansea, across the Bristol Channel, have at some times in the past been connected to Cornwall by ferry, but these do not operate now.[30]
The Isles of Scilly are served by ferry (from Penzance) and by aeroplane, having its own airport — St Mary's Airport. There are regular flights between St Mary's and Land's End Airport, near St Just, and Cornwall Airport Newquay; during the summer season, a service is also provided between St Mary's and Exeter International Airport, in Devon.
Ecology[edit]
Flora and fauna[edit]
See also: Flora and fauna of Cornwall
Cornwall has varied habitats including terrestrial and marine ecosystems. One noted species in decline locally is the Reindeer lichen, which species has been made a priority for protection under the national UK Biodiversity Action Plan.[31][32]




The red-billed chough (Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax), once commonly seen throughout Cornwall, experienced a severe decline in its population in the 20th century.


Botanists divide Cornwall and Scilly into two vice-counties: West (1) and East (2). The standard flora is by F. H. Davey Flora of Cornwall (1909). Davey was assisted by A. O. Hume and he thanks Hume, his companion on excursions in Cornwall and Devon, and for help in the compilation of that Flora, publication of which was financed by him.
Climate[edit]
Main article: Geography of Cornwall § Climate
Cornwall has a temperate Oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfb) and has the mildest and sunniest climate in the United Kingdom, as a result of its southerly latitude and the influence of the Gulf Stream.[33] The average annual temperature in Cornwall ranges from 11.6 °C (52.9 °F) on the Isles of Scilly to 9.8 °C (49.6 °F) in the central uplands. Winters are among the warmest in the country due to the southerly latitude and moderating effects of the warm ocean currents, and frost and snow are very rare at the coast and in the central upland areas. Summers are, however, not as warm as in other parts of southern England.[citation needed] The surrounding sea and its southwesterly position mean that Cornwall's weather can be relatively changeable.
Cornwall is one of the sunniest areas in the UK. It has more than 1,541 hours of sunshine per year, with the highest average of 7.6 hours of sunshine per day in July.[34] The moist, mild air coming from the southwest brings higher amounts of rainfall than in eastern Great Britain, at 1,051 to 1,290 mm (41.4 to 50.8 in) per year. However, this is not as much as in more northern areas of the west coast.[35] The Isles of Scilly, for example, where there are on average fewer than two days of air frost per year, is the only area in the UK to be in the Hardiness zone 10. The islands have, on average, less than one day of air temperature exceeding 30 °C per year and are in the AHS Heat Zone 1. Extreme temperatures in Cornwall are particularly rare; however, extreme weather in the form of storms and floods is common.
Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of Cornwall
Languages[edit]
Main article: Languages of Cornwall
Cornish language[edit]
Main article: Cornish language
English is the main language used in Cornwall, although the revived Cornish language is used, and is spoken fluently by a small minority of people. Most street names and some road signs are written bilingually in Cornish and English.




A welcome sign to Penzance, in the English and Cornish languages


The Cornish language is a language from the Brythonic branch of the Celtic language family, closely related to the other Brythonic languages of Welsh and Breton, and less so to the Goidelic languages of Irish, Scots Gaelic and Manx. The language continued to function visibly as a community language in parts of Cornwall until the late 18th century, and it was claimed in 2011 that the last native speaker did not die until 1914.[36]
There has been a revival of the language since Henry Jenner's Handbook of the Cornish Language was published in 1904. A study in 2000 suggested that there were around 300 people who spoke Cornish fluently.[37] Cornish, however, had no legal status in the UK until 2002. Nevertheless, the language is taught in about twelve primary schools, and occasionally used in religious and civic ceremonies.[38] In 2002 Cornish was officially recognised as a UK minority language[39] and in 2005 it received limited Government funding.[40] A Standard Written Form was agreed in 2008.[41]
Several Cornish mining words are used in English language mining terminology, such as costean, gossan,[42] gunnies, kibbal,[43] kieve[44] and vug.[45]
In the 2010–15 Parliament of the United Kingdom, four Cornish MPs, Andrew George, MP for St Ives, Dan Rogerson, MP for North Cornwall, Steve Gilbert, MP for St Austell and Newquay, and Sarah Newton, MP for Truro and Falmouth repeated their Parliamentary oaths in Cornish.[46]
English dialect[edit]
Main articles: Anglo-Cornish and West Country Dialects
The Cornish language and culture influenced the emergence of particular pronunciations and grammar not used elsewhere in England. The Cornish dialect is spoken to varying degrees, however someone speaking full Anglo-Cornish may be practically unintelligible to one not accustomed it. Cornish dialect has generally declined, in most places it is now little more than a regional accent and grammatical differences have been eroded over time.
Arts[edit]
See also: Media in Cornwall




The Tate Gallery at St Ives






Artwork in the Barbara Hepworth Museum in St Ives


Since the 19th century, Cornwall, with its unspoilt maritime scenery and strong light, has sustained a vibrant visual art scene of international renown. Artistic activity within Cornwall was initially centred on the art-colony of Newlyn, most active at the turn of the 20th century. This Newlyn School is associated with the names of Stanhope Forbes, Elizabeth Forbes,[47] Norman Garstin and Lamorna Birch.[48] Modernist writers such as D. H. Lawrence and Virginia Woolf lived in Cornwall between the wars,[49] and Ben Nicholson, the painter, having visited in the 1920s came to live in St Ives with his then wife, the sculptor Barbara Hepworth, at the outbreak of the second world war.[50] They were later joined by the Russian emigrant Naum Gabo,[51] and other artists. These included Peter Lanyon, Terry Frost, Patrick Heron, Bryan Wynter and Roger Hilton. St Ives also houses the Leach Pottery, where Bernard Leach, and his followers championed Japanese inspired studio pottery.[52] Much of this modernist work can be seen in Tate St Ives.[53] The Newlyn Society and Penwith Society of Arts continue to be active, and contemporary visual art is documented in a dedicated online journal.[54]
Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Cornwall
Cornwall has a full and vibrant folk music tradition which has survived into the present and is well known for its unusual folk survivals such as Mummers Plays, the Furry Dance in Helston played by the famous Helston Town Band, and Obby Oss in Padstow.
Newlyn is home to a food and music festival[55] which hosts live music, cooking demonstrations, and displays of locally caught fish.
As in other former mining districts of Britain, male voice choirs and Brass Bands, e.g. Brass on the Grass concerts during the summer at Constantine, are still very popular in Cornwall: Cornwall also has around 40 brass bands, including the six-times National Champions of Great Britain, Camborne Youth Band, and the bands of Lanner and St Dennis.
Cornish players are regular participants in inter-Celtic festivals, and Cornwall itself has several lively inter-Celtic festivals such as Perranporth's Lowender Peran folk festival.[56]
On a more modern note, contemporary musician Richard D. James (also known as Aphex Twin) grew up in Cornwall, as did Luke Vibert and Alex Parks, winner of Fame Academy 2003. Roger Taylor, the drummer from the band Queen was also raised in the county, and currently lives not far from Falmouth. The American singer-songwriter Tori Amos now resides predominantly in North Cornwall not far from Bude with her family.[57] The lutenist, lutarist, composer and festival director Ben Salfield lives in Truro.
Literature[edit]
Cornwall's rich heritage and dramatic landscape have inspired numerous writers.
Fiction[edit]
See also: Poldark and Winston Graham
Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, author of many novels and works of literary criticism, lived in Fowey: his novels are mainly set in Cornwall. Daphne du Maurier lived at Menabilly near Fowey and many of her novels had Cornish settings, including Rebecca, Jamaica Inn, Frenchman's Creek, My Cousin Rachel, and The House on the Strand.[58] She is also noted for writing Vanishing Cornwall. Cornwall provided the inspiration for The Birds, one of her terrifying series of short stories, made famous as a film by Alfred Hitchcock.[59]




Remains of Tintagel Castle, reputedly King Arthur's birthplace


Medieval Cornwall is the setting of the trilogy by Monica Furlong, Wise Child, Juniper, and Colman, as well as part of Charles Kingsley's Hereward the Wake.
Conan Doyle's The Adventure of the Devil's Foot featuring Sherlock Holmes is set in Cornwall.[60] Winston Graham's series Poldark, Kate Tremayne's Adam Loveday series, Susan Cooper's novels Over Sea, Under Stone[61] and Greenwitch, and Mary Wesley's The Camomile Lawn are all set in Cornwall. Writing under the pseudonym of Alexander Kent, Douglas Reeman sets parts of his Richard Bolitho and Adam Bolitho series in the Cornwall of the late 18th and the early 19th centuries, particularly in Falmouth.
Hammond Innes's novel, The Killer Mine;[62] Charles de Lint's novel The Little Country;[63] and Chapters 24 and 25 of J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows take place in Cornwall (the Harry Potter story at Shell Cottage, which is on the beach outside the fictional village of Tinworth in Cornwall).[64]
David Cornwell, who writes espionage novels under the name John le Carré, lives and writes in Cornwall.[65] Nobel Prize-winning novelist William Golding was born in St Columb Minor in 1911, and returned to live near Truro from 1985 until his death in 1993.[66] D. H. Lawrence spent a short time living in Cornwall. Rosamunde Pilcher grew up in Cornwall, and several of her books take place there.
Poetry[edit]




'For The Fallen' plaque with The Rumps promontory beyond


The late Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman was famously fond of Cornwall and it featured prominently in his poetry. He is buried in the churchyard at St Enodoc's Church, Trebetherick.[67] Charles Causley, the poet, was born in Launceston and is perhaps the best known of Cornish poets. Jack Clemo and the scholar A. L. Rowse were also notable Cornishmen known for their poetry; The Rev. R. S. Hawker of Morwenstow wrote some poetry which was very popular in the Victorian period. The Scottish poet W. S. Graham lived in West Cornwall from 1944 until his death in 1986.[68]
The poet Laurence Binyon wrote "For the Fallen" (first published in 1914) while sitting on the cliffs between Pentire Point and The Rumps and a stone plaque was erected in 2001 to commemorate the fact. The plaque bears the inscription "FOR THE FALLEN / Composed on these cliffs, 1914". The plaque also bears below this the fourth stanza (sometimes referred to as "The Ode") of the poem:

They shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them

Other literary works[edit]
Cornwall produced a substantial number of passion plays such as the Ordinalia during the Middle Ages. Many are still extant, and provide valuable information about the Cornish language. See also Cornish literature
Prolific writer Colin Wilson, best known for his debut work The Outsider (1956) and for The Mind Parasites (1967), lived in Gorran Haven, a small village on the southern Cornish coast. The writer D. M. Thomas was born in Redruth but lived and worked in Australia and the United States before returning to his native Cornwall. He has written novels, poetry, and other works, including translations from Russian.
Thomas Hardy's drama The Queen of Cornwall (1923) is a version of the Tristan story; the second act of Richard Wagner's opera Tristan und Isolde takes place in Cornwall, as do Gilbert and Sullivan's operettas The Pirates of Penzance and Ruddigore. A level of Tomb Raider: Legend, a game dealing with Arthurian Legend, takes place in Cornwall at a museum above King Arthur's tomb.
The fairy tale Jack the Giant Killer takes place in Cornwall.
Sports[edit]
Main article: Sport in Cornwall




Cornish wrestling


The main sports played in Cornwall are rugby, football and cricket. Athletes from Truro have done well in Olympic and Commonwealth Games fencing, winning several medals. Surfing is popular, particularly with tourists, thousands of which take to the water throughout the summer months. Some towns and villages have bowling clubs, and a wide variety of British sports are played throughout Cornwall. Cornwall is also one of the few places in England where shinty is played, the English Shinty Association is based in Penryn.
The Cornwall County Cricket Club plays as one of the minor counties of English cricket.[69] Truro, and all of the towns and some villages have football clubs belonging to the Cornwall County Football Association.

Rugby[edit]
Main article: Rugby in Cornwall
Viewed as an "important identifier of ethnic affiliation", rugby union has become a sport strongly tied to notions of Cornishness.[70] and since the 20th century, rugby union has emerged as one of the most popular spectator and team sports in Cornwall (perhaps the most popular), with professional Cornish rugby footballers being described as a "formidable force",[69] "naturally independent, both in thought and deed, yet paradoxically staunch English patriots whose top players have represented England with pride and passion".[71]
In 1985, sports journalist Alan Gibson made a direct connection between love of rugby in Cornwall and the ancient parish games of hurling and wrestling that existed for centuries before rugby officially began.[71] Among Cornwall's native sports are a distinctive form of Celtic wrestling related to Breton wrestling, and Cornish hurling, a kind of mediaeval football played with a silver ball (distinct from Irish Hurling). Cornish Wrestling is Cornwall's oldest sport and as Cornwall's native tradition it has travelled the world to places like Victoria, Australia and Grass Valley, California following the miners and gold rushes. Cornish hurling now takes place at St. Columb Major, St Ives, and less frequently at Bodmin.[d]
Surfing and watersports[edit]




The world pilot gig rowing championships take place annually in the Isles of Scilly.






Cornwall's north coast is known as a centre for surfing


Due to its long coastline, various maritime sports are popular in Cornwall, notably sailing and surfing. International events in both are held in Cornwall. Cornwall hosted the Inter-Celtic Watersports Festival in 2006. Surfing in particular is very popular, as locations such as Bude and Newquay offer some of the best surf in the UK. Pilot gig rowing has been popular for many years and the World championships takes place annually on the Isles of Scilly. On 2 September 2007, 300 surfers at Polzeath beach set a new world record for the highest number of surfers riding the same wave as part of the Global Surf Challenge and part of a project called Earthwave to raise awareness about global warming.[72]
Fencing[edit]
As its population is comparatively small, and largely rural, Cornwall's contribution to British national sport in the United Kingdom has been limited;[69] the county's greatest successes have come in fencing. In 2014, half of the men's GB team fenced for Truro Fencing Club, and 3 Truro fencers appeared at the 2012 Olympics.[73]
Cuisine[edit]
Main article: Cornish cuisine
Cornwall has a strong culinary heritage. Surrounded on three sides by the sea amid fertile fishing grounds, Cornwall naturally has fresh seafood readily available; Newlyn is the largest fishing port in the UK by value of fish landed, and is known for its wide range of restaurants.[74] Television chef Rick Stein has long operated a fish restaurant in Padstow for this reason, and Jamie Oliver chose to open his second restaurant, Fifteen, in Watergate Bay near Newquay. MasterChef host and founder of Smiths of Smithfield, John Torode, in 2007 purchased Seiners in Perranporth. One famous local fish dish is Stargazy pie, a fish-based pie in which the heads of the fish stick through the piecrust, as though "star-gazing". The pie is cooked as part of traditional celebrations for Tom Bawcock's Eve, but is not generally eaten at any other time.




A Cornish pasty


Cornwall is perhaps best known though for its pasties, a savoury dish made with pastry. Today's pasties usually contain a filling of beef steak, onion, potato and swede with salt and white pepper, but historically pasties had a variety of different fillings. "Turmut, 'tates and mate" (i.e. "Turnip, potatoes and meat", turnip being the Cornish and Scottish term for swede, itself an abbreviation of 'Swedish Turnip', the British term for rutabaga) describes a filling once very common. For instance, the licky pasty contained mostly leeks, and the herb pasty contained watercress, parsley, and shallots.[75] Pasties are often locally referred to as oggies. Historically, pasties were also often made with sweet fillings such as jam, apple and blackberry, plums or cherries.[76] The wet climate and relatively poor soil of Cornwall make it unsuitable for growing many arable crops. However, it is ideal for growing the rich grass required for dairying, leading to the production of Cornwall's other famous export, clotted cream. This forms the basis for many local specialities including Cornish fudge and Cornish ice cream. Cornish clotted cream has Protected Geographical Status under EU law,[77] and cannot be made anywhere else. Its principal manufacturer is A. E. Rodda & Son of Scorrier.
Local cakes and desserts include Saffron cake, Cornish heavy (hevva) cake, Cornish fairings biscuits, figgy 'obbin, Cream tea and whortleberry pie.[78][79][80]
There are also many types of beers brewed in Cornwall – those produced by Sharp's Brewery, Skinner's Brewery, Keltek Brewery and St Austell Brewery are the best-known – including stouts, ales and other beer types. There is some small scale production of wine, mead and cider.
History[edit]
Main articles: History of Cornwall and Timeline of Cornish history




Mên-an-Tol.


Prehistory, Roman and post-Roman periods[edit]
See also: Dumnonia
The present human history of Cornwall begins with the reoccupation of Britain after the last Ice Age. The area now known as Cornwall was first inhabited in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods. It continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then Bronze Age people.
According to John T. Koch and others, Cornwall in the Late Bronze Age was part of a maritime trading-networked culture called the Atlantic Bronze Age, in modern-day Ireland, England, France, Spain and Portugal.[81][82]
During the British Iron Age, Cornwall, like all of Britain south of the Firth of Forth, was inhabited by a Celtic people known as the Britons with distinctive cultural relations to neighbouring Wales and Brittany. The Common Brittonic spoken at the time eventually developed into several distinct tongues, including Cornish.[83]
The first account of Cornwall comes from the 1st century BC Sicilian Greek historian Diodorus Siculus, supposedly quoting or paraphrasing the 4th-century BCE geographer Pytheas, who had sailed to Britain:

The inhabitants of that part of Britain called Belerion (or Land's End) from their intercourse with foreign merchants, are civilised in their manner of life. They prepare the tin, working very carefully the earth in which it is produced ... Here then the merchants buy the tin from the natives and carry it over to Gaul, and after travelling overland for about thirty days, they finally bring their loads on horses to the mouth of the Rhône.[84]





Celtic tribes of Southern Britain.


The identity of these merchants is unknown. It has been theorised that they were Phoenicians, but there is no evidence for this.[85] Professor Timothy Champion, discussing Diodorus Siculus's comments on the tin trade, states that "Diodorus never actually says that the Phoenicians sailed to Cornwall. In fact, he says quite the opposite: the production of Cornish tin was in the hands of the natives of Cornwall, and its transport to the Mediterranean was organised by local merchants, by sea and then over land through France, well outside Phoenician control."[86] (For further discussion of tin mining see the section on the economy below.)
There is little evidence that Roman rule was effective west of Exeter in Devon and few Roman remains have been found. However, after 410, Cornwall appears to have reverted to rule by Romano-Celtic chieftains of the Cornovii tribe as part of Dumnonia including one Marcus Cunomorus with at least one significant power base at Tintagel.
"King" Mark of Cornwall is a semi-historical figure known from Welsh literature, the Matter of Britain, and in particular, the later Norman-Breton medieval romance of Tristan and Yseult where he is regarded as a close relative of King Arthur; himself usually considered to be born of the Cornish people in folklore traditions derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth's Historia Regum Britanniae.
Archaeology supports ecclesiastical, literary and legendary evidence for some relative economic stability and close cultural ties between the sub-Roman Westcountry, South Wales, Brittany and Ireland through the fifth and sixth centuries.[87]
Conflict with Wessex[edit]
The Battle of Deorham in 577 saw the separation of Dumnonia (and therefore Cornwall) from Wales, following which the Dumnonii often came into conflict with the expanding English kingdom of Wessex. The Annales Cambriae report that in 722 AD the Britons of Cornwall won a battle at "Hehil".[88] It seems likely that the enemy the Cornish fought was a West Saxon force, as evidenced by the naming of King Ine of Wessex and his kinsman Nonna in reference to an earlier Battle of Lining in 710.[89]
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle stated in 815 (adjusted date) "and in this year king Ecgbryht raided in Cornwall from east to west." and thenceforth apparently held it as a ducatus or dukedom annexed to his regnum or kingdom of Wessex, but not wholly incorporated with it.[90] The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle states that in 825 (adjusted date) a battle took place between the Wealas (Cornish) and the Defnas (men of Devon) at Gafulforda. In the same year Ecgbert, as a later document expresses it, "disposed of their territory as it seemed fit to him, giving a tenth part of it to God." In other words, he incorporated Cornwall ecclesiastically with the West Saxon diocese of Sherborne, and endowed Eahlstan, his fighting bishop, who took part in the campaign, with an extensive Cornish estate consisting of Callington and Lawhitton, both in the Tamar valley, and Pawton near Padstow.
In 838, the Cornish and their Danish allies were defeated by Egbert in the Battle of Hingston Down at Hengestesdune (probably Hingston Down in Cornwall). In 875, the last recorded king of Cornwall, Dumgarth, is said to have drowned.[91] Around the 880s, Anglo-Saxons from Wessex had established modest land holdings in the eastern part of Cornwall; notably Alfred the Great who had acquired a few estates.[92] William of Malmesbury, writing around 1120, says that King Athelstan of England (924–939) fixed the boundary between English and Cornish people at the east bank of the River Tamar.[13]
Breton–Norman period[edit]




The ancient Hundreds of Cornwall


One interpretation of the Domesday Book is that by this time the native Cornish landowning class had been almost completely dispossessed and replaced by English landowners, particularly Harold Godwinson himself. However, the Bodmin manumissions show that two leading Cornish figures nominally had Saxon names, but these were both glossed with native Cornish names.[93] Naming evidence cited by medievalist Edith Ditmas suggests that many post-Conquest landowners in Cornwall were Breton allies of the Normans[94] and further proposed this period for the early composition of the Tristan and Iseult cycle by poets such as Beroul from a pre-existing shared Brittonic oral tradition.[95]
Soon after the Norman conquest most of the land was transferred to the new Breton–Norman aristocracy, with the lion's share going to Robert, Count of Mortain, half-brother of King William and the largest landholder in England after the king with his stronghold at Trematon Castle near the mouth of the Tamar.[96] Cornwall and Devon west of Dartmoor showed a very different type of settlement pattern from that of Saxon Wessex and places continued, even after 1066, to be named in the Celtic Cornish tradition with Saxon architecture being uncommon.[citation needed]
Later medieval administration and society[edit]
Subsequently, however, Norman absentee landlords became replaced by a new Cornu-Norman elite including scholars such as Richard Rufus of Cornwall. These families eventually became the new ruling class of Cornwall (typically speaking Norman French, Breton-Cornish, Latin and eventually English), many becoming involved in the operation of the Stannary Parliament system, Earldom and eventually the Duchy.[97] The Cornish language continued to be spoken and it acquired a number of characteristics establishing its identity as a separate language from Breton.
Stannary parliaments[edit]
Main article: Stannary Courts and Parliaments
The stannary parliaments and stannary courts were legislative and legal institutions in Cornwall and in Devon (in the Dartmoor area), England. The stannary courts administered equity for the region's tin-miners and tin mining interests, and they were also courts of record for the towns dependent on the mines. The separate and powerful government institutions available to the tin miners reflected the enormous importance of the tin industry to the English economy during the Middle Ages. Special laws for tin miners pre-date written legal codes in Britain, and ancient traditions exempted everyone connected with tin mining in Cornwall and Devon from any jurisdiction other than the stannary courts in all but the most exceptional circumstances.
Piracy and smuggling[edit]
Cornish piracy was active during the Elizabethan era on the west coast of Britain.[98] Cornwall is well known for its wreckers who preyed on ships passing Cornwall's rocky coastline. During the 17th and 18th centuries Cornwall was a major Smuggling area.
Politics and administration[edit]
Main article: Politics of Cornwall
Cornish national identity[edit]
Further information: Cornish nationalism




The percentage of respondents who gave "Cornish" as an answer to the National Identity question in the 2011 census.


Cornwall is recognised by Cornish and Celtic political groups as one of six Celtic nations, alongside Brittany, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland and Wales.[99][100][101][102] (The Isle of Man Government and the Welsh Government also recognise Asturias and Galicia).[103][104] Cornwall is represented, as one of the Celtic nations, at the Festival Interceltique de Lorient, an annual celebration of Celtic culture held in Brittany.[105]
Cornwall Council consider Cornwall's unique cultural heritage and distinctiveness to be one of the area's major assets. They see Cornwall's language, landscape, Celtic identity, political history, patterns of settlement, maritime tradition, industrial heritage, and non-conformist tradition, to be among the features making up its "distinctive" culture.[106] However, it is uncertain how many of the people living in Cornwall consider themselves to be Cornish; results from different surveys (including the national census) have varied. In the 2001 census, 7 per cent of people in Cornwall identified themselves as Cornish, rather than British or English. However, activists have argued that this underestimated the true number as there was no explicit "Cornish" option included in the official census form.[107] Subsequent surveys have suggested that as many as 44 per cent identify as Cornish.[108] Many people in Cornwall say that this issue would be resolved if a Cornish option became available on the census.[109] The question and content recommendations for the 2011 Census provided an explanation of the process of selecting an ethnic identity which is relevant to the understanding of the often quoted figure of 37,000 who claim Cornish identity.[110]
On 24 April 2014 it was announced that Cornish people have been granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.[10]
Local politics[edit]




Cornwall Council's headquarters in Truro






From the 2010 general election, Cornwall has had six parliamentary constituencies


With the exception of the Isles of Scilly, Cornwall is governed by a unitary authority, Cornwall Council, based in Truro. The Crown Court is based at the Courts of Justice in Truro. Magistrates' Courts are found in Truro (but at a different location to the Crown Court) and at Bodmin.
The Isles of Scilly form part of the ceremonial county of Cornwall,[111] and have, at times, been served by the same county administration. Since 1890 they have been administered by their own unitary authority, the Council of the Isles of Scilly. They are grouped with Cornwall for other administrative purposes, such as the National Health Service and Devon and Cornwall Police.[112][113][114]
Before reorganisation on 1 April 2009, council functions throughout the rest of Cornwall were organised on a two-tier basis, with a county council and district councils for its six districts, Caradon, Carrick, Kerrier, North Cornwall, Penwith, and Restormel. While projected to streamline services, cut red tape and save around £17 million a year, the reorganisation was met with wide opposition, with a poll in 2008 giving a result of 89% disapproval from Cornish residents.[115][116][117]
The first elections for the unitary authority were held on 4 June 2009. The council has 123 seats; the largest party (in 2017) is the Tory Party, with 46 seats. The Liberal Democrats are the second largest party, with 37 seats, with the Independents in third place with 30.[118]
Before the creation of the unitary council, the former county council had 82 seats, the majority of which were held by the Liberal Democrats, elected at the 2005 county council elections. The six former districts had a total of 249 council seats, and the groups with greatest numbers of councillors were Liberal Democrats, Conservatives, and Independents.
Parliament and national politics[edit]
Following a review by the Boundary Commission for England taking effect at the 2010 general election, Cornwall is divided into six county constituencies to elect MPs to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom.
Before the 2010 boundary changes Cornwall had five constituencies all of which were won by Liberal Democrats in the 2005 general election. At the 2010 general election Liberal Democrat candidates won three constituencies and Conservative candidates won three constituencies (see also 2010 United Kingdom general election result in Cornwall). At the 2015 general election all six Cornish seats were won by Conservative candidates. All these conservative MPs retained their seats in the 2017 general election
Until 1832, Cornwall had 44 MPs – more than any other county – reflecting the importance of tin to the Crown.[119] Most of the increase in numbers of MPs came between 1529 and 1584 after which there was no change until 1832.[120]
Devolution movement[edit]
Cornish nationalists have organised into two political parties: Mebyon Kernow, formed in 1951, and the Cornish Nationalist Party. In addition to the political parties, there are various interest groups such as the Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament and the Celtic League. The Cornish Constitutional Convention was formed in 2000 as a cross-party organisation including representatives from the private, public and voluntary sectors to campaign for the creation of a Cornish Assembly,[8][121] along the lines of the National Assembly for Wales, Northern Ireland Assembly and the Scottish Parliament. Between 5 March 2000 and December 2001, the campaign collected the signatures of 41,650 Cornish residents endorsing the call for a devolved assembly, along with 8,896 signatories from outside Cornwall. The resulting petition was presented to the Prime Minister, Tony Blair.[8] The Liberal Democrats recognise Cornwall's claims for greater autonomy, as do the Liberal Party.

"The new single council is also the opportunity to gain more control over local issues from regional and national Government bureaucrats – the first step on our way to a Cornish Assembly." – The Liberal Democrat Manifesto for 2009

An additional political issue is the recognition of the Cornish people as a minority.[122]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Cornwall




Falmouth Docks is the major port of Cornwall, and one of the largest natural harbours in the world






The Eden Project near St Austell, Cornwall's largest tourist attraction in terms of visitor numbers


Cornwall is one of the poorest parts of the United Kingdom in terms of per capita GDP and average household incomes. At the same time, parts of the county, especially on the coast, have high house prices, driven up by demand from relatively wealthy retired people and second-home owners.[123] The GVA per head was 65% of the UK average for 2004.[124] The GDP per head for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly was 79.2% of the EU-27 average for 2004, the UK per head average was 123.0%.[125] In 2011, the latest available figures, Cornwall's (including the Isles of Scilly) measure of wealth was 64% of the European average per capita.[126]
Historically mining of tin (and later also of copper) was important in the Cornish economy. The first reference to this appears to be by Pytheas: see above. Julius Caesar was the last classical writer to mention the tin trade, which appears to have declined during the Roman occupation.[127] The tin trade revived in the Middle Ages and its importance to the Kings of England resulted in certain privileges being granted to the tinners; the Cornish Rebellion of 1497 is attributed to grievances of the tin miners.[128] In the mid-19th century, however, the tin trade again fell into decline. Other primary industries that have declined since the 1960s include china clay production, fishing and farming.
Today, the Cornish economy depends heavily on its tourist industry, which makes up around a quarter of the economy. The official measures of deprivation and poverty at district and 'sub-ward' level show that there is great variation in poverty and prosperity in Cornwall with some areas among the poorest in England and others among the top half in prosperity. For example, the ranking of 32,482 sub-wards in England in the index of multiple deprivation (2006) ranged from 819th (part of Penzance East) to 30,899th (part of Saltash Burraton in Caradon), where the lower number represents the greater deprivation.[129][130]
Cornwall is one of two UK areas designated as 'less developed regions' which qualify for Cohesion Policy grants from the European Union.[131] It was granted Objective 1 status by the European Commission for 2000 to 2006,[132] followed by further rounds of funding known as 'Convergence Funding' from 2007 to 2013[133] and 'Growth Programme' for 2014 to 2020.[134]
Tourism[edit]




Par railway station with a British Rail Class 43 (HST) introduced by British Rail to the Cornish Main Line by the InterCity sector.


Tourism is estimated to contribute up to 24% of Cornwall's gross domestic product.[135] In 2011 Tourism brought £1.85 billion into the Cornish economy.[136] Cornwall's unique culture, spectacular landscape and mild climate make it a popular tourist destination, despite being somewhat distant from the United Kingdom's main centres of population. Surrounded on three sides by the English Channel and Celtic Sea, Cornwall has many miles of beaches and cliffs; the South West Coast Path follows a complete circuit of both coasts. Other tourist attractions include moorland, country gardens, museums, historic and prehistoric sites, and wooded valleys. Five million tourists visit Cornwall each year, mostly drawn from within the UK.[137] Visitors to Cornwall are served by the airport at Newquay, whilst private jets, charters and helicopters are also served by Perranporth airfield; nightsleeper and daily rail services run between Cornwall, London and other regions of the UK. Cornwall has a tourism-based seasonal economy.
Newquay and Porthtowan are popular destinations for surfers. In recent years, the Eden Project near St Austell has been a major financial success, drawing one in eight of Cornwall's visitors in 2004.[138]
Internet[edit]
Cornwall is the landing point for twenty-two of the world's fastest high-speed undersea and transatlantic fibre optic cables, making Cornwall an important hub within Europe's Internet infrastructure.[139][140] The Superfast Cornwall project completed in 2015,[141] and saw 95% of Cornish houses and businesses connected to a fibre-based broadband network, with over 90% of properties able to connect with speeds above 24Mbit/s.[142]
Fishing[edit]




Redruth Mine in 1890


Other industries are fishing, although this has been significantly re-structured by EU fishing policies (the Southwest Handline Fishermen's Association has started to revive the fishing industry).[143]
Agriculture[edit]
Agriculture, once an important part of the Cornish economy has declined significantly. However, there is still a strong dairy industry producing products such as Cornish Clotted cream.
Mining[edit]
Main article: Mining in Cornwall
Mining of tin and copper was also an industry, but today the derelict mine workings survive only as a World Heritage Site.[144] However, the Camborne School of Mines, which was relocated to Penryn in 2004, is still a world centre of excellence in the field of mining and applied geology[145] and the grant of World Heritage status has attracted funding for conservation and heritage tourism.[146] China clay extraction has also been an important industry in the St Austell area, but this sector has been in decline, and this, coupled with increased mechanisation, has led to a decrease in employment in this sector, although the industry still employs around 2,133 people in Cornwall, and generates over £80 Million to the local economy.[147]
Aerospace[edit]
The county's newest industry is aviation: Cornwall Airport Newquay is the only national and international airport west of Exeter, and is the home of a growing business park with Enterprise Zone status, known as Aerohub. There are also plans to establish Spaceport Cornwall at Newquay, in partnership with Goonhilly satellite tracking station near Helston in south Cornwall.[citation needed]
Demographics[edit]
Main articles: Demography of Cornwall and List of settlements in Cornwall by population
See also: Cornish diaspora




Graph showing Cornwall's population from 1800 to 2000


Cornwall's population was 537,400 at the last census, with a population density of 144 people per square kilometre, ranking it 40th and 41st respectively among the 47 counties of England. Cornwall's population was 95.7% White British and has a relatively high level of population growth. At 11.2% in the 1980s and 5.3% in the 1990s, it had the fifth-highest population growth rate of the counties of England.[148] The natural change has been a small population decline, and the population increase is due to inward migration into Cornwall.[149] According to the 1991 census, the population was 469,800.
Cornwall has a relatively high retired population, with 22.9% of pensionable age, compared with 20.3% for the United Kingdom as a whole.[150] This may be due to a combination of Cornwall's rural and coastal geography increasing its popularity as a retirement location, and outward migration of younger residents to more economically diverse areas.
Education system[edit]
See also: List of schools in Cornwall




The Old School, Grampound Road


Cornwall has a comprehensive education system, with 31 state and eight independent secondary schools. There are three further education colleges: Truro and Penwith College, Cornwall College and Callywith College which is due to open in September 2017. The Isles of Scilly only has one school while the former Restormel district has the highest school population, and school year sizes are around 200, with none above 270. Before the introduction of comprehensive schools there were a number of grammar schools and secondary modern schools, e.g. the schools that later became Sir James Smith's School and Wadebridge School. There are also primary schools in many villages and towns; e.g. St Mabyn Church of England Primary School.
Higher education is provided by Falmouth University, the University of Exeter (including Camborne School of Mines), the Combined Universities in Cornwall, and by Truro College, Penwith College (which combined in 2008 to make Truro and Penwith College) and Cornwall College.
See also[edit]


Geography portal
Europe portal
United Kingdom portal
England portal
Cornwall portal
Celts portal



Outline of Cornwall – overview of the wide range of topics covered by this subject

Notes[edit]



^ Eilert Ekwall who studied the place-names of England in the 1930s and 40s gives the following forms: Cornubia in Vita Melori &c.; Middle Welsh Cerniu; Welsh Cernyw; Cornish: Kernow; (on) Cornwalum ASC 891; Cornwealum ASC(E) 997; "The Brit name goes back to *Cornavia probably derived from the tribal name Cornovii. OE Cornwealas means 'the Welsh in Cornwall' this folk-name later became the name of the district".[18]
^ "Wales" is derived from the Proto-Germanic word Walhaz, meaning "Romanised foreigner"; through Old English welisċ, wælisċ, wilisċ, meaning "Romano-British"; to Modern English Welsh. The same etymology applies to Cornwall and to Wallonia in Belgium.[27]
^ Britain's only other example of an ophiolite, the Shetland ophiolite, is older, and linked to the Grampian Orogeny.
^ The Bodmin hurl is held whenever the ceremony of beating the bounds takes place: each occasion must be five years or more after the last one.



References[edit]


^ "Cornwall: definition of Cornwall in Oxford dictionary (American English)". Oxforddictionaries.com. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ International Hydrographic Organization
^ "Population Estimates for UK, England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, Mid-2016". Office for National Statistics. 22 June 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. 
^ "UK Standard Area Measurements (SAM)" (ZIP). National Statistics Online. Office for National Statistics. July 2007. Retrieved 1 April 2009. 
^ Office for National Statistics, Key Figures for 2011 Census: Key Statistics
^ "Data from the 2011 Census (Office for National Statistics)". Cornwall Council. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. 
^ Herbert, Kiran. "Where is the seventh Celtic nation?". Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
^ a b c "Blair gets Cornish assembly call". BBC News. 11 December 2001. Retrieved 22 May 2008. 
^ Convention, Cornish Constitutional. "Campaign for a Cornish Assembly - Senedh Kernow". cornishassembly.org. Retrieved 26 November 2017. 
^ a b "Cornish people granted minority status within UK". BBC. Retrieved 24 April 2014. 
^ "Welsh and Cornish are the 'purest Britons', scientists claim". Telegraph.co.uk. Telegraph. Retrieved 4 September 2017. 
^ Morris, Steven (24 April 2014). "Cornish recognised as national minority group for the first time". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 September 2017. 
^ a b Stenton, F. M. (1947) Anglo-Saxon England. Oxford: Clarendon Press; pg. 337
^ "Cornwall". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 21 May 2013. 
^ "Horn". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 21 May 2013. 
^ Payton, Philip (2004). Cornwall: a history (revised ed.). Fowey: Cornwall Editions Ltd. ISBN 1-904880-00-2. 
^ Charles Thomas. (1986). Celtic Britain. (Ancient Peoples & Places Series.) London: Thames & Hudson
^ Ekwall, E., The Concise Dictionary of English Place-names, 2nd ed., 1940, p. 117a.
^ a b Payton (2004), p. 262.
^ Rendle, Phil. "Cornwall – The Mysteries of St Piran" (PDF). Proceedings of the XIX International Congress of Vexillology. The Flag Institute. Retrieved 17 January 2010. 
^ "Cross of Saint Piran". Flags of the World (FOTW). Archived from the original on 17 January 2007. Retrieved 17 January 2010. 
^ Davies Gilbert in 1826 described it as anciently the flag of St Piran and the banner of Cornwall, and another history of 1880 said that: "The white cross of St. Piran was the ancient banner of the Cornish people."
^ "Cornwall (United Kingdom)". Crwflags.com. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "British Flags (United Kingdom) from The World Flag Database". Flags.net. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Deacon, Bernard (2007). A Concise History of Cornwall. University of Wales Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-7083-2032-7. 
^ Watts, Victor (2010). The Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-names (1st paperback ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-521-16855-7. 
^ Davies, John (1994). A History of Wales. London: Penguin. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-14-028475-1. 
^ "The Official Guide to the South West Coast Path". Southwestcoastpath.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "The Cornish Heath – County Flower". Archived from the original on 30 September 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2016. 
^ "Fast Ferries connecting Wales & the South West – Severn Link, Fast Ferries Connecting Wales and the South West". Severnlink.com. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Price, J. H., Hepton, C. E. L. and Honey, S. I. (1979). The Inshore Benthic Biota of the Lizard Peninsula, south west Cornwall: the marine algae – History; Chlorophyta; Phaeophyta. Cornish Studies; no. 7: pp. 7–37
^ Bere, Rennie (1982) The Nature of Cornwall. Buckingham: Barracuda Books
^ "UK climate information". Met Office. 1 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "UK climate information". Met Office. 1 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "UK climate information". Met Office. 1 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "Legend of Dolly Pentreath outlived her native tongue". This is Cornwall. 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2012. 
^ [1] Archived 18 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Cornish in United Kingdom". European Commission. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "November 2002 – Cornish gains official recognition". BBC News. 6 November 2002. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "June 2005 – Cash boost for Cornish language". BBC News. 14 June 2005. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "An Outline of the Standard Written Form of Cornish" (PDF). Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "gossan – definition of gossan by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia". Thefreedictionary.com. 21 September 2009. Retrieved 24 October 2012. 
^ "kibbal - Definition of kibbal - Online Dictionary from Datasegment.com". Onlinedictionary.datasegment.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2015. Retrieved 24 October 2012. 
^ Hunt, Robert (1887). British Mining: A Treatise on the History, Discovery, Practical Development. London: E. & F. N. Spon. p. 778. Retrieved 8 November 2016. The tin stuff is put into a "kieve" about 3½ feet diameter and 2½ feet deep, and with an equal volume of water is continually stirred with a shovel in one direction until the tin stuff is in a state of suspended motion. 
^ Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms by American Geological Institute and U S Bureau of Mines; pp. 128, 249 & 613
^ "MPs swear Oath of Allegiance in Cornish". Maga Kernow. 24 May 2010. Archived from the original on 14 October 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2010. 
^ "Elizabeth Adela Forbes". PenleeHouse.org.uk. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Samuel John Lamorna Birch". HayleGallery.co.uk. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Virginia Woolf". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Ben Nicholson". StormFineArts.com. Archived from the original on 30 December 2006. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Naum Gabo". Artnet.com. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Bernard Leach and the Leach Pottery". Studio-Pots.com. Archived from the original on 3 April 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Tate St Ives". Tate.org.uk. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "art and artists in Cornwall including Cornish galleries". art cornwall .org. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Newlyn fish festival". Newlynfishfestival.org.uk. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "An Daras Cornish Folk Tradition". An-daras.com. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Blackman, Guy (8 May 2005). "The whole Tori – Music – Entertainment". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Daphne du Maurier". DuMaurier.org. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "The Birds". MovieDiva.com. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "The Adventure of the Devil's Foot". WorldwideSchool.org. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "Over Sea, Under Stone". Powell's Books. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "The Killer Mine". BoekBesprekingen.nl. Archived from the original on 8 October 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ The Little Country. Amazon.com. ASIN 0312876491. CS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBN (link)
^ "Shell Cottage". hp-lexicon.org. Retrieved 11 January 2008. 
^ "Le Carré betrayed by 'bad lot' spy Kim Philby". Channel 4 News. London: Channel 4. 12 September 2010. Retrieved 26 May 2011. 
^ "Biography of William Golding". William-Golding.co.uk. Archived from the original on 17 March 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "St Enodoc Church". RockInfo.co.uk. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ "William Sydney Graham". CPRW.com. Retrieved 11 May 2007. 
^ a b c Clegg 2005, p. 10.
^ Harvey, David (2002). Celtic Geographies: Old Culture, New Times. London: Routledge. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-415-22396-6. 
^ a b Gallagher, Brendan (23 October 2008). "Cornish rugby union celebrate 125 years of pride and passion – but are they the lost tribe?". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved 7 September 2009. 
^ "Surfers aim to break world record". BBC News. 2 September 2007. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Pilnick, Brent (1 June 2012). "London 2012: Truro fencers dominate GB Olympic team". BBC Sport. Retrieved 28 July 2016. 
^ "Objective One media release". Objectiveone.com. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Cornish recipe site". Alanrichards.org. 25 February 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Martin, Edith (1929). Cornish Recipes, Ancient & Modern. 22nd edition, 1965. 
^ "Official list of British protected foods". Europa.eu.int. 23 February 2009. Archived from the original on 2 June 2005. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Mason, Laura; Brown, Catherine (1999) From Bath Chaps to Bara Brith. Totnes: Prospect Books
^ Pettigrew, Jane (2004) Afternoon Tea. Andover: Jarrold
^ Fitzgibbon, Theodora (1972) A Taste of England: the West Country. London: J. M. Dent
^ Cunliffe, Karl, Guerra, McEvoy, Bradley; Oppenheimer, Rrvik, Isaac, Parsons, Koch, Freeman and Wodtko (2010). Celtic from the West: Alternative Perspectives from Archaeology, Genetics, Language and Literature. Oxbow Books and Celtic Studies Publications. p. 384. ISBN 978-1-84217-410-4. Archived from the original on 12 June 2010. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Cunliffe, Barry (2009). "A Race Apart: Insularity and Connectivity". Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society. The Prehistoric Society. 75: 55–64. 
^ Payton (2004), p. 40.
^ Halliday (1959), p. 51.
^ Halliday (1959), p. 52.
^ Champion, Timothy (2001). "The appropriation of the Phoenicians in British imperial ideology". Nations and Nationalism. 7 (4): 451–65. doi:10.1111/1469-8219.00027. 
^ "AD 500 – Tintagel". Archaeology.co.uk. 24 May 2007. Retrieved 24 November 2013. 
^ "Medieval Sourcebook: The Annales Cambriae 447–954 (The Annals of Wales)". Fordham.edu. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Weatherhill, Craig Cornovia; p. 10
^ "The Foundation of the Kingdom of England". Third-millennium-library.com. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Annales Cambriae
^ Keynes, Simon; Lapidge, Michael (tr.) (1983), Alfred the Great: Asser's Life of King Alfred and other contemporary sources, London, Penguin Books, p. 175; cf. ibid, p. 89
^ Cornish (and Other) Personal Names from the 10th Century Bodmin Manumissions by Heather Rose Jones
^ "Welsh Journals Online". Welshjournals.llgc.org.uk. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ EMR Ditmas, Tristan and Iseult Twelfth Century Romance by Beroul retold from Norman French 1969
^ Williams, Ann & Martin, G. H. (2002) (tr.) Domesday Book: a complete translation, London: Penguin, pp. 341–357
^ Payton (2004), chapter 5.
^ Matthew, David (July 1924). The Cornish and Welsh Pirates in the Reign of Elizabeth. 39. The English Historical Review: Oxford University Press. pp. 337–348. 
^ "Lords Hansard Text for 25 Jan 2011 (pt002)". Hansard. Parliament of the United Kingdom. 25 January 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2011. Cornwall sees itself as the fourth Celtic nation of the United Kingdom; Lord Teverson 
^ "Mebyon Kernow – The Party for Cornwall – BETA". Mebyon Kernow website. Mebyon Kernow. 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2011. 
^ "The Celtic League". Celtic League website. Celtic League. 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2011. 
^ "The International Celtic Congress". International Celtic Congress. 2009. Retrieved 16 February 2010. 
^ "Welsh Government: Minister in Paris for launch of Celtic festival". Welsh Government website. Welsh Government. 14 March 2002. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2011. 
^ "Isle of Man Post Office Website". Isle of Man Post Office website. Isle of Man Government. 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2011. 
^ "Site Officiel du Festival Interceltique de Lorient". Festival Interceltique de Lorient website. Festival Interceltique de Lorient. 4 February 2011. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2011. 
^ "Cornwall Council – part three". Cornwall Council website. Cornwall Council. 18 March 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2011. 
^ Dugan, Emily (6 September 2009). "The Cornish: they revolted in 1497, now they're at it again". London: Independent (The). Retrieved 14 July 2010. 
^ "Welsh are more patriotic". BBC. 3 March 2004. Retrieved 14 July 2010. 
^ "Information paper: Recommended questions for the 2009 Census Rehearsal and 2011 Census: National Identity" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. December 2008. p. 32. Retrieved 13 May 2009. 
^ "2011 Census; 2011 census questionnaire content; question and content recommendations for 2011; ethnic group prioritisation tool" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. pp. 20–22. Retrieved 15 July 2010. 
^ "Cornwall Lieutenancy: Role and Responsibilities of the Lord-Lieutenant". Cornwall Council. Retrieved 12 September 2017. 
^ "Isles of Scilly; Cornwall through time". visionofbritain.org.uk. Retrieved 19 January 2007. 
^ "Isles of Scilly RD; Cornwall through time". visionofbritain.org.uk. Archived from the original on 6 May 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2007. 
^ "About your local police". Devon and Cornwall Police. Archived from the original on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 23 September 2009. 
^ "One Cornwall – A unified council for Cornwall". Cornwall County Council. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 22 May 2008. 
^ [2] Archived 11 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Cornwall super-council go-ahead". BBC. 25 July 2007. Retrieved 25 July 2007. 
^ http://www.cornwalllive.com/cornwall-local-election-results-2017-are-in-and-here-are-the-highlights/story-30315303-detail/story.html#PorjHvhWgB9eYd1X.99
^ "British Archaeology, no 30, December 1997: Letters". Britarch.ac.uk. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Rowse, A. L. (1941) Tudor Cornwall. London: Cape; pp. 91–94
^ Cornish Constitutional Convention (3 April 2005). "Campaign for a Cornish Assembly – Senedh Kernow". Cornishassembly.org. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Minutes for the Census Sub-Group Meeting held on 23 November 2006". Central & Local Information Partnership. 9 February 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2008. Retrieved 23 May 2008. 
^ Dugan, Emily (27 July 2008). "Cornwall: A land of haves, and have nots". The Independent. London. Retrieved 15 May 2013. 
^ ONS December 2006
^ Eurostat
^ "Cornwall economy slips back in fight with Europe's poorest". Western Morning News. 7 May 2014. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Halliday (1959), p. 69.
^ Halliday (1959), p. 182.
^ "cornwallstatistics.org.uk". 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. 
^ [3] Archived 8 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Cohesion Policy and the United Kingdom" (PDF). European Union. October 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2016. For 2014–2020, the UK has been allocated around €11.8 billion (current prices) in total Cohesion Policy funding: €2.6 billion for less developed regions (Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, West Wales and the Valleys). 
^ "Impact Analysis: ESF Objective 1 Programme Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, 2000–2006" (PDF). University of Exeter. South West of England Regional Development Agency. March 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly (IoS) received Objective One status in 1999, primarily as a consequence of their low Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per head (70.3% of the EU average). This resulted from a myriad of underlying socio-economic problems including the large number of people with relatively low levels of qualifications; with lack of basic skills beyond Level two being a particular problem. 
^ "Convergence Programme for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly Operational Programme 2007–13" (PDF). Department for Communities and Local Government. Retrieved 28 March 2016. The Convergence Programme for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly will succeed the current Objective One Programme, which has been delivered with great effect by the key stakeholders. A total of €458.1 million has been allocated to the new Programme for 2007–13, which will be complemented by €196 million of Convergence ESF funding to support learning and skills related activities. [permanent dead link]
^ "Cornwall Council – Business – Europe". Cornwall Council. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2016. The Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly Growth Programme is worth €603,706,863 (excluding technical assistance) and is made up of two main funding streams: European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) -The ERDF Programme is worth €452,780,147 and makes up 75% of the Programme allocation and European Social Fund (ESF) – The ESF Programme is worth €150,926,716 and makes up 25% of the Programme allocation. 
^ "Home Page – Cornwall Council". Db.cornwall.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 15 June 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "Tourist earnings top £9bn in Devon and Cornwall". Western Morning News. 21 December 2012. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Visit Cornwall, 2007. "Tourism in Cornwall 1992 to 2007" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012.  The total number of visitors to the county includes those on business and visiting relatives. Tourism in Cornwall Archived 18 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine.  (216 KB)
^ Scottish Executive, 2004. A literature review of the evidence base for culture, the arts and sport policy Archived 15 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine..
^ "Submarine Cable Map". submarinecablemap.com. Retrieved 4 September 2017. 
^ Pole, Warren (5 July 2009). "Web in trouble? The hidden cables under a Cornish beach feeding the world's internet". Daily Mail. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ Curtis, Sophie (24 July 2014). "Cornwall claims 'half' of UK's direct fibre broadband links". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 18 March 2016. 
^ "Superfast Cornwall Programme". Superfast Cornwall. Retrieved 18 March 2016. 
^ "Line-caught wild bass from Cornwall – South West Handline Fishermen's Association". Linecaught.org.uk. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape – UNESCO World Heritage Centre". Whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 2 November 2015. 
^ "The University of Exeter – Cornwall Campus – Camborne School of Mines". Uec.ac.uk. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ "Home". Cornish-mining.org.uk. 14 September 2010. Retrieved 25 September 2010. 
^ Imerys Minerals Ltd (2003) Blueprint: Vision for the Future
^ Office for National Statistics, 2001. Population Change in England by County 1981–2000 Archived 30 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Office for National Statistics, 2001. Births, Deaths and Natural Change in Cornwall 1974 – 2001 Archived 29 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Office for National Statistics, 1996. % of Population of Pension Age (1996) Archived 30 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine..


Sources[edit]

Clegg, David (2005). Cornwall & the Isles of Scilly: the complete guide (2nd ed.). Leicester: Matador. ISBN 1-904744-99-0. 
Halliday, Frank Ernest (1959). A History of Cornwall. London: Gerald Duckworth. ISBN 0-7551-0817-5.  A second edition was published in 2001 by the House of Stratus, Thirsk: the original text new illustrations and an afterword by Halliday's son
Payton, Philip (2004). Cornwall: A History (2nd ed.). Fowey: Cornwall Editions Ltd. ISBN 1-904880-00-2. 

Further reading[edit]

Balchin, W. G. V. (1954) Cornwall: an illustrated essay on the history of the landscape. (The Making of the English Landscape). London: Hodder and Stoughton
Boase, George Clement; Courtney, W. P. (1874–1882) Bibliotheca Cornubiensis: a catalogue of the writings, both manuscript and printed, of Cornishmen, and of works relating to the county of Cornwall, with biographical memoranda and copious literary references. 3 vols. London: Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer
du Maurier, Daphne (1967). Vanishing Cornwall. London: Doubleday.  (illustrated edition Published by Victor Gollancz, London, 1981, ISBN 0-575-02844-0, photographs by Christian Browning)
Ellis, Peter Berresford (1974). The Cornish Language and its Literature. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Books. ISBN 0-7100-7928-1.  (Available online on Google Books).
Graves, Alfred Perceval (1928). The Celtic Song Book: Being Representative Folk Songs of the Six Celtic Nations. London: Ernest Benn.  (Available online on Digital Book Index)
Koch, John T. (2006). Celtic culture: a historical encyclopedia. London: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-85109-440-7.  (Available online on Google Books).
Payton, Philip (1996). Cornwall. Fowey: Alexander Associates. ISBN 1-899526-60-9. 
Stoyle, Mark (2001). "BBC – History – The Cornish: A Neglected Nation?". BBC History website. BBC. Retrieved 25 May 2009. 
Stoyle, Mark (2002). West Britons: Cornish Identities and the Early Modern British State. Exeter: University of Exeter Press. ISBN 0-85989-688-9. 
Williams, Michael (ed.) (1973) My Cornwall. St Teath: Bossiney Books (eleven chapters by various hands, including three previously published essays)

External links[edit]

Find more aboutCornwallat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity





Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Cornwall (category)






Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Cornwall.



Cornwall Council
Cornwall at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Images of Cornwall at the English Heritage Archive
Online books, and library resources in your library and in other libraries about Cornwall





Neighbouring counties







Celtic Sea
Celtic Sea
Devon


Celtic Sea


Cornwall


Devon


Celtic Sea
English Channel
English Channel













v
t
e


 Ceremonial county of Cornwall




Cornwall Portal



Unitary authorities



Cornwall Council
Council of the Isles of Scilly





Major settlements



Bodmin
Bude
Callington
Camborne
Camelford
Falmouth
Fowey
Hayle
Helston
Launceston
Liskeard
Looe
Lostwithiel
Marazion
Newlyn
Newquay
Padstow
Par
Penryn
Penzance
Porthleven
Redruth
Saltash
St Austell
St Blazey
St Columb Major
St Ives
St Just in Penwith
St Mawes
Stratton
Torpoint
Truro
Wadebridge
See also: List of civil parishes in Cornwall





Rivers



Allen
Camel
Cober
De Lank
Fal
Fowey
Gannel
Gover
Hayle
Helford
Inny
Kensey
Lerryn
Looe
Lynher
Menalhyl
Ottery
Par
Pont Pill
Port Navas
Red
Seaton
St Austell
Tamar
Tiddy
Truro
Valency
full list...





Topics



History
Status debate
Flag
Culture
Economy
Places
Population of major settlements
Demography
Notable people
The Duchy
Diocese
Politics
Schools
Hundreds/shires
Places of interest
full list...












v
t
e


Pan-Celticism



Nations




Celtic League definition



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Other claimants



Asturias
Galicia
Y Wladfa















Nationalisms



Breton nationalism (history)
Cornish nationalism
Welsh nationalism
Scottish nationalism
Irish nationalism (incl. Republicanism)
Manx nationalism





Pan-Celtic groups



Celtic Congress
Celtic League
Columba Project





Languages



Brythonic (Breton, Cornish & Welsh)
Goidelic (Irish, Manx & Scottish Gaelic)
Mixed (Shelta & Bungee)





Peoples



Britons (Bretons, Cornish & Welsh)
Gaels (Irish incl. Irish Travellers, Manx & Highland Scots incl. Scottish Travellers)





Culture



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales
Celtic art





Music



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Festivals



Festival Interceltique de Lorient
Pan Celtic Festival
Hebridean Celtic Festival
Celtic Connections
Celtic Media Festival





Sport



Bando
Cammag
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cornish wrestling
Curling
Gaelic football
Gaelic handball
Gouren
Rounders
Highland games
Hurling
Road bowls
Shinty








 Celts portal
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject












v
t
e


1974–1996 ←   Ceremonial counties of England   → current






Bedfordshire
Berkshire
Bristol
Buckinghamshire
Cambridgeshire
Cheshire
Cornwall
Cumbria
Derbyshire
Devon
Dorset
Durham
East Riding of Yorkshire
East Sussex
Essex
Gloucestershire
Greater London
Greater Manchester
Hampshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Lancashire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
City of London
Merseyside
Norfolk
Northamptonshire
Northumberland
North Yorkshire
Nottinghamshire
Oxfordshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Somerset
South Yorkshire
Staffordshire
Suffolk
Surrey
Tyne and Wear
Warwickshire
West Midlands
West Sussex
West Yorkshire
Wiltshire
Worcestershire












v
t
e


Districts of South West England



Devon



East Devon
Exeter
Mid Devon
North Devon
South Hams
Teignbridge
Torridge
West Devon





Dorset



Christchurch
East Dorset
North Dorset
Purbeck District
West Dorset
Weymouth and Portland





Gloucestershire



Cheltenham
Cotswold District
Forest of Dean District
Gloucester
Stroud District
Tewkesbury Borough





Somerset



Mendip
Sedgemoor
South Somerset
Taunton Deane
West Somerset





Unitary authorities



Bath and North East Somerset
Bournemouth
Bristol
Cornwall
Isles of Scilly
North Somerset
Plymouth
Borough of Poole
South Gloucestershire
Borough of Swindon
Torbay
Wiltshire












v
t
e


Unitary authorities of England



Districts



Bath and North East Somerset
Bedford
Blackburn with Darwen
Blackpool
Bournemouth
Bracknell Forest
Brighton and Hove
Bristol
Central Bedfordshire
Cheshire East
Cheshire West and Chester
Cornwall
County Durham
Darlington
Derby
East Riding of Yorkshire
Halton
Hartlepool
Herefordshire
Isle of Wight
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Luton
Medway
Middlesbrough
Milton Keynes
North East Lincolnshire
North Lincolnshire
North Somerset
Northumberland
Nottingham
Peterborough
Plymouth
Poole
Portsmouth
Reading
Redcar and Cleveland
Rutland
Shropshire
Slough
Southampton
Southend-on-Sea
South Gloucestershire
Stockton-on-Tees
Stoke-on-Trent
Swindon
Telford and Wrekin
Thurrock
Torbay
Warrington
West Berkshire
Wiltshire
Windsor and Maidenhead
Wokingham
York








Councils



Bath and North East Somerset
Bedford
Blackburn with Darwen
Blackpool
Bournemouth
Bracknell Forest
Brighton and Hove
Bristol
Central Bedfordshire
Cheshire East
Cheshire West and Chester
Cornwall
Derby
Durham
Darlington
East Riding of Yorkshire
Halton
Hartlepool
Herefordshire
Isle of Wight
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Luton
Medway
Middlesbrough
Milton Keynes
North East Lincolnshire
North Lincolnshire
North Somerset
Northumberland
Nottingham
Peterborough
Plymouth
Poole
Portsmouth
Reading
Redcar and Cleveland
Rutland
Shropshire
Slough
Southampton
Southend-on-Sea
South Gloucestershire
Stockton-on-Tees
Stoke-on-Trent
Swindon
Telford and Wrekin
Thurrock
Torbay
Warrington
West Berkshire
Wiltshire
Windsor and Maidenhead
Wokingham
York





Local elections



Bath and North East Somerset
Bedford
Blackburn with Darwen
Blackpool
Bournemouth
Bracknell Forest
Brighton and Hove
Bristol
Central Bedfordshire
Cheshire East
Cheshire West and Chester
Cornwall
County Durham
Darlington
Derby
East Riding of Yorkshire
Halton
Hartlepool
Herefordshire
Isle of Wight
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Luton
Medway
Middlesbrough
Milton Keynes
North East Lincolnshire
North Lincolnshire
North Somerset
Northumberland
Nottingham
Peterborough
Plymouth
Poole
Portsmouth
Reading
Redcar and Cleveland
Rutland
Shropshire
Slough
Southampton
Southend-on-Sea
South Gloucestershire
Stockton-on-Tees
Stoke-on-Trent
Swindon
Telford and Wrekin
Thurrock
Torbay
Warrington
West Berkshire
Wiltshire
Windsor and Maidenhead
Wokingham
York












v
t
e


Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty in England



East of England



Dedham Vale
Norfolk Coast
Suffolk Coast and Heaths








East Midlands



Lincolnshire Wolds





North East



Northumberland Coast
North Pennines





North West



Arnside and Silverdale
Forest of Bowland
Solway Coast





South East



Chichester Harbour
Chilterns
High Weald
Isle of Wight
Kent Downs
South Hampshire Coast
Surrey Hills


Abolished: East Hampshire
Sussex Downs





South West



Blackdown Hills
Cranborne Chase and West Wiltshire Downs
Cornwall
Cotswolds
Dorset
East Devon
Isles of Scilly
Mendip Hills
North Devon Coast
North Wessex Downs
Quantock Hills
South Devon
Tamar Valley





West Midlands



Cannock Chase
Malvern Hills
Shropshire Hills
Wye Valley





Yorkshire and Humber



Howardian Hills
Nidderdale






Coordinates: 50°18′N 4°54′W﻿ / ﻿50.3°N 4.9°W﻿ / 50.3; -4.9





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornwall&oldid=817833922"					Categories: CornwallCeltic nationsEnglish unitary authorities created in 2009Local government districts of South West EnglandNUTS 2 statistical regions of the United KingdomPeninsulas of EnglandUnitary authority districts of EnglandHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: ASIN uses ISBNCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksUse dmy dates from October 2017Use British English from January 2014Articles containing Cornish-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with DMOZ linksCoordinates on Wikidata