For the Cornish dialect and accent of English, see Anglo-Cornish.


Cornish


Kernowek


Pronunciation
[kəɾˈnuːək]


Native to
United Kingdom


Region
Cornwall


Ethnicity
Cornish people



Native speakers

300–400[1][2] (2015)
L2 users: 325–625 (estimated)[3]



Language family


Indo-European

Celtic

Insular Celtic

Brittonic

Southwestern

Cornish














Standard forms

Standard Written Form



Writing system

Latin alphabet


Official status


Regulated by
Cornish Language Partnership


Language codes


ISO 639-1
kw


ISO 639-2
cor


ISO 639-3
Variously:
cor – Modern Cornish
cnx – Middle Cornish
oco – Old Cornish



Linguist List

cnx Middle Cornish


 
oco Old Cornish


Glottolog
corn1251[4]


Linguasphere
50-ABB-a


This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Cornish (Kernowek) is a Southwestern Brittonic Celtic language native to Cornwall. The language began a revival in the early 20th century and is considered to be an important part of Cornish identity, culture and heritage.[5][6] Cornish is currently a recognised minority language of the United Kingdom,[7] protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, and has a growing number of second language speakers[8] and a small number of first language speakers.[9][10][11][12][13]
Along with Welsh and Breton, Cornish is descended directly from the Common Brittonic language spoken throughout much of Britain before the English language came to dominate. It was the main language of Cornwall for centuries until it was pushed westwards by English, maintaining close links with its sister language Breton with which it was mutually intelligible until well into the Middle Ages. Cornish continued to function as a common community language in parts of Cornwall until the late 18th century, and continued to be spoken in the home by some families into the 19th and possibly 20th centuries, overlapping the beginning of revival efforts.[14] A process to revive the language was begun in the early 20th century, with a number of orthographical systems still in use, although an attempt was made to impose a Standard Written Form in 2008. In 2010 UNESCO announced that its former classification of the language as "extinct" was "no longer accurate".[15]
Since the revival of the language, some Cornish textbooks and works of literature have been published and an increasing number of people are studying the language.[8] Recent developments include Cornish music,[16] independent films,[17] and children's books. A small number of people in Cornwall have been brought up to be bilingual native speakers,[13][18] and the language is taught in many schools.[19] The first Cornish language crèche opened in 2010.[20]



Contents


1 Classification
2 History

2.1 Old Cornish
2.2 Middle Cornish
2.3 Early Modern Cornish
2.4 Recent Modern Cornish


3 Geographic distribution

3.1 Official status


4 Phonology

4.1 Consonants
4.2 Vowels


5 Grammar
6 Culture

6.1 Cultural events
6.2 Study and teaching
6.3 Cornish studies
6.4 Literature

6.4.1 Neo-Cornish literature


6.5 Media
6.6 Music
6.7 Placenames and surnames


7 Samples
8 See also
9 References
10 Bibliography
11 External links

11.1 Dictionaries





Classification[edit]
Cornish is one of the Brittonic languages, which constitute a branch of the Insular Celtic section of the Celtic language family. Brittonic also includes Welsh, Breton and the Cumbric language; the last is extinct. Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Manx are part of the separate Goidelic branch of Insular Celtic.
Joseph Loth viewed Cornish and Breton as being two dialects of the same language, claiming that "Middle Cornish is without doubt closer to Breton as a whole than the modern Breton dialect of Quiberon is to that of Saint-Pol-de-Léon."[21]
History[edit]




The Brittonic speakers around the 6th century. Cornish and Breton are very closely related


Cornish evolved from the Common Brittonic spoken throughout Britain south of the Firth of Forth during the British Iron Age and Roman period. As a result of westward Anglo-Saxon expansion, the Britons of the southwest were separated from those in modern-day Wales and Cumbria. Some scholars have proposed that this split took place after the Battle of Deorham in about 577. The western dialects eventually evolved into modern Welsh and the now extinct Cumbric, while Southwestern Brittonic developed into Cornish and Breton, the latter as a result of immigration to parts of the continent, known as Brittany over the following centuries.[22]
Old Cornish[edit]
The area controlled by the southwestern Britons was progressively reduced by the expansion of Wessex over the next few centuries. During the Old Cornish period (800–1200), the Cornish-speaking area was largely coterminous with modern-day Cornwall; the region of Devon was isolated by Wessex in 936 AD and many inhabitants fled to Cornwall or Brittany.[23] The earliest written record of the Cornish language comes from this period; a 9th-century gloss in a Latin manuscript of De Consolatione Philosophiae by Boethius, which used the words ud rocashaas. The phrase means "it [the mind] hated the gloomy places".[24][25] A much more substantial survival from Old Cornish is a Cornish-Latin glossary (the Vocabularium Cornicum or Cottonian Vocabulary) containing translations of around 300 words.[26] The manuscript was widely thought to be in Old Welsh until the 1700s when it was identified as Cornish. At this time there was still little difference between Welsh and Cornish, and even fewer differences between Cornish and Breton, with some scholars arguing that the terms "Old Cornish" and "Old Breton" are merely geographical terms for the same language.
Middle Cornish[edit]




The opening verses of Origo Mundi, the first play of the Ordinalia (the magnum opus of medieval Cornish literature), written by an unknown monk in the late 14th century






Beunans Meriasek (The life of St. Meriasek) (f.56v.) Middle Cornish Saint's Play


The Cornish language continued to flourish well through the Middle Cornish period (1200–1600), reaching a peak of about 39,000 speakers in the 13th century, after which the number started to decline.[27] This period provided the bulk of traditional Cornish literature, which was used to reconstruct the language during its revival. Most important is the Ordinalia, a cycle of three mystery plays, Origo Mundi, Passio Christi and Resurrexio Domini. Together these provide about 20,000 lines of text. Various plays were written by the canons of Glasney College, intended to educate the Cornish people about the Bible and the Celtic saints. From this period also is Beunans Meriasek and the recently discovered Bewnans Ke.
In the reign of Henry VIII, an account was given by Andrew Boorde in his 1542 Boke of the Introduction of Knowledge. He states, "In Cornwall is two speches, the one is naughty Englysshe, and the other is Cornysshe speche. And there be many men and women the which cannot speake one worde of Englysshe, but all Cornyshe."[28]
When Parliament passed the Act of Uniformity 1549, people in many areas of Cornwall did not speak or understand English. The intention of the Act was to replace worship in Latin with worship in English, which was known by the lawmakers not to be universally spoken throughout England. Instead of merely banning Latin, the Act was framed so as to enforce English. The Prayer Book Rebellion, which may also have been influenced by the retaliation of the English after the failed Cornish Rebellion of 1497, broke out, and was ruthlessly suppressed: over 4,000 people who protested against the imposition of an English prayer book were massacred by Edward VI's army. Their leaders were executed and the people suffered numerous reprisals.
The rebels' document claimed they wanted a return to the old religious services and ended, "We the Cornishmen (whereof certain of us understand no English) utterly refuse this new English [altered spelling]." Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, replied to the Cornishmen, inquiring as to why they should be offended by services in English when they had them in Latin, which they also did not understand.[29]




A map showing the westward decline of Cornish, 1300–1750


Through many factors, including loss of life and the spread of English, the Prayer Book Rebellion proved a turning-point for the Cornish language. Indeed, some recent research[citation needed] has suggested that estimates of the Cornish-speaking population prior to the rebellion may have been low, making the decline even more drastic.
Peter Berresford-Ellis cites the years 1550–1650 as a century of immense damage for the language, and its decline can be traced to this period. In 1680, William Scawen wrote an essay describing 16 reasons for the decline of Cornish, among them the lack of a distinctive Cornish alphabet, the loss of contact between Cornwall and Brittany, the cessation of the miracle plays, loss of records in the Civil War, lack of a Cornish bible, and immigration to Cornwall.[30]
Early Modern Cornish[edit]




William Bodinar's letter, dated 3 July 1776






Dolly Pentreath (died 1777), said to be the last native speaker of Cornish, in an engraved portrait published in 1781


By the middle of the 17th century, the language had retreated to Penwith and Kerrier, and transmission of the language to new generations had almost entirely ceased. In his Survey of Cornwall, published in 1602, Richard Carew writes:

[M]ost of the inhabitants can speak no word of Cornish, but very few are ignorant of the English; and yet some so affect their own, as to a stranger they will not speak it; for if meeting them by chance, you inquire the way, or any such matter, your answer shall be, "Meea navidna caw zasawzneck," "I [will] speak no Saxonage."[31]

The Late Cornish period from 1578 to about 1800 has fewer sources of information on the language but they are more varied in nature. Written sources from this period are often spelled following English spelling conventions since the majority of writers of the time had had no exposure to Middle Cornish texts or the Cornish orthography within them, although after 1700 some writers began to adopt the orthography used by Edward Lhuyd in his Archaeologia Brittanica, for example using the circumflex to denote long vowels. In 1776, William Bodinar, who had learnt Cornish from fishermen, wrote a letter in Cornish which was probably the last prose in the language. However, the last verse was the Cranken Rhyme, written in the late 19th century by John Davey of Boswednack.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, there was intense academic and antiquarian interest in the language, particularly in the Middle Cornish literature, and also in attempting to find the last native speaker of the Cornish language. Despite the announcements of the death of the language, this academic interest, along with the beginning of the Celtic Revival in the late 19th century, provided the groundwork for a Cornish language revival movement.
Recent Modern Cornish[edit]
See also: Cornish language revival
In 1904, the Celtic language scholar and Cornish cultural activist Henry Jenner published A Handbook of the Cornish Language. The publication of this book is often considered to be the point at which the revival movement started.
The revival focused on reconstructing and standardising the language, including coining new words for modern concepts, and creating educational material in order to teach Cornish to others. In 1929 Robert Morton Nance published his Unified Cornish system, based on the Middle Cornish literature while extending the attested vocabulary with forms based on Celtic roots also found in Breton and Welsh, publishing a dictionary in 1938. Nance's work became the basis of revived Cornish for most of the 20th century. However, as the revival grew in strength and focus shifted from written to spoken Cornish, Nance's stiff, archaic formulation of the language seemed less suitable for a spoken revival, and academic research into the traditional literature proved that the Unified system lacked some phonological distinctions.
In the 1980s, in response to dissatisfaction with Unified Cornish, Ken George published a new system, Kernewek Kemmyn ("Common Cornish"). Like Unified Cornish, it retained a Middle Cornish base but implemented an orthography that aspired to be as phonemic as possible. It was subsequently adopted by the Cornish Language Board as well as by many Cornish speakers, but came under fierce criticism by academic linguists, few having even a nodding acquaintance with Cornish, for its phonological base, as well as those who found its orthography too different from traditional Cornish spelling conventions. Also during this period, Richard Gendall created his Modern Cornish system (also known as "Revived Late Cornish"), which used Late Cornish as a basis, and Nicholas Williams published a revised version of Unified; however neither of these systems gained the popularity of Unified or Kemmyn.
The revival entered a period of factionalism and public disputes, with each orthography attempting to push the others aside. By the time that Cornish was recognised by the UK government under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in 2002, it had become recognised that the existence of multiple orthographies was unsustainable with regards to using the language in education and public life, as none had achieved a wide consensus. A process of unification was set about which resulted in the creation of the public-body Cornish Language Partnership in 2005 and agreement on a Standard Written Form in 2008.[32][33] In 2010 UNESCO altered its classification of Cornish, stating that its previous label of "extinct" was no longer accurate.[15] This was seen by Cornish speakers as a milestone, turning the language from a state of undergoing revival, to having been revived.
The modern-day Cornish language is a successfully revived language with a number of speakers that is slowly increasing, and is becoming more visible in Cornwall as local government and business are encouraged to make use of the language as part of revitalisation efforts.
Geographic distribution[edit]




The percentage of people who recorded Cornish as their main language for each civil parish in Cornwall during the 2011 UK census.[34] In view of the small populations of many rural parishes, many of the variations shown in this map will not be statistically significant.






Cornish can be seen in many places in Cornwall


Speakers of Cornish reside primarily in Cornwall which has a population of just 536,000 (2014). There are also some speakers living outside Cornwall, particularly in the countries of the Cornish diaspora, as well as other Celtic nations. Estimates of the number of Cornish speakers vary according to the definition of being a speaker, and is difficult to accurately determine due to the individualised nature of language take-up. Nevertheless, there is recognition that the number of Cornish speakers is growing.[8] One figure for the mean number of people who know a few basic words, such as knowing that "Kernow" means "Cornwall", was 300,000; the same survey gave the figure of people able to have simple conversations at 3,000.[35] The Cornish Language Strategy project commissioned research to provide quantitative and qualitative evidence for the number of Cornish speakers: due to the success of the revival project it was estimated that 2,000 people were fluent (surveyed in spring 2008), an increase from the estimated 300 people who spoke Cornish fluently suggested in a study by Kenneth MacKinnon in 2000.[36][37][38] In the 2011 UK census, 557 people in England and Wales declared Cornish to be their main language, 464 of whom lived in Cornwall.[34]
Official status[edit]




The view from Carn Brea beacon (Karn Bre) in Penwith (Pennwydh), near Crows-an-Wra (Krows an Wragh), looking towards the village of Treave (Trev) with Porthcurno (Porthkornow) in the distance. The Cornish language has had substantial influence on Cornwall's toponomy and nomenclature.


Cornish has no official status anywhere but, since 2002, it has been recognised as a minority language under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The Cornish Language Partnership promotes and develops the language in Cornwall.
Cornwall Council's policy is to support the language. A motion passed in November 2009 approved the council's use of Cornish. The policy notes the "place of the Cornish language as a unique cultural asset" and requires the council to promote Cornish in line with the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. One effect of the policy is that worn out road signs are replaced by bilingual ones,[39] but this plan has drawn some criticism.[40]
In October 2015, Cornwall County Council announced that staff would be encouraged to use "basic words and phrases" in Cornish when dealing with the public.[41] In 2014 the Cornish people were recognised by the UK Government as a national minority under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.[42] The FCNM provides certain rights and protections to a national minority with regard to their minority language.[43]
UNESCO's Atlas of World Languages classifies Cornish as "critically endangered". UNESCO has said that a previous classification of "extinct", which came under fierce criticism from Cornish speakers, "does not reflect the current situation for Cornish".[15]
In 2016, national government funding for the Cornish language ceased, and responsibility transferred to Cornwall council.[44]
Phonology[edit]



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


The phonology of modern Cornish is based on a number of sources. The work of the linguist Edward Lhuyd who visited Cornwall in 1700 to record the language, as well as the modern Cornish dialect and accent of English, which got much of its intonation and sounds from the Cornish language,[citation needed] have provided a major source of input. Analysis of the traditional literature has also been used, as the Middle Cornish plays were often written in rhyming verse, and Late Cornish texts were written phonetically following English spelling conventions.
Consonants[edit]



Labial
Dental
Alveolar
Post-
alveolar
Palatal
Velar
Glottal


Nasal
m

n


ŋ



Stop
p b

t d


k ɡ



Fricative
f v
θ ð
s z
ʃ ʒ

x
h


Approximant
central


ɹ

j
ʍ w



lateral


l






Vowels[edit]



Front
Central
Back


short
long
short
short
long


Close
ɪ ʏ
iː ɪː
ɨ ʉ
ʊ
uː


Mid
ɛ œ
eː øː
ə
ɔ
oː


Open
æ
æː

ɒ
ɒː


Grammar[edit]
Main article: Cornish grammar
The grammar of Cornish shares with other Celtic languages a number of features which, while not unique, are unusual in an Indo-European context. The grammatical features most unfamiliar to English speakers of the language are the initial consonant mutations, the verb–subject–object word order, inflected prepositions, fronting of emphasised syntactic elements, and the use of two different forms for "to be". Cornish nouns belong to one of two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine, but are not inflected for case. Cornish has a variety of different endings to indicate the plural, and some nouns have a third collective form. Verbs are conjugated for tense and mood, which can be indicated either by inflection of the main verb, or by the use of auxiliary verbs. In Cornish vocabulary, a large number of the lexical items are language and culture specific. Examples of these include the Cornish word atal, which means "mine waste" and the word beetia, which means "to mend fishing nets". Foogan and hogan are different types of pastry cakes. Troyl is culture specific when referring to "a traditional Cornish dance get-together", while Furry is a specific kind of ceremonial dance that takes place in Cornwall.[45]
In contrast, Cornish translates the English noun, "book", as lyver (cognate with Welsh llyfr, but lyver can actually be translated into English as "book" or "volume" because it can be considered one in a set of books.
As in other Celtic languages, Cornish lacks a number of verbs that are commonly found in other languages. This includes modals and psych-verbs;[46] examples "have", "like", "hate", "prefer", "must"/"have to", "make"/"compel to". These functions are instead fulfilled by periphrastic constructions involving a verb and various prepositional phrases.

Initial consonant mutation: The first sound of a Cornish word may change according to grammatical context. As in Breton, there are four types of mutation in Cornish (compared to three in Welsh, two in Irish and Manx, and one in Scottish Gaelic). These are known as soft (b > v, etc.), hard (b > p), aspirate (b unchanged, t > th) and mixed (b > f).


Consonant mutation in Cornish

Unmutated
consonant
Soft
mutation
Aspirate
mutation
Hard
mutation
Mixed
mutation


p
b
f
-
-


t
d
th
-
-


k
g
h
-
-


b
v
-
p
f


d
dh
-
t
t


g1
disappears
-
k
h


g2
w
-
k
hw


gw
w
-
kw
hw


m
v
-
-
f


ch
j
-
-
-


1 Before unrounded vowels (i, y, e, a), l, and r + unrounded vowel.
2 Before rounded vowels (o, u), and r + rounded vowel.



inflected (or conjugated) prepositions: A preposition combines with a personal pronoun to give a separate word form. For example, gans (with, by) + my (me) → genev; gans + ev (him) → ganso.
No indefinite article. Porth means "harbour" or "a harbour" (there is, however a definite article: an porth means "the harbour").

Culture[edit]




Commemorative plaque in Cornish and English for Michael Joseph the Smith (An Gof) mounted on the north side of Blackheath common, south east London, near the south entrance to Greenwich Park


The Celtic Congress and Celtic League are groups that advocate cooperation amongst the Celtic Nations in order to protect and promote Celtic languages and cultures, thus working in the interests of the Cornish language.
There have been films such as Hwerow Hweg, some televised, made entirely, or significantly, in the language. Some businesses use Cornish names.[47][48]
According to sociolinguist Kenneth MacKinnon, Jenner wrote "There has never been a time when there has been no person in Cornwall without a knowledge of the Cornish language."[49][50]
Cornish has significantly and durably affected Cornwall's place names, as well as in Cornish surnames, and knowledge of the language helps the understanding of these ancient meanings. Cornish names are adopted for children, pets, houses and boats.
There is Cornish literature, in which poetry is the most important genre, particularly in oral form or as song or as traditional Cornish chants historically performed in marketplaces during religious holidays and public festivals and gatherings.[citation needed]
There are periodicals solely in the language such as the monthly An Gannas, An Gowsva, and An Garrick. BBC Radio Cornwall has a news broadcast in Cornish, and sometimes has other programmes and features for learners and enthusiasts. Local newspapers such as the Western Morning News have articles in Cornish, and newspapers such as The Packet, The West Briton and The Cornishman have also been known to have Cornish features. There is an online radio service in Cornish called Radyo an Gernewegva,[51] publishing a one-hour podcast each week, based on a magazine format. It includes music in Cornish as well as interviews and features.[citation needed]
The language has financial sponsorship from sources, including the Millennium Commission. A number of language organisations exist in Cornwall: Agan Tavas (Our Language), the Cornish sub-group of the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages, Gorsedh Kernow, Kesva an Taves Kernewek (the Cornish Language Board) and Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek (the Cornish Language Fellowship)]. There are ceremonies, some ancient, some modern, which use the language or are entirely in the language.




Welcome sign at Truro Cathedral in several languages, including Cornish.


Cultural events[edit]
Though estimations of the number of Cornish speakers vary, the speakers of Cornish today are thought to be around five hundred. Currently, Cornish is spoken by its speakers at home, outside the home, in the workplace, and at ritual ceremonies. Cornish is also being used in the arts. Revived Cornish is constructed on historical Cornish, so that the Cornish language develops. English language has had some effect in this development. Regardless of having "no concrete purpose during the twentieth century," the number of Cornish speakers has gradually increased.
The Celtic Congress and Celtic League are groups that advocate cooperation amongst the Celtic Nations in order to protect and promote Celtic languages and cultures, thus working in the interests of the Cornish language. Cornish has significantly and durably affected Cornwall's place names, as well as in Cornish surnames, and knowledge of the language helps the understanding of these ancient meanings. Cornish names are adopted for children, pets, houses and boats. There are periodicals solely in the language such as the monthly An Gannas, An Gowsva, and An Garrick. BBC Radio Cornwall has a news broadcast in Cornish, and sometimes has other programmes and features for learners and enthusiasts. Local newspapers such as the Western Morning News have articles in Cornish, and newspapers such as The Packet, The West Briton and The Cornishman have also been known to have Cornish features. The language has financial sponsorship from sources, including the Millennium Commission. A number of language organisations exist in Cornwall: Agan Tavas (Our Language), the Cornish sub-group of the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages, Gorsedh Kernow, Kesva an Taves Kernewek (the Cornish Language Board) and Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek (the Cornish Language Fellowship)].[52][53]
Cornwall has had cultural events associated with the language, including the international Celtic Media Festival, hosted in St Ives in 1997. The Old Cornwall Society has promoted the use of the language at events and meetings. Two examples of ceremonies that are performed in both the English and Cornish languages are Crying the Neck[54] and the annual mid-summer bonfires.[55]
Study and teaching[edit]
Cornish is taught in some schools; it was previously taught at degree level at the University of Wales, though the only existing course in the language at University level is as part of a course in Cornish Studies at the University of Exeter.[56] In March 2008, a course in the language was started as part of the Celtic Studies curriculum at the University of Vienna, Austria. The University of Cambridge offers courses in Cornish through its John Trim Resources Centre, which is part of its Language Centre.[57] In addition, the Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic (which is part of the faculty of English), also carries out research into to the Cornish language.[58]
In 2015 a university level course aiming to encourage and support practitioners working with young children to introduce the Cornish language into their settings was launched. The Cornish Language Practice Project (Early Years) is a level 4 course approved by Plymouth University and run at Cornwall College. The course is not a Cornish language course, but students will be assessed on their ability to use the Cornish language constructively in their work with young children. The course will cover such topics as Understanding Bilingualism, Creating Resources and Integrating Language and Play, but the focus of the language provision will be on Cornish. A non-accredited specialist Cornish language course has been developed to run alongside the level 4 course for those who prefer tutor support to learn the language or develop their skills further for use with young children.[59]
Cornwall's first Cornish language crèche, Skol dy'Sadorn Kernewek, was established in 2010 at Cornwall College, Camborne. The nursery teaches children aged between two and five years alongside their parents to ensure the language is also spoken in the home.[37]
A number of dictionaries are available in the different orthographies (a dictionary in the Standard Written Form has yet to be published), including An Gerlyver Meur by Ken George, Gerlyver Kernowek–Sawsnek by Nicholas Williams and A Practical Dictionary of Modern Cornish by Richard Gendall. Course books include the three-part Skeul an Yeth series, Clappya Kernowek, Tavas a Ragadazow and Skeul an Tavas, as well as the more recent Bora Brav and Desky Kernowek.
Classes and conversation groups for adults are available at several locations in Cornwall, as well as in London, Cardiff and Bristol.[60]
Cornish studies[edit]
William Scawen produced a manuscript on the declining Cornish language that continually evolved until he died in 1689, aged 89. He was the first person to realise the language was dying out and wrote detailed manuscripts which he started working on when he was 78. The only version that was ever published was a short first draft, but the final version, which he worked on until his death, is a few hundred pages long. At the same time a group of scholars, led by John Keigwin (nephew of William Scawen), of Mousehole, tried to preserve and further the Cornish language. They left behind a large number of translations of parts of the Bible, proverbs and songs. This group was contacted by the Welsh linguist Edward Lhuyd who came to Cornwall to study the language.[61][62][63][64]
Early Modern Cornish was the subject of a study published by Lhuyd in 1707, and differs from the medieval language in having a considerably simpler structure and grammar. Such differences included the wide use of certain modal affixes that, although out of use by Lhuyd's time, had a considerable effect on the word-order of medieval Cornish[citation needed]. The medieval language also possessed two additional tenses for expressing past events and an extended set of possessive suffixes.
John Whitaker, the Manchester-born rector of Ruan Lanihorne, studied the decline of the Cornish language. In his 1804 work the Ancient Cathedral of Cornwall he concluded that: "[T]he English Liturgy, was not desired by the Cornish, but forced upon them by the tyranny of England, at a time when the English language was yet unknown in Cornwall. This act of tyranny was at once gross barbarity to the Cornish people, and a death blow to the Cornish language.".[65]
Robert Williams published the first comprehensive Cornish dictionary in 1865, the Lexicon Cornu-Britannicum. As a result of the discovery of additional ancient Cornish manuscripts, 2000 new words were added to the vocabulary by Whitley Stokes in A Cornish Glossary. William C. Borlase published Proverbs and Rhymes in Cornish in 1866 while A Glossary of Cornish Place Names was produced by John Bannister in the same year. Frederick Jago published his English–Cornish Dictionary in 1882.
In 2002, the Cornish language gained new recognition because of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. Conversely, along with government provision was the governmental basis of "New Public Management," measuring quantifiable results as means of determining effectiveness. This put enormous pressure on finding a single orthography that could be used in unison. The revival of Cornish required extensive rebuilding. The Cornish orthographies that were reconstructed may be considered versions of Cornish because they are not traditional sociolinguistic variations. In the middle-to-late twentieth century, the debate over Cornish orthographies angered more people because several language groups received public funding. This caused other groups to sense favouritism as playing a role in the debate.[66]
A governmental policymaking structure called New Public Management (NPM) has helped the Cornish language by managing public life of the Cornish language and people. In 2007, the Cornish Language Partnership MAGA represents separate divisions of government and their purpose is to further enhance the Cornish Language Developmental Plan. MAGA established an "Ad-Hoc Group," which resulted in three orthographies being presented. The relations for the Ad-Hoc Group were to obtain consensus among the three orthographies, and then develop a "single written form." The end result was creating a new form of Cornish, which had to be natural for both new learners and skilled speakers.[67]
Literature[edit]
Main article: Cornish literature
Neo-Cornish literature[edit]
In 1981, the Breton library Preder edited Passyon agan arluth (Passion of our lord), a 15th-century Cornish poem.[68] The first complete translation of the Bible into Cornish translated from English, was published in 2011. Another Bible translation project translating from original languages is underway. The New Testament and Psalms were posted on-line on YouVersion (Bible.com) and Bibles.org in July 2014 by the Bible Society.
A few small publishers produce books in Cornish which are stocked in some local bookshops, as well as in Cornish branches of Waterstones and WH Smiths, although newer publications are becoming increasingly available on the Internet.[citation needed] The Truro Waterstones hosts the annual "Holyer an Gof" literary awards, established by Gorsedh Kernow to recognise publications relating to Cornwall or in the Cornish language.[69] In recent years, a number of Cornish translations of literature has been published, including Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (2009),[70] Around the World in Eighty Days (2009),[71] Treasure Island (2010),[72] The Railway Children (2012),[73] Hound of the Baskervilles (2012),[74] War of the Worlds (2012),[75] The Wind in the Willows (2013),[76] Three Men in a Boat (2013),[77] Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass (2014),[78] and A Christmas Carol[79] (which won the 2012 Holyer an Gof award for Cornish Language books), as well as original Cornish literature such as Jowal Lethesow[80] (The Lyonesse Stone) by Craig Weatherhill. Literature aimed at children is also available, such as Ple'ma Spot? (Where's Spot?), Best Goon Brèn (The Beast of Bodmin Moor), three Topsy and Tim titles,[81] and Briallen ha'n Alyon (Briallen and the Alien), which won the 2015 Holyer an Gof award for Cornish Language books for children.[82] In 2014 An Hobys, Nicholas Williams' translation of J.R.R. Tolkien's The Hobbit was published.[83]
An Gannas is a monthly magazine published entirely in the Cornish language. Members contribute articles on various subjects. The magazine is produced by Graham Sandercock who has been its editor since 1976.[84]
Media[edit]
In 1983 BBC Radio Cornwall started broadcasting around two minutes of Cornish every week. In 1987, however, they gave over 15 minutes of airtime on Sunday mornings for a programme called Kroeder Kroghen ("Holdall"), presented by John King, running until the early 1990s.[85] It was eventually replaced with a five-minute news bulletin called An Nowodhow ("The News"). The bulletin was presented every Sunday evening for many years by Rod Lyon, then Elizabeth Stewart, and currently a team presents in rotation.[86] Pirate FM ran short bulletins on Saturday lunchtimes from 1998 to 1999. In 2006, Matthew Clarke who had presented the Pirate FM bulletin, launched a web-streamed news bulletin called Nowodhow an Seythen ("Weekly News"), which in 2008 was merged into a new weekly magazine podcast Radyo an Gernewegva (RanG).
Cornish television shows have included a 1982 series by Westward Television each episode containing a three-minute lesson in Cornish.[87] An Canker-Seth, an eight episode series produced by Television South West and broadcast between June and July 1984, later on S4C from May to July 1985, and as a schools programme in 1986.[88] Also by Television South West were two bilingual programmes on Cornish Culture called Nosweyth Lowen[87] In 2016 Kelly's Ice Cream of Bodmin introduced a light hearted television commercial in the Cornish language and this has been repeated in 2017.
Music[edit]
English composer Peter Warlock, an enthusiast of the Celtic languages, wrote a Christmas carol in Cornish (setting words by Henry Jenner). Cornish musician Jory Bennett (born Redruth, 1963) has composed "Six Songs of Cornwall" for bass and piano, a Cornish song-cycle, settings of Cornish language poems by Nicholas Williams /trans. E. G. Retallack Hooper (f.p. Keele University, 7 May 1986). The Cornish electronic musician Richard D James has often used Cornish names for track titles, most notably on his DrukQs album. Gwenno Saunders is a multilingual Welsh-born musician and a Cornish speaker. Skwardya has produced four CD albums in Cornish in a modern pop/rock/blues/dance style.
A number of traditional Cornish folk songs have been preserved, including "An Awhesyth", "Bro Goth agan Tasow", and "Delkiow Sivy".
Placenames and surnames[edit]
See also: Cornish surnames




Placenames translated into SWF


The Cornish language has influenced the toponomy of Cornwall, and has historically been used in surnames for the Cornish people. Long before the agreement of the Standard Written Form of Cornish in the 21st century, Late Cornish orthography in the Early Modern period usually followed Welsh to English transliteration so phonetically rendering C for K, I for Y, U for W, and Z for S, caused place names such as Porthcurno and Penzance to be adopted into English instead of their Standard Written Form Porth Kernow and Pen Sans. Likewise, words such as Enys ("island") can be found spelled as "Ince" as at Ince Castle. These apparent mistranslations can however reveal an insight into how names and places were actually pronounced, explaining, for example, how anglicised Launceston is still pronounced "Lann-zan" from Cornish "Lann Stefan" with emphasis on the first element.
The following tables present some examples of Cornish placenames and surnames, and their anglicised versions:






English (anglicised) placename
Cornish placename
Translation


Truro
Truru
Three Roads


Falmouth
Aberfala
Mouth [of] Fal


Newquay
Tewynblustri
Dunes [of] Pleustri


Penzance
Pennsans
Head Holy i.e. Holy Headland


Redruth
Resrudh
Ford Red


Camborne
Kammbronn
Camm (crooked) Hill


St Austell
Sen Ostel
Saint Ostel


Bodmin
Bosvena
Abode [of] Monks


Liskeard
Lyskerrys
Court [of the] Crossroads


Launceston
Lannstevan
Land [of] St Stephen






English (anglicised) surname
Cornish surname
Translation


Angwin
An Gwynn
"The White"


Angove
An Gov
"The Smith"


Ellery
Elerghi


Chenoweth
Chi Nowydh
"New House"


Pascoe
Pask
"Easter/Passion"


Curnow
Kernow
"Cornwall"


Teague
Teg
"Beautiful"


Trevithick
Trevuthik


Goldsworthy
Golerewi
"Do Acres"


Tremaine
Tremayn
"Mean/Middle to[w]n"






Samples[edit]
From the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:


Cornish
Translation


Genys frank ha par yw oll tus an bys
All human beings are born free and


yn aga dynita hag yn aga gwiryow.
equal in dignity and rights. They are


Enduys yns gans reson ha kowses
endowed with reason and conscience


hag y tal dhedha omdhon an eyl orth
and should act towards one another


y gila yn spyrys a vrederedh.
in a spirit of brotherhood.


From Bro Goth agan Tasow, the Cornish anthem:


Cornish
Translation


Bro goth agan tasow, dha fleghes a'th kar,
Old land of our fathers, your children love you,


Gwlas ker an howlsedhes, pan vro yw dha bar?
Dear country of the west, what land is your equal?


War oll an norvys 'th on ni skollys a-les,
Over all the world, we are spread far and wide,


Mes agan kerensa yw dhis.
But our love is for you.


Kernow, Kernow y keryn Kernow;
Cornwall, Cornwall, we love Cornwall;


An mor hedre vo yn fos dhis a-dro
For as long as the sea is a wall around you


Th on onan hag oll rag Kernow!
We are one and all for Cornwall!


See also[edit]


Cornwall portal
Language portal



Anglo-Cornish, the Cornish dialect of the English language
Bible translations into Cornish
Cornish literature
List of Celtic-language media
Languages in the United Kingdom
List of topics related to Cornwall
Language revival
The Cornish Language Council (Cussel an Tavas Kernuak)
Manx, another revived Celtic language
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
Irish language revival

References[edit]


^ Harley, Nicola (5 November 2015). "Council splashes out £180,000 to try to stop the Cornish language dying out". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 1 July 2017. 
^ "Cornish language no longer extinct, says UN". 7 December 2010 – via www.bbc.com. 
^ "Language in England and Wales: 2011" – via ons.gov.uk. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Cornish". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ "Funding boost to safeguard Cornish language announced". gov.uk. 13 March 2015. 
^ "Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek wins Heritage Lottery Fund support". 19 August 2014. Archived from the original on 31 March 2016. 
^ "Cornish gains official recognition". BBC News. 2002-11-06. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ a b c Diarmuid O'Neill. Rebuilding the Celtic Languages: Reversing Language Shift in the Celtic Countries. Y Lolfa. p. 240. ISBN 0-86243-723-7. 
^ Deacon, Bernard; Tregidga, Garry; Cole, Richard (2003). Mebyon Kernow and Cornish Nationalism. Welsh Academic Press. p. 132. 
^ Kendrick, Donald (2000). Scholarship and the Gypsy Struggle : Commitment in Romani Studies: A Collection of Papers and Poems to Celebrate Donald Kenrick's Seventieth Year. University of Hertfordshire Press. p. 43. 
^ Linguistic minorities in countries belonging to the European community: summary report. Commission of the European Communities. 1986. p. 195. 
^ Ball, Martin; Muller, Nicole (2009). The Celtic Languages. Routledge. 
^ a b Ken MacKinnon, Cornish Language Study 2000 – http://www.magakernow.org.uk/default.aspx?page=797
^ Beresford Ellis, Peter (1990). The Story of the Cornish Language. Tor Mark Press. pp. 19–25. ISBN 0-85025-371-3. 
^ a b c "Cornish language no longer extinct, says UN". BBC News Online. 2010-12-07. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ [1] Archived 25 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ [2] Archived 25 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Cornish at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
^ "Cornish language – is it dead?". This is The West Country. 2009-02-21. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ "Have a good dy: Cornish language is taught in nursery". The Times. 15 January 2010. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ Williams, Nicholas J. A. (2010). "The Preterite in Cornish". Cornish Studies. Second Series. 18: 201. 
^ Jackson, Kenneth (1953). Language and History in Early Britain. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
^ Ball, Martin J.; Fife, James (1993). The Celtic Languages. New York: Routledge. Retrieved 4 Sep 2016. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2016. 
^ Sims-Williams, P. (Winter 2005) "A New Brittonic Gloss on Boethius: ud rocashaas", Cambrian Medieval Celtic Studies 50, 77–86.
^ Graves, Eugene van T. (ed.) (1964) The Old Cornish Vocabulary. Ann Arbor, Mich: Univ. M/films
^ Estimate by Ken George
^ Jenner, Henry (1904) A Handbook of the Cornish Language Chiefly in Its Latest Stages with Some Account of Its History and Literature. London: David Nutt
^ Rose-Troup, Frances (1913). The Western Rebellion of 1549. London: Smith. pp. 435–36. Retrieved 4 Sep 2016. 
^ Ellis, Peter Berresford (1 January 1974). "The Cornish Language and Its Literature". Mass. – via Google Books. 
^ Carew, Richard (1811). Carew's Survey of Cornwall: to which are added, notes illustrative of its history and antiquities. Printed by T. Bensley for J. Faulder. p. 152. Retrieved 13 February 2013. 
^ Morris, Jonathan (2008-05-19). "Breakthrough for Cornish language". BBC News Online. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ "Standard Cornish spelling agreed". BBC News Online. 2008-05-19. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ a b UK 2011 Census
^ Diarmuid O'Neill. Rebuilding the Celtic Languages: Reversing Language Shift in the Celtic Countries. Y Lolfa. p. 242. ISBN 0-86243-723-7. 
^ "'South West:TeachingEnglish:British Council:BBC". BBC/British Council website. BBC. 2010. Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2010. 
^ a b "First Cornish-speaking creche is inspired by example set in Wales". WalesOnline website. Welsh Media Ltd. 16 January 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ [3] Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Mann, Petra (12 November 2009). "Council backs bilingual road signs". Western Morning News. Retrieved 14 August 2015. 
^ "Dyslexic councillor says Cornish language road signs could prove dangerous for drivers". Plymouth Herald. 21 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. 
^ Elgot, Jessica (7 October 2015). "Cornwall council plans to encourage staff to speak Cornish". The Guardian. 
^ "Cornish people formally declared a national minority along with Scots, Welsh and Irish". The Independent. 23 April 2014. 
^ Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Strasbourg, 1 February 1995
^ "Cornish language funding stopped by government". BBC News. 21 April 2016. 
^ Mills, Jon. "The Vocabularium Cornicum: a Cornish vocabulary?". Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie. 60 (1). doi:10.1515/zcph.2013.009. 
^ Padel, Oliver. "The nature and date of the Old Cornish Vocabulary". Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie. 61 (1). doi:10.1515/zcph.2014.009. 
^ "Cornish (Kernewek/Kernowek/Kernuak/Curnoack)". Omniglot. Retrieved 4 Sep 2016. 
^ "Business Use". Cornish Language Partnership. Retrieved 4 Sep 2016. 
^ Rebuilding the Celtic languages By Diarmuid O'Néill (Page 222)
^ In a post on the blog Language Log. Retrieved 2 August 2011, linguist Geoffrey K. Pullum reported that MacKinnon was quoting an edition of Jenner that is no longer available to him (Pullum's main concern was the impact of the triple negative in the cited sentence).
^ "RanG". Radyo.kernewegva.com. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ Mills, J. (November 1, 2000). "Linguistic Relativity and Linguistic Determinism: Idiom in 20th Century Cornish" (PDF). Retrieved 24 April 2017. 
^ Stoyle, Mark (October 1999). "The Dissidence Of Despair: Rebellion And Identity In Early Modern Cornwall". Journal of British Studies. 38 (4): 423–444. JSTOR 175946. 
^ "Crying the Neck in Cornwall". Newquay.oldcornwall.org.uk. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2012. 
^ "Bonfire". Redrutholdcornwall.org. 26 May 2012. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2012. 
^ "About the Institute". Institute of Cornish Studies. University of Exeter. 
^ "The Language Centre". University of Cambridge. 
^ "The Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse & Celtic". University of Cambridge. 
^ "Kevren" (PDF). Maga. December 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 24 January 2015. 
^ "Find a Class". Learn Cornish Now. Cornish Language Office. Retrieved 11 December 2017. 
^ Ellis, P. B. (1974); pp. 82–94
^ Lhuyd, Edward (1707) Archæologia Britannica: giving some account additional to what has been hitherto publish'd, of the languages, histories and customs of the original inhabitants of Great Britain, from collections and observations in travels through Wales, Cornwal, Bas-Bretagne, Ireland, and Scotland; Vol. I. Glossography. Oxford: printed at the Theater for the author, and sold by Mr. Bateman, London
^ Ellis, P. B. (1974); pp. 100–08
^ Lhuyd, Edward (1702) [Elegy on the death of King William III, in Cornish verse] in: Pietas Universitatis Oxoniensis in obitum augustissimi Regis Gulielmi III; et gratulatio in exoptatissimam serenissimae Annæ Reginæ inaugurationem. Oxonii: e Theatro Sheldoniano
^ Jago, Fred W. P. (1882) The Ancient Language and the Dialect of Cornwall. New York: AMS Press, 1983, (originally published 1882, Netherton and Worth, Truro), pp. 4 ff.
^ Sayers, Dave (2012). "Standardising Cornish: The Politics Of A New Minority Language". Language Problems and Language Planning. 36 (2): 99–119. doi:10.1075/lplp.36.2.01say. Retrieved April 24, 2017. 
^ Holmes, Clive (1998). Review of Faction and Faith. Politics and Religion of the Cornish Gentry before the Civil War; Law, Order and Government in Caernarfonshire, 1558–1640 by Anne Duffin; Law, Order and Government in Caernarfonshire, 1558–1640. Justices of the Peace and the Gentry by John Gwynfor Jones. 113. The English Historical Review. pp. 177–179. JSTOR 576240. 
^ "Passyon Agan Arluth". Preder.net. 2009-10-22. Retrieved 2012-11-11. 
^ "Holyer an Gof Awards". Retrieved 2015-01-21. 
^ "Alys in Pow an Anethow". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Adro dhe'n Bÿs in Peswar Ugans Dëdh". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Enys Tresour". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Flehes an Hens Horn". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Ky Teylu Baskerville". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Gwerryans an Planettys". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "An Gwyns i'n Helyk". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Tredden in Scath (Heb Gwil Mencyon a'n Ky)". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Alys y'n Vro a Varthusyon ha Der an Gweder-Mires". Kesva an Taves Kernewek. 
^ "Karol Nadelik". Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek. 
^ "Jowal Lethesow". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "Topsy and Tim". Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek. 
^ "Briallen ha'n Alyon". Ors Sempel. 
^ "An Hobys, pò An Fordh Dy ha Tre Arta". Evertype. Retrieved 2014-12-03. 
^ "An Gannas – Cornish language magazine". 
^ Martin Ball, Nicole Muller, The Celtic Languages, Psychology Press, 12 Nov 2012
^ "Cornwall – Connected – Hear the news read in Cornish". BBC. Retrieved 2013-05-28. 
^ a b Martin Ball, Nicole Muller
^ "An Canker-Seth". BroadcastForSchools.co.uk. 2011-12-31. Retrieved 2013-05-28. 


Bibliography[edit]

Norris, Edwin, Sketch of Cornish grammar (1859) [4] [5] [6]
Stokes, Whitley, Gwreans an bys = The Creation of the world : a Cornish mystery (1863)
F. W. P. Jago, A Cornish Dictionary (1887) English Cornish dictionary
Jenner, Henry, A handbook of the Cornish language : chiefly in its latest stages with some account of its history and literature (1904) [7] [8]
Williams, G. P, The preverbal particle Re in Cornish (1908)
Ellis, Peter B. (1974) The Cornish Language and its Literature. ix, 230 p. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul
Ellis, Peter B. (1971) The Story of the Cornish Language. 32 p. Truro: Tor Mark Press
Jackson, Kenneth (1953) Language and History in Early Britain: a chronological survey of the Brittonic languages, first to twelfth century a.D. Edinburgh: U. P. 2nd ed. Dublin : Four Courts Press, 1994 has a new introduction by William Gillies
Sandercock, Graham (1996) A Very Brief History of the Cornish Language. Hayle: Kesva an Tavas Kernewek ISBN 0-907064-61-2
Weatherhill, Craig (1995) Cornish Place Names & Language. Wilmslow: Sigma Press (reissued in 1998, 2000 ISBN 1-85058-462-1; second revised edition 2007 ISBN 978-1-85058-837-5)

—— (2009) Concise Dictionary of Cornish Place-names ; edited by Michael Everson. Westport, co. Mayo: Evertype ISBN 978-1-904808-22-0


Ferdinand, Siarl (2013). Brief History of the Cornish language, its Revival and its Current Situation. E-Keltoi, Vol. 2, 2 Dec. pp. 199–227 [9]

External links[edit]



Cornish edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





For a list of words relating to Cornish, see the Cornish language category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cornish language.



A Handbook of the Cornish Language, by Henry Jenner A Project Gutenberg eBook
Cornish Language Partnership website
Endangered Languages Project: Cornish
A Cornish Internet radio station in nascent state featuring weekly podcasts in Cornish
Spellyans – Standard Written Form Cornish discussion list
UdnFormScrefys' site for the proposed compromise orthography, Kernowek Standard
List of localized software in Cornish
Blas Kernewek – A Taste of Cornish – basic Cornish lessons hosted by BBC Cornwall
Cornish Language Fellowship
Lyver Pysadow Kemyn (1980) Portions of the Book of Common Prayer in Cornish
Cornish today by Kenneth MacKinnon – from the BBC
Bibel Kernewek Cornish Bible Translation Project
An Index to the Historical Place Names of Cornwall

Dictionaries[edit]

An English-Cornish Glossary in the Standard Written Form – Cornish Language Partnership
An English-Cornish Glossary in the Standard Written Form (using traditional graphs) – Cornish Language Partnership
Lexicon Cornu-Britannicum: a Dictionary of the Ancient Celtic Language of Cornwall by Robert Williams, Llandovery, 1865.





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Cornish language



Topics



Revival
Last speaker
Grammar
Numbers
Cornish surnames
Glasney College
Plen-an-gwary





Literature



Bodmin manumissions
Pascon agan Arluth
Ordinalia
Beunans Meriasek
Bewnans Ke
Cranken Rhyme
Bible translations





Orthographies



Standard Written Form
Kernewek Kemmyn
Kernowek Standard
Modern Cornish
Unified Cornish





Organisations



Cornish Language Partnership
Agan Tavas
Cussel an Tavas Kernuak
Kesva an Taves Kernewek
Kowethas an Yeth Kernewek
Movyans Skolyow Meythrin





Key figures



Henry Jenner
Robert Morton Nance
Edward Lhuyd
Dolly Pentreath
Chesten Marchant
John Davey
Richard Gendall
Ken George
Nicholas Williams





Related articles



Brittonic languages
Celtic languages






Cornwall Portal










v
t
e


 Ceremonial county of Cornwall




Cornwall Portal



Unitary authorities



Cornwall Council
Council of the Isles of Scilly





Major settlements



Bodmin
Bude
Callington
Camborne
Camelford
Falmouth
Fowey
Hayle
Helston
Launceston
Liskeard
Looe
Lostwithiel
Marazion
Newlyn
Newquay
Padstow
Par
Penryn
Penzance
Porthleven
Redruth
Saltash
St Austell
St Blazey
St Columb Major
St Ives
St Just in Penwith
St Mawes
Stratton
Torpoint
Truro
Wadebridge
See also: List of civil parishes in Cornwall





Rivers



Allen
Camel
Cober
De Lank
Fal
Fowey
Gannel
Gover
Hayle
Helford
Inny
Kensey
Lerryn
Looe
Lynher
Menalhyl
Ottery
Par
Pont Pill
Port Navas
Red
Seaton
St Austell
Tamar
Tiddy
Truro
Valency
full list...





Topics



History
Status debate
Flag
Culture
Economy
Places
Population of major settlements
Demography
Notable people
The Duchy
Diocese
Politics
Schools
Hundreds/shires
Places of interest
full list...












v
t
e


Celtic languages



Continental Celtic



Celtiberian
Cisalpine Gaulish
Galatian
Gallaecian
Gaulish
Lepontic
Noric





Insular Celtic




Brittonic (Brythonic)



Common Brittonic
Old Welsh
Middle Welsh
Welsh
Cumbric
Cornish
Breton
Ivernic





Goidelic (Gaelic)



Primitive Irish
Old Irish
Middle Irish
Classical Gaelic
Irish
Manx
Scottish Gaelic





Uncertain



Pictish








Mixed



Beurla Reagaird
Shelta





Celtic-speaking areas



Gaeltacht
Gàidhealtachd
Y Fro Gymraeg
Lower Brittany
Cape Breton Island
Y Wladfa





Immersive education



Irish medium education
Gaelic medium education
Manx medium education
Welsh medium education
Breton medium education
Cornish medium nursery






Italics indicate extinct or ancestor languages










v
t
e


Pan-Celticism



Nations




Celtic League definition



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Other claimants



Asturias
Galicia
Y Wladfa















Nationalisms



Breton nationalism (history)
Cornish nationalism
Welsh nationalism
Scottish nationalism
Irish nationalism (incl. Republicanism)
Manx nationalism





Pan-Celtic groups



Celtic Congress
Celtic League
Columba Project





Languages



Brythonic (Breton, Cornish & Welsh)
Goidelic (Irish, Manx & Scottish Gaelic)
Mixed (Shelta & Bungee)





Peoples



Britons (Bretons, Cornish & Welsh)
Gaels (Irish incl. Irish Travellers, Manx & Highland Scots incl. Scottish Travellers)





Culture



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales
Celtic art





Music



Brittany
Cornwall
Ireland
Isle of Man
Scotland
Wales





Festivals



Festival Interceltique de Lorient
Pan Celtic Festival
Hebridean Celtic Festival
Celtic Connections
Celtic Media Festival





Sport



Bando
Cammag
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cornish wrestling
Curling
Gaelic football
Gaelic handball
Gouren
Rounders
Highland games
Hurling
Road bowls
Shinty








 Celts portal
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject












v
t
e


 Languages of the United Kingdom



Official language



None in the United Kingdom as a whole. English is de facto





Recognized regional languages



Cornish
French
Irish
Manx
Norman

Auregnais
Guernésiais
Jèrriais
Sercquiais


Scots
Scottish Gaelic
Ulster Scots
Welsh





Other languages



Angloromani
Shelta





Sign languages



British
Irish
Northern Irish
Old Kentish





Languages by region



Cornwall
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales












v
t
e


Languages of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union














Authority control



LCCN: sh85032849
GND: 4258760-8
BNF: cb11959109f (data)
NDL: 00566611











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornish_language&oldid=818339915"					Categories: Brittonic languagesCornish languageLanguages of EnglandLanguages of the United KingdomLanguages of EuropeCornish nationalismEndangered Celtic languagesVerb–subject–object languagesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksLanguage articles citing Ethnologue 18Use dmy dates from July 2012Articles containing Cornish-language textLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeLanguage articles without reference fieldArticles containing Latin-language textArticles containing Middle English-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2007Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015Articles containing Welsh-language textArticles with unsourced statements from January 2015Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014Articles with unsourced statements from April 2007Articles containing Breton-language textWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers