"Countess" redirects here. For other uses, see Countess (disambiguation).
This article is about the style or title of nobility. For other uses, see Count (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Royal, noble and
chivalric ranks




Emperor


King


Archduke


Grand Prince
Grand Duke


Prince / Infante


Duke


Sovereign Prince / Fürst


Marquess / Marquis /
Margrave / Landgrave /
Count palatine


Count / Earl


Viscount / Vidame


Baron


Baronet
Hereditary Knight


Knight


Esquire


Gentleman





v
t
e





Count (male) or countess (female) is a title in European countries for a noble of varying status, but historically deemed to convey an approximate rank intermediate between the highest and lowest titles of nobility.[1] The word count came into English from the French comte, itself from Latin comes—in its accusative comitem—meaning “companion”, and later “companion of the emperor, delegate of the emperor”. The adjective form of the word is "comital". The British and Irish equivalent is an earl (whose wife is a "countess", for lack of an English term). Equivalents of the rank of count exist or have existed in the nobility structures in various countries, such as Graf in Germany and hakushaku during the Japanese Imperial era.



Contents


1 Definition
2 Comital titles in different European languages

2.1 Etymological derivations from the Latin comes
2.2 Etymological parallels of the German Graf (some unclear)
2.3 Compound and related titles


3 Lists of countships

3.1 Territory of today's France

3.1.1 West-Francia proper
3.1.2 Parts of today's France long within other kingdoms of the Holy Roman Empire


3.2 The Holy Roman Empire

3.2.1 In Germany
3.2.2 In Italy

3.2.2.1 Holy See


3.2.3 In Austria
3.2.4 In Poland
3.2.5 In the Low Countries
3.2.6 In Switzerland


3.3 In other continental European countries

3.3.1 In Iberia

3.3.1.1 Portugal
3.3.1.2 Spain


3.3.2 Bulgaria
3.3.3 Montenegro and Serbia


3.4 Crusader states


4 Equivalents
5 See also
6 References
7 Sources
8 External links



Definition[edit]
Main article: Comes
In the late Roman Empire, the Latin title comes, meaning (imperial) "companion", denoted the high rank of various courtiers and provincial officials, either military or administrative: before Anthemius became emperor in the West in 467, he was military comes charged with strengthening defenses on the Danube frontier.[2]
In the Western Roman Empire, Count came to indicate generically a military commander, but was not a specific rank. In the Eastern Roman Empire, from about the seventh century, "count" was a specific rank indicating the commander of two centuries (i.e., 200 men).
Military counts in the Late Empire and the Germanic successor kingdoms were often appointed by a dux and later by a king. From the start the count was not in charge of a roving warband, but settled in a locality, known as a county; his main rival for power was the bishop, whose diocese was sometimes coterminous with the county.
In many Germanic and Frankish kingdoms in the early Middle Ages, a count might also be a count palatine, whose authority derived directly from the royal household, the "palace" in its original sense of the seat of power and administration. This other kind of count had vague antecedents in Late Antiquity too: the father of Cassiodorus held positions of trust with Theodoric, as comes rerum privatarum, in charge of the imperial lands, then as comes sacrarum largitionum ("count of the sacred doles"), concerned with the finances of the realm.[3]
The position of comes was originally not hereditary. By virtue of their large estates, many counts could pass the title to their heirs—but not always. For instance, in Piast Poland, the position of komes was not hereditary, resembling the early Merovingian institution. The title had disappeared by the era of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the office had been replaced by others. Only after the Partitions of Poland did the title of "count" resurface in the title hrabia, derived from the German Graf.
The title of Count was also often conferred by the monarch as an honorific title for special services rendered, without a feudal estate (countship, county) being attached, so it was merely a title, with or without a domain name attached to it. In the United Kingdom, the equivalent "Earl" can also be used as a courtesy title for the eldest son of a duke or marquess. In Italy, by contrast, all the sons of certain counts were counts (contini). In Sweden there is a distinction between counts (Swedish: greve) created before and after 1809. All children in comital families elevated before 1809 are called count/countess. In families elevated after 1809, only the head of the family is called count, the rest had a status similar to barons and were called by the equivalent of Mr/Ms/Mrs, before the recognition of titles of nobility was abolished.
Comital titles in different European languages[edit]
The following lists are originally based on a Glossary on Heraldica.org by Alexander Krischnig. The male form is followed by the female, and when available, by the territorial circumscription.
Etymological derivations from the Latin comes[edit]


Language
Male title
Female title / Spouse
Territory


Albanian
Kont
Konteshë
Konte


Armenian
Կոմս (Koms)
Կոմսուհի (Komsuhi)



Bulgarian
Кмет (Kmet), present meaning: mayor; medieval (9th-century) Комит (Komit): hereditary provincial ruler
Кметица (Kmetitsa), woman mayor / Кметша (Kmetsha), mayor's wife
Кметство (Kmetstvo); medieval Комитат (Komitat)


Catalan
Comte
Comtessa
Comtat


English
Count (applies to title granted by monarchies other than the British where Earl applies)
Countess (even where Earl applies)
Earldom for an Earl; Countship or county for a count (County persists in English-speaking countries as a sub-national administrative division)


French
Comte
Comtesse
Comté


Hungarian
Vikomt
Vikomtessz
Actually meaning viscount. These forms are now archaic or literary; Gróf is used instead.


Irish
Cunta; Iarla
Cuntaois, Baniarla
Honorary title only; iarla does not derive from Latin comes but rather from English "earl".


Italian
Conte
Contessa
Contea, Contado, Comitato


Greek
Κόμης (Kómēs)
Κόμησσα (Kómēssa)
Κομητεία (Komēteía); in the Ionian Islands the respective Italianate terms Kóntes, Kontéssa were used instead


Latin (feudal jargon, not classical)
Comes
Comitissa
Comitatus


Maltese
Konti
Kontessa



Monegasque
Conte
Contessa



Portuguese
Conde
Condessa
Condado


Romanian
Conte
Contesă
Comitat


Romansh
Cont
Contessa



Spanish
Conde
Condesa
Condado


Turkish
Kont
Kontes
Kontluk


Etymological parallels of the German Graf (some unclear)[edit]


Language
Male title
Female title / Spouse
Territory


Afrikaans
Graaf
Gravin
Graafskap


Belarusian
Граф (Hraf)
Графiня (Hrafinia)
Графствa (Hrafstva)


Bulgarian
Граф (Graf)
Графиня (Grafinya)
Графство (Grafstvo)


Croatian
Grof
Grofica
Grofovija


Czech
Hrabě
Hraběnka
Hrabství


Danish
Greve
Grevinde (Count's wife)
Komtesse (Unmarried daughter of a count.)

Grevskab


Dutch
Graaf
Gravin
Graafschap


English
Grave
Gravine
Graviate


Estonian
Krahv
Krahvinna
Krahvkond


Finnish
Kreivi
Kreivitär
Kreivikunta


German
Graf
Gräfin
Grafschaft


Greek
Γράβος




Georgian
გრაფი(Grafi)
გრაფინია(Grafinya)
საგრაფო(Sagrafo)


Hungarian
Gróf
Grófnő, Grófné
Grófság


Icelandic
Greifi
Greifynja



Latvian
Grāfs
Grāfiene
Grāfiste


Lithuanian
Grafas
Grafienė
Grafystė


Luxembourgish
Grof
Gréifin



Macedonian
Гроф (Grof)
Грофица (Grofica)



Norwegian
Greve
Grevinne
Grevskap


Polish
Hrabia
Hrabina
Hrabstwo


Romanian
Grof (also Conte, see above)




Russian
Граф (Graf)
Графиня (Grafinya)
Графство (Grafstvo)


Serbian
Гроф
Грофица
Грофовија


Slovak
Gróf
Grófka
Grófstvo


Slovene
Grof
Grofica
Grofija


Swedish
Greve
Grevinna
Grevskap


Ukrainian
Граф (Hraf)
Графиня (Hrafynya)
Графство (Hrafstvo)


Compound and related titles[edit]
Apart from all these, a few unusual titles have been of comital rank, not necessarily to remain there.

Dauphin (English: Dolphin; Spanish: Delfín; Italian: Delfino; Portuguese: Delfim; Latin: Delphinus) was a multiple (though rare) comital title in southern France, used by the Dauphins of Vienne and Auvergne, before 1349 when it became the title of the heir to the French throne. The Dauphin was the lord of the province still known as the région Dauphiné.
Conde-Duque "Count-Duke" is a rare title used in Spain, notably by Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares who had inherited the title of count of Olivares, but being created Duke of Sanlucar la Mayor by King Philip IV of Spain begged permission to preserve his inherited title in combination with the new honour—according to a practice almost unique in Spanish history; logically the incumbent ranks as Duke (higher than Count) just as he would when simply concatenating both titles.
Conde-Barão 'Count-Baron' is a rare title used in Portugal, notably by D. Luís Lobo da Silveira, 7th Baron of Alvito, who received the title of Count of Oriola in 1653 from King John IV of Portugal. His palace in Lisbon still exists, located in a square named after him (Largo do Conde-Barão).
Archcount is a very rare title, etymologically analogous to archduke, apparently never recognized officially, used by or for:

the count of Flanders (an original pairie of the French realm in present Belgium, very rich, once expected to be raised to the rank of kingdom); the informal, rather descriptive use on account of the countship's de facto importance is rather analogous to the unofficial epithet Grand Duc de l'Occident (before Grand duke became a formal title) for the even wealthier Duke of Burgundy
at least one Count of Burgundy (i.e. Freigraf of Franche-Comté)


In German kingdoms, the title Graf was combined with the word for the jurisdiction or domain the nobleman was holding as a fief or as a conferred or inherited jurisdiction, such as Markgraf (see also Marquess), Landgraf, Freigraf ("free count"), Burggraf, where burg signifies castle; see also Viscount, Pfalzgraf (translated both as "Count Palatine" and, historically, as "Palsgrave"), Raugraf ("Raugrave", see "Graf", and Waldgraf (comes nemoris), where wald signifies a large forest).
The German Graf and Dutch graaf (Latin: Grafio) stems from the Byzantine-Greek grapheus meaning "he who calls a meeting [i.e. the court] together").[citation needed]
The Ottoman military title of Serdar was used in Montenegro and Serbia as a lesser noble title with the equivalent rank of a Count.
These titles are not to be confused with various minor administrative titles containing the word -graf in various offices which are not linked to nobility of feudality, such as the Dutch titles Pluimgraaf (a court sinecure, so usually held by noble courtiers, may even be rendered hereditary) and Dijkgraaf (to the present, in the Low Countries, a managing official in the local or regional administration of water household trough dykes, ditches, controls etcetera; also in German Deichgraf, synonymous with Deichhauptmann, "dike captain").

Lists of countships[edit]
Territory of today's France[edit]
West-Francia proper[edit]
Since Louis VII (1137–80), the highest precedence amongst the vassals (Prince-bishops and secular nobility) of the French crown was enjoyed by those whose benefice or temporal fief was a pairie, i.e. carried the exclusive rank of pair; within the first (i.e. clerical) and second (noble) estates, the first three of the original twelve anciennes pairies were ducal, the next three comital comté-pairies:

Bishop-counts of Beauvais (in Picardy)
Bishop-counts of Châlons (in Champagne)
Bishop-counts of Noyon (in Picardy)
Count of Toulouse, until united to the crown in 1271 by marriage
Count of Flanders (Flandres in French), which is in the Low countries and was confiscated in 1299, though returned in 1303
Count of Champagne, until united to the crown (in 1316 by marriage, conclusively in 1361)

Later other countships (and duchies, even baronies) have been raised to this French peerage, but mostly as apanages (for members of the royal house) or for foreigners; after the 16th century all new peerages were always duchies and the medieval countship-peerages had died out, or were held by royal princes
Other French countships of note included those of:

Count of Angoulême, later Dukes
Count of Anjou, later Dukes
Count of Auvergne
Count of Bar, later Dukes
Count of Blois
Count of Boulogne
Count of Foix
Count of Montpensier
Count of Poitiers
Count of Saint Germain

Parts of today's France long within other kingdoms of the Holy Roman Empire[edit]

Freigraf ("free count") of Burgundy (i.e. present Franche-Comté)
The Dauphiné

The Holy Roman Empire[edit]
See also above for parts of present France
In Germany[edit]
Main article: Graf
A Graf ruled over a territory known as a Grafschaft ('county'). See also various comital and related titles; especially those actually reigning over a principality: Gefürsteter Graf, Landgraf, Reichsgraf; compare Markgraf, Pfalzgraf
In Italy[edit]
The title of Conte is very prolific on the peninsula. In the eleventh century, conti like the Count of Savoy or the Norman Count of Apulia, were virtually sovereign lords of broad territories. Even apparently "lower"-sounding titles, like Viscount, could describe powerful dynasts, such as the House of Visconti which ruled a major city such as Milan. The essential title of a feudatory, introduced by the Normans, was signore, modelled on the French seigneur, used with the name of the fief. By the fourteenth century, conte and the Imperial title barone were virtually synonymous.
Some titles of count, according to the particulars of the patent, might be inherited by the eldest son of a Count. Younger brothers might be distinguished as "X dei conti di Y" ("X of the counts of Y"). However, if there is no male to inherit the title and the count has a daughter, in some regions she could inherit the title. The Papacy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies might appoint counts palatine with no particular territorial fief. Until 1812 in some regions, the purchaser of land designated "feudal" was ennobled by the noble seat that he held and became a conte. This practice ceased with the formal abolition of feudalism in the various principalities of early-19th century Italy, last of all in the Papal States.
Many Italian counts left their mark on Italian history as individuals, yet only a few contadi (countships; the word contadini for inhabitants of a "county" remains the Italian word for "peasant") were politically significant principalities, notably:

Norman Count of Apulia
Count of Savoy, later Duke (also partly in France and in Switzerland)
Count of Asti
Count of Montferrat (Monferrato)
Count of Montefeltro
Count of Tusculum

Holy See[edit]
Further information: Papal count
Count/Countess is one of the noble titles granted by the Pope as a temporal sovereign, and the title's holder is sometimes informally known as a papal count/papal countess or less so as a Roman count\Roman countess, but mostly as count/countess. The comital title, which can be for life or hereditary, has been awarded in various forms by popes and Holy Roman Emperors since the Middle Ages, infrequently before the 14th century, and the pope continued to grant the comital and other noble titles even after 1870 and into the present day.
In Austria[edit]
The principalities tended to start out as margraviate or (promoted to) duchy, and became nominal archduchies within the Habsburg dynasty; noteworthy are:

Count of Tyrol
Count of Cilli
Count of Schaumburg

In Poland[edit]
Numerous small ones, particularly:

Counts of Galicia and Poland

In the Low Countries[edit]
Apart from various small ones, significant were :

in present Belgium :

Count of Flanders (Vlaanderen in Dutch), but only the small part east of the river Schelde remained within the empire; the far larger west, an original French comté-pairie became part of the French realm
Count of Hainaut
Count of Namur, later a margraviate
Count of Leuven (Louvain) soon became the Duke of Brabant
Count of Mechelen, though the Heerlijkheid Mechelen was given the title of "Graafschap" in 1490, the city was rarely referred to as a county and the title of Count has not been in practical use by or for anyone of the series of persons that became rightfully entitled to it; the flag and weapon of the municipality still has the corresponding heraldic crowned single-headed eagle of sabre on gold.[4][5]


in the present Netherlands:

Count of Guelders later Dukes of Guelders
Count of Holland
Count of Zeeland
Count of Zutphen



In Switzerland[edit]




Comital ephemera: a Count's coronet and crest on a doily.



Count of Neuenburg
Count of Toggenburg
Count of Kyburg
Count de Salis-Soglio (also in the UK, Canada and Australia)
Count de Salis-Seewis
Count of Panzutti

In other continental European countries[edit]
In Iberia[edit]
As opposed to the plethora of hollow "gentry" counts, only a few countships ever were important in medieval Iberia; most territory was firmly within the Reconquista kingdoms before counts could become important. However, during the 19th century, the title, having lost its high rank (equivalent to that of Duke), proliferated.
Portugal[edit]
Portugal itself started as a countship in 868, but became a kingdom in 1139 (see:County of Portugal). Throughout the History of Portugal, especially during the Constitutional Monarchy many other countships were created (see: List of Countships in Portugal).
Spain[edit]




Coronet of a count (Spanish heraldry)


In Spain, no countships of wider importance exist, except in the former Spanish march.[citation needed]

County of Barcelona, the initial core of the Principality of Catalonia, later one of the states of the Crown of Aragon, which became one of the two main components of the Spanish crown.
Count of Aragon
Count of Castile
Count of Galicia
Count of Lara
Count Cassius, progenitor of the Banu Qasi
County of Urgell, later integrated into the Principality of Catalonia.
The other Catalan counties were much smaller and were absorbed early into the County of Barcelona (between parentheses the annexation year): County of Girona (897), County of Besalú, County of Osona, which included the nominal County of Manresa (1111), County of Berga and County of Conflent (1117) and County of Cerdanya (1118). From 1162 these counties, together with that of Barcelona, were merged into the Principality of Catalonia, a sovereign state that absorbed some other counties: County of Roussillon (1172), County of Pallars Jussà (1192), County of Empúries (1402), County of Urgell (1413) and County of Pallars Sobirà (1487), giving the Principality its definitive shape.

Bulgaria[edit]
In the First Bulgarian Empire, a komit was a hereditary provincial ruler under the tsar documented since the reign of Presian (836-852)[6] The Cometopouli dynasty was named after its founder, the komit of Sredets.
Montenegro and Serbia[edit]
The title of Count (Serdar) was used in the Principality of Montenegro and the Principality of Serbia as a lesser noble title below that of Vojvoda (Duke).
Crusader states[edit]

Count of Edessa
Count of Tripoli (1102–1288)

Equivalents[edit]
Like other major Western noble titles, Count is sometimes used to render certain titles in non-western languages with their own traditions, even though they are as a rule historically unrelated and thus hard to compare, but which are considered "equivalent" in rank.
This is the case with:

the Chinese Bó (伯), hereditary title of nobility ranking below Hóu (侯) and above Zĭ (子)
the Japanese equivalent Hakushaku (伯爵), adapted during the Meiji restoration
the Korean equivalent Baekjak (백작) or Poguk
in Vietnam, it is rendered Bá, one of the lower titles reserved for male members of the Imperial clan, above Tử (Viscount), Nam (Baron) and Vinh phong (lowest noble title), but lower than—in ascending order—Hầu (Marquis), Công (Prince), Quan-Cong (Duke) and Quốc-Công (Grand Duke), all under Vương (King).
the Indian Sardar, adopted by the Maratha Empire, additionally, Jagirdar and Deshmukh are close equivalents
the Arabic equivalent Sheikh
In traditional Sulu equivalent to Datu Sadja

See also[edit]

County
Viscount

References[edit]



^ Pine, L. G. Titles: How the King Became His Majesty. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1992. p. 73. OCLC 27827106.
^ "An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors". University of South Carolina. Retrieved 2008-04-10. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2005-05-10. Retrieved 2005-06-21. 
^ "Geschiedenis". Ppant.be. Retrieved 2016-08-27. 
^ Mechelen de oude hoofdstad van de Nederlanden, F.O. Van Hammée (not verified, referenced on a blog)
^ Лъв Граматик, Гръцки извори за българската история, т. V, стр. 156; Жеков, Ж. България и Византия VII-IX в. - военна администрация, Университетско издателство "Св. Климент Охридски", София, 2007, ISBN 978-954-07-2465-2, стр. 254



Sources[edit]

Labarre de Raillicourt: Les Comtes Romains
Westermann, Großer Atlas zur Weltgeschichte (in German)

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Counts.





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Count.





Look up count in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Heraldica.org - here the French peerage
Italian Titles of Nobility
Webster's 1828 Dictionary






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Count&oldid=817547892"					Categories: CountsFeudalismRoman Empire in Late AntiquityNoble titlesTitlesMen's social titlesWomen's social titlesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from August 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2012Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007Articles containing Japanese-language text