Not to be confused with European Council or Council of the European Union.

Council of Europe

Conseil de l'Europe



Logo






Abbreviation

CoE



European Flag



European Anthem
"Ode to Joy" (orchestral)





Formation
Treaty of London 1949


Type
Regional intergovernmental organisation


Headquarters
Strasbourg, France


Location



Europe






Membership




47 member states
5 Council observers
3 Assembly observers






Official languages

English, French
Other working languages: German, Italian, Russian, and Turkish[1]



Secretary General

Thorbjørn Jagland



Deputy Secretary General

Gabriella Battaini-Dragoni



President of the Parliamentary Assembly

Stella Kyriakides



President of the Committee of Ministers

Anders Samuelsen



President of the Congress

Jean-Claude Frécon


Website
www.coe.int


The Council of Europe (CoE; French: Conseil de l'Europe) is an international organisation whose stated aim[2] is to uphold human rights, democracy, rule of law in Europe[3] and promote European culture.[4] Founded in 1949, it has 47 member states, covers approximately 820 million people and operates with an annual budget of approximately half a billion euros.[5]
The organisation is distinct from the 28-nation European Union (EU), although it is sometimes confused with it, partly because the EU has adopted the original European Flag which was created by the Council of Europe in 1955,[6] as well as the European Anthem.[7] No country has ever joined the EU without first belonging to the Council of Europe.[8] The Council of Europe is an official United Nations Observer.[9]
Unlike the EU, the Council of Europe cannot make binding laws, but it does have the power to enforce select international agreements reached by European states on various topics. The best known body of the Council of Europe is the European Court of Human Rights, which enforces the European Convention on Human Rights.
The Council's two statutory bodies are the Committee of Ministers, comprising the foreign ministers of each member state, and the Parliamentary Assembly, composed of members of the national parliaments of each member state. The Commissioner for Human Rights is an independent institution within the Council of Europe, mandated to promote awareness of and respect for human rights in the member states. The Secretary General heads the secretariat of the organisation. Other major CoE bodies include the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines.
The headquarters of the Council of Europe are in Strasbourg, France. English and French are its two official languages. The Committee of Ministers, the Parliamentary Assembly and the Congress also use German, Italian, Russian, and Turkish for some of their work.



Contents


1 History
2 Aims and achievements
3 Institutions

3.1 Headquarters and buildings


4 Member states, observers, partners
5 Co-operation

5.1 Non-member states
5.2 European Union
5.3 United Nations
5.4 Non-governmental organisations


6 Characteristics

6.1 Privileges and immunities
6.2 Symbol and anthem


7 Criticism and controversies
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]




Plaque commemorating the first session of the Council of Europe Assembly at Strasbourg University


In a speech at the University of Zurich on 19 September 1946, Sir Winston Churchill called for a "kind of United States of Europe" and for the creation of a Council of Europe.[10][11] He had spoken of a Council of Europe as early as 1943 in a radio broadcast.[12]




Session of the Council of Europe's Assembly in the former House of Europe in Strasbourg in 1967. Willy Brandt, German minister for Foreign Affairs, is speaking.


The future structure of the Council of Europe was discussed at a specific congress of several hundred leading politicians, government representatives and civil society in The Hague, Netherlands, in 1948. There were two schools of thought competing: some favoured a classical international organisation with representatives of governments, while others preferred a political forum with parliamentarians. Both approaches were finally combined through the creation of the Committee of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly under the Statute of the Council of Europe. This dual intergovernmental and inter-parliamentary structure was later copied for the European Communities, North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
The Council of Europe was founded on 5 May 1949 by the Treaty of London. The Treaty of London or the Statute of the Council of Europe was signed in London on that day by ten states: Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Many other states followed, especially after the democratic transitions in central and eastern Europe during the early 1990s, and the Council of Europe now includes all European states except Belarus,[13] Vatican City[14], Kazakhstan and European territories with limited recognition such as Artsakh, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Northern Cyprus, Transnistria, and Kosovo.
Aims and achievements[edit]
Article 1(a) of the Statute states that "The aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress."[15] Membership is open to all European states who seek harmony, cooperation, good governance and human rights, accepting the principle of the rule of law and are able and willing to guarantee democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms.
While the member states of the European Union transfer part of their national legislative and executive powers to the European Commission and the European Parliament, Council of Europe member states maintain their sovereignty but commit themselves through conventions/treaties (international law) and co-operate on the basis of common values and common political decisions. Those conventions and decisions are developed by the member states working together at the Council of Europe. Both organisations function as concentric circles around the common foundations for European co-operation and harmony, with the Council of Europe being the geographically wider circle. The European Union could be seen as the smaller circle with a much higher level of integration through the transfer of powers from the national to the EU level. "The Council of Europe and the European Union: different roles, shared values."[16] Council of Europe conventions/treaties are also open for signature to non-member states, thus facilitating equal co-operation with countries outside Europe.
The Council of Europe's most famous achievement is the European Convention on Human Rights, which was adopted in 1950 following a report by the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, and followed on from the United Nations 'Universal Declaration of Human Rights' (UDHR).[17] The Convention created the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The Court supervises compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights and thus functions as the highest European court. It is to this court that Europeans can bring cases if they believe that a member country has violated their fundamental rights and freedoms.
The various activities and achievements of the Council of Europe can be found in detail on its official website. The Council of Europe works in the following areas:




Building of the European Court of Human Rights



Protection of the rule of law and fostering legal co-operation through some 200 conventions and other treaties,[18] including such leading instruments as the Convention on Cybercrime, the Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, Conventions against Corruption and Organised Crime,[19][20][21] the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, and the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine.[22]
CODEXTER, designed to co-ordinate counter-terrorism measures
The European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)
Protection of human rights, notably through:

the European Convention on Human Rights
the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture
the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings[23]
the Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse[24]
The Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.[25]
social rights under the European Social Charter
linguistic rights under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
minority rights under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
Media freedom under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention on Transfrontier Television


Protection of democracy through parliamentary scrutiny and election monitoring by its Parliamentary Assembly as well as assistance in democratic reforms, in particular by the Venice Commission.
Promotion of cultural co-operation and diversity under the Council of Europe's Cultural Convention of 1954 and several conventions on the protection of cultural heritage as well as through its Centre for Modern Languages in Graz, Austria, and its North-South Centre in Lisbon, Portugal.
Promotion of the right to education under Article 2 of the first Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights and several conventions on the recognition of university studies and diplomas (see also Bologna Process and Lisbon Recognition Convention).
Promotion of fair sport through the Anti-Doping Convention[26]
Promotion of European youth exchanges and co-operation through European Youth Centres in Strasbourg and Budapest, Hungary.
Promotion of the quality of medicines throughout Europe by the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and its European Pharmacopoeia.

Institutions[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The institutions of the Council of Europe are:

The Secretary General, who is elected for a term of five years by the Parliamentary Assembly and heads the Secretariat of the Council of Europe. Mr Thorbjørn Jagland, the former Prime Minister of Norway was elected Secretary General of the Council of Europe in September 2009. In June 2014, he was re-elected, and his second term in office commenced on 1 October 2014.
The Committee of Ministers, comprising the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of all 47 member states who are represented by their Permanent Representatives and Ambassadors accredited to the Council of Europe. Committee of Ministers' presidencies are held in alphabetical order for six months following the English alphabet: Turkey 11/2010-05/2011, Ukraine 05/2011-11/2011, the United Kingdom 11/2011-05/2012, Albania 05/2012-11/2012, Andorra 11/2012-05/2013, Armenia 05/2013-11/2013, Austria 11/2013-05/2014, and so on.[27]





Council's Parliamentary Assembly hemicycle



The Parliamentary Assembly (PACE), which comprises national parliamentarians from all member states. It elects its President for a year with the possibility of being re-elected for another year. In January 2016, Pedro Agramunt from Spain was elected President of the Parliamentary Assembly. In 2017, October 6 Stella Kyriakides from Cyprus has been elected President of the PACE following the resignation of Pedro Agramunt.[28]  She will remain in office until the opening of the next ordinary session in January, 2018. National parliamentary delegations to the Assembly must reflect the political spectrum of their national parliament, i.e. comprise government and opposition parties. The Assembly appoints members as rapporteurs with the mandate to prepare parliamentary reports on specific subjects. The British MP Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe was rapporteur for the drafting of the European Convention on Human Rights. Dick Marty's reports on secret CIA detentions and rendition flights in Europe became quite famous in 2006 and 2007. Other Assembly reports were instrumental in, for example, the abolition of the death penalty in Europe, highlighting the political and human rights situation in Chechnya, identifying who was responsible for disappeared persons in Belarus, chronicling threats to freedom of expression in the media and many other subjects.
The Congress of the Council of Europe (Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe), which was created in 1994 and comprises political representatives from local and regional authorities in all member states. The most influential instruments of the Council of Europe in this field are the European Charter of Local Self-Government of 1985 and the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or Authorities of 1980.[29][30]
The European Court of Human Rights, created under the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950, is composed of a judge from each member state elected for a single, non-renewable term of nine years by the Parliamentary Assembly and is headed by the elected President of the Court. The current President of the Court is Guido Raimondi from Italy. Under the recent Protocol No. 14 to the European Convention on Human Rights, the Court's case-processing was reformed and streamlined. Ratification of Protocol No. 14 was delayed by Russia for a number of years, but won support to be passed in January 2010.
The Commissioner for Human Rights is elected by the Parliamentary Assembly for a non-renewable term of six years since the creation of this position in 1999. Since April 2012, this position has been held by Nils Muižnieks from Latvia.[31]
The Conference of INGOs. NGOs can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe. Since the [Resolution (2003)8] adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 November 2003, they are given a "participatory status".[32]
The Joint Council on Youth of the Council of Europe. The European Steering Committee (CDEJ) on Youth and the Advisory Council (CCJ) on Youth of the Council of Europe form together the Joint Council on Youth (CMJ). The CDEJ brings together representatives of ministries or bodies responsible for youth matters from the 50 States Parties to the European Cultural Convention. The CDEJ fosters co-operation between governments in the youth sector and provides a framework for comparing national youth policies, exchanging best practices and drafting standard-setting texts. The Advisory Council on Youth comprises 30 representatives of non-governmental youth organisations and networks. It provides opinions and input from youth NGOs on all youth sector activities and ensures that young people are involved in the Council’s other activities.
Information Offices of the Council of Europe in many member states.





European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines.


The CoE system also includes a number of semi-autonomous structures known as "Partial Agreements", some of which are also open to non-member states:

The Council of Europe Development Bank in Paris
The European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines with its European Pharmacopoeia
The European Audiovisual Observatory
The European Support Fund Eurimages for the co-production and distribution of films
The Pompidou Group – Cooperation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking in Drugs
The European Commission for Democracy through Law, better known as the Venice Commission
The Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO)
The European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement (EUR-OPA) which is a platform for co-operation between European and Southern Mediterranean countries in the field of major natural and technological disasters.
The Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport, which is open to accession by states and sport associations.[33]
The North-South Centre of the Council of Europe in Lisbon (Portugal)
The Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz (Austria)

Headquarters and buildings[edit]
See also: European Institutions in Strasbourg




Aerial shot of the Palais de l'Europe in Strasbourg






Council of Europe's Agora building


The seat of the Council of Europe is in Strasbourg, France. First meetings were held in Strasbourg's University Palace in 1949, but the Council of Europe soon moved into its own buildings. The Council of Europe's eight main buildings are situated in the Quartier européen, an area in the northeast of Strasbourg spread over the three districts of Le Wacken, La Robertsau and Quartier de l'Orangerie, where are also located the four buildings of the seat of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, the Arte headquarters and the seat of the International Institute of Human Rights.
Building in the area started in 1949 with the predecessor of the Palais de l'Europe, the House of Europe (demolished in 1977), and came to a provisional end in 2007 with the opening of the New General Office Building, later named "Agora", in 2008.[34] The Palais de l'Europe (Palace of Europe) and the Art Nouveau Villa Schutzenberger (seat of the European Audiovisual Observatory) are in the Orangerie district, and the European Court of Human Rights, the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and the Agora Building are in the Robertsau district. The Agora building has been voted "best international business center real estate project of 2007" on 13 March 2008, at the MIPIM 2008.[35] The European Youth Centre is located in the Wacken district.
Besides its headquarters in Strasbourg, the Council of Europe is also present in other cities and countries. The Council of Europe Development Bank has its seat in Paris, the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe is established in Lisbon, Portugal, and the Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz, Austria. There are European Youth Centres in Budapest, Hungary, and in Strasbourg. The European Wergeland Centre, a new Resource Centre on education for intercultural dialogue, human rights and democratic citizenship, operated in cooperation with the Norwegian Government, opened in Oslo, Norway, in February 2009.[36]
The Council of Europe has offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, and Ukraine; information offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, the Republic of Macedonia, and Ukraine; and a projects office in Turkey. All these offices are establishments of the Council of Europe and they share its juridical personality with privileges and immunities.
Due to persistent budgetary shortages, the Council of Europe is expected to cut down significantly the number of its activities, and thus the number of its employees, from 2011 on. This will notably affect the economy of the city of Strasbourg, where a total of 2,321 people (on 1 January 2010) are doing salaried work for the CoE. Most offices in foreign countries are expected to be closed as well.[37]
Member states, observers, partners[edit]
Main article: Member states of the Council of Europe
The Council of Europe was founded on 5 May 1949 by Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Greece and Turkey joined three months later, and Iceland and West Germany the next year. It now has 47 member states, with Montenegro being the latest to join.
Article 4 of the Council of Europe Statute specifies that membership is open to any "European" State. This has been interpreted liberally from the beginning (when Turkey was admitted) to include transcontinental states such as Russia, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan.
Nearly all European states have acceded to the Council of Europe, with the exceptions of Belarus (human rights concerns), Kazakhstan (human rights concerns), and the Vatican City (a theocracy), as well as some of the territories with limited recognition.
Besides the status as a full member, the Council of Europe has established other instruments for cooperation and participation of non-member states: observer, applicant, special guest, and partner for democracy.
Co-operation[edit]
Non-member states[edit]
The Council of Europe works mainly through conventions. By drafting conventions or international treaties, common legal standards are set for its member states. However, several conventions have also been opened for signature to non-member states. Important examples are the Convention on Cybercrime (signed for example, by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States), the Lisbon Recognition Convention on the recognition of study periods and degrees (signed for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada, the Holy See, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand and the United States), the Anti-doping Convention (signed, for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada and Tunisia) and the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (signed for example, by Burkina Faso, Morocco, Tunisia and Senegal as well as the European Community). Non-member states also participate in several partial agreements, such as the Venice Commission, the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO), the European Pharmacopoeia Commission and the North-South Centre.
Invitations to sign and ratify relevant conventions of the Council of Europe on a case-by-case basis are sent to three groups of non-member entities:[38]

Non-European states: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Senegal, South Africa, Syria, Tajikistan, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuela and the observers Canada, Israel, Japan, Mexico, United States.
European states: Kosovo, Kazakhstan, Belarus and the observer Vatican City.
the European Community and later the European Union after its legal personality was established by the ratification of the EU's Lisbon Treaty.

European Union[edit]









































































A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements.


v
t
e





The Council of Europe is not to be confused with the Council of the European Union (the "Council of Ministers") or the European Council. These belong to the European Union, which is separate from the Council of Europe, although they have shared the same European flag and anthem since the 1980s because they both work for European integration. The Council of Europe is not to be confused with the European Union itself.
The Council of Europe is an entirely separate body[39] from the European Union. It is not controlled by it.
Cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe has recently been reinforced, notably on culture and education as well as on the international enforcement of justice and Human Rights.[40]
The European Union is expected to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights (the Convention). There are also concerns about consistency in case law – the European Court of Justice (the EU's court in Luxembourg) is treating the Convention as part of the legal system of all EU member states in order to prevent conflict between its judgements and those of the European Court of Human Rights (the court in Strasbourg interpreting the Convention). Protocol No. 14 of the Convention is designed to allow the EU to accede to it and the EU Treaty of Lisbon contains a protocol binding the EU to join. The EU would thus be subject to its human rights law and external monitoring as its member states currently are.[41][42]
United Nations[edit]
The beginning of co-operation between the CoE and the UN started with the agreement signed by the Secretariats of these institutions on 15 December 1951. On 17 October 1989, the General Assembly of the United Nations approved a resolution on granting observer status to the Council of Europe which was proposed by several member states of the CoE.[43] Currently Council of Europe holds observer status with the United Nations and is regularly represented in the UN General Assembly. It has organised the regional UN conferences against racism and on women and co-operates with the United Nations at many levels, in particular in the areas of human rights, minorities, migration and counter-terrorism. In November 2016, the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus Resolution (A/Res/71/17) on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe whereby it acknowledged the contribution of Council of Europe to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, welcomed the ongoing co-operation in a variety of fields.
Non-governmental organisations[edit]
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe and become observers to inter-governmental committees of experts. The Council of Europe drafted the European Convention on the Recognition of the Legal Personality of International Non-Governmental Organisations in 1986, which sets the legal basis for the existence and work of NGOs in Europe. Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to freedom of association, which is also a fundamental norm for NGOs. The rules for Consultative Status for INGOs appended to the resolution (93)38 "On relation between the Council of Europe and non-governmental organisations", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 18 October 1993 at the 500th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies. On 19 November 2003 the Committee of Ministers changed the consultative status into a participatory status, "considering that it is indispensable that the rules governing the relations between the Council of Europe and NGOs evolve to reflect the active participation of international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) in the Organisation's policy and work programme".[44]
Characteristics[edit]
Privileges and immunities[edit]
The General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe grants the organisation certain privileges and immunities.[45]
The working conditions of staff are governed by the Council's staff regulations, which are public.[46] Salaries and emoluments paid by the Council of Europe to its officials are tax-exempt on the basis of Article 18 of the General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe.[45]
Symbol and anthem[edit]
Main articles: Symbols of Europe and Flag of Europe




Flag of Europe


The Council of Europe created, and has since 1955 used as its official symbol, the European Flag with 12 golden stars arranged in a circle on a blue background.
Its musical anthem since 1972, the "European Anthem", is based on the "Ode to Joy" theme from Ludwig van Beethoven's Ninth symphony.
On 5 May 1964, the 15th anniversary of its founding, the Council of Europe established 5 May as Europe Day.[47]
The wide private and public use of the European Flag is encouraged to symbolise a European dimension. To avoid confusion with the European Union which subsequently adopted the same flag in the 1980s, as well as other European institutions, the Council of Europe often uses a modified version with a lower-case "e" surrounding the stars which is referred to as the "Council of Europe Logo".[47][48]
Criticism and controversies[edit]
In recent years, the Council of Europe has been criticised for doing too little to stand up to the transgressions of some of its members. In 2013 The Economist agreed, saying that the "Council of Europe's credibility is on the line".[49] Both Human Rights Watch and the European Stability Initiative have called on the Council of Europe to undertake concrete actions to show that it is willing and able to return to its "original mission to protect and ensure human rights".[50]
Issues have been raised regarding Azerbaijan's relationship to the Council of Europe, including allegations that Azerbaijan has, over a sustained period, provided bribes to Council members to vote down criticism of the authoritarian rule of the Aliyev regime and support motions advantageous to Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan joined the Council of Europe in 2001. In September 2014 Human Rights Watch, said that Azerbaijan's "systematic crackdown on human rights defenders and other perceived government critics shows sheer contempt for its commitments to the Council of Europe".[51] In 2017 Council member and Italian politician Luca Volontè was accused by Italian prosecutors of receiving over 2.3 million euros in bribes in exchange for working for Azerbaijan in the parliamentary assembly, and that in 2013 he played a key role in orchestrating the defeat of a highly critical report on the abuse of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.[52][53] The money was paid to Volontè in monthly installments of 100,000 euros, starting in 2013, via four anonymous offshore companies. The payment's stopped in 2014 when Volontè's bank reported them as suspicious transactions to the Milan prosecutor's office.[54] Arif Mammadov, former head of the Azerbaijan representation at the Council of Europe, has stated that Azerbaijan's delegation at the Council had 25 million dollars available to "bribe members of the delegations and Pace generally".[55]
See also[edit]


Europe portal



CAHDI
CODEXTER
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
Conference of Specialised Ministers
Council of Europe Archives
European Anti-fraud Office
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
European Court of Human Rights
European Social Charter
European Union
Film Award of the Council of Europe
Group of States Against Corruption
Moneyval
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI)
International organisations in Europe, and co-ordinated organisations
List of linguistic rights in European constitutions
North–South Centre of the Council of Europe
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
Venice Commission
World Anti-Doping Agency

References[edit]



^ "No". assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 2016-01-26. 
^ "Values". The Council of Europe in brief. Retrieved 2017-04-21. 
^ "BBC News - Profile: The Council of Europe". news.bbc.co.uk. 
^ Anonymous (16 June 2016). "The European flag". European Union – European Commission. 
^ Council of Europe, Budget, Retrieved: 21 April 2016
^ Council of Europe The European flag, Retrieved: 18 April 2016
^ Council of Europe The European anthem, Retrieved: 18 April 2016
^ Council of Europe How to Distinguish Us, Retrieved: 18 April 2016
^ "Intergovernmental Organizations". www.un.org. 
^ "Winston Churchill and the Council of Europe". Council of Europe: Archiving and Documentary Resources. Council of Europe. 6 April 2009. Retrieved 18 November 2013. , including audio extracts
^ "European Navigator (ENA)". Retrieved 4 April 2011.  Including full transcript
^ "Winston Churchill and the Council of Europe". Council of Europe: Archiving and Documentary Resources. Council of Europe. Retrieved 4 April 2011.  Including audio extracts
^ See Applicants section.
^ The Holy See is currently observer to the CoE Committee of Ministers.
^ "Statute of the Council of Europe". conventions.coe.int. Retrieved 19 December 2014. 
^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union". www.coe.int. 
^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". www.un.org. 
^ "Full list". Treaty Office. 
^ "Full list". Treaty Office. 
^ "Full list". Treaty Office. 
^ "Search on Treaties". Treaty Office. 
^ "Council of Europe Convention for the protection of Human Rights and dignity of the human being with regard to the application of biology and medicine". 
^ "Microsoft Word - Convention 197 Trafficking E.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008. 
^ "Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse". 
^ "Full list". Treaty Office. 
^ "Anti-Doping Convention". 
^ "Chairmanship". Committee of Ministers. Retrieved 2017-12-13. 
^ "PACE: News". assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 2017-11-04. 
^ "In brief". Congress
of Local and Regional Authorities. Retrieved 2017-12-13. 
^ "History". Congress
of Local and Regional Authorities. Retrieved 2017-12-13. 
^ "Home - Commissioner for Human Rights". Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved 2017-12-13. 
^ "A word from the President on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Conference of INGOs of the Council of Europe". 
^ "Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport". Council of Europe. 
^ "Inauguration of the Agora Building" (PDF) (Press release) (in French). Council of Europe. 30 January 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008. 
^ "2008 List of MIPIM winners". [permanent dead link]
^ "European Wergeland Centre". Archived from the original on 18 April 2009. 
^ "Conseil de l'Europe – Réduction drastique des activités à Strasbourg". L'Alsace. Mulhouse. 19 June 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2010. [permanent dead link]
^ "CoE Conventions". Conventions.coe.int. 31 December 1998. Retrieved 2012-02-11. 
^ "Council of the European Union". European Union. Retrieved 2012-05-19. 
^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union sign an agreement to foster mutual cooperation". Council of Europe. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 5 August 2008. 
^ Juncker, Jean-Claude (2006). "Council of Europe – European Union: "A sole ambition for the European continent"" (PDF). Council of Europe. Retrieved 5 August 2008. 
^ "Draft treaty modifying the treaty on the European Union and the treaty establishing the European community" (PDF). Open Europe. 24 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2007. Retrieved 5 August 2008. 
^ "The Council of Europe's Relations with the United Nations". www.coe.int. Retrieved 2017-08-25. 
^ [1] (Resolution Res (2003)8)
^ a b General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe, Council of Europe
^ Resolutions on the Council of Europe Staff Regulations, Council of Europe
^ a b "Flag, anthem and logo: the Council of Europe's symbols". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 5 August 2008. 
^ "Logo of the Council of Europe". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 2011-01-02. Retrieved 5 August 2008. 
^ The Economist (23 March 2013). "Azerbaijan and the Council of Europe". Retrieved 29 September 2014. 
^ European Stability Initiative. "What the 2014 Havel Prize says about the Council of Europe – and what should happen now" (29 September 2014). ESI web. Retrieved 29 September 2014. 
^ Human Rights Watch (29 September 2014). "Azerbaijan: Government Repression Tarnishes Chairmanship Council of Europe's Leadership Should Take Action". Retrieved 29 September 2014. 
^ Jennifer Rankin, Council of Europe urged to investigate Azerbaijan bribery allegations, The Guardian, 1 February 2017 [2].
^ Matthew Valencia, Heaping on the Caviar Diplomacy
^ Gabanelli, Milena. "Il Consiglio d'Europa e il caso Azerbaijan tra regali e milioni". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 2017-01-30. 
^ Jennifer Rankin, Fresh claims of Azerbaijan vote-rigging at European human rights body, The Guardian, 20 April 2017 [3].


External links[edit]

Official website
General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe, Paris, 2 September 1949







v
t
e


 Council of Europe



Institutions



Secretary General
Committee of Ministers
Parliamentary Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance








Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia1
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





Observers



Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
Sovereign Military Order of Malta





Former members



Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)






1 Provisionally referred to by the Council of Europe as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.








Links to related articles











v
t
e


Europe articles



History




Chronology



Prehistory
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early modernity
World War I & II
Pax Europaea
Crisis situations and unrest since 2000





By topic



Military
Sovereignty

predecessor states










Geography







Areas and populations
Countries by area
Largest metropolitan areas
Cities
Extreme points
Geology
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Sovereign states and dependent territories

by population


Villages








Politics











Eurosphere
International organisations
Integration
Law
Politics
Post-Soviet Europe
Transatlantic relations





Intergovernmental



Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Council of Europe (CoE)
Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO)
GUAM Organization
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)

statistics







European Union



Economy

relations
free trade agreements


Education
European Economic Area (EEA)
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)
European Union Customs Union (EUCU)
Eurozone
Foreign relations
Members

enlargement


Politics
Schengen Area
Statistics
Visa policy











Economy











History
Financial (and social) rankings
Free trade areas
Energy
Telecommunications
Transport





Intergovernmental



Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA)
Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia (CUBKR)
Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC)
European Free Trade Association (EFTA)





Sovereign states by



Average wage
Budget revenues

per capita


Corruption index
GDP (nominal)

per capita


GDP (PPP)

per capita


GNI (nominal) per capita
GNI (PPP) per capita
HDI
Internet users (%)
Minimum wage
Press Freedom Index
Unemployment rate (%)
Health expense per capita
Military spending (%)
Childhood population (%)
Urban population (%)
Life expectancy
Electricity use per capita











Society







Etiquette
Social (and financial) rankings
Languages

endangered


Universities

Bologna Process
Erasmus







Culture



Art

painting
sculpture


Architecture
Capital of Culture
Cinema

film festivals


Classical music
Cuisine
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
Religion

Christianity
Islam
Judaism


Sport
Symbols





Demographics



Ageing
Ethnic groups

genetic history


Immigration
Life expectancy
Retirement












Outline
Index



Category
Portal
Maps












v
t
e


Regional organizations



Bodies



African Union
Arab League
Asia Cooperation Dialogue
Association of Caribbean States
ASEAN
BBIN
BIMSTEC
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Commonwealth of Independent States
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Council of Europe
East African Community
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Cooperation Organization
Eurasian Economic Union
European Union
GUAM
Gulf Cooperation Council
Latin American Parliament
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Mercosur
NATO
Nordic Council
Organization of American States
Pacific Islands Forum
Polynesian Leaders Group
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
SCO
SAARC
TAKM
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat
Turkic Council
Union of South American Nations
NORDEFCO
West Nordic Council





Topics



Regional integration
Regional organizations by population
Regionalism (international relations)












v
t
e


Power in international relations







Types



Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Power politics
Realpolitik
Smart
Soft





Status



Emerging
Small
Middle
Regional
Great
Super
Hyper





Geopolitics



American
Asian
British
Chinese
Indian
Pacific





History



List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)





Theory



Balance of power

European


Center of power
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement





Studies



Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power













Organizations and groups by region or regions affected







Africa



African Union
Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–Asia



Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)





Americas



Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (Unasur)





Asia



Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)





Europe



Council of Europe (CE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegrád Group





Eurasia



Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Turkic Council





North America–Europe



North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Arctic Council





Africa–Asia–Europe



Union for the Mediterranean





Africa–South America



South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone





Oceania-Pacific



Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)





Non-regional



Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
Commonwealth of Nations
Francophonie
Colombia–Indonesia–Vietnam–Egypt–Turkey–South Africa (CIVETS)
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico–Indonesia–Nigeria–Turkey (MINT)
Next Eleven (N-11)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Uniting for Consensus





Global



United Nations (UN)



















Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Source texts
from Wikisource
Data
from Wikidata







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 305114716
LCCN: n78095594
ISNI: 0000 0001 2188 0156
GND: 36821-0
SUDOC: 027230783
BNF: cb11868456k (data)
HDS: 26470
NDL: 00297321











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Council_of_Europe&oldid=817362555"					Categories: Organizations based in FranceCouncil of EuropePolitics of EuropeInternational organisations of EuropeOrganizations based in StrasbourgOrganizations established in 1949CouncilsUnited Nations General Assembly observers1949 establishments in EnglandInternational organizations based in FranceHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from November 2017CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Use British English from February 2014Use dmy dates from July 2013Articles containing French-language textArticles needing additional references from May 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers