Not to be confused with Counselor.


Legislature


Chambers




Unicameralism
Multicameralism
Bicameralism


Tricameralism
Tetracameralism



Upper house (Senate)
Lower house





Parliament




Parliamentary system
Parliamentary group


Member of parliament
International parliament




Parliamentary procedure




Committee
Quorum
Motion (no-confidence)




Types




Congress (Member of Congress)


City council (Councillor)
The Estates




Legislatures by country





v
t
e












This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (January 2018)









This article is missing information about the office(s) in Liberia. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (January 2018)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A Councillor is a member of a local government council.



Contents


1 United Kingdom

1.1 Remuneration
1.2 Regional government


2 United States
3 The Philippines
4 Finland
5 Turkey
6 Other countries
7 References



United Kingdom[edit]
All local authorities in the United Kingdom are overseen by elected councillors. These include:

unitary authorities
county councils and district councils
parish, town and community councils
The Common Council of the City of London (in which councillors are known as aldermen and councilmen)

According to Debrett's Correct Form the English title "Councillor" (often shortened to ‘Cllr’) applies only to elected members of city, borough or district councils.[1] However, there is no legal basis for this restriction and in practice the title is applied to all councillors at all levels of local government. Where necessary, parish and county councillors are differentiated by the use of a fuller title such as "town councillor" or "county councillor". The title precedes the holder's rank or other title, as in Cllr Dr Jenny Smith or Cllr Sir James Smith, and for women it precedes their title of marital status, as in Cllr Mrs Joan Smith.[1]
Councillors are typically elected as members of political parties or alternatively as independents. Councils may also co-opt unelected councillors to fill vacancies on a council where insufficient candidates have stood for election, although in practice this is rare outside parish councils. Once elected, they are meant to represent all the residents under the whole authority, not just those who voted for them or just those in the district or ward they were elected in. They are bound by a code of conduct enforced by standards boards.
In 2007 the age limit for councillors fell to 18, leading to younger people standing.[citation needed]
Youth Councillors are also elected in local areas.[citation needed]
Remuneration[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Most councillors are not full-time professionals.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland most larger borough, unitary authority or county councils do pay them basic allowances and out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, special responsibility allowances are paid to councillors who carry out more senior duties. The basic allowances and special responsibility allowances are theoretically paid to compensate councillors for time spent on council duties and are classed as salaries for tax purposes. Parish, town or community councillors may, since the Local Government Act 2000, be paid for their services, but most do it voluntarily.
In Scotland, since 2007, councillors have received a salary of £15,000, as opposed to a series of allowances. These are often topped up by special responsibility allowances.
Regional government[edit]
The London Assembly is regarded, not as a local authority, but as a regional devolved assembly and its members are referred to as Assembly Members, not councillors.
United States[edit]
Council member, councilman/councilwoman, councilor, or councillor is a title for a member of a council used in the United States.[2]
In particular, the title is used in the following cases:

City councils or town councils that do not use the title of alderman
Council of the District of Columbia





This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (June 2008)



The Philippines[edit]
Under the Philippine Republic Act No. 7160 (otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991), a councilor is a member of a local council that is the legislative body of the local government unit. They are commonly referred to as "Sanggunian Member" because the official designation of municipal, city and provincial councils is the equivalent term in Filipino (used even when speaking or writing in English): Sanggunian Bayan, Sanggunian Panglunsod and Sanggunian Panlalawigan, respectively.[1]
Finland[edit]
This is about honorary rank, not elected officials.
In Finland councillor (neuvos) is the highest possible title of honour which can be granted by the President of Finland. There are several ranks of councillors and they have existed since the Russian Regime. Some examples of different councillors in Finland are as follows:

Councillor of State: the highest class of the titles of honour; granted to successful statesmen
Mining Councillor/Trade Councillor/Industry Councillor/Economy Councillor: granted to leading industry figures in different fields of the economy
Councillor of Parliament: granted to successful statesmen
Office Councillor: granted to leading university figures
Councillor of Culture/Theatre Councillor/Film Councillor: granted to leading cultural figures
Chamber Councillor: granted for successful officials in the field of local government

Turkey[edit]
Two types of councillor are elected in local elections held every five years in Turkey. These include 1,251 provincial councillors and 20,500 municipal councillors. Municipal councillors serve on the council of the 1,351 district and 30 metropolitan municipalities of Turkey, while provincial councillors serve on the provincial general council (İl Genel Meclisi).
Other countries[edit]
In Australia, The Bahamas, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, Botswana, Trinidad and Tobago and other parts of the Commonwealth, as well as in Ireland, a councillor or councilor is an elected representative on a local government council.
In the Netherlands, a member of the municipal council is called a gemeenteraadslid or raadslid. Someone out of this group who is elected to serve on the municipal executive is called a wethouder, which is usually translated as ‘alderman’ or ‘councillor’. The Dutch word for mayor is burgemeester. This is expressed in English as "mayor" or "burgomaster". The municipal executive is referred to collectively as the College van Burgemeester en Wethouders.
In Belgium, a member of the municipal council is called a gemeenteraadslid in Dutch, and Conseiller Communal in French. Someone out of this group who is elected to serve on the municipal executive is called a schepen in Dutch or échevin in French. This is usually translated as "alderman" or "councillor" in English. The municipal executive is referred to collectively as the College van Burgemeester en Schepenen ou Collège du Bourgmestre et Echevins.
In Luxembourg, an échevin (Luxembourgish: Schäffe, German: Schöffe) is a member of the administration of a Luxembourgian commune.
In Hong Kong, members of district councils are also referred to as councillors.[3] Before 1999 the district councils were known as district boards, upon the abolition of the municipal councils (the UrbCo and the RegCo) in December that year. In addition, members of the legislative council are also referred to as councillors. From 1996 to 1998 the Legislative Council were known as "Provisional Legislative Council", upon the abolition of the interim legislature in July 1998.
In Norway, a member of the municipal council, kommunestyret, is called a kommunestyrerepresentant in Norwegian. The Norwegian word for mayor is ordfører.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (June 2008)



References[edit]



^ a b Debrett's Correct Form, pg 193, Headline Book Publishing 2002
^ Viser, Matt (7 August 2006). "Spelling spats divide City Council". Boston Globe. Retrieved 7 August 2006. 
^ http://www.scmp.com%2Fnews/hong-kong/article/1246797/district-councillors-may-get-20pc-more-rent-subsidy Archived 21 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine. and http://www.news.gov.hk/en/categories/health/html/2014/10/20141010_143215.shtml






Authority control



GND: 4177008-0











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Councillor&oldid=818154842"					Categories: TitlesLegislatorsGovernment occupationsManagement occupationsLocal government in the United KingdomHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from January 2011Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2018All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2018All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles to be expanded from January 2018Articles that may contain original research from January 2018All articles that may contain original researchArticles needing additional references from January 2018All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2014Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles needing additional references from October 2014Articles to be expanded from June 2008All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesArticles containing Luxembourgish-language textArticles containing German-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers