For other uses, see Craft (disambiguation) and The Craft (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Bagh Print Traditional hand block print craft in India






Woodworking being done in a workshop






Shoes are repaired by a skilled shoemaker, here he evaluates a pair of shoes with a customer watching


A craft or trade is a pastime or a profession that requires particular skills and knowledge of skilled work. In a historical sense, particularly the Middle Ages and earlier, the term is usually applied to people occupied in small-scale production of goods, or their maintenance, for example by tinkers. The traditional terms craftsman and craftswoman are nowadays often replaced by artisan and rarely by craftsperson (craftspeople).
The beginning of crafts in areas like the Ottoman Empire involved the governing bodies requiring members of the city who were skilled at creating goods to open shops in the center of town. These people slowly stopped acting as subsistence farmers (who created goods in their own homes to trade with neighbors) and began to represent what we think of a "craftsman" today.[1]
Historically, craftsmen tended to concentrate in urban centers and formed guilds. The skill required by their professions and the need to be permanently involved in the exchange of goods also demanded a generally higher level of education, and craftsmen were usually in a more privileged position than the peasantry in societal hierarchy. The households of craftsmen were not as self-sufficient as those of people engaged in agricultural work and therefore had to rely on the exchange of goods.
Once an apprentice of a craft had finished his apprenticeship, he would become a journeyman searching for a place to set up his own shop and make a living. After he set up his own shop, he could then call himself a master of his craft.
This system of a stepwise approach to mastery of a craft, which includes the obtainment of a certain amount of education and the learning of skills, has survived in some countries of the world until today. But crafts have undergone deep structural changes during and since the end of the Industrial Revolution. The mass production of goods by large-scale industry has limited crafts to market segments in which industry's modes of functioning or its mass-produced goods would not or cannot satisfy the preferences of potential buyers. Moreover, as an outcome of these changes, craftspeople today increasingly make use of semi-finished components or materials and adapt these to their customers' requirements or demands and, if necessary, to the environments of their customers. Thus, they participate in a certain division of labour between industry and craft.



Contents


1 Classification

1.1 Handicraft
1.2 The Arts and Crafts Movement
1.3 Studio crafts
1.4 Craft fairs
1.5 Tradesperson


2 See also

2.1 Communities


3 References
4 External links



Classification[edit]
Main article: Outline of crafts
There are three aspects to human creativity - Art, Crafts, and Science. Roughly determinated, art relies upon intuitive sensing, vision and expression, crafts upon sophisticated technique and science upon knowledge.




Street handicraft: here a skilled metalsmith in Agra, India sits between scooters in a commercial area making careful observations in the practice of his trade


Handicraft[edit]
Main article: Handicraft
Handicraft is the "traditional" main sector of the crafts, it is a type of work where useful and decorative devices are made completely by hand or by using only simple tools. Usually the term is applied to traditional means of making goods. The individual artisanship of the items is a paramount criterion, such items often have cultural and/or religious significance. Items made by mass production or machines are not handicraft goods. Handicraft goods are made with craft production processes.




Mexican craft.


The Arts and Crafts Movement[edit]
Main article: Arts and Crafts Movement




Japanese potter at his wheel (1914)


The term crafts is often used to describe the family of artistic practices within the family decorative arts that traditionally are defined by their relationship to functional or utilitarian products (such as sculptural forms in the vessel tradition) or by their use of such natural media as wood, clay, ceramics, glass, textiles, and metal.
Studio crafts[edit]
Main article: Studio craft
Crafts practiced by independent artists working alone or in small groups are often referred to as studio craft. Studio craft includes studio pottery, metal work, weaving, wood turning, paper and other forms of wood working, glass blowing, and glass art.
Craft fairs[edit]
A craft fair is an organized event to display and sell crafts. There are craft shops where such goods are sold and craft communities, such as Craftster, where expertise is shared.
Tradesperson[edit]
Main article: Tradesperson
A tradesperson is a skilled manual worker in a particular trade or craft. Economically and socially, a tradesperson's status is considered between a laborer and a professional, with a high degree of both practical and theoretical knowledge of their trade. In cultures where professional careers are highly prized, there can be a shortage of skilled manual workers, leading to lucrative niche markets in the trades.
See also[edit]





Apprentice
Apprenticeship
Artisan
Arts and crafts
Arts and Crafts movement
Craft production
Decorative art
Guild
Japanese craft
Journeyman
Master craftsman
Otium
Profession
Semiprofession
Vocation
Bagh prints



Communities[edit]

American Craft Council
Japan Kōgei Association
Street Artists Program of San Francisco
Pike Place Market
Chamber of Commerce
Craft Northern Ireland
Crafts Association of British Columbia
General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York
Etsy





References[edit]



^ Suraiya., Faroqhi, (2014-01-01). Artisans of Empire : Crafts and Craftspeople Under the Ottomans. I.B. Tauris. p. 119. ISBN 9780857710628. OCLC 956646181. 



External links[edit]



Look up craft in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


 Media related to Crafts at Wikimedia Commons






v
t
e


Visual arts






Architecture
Art
Ceramics
Craft
Drawing
Design
Painting
Photography
Public art
Sculpture
Site-specific art
Street art








Computer art
Filmmaking
Printmaking








List of artistic media











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Craft&oldid=806839541"					Categories: CraftsSkillsMedieval economicsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2017All articles needing additional references