"Murder mystery" redirects here. For other uses, see Murder mystery (disambiguation).






This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (March 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Sherlock Holmes, right, hero of crime fiction, confers with his colleague Dr. Watson; together these characters popularized the genre.


Crime fiction is the literary genre that fictionalises crimes, their detection, criminals, and their motives. It is usually distinguished from mainstream fiction and other genres such as historical fiction or science fiction, are indistinct. Crime fiction has multiple subgenres,[1] including detective fiction (such as the whodunit), courtroom drama, hard-boiled fiction and legal thrillers. Most crime drama focus on crime investigation and does not feature the court room. Suspense and mystery are key elements that are nearly ubiquitous to the genre.



Contents


1 History of crime fiction
2 Categories

2.1 Pseudonymous authors


3 Availability of crime novels

3.1 Quality and availability
3.2 Classics and bestsellers
3.3 Forgotten classics
3.4 Revival of past classics


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



History of crime fiction[edit]
Main article: History of crime fiction
The earliest known crime fiction is Thomas Skinner Sturr's anonymous Richmond, or stories in the life of a Bow Street officer (1827); the earliest full-length short-story in the genre is The Rector of Veilbye by the Danish author Steen Steensen Blicher, published in 1829. Better known are the earlier dark works of Edgar Allan Poe (e.g., "The Murders in the Rue Morgue" (1841), "The Mystery of Marie Roget" (1842), and "The Purloined Letter" (1844)). Wilkie Collins' epistolary novel The Woman in White was published in 1860, while The Moonstone (1868) is often thought to be his masterpiece. French author Émile Gaboriau's Monsieur Lecoq (1868) laid the groundwork for the methodical, scientifically minded detective. The evolution of locked room mysteries was one of the landmarks in the history of crime fiction. The Sherlock Holmes mysteries of Arthur Conan Doyle are said to have been singularly responsible for the huge popularity in this genre. A precursor was Paul Féval, whose series Les Habits Noirs (1862–67) features Scotland Yard detectives and criminal conspiracies. The best-selling crime novel of the nineteenth century was Fergus Hume's The Mystery of a Hansom Cab (1886), set in Melbourne, Australia.[2]
The evolution of the print mass media in the United Kingdom and the United States in the latter half of the 19th century was crucial in popularising crime fiction and related genres. Literary 'variety' magazines like Strand, McClure's, and Harper's quickly became central to the overall structure and function of popular fiction in society, providing a mass-produced medium that offered cheap, illustrated publications that were essentially disposable.
Like the works of many other important fiction writers of his day—e.g. Wilkie Collins and Charles Dickens—Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes stories first appeared in serial form in the monthly Strand magazine in the United Kingdom. The series quickly attracted a wide and passionate following on both sides of the Atlantic, and when Doyle killed off Holmes in The Final Problem, the public outcry was so great, and the publishing offers for more stories so attractive, that he was reluctantly forced to resurrect him.
Later a set of stereotypic formulae began to appear to cater to various tastes.
Categories[edit]

Detective fiction
The cozy mystery: a subgenre of detective fiction in which profanity, sex, and violence are downplayed or treated humorously.
The locked room mystery: a specialized kind of a whodunit in which the crime is committed under apparently impossible circumstances, such as a locked room which no intruder could have entered or left.
The whodunit: the most common form of detective fiction. It features a complex, plot-driven story in which the reader is provided with clues from which the identity of the perpetrator of the crime may be deduced before the solution is revealed at the end of the book.


The historical whodunnit: also a subgenre of historical fiction. The setting of the story and the crime has some historical significance.
The American hardboiled school: distinguished by the unsentimental portrayal of sex and violence; the sleuth usually also confronts danger and engages in violence.
The police procedural: the detective is a member of the police, and thus the activities of a police force are usually convincingly depicted.
Forensic crime fiction; similar to the police procedural. The investigator the reader follows is usually a medical examiner or pathologist—they must use the forensic evidence left on the body and at the crime scene to catch the killer. This subgenre was first introduced by Patricia Cornwell.
The legal thriller: the major characters are lawyers and their employees, and they become involved in proving their cases.
The spy novel: the major characters are spies, usually working for an intelligence agency.
The caper story and the criminal novel: the stories are told from the point of view of the criminals.
The psychological thriller or psychological suspense: this specific subgenre of the thriller genre also incorporates elements from detective fiction, as the protagonist must solve the mystery of the psychological conflict presented in these types of stories.
The parody or spoof.

Pseudonymous authors[edit]
As far as the history of crime fiction is concerned, some authors have been reluctant to publish their crime novels under their real names. More currently, some publish pseudonymously because of the belief that since the large booksellers are aware of their historical sales figures, and command a certain degree of influence over publishers, the only way to "break out" of their current advance numbers is to publish as someone with no track record.
In the late 1930s and 40s, British County Court judge Arthur Alexander Gordon Clark (1900–1958) published a number of detective novels under the alias Cyril Hare in which he made use of his profoundly extensive knowledge of the English legal system. In Tragedy at Law (1942). Scottish journalist Leopold Horace Ognall (1908–1979) authored over ninety novels as Hartley Howard and Harry Carmichael. When he was still young and unknown, award-winning British novelist Julian Barnes (born 1946) published some crime novels under the alias Dan Kavanagh. Other authors take delight in cherishing their alter egos: Ruth Rendell (born 1930) writes one sort of crime novels as Ruth Rendell and another type as Barbara Vine; John Dickson Carr also used the pseudonym Carter Dickson. The author Evan Hunter (which itself was a pseudonym) wrote his crime fiction under the name of Ed McBain.
Availability of crime novels[edit]
Quality and availability[edit]
As with any other entity, quality of a crime fiction book is not in any meaningful proportion to its availability. Some of the crime novels generally regarded as the finest, including those regularly chosen by experts as belonging to the best 100 crime novels ever written (see bibliography), have been out of print ever since their first publication, which often dates back to the 1920s or 30s. The bulk of books that can be found today on the shelves labelled "Crime" consists of recent first publications usually no older than a few years.
Classics and bestsellers[edit]
Furthermore, only a select few authors have achieved the status of "classics" for their published works. A classic is any text that can be received and accepted universally, because they transcend context. A popular, well known example is Agatha Christie, whose texts, originally published between 1920 and her death in 1976, are available in UK and US editions in all English speaking nations. Christie's works, particularly featuring detectives Hercule Poirot or Miss Jane Marple, have given her the title the 'Queen of Crime' and made her one of the most important and innovative writers in the development of the genre. Her most famous novels include Murder on the Orient Express (1934), Death on the Nile (1937), and the world's best-selling mystery And Then There Were None (1939).[3]
Other less successful, contemporary authors who are still writing have seen reprints of their earlier works, due to current overwhelming popularity of crime fiction texts among audiences. One example is Val McDermid, whose first book appeared as far back as 1987; another is Florida-based author Carl Hiaasen, who has been publishing books since 1981, all of which are readily available.
Forgotten classics[edit]
On the other hand, English crime writer Edgar Wallace, who was immensely popular with the English readership during the early decades of the 20th century (and who achieved fame in German-speaking countries due to the many B movies made in the 1950s, 60s, and 70s that were based on his novels), had almost been forgotten in his home country until House of Stratus eventually started republishing many of his 170 books around the turn of the millennium. Similarly, the books by the equally successful American author Erle Stanley Gardner (1889–1970), creator of the lawyer Perry Mason, which have frequently been adapted for film, radio, and TV, were only recently republished in the United Kingdom—books such as The Case of the Stuttering Bishop (1937), The Case of the Green-Eyed Sister (1953), etc.
Even television adaptations are not enough to save some authors. Gladys Mitchell rivalled Agatha Christie for UK sales in the 1930s and 1940s but only one of her 66 novels remains in print despite a BBC television series of The Mrs Bradley Mysteries in 1999.
Revival of past classics[edit]
From time to time publishing houses decide, for commercial purposes, to revive long-forgotten authors and reprint one or two of their more commercially successful novels. Apart from Penguin Books, who for this purpose have resorted to their old green cover and dug out some of their vintage authors, Pan started a series in 1999 entitled "Pan Classic Crime," which includes a handful of novels by Eric Ambler, but also American Hillary Waugh's Last Seen Wearing .... In 2000, Edinburgh-based Canongate Books started a series called "Canongate Crime Classics," in which they published John Franklin Bardin's The Deadly Percheron (1946)—both a whodunnit and a roman noir about amnesia and insanity—and other novels. However, books brought out by smaller publishers like Canongate Books are usually not stocked by the larger bookshops and overseas booksellers. The British Library has also (since 2012) starting republishing "lost" crime classics, with the collection referred to on their website as "British Library Crime Classics series".
Sometimes older crime novels are revived by screenwriters and directors rather than publishing houses. In many such cases, publishers then follow suit and release a so-called "film tie-in" edition showing a still from the movie on the front cover and the film credits on the back cover of the book—yet another marketing strategy aimed at those cinemagoers who may want to do both: first read the book and then watch the film (or vice versa). Recent examples include Patricia Highsmith's The Talented Mr. Ripley (originally published in 1955), Ira Levin's Sliver (1991), with the cover photograph depicting a steamy sex scene between Sharon Stone and William Baldwin straight from the 1993 movie, and, again, Bret Easton Ellis's American Psycho (1991). Bloomsbury Publishing PLC on the other hand have launched what they call "Bloomsbury Film Classics"—a series of original novels on which feature films were based. This series includes, for example, Ethel Lina White's novel The Wheel Spins (1936), which Alfred Hitchcock—before he went to Hollywood—turned into a much-loved movie entitled The Lady Vanishes (1938), and Ira Levin's (born 1929) science fiction thriller The Boys from Brazil (1976), which was filmed in 1978.
Older novels can often be retrieved from the ever-growing Project Gutenberg database.
See also[edit]


Novels portal



The Top 100 Crime Novels of All Time
Detective fiction
Murder mystery game
Mystery fiction
Mystery film
List of crime writers
List of female detective characters
Whodunit
Hardboiled
Art theft
Crime Writers' Association
Crime comics
Giallo
Scandinavian noir

References[edit]



^ Franks, Rachel (2011). "May I Suggest Murder?: An Overview of Crime Fiction for Readers' Advisory Services Staff". Australian Library Journal. 60 (2). Retrieved 18 January 2016. 
^ Sussex, Lucy (2015). Blockbuster! Fergus Hume and The Mystery of a Hansom Cab. Melbourne: Text. ISBN 9781922147943. 
^ Davies, Helen; Marjorie Dorfman; Mary Fons; Deborah Hawkins; Martin Hintz; Linnea Lundgren; David Priess; Julia Clark Robinson; Paul Seaburn; Heidi Stevens; Steve Theunissen (14 September 2007). "21 Best-Selling Books of All Time". Editors of Publications International, Ltd. Retrieved 2009-03-25. 




Binyon, T J: "Murder Will Out". The Detective in Fiction (Oxford, 1990, ISBN 0-19-282730-8)
The Crown Crime Companion. The Top 100 Mystery Novels of All Time Selected by the Mystery Writers of America, annotated by Otto Penzler, compiled by Mickey Friedman (New York, 1995, ISBN 0-517-88115-2)
De Andrea, William L: Encyclopedia Mysteriosa. A Comprehensive Guide to the Art of Detection in Print, Film, Radio, and Television (New York, 1994, ISBN 0-02-861678-2)
Duncan, Paul: Film Noir. Films of Trust and Betrayal (Harpenden, 2000, ISBN 1-903047-08-0)
The Hatchards Crime Companion. 100 Top Crime Novels Selected by the Crime Writers' Association, ed. Susan Moody (London, 1990, ISBN 0-904030-02-4)
Hitt, Jim: Words and Shadows. Literature on the Screen (New York, 1992, ISBN 0-8065-1340-3)
Mann, Jessica: Deadlier Than the Male (David & Charles, 1981. Macmillan,N.Y, 1981)
McLeish, Kenneth and McLeish, Valerie: Bloomsbury Good Reading Guide to Murder. Crime Fiction and Thrillers (London, 1990, ISBN 0-13-359092-5)
Ousby, Ian: The Crime and Mystery Book. A Reader's Companion (London, 1997).
Symons, Julian: Bloody Murder. From the Detective Story to the Crime Novel: A History (Harmondsworth, 1974).
Waterstone's Guide to Crime Fiction, ed. Nick Rennison and Richard Shephard (Brentford, 1997).
Willett, Ralph: The Naked City. Urban Crime Fiction in the USA (Manchester, 1996).

External links[edit]

World's Best Detective, Crime, and Murder Mystery Books
Short reviews of the 400 best crime fiction books
Crime and Crime Fiction at the British Library







v
t
e


Narrative



Character



Antagonist
Antihero
Archenemy
Character arc
Characterization
Deuteragonist
False protagonist
Focal character
Foil
Protagonist
Stock character
Supporting character
Tritagonist
Narrator
Tragic hero





Plot



Action
Backstory
Cliché
Climax
Cliffhanger
Conflict
Deus ex machina
Dialogue
Dramatic structure
Exposition
Eucatastrophe
Foreshadowing
Flashback
Flashforward
Frame story
In medias res
Pace
Plot device
Plot twist
Poetic justice
Reveal
Self-fulfilling prophecy
Subplot
Trope
Kishōtenketsu





Setting



Backstory
Utopia
Dystopia
Alternate history
Fictional location

city
country
universe







Theme



Leitmotif
Metaphor
Moral
Motif
Irony





Style



Allegory
Bathos
Diction
Figure of speech
Imagery
Narrative techniques
Narration
Stylistic device
Suspension of disbelief
Symbolism
Tone
Mode
Mood





Structure



Linear narrative
Nonlinear narrative

films
television series


Types of fiction with multiple endings





Form



Epic
Fable
Fabliau
Fairy tale
Folktale
Flash fiction
Legend
Novella
Novel
Parable
Play
Poem
Screenplay
Short story





Genre



Action fiction
Adventure
Comic
Crime
Docufiction
Epistolary
Erotic
Fiction
Fantasy
Gothic
Historical
Horror
Magic realism
Mystery
Nautical
Paranoid
Philosophical
Picaresque
Political
Psychological
Romance
Saga
Satire
Science
Speculative
Superhero
Thriller
Urban
Western
List of writing genres





Narration



First-person
Multiple narrators
Stream of consciousness
Stream of unconsciousness
Unreliable





Tense



Past
Present
Future





Related



Audience
Author
Creative nonfiction
Fiction writing
Literary theory
Literary science
Narratology
Monomyth
Rhetoric
Screenwriting
Storytelling
Tellability






Literature portal










v
t
e


Detective, mystery, and crime fiction



General info



History of crime fiction
Crime writers





Subgenres




Theme



Caper
Detective

occult


Giallo
Gong'an
Hardboiled
Inverted detective story
Legal drama

thriller


Mystery

cozy
locked room


Noir
Spy
Spy-Fi
Tart Noir
Thriller
Whodunit

historical mystery







Film and television



Police procedural
Procedural drama
Heist
Mystery
Noir
Neo-noir
Trial





Character



Fictional detectives

male
female
police
private
historical
teams
science fiction and fantasy














Authority control



LCCN: sh85033995
GND: 4165727-5
BNF: cb12453012w (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crime_fiction&oldid=818120404"					Categories: Crime fictionHidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2010All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers