"Critical sociology" redirects here. For the journal, see Critical Sociology (journal).






This article needs attention from an expert in Sociology. The specific problem is: The article's tone is too technical. See the talk page for details. WikiProject Sociology may be able to help recruit an expert. (August 2017)





Sociology







History
Outline
Portal




Main theories




Structural functionalism
Conflict theory
Symbolic interactionism




Methods




Quantitative
Qualitative
Historical
Comparative
Mathematical
Computational
Ethnography
Ethnomethodology
Network analysis
Positivism
Critical theory




Subfields and other major theories




Conflict
Criminology
Social constructionism
Culture
Development
Deviance
Demography
Education
Economic
Environmental
Family
Feminist sociology
Gender
Health
Industrial
Inequality
Knowledge
Law
Literature
Medical
Military
Organizational
Political
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Rural
Science
Social change
Social movements
Social psychology in sociology
Stratification
Science and technology
Technology
Urban
Utilitarianism




Browse




Bibliography
By country
Index
Journals
Organizations
People
Timeline







v
t
e





Critical Theory is a school of thought that stresses the reflective assessment and critique of society and culture by applying knowledge from the social sciences and the humanities. As a term, Critical Theory has two meanings with different origins and histories: the first originated in sociology and the second originated in literary criticism, whereby it is used and applied as an umbrella term that can describe a theory founded upon critique; thus, the theorist Max Horkheimer described a theory as critical insofar as it seeks "to liberate human beings from the circumstances that enslave them".[1]
In sociology and political philosophy, the term Critical Theory describes the neo-Marxist philosophy of the Frankfurt School, which was developed in Germany in the 1930s. This use of the term requires proper noun capitalization, whereas "a critical theory" or "a critical social theory" may have similar elements of thought, but not stress its intellectual lineage specifically to the Frankfurt School. Frankfurt School theorists drew on the critical methods of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. Critical Theory maintains that ideology is the principal obstacle to human liberation.[2] Critical Theory was established as a school of thought primarily by the Frankfurt School theoreticians Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, and Erich Fromm. Modern Critical Theory has additionally been influenced by György Lukács and Antonio Gramsci, as well as the second generation Frankfurt School scholars, notably Jürgen Habermas. In Habermas's work, Critical Theory transcended its theoretical roots in German idealism and progressed closer to American pragmatism. Concern for social "base and superstructure" is one of the remaining Marxist philosophical concepts in much of contemporary Critical Theory.[3]
While critical theorists have been frequently defined as Marxist intellectuals,[4] their tendency to denounce some Marxist concepts and to combine Marxian analysis with other sociological and philosophical traditions has resulted in accusations of revisionism by Classical, Orthodox, and Analytical Marxists, and by Marxist–Leninist philosophers. Martin Jay has stated that the first generation of Critical Theory is best understood as not promoting a specific philosophical agenda or a specific ideology, but as "a gadfly of other systems".[5]



Contents


1 Frankfurt School
2 Definition
3 Critical Theory and academic fields

3.1 Marxism
3.2 Postmodernism
3.3 Communication
3.4 Education


4 See also

4.1 Lists
4.2 Journals related to Critical Theory or critical sociology


5 Footnotes
6 References
7 External links

7.1 Archival collections
7.2 Other





Frankfurt School[edit]
In sociology and political philosophy, the term Critical Theory describes the neo-Marxist philosophy of the Frankfurt School, which was developed in Germany in the 1930s. Frankfurt theorists drew on the critical methods of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. Critical Theory maintains that ideology is the principal obstacle to human liberation.[6] Critical Theory was established as a school of thought primarily by five Frankfurt School theoreticians: Herbert Marcuse, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Walter Benjamin, and Erich Fromm. Modern Critical Theory has additionally been influenced by György Lukács and Antonio Gramsci, as well as the second generation Frankfurt School scholars, notably Jürgen Habermas. In Habermas's work, Critical Theory transcended its theoretical roots in German idealism, and progressed closer to American pragmatism. Concern for social "base and superstructure" is one of the remaining Marxist philosophical concepts in much of contemporary Critical Theory.[7]
Definition[edit]
Critical Theory (German: Kritische Theorie) was first defined by Max Horkheimer of the Frankfurt School of sociology in his 1937 essay Traditional and Critical Theory: Critical Theory is a social theory oriented toward critiquing and changing society as a whole, in contrast to traditional theory oriented only to understanding or explaining it. Horkheimer wanted to distinguish Critical Theory as a radical, emancipatory form of Marxian theory, critiquing both the model of science put forward by logical positivism and what he and his colleagues saw as the covert positivism and authoritarianism of orthodox Marxism and Communism. He described a theory as critical insofar as it seeks "to liberate human beings from the circumstances that enslave them".[8] Critical Theory involves a normative dimension, either through criticizing society from some general theory of values, norms, or "oughts", or through criticizing it in terms of its own espoused values.[9][citation needed]
The core concepts of Critical Theory are as follows:

That critical social theory should be directed at the totality of society in its historical specificity (i.e. how it came to be configured at a specific point in time), and
That Critical Theory should improve understanding of society by integrating all the major social sciences, including geography, economics, sociology, history, political science, anthropology, and psychology.

This version of "critical" theory derives from Kant's (18th-century) and Marx's (19th-century) use of the term "critique", as in Kant's Critique of Pure Reason and Marx's concept that his work Das Kapital (Capital) forms a "critique of political economy". For Kant's transcendental idealism, "critique" means examining and establishing the limits of the validity of a faculty, type, or body of knowledge, especially through accounting for the limitations imposed by the fundamental, irreducible concepts in use in that knowledge system.
Kant's notion of critique has been associated with the overturning of false, unprovable, or dogmatic philosophical, social, and political beliefs, because Kant's critique of reason involved the critique of dogmatic theological and metaphysical ideas and was intertwined with the enhancement of ethical autonomy and the Enlightenment critique of superstition and irrational authority. Ignored by many in "critical realist" circles, however, is that Kant's immediate impetus for writing his "Critique of Pure Reason" was to address problems raised by David Hume's skeptical empiricism which, in attacking metaphysics, employed reason and logic to argue against the knowability of the world and common notions of causation. Kant, by contrast, pushed the employment of a priori metaphysical claims as requisite, for if anything is to be said to be knowable, it would have to be established upon abstractions distinct from perceivable phenomena.
Marx explicitly developed the notion of critique into the critique of ideology and linked it with the practice of social revolution, as stated in the famous 11th of his Theses on Feuerbach: "The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point is to change it."[10]
One of the distinguishing characteristics of Critical Theory, as Adorno and Horkheimer elaborated in their Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947), is a certain ambivalence concerning the ultimate source or foundation of social domination, an ambivalence which gave rise to the "pessimism" of the new Critical Theory over the possibility of human emancipation and freedom.[11] This ambivalence was rooted, of course, in the historical circumstances in which the work was originally produced, in particular, the rise of National Socialism, state capitalism, and mass culture as entirely new forms of social domination that could not be adequately explained within the terms of traditional Marxist sociology.[12]
For Adorno and Horkheimer, state intervention in economy had effectively abolished the tension between the "relations of production" and "material productive forces of society", a tension which, according to traditional Critical Theory, constituted the primary contradiction within capitalism. The market (as an "unconscious" mechanism for the distribution of goods) and private property had been replaced by centralized planning and socialized ownership of the means of production.[13]
Yet, contrary to Marx's famous prediction in the Preface to a Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, this shift did not lead to "an era of social revolution", but rather to fascism and totalitarianism. As such, Critical Theory was left, in Jürgen Habermas' words, without "anything in reserve to which it might appeal; and when the forces of production enter into a baneful symbiosis with the relations of production that they were supposed to blow wide open, there is no longer any dynamism upon which critique could base its hope".[14] For Adorno and Horkheimer, this posed the problem of how to account for the apparent persistence of domination in the absence of the very contradiction that, according to traditional Critical Theory, was the source of domination itself.
In the 1960s, Jürgen Habermas raised the epistemological discussion to a new level in his Knowledge and Human Interests, by identifying critical knowledge as based on principles that differentiated it either from the natural sciences or the humanities, through its orientation to self-reflection and emancipation. Although unsatisfied with Adorno and Horkeimer's thought presented in Dialectic of Enlightenment, Habermas shares the view that, in the form of instrumental rationality, the era of modernity marks a move away from the liberation of enlightenment and toward a new form of enslavement.[15] In Habermas's work, Critical Theory transcended its theoretical roots in German idealism, and progressed closer to American pragmatism.
Habermas is now influencing the philosophy of Law in many countries—for example the creation of the social philosophy of Law in Brazil, and his theory also has the potential to make the discourse of law one important institution of the modern world as a heritage of the Enlightenment.[16]
His ideas regarding the relationship between modernity and rationalization are in this sense strongly influenced by Max Weber. Habermas dissolved further the elements of Critical Theory derived from Hegelian German Idealism, although his thought remains broadly Marxist in its epistemological approach. Perhaps his two most influential ideas are the concepts of the public sphere and communicative action; the latter arriving partly as a reaction to new post-structural or so-called "post-modern" challenges to the discourse of modernity. Habermas engaged in regular correspondence with Richard Rorty and a strong sense of philosophical pragmatism may be felt in his theory; thought which frequently traverses the boundaries between sociology and philosophy.
Critical Theory and academic fields[edit]
Marxism[edit]
While critical theorists have been frequently defined as Marxist intellectuals,[17] their tendency to denounce some Marxist concepts and to combine Marxian analysis with other sociological and philosophical traditions has resulted in accusations of revisionism by Classical, Orthodox, and Analytical Marxists, and by Marxist–Leninist philosophers. Martin Jay has stated that the first generation of Critical Theory is best understood as not promoting a specific philosophical agenda or a specific ideology, but as "a gadfly of other systems".[5]
Postmodernism[edit]
While modernist Critical Theory (as described above) concerns itself with "forms of authority and injustice that accompanied the evolution of industrial and corporate capitalism as a political-economic system", postmodern Critical Theory politicizes social problems "by situating them in historical and cultural contexts, to implicate themselves in the process of collecting and analyzing data, and to relativize their findings".[18] Meaning itself is seen as unstable due to the rapid transformation in social structures. As a result, the focus of research is centered on local manifestations, rather than broad generalizations.
Postmodern critical research is also characterized by the crisis of representation, which rejects the idea that a researcher's work is an "objective depiction of a stable other". Instead, many postmodern scholars have adopted "alternatives that encourage reflection about the 'politics and poetics' of their work. In these accounts, the embodied, collaborative, dialogic, and improvisational aspects of qualitative research are clarified".[19]
The term "Critical Theory" is often appropriated when an author works within sociological terms, yet attacks the social or human sciences (thus attempting to remain "outside" those frames of inquiry). Michel Foucault is one of these authors.[20]
Jean Baudrillard has also been described as a critical theorist to the extent that he was an unconventional and critical sociologist;[21] this appropriation is similarly casual, holding little or no relation to the Frankfurt School.[22] Jürgen Habermas of The Frankfurt School is one of the key critics of Post-modernism.[23]
Critical Theory is focused on language, symbolism, communication, and social construction.
Communication[edit]
From the 1960s and 1970s onward, language, symbolism, text, and meaning came to be seen as the theoretical foundation for the humanities, through the influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein, Ferdinand de Saussure, George Herbert Mead, Noam Chomsky, Hans-Georg Gadamer, Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida and other thinkers in linguistic and analytic philosophy, structural linguistics, symbolic interactionism, hermeneutics, semiology, linguistically oriented psychoanalysis (Jacques Lacan, Alfred Lorenzer), and deconstruction.
When, in the 1970s and 1980s, Jürgen Habermas redefined critical social theory as a theory of communication, i.e. communicative competence and communicative rationality on the one hand, distorted communication on the other.
Education[edit]
Critical theorists have widely credited Paulo Freire for the first applications of Critical Theory towards education. They consider his best-known work, Pedagogy of the Oppressed, a seminal text in what is now known as the philosophy and social movement of critical pedagogy.

See also[edit]





Book: Critical theory





Frankfurt School
Outline of Critical Theory

Lists[edit]

Information criticism
List of critical theorists
List of works in Critical Theory

Journals related to Critical Theory or critical sociology[edit]

Constellations
Representations
Critical Inquiry
Telos
Law and Critique

Footnotes[edit]


^ (Horkheimer 1982, 244)
^ [Geuss, R. The Idea of a Critical Theory, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press]
^ Outhwaite, William. 1988. Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers 2nd Edition (2009), pp. 5-8 (ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1)
^ See, e.g., Leszek Kołakowski's Main Currents of Marxism (1979), vol. 3 chapter X; W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0393329437
^ a b Jay, Martin (1996) The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research, 1923–1950. University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-20423-2, p. 41
^ [Geuss, R. The Idea of a Critical Theory, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press]
^ Outhwaite, William. 1988. Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers 2nd Edition (2009), pp. 5-8 (ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1)
^ Horkheimer 1982, p. 244.
^ Bohman, James (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2016 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
^ "Theses on Feuerbach". §XI. Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 11 April 2015. 
^ Adorno, T. W., with Max Horkheimer. Dialectic of Enlightenment. Trans. Edmund Jephcott. Stanford: Stanford UP, 2002. 242.
^ "Critical Theory was initially developed in Horkheimer's circle to think through political disappointments at the absence of revolution in the West, the development of Stalinism in Soviet Russia, and the victory of fascism in Germany. It was supposed to explain mistaken Marxist prognoses, but without breaking Marxist intentions." "The Entwinement of Myth and Enlightenment: Horkheimer and Adorno." in Habermas, Jürgen. The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve Lectures. trans. Frederick Lawrence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987. 116. Also, see Helmut Dubiel, Theory and Politics: Studies in the Development of Critical Theory, trans. Benjamin Gregg (Cambridge, Mass. and London, 1985).
^ "[G]one are the objective laws of the market which ruled in the actions of the entrepreneurs and tended toward catastrophe. Instead the conscious decision of the managing directors executes as results (which are more obligatory than the blindest price-mechanisms) the old law of value and hence the destiny of capitalism." Dialectic of Enlightenment. p. 38.
^ "The Entwinement of Myth and Enlightenment," p. 118.
^ Outhwaite, William. 1988. Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers 2nd Edition (2009). p6. ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1
^ Bittar, Eduardo C. B., Democracia, Justiça e Emancipação Social, São Paulo, Quartier Latin, 2013.
^ See, e.g., Leszek Kołakowski's Main Currents of Marxism (1979), vol. 3 chapter X; W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0393329437
^ Lindlof & Taylor, 2002, p. 52
^ Lindlof & Taylor, 2002, p. 53
^ Rivera Vicencio, E. (2012). "Foucault: His influence over accounting and management research. Building of a map of Foucault's approach". Int. J. Critical Accounting. 4 (5/6): 728–756. 
^ "Introduction to Jean Baudrillard, Module on Postmodernity". www.cla.purdue.edu. Retrieved 2017-06-16. 
^ Kellner, Douglas (2015). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2015 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
^ Aylesworth, Gary (2015). "Postmodernism". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 24 June 2017. 


References[edit]

Horkheimer, Max. 1982. Critical Theory Selected Essays. New York: Continuum Pub.
An accessible primer for the literary aspect of Critical Theory is Jonathan Culler's Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction ISBN 0-19-285383-X
Another short introductory volume with illustrations: "Introducing Critical Theory" Stuart Sim & Borin Van Loon, 2001. ISBN 1-84046-264-7
A survey of and introduction to the current state of critical social theory is Craig Calhoun's Critical Social Theory: Culture, History, and the Challenge of Difference (Blackwell, 1995) ISBN 1-55786-288-5
Problematizing Global Knowledge. Theory, Culture & Society. Vol. 23 (2–3). (Sage, 2006) ISSN 0263-2764
Raymond Geuss The Idea of a Critical Theory. Habermas and the Frankfurt School. (Cambridge University Press, 1981) ISBN 0-521-28422-8
Charles Arthur Willard Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy. University of Chicago Press. 1996.
Charles Arthur Willard, A Theory of Argumentation. University of Alabama Press. 1989.
Charles Arthur Willard, Argumentation and the Social Grounds of Knowledge. University of Alabama Press. 1982.
Harry Dahms (ed.), No Social Science Without Critical Theory. Volume 25 of Current Perspectives in Social Theory (Emerald/JAI, 2008).
Charmaz, K. (1995). Between positivism and postmodernism: Implications for methods. Studies in Symbolic Interaction, 17, 43–72.
Conquergood, D. (1991). "Rethinking ethnography: Towards a critical cultural politics" (PDF). Communication Monographs. 58 (2): 179–194. doi:10.1080/03637759109376222. 
Gandler, Stefan (2009) (in German), Fragmentos de Frankfurt. Ensayos sobre la Teoría crítica, México: Siglo XXI Editores/Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro, ISBN 978-607-03-0070-7 
Lindlof, T. R., & Taylor, B. C. (2002). Qualitative Communication Research Methods, 2nd Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morgan, Marcia. (2012). Kierkegaard and Critical Theory. New York: Lexington Books.
An example of critical postmodern work is Rolling, Jr., J. H. (2008). Secular blasphemy: Utter(ed) transgressions against names and fathers in the postmodern era. Qualitative Inquiry, 14, 926–948.
Thomas, Jim (1993). Doing Critical Ethnography. London, New York (NY): Sage 1993, pp. 1–5 & 17–25
An example of critical qualitative research is Tracy, S. J. (2000). Becoming a character for commerce: Emotion labor, self subordination and discursive construction of identity in a total institution. Management Communication Quarterly, 14, 90–128.
Eduardo C. B. Bittar, Democracy, Justice and Human Rights: Studies of Critical Theory and Social Philosophy of Law. Saarbruken: Lambert, 2016.
Luca Corchia, La logica dei processi culturali. Jürgen Habermas tra filosofia e sociologia, Genova, Edizioni ECIG, 2010, ISBN 978-88-7544-195-1.

External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Critical theory





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Critical theory.


Archival collections[edit]

Guide to the Critical Theory Offprint Collection. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, CaliGuide to the Critical Theory Institute Audio and Video Recordings, University of California, Irvine. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.
University of California, Irvine, Critical Theory Institute Manuscript Materials. Special Collections and Archives, The UC Irvine Libraries, Irvine, California.

Other[edit]

Critical Theory, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"The Frankfurt School and Critical Theory". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Gerhardt, Christina. "Frankfurt School." The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest. Ness, Immanuel (ed). Blackwell Publishing, 2009. Blackwell Reference Online.
"Theory: Death Is Not the End" N+1 magazine's short history of academic Critical Theory.
Critical Legal Thinking A Critical Legal Studies website which uses Critical Theory in an analysis of law and politics.
L. Corchia, Jürgen Habermas. A Bibliography: works and studies (1952-2013), Pisa, Edizioni Il Campano – Arnus University Books, 2013, 606 pages.







v
t
e


Critical theory



Origins



Frankfurt School
Freudo-Marxism





Concepts



Critical vocabulary
Binary opposition
Dominant privilege
Phallogocentrism
Reconstructivism





Derivatives



Archetypal literary criticism
New Historicism
Technocriticism




Critical ...



applied linguistics
cartography
criminology
design
discourse analysis
ethnography
geography
geopolitics
historiography
international relations theory
language awareness
legal studies
management studies
medical anthropology
pedagogy
practice
psychiatry
psychology
race theory
security studies
social thought
technical practice
terrorism studies















v
t
e


Continental philosophy



Philosophers



Theodor W. Adorno
Giorgio Agamben
Louis Althusser
Hannah Arendt
Gaston Bachelard
Alain Badiou
Roland Barthes
Georges Bataille
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Walter Benjamin
Simone de Beauvoir
Henri Bergson
Maurice Blanchot
Pierre Bourdieu
Wendy Brown
Martin Buber
Judith Butler
Albert Camus
Ernst Cassirer
Cornelius Castoriadis
Emil Cioran
Guy Debord
Gilles Deleuze
Jacques Derrida
Hubert L. Dreyfus
Umberto Eco
Terry Eagleton
Frantz Fanon
Johann Gottlieb Fichte
Michel Foucault
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Félix Guattari
Antonio Gramsci
Roman Ingarden
Jürgen Habermas
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Martin Heidegger
Edmund Husserl
Luce Irigaray
Fredric Jameson
Karl Jaspers
Walter Kaufmann
Søren Kierkegaard
Pierre Klossowski
Alexandre Kojève
Alexandre Koyré
Leszek Kołakowski
Julia Kristeva
Jacques Lacan
François Laruelle
Henri Lefebvre
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Emmanuel Levinas
Niklas Luhmann
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Gabriel Marcel
Herbert Marcuse
Karl Marx
Quentin Meillassoux
Maurice Merleau-Ponty
Antonio Negri
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Paul Ricœur
Edward Said
Jean-Paul Sartre
Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
Carl Schmitt
Arthur Schopenhauer
Michel Serres
Gilbert Simondon
Peter Sloterdijk
Leo Strauss
Raymond Williams
Slavoj Žižek





Theories



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Frankfurt School
German idealism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Kantianism
Non-philosophy
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Psychoanalytic theory
Social constructionism
Speculative realism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Concepts



Angst
Authenticity
Being in itself
Boredom
Dasein
Différance
Difference
Existential crisis
Facticity
Intersubjectivity
Ontic
Other
Self-deception
Trace








Category
Index












v
t
e


Philosophy








Branches







Traditional



Metaphysics

Ontology


Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics





Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Business
Color
Cosmos
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Feminism
Language
Life
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy of psychiatry
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Culture
Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Engineering
Information


War
















Schools of thought







By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary







Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen





Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Atomism
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eleatics
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Ionian

Ephesian
Milesian


Megarian school
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Pluralism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism
Neopythagoreanism
Sophistic
Stoicism





Indian



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Ājīvika
Ajñana
Cārvāka
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika







Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism








Medieval




European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism





East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism





Indian



Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Navya-Nyāya





Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Sufi





Jewish



Judeo-Islamic








Modern




People



Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism
Spinozism





0



Anarchism
Classical Realism
Liberalism
Collectivism
Conservatism
Determinism
Dualism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Historicism
Holism
Humanism
Idealism

Absolute
British
German
Objective
Subjective
Transcendental


Individualism
Kokugaku
Materialism
Modernism
Monism
Naturalism
Natural law
Nihilism
New Confucianism
Neo-Scholasticism
Pragmatism
Phenomenology
Positivism
Reductionism
Rationalism
Social contract
Socialism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism








Contemporary




Analytic



Applied ethics
Analytic feminism
Analytical Marxism
Communitarianism
Consequentialism
Critical rationalism
Experimental philosophy
Falsificationism
Foundationalism / Coherentism
Generative linguistics
Internalism and Externalism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Normative ethics
Meta-ethics
Moral realism
Neo-Aristotelian
Quinean naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Systemics
Scientism
Scientific realism
Scientific skepticism
Contemporary utilitarianism
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian





Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
New Historicism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Marxism
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...



















Positions







Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response





Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue





Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism





Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism





Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism / Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism





Mind



Behaviorism
Emergentism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism





Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism





Ontology



Action
Event
Process





Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Physicalism
Realism



















Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists
Miscellaneous










By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
Australian
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene
Spanish
Turkish





Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications





Miscellaneous



Women in philosophy
Sage (philosophy)














 Portal
 Category
 Book












v
t
e


Positivism







Perspectives



Antihumanism
Empiricism
Rationalism
Scientism





Declinations



Legal positivism
Logical positivism / analytic philosophy
Positivist school
Postpositivism
Sociological positivism
Machian positivism (empiriocriticism)
Rankean historical positivism
Polish positivism
Russian positivism (empiriomonism)





Principal concepts



Consilience
Demarcation
Evidence
Induction
Justificationism
Pseudoscience
Critique of metaphysics
Unity of science
Verificationism





Antitheses



Antipositivism
Confirmation holism
Critical theory
Falsifiability
Geisteswissenschaft
Hermeneutics
Historicism
Historism
Human science
Humanities
Problem of induction
Reflectivism





Related paradigm shifts
in the history of science



Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s)
Heisenberg uncertainty principle (1927)





Related topics



Behavioralism
Critical rationalism
Criticism of science
Epistemological idealism
Epistemology
Holism in anthropology
Instrumentalism
Modernism
Naturalism in literature
Nomothetic–idiographic distinction
Objectivity in science
Operationalism
Phenomenalism
Philosophy of science

Deductive-nomological model
Ramsey sentence
Sense-data theory


Qualitative research
Relationship between religion and science
Sociology
Social science (Philosophy)
Structural functionalism
Structuralism
Structuration theory













Positivist-related debate







Method



1890s Methodenstreit (economics)
1909–1959 Werturteilsstreit
1960s Positivismusstreit
1980s Fourth Great Debate in international relations
1990s Science Wars





Contributions



1830 The Course in Positive Philosophy
1848 A General View of Positivism
1869 Critical History of Philosophy
1879 Idealism and Positivism
1886 The Analysis of Sensations
1927 The Logic of Modern Physics
1936 Language, Truth, and Logic
1959 The Two Cultures
2001 The Universe in a Nutshell





Proponents



Richard Avenarius
A. J. Ayer
Auguste Comte
Eugen Dühring
Émile Durkheim
Ernst Laas
Ernst Mach
Berlin Circle
Vienna Circle





Criticism



1909 Materialism and Empiriocriticism
1923 History and Class Consciousness
1934 The Logic of Scientific Discovery
1936 The Poverty of Historicism
1942 World Hypotheses
1951 Two Dogmas of Empiricism
1960 Truth and Method
1962 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
1963 Conjectures and Refutations
1964 One-Dimensional Man
1968 Knowledge and Human Interests
1978 The Poverty of Theory
1980 The Scientific Image
1986 The Rhetoric of Economics





Critics



Theodor W. Adorno
Gaston Bachelard
Mario Bunge
Wilhelm Dilthey
Paul Feyerabend
Hans-Georg Gadamer
Thomas Kuhn
György Lukács
Karl Popper
Willard Van Orman Quine
Max Weber





Concepts in contention



Knowledge
Phronesis
Truth
Verstehen












Category







Authority control



GND: 4073840-1
NDL: 01134339











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_theory&oldid=817656078"					Categories: Critical theoryContinental philosophyPhilosophical movementsPolitical philosophySocial philosophyFrankfurt SchoolHidden categories: Use dmy dates from December 2012Articles needing expert attention from August 2017All articles needing expert attentionSociology articles needing expert attentionArticles containing German-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2012Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers