This article is about the conservation designation itself. For lists of critically endangered species, see Lists of IUCN Red List Critically Endangered species.


Conservation status
by IUCN Red List category






Extinct





Extinct (EX)
Extinct in the Wild (EW)






(list)
(list)





Threatened





Critically Endangered (CR)
Endangered (EN)
Vulnerable (VU)






(list)
(list)
(list)





Lower Risk





Near Threatened (NT)
Conservation Dependent (CD)
Least Concern (LC)






(list)
(list)







Other categories





Data Deficient (DD)
Not Evaluated (NE)






(list)







Related topics



International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN)

IUCN Red List
Lists of organisms by population














v
t
e





A critically endangered (CR) species is one which has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as facing a very high risk of extinction in the wild.[1] It is the highest risk category assigned by the IUCN Red List for wild species.
As of 2014, there are 2464 animal and 2104 plant species with this assessment, compared with 1998 levels of 854 and 909, respectively.[2]
As the IUCN Red List does not consider a species extinct until extensive, targeted surveys have been conducted, species which are possibly extinct are still listed as critically endangered. IUCN maintains a list[3] of "possibly extinct" CR(PE) and "possibly extinct in the wild" CR(PEW) species, modelled on categories used by BirdLife International to categorize these taxa.



Contents


1 International Union for Conservation of Nature definition
2 See also
3 Notes
4 References
5 External links



International Union for Conservation of Nature definition[edit]
To be defined as critically endangered in the Red List, a species must meet any of the following criteria (A–E) ("3G/10Y" signifies three generations or ten years—whichever is longer—over a maximum of 100 years; "MI" signifies Mature Individuals):[4]

A: Occurring over less than 100 km² and two of:

1. Severe habitat fragmentation or existing at just one location






2. Decline in extent of occurrence, area of occupancy, area/extent/quality of habitat, number of locations/subpopulations, or amount of MI.






3. Extreme fluctuations in extent of occurrence, area of occupancy, number of locations/subpopulations, or amount of MI.




B: As above, but less than 10 km² (used to show differing levels of severity).


C: Declining population of less than 250 MI and either:

1. A decline of 25% over 3G/10Y;






2. Extreme fluctuations, or over 90% of MI in a single subpopulation, or no more than 50 MI in any one subpopulation.




D: Numbers less than 50 MI.


E: At least 50% chance of going Extinct in the Wild over 3G/10Y.

See also[edit]


Ecology portal
Extinct and endangered species portal



Lists of IUCN Red List Critically Endangered species for lists ordered by taxonomic rank.
Category:IUCN Red List critically endangered species for an alphabetical list
The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates
The world's 100 most threatened species
IUCN for additional information on the IUCN
List of critically endangered amphibians
List of critically endangered arthropods
List of critically endangered birds
List of critically endangered fish
List of critically endangered insects
List of critically endangered invertebrates
List of critically endangered mammals
List of critically endangered molluscs
List of critically endangered plants
List of critically endangered reptiles
List of Chromista by conservation status
List of fungi by conservation status

Notes[edit]



^ "Apes extinct in a generation". BBC. 2005-09-01. Retrieved 2005-09-01. 
^ IUCN (2014). "Table 2: Changes in numbers of species in the threatened categories (CR, EN, VU) from 1996 to 2014 (IUCN Red List version 2014.2) for the major taxonomic groups on the Red List" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-08-30. 
^ "Summary Statistics". www.iucnredlist.org. Retrieved 2017-12-10. 
^ IUCN (9 Feb 2000). "IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria, Version 3.1" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-12-31. 



References[edit]

List of Critically Endangered Species. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2014.2. International Union for Conservation of Nature. 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014.

External links[edit]

The Criteria for Critically Endangered, IUCN







v
t
e


Threatened species




Template: Threatened species by region



IUCN Red List




Categories1




Extinct



Extinct (EX)
Extinct in the Wild (EW)





Threatened



Critically Endangered (CR)
Endangered (EN)
Vulnerable (VU)





Lower risk



Near Threatened (NT)
Least Concern (LC)
Lower Risk (LR)
Conservation Dependent (LR/cd)





Not fully assessed



Data Deficient (DD)
Not Evaluated (NE)








Species




Lists



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





 WP categories



Extinct
Extinct in the Wild
Critically Endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable
Near Threatened
Least Concern
Data Deficient





CITES



Appendix I
Appendix II
Appendix III














By taxa



Endangered arthropods / spiders
Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista
The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates
The world's 100 most threatened species





Conservation



Biodiversity action plan
Biodiversity threats
Conservation biology
CITES
ARKive
Bird conservation
Conservation status
Conservation-reliant species
Ecoregion conservation status
Habitat destruction
Latent extinction risk
Rare species
Vulnerability and susceptibility






1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics.










v
t
e


Threatened species by region



By region



Blue-listed
Environmental Vulnerability Index
Regional Red List











Australasia



Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
ROTAP
Threatened Species Protection Act 1995
Threatened ecological community
Trade in Endangered Species Act 1989





Canada



Species at Risk Act
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada





Europe



European Endangered Species Programme
Funds for Endangered Parrots





South Africa



Endangered Wildlife Trust





United
States



Distinct population segment
Endangered Species Act of 1973
Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978
Endangered species recovery plan
Endangered Wolf Center
National Wildlife Refuge
NatureServe conservation status
The Nature Conservancy





Lists




Asia



List of endangered and protected species of China
Endangered mammals of India
List of endangered animals in India
List of endangered species in Pakistan
List of threatened species of the Philippines
List of endangered species in Vietnam





Europe



Threatened mammals of Europe
Endangered plants of Europe
List of United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan species
List of extinct and endangered species of Italy
List of extinct and endangered species of Lithuania





North
America



List of endangered plants in North America
List of endangered species in North America
Endangered mammals and birds of the United States
List of threatened mammals of the United States
List of threatened birds of the United States
List of threatened reptiles and amphibians of the United States





Elsewhere



Threatened fauna of Australia
List of threatened flora of Australia
List of endangered flora of Brazil
List of threatened mammals of Brazil
List of threatened birds of Brazil














						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critically_endangered&oldid=814702941"					Categories: Critically endangered speciesBiota by conservation statusIUCN Red List