"Missile Crisis" redirects here. For the Cyprus Missile Crisis, see Cyprus Missile Crisis.


Cuban Missile Crisis


Part of the Cold War



Soviet R-12 intermediate-range nuclear ballistic missile (NATO designation SS-4) in Moscow





Date
October 16–28, 1962
(naval blockade of Cuba ended November 20, 1962)


Location
Cuba


Result


Withdrawal of the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles from Cuba
Withdrawal of American nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy
Agreement with the Soviet Union that the United States would never invade Cuba without direct provocation
Creation of a nuclear hotline between the United States and the Soviet Union







Belligerents


 Soviet Union
 Cuba
Supported by:
 Warsaw Pact
 United States
 Italy
 Turkey
Supported by:
 NATO


Commanders and leaders





 Nikita Khrushchev
 Anastas Mikoyan
 Rodion Malinovsky
 Issa Pliyev
 Georgy Abashvili
 Fidel Castro
 Raúl Castro
 Che Guevara






 John F. Kennedy
 Robert McNamara
 Maxwell D. Taylor
 Curtis LeMay
 George Whelan Anderson Jr.
 Robert F. Kennedy
 Amintore Fanfani
 Giulio Andreotti
 Cemal Gürsel





Casualties and losses


64 soviet citizens died (statistics of the MoD of the RF for 1962—1964)[1]
1 U-2 spy aircraft
1 aircraft damaged
1 killed


The Cuban Missile Crisis, also known as the October Crisis (Spanish: Crisis de Octubre), the Caribbean Crisis (Russian: Карибский кризис, tr. Karibsky krizis, IPA: [kɐˈrʲipskʲɪj ˈkrʲizʲɪs]), or the Missile Scare, was a 13-day (October 16–28, 1962) confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union concerning American ballistic missile deployment in Italy and Turkey with consequent Soviet ballistic missile deployment in Cuba. The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war.[2]
In response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 and the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to agree to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter a future invasion. An agreement was reached during a secret meeting between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro in July 1962 and construction of a number of missile launch facilities started later that summer.
The 1962 United States elections were under way, and the White House had denied charges that it was ignoring dangerous Soviet missiles 90 miles from Florida. The missile preparations were confirmed when an Air Force U-2 spy plane produced clear photographic evidence of medium-range (SS-4) and intermediate-range (R-14) ballistic missile facilities. The US established a military blockade to prevent further missiles from reaching Cuba; Oval Office tapes during the crisis revealed that Kennedy had also put the blockade in place as an attempt to provoke Soviet-backed forces in Berlin as well. It announced that they would not permit offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba and demanded that the weapons already in Cuba be dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union.
After a long period of tense negotiations, an agreement was reached between US President John F. Kennedy and Khrushchev. Publicly, the Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a US public declaration and agreement to avoid invading Cuba again. Secretly, the United States also agreed that it would dismantle all U.S.-built Jupiter MRBMs, which had been deployed in Turkey against the Soviet Union; there has been debate on whether or not Italy was included in the agreement as well.
When all offensive missiles and Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers had been withdrawn from Cuba, the blockade was formally ended on November 21, 1962. The negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear, and direct communication line between Washington and Moscow. As a result, the Moscow–Washington hotline was established. A series of agreements reduced US-Soviet tensions for several years.



Contents


1 Earlier US actions
2 Balance of power
3 Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba
4 Missiles reported

4.1 Aerial images find Soviet missiles
4.2 President notified
4.3 Responses considered


5 Operational plans
6 Quarantine

6.1 Speech to the nation
6.2 Crisis deepens
6.3 International response
6.4 Soviet broadcast
6.5 U.S. alert level raised
6.6 Blockade challenged
6.7 Stalemate


7 Secret negotiations

7.1 Crisis continues
7.2 Drafting response


8 Crisis ends
9 Aftermath
10 Later revelations
11 In popular culture

11.1 Media representations


12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading

15.1 Historiography
15.2 Primary sources
15.3 Lesson plans


16 External links



Earlier US actions
The U.S. was concerned about an expansion of communism, and a Latin American country openly allying with the Soviet Union was regarded by it as unacceptable since the end of World War II, and the start of the Cold War. Such an involvement would also directly defy the Monroe Doctrine, a U.S. policy limiting U.S. involvement in European colonies and European affairs but holding that the Western Hemisphere was in the U.S. sphere of influence.
The Kennedy administration had been publicly embarrassed by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April, 1961, which had been launched under President John F. Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles. Afterward, former President Dwight Eisenhower told Kennedy that "the failure of the Bay of Pigs will embolden the Soviets to do something that they would otherwise not do."[3]:10 The half-hearted invasion left Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and his advisers with the impression that Kennedy was indecisive and, as one Soviet adviser wrote, "too young, intellectual, not prepared well for decision making in crisis situations... too intelligent and too weak."[3] U.S. covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful Operation Mongoose.[4]
In addition, Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weaknesses was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly to the building of the Berlin Wall. Speaking to Soviet officials in the aftermath of the crisis, Khrushchev asserted, "I know for certain that Kennedy doesn't have a strong background, nor, generally speaking, does he have the courage to stand up to a serious challenge." He also told his son Sergei that on Cuba, Kennedy "would make a fuss, make more of a fuss, and then agree."[5]
In January, 1962, US Army General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban government in a top-secret report (partially declassified 1989), addressed to Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose.[4] CIA agents or "pathfinders" from the Special Activities Division were to be infiltrated into Cuba to carry out sabotage and organization, including radio broadcasts.[6] In February, 1962, the US launched an embargo against Cuba,[7] and Lansdale presented a 26-page, top-secret timetable for implementation of the overthrow of the Cuban government, mandating guerrilla operations to begin in August and September. "Open revolt and overthrow of the Communist regime" would occur in the first two weeks of October.[4]
Balance of power






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



When Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged "missile gap" with the Soviets leading. In fact, the US led the Soviets by a wide margin that would only increase. In 1961, the Soviets had only four intercontinental ballistic missiles (R-7 Semyorka). By October 1962, they may have had a few dozen, with some intelligence estimates as high as 75.[8]
The U.S., on the other hand, had 170 ICBMs and was quickly building more. It also had eight George Washington- and Ethan Allen-class ballistic missile submarines, with the capability to launch 16 Polaris missiles, each with a range of 2,500 nautical miles (4,600 km).
Khrushchev increased the perception of a missile gap when he loudly boasted to the world that the Soviets were building missiles "like sausages" but Soviet missiles' numbers and capabilities actually were nowhere close to his assertions. The Soviet Union had medium-range ballistic missiles in quantity, about 700 of them, but they were very unreliable and inaccurate. The US had a considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads (27,000 against 3,600) and in the technology required for their accurate delivery.
The US also led in missile defensive capabilities, naval and air power; but the Soviets had a 2-1 advantage in conventional ground forces, more pronounced in field guns and tanks, particularly in the European theater.[8]
Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba
In May 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was persuaded by the idea of countering the US's growing lead in developing and deploying strategic missiles by placing Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite the misgivings of the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, Alexandr Ivanovich Alexeyev, who argued that Castro would not accept the deployment of the missiles.[9] Khrushchev faced a strategic situation in which the US was perceived to have a "splendid first strike" capability that put the Soviet Union at a huge disadvantage. In 1962, the Soviets had only 20 ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear warheads to the US from inside the Soviet Union.[10] The poor accuracy and reliability of the missiles raised serious doubts about their effectiveness. A newer, more reliable generation of ICBMs would become operational only after 1965.[10]
Therefore, Soviet nuclear capability in 1962 placed less emphasis on ICBMs than on medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs and IRBMs). The missiles could hit American allies and most of Alaska from Soviet territory but not the Contiguous US. Graham Allison, the director of Harvard University's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, points out, "The Soviet Union could not right the nuclear imbalance by deploying new ICBMs on its own soil. In order to meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had very few options. Moving existing nuclear weapons to locations from which they could reach American targets was one."[11]
A second reason that Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba was because Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin, controlled by the American, British and French within Communist East Germany, into the Soviet orbit. The East Germans and Soviets considered western control over a portion of Berlin a grave threat to East Germany. Khrushchev made West Berlin the central battlefield of the Cold War. Khrushchev believed that if the US did nothing over the missile deployments in Cuba, he could muscle the West out of Berlin using said missiles as a deterrent to western countermeasures in Berlin. If the US tried to bargain with the Soviets after it became aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin. Since Berlin was strategically more important than Cuba, the trade would be a win for Khrushchev, as Kennedy recognized: "The advantage is, from Khrushchev's point of view, he takes a great chance but there are quite some rewards to it."[12]




More than 100 US-built missiles having the capability to strike Moscow with nuclear warheads were deployed in Italy and Turkey in 1961.


Khrushchev was also reacting in part to the nuclear threat of obsolescent Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles that had been installed by the US in Turkey in April 1962.[8]
In early 1962, a group of Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied an agricultural delegation to Havana. They obtained a meeting with Cuban leader Fidel Castro. The Cuban leadership had a strong expectation that the US would invade Cuba again and enthusiastically approved the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba. However, according to another source, Castro objected to the missiles deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but he was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be an irritant to the US and help the interests of the entire socialist camp.[13] Also, the deployment would include short-range tactical weapons (with a range of 40 km, usable only against naval vessels) that would provide a "nuclear umbrella" for attacks upon the island.
By May, Khrushchev and Castro agreed to place strategic nuclear missiles secretly in Cuba. Like Castro, Khrushchev felt that a US invasion of Cuba was imminent and that to lose Cuba would do great harm to the communists, especially in Latin America. He said he wanted to confront the Americans "with more than words.... the logical answer was missiles."[14]:29 The Soviets maintained their tight secrecy, writing their plans longhand, which were approved by Rodion Malinovsky on July 4 and Khrushchev on July 7.
From the very beginning, the Soviets' operation entailed elaborate denial and deception, known as "maskirovka".[15] All the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were carried out in the utmost secrecy, with only a very few told the exact nature of the mission. Even the troops detailed for the mission were given misdirection by being told that they were headed for a cold region and being outfitted with ski boots, fleece-lined parkas, and other winter equipment.[15] The Soviet codename was Operation Anadyr. The Anadyr River flows into the Bering Sea, and Anadyr is also the capital of Chukotsky District and a bomber base in the far eastern region. All the measures were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences.[15]
Specialists in missile construction under the guise of "machine operators," "irrigation specialists," and "agricultural specialists" arrived in July.[15] A total of 43,000 foreign troops would ultimately be brought in.[16] Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, chief of the Soviet Rocket Forces, led a survey team that visited Cuba. He told Khrushchev that the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by palm trees.[8]
The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September, the US Congress approved Joint Resolution 230, which expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally-supported military establishment.[17][18] On the same day, the US announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIGLEX-62, which Cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation and proof that the US planned to invade Cuba.[18][19][unreliable source?]
The Soviet leadership believed, based on its perception of Kennedy's lack of confidence during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, that he would avoid confrontation and accept the missiles as a fait accompli.[3]:1 On September 11, the Soviet Union publicly warned that a US attack on Cuba or on Soviet ships that were carrying supplies to the island would mean war.[4] The Soviets continued the Maskirovka program to conceal their actions in Cuba. They repeatedly denied that the weapons being brought into Cuba were offensive in nature. On September 7, Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin assured United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the Soviet Union was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba. On September 11, the Telegrafnoe Agentstvo Sovetskogo Soyuza (Soviet News Agency TASS) announced that the Soviet Union had no need or intention to introduce offensive nuclear missiles into Cuba. On October 13, Dobrynin was questioned by former Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles about whether the Soviets planned to put offensive weapons in Cuba. He denied any such plans.[18] On October 17, Soviet embassy official Georgy Bolshakov brought President Kennedy a personal message from Khrushchev reassuring him that "under no circumstances would surface-to-surface missiles be sent to Cuba."[18]:494
As early as August 1962, the US suspected the Soviets of building missile facilities in Cuba. During that month, its intelligence services gathered information about sightings by ground observers of Russian-built MiG-21 fighters and Il-28 light bombers. U-2 spyplanes found S-75 Dvina (NATO designation SA-2) surface-to-air missile sites at eight different locations. CIA director John A. McCone was suspicious. Sending antiaircraft missiles into Cuba, he reasoned, "made sense only if Moscow intended to use them to shield a base for ballistic missiles aimed at the United States."[20] On August 10, he wrote a memo to Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba.[8]
With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the crisis became enmeshed in American politics. On August 31, Senator Kenneth Keating (R-New York), who received his information from Cuban exiles in Florida, warned on the Senate floor that the Soviet Union may be constructing a missile base in Cuba. He charged the Kennedy administration of covering up a major threat to the US.[21] Air Force General Curtis LeMay presented a pre-invasion bombing plan to Kennedy in September, and spy flights and minor military harassment from US forces at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base were the subject of continual Cuban diplomatic complaints to the US government.[4]




Map created by American intelligence showing Surface-to-Air Missile activity in Cuba, 5 September 1962


The first consignment of R-12 missiles arrived on the night of September 8, followed by a second on September 16. The R-12 was a medium-range ballistic missile, capable of carrying a thermonuclear warhead.[22] It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fueled missile that could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon.[23] The Soviets were building nine sites — six for R-12 medium-range missiles (NATO designation SS-4 Sandal) with an effective range of 2,000 kilometres (1,200 mi) and three for R-14 intermediate-range ballistic missiles (NATO designation SS-5 Skean) with a maximum range of 4,500 kilometres (2,800 mi).[24]
On October 7, Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado spoke at the UN General Assembly: "If... we are attacked, we will defend ourselves. I repeat, we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves; we have indeed our inevitable weapons, the weapons, which we would have preferred not to acquire, and which we do not wish to employ."
Missiles reported
The missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to target effectively most of the Continental US. The planned arsenal was forty launchers. The Cuban populace readily noticed the arrival and deployment of the missiles and hundreds of reports reached Miami. US intelligence received countless reports, many of dubious quality or even laughable, most of which could be dismissed as describing defensive missiles.
Only five reports bothered the analysts. They described large trucks passing through towns at night that were carrying very long canvas-covered cylindrical objects that could not make turns through towns without backing up and maneuvering. Defensive missiles could turn. The reports could not be satisfactorily dismissed.[25]




A U-2 reconnaissance photograph of Cuba, showing Soviet nuclear missiles, their transports and tents for fueling and maintenance.


Aerial images find Soviet missiles
The United States had been sending U-2 surveillance over Cuba since the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.[26] The first issue that led to a pause in reconnaissance flights took place on August 30, when a U-2 operated by the U.S. Air Force's Strategic Air Command flew over Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East by mistake. The Soviets lodged a protest and the US apologized. Nine days later, a Taiwanese-operated U-2[27][28] was lost over western China to an SA-2 surface-to-air missile. US officials were worried that one of the Cuban or Soviet SAMs in Cuba might shoot down a CIA U-2, initiating another international incident. In a meeting with members of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance (COMOR) on 10 September, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy heavily restricted further U-2 flights over Cuban airspace. The resulting lack of coverage over the island for the next five weeks became known to historians as the "Photo Gap."[29] No significant U-2 coverage was achieved over the interior of the island. US officials attempted to use a Corona photoreconnaissance satellite to obtain coverage over reported Soviet military deployments, but imagery acquired over western Cuba by a Corona KH-4 mission on 1 October was heavily covered by clouds and haze and failed to provide any usable intelligence.[30] At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov, with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28 light bomber fuselages.[8]
In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases, leading DIA to lobby for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island.[31] Although in the past the flights had been conducted by the CIA, pressure from the Defense Department made the authority be transferred to the Air Force.[8] Following the loss of a CIA U-2 over the Soviet Union in May 1960, it was thought that if another U-2 were shot down, an Air Force aircraft arguably being used for a legitimate military purpose would be easier to explain than a CIA flight.
When the reconnaissance missions were reauthorized on October 9, poor weather kept the planes from flying. The US first obtained U-2 photographic evidence of the missiles on October 14, when a U-2 flight piloted by Major Richard Heyser took 928 pictures on a path selected by DIA analysts, capturing images of what turned out to be an SS-4 construction site at San Cristóbal, Pinar del Río Province (now in Artemisa Province), in western Cuba.[32]
President notified
On October 15, the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation Center (NPIC) reviewed the U-2 photographs and identified objects that they interpreted as medium range ballistic missiles. This identification was made, in part, on the strength of reporting provided by Oleg Penkovsky, a double agent in the GRU working for CIA and MI6. Although he provided no direct reports of the Soviet missile deployments to Cuba, technical and doctrinal details of Soviet missile regiments that had been provided by Penkovsky in the months and years prior to the Crisis helped NPIC analysts correctly identify the missiles on U-2 imagery.[33]
That evening, the CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President. McNamara was briefed at midnight. The next morning, Bundy met with Kennedy and showed him the U-2 photographs and briefed him on the CIA's analysis of the images.[34] At 6:30 pm EDT, Kennedy convened a meeting of the nine members of the National Security Council and five other key advisors,[35] in a group he formally named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council (EXCOMM) after the fact on October 22 by the National Security Action Memorandum 196.[36] Without informing the members of EXCOMM, President Kennedy tape recorded all of their proceedings, and Sheldon M. Stern, head of the Kennedy library transcribed some of them.[37][38]
Responses considered




President Kennedy meets in the Oval Office with General Curtis LeMay and the reconnaissance pilots who found the missile sites in Cuba.


The US had no plan in place because its intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba. The EXCOMM quickly discussed several possible courses of action:[39]

Do nothing: American vulnerability to Soviet missiles was not new.
Diplomacy: Use diplomatic pressure to get the Soviet Union to remove the missiles.
Secret approach: Offer Castro the choice of splitting with the Russians or being invaded.
Invasion: Full force invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro.
Air strike: Use the US Air Force to attack all known missile sites.
Blockade: Use the US Navy to block any missiles from arriving in Cuba.





As the article describes, both the US and the Soviet Union considered many possible outcomes of their actions and threats during the crisis (Allison, Graham T.; Zelikow, Philip D.). This game tree models how both actors would have considered their decisions. It is broken down into a simple form for basic understanding.


The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed that a full-scale attack and invasion was the only solution. They believed that the Soviets would not attempt to stop the US from conquering Cuba. Kennedy was skeptical:

They, no more than we, can let these things go by without doing something. They can't, after all their statements, permit us to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing. If they don't take action in Cuba, they certainly will in Berlin.[40]

Kennedy concluded that attacking Cuba by air would signal the Soviets to presume "a clear line" to conquer Berlin. Kennedy also believed that US allies would think of the country as "trigger-happy cowboys" who lost Berlin because they could not peacefully resolve the Cuban situation.[41]




President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting.


The EXCOMM then discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would seriously alter the military balance, but McNamara disagreed. An extra 40, he reasoned, would make little difference to the overall strategic balance. The US already had approximately 5,000 strategic warheads,[42]:261 but the Soviet Union had only 300. McNamara concluded that the Soviets having 340 would not therefore substantially alter the strategic balance. In 1990, he reiterated that "it made no difference.... The military balance wasn't changed. I didn't believe it then, and I don't believe it now."[43]
The EXCOMM agreed that the missiles would affect the political balance. Kennedy had explicitly promised the American people less than a month before the crisis that "if Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the United States... the United States would act."[44]:674–681 Also, credibility among US allies and people would be damaged if the Soviet Union appeared to redress the strategic balance by placing missiles in Cuba. Kennedy explained after the crisis that "it would have politically changed the balance of power. It would have appeared to, and appearances contribute to reality."[45]




President Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in the Oval Office (October 18, 1962)


On October 18, Kennedy met with Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko, who claimed the weapons were for defensive purposes only. Not wanting to expose what he already knew and to avoid panicking the American public,[46] Kennedy did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile buildup.[47]
By October 19, frequent U-2 spy flights showed four operational sites.[48] On the night of October 19 at 23:56 a helicopter from USS Essex CVS-9 squadron HSS-2 crashed into the Gulf of Mexico. Lt. Cmdr. James Robert Hughes and AM-3 George Blythe perished. Their bodies were never recovered. On October 22, 1962 a second helicopter crashed into the Gulf, that also was from HSS-2 stationed on the Essex. Lost that night were Lt. Cmdr. Witkowski and Enlisted Serviceman 50 AZ Murphy. The details of the deaths of October 19, 1962 have never been provided to the families affected. There are numerous rumors that exist from bad storms, Soviet interference with the flight, or a one-way suicide recon mission. However, the most consistently repeated accounts from on deck witnesses indicate that the helicopter on October 19 was "shot down."[citation needed]
Operational plans
Two Operational Plans (OPLAN) were considered. OPLAN 316 envisioned a full invasion of Cuba by Army and Marine units, supported by the Navy following Air Force and naval airstrikes. However, Army units in the US would have had trouble fielding mechanized and logistical assets, and the US Navy could not supply enough amphibious shipping to transport even a modest armored contingent from the Army.
OPLAN 312, primarily an Air Force and Navy carrier operation, was designed with enough flexibility to do anything from engaging individual missile sites to providing air support for OPLAN 316's ground forces.[49]
Quarantine




A US Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis.[50]


Kennedy met with members of EXCOMM and other top advisers throughout October 21, considering two remaining options: an air strike primarily against the Cuban missile bases or a naval blockade of Cuba.[47] A full-scale invasion was not the administration's first option. McNamara supported the naval blockade as a strong but limited military action that left the US in control. However, the term "blockade" was problematic. According to international law, a blockade is an act of war, but the Kennedy administration did not think that the Soviets would be provoked to attack by a mere blockade.[51] Additionally, legal experts at the State Department and Justice Department concluded that a declaration of war could be avoided if another legal justification, based on the Rio Treaty for defense of the Western Hemisphere, was obtained from a resolution by a two-thirds vote from the members or the Organization of American States (OAS).[52]
Admiral Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations wrote a position paper that helped Kennedy to differentiate between what they termed a "quarantine"[53] of offensive weapons and a blockade of all materials, claiming that a classic blockade was not the original intention. Since it would take place in international waters, Kennedy obtained the approval of the OAS for military action under the hemispheric defense provisions of the Rio Treaty:

Latin American participation in the quarantine now involved two Argentine destroyers which were to report to the U.S. Commander South Atlantic [COMSOLANT] at Trinidad on November 9. An Argentine submarine and a Marine battalion with lift were available if required. In addition, two Venezuelan destroyers (Destroyers ARV D-11 Nueva Esparta" and "ARV D-21 Zulia") and one submarine (Caribe) had reported to COMSOLANT, ready for sea by November 2. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago offered the use of Chaguaramas Naval Base to warships of any OAS nation for the duration of the "quarantine." The Dominican Republic had made available one escort ship. Colombia was reported ready to furnish units and had sent military officers to the U.S. to discuss this assistance. The Argentine Air Force informally offered three SA-16 aircraft in addition to forces already committed to the "quarantine" operation.[54]


This initially was to involve a naval blockade against offensive weapons within the framework of the Organization of American States and the Rio Treaty. Such a blockade might be expanded to cover all types of goods and air transport. The action was to be backed up by surveillance of Cuba. The CNO's scenario was followed closely in later implementing the "quarantine."

On October 19, the EXCOMM formed separate working groups to examine the air strike and blockade options, and by the afternoon most support in the EXCOMM shifted to the blockade option. However, reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the October 21, the paramount concern being that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles. Consequently, the US could find itself bombing operational missiles if blockade failed to force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island.[55]
Speech to the nation




President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962.[56]


At 3:00 pm EDT on October 22, President Kennedy formally established the Executive Committee (EXCOMM) with National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) 196. At 5:00 pm, he met with Congressional leaders who contentiously opposed a blockade and demanded a stronger response. In Moscow, Ambassador Foy D. Kohler briefed Khrushchev on the pending blockade and Kennedy's speech to the nation. Ambassadors around the world gave notice to non-Eastern Bloc leaders. Before the speech, US delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, and French President Charles de Gaulle to brief them on the US intelligence and their proposed response. All were supportive of the U.S position.[57]
Shortly before his speech, Kennedy called former President Dwight Eisenhower.[58] Kennedy's conversation with the former President also revealed that the two were conspiring during the Cuban Missile Crisis.[59]









Address on the Buildup of Arms in Cuba






Kennedy addressing the nation on October 22, 1962 about the buildup of arms on Cuba






Problems playing this file? See media help.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Cuban Missile Crisis



On October 22 at 7:00 pm EDT, Kennedy delivered a nationwide televised address on all of the major networks announcing the discovery of the missiles. He noted:

It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.[60]

Kennedy described the administration's plan:

To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated. All ships of any kind bound for Cuba, from whatever nation or port, will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back. This quarantine will be extended, if needed, to other types of cargo and carriers. We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948.[60]

During the speech, a directive went out to all US forces worldwide, placing them on DEFCON 3. The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade,[53] with USS Leary as Newport News's destroyer escort.[54]
Crisis deepens




Khrushchev's October 24, 1962 letter to Kennedy stating that the blockade of Cuba "constitute[s] an act of aggression..."[61][62]


On October 23, at 11:24 am EDT, a cable, drafted by George Wildman Ball to the US Ambassador in Turkey and NATO, notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw what the US knew to be nearly-obsolete missiles from Italy and Turkey, in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba. Turkish officials replied that they would "deeply resent" any trade involving the US's missile presence in their country.[63] Two days later, on the morning of October 25, US journalist Walter Lippmann proposed the same thing in his syndicated column. Castro reaffirmed Cuba's right to self-defense and said that all of its weapons were defensive and Cuba would not allow an inspection.[4]
International response
Three days after Kennedy's speech, the Chinese People's Daily announced that "650,000,000 Chinese men and women were standing by the Cuban people."[57] In West Germany, newspapers supported the US's response by contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months. They also expressed some fear that the Soviets might retaliate in Berlin. In France on October 23, the crisis made the front page of all the daily newspapers. The next day, an editorial in Le Monde expressed doubt about the authenticity of the CIA's photographic evidence. Two days later, after a visit by a high-ranking CIA agent, the newspaper accepted the validity of the photographs. Also in France, in the October 29 issue of Le Figaro, Raymond Aron wrote in support of the American response.[64] On October 24, Pope John XXIII sent a message to the Soviet embassy in Rome to be transmitted to the Kremlin in which he voiced his concern for peace. In this message he stated, "We beg all governments not to remain deaf to this cry of humanity. That they do all that is in their power to save peace."[65]
Soviet broadcast
The crisis was continuing unabated, and in the evening of October 24, the Soviet news agency TASS broadcast a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy in which Khrushchev warned that the United States's "outright piracy" would lead to war.[66] However, that was followed at 9:24 pm by a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy, which was received at 10:52 pm EDT. Khrushchev stated, "if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA" and that the Soviet Union views the blockade as "an act of aggression" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it.[62]
U.S. alert level raised




Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations, October 25, 1962.


The US requested an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council on October 25. US Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting of the Security Council, challenging him to admit the existence of the missiles. Ambassador Zorin refused to answer. The next day at 10:00 pm EDT, the US raised the readiness level of SAC forces to DEFCON 2. For the only confirmed time in US history, B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, and B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice.[67][68] One eighth of SAC's 1,436 bombers were on airborne alert, and some 145 intercontinental ballistic missiles stood on ready alert, some of which targeted Cuba,[69] and Air Defense Command (ADC) redeployed 161 nuclear-armed interceptors to 16 dispersal fields within nine hours, with one third maintaining 15-minute alert status.[49] Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52s were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union so that it would believe that the US was serious.[70] Jack J. Catton later estimated that about 80 percent of SAC's planes were ready for launch during the crisis; David A. Burchinal recalled that, by contrast:[71]

the Russians were so thoroughly stood down, and we knew it. They didn't make any move. They did not increase their alert; they did not increase any flights, or their air defense posture. They didn't do a thing, they froze in place. We were never further from nuclear war than at the time of Cuba, never further.

By October 22, Tactical Air Command (TAC) had 511 fighters plus supporting tankers and reconnaissance aircraft deployed to face Cuba on one-hour alert status. However, TAC and the Military Air Transport Service had problems. The concentration of aircraft in Florida strained command and support echelons, which faced critical undermanning in security, armaments, and communications; the absence of initial authorization for war-reserve stocks of conventional munitions forced TAC to scrounge; and the lack of airlift assets to support a major airborne drop necessitated the call-up of 24 Reserve squadrons.[49]
On October 25 at 1:45 am EDT, Kennedy responded to Khrushchev's telegram by stating that the US was forced into action after receiving repeated assurances that no offensive missiles were being placed in Cuba, and when the assurances proved to be false, the deployment "required the responses I have announced.... I hope that your government will take necessary action to permit a restoration of the earlier situation."




A declassified map used by the U.S. Navy's Atlantic Fleet showing the position of American and Soviet ships at the height of the crisis.


Blockade challenged
At 7:15 am EDT on October 25, USS Essex and USS Gearing attempted to intercept Bucharest but failed to do so. Fairly certain that the tanker did not contain any military material, the US allowed it through the blockade. Later that day, at 5:43 pm, the commander of the blockade effort ordered the destroyer USS Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. to intercept and board the Lebanese freighter Marucla. That took place the next day, and Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked.[72]
At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on. That report was later verified by a CIA report that suggested there had been no slowdown at all. In response, Kennedy issued Security Action Memorandum 199, authorizing the loading of nuclear weapons onto aircraft under the command of SACEUR, which had the duty of carrying out first air strikes on the Soviet Union. During the day, the Soviets responded to the blockade by turning back 14 ships that were presumably carrying offensive weapons.[68]
Stalemate
The next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba. However, he was persuaded to give the matter time and continue with both military and diplomatic pressure. He agreed and ordered the low-level flights over the island to be increased from two per day to once every two hours. He also ordered a crash program to institute a new civil government in Cuba if an invasion went ahead.
At this point, the crisis was ostensibly at a stalemate. The Soviets had shown no indication that they would back down and had made several comments to the contrary. The US had no reason to believe otherwise and was in the early stages of preparing for an invasion, along with a nuclear strike on the Soviet Union if it responded militarily, which was assumed.[73]
Secret negotiations
At 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A. Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin, the cover name of Alexander Feklisov, the KGB station chief in Washington, at Fomin's request. Following the instructions of the Politburo of the CPSU,[74] Fomin noted, "War seems about to break out." He asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his "high-level friends" at the State Department to see if the US would be interested in a diplomatic solution. He suggested that the language of the deal would contain an assurance from the Soviet Union to remove the weapons under UN supervision and that Castro would publicly announce that he would not accept such weapons again in exchange for a public statement by the US that it would avoid invading Cuba.[75] The US responded by asking the Brazilian government to pass a message to Castro that the US would be "unlikely to invade" if the missiles were removed.[63]


Mr. President, we and you ought not now to pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter that knot will be tied. And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it, and then it will be necessary to cut that knot, and what that would mean is not for me to explain to you, because you yourself understand perfectly of what terrible forces our countries dispose. Consequently, if there is no intention to tighten that knot and thereby to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot. We are ready for this.

Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 26, 1962[76]
On October 26 at 6:00 pm EDT, the State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by Khrushchev. It was Saturday at 2:00 am in Moscow. The long letter took several minutes to arrive, and it took translators additional time to translate and transcribe it.[63]
Robert F. Kennedy described the letter as "very long and emotional." Khrushchev reiterated the basic outline that had been stated to Scali earlier in the day: "I propose: we, for our part, will declare that our ships bound for Cuba are not carrying any armaments. You will declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its troops and will not support any other forces which might intend to invade Cuba. Then the necessity of the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will disappear." At 6:45 pm EDT, news of Fomin's offer to Scali was finally heard and was interpreted as a "set up" for the arrival of Khrushchev's letter. The letter was then considered official and accurate although it was later learned that Fomin was almost certainly operating of his own accord without official backing. Additional study of the letter was ordered and continued into the night.[63]
Crisis continues

Direct aggression against Cuba would mean nuclear war. The Americans speak about such aggression as if they did not know or did not want to accept this fact. I have no doubt they would lose such a war.
— Ernesto Guevara, October 1962[77]





S-75 Dvina with V-750V 1D missile (NATO SA-2 Guideline) on a launcher. An installation similar to this one shot down Major Anderson's U-2 over Cuba.


Castro, on the other hand, was convinced that an invasion of Cuba was soon at hand, and on October 26, he sent a telegram to Khrushchev that appeared to call for a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the US in case of attack. However, in a 2010 interview, Castro expressed regret about his earlier stance on first use: "After I've seen what I've seen, and knowing what I know now, it wasn't worth it at all."[78] Castro also ordered all anti-aircraft weapons in Cuba to fire on any US aircraft:[79] the orders had been to fire only on groups of two or more. At 6:00 am EDT on October 27, the CIA delivered a memo reporting that three of the four missile sites at San Cristobal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande appeared to be fully operational. It also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action but was under order not to initiate action unless attacked.[citation needed]
At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev. Contrary to the letter of the night before, the message offered a new trade: the missiles on Cuba would be removed in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey. At 10:00 am EDT, the executive committee met again to discuss the situation and came to the conclusion that the change in the message was because of internal debate between Khrushchev and other party officials in the Kremlin.[80]:300 Kennedy realized that he would be in an "insupportable position if this becomes Khrushchev's proposal" because the missiles in Turkey were not militarily useful and were being removed anyway and "It's gonna – to any man at the United Nations or any other rational man, it will look like a very fair trade." Bundy explained why Khrushchev's public acquiescence could not be considered: "The current threat to peace is not in Turkey, it is in Cuba."[81]
McNamara noted that another tanker, the Grozny, was about 600 miles (970 km) out and should be intercepted. He also noted that they had not made the Soviets aware of the blockade line and suggested relaying that information to them via U Thant at the United Nations.[82]




A Lockheed U-2F, the high altitude reconnaissance type shot down over Cuba, being refueled by a Boeing KC-135Q. The aircraft in 1962 was painted overall gray and carried USAF military markings and national insignia.


While the meeting progressed, at 11:03 am EDT a new message began to arrive from Khrushchev. The message stated, in part:
"You are disturbed over Cuba. You say that this disturbs you because it is ninety-nine miles by sea from the coast of the United States of America. But... you have placed destructive missile weapons, which you call offensive, in Italy and Turkey, literally next to us.... I therefore make this proposal: We are willing to remove from Cuba the means which you regard as offensive.... Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the United States... will remove its analogous means from Turkey... and after that, persons entrusted by the United Nations Security Council could inspect on the spot the fulfillment of the pledges made."
The executive committee continued to meet through the day.
Throughout the crisis, Turkey had repeatedly stated that it would be upset if the Jupiter missiles were removed. Italy's Prime Minister Amintore Fanfani, who was also Foreign Minister ad interim, offered to allow withdrawal of the missiles deployed in Apulia as a bargaining chip. He gave the message to one of his most trusted friends, Ettore Bernabei, the general manager of RAI-TV, to convey to Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. Bernabei was in New York to attend an international conference on satellite TV broadcasting. Unknown to the Soviets, the US regarded the Jupiter missiles as obsolescent and already supplanted by the Polaris nuclear ballistic submarine missiles.[8]




The engine of the Lockheed U-2 shot down over Cuba on display at Museum of the Revolution in Havana.


On the morning of October 27, a U-2F (the third CIA U-2A, modified for air-to-air refueling) piloted by USAF Major Rudolf Anderson,[83] departed its forward operating location at McCoy AFB, Florida. At approximately 12:00 pm EDT, the aircraft was struck by a S-75 Dvina (NATO designation SA-2 Guideline) surface-to-air missile launched from Cuba. The aircraft was shot down, and Anderson was killed. The stress in negotiations between the Soviets and the US intensified; it was only later believed that the decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander, acting on his own authority. Later that day, at about 3:41 pm EDT, several US Navy RF-8A Crusader aircraft, on low-level photoreconnaissance missions, were fired upon.
On October 28, 1962, Khrushchev told his son Sergei that the shooting down of Anderson's U-2 was by the "Cuban military at the direction of Raul Castro."[84][85][86][87]
At 4:00 pm EDT, Kennedy recalled members of EXCOMM to the White House and ordered that a message should immediately be sent to U Thant asking the Soviets to suspend work on the missiles while negotiations were carried out. During the meeting, General Maxwell Taylor delivered the news that the U-2 had been shot down. Kennedy had earlier claimed he would order an attack on such sites if fired upon, but he decided to not act unless another attack was made. Forty years later, McNamara said:

We had to send a U-2 over to gain reconnaissance information on whether the Soviet missiles were becoming operational. We believed that if the U-2 was shot down that—the Cubans didn't have capabilities to shoot it down, the Soviets did—we believed if it was shot down, it would be shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air-missile unit, and that it would represent a decision by the Soviets to escalate the conflict. And therefore, before we sent the U-2 out, we agreed that if it was shot down we wouldn't meet, we'd simply attack. It was shot down on Friday.... Fortunately, we changed our mind, we thought "Well, it might have been an accident, we won't attack." Later we learned that Khrushchev had reasoned just as we did: we send over the U-2, if it was shot down, he reasoned we would believe it was an intentional escalation. And therefore, he issued orders to Pliyev, the Soviet commander in Cuba, to instruct all of his batteries not to shoot down the U-2.[note 1][88]

Drafting response






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Emissaries sent by both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to meet at the Yenching Palace Chinese restaurant in the Cleveland Park neighborhood of Washington, DC, on the evening of October 27.[89] Kennedy suggested to take Khrushchev's offer to trade away the missiles. Unknown to most members of the EXCOMM, Robert Kennedy had been meeting with the Soviet Ambassador in Washington to discover whether the intentions were genuine. The EXCOMM was generally against the proposal because it would undermine NATO's authority, and the Turkish government had repeatedly stated it was against any such trade.
As the meeting progressed, a new plan emerged, and Kennedy was slowly persuaded. The new plan called for him to ignore the latest message and instead to return to Khrushchev's earlier one. Kennedy was initially hesitant, feeling that Khrushchev would no longer accept the deal because a new one had been offered, but Llewellyn Thompson argued that it was still possible.[90] White House Special Counsel and Adviser Ted Sorensen and Robert Kennedy left the meeting and returned 45 minutes later, with a draft letter to that effect. The President made several changes, had it typed, and sent it.
After the EXCOMM meeting, a smaller meeting continued in the Oval Office. The group argued that the letter should be underscored with an oral message to Dobrynin that stated that if the missiles were not withdrawn, military action would be used to remove them. Rusk added one proviso that no part of the language of the deal would mention Turkey, but there would be an understanding that the missiles would be removed "voluntarily" in the immediate aftermath. The President agreed, and the message was sent.




October 29, 1962 EXCOMM meeting held in the White House Cabinet Room. President Kennedy, Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk.


At Rusk's request, Fomin and Scali met again. Scali asked why the two letters from Khrushchev were so different, and Fomin claimed it was because of "poor communications." Scali replied that the claim was not credible and shouted that he thought it was a "stinking double cross." He went on to claim that an invasion was only hours away, and Fomin stated that a response to the US message was expected from Khrushchev shortly and urged Scali to tell the State Department that no treachery was intended. Scali said that he did not think anyone would believe him, but he agreed to deliver the message. The two went their separate ways, and Scali immediately typed out a memo for the EXCOMM.[citation needed]
Within the US establishment, it was well understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put Khrushchev in a terrible position. Military preparations continued, and all active duty Air Force personnel were recalled to their bases for possible action. Robert Kennedy later recalled the mood: "We had not abandoned all hope, but what hope there was now rested with Khrushchev's revising his course within the next few hours. It was a hope, not an expectation. The expectation was military confrontation by Tuesday, and possibly tomorrow...."[citation needed]
At 8:05 pm EDT, the letter drafted earlier in the day was delivered. The message read, "As I read your letter, the key elements of your proposals—which seem generally acceptable as I understand them—are as follows: 1) You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safe-guards, to halt the further introduction of such weapon systems into Cuba. 2) We, on our part, would agree—upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations, to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments (a) to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect and (b) to give assurances against the invasion of Cuba." The letter was also released directly to the press to ensure it could not be "delayed."[91] With the letter delivered, a deal was on the table. However, as Robert Kennedy noted, there was little expectation it would be accepted. At 9:00 pm EDT, the EXCOMM met again to review the actions for the following day. Plans were drawn up for air strikes on the missile sites as well as other economic targets, notably petroleum storage. McNamara stated that they had to "have two things ready: a government for Cuba, because we're going to need one; and secondly, plans for how to respond to the Soviet Union in Europe, because sure as hell they're going to do something there."[92]
At 12:12 am EDT, on October 27, the US informed its NATO allies that "the situation is growing shorter.... the United States may find it necessary within a very short time in its interest and that of its fellow nations in the Western Hemisphere to take whatever military action may be necessary." To add to the concern, at 6:00 am, the CIA reported that all missiles in Cuba were ready for action.




A U.S. Navy HSS-1 Seabat helicopter hovers over Soviet submarine B-59, forced to the surface by U.S. Naval forces in the Caribbean near Cuba (October 28–29, 1962)


Later that same day, what the White House later called "Black Saturday," the US Navy dropped a series of "signaling depth charges" (practice depth charges the size of hand grenades[93]) on a Soviet submarine (B-59) at the blockade line, unaware that it was armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo with orders that allowed it to be used if the submarine was "hulled" (a hole in the hull from depth charges or surface fire).[94] The decision to launch these required agreement from all three officers on board, but one of them, Vasili Arkhipov, objected and so the launch was narrowly averted.
On the same day a U-2 spy plane made an accidental, unauthorized ninety-minute overflight of the Soviet Union's far eastern coast.[95] The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island; in turn, the Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea.[96]
On October 27, Khrushchev also received a letter from Castro, what is now known as the Armageddon Letter (dated the day before), which was interpreted as urging the use of nuclear force in the event of an attack on Cuba:[97] "I believe the imperialists' aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be," Castro wrote.[98]
Crisis ends
On October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in Turkey and possibly southern Italy, the former on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba.[99] There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement. Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was, and when the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey.[100]
At 9:00 am EST, on October 28, a new message from Khrushchev was broadcast on Radio Moscow. Khrushchev stated that "the Soviet government, in addition to previously issued instructions on the cessation of further work at the building sites for the weapons, has issued a new order on the dismantling of the weapons which you describe as 'offensive' and their crating and return to the Soviet Union."[citation needed]
At 10:00 am, October 28, Kennedy first learned of Khrushchev's solution to the crisis to remove the 15 Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviets would remove the rockets from Cuba. Khrushchev had made the offer in a public statement for the world to hear. Despite almost solid opposition from his senior advisers, Kennedy quickly embraced the Soviet offer. "This is a pretty good play of his," Kennedy said, according to a tape recording that he made secretly of the Cabinet Room meeting. Kennedy had deployed the Jupiters in March of the year, causing a stream of angry outbursts from Khrushchev. "Most people will think this is a rather even trade and we ought to take advantage of it," Kennedy said. Vice President Lyndon Johnson was the first to endorse the missile swap but others continued to oppose the offer. Finally, Kennedy ended the debate. "We can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil and blood," Kennedy said, "when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles on Turkey. If that's part of the record, then you don't have a very good war."[101]
Kennedy immediately responded, issuing a statement calling the letter "an important and constructive contribution to peace." He continued this with a formal letter:

I consider my letter to you of October twenty-seventh and your reply of today as firm undertakings on the part of both our governments which should be promptly carried out.... The US will make a statement in the framework of the Security Council in reference to Cuba as follows: it will declare that the United States of America will respect the inviolability of Cuban borders, its sovereignty, that it take the pledge not to interfere in internal affairs, not to intrude themselves and not to permit our territory to be used as a bridgehead for the invasion of Cuba, and will restrain those who would plan to carry an aggression against Cuba, either from US territory or from the territory of other countries neighboring to Cuba.[102]:103

Kennedy's planned statement would also contain suggestions he had received from his adviser Schlesinger Jr. in a "Memorandum for the President" describing the "Post Mortem on Cuba."[103]
Kennedy's Oval Office telephone conversation with Eisenhower soon after Khrushchev's message arrived revealed that the President was planning to use the Cuban Missile Crisis to escalate tensions with Khrushchev[104] and in the long run, Cuba as well.[104] The President also claimed that he thought the crisis would result in direct military confrontations in Berlin by the end of the next month.[104] He also claimed in his conversation with Eisenhower that the Soviet leader had offered to withdraw from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey and that while the Kennedy Administration had agreed not to invade Cuba,[104] they were only in process of determining Khrushchev's offer to withdraw from Turkey.[104]
When former US President Harry Truman called President Kennedy the day of Khrushchev's offer, the President informed him that his Administration had rejected the Soviet leader's offer to withdraw missiles from Turkey and was planning on using the Soviet setback in Cuba to escalate tensions in Berlin.[105]




Herblock cartoon in Washington Post, (November 1962)






Removal of Missiles in Cuba November 11, 1962 – NARA – 193868


The US continued the blockade; in the following days, aerial reconnaissance proved that the Soviets were making progress in removing the missile systems. The 42 missiles and their support equipment were loaded onto eight Soviet ships. On November 2, 1962, Kennedy addressed the US via radio and television broadcasts regarding the dismantlement process of the Soviet R-12 missile bases located in the Caribbean region.[106] The ships left Cuba on November 5 to 9. The US made a final visual check as each of the ships passed the blockade line. Further diplomatic efforts were required to remove the Soviet IL-28 bombers, and they were loaded on three Soviet ships on December 5 and 6. Concurrent with the Soviet commitment on the IL-28s, the US government announced the end of the blockade from 6:45 pm EST on November 20, 1962.[48]
At the time when the Kennedy administration thought that the Cuban Missile Crisis was resolved, nuclear tactical rockets stayed in Cuba since they were not part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings and the Americans did not know about them. However, the Soviets changed their minds, fearing possible future Cuban militant steps, and on November 22, 1962, Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union Anastas Mikoyan told Castro that the rockets with the nuclear warheads were being removed as well.[13]
In his negotiations with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Robert Kennedy informally proposed that the Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be removed "within a short time after this crisis was over."[107]:222 The last U.S. missiles were disassembled by April 24, 1963 and were flown out of Turkey soon afterward.[108]
The practical effect of the Kennedy-Khrushchev Pact was that the US would not invade Cuba. It is possible that Khrushchev placed the missiles in Cuba only to get Kennedy to remove the missiles from Italy and Turkey and that the Soviets had no intention of resorting to nuclear war if they were out-gunned by the U.S.[109] Because the withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time, Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened. The perception was that Kennedy had won the contest between the superpowers and that Khrushchev had been humiliated. However, both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite pressures from their respective governments. Khrushchev held power for another two years.[102]:102–105
Aftermath




The nuclear-armed Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile. The US secretly agreed to withdraw the missiles from Italy and Turkey.


The compromise embarrassed Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of US missiles from Italy and Turkey was a secret deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev. Khrushchev went to Kennedy as he thought that the crisis was getting out of hand, but the Soviets were seen as retreating from circumstances that they had started.
Khrushchev's fall from power two years later was in part because of the Soviet Politburo's embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the US and this ineptitude in precipitating the crisis in the first place. According to Dobrynin, the top Soviet leadership took the Cuban outcome as "a blow to its prestige bordering on humiliation."[110]
Cuba perceived the outcome as a betrayal by the Soviets, as decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev. Castro was especially upset that certain issues of interest to Cuba, such as the status of the US Naval Base in Guantánamo, were not addressed. That caused Cuban–Soviet relations to deteriorate for years to come.[111]:278 On the other hand, Cuba continued to be protected from invasion.
Although LeMay told the President that he considered the resolution of the crisis the "greatest defeat in our history", his was a minority position.[41] He had pressed for an immediate invasion of Cuba as soon as the crisis began and still favored invading Cuba even after the Soviets had withdrawn their missiles.[112] Twenty-five years later, LeMay still believed that "We could have gotten not only the missiles out of Cuba, we could have gotten the Communists out of Cuba at that time."[71]
After the crisis, the U.S. and the Soviet Union created the Moscow–Washington hotline, a direct communications link between Moscow and Washington. The purpose was to have a way that the leaders of the two Cold War countries could communicate directly to solve such a crisis. The worldwide U.S. Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned to DEFCON 4 on November 20, 1962. U-2 pilot Anderson's body was returned to the US and was buried with full military honors in South Carolina. He was the first recipient of the newly created Air Force Cross, which was awarded posthumously.
Although Anderson was the only combatant fatality during the crisis, 11 crew members of three reconnaissance Boeing RB-47 Stratojets of the 55th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing were also killed in crashes during the period between September 27 and November 11, 1962.[113] Seven crew died when a Military Air Transport Service Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23.[114]
Critics, including Seymour Melman,[115] and Seymour Hersh [116] suggested that the Cuban Missile Crisis encouraged the United States' use of military means, such as the case in the later Vietnam War.
Later revelations
Schlesinger, a historian and adviser to Kennedy, told National Public Radio in an interview on October 16, 2002 that Castro did not want the missiles, but Khrushchev pressured Castro to accept them. Castro was not completely happy with the idea, but the Cuban National Directorate of the Revolution accepted them, both to protect Cuba against US attack and to aid the Soviet Union.[111]:272 Schlesinger believed that when the missiles were withdrawn, Castro was more angry with Khrushchev than with Kennedy because Khrushchev had not consulted Castro before deciding to remove them.[note 2] Although Castro was infuriated by Khrushchev, he planned on striking the US with remaining missiles if an invasion of the island occurred.[111]:311
In early 1992, it was confirmed that Soviet forces in Cuba had, when the crisis broke, already received tactical nuclear warheads for their artillery rockets and Il-28 bombers.[117] Castro stated that he would have recommended their use if the US invaded despite Cuba being destroyed.[117]
Arguably, the most dangerous moment in the crisis was not recognized until the Cuban Missile Crisis Havana conference, in October 2002. Attended by many of the veterans of the crisis, they all learned that on October 27, 1962, USS Beale had tracked and dropped signaling depth charges (the size of hand grenades) on B-59, a Soviet Project 641 (NATO designation Foxtrot) submarine. Unknown to the US, it was armed with a 15-kiloton nuclear torpedo.[118] Running out of air, the Soviet submarine was surrounded by American warships and desperately needed to surface. An argument broke out among three officers aboard B-59, including submarine captain Valentin Savitsky, political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov, and Deputy brigade commander Captain 2nd rank (U.S. Navy Commander rank equivalent) Vasili Arkhipov. An exhausted Savitsky became furious and ordered that the nuclear torpedo on board be made combat ready. Accounts differ about whether Arkhipov convinced Savitsky not to make the attack or whether Savitsky himself finally concluded that the only reasonable choice left open to him was to come to the surface.[119]:303, 317 During the conference, McNamara stated that nuclear war had come much closer than people had thought. Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archive, said, "A guy called Vasili Arkhipov saved the world."
Fifty years after the crisis, Graham T. Allison wrote:

Fifty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster. During the standoff, US President John F. Kennedy thought the chance of escalation to war was "between 1 in 3 and even," and what we have learned in later decades has done nothing to lengthen those odds. We now know, for example, that in addition to nuclear-armed ballistic missiles, the Soviet Union had deployed 100 tactical nuclear weapons to Cuba, and the local Soviet commander there could have launched these weapons without additional codes or commands from Moscow. The US air strike and invasion that were scheduled for the third week of the confrontation would likely have triggered a nuclear response against American ships and troops, and perhaps even Miami. The resulting war might have led to the deaths of over 100 million Americans and over 100 million Russians.[120][121]

BBC journalist Joe Matthews published the story, on October 13, 2012, behind the 100 tactical nuclear warheads mentioned by Graham Allison in the excerpt above.[122] Khrushchev feared that Castro's hurt pride and widespread Cuban indignation over the concessions he had made to Kennedy might lead to a breakdown of the agreement between the Soviet Union and the US. To prevent that, Khrushchev decided to offer to give Cuba more than 100 tactical nuclear weapons that had been shipped to Cuba along with the long-range missiles but, crucially, had escaped the notice of U.S. intelligence. Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests.[122]
Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal that was designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union. While in Havana, Mikoyan witnessed the mood swings and paranoia of Castro, who was convinced that Moscow had made the agreement with the US at the expense of Cuba's defense. Mikoyan, on his own initiative, decided that Castro and his military not be given control of weapons with an explosive force equal to 100 Hiroshima-sized bombs under any circumstances. He defused the seemingly intractable situation, which risked re-escalating the crisis, on November 22, 1962. During a tense, four-hour meeting, Mikoyan convinced Castro that despite Moscow's desire to help, it would be in breach of an unpublished Soviet law, which did not actually exist, to transfer the missiles permanently into Cuban hands and provide them with an independent nuclear deterrent. Castro was forced to give way and, much to the relief of Khrushchev and the rest of the Soviet government, the tactical nuclear weapons were crated and returned by sea to the Soviet Union during December 1962.[122]
In popular culture
The American popular media, especially television, made heavy use of the events of the missile crisis and both fictional and documentary forms.[123] Jim Willis includes the Crisis as one of the 100 "media moments that changed America."[124] Sheldon Stern finds that a half century later there are still many "misconceptions, half-truths, and outright lies" that have shaped media versions of what happened in the White House during those harrowing two weeks.[125]
According to William Cohn, television programs are typically the main source used by the American public to know about and interpret the past.[126] The Soviet media proved somewhat disorganized as it was unable to generate a coherent popular history. Khrushchev lost power and was airbrushed out of the story. Cuba was no longer portrayed as a heroic David against the American Goliath. One contradiction that pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasizes the horrors of nuclear war and the militancy of the need to prepare Soviets for war against American aggression.[127]
Media representations
(Listed chronologically)

Thirteen Days, Robert F. Kennedy's account of the crisis, released in 1969; It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries.[128]
Topaz, 1969 film by Alfred Hitchcock based on the 1967 novel by Leon Uris, set during the run-up to the crisis
The Missiles of October, 1974 TV docudrama about the crisis
The World Next Door, 1990 novel by Brad Ferguson, set in this period
Quantum Leap, 1991 TV Show, (Season 3 Episode, Nuclear Family – October 26, 1962), Sam must deal with the panic associated with the Cuban Missile Crisis as a Florida fallout shelter salesman, as well as prevent a man from being killed during a practice raid a few days after his arrival.
The short film Symposium on Intelligence and the Cuban Missile Crisis 1962 is available for free download at the Internet Archive
Matinee, 1993 film starring John Goodman set during the Cuban Missile Crisis in which an independent-filmmaker decides to seize the opportunity to debut an atomic themed film.
seaQuest 2032, 1995 TV Show, (Season 3 Episode, "Second Chance"), seaQuest inadvertently travels back to 1962 where their presence accidentally interferes with the Cuban Missile Crisis
Blast from the Past (film), 1999 American romantic comedy film, set in the period
K-19: The Widowmaker, Docudrama about the history just before the crisis
Thirteen Days (film), 2000 docudrama directed by Roger Donaldson about the crisis
The Fog of War, 2003 American documentary film about the life and times of former U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara directed by Errol Morris, which won that years' Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature.
"Meditations in an Emergency", the last episode of season 2 of the television series Mad Men takes place during the crisis
Ur, a 2009 short novel by Stephen King released for the Amazon Kindle, is about three men who discover through a magic Kindle that in another "Ur", the Cuban Missile Crisis escalated into a nuclear war and ended that "Ur".
Call of Duty: Black Ops, 2010 video game, set during and after the Cuban Missile Crisis.
The Kennedys (TV miniseries), 2011 production chronicling the lives of the Kennedy family, including a dramatization of the crisis
X-Men: First Class, 2011 superhero film set during the Cuban Missile Crisis, which depicts the crisis as being escalated by a group of mutants with the goal of establishing a mutant ruling class after the subsequent war.
The Politics of Deception: JFK'S Secret Decisions on Vietnam, Civil Rights and Cuba. Patrick J. Sloyan, St. Martins Press, New York, 2015.
The 2016 music video for My Trigger, by Miike Snow, is based loosely on the crisis.
The Doomsday Machine: Confessions of a Nuclear War Planner. Daniel Ellsberg, Bloomsbury USA, New York, 2017

See also


Cold War portal
Cuba portal
Soviet Union portal
United States portal




List of nuclear close calls
Bomber gap
Cuba–Soviet Union relations
Leninsky Komsomol class cargo ships
Mutual assured destruction
Norwegian rocket incident
Nuclear disarmament
Soviet Navy


Notes



^ McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26.
^ In his biography, Castro did not compare his feelings for either leader at that moment but makes it clear that he was angry with Khrushchev for failing to consult with him. (Ramonet 1978)



References


^ 55 лет назад на Кубу были доставлены первые советские баллистические ракеты// Департамент информации и массовых коммуникаций Министерства обороны Российской Федерации
^ Len Scott; R. Gerald Hughes (2015). The Cuban Missile Crisis: A Critical Reappraisal. Taylor & Francis. p. 17. 
^ a b c Absher, Kenneth Michael (2009). "Mind-Sets and Missiles: A First Hand Account of the Cuban Missile Crisis". Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College. 
^ a b c d e f Franklin, Jane (1997). Cuba and the United States: A Chronological History. Melbourne: Ocean Press. ISBN 1-875284-92-3. 
^ Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. Penguin Group USA. 
^ Rodriguez (October 1989). Shadow Warrior: The CIA Hero of 100 Unknown Battles. John Weisman. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-66721-4. 
^ "Proclamation 3447 – Embargo on All Trade With Cuba" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. February 3, 1962. 
^ a b c d e f g h Correll, John T. (August 2005). "Airpower and the Cuban Missile Crisis". AirForce-Magazine.com. 88 (8). Retrieved May 4, 2010. 
^ Alexeyev, Alexandr. "Interview" (PDF). Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ a b Allison, Graham and Philip Zelikow (1999). Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. p. 92. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
^ Allison, Graham and Philip Zelikow (1999). Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. pp. 94–95. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
^ Allison, Graham and Philip Zelikow (1999). Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. p. 105. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
^ a b "The Soviet Cuban Missile Crisis: Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khruschev, and the Missiles of November". The national security archive. October 10, 2012. 
^ Weldes, Jutta (1999). Constructing National Interests: The United States and the Cuban Missile Crisis. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-3111-7. 
^ a b c d Hansen, James H. "Soviet Deception in the Cuban Missile Crisis" (PDF). Learning from the Past. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 15, 2010. Retrieved May 2, 2010. 
^ "Cool Crisis Management? It's a Myth, Ask JFK". The Washington Post. 
^ "Joint resolution expressing the determination of the United States with respect to the situation in Cuba – P.L. 87-733" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. October 3, 1962. 
^ a b c d Blight, James G.; Bruce J. Allyn; David A. Welch (2002). Cuba on the Brink: Castro, the Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse; [revised for the Fortieth Anniversary] (2nd ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-2269-5. 
^ "The Days the World Held Its Breath". July 31, 1997. Retrieved March 4, 2010. 
^ Allison, Graham and Philip Zelikow (1999). Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. p. 80. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
^ Stern, Sheldon M. (2003). Averting 'the Final Failure': John F. Kennedy and the Secret Cuban Missile Crisis Meetings. Stanford University Press. p. 26. 
^ Zak, Anatoly (2012). "Rockets: R-12". Morristown, New Jersey: RussianSpaceWeb.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved 2012-10-21. 
^ "R-12 / SS-4 SANDAL". Global Security. Retrieved April 30, 2010. 
^ "R-14 / SS-5 SKEAN". Global Security. Retrieved April 30, 2010. 
^ "Interview with Sidney Graybeal – 29 January 1998". Episode 21. George Washington University, National Security Archive. March 14, 1999. 
^ Pedlow, Gregory, The Central Intelligence Agency and Overhead Reconnaissance. CIA. 1962.
^ "Project RAZOR". Taiwan Air Blog, updated April 11, 2007. Retrieved: September 14, 2009.
^ "Project RAZOR". Taiwan Air Blog, updated April 15, 2007. Retrieved: September 14, 2009.
^ Max Holland. "The 'Photo Gap' That Delayed Discovery of Missiles." Studies in Intelligence, Vol. 49, No. 4; published online April 15, 2007. Retrieved: March 22, 2015.
^ Joseph Caddell. "Corona over Cuba: The Missile Crisis and the Early Limitations of Satellite Imagery Intelligence." Intelligence & National Security; published online February 17, 2015. Retrieved: March 22, 2015.
^ Remarks by LTG Ronald L. Burgess Jr., Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Association of Former Intelligence Officers, August 12, 2011
^ "Cuban Missile Crisis". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved May 6, 2010. 
^ Vladislav Zubok & Constantine Pleshkov, Inside the Kremlin's Cold War, 1996, page 264, Harvard Press, Massachusetts ISBN 0-674-45532-0
^ "Revelations from the Russian Archives". Library of Congress. Retrieved April 20, 2010. 
^ "Off the Record Meeting on Cuba: The White House". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. October 16, 1962. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ "National Security Action Memorandum 196". JFK Presidential Library and Museum. October 22, 1962. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ Averting The Final Failure, John F. Kennedy and the Secret Cuban Missile Crisis Meetings, Sheldon M. Stern, Stanford University Press, 2003.
^ The Cuban Missile Crisis in American Memory: Myths versus Reality (Stanford Nuclear Age Series), Sheldon M. Stern, Stanford University Press, 2012
^ Allison, Graham T.; Zelikow, Philip D. (1999) [1971]. Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (2nd ed.). New York: Addison Wesley Longman. pp. 111–116. ISBN 978-0-321-01349-1. 
^ Kennedy, Robert (1971). Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-393-09896-9. 
^ a b Axelrod, Alan (2009). The Real History of the Cold War: A New Look at the Past. New York: Sterling Publishing Co. pp. 332, 335. ISBN 978-1-4027-6302-1. Retrieved April 22, 2010. 
^ Ornstein, Robert Evan (1989). New world new mind: moving toward conscious evolution. The University of Michigan, Doubleday. 
^ Blight, James G.; David A. Welch (1989). On the Brink: Americans and Soviets Reexamine the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Hill and Wang. ISBN 978-0-374-22634-3. 
^ Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. "John F. Kennedy: "378 – The President's News Conference," September 13, 1962". The American Presidency Project. University of California – Santa Barbara. 
^ Kennedy, J. (December 17, 1962). "After Two Years: A conversation with the president". In 'Public Papers of the Presidents: John F. Kennedy, 1962'. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office: 889–904. 
^ "Cuban Missile Crisis". Online Highways LLC. Retrieved May 5, 2010. 
^ a b "JFK on the Cuban Missile Crisis". The History Place. Retrieved May 3, 2010. 
^ a b "Cuban Missile Crisis". Global Security. Retrieved May 6, 2010. 
^ a b c Kamps, Charles Tustin, "The Cuban Missile Crisis", Air & Space Power Journal, AU Press, Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, Fall 2007, Volume XXI, Number 3, page 88.
^ "Third VP-18". Dictionary of American Naval Aviation Squadrons (PDF). 2. Naval Aviation History Office. November 9, 2000. p. 2. Retrieved January 16, 2011. 
^ "The Naval Quarantine of Cuba, 1962". Report on the Naval Quarantine of Cuba, Operational Archives Branch, Post 46 Command File, Box 10, Washington, DC. Naval History & Heritage Command. Retrieved January 25, 2011. 
^ Allison, Graham and Philip Zelikow (1999). Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. p. 119. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
^ a b Ernest R May (2011). "John F Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis". Retrieved February 7, 2012.  BBC History of the Cold War.
^ a b The Naval Quarantine of Cuba, 1962: Abeyance and Negotiation, 31 October − 13 November (Report). Department of the Navy, Naval Historical Center. January 2001. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ Gibson, David R. (2012) Talk at the Brink: Deliberation and Decision during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 99–101.
^ "Proclamation 3504 – Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. October 23, 1962. 
^ a b Buffet, Cyril; Touze, Vincent. "Brinkmanship". The Cuban Missile Crisis exhibition. The Caen Mémorial. Retrieved May 3, 2010. 
^ "JFK Tapes » JFK and Dwight Eisenhower during the Cuban Missile Crisis". October 22, 1962. 
^ David Von Pein's JFK Channel (August 30, 2013). "JFK TALKS WITH DWIGHT EISENHOWER ABOUT THE CUBAN CRISIS (OCTOBER 22, 1962)" – via YouTube. 
^ a b "1962 Year In Review: Cuban Missile Crisis". United Press International, Inc. 1962. Retrieved April 22, 2010. 
^ "Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy". Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963 Volume VI, Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges Document 63. United States Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian. October 24, 1962. 
^ a b "Khruschev Letter to President Kennedy". October 24, 1962. 
^ a b c d "Chronology 1: October 26, 1962 to November 15, 1962" (PDF). The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962. The National Security Archive. Retrieved April 8, 2011. 
^ Buffet, Cyril; Touze, Vincent. "Germany, between Cuba and Berlin". The Cuban Missile Crisis exhibition. The Caen Mémorial. Retrieved May 3, 2010. 
^ "Pope John Helped settle the Cuban missile crisis". The Telegraph. June 4, 1971. 
^ "Outright Piracy". 
^ Stephanie Ritter (19 October 2012). "SAC during the 13 Days of the Cuban Missile Crisis". Air Force Global Strike Command. 
^ a b Goldman, Jerry, ed. (October 8, 1997). "The Cuban Missile Crisis, October 18–29, 1962". History and Politics Out Loud. Northwestern University. Retrieved May 11, 2011. 
^ Sowa, Tom (September 21, 2014). "Buried treasures". The Spokesman Review. Spokane, WA. Retrieved January 26, 2017. 
^ Boyland, Vista; Klyne D. Nowlin (January 2012). "WW III, A Close Call" (PDF). The Intercom. 35 (1): 19–20. 
^ a b Kohn, R. H.; Harahan, J. P. (1988). "U.S. Strategic Air Power, 1948–1962: Excerpts from an Interview with Generals Curtis E. LeMay, Leon W. Johnson, David A. Burchinal, and Jack J. Catton". International Security. 12 (4): 78–95. doi:10.2307/2538995. JSTOR 2538995. 
^ Reynolds, K.C. "Boarding MARUCLA: A personal account from the Executive Officer of USS Joseph P. Kennedy Jr". Retrieved June 22, 2010. 
^ Helms, Richard (January 19, 1962). "Memorandum for the Director of Central Intelligence: Meeting with the Attorney General of the United States Concerning Cuba" (PDF). George Washington University, National Security Archive. 
^ Проблемы борьбы с лженаукой (обсуждение в Президиуме РАН), quote:"Документы заседания Президиума ЦК КПСС весьма лаконичны, но благодаря тому, что в архиве я нашел выписку из решения Президиума ЦК КПСС, слово в слово совпадающую с тем, что обсуждалось на встрече разведчика с журналистом, стало совершенно очевидно, кто был истинным автором плана урегулирования Карибского кризиса."
^ "Chronology 1: September 28, 1962 to October 26, 1962" (PDF). The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962. The National Security Archive. Retrieved April 9, 2011. 
^ "Department of State Telegram Transmitting Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy". The Cuban Missile Crisis, October 1962. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. 26 October 1962. Retrieved 9 April 2011. 
^ Brandon, Henry (October 28, 1962). "Attack us at your Peril, Cocky Cuba Warns US". The Sunday Times. London. 
^ Goldberg, Jeffrey (September 8, 2010). "Cuban model no longer works, says Fidel Castro". BBC. 
^ Baggins, Brian. "Cuban History Missile Crisis". Marxist History: Cuba (1959 – present). Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved May 7, 2010. 
^ Christopher, Andrew (March 1, 1996). For the President's Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush. Harper Perennial. p. 688. ISBN 978-0-06-092178-1. 
^ "The Week The World Stood Still: Inside The Secret Cuban Missile Crisis" By Sheldon M. Stern, 2012
^ Dorn, A. Walter; Pauk, Robert (April 2009). "Unsung Mediator: U Thant and the Cuban Missile Crisis". Diplomatic History. 33 (2): 261–292. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.2008.00762.x. 
^ Pocock, Chris. 50 Years of the U-2: The Complete Illustrated History of the 'Dragon Lady'. Atglen, Pennsylvania: Schiffer Publishing, Ltd. p. 406. ISBN 978-0-7643-2346-1. LCCN 2005927577. 
^ "Was Castro Out of Control In 1962?". 
^ Fontova, Humberto. "Raul Castro meets with Bill Clinton in New York (To Thank Him?)". 
^ "An Act of Terrorism by Castro, An Abortion of Justice by Obama". 
^ "U-2 Pilot Maj. Rudy Anderson: The Only American Killed During the Cuban Missile Crisis – Defense Media Network". 
^ Robert McNamara (2004) [1964]. Interview included as special feature on Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (DVD). Columbia Tristar Home Entertainment. 
^ Frey, Jennifer (January 14, 2007). "At Yenching Palace, Five Decades of History to Go". Washington Post. Retrieved December 27, 2008. 
^ Gibson, David R. (2012) Talk at the Brink: Deliberation and Decision during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp. 135–56.
^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume VI, Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges – Office of the Historian". history.state.gov. 
^ Evans, Michael. "The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962: Audio Clips". 
^ "The Submarines of October". George Washington University, National Security Archive. Retrieved May 1, 2010. 
^ "The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962: Press Release, 11 October 2002, 5:00 pm". George Washington University, National Security Archive. October 11, 2002. Retrieved October 26, 2008. 
^ Dobbs, Michael (June 2008). "Why We Should Still Study the Cuban Missile Crisis" (PDF). Special Report 205. United States Institute of Peace. Retrieved August 26, 2011. 
^ Schoenherr, Steven (April 10, 2006). "The Thirteen Days, October 16–28, 1962". Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved May 3, 2010. 
^ Blight, James G. and Janet M. Lang (2012). "The Armageddon Letters: Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro in the Cuban Missile Crisis". Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-1679-2. 
^ Taubman, William (2004). Khrushchev: The Man and His Era. New York: W.W. Norton & Company. p. 573. ISBN 978-1-4422-1679-2. 
^ Jim Hershberg (Spring 1995). "Anatomy of a Controversy:Anatoly F. Dobrynin's Meeting With Robert F. Kennedy, Saturday, 27 October 1962". Retrieved May 29, 2012. 
^ Johnson, Dominic D. P. Failing to Win p. 105
^ Bruce W. Nelan (October 6, 1997). "Armageddon's Echoes". CNN. Retrieved December 21, 2017. 
^ a b Faria, Miguel A. (2002). Cuba in Revolution: Escape from a Lost Paradise. Macon, GA: Hacienda Pub. ISBN 978-0-9641077-3-1. 
^ Schlesinger, Arthur Jr. "Memorandum for the President: Post Mortem on Cuba, Oct. 29, 1962 – full text
^ a b c d e JFK Library (October 28, 2016). "Phone Call with General Eisenhower during Cuban Missile Crisis" – via YouTube. 
^ rmm413c (August 13, 2008). "JOHN F. KENNEDY TAPES: Truman on Cuban Missile Crisis" – via YouTube. 
^ "Radio and television remarks on dismantling of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, 2 November 1962". John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. 
^ Glover, Jonathan (2000). Humanity: a moral history of the twentieth century. Yale University Press. p. 464. ISBN 978-0-300-08700-0. Retrieved July 2, 2009. 
^ Schlesinger, Arthur (2002). Robert Kennedy and his times. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 1088. ISBN 978-0-618-21928-5. Retrieved July 2, 2009. 
^ Garthoff, Raymond L. (July 1988). "Did Khrushchev Bluff in Cuba? No". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. pp. 40–43. Retrieved January 25, 2011. 
^ William Taubman, Khrushchev: The Man and His Era (2004) p. 579.
^ a b c Ignacio, Ramonet (2007). Fidel Castro: My Life. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-102626-8. 
^ "Militaryhistory.about.com". 
^ Lloyd, Alwyn T., "Boeing's B-47 Stratojet", Specialty Press, North Branch, Minnesota, 2005, ISBN 978-1-58007-071-3, page 178.
^ "Aviation Safety". 
^ Melman, Seymour (1988). The Demilitarized Society: Disarmament and Conversion. Montreal: Harvest House. 
^ Hersh, Seymour (1978). The Dark Side of Camelot. 
^ a b "Arms Control Today". Arms Control Association. November 1, 2002. 
^ Evans, Michael. "The Submarines of October". nsarchive.gwu.edu. Retrieved 2016-10-24. 
^ Dobbs, Michael (2008). One Minute to Midnight: Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4358-3. 
^ Allison, Graham (2012). "The Cuban Missile Crisis at 50". Foreign Affairs. 91 (4). Retrieved 9 July 2012. 
^ "ВЗГЛЯД / «США и Россия: кризис 1962-го»". 
^ a b c Matthews, Joe. "Cuban missile crisis: The other, secret one". BBC News Magazine. Retrieved 13 October 2012. 
^ Priscilla Roberts (2012). Cuban Missile Crisis: The Essential Reference Guide. ABC-CLIO. p. 267. 
^ Jim Willis (2010). 100 Media Moments that Changed America. ABC-CLIO. pp. 97–99. 
^ Sheldon Stern (2012). The Cuban Missile Crisis in American Memory: Myths versus Reality. Stanford University Press. p. viii. 
^ William H. Cohn, "History for the masses: Television portrays the past." Journal of Popular Culture 10#2 (1976) pp: 280–289.
^ Andrei Kozovoi, "Dissonant Voices" Journal of Cold War Studies (2014) 16#3 pp 29–61.
^ Haruya Anami, "'Thirteen Days' Thirty Years After: Robert Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis Revisited," Journal of American & Canadian Studies (1994) Issue 12, pp 69–88.


Further reading

Allison, Graham; Zelikow, Philip (1999). Essence of Decision, Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-321-01349-2. 
Barrett, David M. and Max Holland (2012). Blind Over Cuba: The Photo Gap and the Missile Crisis. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 2012.
Chayes, Abram (1974). The Cuban Missile Crisis. International crises and the role of law. London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-825320-4. 
Diez Acosta, Tomás (2002). October 1962: The "Missile" Crisis As Seen from Cuba. New York: Pathfinder. ISBN 978-0-87348-956-0. 
Divine, Robert A. (1988). The Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: M. Wiener Pub. ISBN 978-0-910129-15-2. 
Dobbs, Michael (2008). One Minute to Midnight: Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War. New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-7891-2. 
Feklisov, Aleksandr; Kostin, Sergueï (2001). The Man Behind the Rosenbergs: By the KGB Spymaster Who Was the Case Officer of Julius Rosenberg, Klaus Fuchs, and Helped Resolve the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-08-7. 
Frankel, Max (2004). High Noon in the Cold War: Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-46505-4. 
Fursenko, Aleksandr; Naftali, Timothy J. (1998). One Hell of a Gamble: Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958–1964. New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-31790-9. 
Fursenko, Aleksandr (Summer 2006). "Night Session of the Presidium of the Central Committee, 22–23 October 1962". Naval War College Review. 59 (3). 
George, Alice L. (2003). Awaiting Armageddon: How Americans Faced the Cuban Missile Crisis. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-2828-1. 
Gibson, David R. (2012). Talk at the Brink: Deliberation and Decision during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15131-1. 
Gonzalez, Servando (2002). The Nuclear Deception: Nikita Khrushchev and the Cuban Missile Crisis. Oakland, CA: Spooks Books. ISBN 978-0-9711391-5-2. 
Jones, Milo; Silberzahn, Philppe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804793360. 
Khrushchev, Sergei (October 2002). "How My Father And President Kennedy Saved The World". American Heritage. 53 (5). 
Polmar, Norman; Gresham, John D. (2006). DEFCON-2: Standing on the Brink of Nuclear War During the Cuban Missile Crisis. Foreword by Tom Clancy. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-67022-3. 
Pope, Ronald R. (1982). Soviet Views on the Cuban Missile Crisis: Myth and Reality in Foreign Policy Analysis. Washington, DC: Univ. Press of America. ISBN 978-0-8191-2584-2. 
Pressman, Jeremy (2001). "September Statements, October Missiles, November Elections: Domestic Politics, Foreign-Policy Making, and the Cuban Missile Crisis". Security Studies. 10 (3): 80–114. doi:10.1080/09636410108429438. 
Russell, Bertrand (1963). Unarmed Victory. London: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 0-04-327024-7. 
Stern, Sheldon M. (2003). Averting 'the Final Failure': John F. Kennedy and the Secret Cuban Missile Crisis Meetings. Stanford nuclear age series. Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4846-9. 
Stern, Sheldon M. (2005). The Week the World Stood Still: Inside the Secret Cuban Missile Crisis. Stanford nuclear age series. Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-5077-6. 
Stern, Sheldon M. (2012). The Cuban Missile Crisis in American Memory: Myths versus Reality. Stanford nuclear age series. Stanford, Calif: Stanford University Press. 
Trahair, Richard C. S.; Miller, Robert L. (2009). Encyclopedia of Cold War Espionage, Spies, and Secret Operations. New York: Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-75-9. 
Matthews, Joe (October 2012). "Cuban missile crisis: The other, secret one". BBC. 

Historiography

Allison, Graham T. (September 1969). "Conceptual Models and the Cuban Missile Crisis". American Political Science Review. 63 (3): 689–718. JSTOR 1954423. 
Dorn, A. Walter; Pauk, Robert (April 2009). "Unsung Mediator: U Thant and the Cuban Missile Crisis". Diplomatic History. 33 (2): 261–292. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.2008.00762.x. 
Garthoff, Raymond L. (Spring 2004). "Foreign Intelligence and the Historiography of the Cold War". Journal of Cold War Studies. Project MUSE. 6 (2): 21–56. doi:10.1162/152039704773254759. ISSN 1520-3972. 
Gibson, David R. (2011). "Avoiding Catastrophe: The Interactional Production of Possibility during the Cuban Missile Crisis". The American Journal of Sociology. 117 (2): 361–419. JSTOR 10.1086/661761. 
Jones, John A.; Jones, Virginia H. (Spring 2005). "Through the Eye of the Needle: Five Perspectives on the Cuban Missile Crisis". Rhetoric & Public Affairs. Project MUSE. 8 (1): 133–144. doi:10.1353/rap.2005.0044. 
Jones, Milo; Silberzahn, Philppe (2013). Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001. Stanford University Press. pp. 135–191. ISBN 978-0804793360. 
Lebow, Richard Ned (October 1990). "Domestic Politics and the Cuban Missile Crisis: The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated". Diplomatic History. 14 (4): 471–492. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7709.1990.tb00103.x. 

Primary sources

Chang, Laurence; Kornbluh, Peter, eds. (1998). "Introduction". The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962: A National Security Archive Documents Reader (2nd ed.). New York: New Press. ISBN 978-1-56584-474-2. 
"Cuban Missile Crisis". JFK in History. John F. Kennedy Library. 
"Cuban Missile Crisis 1962". Presidential Recordings Program. Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. 
"Cuban Missile Crisis". Wilson Center Digital Archive. Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. 
Keefer, Edward C.; Sampson, Charles S.; Smith, Louis J., eds. (1996). Cuban Missile Crisis and Aftermath. Foreign relations of the United States, 1961–1963. XI. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office. ISBN 0-16-045210-4. 
Kennedy, Robert F. (1969). Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-31834-0. 
May, Ernest R.; Zelikow, Philip D., eds. (2002) [1997]. The Kennedy Tapes: Inside the White House During the Cuban Missile Crisis (2nd ed.). New York: Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-32259-0. 
McAuliffe, Mary S., ed. (October 1992). "CIA Documents on the Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962" (PDF). Historical Review Program. Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency. 
"The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962: The 40th Anniversary". National Security Archive: Special Exhibits. Gelman Library: The George Washington University. 
"The World On the Brink: John F. Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis". Interactive Exhibits. John F. Kennedy Library. 
Gavrov, Sergei (ed.). "America and Russia: The Crisis of 1962. On the 50th anniversary of the missile crisis". Moscow: Vzglyad (Russia). 
Dallek, Robert. "If We Listen to Them, None of Us Will Be Alive." In Camelot's Court, 279–334. New York: HarperCollins, 2013.

Lesson plans

"Cuban Missile Crisis". Slideshows for Educators. Bureau of Public Affairs, U.S. Department of State. 
Moser, John; Hahn, Lori (July 15, 2010). "The Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962: 'The Missiles of October'". EDSITEment: Lesson Plans. National Endowment for the Humanities. 

External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Cuban Missile Crisis





Wikimedia Commons has media related to 
Cuban Missile Crisis.



"Cuban Missile Crisis", 2012, Harvard Kennedy School, Belfer Center's 50th anniversary of the crisis – commemorative website
Cuban Missile Crisis: Операция Анадырь (Operation Anadyr) on Flickr
Cuban Missile Crisis and the Fallout from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
"Cuban Missile Crisis". Topics. History Channel. 2011. 
"Cuban Missile Crisis". Nuclear Weapons History: Cold War. Nuclear Age Peace Foundation. 
"Cuban Missile Crisis Bibliography". Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues. 
Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962
October 1962: DEFCON 4, DEFCON 3
Spartacus Educational(UK): Cuban Missile Crisis
Document – Britain's Cuban Missile Crisis
No Time to Talk: The Cuban Missile Crisis
The 32nd Guards Air Fighter Regiment in Cuba (1962–1963) S.Isaev.
The short film Symposium on Intelligence and the Cuban Missile Crisis 1962 (1992) is available for free download at the Internet Archive
The Woodrow Wilson Center's Digital Archive has a collection of primary source archival documents on the Cuban Missile Crisis.
EDSITEment lesson plan Cuban Missile Crisis
EDSITEment Cuban Missile Crisis Interactive
Cuban Missile Crisis: Three Men Go To War Documentary produced by PBS
The Armageddon Letters, a transmedia storytelling of the crisis with animated short films and other digital content
The Man Who Saved the World Documentary produced by PBS Series Secrets of the Dead







v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


 Cuba–United States relations 



pre-1902



Spanish–American War
Teller Amendment
Platt Amendment








1902–1959



Cuban–American Treaty of Relations (1903)
First Occupation
Second Occupation
Sugar Intervention
Hay-Quesada Treaty (1925)
Cuban–American Treaty of Relations (1934)





1959–present




Groups and individuals



Brothers to the Rescue
Balseros (rafters)
Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba
Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations
Cuban-American lobby
Cuban Five
Luis Posada Carriles





Military and activities



Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Missile Crisis
Cuban Project
Elián González
Cuba–United States aircraft hijackings
Mariel boatlift
Operation Northwoods
Operation Peter Pan





Legislation and offices



United States embargo against Cuba
United States Interests Section in Havana (1977–2015)
Cuban thaw
Embassy of the United States, Havana
Embassy of Cuba in Washington, D.C.
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
Helms–Burton Act
United States Ambassador to Cuba





Miscellaneous



Balseros (2002 film)
Cuban Americans















v
t
e


John F. Kennedy






35th President of the United States (1961–1963)
U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953–1960)
U.S. Representative for MA-11 (1947–1953)





Presidency
(timeline)



Presidential Office: Inauguration
Cabinet
Judicial appointments

Supreme Court


Presidential pardons


Domestic policy: Clean Air Act
Communications Satellite Act
Community Mental Health Act
Equal Pay Act
Federal affirmative action
Federal housing segregation ban
Fifty-mile hikes
Food for Peace
New Frontier
Pilot Food Stamp Program
Space policy
Status of Women (Presidential Commission)
University of Alabama integration
Voter Education Project


Foreign policy: Alliance for Progress
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency

Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty


Flexible response
Kennedy Doctrine
Peace Corps
Trade Expansion Act
USAID
Vietnam War
Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Project
Cuban Missile Crisis

ExComm


Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis
Moscow–Washington hotline
Vienna summit


White House: Presidential limousine
Presidential yacht
Resolute desk
Situation Room





Presidential
speeches



Inaugural address
American University speech
"We choose to go to the Moon"
Report to the American People on Civil Rights
"Ich bin ein Berliner"
"A rising tide lifts all boats"





Elections



U.S. States House of Representatives elections, 1946
1948
1950
U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts, 1952
1958
1960 Presidential primaries
1960 Presidential campaign
Democratic National Convention 1956
1960
U.S. presidential election, 1960

debates







Personal life



Birthplace and childhood home
Kennedy Compound
US Navy service PT-109

Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana
Arthur Evans
PT-59
Castle Hot Springs


Hammersmith Farm
Coretta Scott King phone call
Rocking chair
"Happy Birthday, Mr. President"





Books



Why England Slept (1940)
Profiles in Courage (1956)
A Nation of Immigrants (1958)





Death



Assassination

timeline
reactions
in popular culture


State funeral

Riderless horse
attending dignitaries


Gravesite and Eternal Flame





Legacy



John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum (Boston)
1964 Civil Rights Act
Apollo 11 Moon landing
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Kennedy Space Center (Florida)
Kennedy Round
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
VISTA
Cultural depictions

films
Kennedy half dollar
U.S. postage stamps
U.S. five cent stamp
Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences


Operation Sail





Memorials,
namesakes



Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (Washington DC)
JK College (Mauritius)
Kennedy Expressway (Chicago)
JFK International Airport (New York)
JFK Memorial (Dallas)
JFK Memorial Bridge (Kentucky–Indiana)
JFK School of Government (Harvard Univ.)
JFK Special Warfare Center and School (Fort Bragg, North Carolina)
JFK University (California)
JFK Memorial (Runnymede, Britain)
Yad Kennedy (Jerusalem)
USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67)
USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79)
MV John F. Kennedy





Family



Jacqueline Bouvier (wife)
Caroline Kennedy (daughter)
John F. Kennedy Jr.

son
plane crash


Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son)
Jack Schlossberg (grandson)
Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Fitzgerald (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Robert F. Kennedy (brother)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
P. J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)








← Dwight D. Eisenhower
Lyndon B. Johnson →


 Category












v
t
e


Robert F. Kennedy




November 20, 1925 – June 6, 1968

United States Senator from New York, 1965–1968
64th United States Attorney General, 1961–1964





Life



1948 Palestine visit
Senate Committee investigation of Labor and Management
Cuban Missile Crisis

ExComm


Civil rights

Freedom Riders
Voter Education Project


Baldwin–Kennedy meeting
1964 Democratic National Convention
Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation
Mississippi Delta tour
Kennedy Compound
Hickory Hill home










Electoral



1964 U.S. Senate election
1968 presidential campaign

primaries
Boiler Room Girls







Speeches



Law Day Address (1961)
Day of Affirmation Address (1966)
Conflict in Vietnam and at Home (1968)
University of Kansas (1968)
Ball State (1968)
On the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. (1968)
"On the Mindless Menace of Violence" (1968)





Books



The Enemy Within (1960)
The Pursuit of Justice (1964)
To Seek a Newer World (1967)
Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis (1969)





Assassination



Sirhan Sirhan
Ambassador Hotel
Conspiracy theories
Gravesite





Legacy and
memorials



Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building
Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights

Human Rights Award
Journalism Award
Book Award


Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium
Landmark for Peace Memorial
Kennedy–King College
Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools
Robert F. Kennedy Bridge





Popular
culture



Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment (1963 documentary)
Robert Kennedy Remembered (1968 documentary)
"Abraham, Martin and John" (1968 song)
The Missiles of October (1974 docudrama)
Kennedy (1983 miniseries)
Blood Feud (1983 film)
Prince Jack (1985 film)
Robert Kennedy and His Times (1985 miniseries)
Hoover vs. The Kennedys (1987 miniseries)
Thirteen Days (2000 film)
RFK (2002 film)
Bobby (2006 film)
RFK Must Die (2007 documentary)
The Kennedys (2011 miniseries)
Ethel (2012 documentary)
Jackie (2016 film)





Family,
family tree



Ethel Skakel (wife)
Kathleen Kennedy (daughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy (son)
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (son)
David Kennedy (son)
Courtney Kennedy (daughter)
Michael Kennedy (son)
Kerry Kennedy (daughter)
Chris Kennedy (son)
Max Kennedy (son)
Doug Kennedy (son)
Rory Kennedy (daughter)
Joseph P. Kennedy III (grandson)
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. (father)
Rose Kennedy (mother)
Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (brother)
John F. Kennedy (brother
presidency)
Rosemary Kennedy (sister)
Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish (sister)
Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister)
Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister)
Jean Kennedy Smith (sister)
Ted Kennedy (brother)
Patrick J. Kennedy (grandfather)
John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather)












v
t
e


Fidel Castro



Timeline



Early life
Cuban Revolution

Participation
26th of July Movement
"History Will Absolve Me"


Primacy

Premiership

Land reform
Bay of Pigs Invasion
Cuban Missile Crisis


Presidency

Machurucuto Incident


Transfer of duties


Death and state funeral





Family



Ángel Castro y Argiz (father)
Ramón Castro Ruz (brother)
Raúl Castro (brother)
Juanita Castro (sister)
Mirta Diaz-Balart (wife)
Natalia Revuelta Clews (lover)
Vilma Espín (sister-in-law)
Alina Fernández (daughter)
Mariela Castro (niece)
Alejandro Castro Espín (nephew)





Popular culture




Films



Fidel: The Untold Story (2001)
Fidel (2002)
Comandante (2003)
Looking for Fidel (2004)
638 Ways to Kill Castro (2006)





Other



Guerrilla War (1987)
The Real Fidel Castro (2003)
Fidel Castro Handbook (2006)
Killing Castro (2006)
The Cuba Wars (2008)








Other



Assassination attempts

Robert Maheu


Awards and honours
Birán
Eponymous things
Politics
Religious views
My Life
Granma (yacht)












v
t
e


United States intervention in Latin America



Policy



Monroe Doctrine (1823)
Platt Amendment (1901–04)
Roosevelt Corollary/Big Stick ideology (1904)
Good Neighbor policy (1933)
Dollar diplomacy
Banana Wars





Wars



Mexican–American War (1846-48)
Spanish–American War (1898)
Border War (1910–19)
United States involvement in the Mexican Revolution (1916–19)





Overt actions
and occupations



Paraguay expedition (1858)
First Occupation of Cuba (1899–1902)
Panama–Colombia separation and Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty (1903)
Second Occupation of Cuba (1906–09)
Occupations of Honduras
Occupation of Nicaragua (1912–33)
Occupation of Veracruz (1914)
Occupation of Haiti (1915–34)
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–24)
Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
Invasion of Grenada (1983)
Invasion of Panama (1989)





Covert actions



1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Bay of Pigs Invasion (1961)
Operation MONGOOSE
Project FUBELT
1973 Chilean coup d'état





Disputed claims



2002 Venezuelan coup d'état attempt
2004 Haitian rebellion





Other



Cuban Missile Crisis (1962)








Foreign policy of the United States
Latin America–United States relations












v
t
e


History of the United States



Timeline



Prehistory
Pre-Columbian
Colonial
America's Critical Period
1776–89
1789–1849
1849–65
1865–1918
1918–45
1945–64
1964–80
1980–91
1991–2008
2008–present





Topics



American Century
Cities
Constitution
Demographic
Diplomatic
Economic
Education
Immigration
Medical
Merchant Marine
Military
Musical
Religious
Slavery
Southern
Technological and industrial
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Voting rights
Women








 Category
 Portal









Authority control



GND: 4136402-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cuban_Missile_Crisis&oldid=818044760"					Categories: Cuban Missile CrisisCold War conflictsConflicts in 19621962 in international relationsCold War history of CubaCold War history of the Soviet UnionCold War history of the United States1962 in Cuba1962 in the Soviet Union1962 in the United StatesBlockadesCold War military history of CubaCuban RevolutionHistory of CubaHistory of Key West, FloridaNuclear history of the Soviet UnionNuclear history of the United StatesFidel CastroNikita KhrushchevPresidency of John F. KennedyCuba–Soviet Union relationsCuba–United States relationsSoviet Union–United States relationsDEFCON 2 ConflictsDEFCON 3 Conflicts1962 establishments in Cuba1962 disestablishments in Cuba1960s in Cuba1960s in the Soviet Union1960s in the United StatesOctober 1962 eventsHidden categories: Wikipedia semi-protected pagesUse mdy dates from March 2012Articles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing Russian-language textArticles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2013All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2017Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers