For other uses, see Customs (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Customs, Tolls or Duties of the Corporation of Kinsale (1788)






Officers from US Customs and Border Protection boarding a ship


Customs is an authority or agency in a country responsible for collecting tariffs and for controlling the flow of goods, including animals, transports, personal, and hazardous items, into and out of a country.[1] The movement of people into and out of a country is normally monitored by immigration authorities, under a variety of names and arrangements. The immigration authorities normally check for appropriate documentation, verify that a person is entitled to enter the country, apprehend people wanted by domestic or international arrest warrants, and impede the entry of people deemed dangerous to the country. In many places, K9 units are also used.
Each country has its own laws and regulations for the import and export of goods into and out of a country, which its customs authority enforces. The import or export of some goods may be restricted or forbidden.[2] In most countries, customs are attained through government agreements and international laws. A customs duty is a tariff or tax on the importation (usually) or exportation (unusually) of goods. Commercial goods not yet cleared through customs are held in a customs area, often called a bonded store, until processed. All authorized ports are recognized customs areas.
At airports, customs is the point of no return for all passengers, once a passenger has cleared customs, they cannot go back.



Contents


1 Red and green channels

1.1 Blue channel
1.2 Red point phone


2 Privatization of customs
3 Summary of basic custom rules

3.1 European Union

3.1.1 Germany
3.1.2 Romania
3.1.3 Italy
3.1.4 Czech Republic and Slovakia


3.2 North America

3.2.1 United States


3.3 South America
3.4 Argentina


4 "Magic mail"
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Red and green channels[edit]
In many countries, customs procedures for arriving passengers at many international airports and some road crossings are separated into red and green channels.[3][4] Passengers with goods to declare (carrying goods above the permitted customs limits and/or carrying prohibited items) go through the red channel. Passengers with nothing to declare (carrying goods within the permitted customs limits and not carrying prohibited items) go through the green channel. However, entry into a particular channel constitutes a legal declaration, if a passenger going through the green channel is found to be carrying goods above the customs limits or prohibited items, he or she may be prosecuted for making a false declaration to customs, by virtue of having gone through the green channel. Each channel is a point of no return, once a passenger has entered a particular channel, they can not go back.
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States do not officially operate a red and green channel system; however, some airports copy this layout.
Blue channel[edit]
Airports in EU countries such as Finland, Ireland or the United Kingdom, also have a blue channel. As the EU is a customs union, travellers between EU countries do not have to pay customs duties. Value-added tax and excise duties may be applicable if the goods are subsequently sold, but these are collected when the goods are sold, not at the border. Passengers arriving from other EU countries go through the blue channel, where they may still be subject to checks for prohibited or restricted goods. Luggage tickets for checked luggage travelling within the EU are green-edged so they may be identified.[5][6] In most EU member states, travellers coming from other EU countries can simply use the green lane.
Red point phone[edit]
All airports in the United Kingdom operate a channel system, however some don't have a red channel, they instead have a red point phone which serves the same purpose.
Privatization of customs[edit]




The Customs-and-duty House at the port of Haifa, Israel


Customs is part of one of the three basic functions of a government, namely: administration; maintenance of law, order, and justice; and collection of revenue. However, in a bid to mitigate corruption, many countries have partly privatised their customs. This has occurred by way of contracting pre-shipment inspection agencies, which examine the cargo and verify the declared value before importation occurs. The country's customs is obliged to accept the agency's report for the purpose of assessing duties and taxes at the port of entry.
While engaging a pre-shipment inspection agency may appear justified in a country with an inexperienced or inadequate customs establishment, the measure has not been able to plug the loophole and protect revenue. It has been found that evasion of customs duty escalated when pre-shipment agencies took over.[7] It has also been alleged that involvement of such agencies has caused shipping delays.[2] Privatization of customs has been viewed as a fatal remedy.[7]
Summary of basic custom rules[edit]
European Union[edit]
The basic customs law is harmonized across Europe within the European Union Customs Union. This includes customs duties and restrictions. Customs tax from €22 to €150. In addition, see regulations of each member state.
For customs declarations in the EU and in Switzerland, Norway and Iceland, the "Single Administrative Document" (SAD) is used as a basis.[8]
Germany[edit]
Up to €22, there are no taxes. From €22 up to €150, it is necessary to pay VAT (EUSt in Germany), which is 7% or 19% depending on the goods. From €150 it is necessary to pay VAT and customs.
Romania[edit]
Customs may be very strict, especially for goods shipped from anywhere outside the EU. Up to €10 goods/package.
Italy[edit]
Customs in Italy takes additional 22% VAT (Value-added tax) for goods imported from outside the European Union even if the VAT is already paid to the origin country sender.
Czech Republic and Slovakia[edit]
Up to €22, there are no taxes. From €22 up to €150, it is necessary to pay VAT (DPH in Czech/Slovak), which is 21%. From €150, it is necessary to pay VAT and customs. Customs may range from zero to 10% depending on the type of imported goods.
North America[edit]
United States[edit]
The United States imposes tariffs or "customs duties" on imports of goods: 3% on average.[9] The duty is levied at the time of import and is paid by the importer of record. Individuals arriving in the United States may be exempt from duty on a limited amount of purchases, and on goods temporarily imported (such as laptop computers) under the ATA Carnet system. Customs duties vary by country of origin and product, with duties ranging from zero to 81% of the value of the goods. Goods from many countries are exempt from duty under various trade agreements. Certain types of goods are exempt from duty regardless of source. Customs rules differ from other import restrictions. Failure to comply with customs rules can result in seizure of goods and civil and criminal penalties against involved parties. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) enforces customs rules. All goods entering the United States are subject to inspection by CBP prior to legal entry.
South America[edit]
Argentina[edit]
Customs may be very strict. Up to u$300 overall, there are no taxes. From to u$300 to u$1500, tax is 50% of the value of all acquired goods sumed up.
"Magic mail"[edit]
Juan Pablo Escobar writes, in My Father Pablo Escobar, "At the time Pablo Escobar was trafficking cocaine, Colombia's major airports had what was known as "magic mail", a sort of parallel customs system that made it possible to bring anything into the country without leaving a paper trail - in exchange for a fat bribe."
See also[edit]

Australian Border Force
Canada Border Services Agency
Customs Trade Partnership against Terrorism
Duty (economics)
HM Customs and Excise (now Border Force) (United Kingdom)
Port authority
World Customs Journal
World Customs Organization
U.S. Customs and Border Protection

References[edit]



^ "customs". WordReference. Retrieved 2013-09-16. 
^ a b Chowdhury, F. L. (1992) Evasion of Customs Duty in Bangladesh, unpublished MBA dissertation submitted to Monash University, Australia.
^ "Dual-Channel System (Customs Clearance)". Ica.gov.sg. Retrieved 2015-09-02. 
^ "Wayback Machine" (PDF). Web.archive.org. 19 March 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2017. 
^ "EUROPA - Taxation and Customs Union / Baggage controls". Ec.europa.eu. 2007-02-21. Retrieved 2012-01-06. 
^ [1][dead link]
^ a b Chowdhury, F. L. (2006) Corrupt bureaucracy and privatization of Customs in Bangladesh, Pathok Samabesh, Dhaka.
^ "The single administrative document (SAD) - Taxation and customs union - European Commission". Taxation and customs union. Retrieved 31 December 2017. 
^ "Federation of International Trade Associations, country profile : United States". Fita.org. Retrieved 2012-01-06. 



External links[edit]

World Customs Organization
EU Customs







v
t
e


Customs services by country



Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Customs services of Ivory Coast Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





Asia



Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
Mainland China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Macau, China
Malaysia
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Palestine
Philippines
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Republic of China (Taiwan)
Thailand
Tajikistan
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





Europe



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





North America



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
St. Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States





South America



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand





Non-recognized



Kosovo
Northern Cyprus





Defunct



Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Serbia and Montenegro
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Customs&oldid=817948967"					Categories: Customs dutiesCustoms servicesExport and import controlInternational lawHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles needing additional references from June 2013All articles needing additional references