For other uses, see Ivory Coast (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 8°N 5°W﻿ / ﻿8°N 5°W﻿ / 8; -5


Republic of Côte d'Ivoire
République de Côte d'Ivoire (French)







Flag



Coat of arms






Motto: "Union – Discipline – Travail" (French)
"Unity – Discipline – Work"




Anthem: L'Abidjanaise
Song of Abidjan













Location of  Ivory Coast  (dark blue)
in the African Union  (light blue)








Capital
Yamoussoukro (political)
Abidjan (economic)
6°51′N 5°18′W﻿ / ﻿6.850°N 5.300°W﻿ / 6.850; -5.300


Largest city
Abidjan


Official languages
French


Vernacular
languages



Bété
Dioula
Baoulé
Abron
Agni
Cebaara Senufo
others





Ethnic groups (1998)



42.1% Akan
17.6% Voltaiques / Gur
16.5% Northern Mandé
11.0% Krous
10.0% Southern Mandé
2.8% othersa





Demonym



Ivorian
Ivoirian





Government
Unitary presidential republic under a parliamentary system



• President

Alassane Ouattara



• Vice-president

Daniel Kablan Duncan



• Prime Minister

Amadou Gon Coulibaly


Legislature
Parliament of Ivory Coast



• Upper house

Senate



• Lower house

National Assembly


Independence



• from France

7 August 1960


Area



• Total

322,463 km2 (124,504 sq mi) (68th)



• Water (%)

1.4[1]


Population



• 2016 estimate

23,740,424[2] (54th)



• 2015 census

26,578,367



• Density

63.9/km2 (165.5/sq mi) (139th)


GDP (PPP)
2017 estimate



• Total

$96.092 billion[3]



• Per capita

$3,849[3]


GDP (nominal)
2017 estimate



• Total

$38.396 billion[3]



• Per capita

$1,538[3]


Gini (2008)
41.5[4]
medium


HDI (2015)
 0.474[5]
low · 171st


Currency
West African CFA franc (XOF)


Time zone
GMT (UTC+0)


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+225


ISO 3166 code
CI


Internet TLD
.ci





Including approximately 130,000 Lebanese and 14,000 French people.





Ivory Coast (/ˌaɪvəri ˈkoʊst/ ( listen)) or Côte d'Ivoire (/ˌkoʊt diˈvwɑːr/ KOHT dee-VWAHR;[6] French: [kot divwaʁ] ( listen)), officially the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire[7][8] (French: République de Côte d'Ivoire), is a sovereign state located in West Africa. Ivory Coast's political capital is Yamoussoukro, and its economic capital and largest city is the port city of Abidjan. Its bordering countries are Guinea and Liberia in the west, Burkina Faso and Mali in the north, and Ghana in the east. The Gulf of Guinea (Atlantic Ocean) is located south of Ivory Coast.
Prior to its colonization by Europeans, Ivory Coast was home to several states, including Gyaaman, the Kong Empire, and Baoulé. Two Anyi kingdoms, Indénié and Sanwi, attempted to retain their separate identity through the French colonial period and after independence.[9] Ivory Coast became a protectorate of France in 1843–1844 and was later formed into a French colony in 1893 amid the European scramble for Africa. Ivory Coast achieved independence in 1960, led by Félix Houphouët-Boigny, who ruled the country until 1993. The country maintained close political and economic association with its West African neighbors while at the same time maintaining close ties to the West, especially France. Since the end of Houphouët-Boigny's rule in 1993, Ivory Coast has experienced one coup d'état, in 1999, and two religion-grounded civil wars. The first took place between 2002 and 2007[10] and the second during 2010–2011. In 2000, the country adopted a new constitution.[11]
Ivory Coast is a republic with a strong executive power invested in its President. Through the production of coffee and cocoa, the country was an economic powerhouse in West Africa during the 1960s and 1970s. Ivory Coast went through an economic crisis in the 1980s, contributing to a period of political and social turmoil. Changing into the 21st-century Ivorian economy is largely market-based and still relies heavily on agriculture, with smallholder cash-crop production being dominant.[1]
The official language is French, with local indigenous languages also widely used, including Baoulé, Dioula, Dan, Anyin, and Cebaara Senufo. In total there are around 78 languages spoken in Ivory Coast. Popular religions include Christianity (primarily Roman Catholicism), Islam, and various indigenous religions.



Contents


1 Names
2 History

2.1 Land migration
2.2 Pre-Islamic and Islamic periods
2.3 Pre-European era
2.4 Establishment of French rule
2.5 French colonial era
2.6 Independence
2.7 Houphouët-Boigny administration
2.8 Bédié administration
2.9 1999 military coup
2.10 Gbagbo administration
2.11 Ivorian Civil War

2.11.1 2002 Unity Government


2.12 2010 election
2.13 2011 Civil War


3 Geography

3.1 Administrative divisions
3.2 Environment


4 Politics

4.1 Foreign relations
4.2 Military


5 Economy
6 Society

6.1 Demographics
6.2 Languages
6.3 Employment
6.4 Ethnic groups
6.5 Largest cities
6.6 Religion
6.7 Health
6.8 Education


7 Science and technology
8 Culture

8.1 Music
8.2 Media
8.3 Sport
8.4 Cuisine


9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 Bibliography
13 External links



Names[edit]
Originally, Portuguese and French merchant-explorers in the 15th and 16th centuries divided the west coast of Africa, very roughly, into five "coasts" reflecting local economies. The coast that the French named the Côte d'Ivoire and the Portuguese named the Costa do Marfim—both, literally, being "Ivory Coast"—lay between what was known as the Guiné de Cabo Verde, so-called "Upper Guinea" at Cap-Vert, and Lower Guinea.[12][13] There was also a Pepper Coast also known as the "Grain Coast", a "Gold Coast", and a "Slave Coast". Like those, the name "Ivory Coast" reflected the major trade that occurred on that particular stretch of the coast, the export of ivory.[14][12][15][16][17]
Other names for the coast of ivory included the Côte de Dents,[n 1] literally "Coast of Teeth", again reflecting the trade in ivory;[19][20][14][13][17][21] the Côte de Quaqua, after the people whom the Dutch named the Quaqua (alternatively Kwa Kwa);[20][12][18] the Coast of the Five and Six Stripes, after a type of cotton fabric also traded there;[20] and the Côte du Vent[n 2], the Windward Coast, after perennial local off-shore weather conditions.[14][12] One can find the name Cote de(s) Dents regularly used in older works.[20] It was used in Duckett's Dictionnaire (Duckett 1853) and by Nicolas Villault de Bellefond, for examples, although Antoine François Prévost used Côte d'Ivoire.[21] In the 19th century, usage switched to Côte d'Ivoire.[20]
The coastline of the modern state is not quite coterminous with what the 15th- and 16th-century merchants knew as the "Teeth" or "Ivory" coast, which was considered to stretch from Cape Palmas to Cape Three Points and which is thus now divided between the modern states of Ghana and Ivory Coast (with a minute portion of Liberia).[19][15][21][18] It retained the name through French rule and independence in 1960.[22] The name had long since been translated literally into other languages,[n 3] which the post-independence government considered to be increasingly troublesome whenever its international dealings extended beyond the Francophone sphere. Therefore, in April 1986, the government declared Côte d'Ivoire (or, more fully, République de Côte d'Ivoire[24]) to be its formal name for the purposes of diplomatic protocol, and officially refuses to recognize or accept any translation from French to another language in its international dealings.[23][25][26]
Despite the Ivorian government's request, the English translation "Ivory Coast" (often "the Ivory Coast") is still frequently used in English, by various media outlets and publications.[n 4][n 5]
History[edit]
Main article: History of Ivory Coast
Land migration[edit]




Prehistoric polished stone celt from Boundiali in northern Ivory Coast, photo taken at the IFAN Museum of African Arts in Dakar, Senegal


The first human presence in Ivory Coast has been difficult to determine because human remains have not been well preserved in the country's humid climate. However, the presence of newly found weapon and tool fragments (specifically, polished axes cut through shale and remnants of cooking and fishing) has been interpreted as a possible indication of a large human presence during the Upper Paleolithic period (15,000 to 10,000 BC),[35] or at the minimum, the Neolithic period.[36]
The earliest known inhabitants of Ivory Coast have left traces scattered throughout the territory. Historians believe that they were all either displaced or absorbed by the ancestors of the present indigenous inhabitants, who migrated south into the area before the 16th century. Such groups included the Ehotilé (Aboisso), Kotrowou (Fresco), Zéhiri (Grand Lahou), Ega and Diès (Divo).[37]
Pre-Islamic and Islamic periods[edit]
The first recorded history is found in the chronicles of North African (Berber) traders, who, from early Roman times, conducted a caravan trade across the Sahara in salt, slaves, gold, and other goods. The southern terminals of the trans-Saharan trade routes were located on the edge of the desert, and from there supplemental trade extended as far south as the edge of the rain forest. The more important terminals—Djenné, Gao, and Timbuctu—grew into major commercial centres around which the great Sudanic empires developed.
By controlling the trade routes with their powerful military forces, these empires were able to dominate neighbouring states. The Sudanic empires also became centres of Islamic education. Islam had been introduced in the western Sudan (today's Mali) by Muslim Berber traders from North Africa; it spread rapidly after the conversion of many important rulers. From the 11th century, by which time the rulers of the Sudanic empires had embraced Islam, it spread south into the northern areas of contemporary Ivory Coast.
The Ghana empire, the earliest of the Sudanic empires, flourished in present-day eastern Mauritania from the fourth to the 13th centuries. At the peak of its power in the 11th century, its realms extended from the Atlantic Ocean to Timbuctu. After the decline of Ghana, the Mali Empire grew into a powerful Muslim state, which reached its apogee in the early part of the 14th century. The territory of the Mali Empire in Ivory Coast was limited to the north-west corner around Odienné.
Its slow decline starting at the end of the 14th century followed internal discord and revolts by vassal states, one of which, Songhai, flourished as an empire between the 14th and 16th centuries. Songhai was also weakened by internal discord, which led to factional warfare. This discord spurred most of the migrations of peoples southward toward the forest belt. The dense rain forest, covering the southern half of the country, created barriers to the large-scale political organizations that had arisen in the north. Inhabitants lived in villages or clusters of villages; their contacts with the outside world were filtered through long-distance traders. Villagers subsisted on agriculture and hunting.
Pre-European era[edit]




Pre-European kingdoms


Five important states flourished in Ivory Coast during the pre-European era. The Muslim Kong Empire was established by the Joola in the early 18th century in the north-central region inhabited by the Sénoufo, who had fled Islamization under the Mali Empire. Although Kong became a prosperous center of agriculture, trade, and crafts, ethnic diversity and religious discord gradually weakened the kingdom. The city of Kong was destroyed in 1895 by Samori Ture.
The Abron kingdom of Gyaaman was established in the 17th century by an Akan group, the Abron, who had fled the developing Ashanti confederation of Asanteman in what is present-day Ghana. From their settlement south of Bondoukou, the Abron gradually extended their hegemony over the Dyula people in Bondoukou, who were recent émigrés from the market city of Begho. Bondoukou developed into a major center of commerce and Islam. The kingdom's Quranic scholars attracted students from all parts of West Africa. In the mid-17th century in east-central Ivory Coast, other Akan groups fleeing the Asante established a Baoulé kingdom at Sakasso and two Agni kingdoms, Indénié and Sanwi.
The Baoulé, like the Ashanti, developed a highly centralized political and administrative structure under three successive rulers. It finally split into smaller chiefdoms. Despite the breakup of their kingdom, the Baoulé strongly resisted French subjugation. The descendants of the rulers of the Agni kingdoms tried to retain their separate identity long after Ivory Coast's independence; as late as 1969, the Sanwi attempted to break away from Ivory Coast and form an independent kingdom.[38] The current king of Sanwi is Nana Amon Ndoufou V (since 2002).
Establishment of French rule[edit]
Compared to neighboring Ghana, Ivory Coast though practicing slavery and slave raiding suffered little from the slave trade as such. European slaving and merchant ships preferred other areas along the coast with better harbors to trade with local slave owners. The earliest recorded European voyage to West Africa was made by the Portuguese in 1482. The first West African French settlement, Saint Louis, was founded in the mid-17th century in Senegal, while at about the same time, the Dutch ceded to the French a settlement at Goree Island, off Dakar. A French mission was established in 1637 Assinie near the border with the Gold Coast (now Ghana). The Europeans suppressed the local practice of slavery at this time, and forbade the trade to their merchants.
Assinie's survival was precarious, however; the French were not firmly established in Ivory Coast until the mid-19th century. In 1843–4, French admiral Bouët-Willaumez signed treaties with the kings of the Grand Bassam and Assinie regions, making their territories a French protectorate. French explorers, missionaries, trading companies, and soldiers gradually extended the area under French control inland from the lagoon region. Pacification was not accomplished until 1915.
Activity along the coast stimulated European interest in the interior, especially along the two great rivers, the Senegal and the Niger. Concerted French exploration of West Africa began in the mid-19th century, but moved slowly, based more on individual initiative than on government policy. In the 1840s, the French concluded a series of treaties with local West African chiefs that enabled the French to build fortified posts along the Gulf of Guinea to serve as permanent trading centres.




Louis-Gustave Binger of French West Africa in 1892 treaty signing with Famienkro leaders, in present-day N'zi-Comoé Region, Ivory Coast


The first posts in Ivory Coast included one at Assinie and another at Grand Bassam, which became the colony's first capital. The treaties provided for French sovereignty within the posts, and for trading privileges in exchange for fees or coutumes paid annually to the local chiefs for the use of the land. The arrangement was not entirely satisfactory to the French, because trade was limited and misunderstandings over treaty obligations often arose. Nevertheless, the French government maintained the treaties, hoping to expand trade.
France also wanted to maintain a presence in the region to stem the increasing influence of the British along the Gulf of Guinea coast. The French built naval bases to keep out non-French traders and began a systematic pacification of the interior to stop raids on their settlements. (They accomplished this only after a long war in the 1890s against Mandinka tribesmen, mostly from Gambia. However, raids by the Baoulé and other eastern tribes continued until 1917).[citation needed]
The defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War in 1871 and the subsequent annexation by Germany of the French province of Alsace-Lorraine caused the French government to abandon its colonial ambitions and withdraw its military garrisons from its French West African trading posts, leaving them in the care of resident merchants. The trading post at Grand Bassam in Ivory Coast was left in the care of a shipper from Marseille, Arthur Verdier, who in 1878 was named Resident of the Establishment of Ivory Coast.[38]
In 1886, to support its claims of effective occupation, France again assumed direct control of its West African coastal trading posts and embarked on an accelerated program of exploration in the interior. In 1887, Lieutenant Louis Gustave Binger began a two-year journey that traversed parts of Ivory Coast's interior. By the end of the journey, he had concluded four treaties establishing French protectorates in Ivory Coast. Also in 1887, Verdier's agent, Marcel Treich-Laplène, negotiated five additional agreements that extended French influence from the headwaters of the Niger River Basin through Ivory Coast.
French colonial era[edit]




Arrival in Kong of new French West Africa governor Louis-Gustave Binger in 1892.


By the end of the 1880s, France had established what came through for control over the coastal regions of Ivory Coast, and in 1889 Britain recognized French sovereignty in the area. That same year, France named Trench-Laplène titular governor of the territory. In 1893, Ivory Coast was made a French colony, and then Captain Binger was appointed governor. Agreements with Liberia in 1892 and with Britain in 1893 determined the eastern and western boundaries of the colony, but the northern boundary was not fixed until 1947 because of efforts by the French government to attach parts of Upper Volta (present-day Burkina Faso) and French Sudan (present-day Mali) to Ivory Coast for economic and administrative reasons.
France's main goal was to stimulate the production of exports. Coffee, cocoa, and palm oil crops were soon planted along the coast. Ivory Coast stood out as the only West African country with a sizeable population of settlers; elsewhere in West and Central Africa, the French and British were largely bureaucrats. As a result, French citizens owned one-third of the cocoa, coffee, and banana plantations and adopted the local forced-labor system.
Throughout the early years of French rule, French military contingents were sent inland to establish new posts. Some of the native population and former slave-owning class resisted French civilization and settlement. Among those offering greatest resistance was Samori Ture, who in the 1880s and 1890s was conquering his neighbors, re-establishing slavery and founding the Wassoulou Empire, which extended over large parts of present-day Guinea, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Ivory Coast. Samori Ture's large, well-equipped army, which could manufacture and repair its own firearms, attracted some support throughout the region from chiefs who sought to play the two sides off against each other. The French responded to Samori Ture's expansion and conquest with military pressure. French campaigns against Samori Ture, which were met with greater resistance than usual in tribal warfare, intensified in the mid-1890s until he was captured in 1898 and his empire dissolved.
France's imposition of a head tax in 1900 to support the colony in a public works program provoked unexpected protests. Many Ivoirians viewed the tax as a violation of the terms of the protectorate treaties because they imagined that France was demanding the equivalent of a coutume from the local kings, rather than the reverse. Many of the population, especially in the interior, considered the tax a humiliating symbol of submission.[39] In 1905, the French officially abolished slavery in most of French West Africa.[40]




Samori Touré – founder and leader of the Wassoulou Empire, a jihadist state in Western Africa that resisted French rule


From 1904 to 1958, Ivory Coast was a constituent unit of the Federation of French West Africa. It was a colony and an overseas territory under the Third Republic. In World War I, France organized regiments from Ivory Coast to fight in France, and colony resources were rationed from 1917–1919. Some 150,000 men from Ivory Coast died in World War I. Until the period following World War II, governmental affairs in French West Africa were administered from Paris. France's policy in West Africa was reflected mainly in its philosophy of "association", meaning that all Africans in Ivory Coast were officially French "subjects", but without rights to representation in Africa or France.
French colonial policy incorporated concepts of assimilation and association. Based on an assumption of the superiority of French culture over all others, in practice the assimilation policy meant the extension of French language, institutions, laws, and customs to the colonies. The policy of association also affirmed the superiority of the French in the colonies, but it entailed different institutions and systems of laws for the colonizer and the colonized. Under this policy, the Africans in Ivory Coast were allowed to preserve their own customs insofar as they were compatible with French interests, such as the recent abolition of the slave trade.
An indigenous elite trained in French administrative practice formed an intermediary group between the French and the Africans. Assimilation was practiced in Ivory Coast to the extent that after 1930, a small number of Westernized Ivoirians were granted the right to apply for French citizenship. Most Ivoirians, however, were classified as French subjects and were governed under the principle of association.[41] As subjects of France, natives outside the above-mentioned civilized elite had no political rights until they entered it. They were drafted for work in mines, on plantations, as porters, and on public projects as part of their tax responsibility. They were expected to serve in the military and were subject to the indigénat, a separate system of law.[42]
In World War II, the Vichy regime remained in control until 1942, when British troops invaded without much resistance. Winston Churchill gave power back to members of General Charles de Gaulle's provisional government. By 1943, the Allies had returned French West Africa to the French. The Brazzaville Conference of 1944, the first Constituent Assembly of the Fourth Republic in 1946, and France's gratitude for African loyalty during World War II, led to far-reaching governmental reforms in 1946. French citizenship was granted to all African "subjects", the right to organize politically was recognized, and various forms of forced labor were abolished.
Until 1958, governors appointed in Paris administered the colony of Ivory Coast, using a system of direct, centralized administration that left little room for Ivoirian participation in policy making. Whereas British colonial administration adopted divide-and-rule policies elsewhere, applying ideas of assimilation only to the educated elite, the French were interested in ensuring that the small but influential elite was sufficiently satisfied with the status quo to refrain from any anti-French sentiment. Although strongly opposed to the practices of association, educated Ivoirians believed that they would achieve equality with their French peers through assimilation rather than through complete independence from France. After the assimilation doctrine was implemented entirely through the postwar reforms, though, Ivoirian leaders realized that even assimilation implied the superiority of the French over the Ivoirians. Some of them thought that discrimination and political inequality would end only with independence; others thought the problem of the division between the tribal culture and modernity would continue.[43]
Independence[edit]




President Félix Houphouët-Boigny and First Lady Marie-Thérèse Houphouët-Boigny in the White House Entrance Hall with President John F. Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy in 1962.


Félix Houphouët-Boigny, the son of a Baoulé chief, became Ivory Coast's father of independence. In 1944, he formed the country's first agricultural trade union for African cocoa farmers like himself. Angered that colonial policy favoured French plantation owners, they united to recruit migrant workers for their own farms. Houphouët-Boigny soon rose to prominence and within a year was elected to the French Parliament in Paris. A year later, the French abolished forced labour. Houphouët-Boigny established a strong relationship with the French government, expressing a belief that the Ivory Coast would benefit from the relationship, which it did for many years. France appointed him as a minister, the first African to become a minister in a European government.
A turning point in relations with France was reached with the 1956 Overseas Reform Act (Loi Cadre), which transferred a number of powers from Paris to elected territorial governments in French West Africa and also removed the remaining voting inequalities. In 1958, Ivory Coast became an autonomous member of the French Community, which had replaced the French Union.
At the time of Ivory Coast's independence (1960), the country was easily French West Africa's most prosperous, contributing over 40% of the region's total exports. When Houphouët-Boigny became the first president, his government gave farmers good prices for their products to further stimulate production. This was further boosted by a significant immigration of workers from surrounding countries. Coffee production increased significantly, catapulting Ivory Coast into third place in world output (behind Brazil and Colombia). By 1979, the country was the world's leading producer of cocoa.
It also became Africa's leading exporter of pineapples and palm oil. French technicians contributed to the "Ivoirian miracle". In other African nations, the people drove out the Europeans following independence, but in Ivory Coast, they poured in. The French community grew from only 30,000 prior to independence to 60,000 in 1980, most of them teachers, managers, and advisors.[44] For 20 years, the economy maintained an annual growth rate of nearly 10%—the highest of Africa's non-oil-exporting countries.
Houphouët-Boigny administration[edit]
Houphouët-Boigny's one-party rule was not amenable to political competition. Laurent Gbagbo, who would become the president of Ivory Coast in 2000, had to flee the country in the 1980s, as he incurred the ire of Houphouët-Boigny when Gbagbo founded the Front Populaire Ivoirien.[45] Houphouët-Boigny banked on his broad appeal to the population who continually elected him. He was also criticized for his emphasis on developing large-scale projects.
Many felt the millions of dollars spent transforming his home village, Yamoussoukro, into the new political capital were wasted; others supported his vision to develop a centre for peace, education, and religion in the heart of the country. In the early 1980s, the world recession and a local drought sent shock waves through the Ivoirian economy. Due to the overcutting of timber and collapsing sugar prices, the country's external debt increased three-fold. Crime rose dramatically in Abidjan.[citation needed]
In 1990, hundreds of civil servants went on strike, joined by students protesting institutional corruption. The unrest forced the government to support multiparty democracy. Houphouët-Boigny became increasingly feeble, and died in 1993. He favoured Henri Konan Bédié as his successor.
Bédié administration[edit]
In October 1995, Bédié overwhelmingly won re-election against a fragmented and disorganised opposition. He tightened his hold over political life, jailing several hundred opposition supporters. In contrast, the economic outlook improved, at least superficially, with decreasing inflation and an attempt to remove foreign debt.




Election results of 2002 in Ivory Coast


Unlike Houphouët-Boigny, who was very careful in avoiding any ethnic conflict and left access to administrative positions open to immigrants from neighbouring countries, Bedié emphasized the concept of "Ivority" (Ivoirité) to exclude his rival Alassane Ouattara, who had two northern Ivorian parents, from running for future presidential election. As people originating from foreign countries are a large part of the Ivoirian population, this policy excluded many people from Ivoirian nationality, and the relationship between various ethnic groups became strained, which resulted in two civil wars in the following decades.
1999 military coup[edit]
Similarly, Bedié excluded many potential opponents from the army. In late 1999, a group of dissatisfied officers staged a military coup, putting General Robert Guéï in power. Bedié fled into exile in France. The new leadership reduced crime and corruption, and the generals pressed for austerity and campaigned in the streets for a less wasteful society.
Gbagbo administration[edit]
A presidential election was held in October 2000 in which Laurent Gbagbo vied with Guéï, but it was peaceful. The lead-up to the election was marked by military and civil unrest. Following a public uprising that resulted in around 180 deaths, Guéï was swiftly replaced by Gbagbo. Alassane Ouattara was disqualified by the country's Supreme Court, due to his alleged Burkinabé nationality. The existing and later reformed constitution [under Guéï] did not allow noncitizens to run for the presidency. This sparked violent protests in which his supporters, mainly from the country's north, battled riot police in the capital, Yamoussoukro.
Ivorian Civil War[edit]
Main article: First Ivorian Civil War




A technical in the First Ivorian Civil War, 2002–2007


In the early hours of 19 September 2002, while the President was in Italy, an armed uprising occurred. Troops who were to be demobilised mutinied, launching attacks in several cities. The battle for the main gendarmerie barracks in Abidjan lasted until mid-morning, but by lunchtime, the government forces had secured the main city, Abidjan. They had lost control of the north of the country, and the rebel forces made their stronghold in the northern city of Bouaké.
The rebels threatened to move on Abidjan again, and France deployed troops from its base in the country to stop the rebel advance. The French said they were protecting their own citizens from danger, but their deployment also helped government forces. That the French were helping either side was not established as a fact; but each side accused the French of supporting the opposite side. Whether French actions improved or worsened the situation in the long term is disputed.
What exactly happened that night is disputed. The government claimed that former president Robert Guéï led a coup attempt, and state TV showed pictures of his dead body in the street; counter-claims stated that he and 15 others had been murdered at his home, and his body had been moved to the streets to incriminate him. Alassane Ouattara took refuge in the German embassy; his home had been burned down.
President Gbagbo cut short his trip to Italy and on his return stated, in a television address, that some of the rebels were hiding in the shanty towns where foreign migrant workers lived. Gendarmes and vigilantes bulldozed and burned homes by the thousands, attacking the residents.
An early ceasefire with the rebels, which had the backing of much of the northern populace, proved short-lived, and fighting over the prime cocoa-growing areas resumed. France sent in troops to maintain the cease-fire boundaries,[46] and militias, including warlords and fighters from Liberia and Sierra Leone, took advantage of the crisis to seize parts of the west.
2002 Unity Government[edit]




Armed Ivorians next to a French Foreign Legion armoured car, 2004


In January 2003, Gbagbo and rebel leaders signed accords creating a "government of national unity". Curfews were lifted, and French troops patrolled the western border of the country. The unity government was unstable, and central problems remained, with neither side achieving its goals. In March 2004, 120 people were killed in an opposition rally, and subsequent mob violence led to the evacuation of foreign nationals. A later report concluded the killings were planned.
Though UN peacekeepers were deployed to maintain a "Zone of Confidence", relations between Gbagbo and the opposition continued to deteriorate.
Early in November 2004, after the peace agreement had effectively collapsed following the rebels' refusal to disarm, Gbagbo ordered airstrikes against the rebels. During one of these airstrikes in Bouaké, on 6 November 2004, French soldiers were hit, and nine were killed; the Ivorian government said it was a mistake, but the French claimed it was deliberate. They responded by destroying most Ivoirian military aircraft (two Su-25 planes and five helicopters), and violent retaliatory riots against the French broke out in Abidjan.[47]
Gbagbo's original mandate as president expired on 30 October 2005, but due to the lack of disarmament, holding an election was deemed impossible, so his term in office was extended for a maximum of one year, according to a plan worked out by the African Union; this plan was endorsed by the United Nations Security Council.[48] With the late-October deadline approaching in 2006, the election was regarded as very unlikely to be held by that point, and the opposition and the rebels rejected the possibility of another term extension for Gbagbo.[49] The UN Security Council endorsed another one-year extension of Gbagbo's term on 1 November 2006; however, the resolution provided for the strengthening of Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny's powers. Gbagbo said the next day that elements of the resolution deemed to be constitutional violations would not be applied.[50]
A peace accord between the government and the rebels, or New Forces, was signed on 4 March 2007, and subsequently Guillaume Soro, leader of the New Forces, became prime minister. These events were seen by some observers as substantially strengthening Gbagbo's position.[51]
According to UNICEF, at the end of the Civil War, the water and sanitation situation was greatly damaged. Communities across the country required repairs to their water supply infrastructure. [52]
2010 election[edit]
Main article: Ivorian presidential election, 2010






Alassane Ouattara
President since 2010
Daniel Kablan Duncan
Prime Minister from 2012 to 2017


The presidential elections that should have been organized in 2005 were postponed until November 2010. The preliminary results announced independently by the president of the Electoral Commission from the headquarters of Allasane due to concern about fraud in that commission. They showed a loss for Gbagbo in favour of his rival, former prime minister Alassane Ouattara.[53]
The ruling FPI contested the results before the Constitutional Council, charging massive fraud in the northern departments controlled by the rebels of the New Forces. These charges were contradicted by United Nations observers (unlike African Union observers). The report of the results led to severe tension and violent incidents. The Constitutional Council, which consisted of Gbagbo supporters, declared the results of seven northern departments unlawful and that Gbagbo had won the elections with 51% of the vote – instead of Ouattara winning with 54%, as reported by the Electoral Commission.[53]
After the inauguration of Gbagbo, Ouattara—who was recognized as the winner by most countries and the United Nations—organized an alternative inauguration. These events raised fears of a resurgence of the civil war; thousands of refugees fled the country.[53]
The African Union sent Thabo Mbeki, former President of South Africa, to mediate the conflict. The United Nations Security Council adopted a common resolution recognising Alassane Ouattara as winner of the elections, based on the position of the Economic Community of West African States, which suspended Ivory Coast from all its decision-making bodies[54] while the African Union also suspended the country's membership.[55]
In 2010, a colonel of the Ivory Coast armed forces, Nguessan Yao, was arrested in New York in a year-long U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement operation charged with procuring and illegal export of weapons and munitions: 4,000 9 mm handguns, 200,000 rounds of ammunition, and 50,000 tear-gas grenades, in violation of a UN embargo. Several other Ivory Coast officers were released based on their diplomatic passports. His accomplice, Michael Barry Shor, an international trader, was located in Virginia.[56]
2011 Civil War[edit]




A shelter for internally displaced persons during the 2011 civil war


Main article: Second Ivorian Civil War
The 2010 presidential election led to the 2010–2011 Ivorian crisis and the Second Ivorian Civil War. International organizations reported numerous human-rights violations by both sides. In the city of Duékoué, hundreds of people were killed. In nearby Bloléquin, dozens were killed.[57] UN and French forces took military action against Gbagbo.[58] Gbagbo was taken into custody after a raid into his residence on 11 April 2011. The country was severely damaged by the war, and observers say it will be a challenge for Ouattara to rebuild the economy and reunite Ivorians.[59]

Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of Ivory Coast




Côte d'Ivoire map of Köppen climate classification.


Ivory Coast is a country of western sub-Saharan Africa. It borders Liberia and Guinea in the west, Mali and Burkina Faso in the north, Ghana in the east, and the Gulf of Guinea (Atlantic Ocean) in the south. The country lies between latitudes 4° and 11°N, and longitudes 2° and 9°W. Around 64.8% of the land is agricultural land, Arable land taking up 9.1%, permanent pasture with 41.5%, and permanent crops occupying 14.2%. Water pollution is amongst one of the biggest issues that the country is currently facing.[60]
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Subdivisions of Ivory Coast, Districts of Ivory Coast, Regions of Ivory Coast, Departments of Ivory Coast, and Sub-prefectures of Ivory Coast
Since 2011, Ivory Coast has been administratively organised into 12 districts plus two district-level autonomous cities. The districts are divided into 31 regions; the regions are divided into 108 departments; and the departments are divided into 510 sub-prefectures.[61] In some instances, multiple villages are organised into communes. The autonomous districts are not divided into regions, but they do contain departments, sub-prefectures, and communes.
Since 2011, governors for the 12 non-autonomous districts have not been appointed, and as a result these districts have not yet begun to function as governmental entities.




Districts of Ivory Coast


The following is the list of districts, district capitals and each district's regions:


Map no.
District
District capital
Regions
Region seat
Population[62]


1
Abidjan
(District Autonome d'Abidjan)
4,707,404


2
Bas-Sassandra
(District du Bas-Sassandra)
San-Pédro
Gbôklé
Sassandra
400,798


Nawa
Soubré
1,053,084


San-Pédro
San-Pédro
826,666


3
Comoé
(District du Comoé)
Abengourou
Indénié-Djuablin
Abengourou
560,432


Sud-Comoé
Aboisso
642,620


4
Denguélé
(District du Denguélé)
Odienné
Folon
Minignan
96,415


Kabadougou
Odienné
193,364


5
Gôh-Djiboua
(District du Gôh-Djiboua)
Gagnoa
Gôh
Gagnoa
876,117


Lôh-Djiboua
Divo
729,169


6
Lacs
(District des Lacs)
Dimbokro
Bélier Region
Yamoussoukro[63]
346,768


Iffou
Daoukro
311,642


Moronou
Bongouanou
352,616


N'Zi
Dimbokro
247,578


7
Lagunes
(District des Lagunes)
Dabou
Agnéby-Tiassa
Agboville
606,852


Grands-Ponts
Dabou
356,495


La Mé
Adzopé
514,700


8
Montagnes
(District des Montagnes)
Man
Cavally
Guiglo
459,964


Guémon
Duékoué
919,392


Tonkpi
Man
992,564


9
Sassandra-Marahoué
(District du Sassandra-Marahoué)
Daloa
Haut-Sassandra
Daloa
1,430,960


Marahoué
Bouaflé
862,344


10
Savanes
(District des Savanes)
Korhogo
Bagoué
Boundiali
375,687


Poro
Korhogo
763,852


Tchologo
Ferkessédougou
467,958


11
Vallée du Bandama
(District de la Vallée du Bandama)
Bouaké
Gbêkê
Bouaké
1,010,849


Hambol
Katiola
429,977


12
Woroba
(District du Woroba)
Séguéla
Béré
Mankono
389,758


Bafing
Touba
183,047


Worodougou
Séguéla
272,334


13
Yamoussoukro
(District Autonome du Yamoussoukro)
355,573


14
Zanzan
(District du Zanzan)
Bondoukou
Bounkani
Bouna
267,167


Gontougo
Bondoukou
667,185


Environment[edit]
Main article: Environment of Ivory Coast




This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (May 2017)



Main article: List of national parks of Ivory Coast
Politics[edit]
Main article: Politics of Ivory Coast




Special Forces Military Operations unit of the Republican Forces of the Ivory Coast


The government is divided into three branches: the executive power, the legislative power, and the judicial power. In the legislative branch, Guillaume Soro directs the 2016 National Assembly and the 225 members. They are elected for five-year terms.
Since 1983, Ivory Coast's capital has been Yamoussoukro, while Abidjan is the administrative center. Most countries maintain their embassies in Abidjan. The Ivoirian population has suffered because of the ongoing civil war. International human-rights organizations have noted problems with the treatment of captive non-combatants by both sides and the re-emergence of child slavery in cocoa production.[64]
Although most of the fighting ended by late 2004, the country remained split in two, with the north controlled by the New Forces. A new presidential election was expected to be held in October 2005, and an agreement was reached among the rival parties in March 2007 to proceed with this, but it continued to be postponed until November 2010 due to delays in its preparation.
Elections were finally held in 2010. The first round of elections was held peacefully, and widely hailed as free and fair. Runoffs were held 28 November 2010, after being delayed one week from the original date of 21 November. Laurent Gbagbo as president ran against former Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara.[65]
On 2 December, the Electoral Commission declared that Ouattara had won the election by a margin of 54% to 46%. In response, the Gbagbo-aligned Constitutional Council rejected the declaration, and the government announced that country's borders had been sealed. An Ivorian military spokesman said, "The air, land, and sea border of the country are closed to all movement of people and goods."[66]
Foreign relations[edit]




Former President Laurent Gbagbo was extradited to the International Criminal Court (ICC), becoming the first head of state to be taken into the court's custody.[67]


Further information: Foreign relations of Ivory Coast
In Africa, Ivorian diplomacy favors step-by-step economic and political cooperation. In 1959, Ivory Coast formed the Council of the Entente with Dahomey (Benin), Upper Volta (Burkina Faso), Niger and Togo; in 1965, the African and Malagasy Common Organization (OCAM); in 1972, the Economic Community of West Africa (CEAO). The last mentioned organisation changing to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 1975. A founding member of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1963 and then of the African Union in 2000, Ivory Coast defends respect for state sovereignty and peaceful cooperation between African countries.
Worldwide, Ivorian diplomacy is committed to fair economic and trade relations, including the fair the trade of agricultural products and the promotion of peaceful relations with all countries. Ivory Coast thus maintains diplomatic relations with international organizations and countries all around the world. In particular, it has signed United Nations treaties such as the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, the 1967 Protocol, and the 1969 Convention Governing Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa. Ivory Coast is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, African Union, La Francophonie, Latin Union, Economic Community of West African States, and South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone.
Ivory Coast have partnered with nations of the Sub-Saharan region in strengthening water and sanitation infrastructure. This has been done mainly with the help of organizations such as UNICEF and Nestle.[68]
In 2015, the United Nations engineered the Sustainable Development Goals (replacing the Millennium Development Goals). They focus on health, education, poverty, hunger, climate change, water sanitation, and hygiene. A major focus was clean water and salinisation. Experts working on this field have designed the WASH concept. WASH focuses on safe drinkable water, hygiene, and proper sanitation. The group has had a major impact on the sub-Saharan region of Africa, particularly the Ivory Coast. By 2030, they plan to have universal and equal access to safe and affordable drinking water.[69]
Military[edit]
Further information: Military of Ivory Coast
As of 2012[update], major equipment items reported by the Ivory Coast Army included 10 T-55 tanks (marked as potentially unserviceable), five AMX-13 light tanks, 34 reconnaissance vehicles, 10 BMP-½ armoured infantry fighting vehicles, 41 wheeled APCs, and 36+ artillery pieces.[70]
In 2012, the Ivory Coast Airforce consisted of one Mil Mi-24 attack helicopter and three SA330L Puma transports (marked as potentially unserviceable).[71]
Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of Ivory Coast




A proportional representation of Ivory Coast's exports in 2011


Ivory Coast has, for the region, a relatively high income per capita (US$1014.4 in 2013) and plays a key role in transit trade for neighboring, landlocked countries. The country is the largest economy in the West African Economic and Monetary Union, constituting 40% of the monetary union’s total GDP. The country is the world's largest exporter of cocoa beans, and the fourth-largest exporter of goods, in general, in sub-Saharan Africa (following South Africa, Nigeria, and Angola).[72]
In 2009, the cocoa-bean farmers earned $2.53 billion for cocoa exports and were expected to produce 630,000 metric tons in 2013.[73][74] According to the Hershey Company, the price of cocoa beans is expected to rise dramatically in upcoming years.[75] The Ivory Coast also has 100,000 rubber farmers who earned a total of $105 million in 2012.[76][77]
The maintenance of close ties to France since independence in 1960, diversification of agriculture for export, and encouragement of foreign investment have been factors in the economic growth of Ivory Coast. In recent years, Ivory Coast has been subject to greater competition and falling prices in the global marketplace for its primary agricultural crops: coffee and cocoa. That, compounded with high internal corruption, makes life difficult for the grower, those exporting into foreign markets, and the labor force, inasmuch as instances of indentured labor have been reported in the cocoa and coffee production in every edition of the U.S. Department of Labor's List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor since 2009.[78]
South Africa and North Africa aside, most African economies have not grown faster since independence. One possible reason for this might be the taxation on export agriculture. Ivory Coast, Nigeria, and Kenya were exceptions as their rulers were themselves large cash-crop producers, and the newly independent countries desisted from imposing penal rates of taxation of export agriculture, with the result that their economies were doing well.[79]
Society[edit]
Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of Ivory Coast




Abidjan is the Ivory Coast's largest city and its economic capital.






Congestion at a market in Abidjan


The country's population was 15,366,672 in 1998,[80] and was estimated to be 20,617,068 in 2009,[1] and 23,919,000 in July 2014.[81] Ivory Coast's first national census in 1975 counted 6.7 million inhabitants.[82]
According to 2012 government survey, the fertility rate was 5.0 children born per woman, with 3.7 in urban areas and 6.3 in rural areas.[83]
Languages[edit]
Further information: Languages of Ivory Coast
French, the official language, is taught in schools and serves as a lingua franca in the country. An estimated 65 languages are spoken in Ivory Coast. One of the most common is the Dyula language, which acts as a trade language, as well as a language commonly spoken by the Muslim population.
Employment[edit]
Around 7.5 million people of Ivory Coast made up the work force in 2009. The work force took a hit, especially in the private sector, during the early 2000s due to the numerous economic crises since 1999. Furthermore, these crises caused companies to close and move locations, especially in Ivory Coast's tourism industry, transit and banking companies. Job markets decreasing posed as a huge issue in Ivory Coast society as unemployment rates grew. Unemployment rates raised to 9.4% in 2012.[84]
Solutions proposed to decrease unemployment included diversifying jobs in small trade. This division of work encouraged farmers and the agricultural sector. Self-employment policy, established by the Ivorian government, allowed for very strong growth in the field with an increase of 142% in seven years from 1995.[85] Despite efforts like this to decrease unemployment, it still remains as a social problem.
Ethnic groups[edit]
Ethnic groups include Akan (42.1%), Voltaiques or Gur (17.6%), Northern Mandés (16.5%), Krous (11%), Southern Mandés (10%), and others (2.8%, including 30,000 Lebanese and 45,000 French; 2004). About 77% of the population is considered Ivorian.
Since Ivory Coast has established itself as one of the most successful West African nations, about 20% of the population (about 3.4 million) consists of workers from neighbouring Liberia, Burkina Faso, and Guinea.
About 4% of the population is of non-African ancestry. Many are French,[86] Lebanese,[87] Vietnamese and Spanish citizens, as well as Protestant missionaries from the United States and Canada. In November 2004, around 10,000 French and other foreign nationals evacuated Ivory Coast due to attacks from progovernment youth militias.[88] Aside from French nationals, native-born descendants of French settlers who arrived during the country's colonial period are present.
Largest cities[edit]



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in Ivory Coast
geohive.com




Rank
Name
District
Pop.



Abidjan
1
Abidjan
Abidjan
4 395 243


2
Bouaké
Vallée du Bandama
536 189


3
Daloa
Sassandra-Marahoué
319 427


4
Korhogo
Savanes
286 071


5
Yamoussoukro
Yamoussoukro
281 735


6
San-Pédro
Bas-Sassandra
261 616


7
Gagnoa
Gôh-Djiboua
213 918


8
Man
Montagnes
188 704


9
Duékoué
Montagnes
185 344


10
Divo
Bas-Sassandra
179 455


Religion[edit]




Religion in Ivory Coast, 2008 census[89]


Religion


Percent



Islam

 

39%


Christianity

 

33%


Folk religion

 

12%


Other

 

16%




Further information: Religion in Ivory Coast




Basilica of Our Lady of Peace in Yamoussoukro


Religion in Ivory Coast remains very heterogeneous, with Islam (almost all Sunni Muslims, with some Ahmadi Muslims[90]) and Christianity (mostly Roman Catholic with smaller numbers of Protestants, primarily Methodists) being the major religions. Muslims dominate the north, while Christians dominate the south. In 2009, according to U.S. Department of State estimates, Christians and Muslims each made up 35 to 40% of the population, while an estimated 25% of the population practiced traditional (animist) religions.[91]
Ivory Coast's capital, Yamoussoukro, is home to the largest church building[n 6] in the world, the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro.
Judaism is rare in the Ivory Coast currently, but Jews can still be found scattered throughout the country. The Jewish people had a larger presence in the late 20th century before a mass Jewish immigration in which Jews from the Ivory Coast and all over the world left their native countries for Israel. Despite this a growing Jewish population is beginning to re-emerge in the Ivory Coast.[citation needed]
Health[edit]
Main article: Health in Ivory Coast
Life expectancy at birth was 41 for males in 2004; for females it was 47.[92] Infant mortality was 118 of 1000 live births.[92] Twelve physicians are available per 100,000 people.[92] About a quarter of the population lives below the international poverty line of US$1.25 a day.[93] About 36% of women have undergone female genital mutilation.[94] According to 2010 estimates, Ivory Coast has the 27th-highest maternal mortality rate in the world.[95] The HIV/AIDS rate was 19th-highest in the world, estimated in 2012 at 3.20% among adults aged 15–49 years.[96]
Education[edit]




The university campus of the Université de Cocody


Main article: Education in Ivory Coast
A large part of the adult population, in particular women, are illiterate. Many children between 6 and 10 years are not enrolled in school.[97] The majority of students in secondary education are male.[98] At the end of secondary education, students can sit the baccalauréat examination.[98]
The country has a number of universities, such as the Université de Cocody in Abidjan and the Université de Bouaké in Bouaké. In 2012, there were 57,541 students enrolled at post-secondary diploma level, 23,008 students studying for a bachelor's or master's degree and 269 PhD students. Enrolment in tertiary education suffered during the political crisis, dropping from 9.03% to 4.46% of the 18-25-year cohort between 2009 and 2012.[99]
Science and technology[edit]
Main article: Science and technology in Ivory Coast
According to the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, Ivory Coast devotes about 0.13% of GDP to GERD. Apart from low investment, other challenges include inadequate scientific equipment, the fragmentation of research organizations and a failure to exploit and protect research results.[99]
The share of the National Development Plan for 2012–2015 that is devoted to scientific research remains modest. Within the section on greater wealth creation and social equity (63.8% of the total budget for the Plan), just 1.2% is allocated to scientific research. Twenty-four national research programmes group public and private research and training institutions around a common research theme. These programmes correspond to eight priority sectors for 2012–2015, namely: health, raw materials, agriculture, culture, environment, governance, mining and energy; and technology.[99]
Culture[edit]
Main article: Culture of Ivory Coast
Music[edit]
Main article: Music of Ivory Coast
Each of the ethnic groups in Ivory Coast has its own music genres, most showing strong vocal polyphony. Talking drums are also common, especially among the Appolo, and polyrhythms, another African characteristic, are found throughout Ivory Coast and are especially common in the southwest.
Popular music genres from Ivory Coast include zoblazo, zouglou, and Coupé-Décalé. A few Ivorian artists who have known international success are Magic Système, Alpha Blondy, Meiway, Dobet Gnahore, Tiken Dja Fakoly, and Christina Goh from Ivorian descent.
Media[edit]
Main article: Media of Ivory Coast
Sport[edit]
See also: Ivory Coast at the Olympics




The Ivory Coast national football team



The country has been the host for several major African sporting events, with the most recent being the 2013 African Basketball Championship. In the past, the country hosted the 1984 Africa Cup of Nations, in which its football team finished fifth, and the 1985 African Basketball Championship, where its basketball team won the gold medal.
Ivory Coast won an Olympic silver medal for men's 400-metre in the 1984 games, where it competed as "Côte d'Ivoire".
The most popular sport in Ivory Coast is association football. The national football team has played in the World Cup three times, in Germany 2006, in South Africa 2010, and Brazil in 2014. The woman's football team played in the 2015 Women's World Cup in Canada. Ivory Coast notable footballers are Didier Drogba, Yaya Touré, Eric Bailly and Gervinho. Rugby union is also popular, and the national rugby union team qualified to play at the Rugby World Cup in South Africa in 1995. Ivory Coast also won two Africa Cups one 1992 and the other 2015.
Cuisine[edit]




Yassa is a popular dish throughout West Africa prepared with chicken or fish. Chicken yassa is pictured.


Main article: Ivorian cuisine
The traditional cuisine of Ivory Coast is very similar to that of neighboring countries in West Africa in its reliance on grains and tubers. Cassava and plantains are significant parts of Ivorian cuisine. A type of corn paste called aitiu is used to prepare corn balls, and peanuts are widely used in many dishes. Attiéké is a popular side dish in Ivory Coast made with grated cassava and is a vegetable-based couscous. A common street food is alloco, which is ripe banana fried in palm oil, spiced with steamed onions and chili and eaten alone or with grilled fish. Chicken is commonly consumed and has a unique flavor due to its lean, low-fat mass in this region. Seafood includes tuna, sardines, shrimp, and bonito, which is similar to tuna. Mafé is a common dish consisting of meat in a peanut sauce.[100]
Slow-simmered stews with various ingredients are another common food staple in Ivory Coast.[100] Kedjenou is a dish consisting of chicken and vegetables that are slow-cooked in a sealed pot with little or no added liquid, which concentrates the flavors of the chicken and vegetables and tenderizes the chicken.[100] It is usually cooked in a pottery jar called a canary, over a slight fire, or cooked in an oven.[100] Bangui is a local palm wine.
Ivorians have a particular kind of small, open-air restaurant called a maquis, which is unique to the region. A maquis normally features braised chicken and fish covered in onions and tomatoes, served with attiéké or kedjenou.
See also[edit]


Geography portal
Africa portal
Ivory Coast portal



Art of Ivory Coast
Children in cocoa production
Index of Ivory Coast-related articles
List of universities in Ivory Coast
List of cities in Ivory Coast
Outline of Ivory Coast
Telecommunications in Ivory Coast
Transport in Ivory Coast
Agriculture in Ivory Coast
Health in Ivory Coast
Sahel-Benin Union

Notes[edit]


^ Joseph Vaissète, in his 1755 Géographie historique, ecclésiastique et civile, lists the name as La Côte des Dents ("The Coast of the Teeth"), but notes that Côte de Dents is the more correct form.[18]
^ Côte du Vent sometimes denoted the combined "Ivory" and "Grain" coasts, or sometimes just the "Grain" coast.[14][12]
^ Literal translations include Elfenbeinküste (German), Costa d'Avorio (Italian), Norsunluurannikko (Finnish), Бе́рег Слоно́вой Ко́сти (Russian), and of course Ivory Coast.[23]
^ Many governments use "Côte d'Ivoire" for diplomatic reasons, as do their outlets, such as the Chinese CCTV News. Other organizations that use "Côte d'Ivoire" include the Central Intelligence Agency in its World Factbook[27] and the international sport organizations FIFA[28] and the IOC[29] (referring to their national football and Olympic teams in international games and in official broadcasts), news magazine The Economist,[30] the Encyclopædia Britannica[31] and the National Geographic Society.[32]
^ The BBC usually uses "Ivory Coast" both in news reports and on its page about the country.[33] The Guardian newspaper's style guide says: "Ivory Coast, not 'The Ivory Coast' or 'Côte d'Ivoire'; its nationals are Ivorians."[34] ABC News, FOX News, The Times, The New York Times, the South African Broadcasting Corporation, and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation all use "Ivory Coast" either exclusively or predominantly.[citation needed]
^ It is actually a basilica, but is listed in the Guinness World Records as the largest "church" in the world.


References[edit]

 This article incorporates public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies website http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/citoc.html#ci0079.
 This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook website https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html.
 This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Department of State website http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/index.htm (Background Notes).



^ a b c "Côte d'Ivoire". The World Factbook. CIA Directorate of Intelligence. 24 July 2008. Retrieved 8 August 2008. 
^ "Côte d'Ivoire". The World Factbook. CIA Directorate of Intelligence. Retrieved 18 February 2017. 
^ a b c d "Côte d'Ivoire". International Monetary Fund. 
^ "Gini Index". World Bank. Retrieved 2 March 2011. 
^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2017. 
^ "Cote d'Ivoire definition". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 23 May 2014. 
^ "UNGEGN list of country names" (PDF). United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names. 2–6 May 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2016. 
^ "AFRICA :: COTE D'IVOIRE". The World Factbook. 
^ "Pre-European Period". Library of Congress Country Studies. Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ "Loi n° 2000-513 du 1er août 2000 portant Constitution de la République de Côte d'Ivoire" (PDF). Journal Officiel de la République de Côte d'Ivoire (in French). 42 (30): 529–538. 3 August 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 7 August 2008. 
^ Loi no 2000-513 du 1er août 2000 portant constitution de la République de Côte d’Ivoire, Journal officiel de la République de Côte d’Ivoire, no 30, Abidjan, jeudi 3 août 2000, p. 529–538
^ a b c d e Thornton 1996, p. 53–56.
^ a b Lipski 2005, p. 39.
^ a b c d Duckett 1853, p. 594.
^ a b Homans 1858, p. 14.
^ Lipsky 2005, p. 39.
^ a b Plée 1868, p. 146.
^ a b c Vaissète 1755, p. 185–186.
^ a b Blanchard 1818, p. 57.
^ a b c d e Chisholm 1911, p. 100.
^ a b c Walckenaer 1827, p. 35.
^ "The Ivory Coast". World Digital Library. Retrieved 16 February 2013. 
^ a b David 2000, p. 7.
^ Auzias & Labourdette 2008, p. 9.
^ Lea & Rowe 2001, p. 127.
^ Jessup 1998, p. 351.
^ "Cote d'Ivoire". CIA.gov. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "CAF Member Associations". CAF Online. CAF-Confederation of African Football. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "Côte d'Ivoire". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 20 July 2017. 
^ "Research Tools". The Economist. Archived from the original on 1 April 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "Cote d'Ivoire –". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "Places Directory". nationalgeographic.com. 25 June 2008. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "Country profile: Ivory Coast". BBC News. 24 February 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2010. 
^ "Guardian Style Guide: I". The Guardian. London. 19 December 2008. Retrieved 30 April 2010. 
^ Guédé, François Yiodé (1995). "Contribution à l'étude du paléolithique de la Côte d'Ivoire : État des connaissances". Journal des Africanistes. 65 (2): 79–91. doi:10.3406/jafr.1995.2432. 
^ Rougerie 1978, p. 246
^ Kipré 1992, pp. 15–16
^ a b "Ivory Coast – Arrival of the Europeans". Library of Congress Country Studies. Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ "Library of Congress Country Studies". Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ "Slave Emancipation and the Expansion of Islam, 1905–1914 Archived 2 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine.". p. 11.
^ "Ivory Coast – FRENCH RULE UNTIL WORLD WAR II: Evolution of Colonial Policy". Library of Congress Country Studies. Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ "Ivory Coast – Colonial Administration". Library of Congress Country Studies. Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ "Ivory Coast – Repression and Conquest". Library of Congress Country Studies. Library of Congress. November 1988. Retrieved 11 April 2009. 
^ Ivory Coast – The Economy, U.S. Library of Congress
^ McGovern, Mike (2011) Making War in Côte d'Ivoire, The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226514609. p. 16.
^ "Ivory Coast – Heart of Darkness". Kepi.cncplusplus.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ Holguin, Jaime (15 November 2004) ""France's 'Little Iraq'"". Archived from the original on 8 October 2013. Retrieved 2009-10-26. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) . CBS News.
^ "UN endorses plan to leave president in office beyond mandate", IRIN, 14 October 2005.
^ Bavier, Joe (18 August 2006) "Ivory Coast Opposition, Rebels Say No to Term Extension for President", VOA News.
^ "Partial rejection of UN peace plan", IRIN, 2 November 2006.
^ "New Ivory Coast govt 'a boost for Gbagbo'", AFP via int.iol.co.za, 12 April 2007.
^ "Water And Sanitation". unicef.org. Retrieved 19 May 2016. 
^ a b c "Thousands flee Ivory Coast for Liberia amid poll crisis". BBC News. 26 December 2010. Retrieved 26 December 2010. 
^ "Final Communique on the Extraordinary Session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government on Cote D’Ivoire", Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), 7 December 2010.
^ "Communique of the 252nd Meeting of the Peace and Security Council" Archived 6 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine., African Union, 9 December 2010.
^ "FBI nabbed colonel on official business", UPI, 21 September 2010.
^ DiCampo, Peter (27 April 2011). "An Uncertain Future". Ivory Coast: Elections Turn to War. Pulitzer Center. 
^ Lynch, Colum; Branigin, William (11 April 2011). "Ivory Coast strongman arrested after French forces intervene". Washington Post. Retrieved 12 April 2011. 
^ Griffiths, Thalia (11 April 2011). "The war is over — but Ouattara's struggle has barely begun". The Guardian. London. 
^ "CIA World Factbook Ivory Coast". cia.gov. Retrieved 20 May 2016. 
^ Geopolitical Entities, Names, and Codes (GENC) second edition
^ "Districts of Côte d'Ivoire". Statoids.  Institut National de la Statistique, Côte d'Ivoire.
^ While Yamoussoukro is the seat of Bélier region, the city itself is not part of the region.
^ slavefreechocolate.org
^ Agnero, Eric (10 November 2010). "Ivory Coast postpones presidential runoff vote". CNN. Retrieved 11 November 2010. 
^ "Ivory Coast election: Army says it has sealed borders". BBC. 3 December 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "Ivory Coast’s former president Laurent Gbagbo oversaw ‘unspeakable crimes’, says ICC". The Daily Telegraph. 28 January 2016.
^ "Water And Sanitation". unicef.org. Retrieved 20 May 2016. 
^ "Sustainable Development Goals". sustainabledevelopment.un.org. Retrieved 20 May 2016. 
^ IISS The Military Balance 2012, 429.
^ IISS The Military Balance 2012, 430.
^ "Côte d'Ivoire: Financial Sector Profile". MFW4A.org. Archived from the original on 22 October 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2010. 
^ "Ivory Coast Makes 1st Cocoa Export Since January". Associated Press via NPR. 9 May 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2014. 
^ Monnier, Olivier (27 March 2013). "Ivory Coast San Pedro Port Sees Cocoa Exports Stagnating". Bloomberg. Retrieved 21 January 2014. 
^ Tuttle, Brad (23 September 2013), "Time to Get Ready for a Smaller Hershey Bar?" Business.time.com. Retrieved on 20 April 2014.
^ "Ivory Coast reaps more rubber as farmers shift from cocoa". Reuters. 13 February 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2014. 
^ "Cote d'Ivoire | Office of the United States Trade Representative". Ustr.gov. 29 March 2009. Retrieved 21 January 2014. 
^ 2013 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor in Côte d'Ivoire; the United States Department of Labor
^ Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 335. ISBN 9781107507180. 
^ Premiers résultats définitifs du RGPH-98 (Recensement Général de la Population et de l’Habitation de 1998) (in French), Abidjan: Institut National de la Statistique, Bureau Technique Permanent du Recensement, 2002 
^ "Republic of Côte d'Ivoire National Statistical Institute". ins.ci. 1 October 2014. 
^ Ivory Coast – Population, U.S. Library of Congress.
^ Enquête Démographique et de Santé et à Indicateurs Multiples. Côte d’Ivoire 2011–2012. Ministère de la Santé et de la Lutte contre le Sida, Institut National de la Statistique. July 2012
^ "Ivory Coast Unemployment Rate | 1998–2017 | Data | Chart | Calendar". www.tradingeconomics.com. Retrieved 2017-02-17. 
^ (La Côte d'Ivoire en chiffres, 2007, p. 176–180)
^ "Ivory Coast – The Economy". Countrystudies.us. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "Ivory Coast – The Levantine Community". Countrystudies.us. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "Rwanda Syndrome on the Ivory Coast"
^ "Cote d'Ivoire". International Religious Freedom Report for 2015. United States Department of State. Retrieved 4 May 2017. 
^ Marie Miran (2006). Islam, histoire et modernité en Côte d'Ivoire. p. 352. ISBN 2-84586-776-X. Retrieved 4 June 2014. 
^ Cote d'Ivoire. State.gov. Retrieved on 17 August 2012.
^ a b c "WHO Country Offices in the WHO African Region". World Health Organization. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ Human Development Indices Archived 19 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine., Table 3: Human and income poverty, p. 35. Retrieved on 1 June 2009.
^ "Female genital mutilation and other harmful practices". World Health Organization. 
^ "Country Comparison :: Maternal Mortality Rate". The World Factbook. CIA.gov. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ "Country Comparison :: HIV/AIDS – Adult Prevalence Rate". The World Factbook. CIA.gov. Retrieved 12 February 2015. 
^ "Population, Health, and Human Well-Being-- Côte d'Ivoire" (PDF). EarthTrends. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 6 December 2010. 
^ a b "Côte d'Ivoire – Secondary Education". Education.stateuniversity.com. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ a b c Essegbey, George; Diaby, Nouhou; Konté, Almamy (2015). West Africa. In: UNESCO Science Report: towards 2030 (PDF). Paris: UNESCO. pp. 498–533. ISBN 978-92-3-100129-1. 
^ a b c d "Ivory Coast, Côte d'Ivoire: Cuisine and Recipes." Whats4eats.com. Retrieved June 2011.


Bibliography[edit]


Amin, Samir; Bernard Nantet (1999), "Côte-d'Ivoire", Encyclopædia Universalis (in French), Paris: Encyclopædia Universalis 
Amondji, Marcel (1986), Côte-d'Ivoire. Le P.D.C.I. et la vie politique de 1945 à 1985 (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-85802-631-9 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony; Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., eds. (1999), Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience (in French), New York: Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-00071-1, OCLC 41649745 
Asselain, Jean Charles; Mougel, François; Delfaud, Pierre; Guillaume, Pierre; Guillaume, Sylvie; Kinta, Jean Pierre (2000), Précis d'histoire européenne: XIXe–XXe siècle (in French), Paris: Armand Colin, ISBN 2-200-26086-5, OCLC 35145674 
Auzias, Dominique; Labourdette, Jean-Paul (2008). Côte d'Ivoire. Petit futé Country Guides (in French). Petit Futé. ISBN 9782746924086. 
Baulin, Jacques (1982), La Politique intérieure d'Houphouet-Boigny (in French), Paris: Eurafor Press, OCLC 9982529 
Blanchard, Pierre (1818). Le Voyageur de la jeunesse dans les quatre parties du monde (in French) (5th ed.). Paris: Le Prieur. 
Bédié, Henri Konan; Laurent, Éric (1999), Les chemins de ma vie: entretiens avec Éric Laurent (in French), Paris: Plon, ISBN 2-259-19060-X, OCLC 43895424 
Boahen, A. Adu (1989), Histoire générale de l'Afrique: Volume 7, l'Afrique sous domination coloniale 1880–1935 (in French), Paris: Présence Africaine, UNESCO, ISBN 2-7087-0519-9 
Borremans, Raymond (1986–2004), Le grand dictionnaire encyclopédique de la Côte d’Ivoire (in French), VI, Abidjan: Nouvelles Editions africaines, ISBN 2-7236-0733-X 
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Ivory Coast". Encyclopædia Britannica. 15 (11th ed.). 
David, Philippe (2000). La Côte d'Ivoire (in French) (KARTHALA Editions, 2009 ed.). Paris: Méridiens. ISBN 9782811101961. 
Diabaté, Henriette; Kodjo, Léonard; Bamba, Sékou (1991), Les chemins de ma vie: entretiens avec Éric Laurent (in French), Abidjan: Ivoire Média, OCLC 29185113 
Dégni-Ségui, René (2002), Droit administratif général: l'organisation administrative (in French) (3rd ed.), Abidjan: CEDA, ISBN 2-86394-475-4, OCLC 53482423 
Désalmand, Paul; Konan-Dauré, N'Guessan (2005), Histoire de l'éducation en Côte d’Ivoire: de la Conférence de Brazzaville à 1984 (in French), Abidjan: CERAP, ISBN 978-2-915352-01-6, OCLC 10724568 
Diégou, Bailly (2000), La Réinstauration du multipartisme en Côte d’Ivoire: ou la double mort d’Houphouët-Boigny (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7384-2349-3 
Duckett, William (1853). "Côte Des Dents". Dictionnaire de la conversation et de la lecture inventaire raisonné des notions générales les plus indispensables à tous (in French). 6 (2nd ed.). Paris: Michel Lévy frères. 
Ekanza, Simon Pierre (2005), L’Afrique au temps des Blancs (1880–1935) (in French), Abidjan: CERAP, ISBN 2-915352-09-7 
Ekanza, Simon Pierre (2006), Côte d’Ivoire: Terre de convergence et d’accueil (XVe–XIXe siècles) (in French), Abidjan: Éditions CERAP, ISBN 2-915352-22-4, OCLC 70242387 
Ellenbogen, Alice (2002), La succession d'Houphouët-Boigny: entre tribalisme et démocratie (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7475-2950-9, OCLC 62407712 
Garrier, Claude (2006), Forêt et institutions ivoiriennes: la forêt miroir des politiques (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-296-02655-9, OCLC 85336182 
Garrier, Claude (2006), L'exploitation coloniale des forêts de Côte d’Ivoire: une spoliation institutionnalisée (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7475-9866-7 
Garrier, Claude (2007), Côte d’Ivoire et zone OHADA: gestion immobilière et droit foncier urbain (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-296-04169-8, OCLC 191732681 
Gbagbo, Laurent (1983), Côte-d'Ivoire: pour une alternative démocratique (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-85802-303-4, OCLC 11345813 
Gnahoua, Ange Ralph (2006), La crise du système ivoirien: aspects politiques et juridiques (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-296-00425-3, OCLC 67609894 
Goba, Arsène Ouegui (2000), Côte d'Ivoire: Quelle issue pour la transition? (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7384-9483-8, OCLC 216694298 
Gonnin, Gilbert; Allou, René Kouamé (2006), Initiation à l'économie des pays en voie de développement (in French), Abidjan: CERAP, ISBN 2-915352-30-5, OCLC 144686149 
Handloff, Robert Earl (ed.) (1991), Ivory Coast: A Country Study, Library of Congress Country Studies, Washington: U.S. GPO, ISBN 0-16-030978-6, OCLC 21336559 CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Hauhouot, Antoine Asseypo (2002), Développement, amenagement, régionalisation en Côte d'Ivoire (in French), Abidjan: Editions universitaires de Côte d'Ivoire, ISBN 2-84515-020-2, OCLC 56179194 
Homans, Isaac Smith (1858). "Africa". A cyclopedia of commerce and commercial navigation. 1. New York: Harper & brothers. 
Jessup, John E. (1998), An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Conflict and Conflict Resolution, 1945–1996, Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-313-28112-2, OCLC 37742322 
Kipré, Pierre (1992), Histoire de la Côte d'Ivoire (in French), Abidjan: Editions AMI, OCLC 33233462 
Koné, Amadou (2003), Houphouët-Boigny et la crise ivoirienne (in French), Paris: Karthala, ISBN 2-84586-368-3, OCLC 52772495 
Koulibaly, Mamadou (2003), La guerre de la France contre la Côte d'Ivoire (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7475-5367-1, OCLC 53961576 
Lea, David; Rowe, Annamarie (2001). "Côte d'Ivoire". A Political Chronology of Africa. Political Chronologies of the World. 4. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781857431162. 
Lipski, John M. (2005). A History of Afro-Hispanic Language: Five Centuries, Five Continents. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521822657. 
Lisette, Gabriel (1983), Le Combat du Rassemblement Démocratique Africain pour la décolonisation pacifique de l'Afrique Noire (in French), Paris: Présence Africaine, ISBN 2-7087-0421-4, OCLC 10765611 
Loucou, Jean Noël (2007), Côte d’Ivoire: les résistances à la conquête coloniale (in French), Abidjan: CERAP, ISBN 2-915352-31-3, OCLC 234202640 
Ministry of Economy and Finances of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire (2007), La Côte d'Ivoire en chiffres (in French), Abidjan: Dialogue Production, OCLC 173763995 
Miran, Marie (2006), Islam, histoire et modernité en Côte d’Ivoire (in French), Paris: Karthala, ISBN 2-84586-776-X, OCLC 70712775 
Mundt, Robert J. (1997), "Côte d'Ivoire: Continuity and Change in a Semi-Democracy", in John F. Clark and David Gardinier, Political Reform in Francophone Africa, Boulder: Westview Press, ISBN 0-8133-2785-7, OCLC 35318507 
Plée, Victorine François (1868). "Côte des Dents où d'Ivoire". Peinture géographique du monde moderne: suivant l'ordre dans lequel il a été reconnu et decouvert (in French). Paris: Pigoreau. 
Rougerie, Gabriel (1978), L'Encyclopédie générale de la Côte d'Ivoire (in French), Abidjan: Nouvelles publishers africaines, ISBN 2-7236-0542-6, OCLC 5727980 
Sauvy, Jean (1968), Initiation à l'économie des pays en voie de développement (in French), Paris: Institut international d'Administration publique, ISBN 2-84515-020-2, OCLC 4502227 
Thomas, Yves (1995), "Pays du monde: Côte-d'Ivoire: 1990–1994", Mémoires du XXe siècle: Dictionnaire de France (in French), Paris: Société générale d'édition et de diffusion, ISBN 2-84248-041-4, OCLC 41524503 
Thornton, John K. (1996). "The African background to American colonization". In Engerman, Stanley L.; Gallman, Robert E. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States. 1. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521394420. 
Garrier, Claude (2005), Le millefeuille ivoirien: un héritage de contraintes (in French), Paris: Harmattan, ISBN 2-7475-9866-7, OCLC 62895346 
Touré, Saliou (1996), L'ivoirité ou l'esprit du nouveau contrat social du Président Henri Konan Bédié (in French), Abidjan: Presses Universitaires de Côte d'Ivoire, ISBN 2-7166-0392-8, OCLC 40641392 
Vaissète, Jean Joseph (1755). Géographie historique, ecclesiastique et civile (in French). 11. Paris: chez Desaint & Saillant, J.-T. Herissant, J. Barois. 
Walckenaer, Charles-Athanase (1827). Histoire générale des voyages ou Nouvelle collection des relations de voyages par mer et par terre (in French). 8. Paris: Lefèvre. 
Wodié, Francis (1996), Institutions politiques et droit constitutionnel en Côte d’Ivoire (in French), Abidjan: Presses Universitaires de Côte d'Ivoire, ISBN 2-7166-0389-8, OCLC 37979208 


External links[edit]

Find more aboutCôte d'Ivoireat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Official website of the Government of Ivory Coast (in French)
"Cote d'Ivoire". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Ivory Coast at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Côte d'Ivoire


Trade


Ivory Coast 2012 Trade Summary







v
t
e


Ivory Coast articles



History



Gyaaman
Ashanti Empire
French West Africa
1960–99
1999 coup d'état
First Civil War
Second Civil War (2010–11 Ivorian crisis)
2017 mutiny








Geography







Cities
Climate
Departments
Districts
Regions
Rivers
Sub-prefectures
Wildlife








Politics







Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Military
Political parties
President
Vice-President
Prime Minister








Economy







Agriculture
Companies
Energy
Franc (currency)
Mining
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport

airports










Society







Culture
Demographics
Education
Ethnic groups
Flag
Health
Languages
Media
Music
Olympics
Public holidays
Religion












Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Countries and territories of Africa



Sovereign states




entirely
in Africa



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe





partly
in Africa



France

Mayotte
Réunion


Italy

Pantelleria
Pelagie Islands


Portugal

Madeira


Spain

Canary Islands
Ceuta
Melilla
Plazas de soberanía


Yemen

Socotra














Territories and
dependencies




Îles Éparses

France


Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha

UK


Southern Provinces (Western Sahara)1






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






1 Unclear sovereignty.








International membership











v
t
e


African Union (AU)



History







Pan-Africanism
Casablanca Group
Monrovia Group
Abuja Treaty
Sirte Declaration
Lome Summit





Organisation of African Unity



Chairperson
Secretary General











Geography



Borders
Extreme points
Member states
Regions





Organs







Executive Council
Permanent Representatives' Committee
Specialized Technical Committees





Assembly



Chairperson





Commission



Chairperson
Deputy Chairperson
AUCC





Pan-African Parliament



Bureau
Secretariat
Gallagher Estate





African Court of Justice



African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights





ECOSOCC Committees



Peace and Security
Political Affairs
Infrastructure and Energy
Social Affairs and Health
HR, Sciences and Technology
Trade and Industry
Rural Economy and Agriculture
Economic Affairs
Women and Gender
Cross-Cutting Programs





Financial Institutions



African Central Bank
African Monetary Fund
African Investment Bank





Peace and Security Council



ACIRC
African Standby Force
Panel of the Wise
UNAMID
AMIB
AMIS
AMISOM
MISCA








Politics







APRM
Foreign relations
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights
African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights
Enlargement





Symbols



Anthem
Emblem
Flag








Economy



Currencies
Development Bank
African Economic Community
NEPAD
African Free Trade Zone
Tripartite Free Trade Area





Culture



Africa Day
Languages





Theory



Afro
United States of Africa
United States of Latin Africa








 Category












v
t
e


La Francophonie



Membership




Members



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Belgium

French Community


Benin
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada

New Brunswick
Quebec


Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Cyprus1
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Dominica
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
France

French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
St. Pierre and Miquelon


Gabon
Ghana1
Greece
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Ivory Coast
Laos
Luxembourg
Lebanon
Macedonia2
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Moldova
Monaco
Morocco
Niger
Qatar
Romania
Rwanda
St. Lucia
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Switzerland
Togo
Tunisia
Vanuatu
Vietnam








Observers



Austria
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Czech Republic
Dominican Republic
Georgia
Hungary
Kosovo
Latvia
Lithuania
Montenegro
Mozambique
Ontario
Poland
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Thailand
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
Uruguay






1 Associate member.
2 Provisionally referred to by the Francophonie as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia"; see Macedonia naming dispute.






Organization



Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique
Agence universitaire de la Francophonie





Secretaries-General



Boutros Boutros-Ghali
Abdou Diouf
Michaëlle Jean





Culture



French language
UN French Language Day
International Francophonie Day
Jeux de la Francophonie
Prix des cinq continents de la francophonie
Senghor University
AFFOI
TV5Monde
LGBT rights








 Category














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 267161872
LCCN: n82047825
GND: 4014426-4
SUDOC: 026488108
BNF: cb11872713w (data)
HDS: 3440
NDL: 00566815











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ivory_Coast&oldid=818515651"					Categories: Ivory CoastBlood diamondsEconomic Community of West African StatesExtractive Industries Transparency InitiativeFrench-speaking countries and territoriesMember states of the Organisation internationale de la FrancophonieMember states of the African UnionMember states of the Organisation of Islamic CooperationMember states of the United NationsRepublicsStates and territories established in 1960West African countries1960 establishments in Ivory CoastCountries in AfricaHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2012CS1 French-language sources (fr)Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from June 2014Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing French-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Articles with unsourced statements from July 2008Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010Articles to be expanded from May 2017All articles to be expandedArticles with empty sections from May 2017All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxesArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2018Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Library of Congress Country StudiesWikipedia articles incorporating text from the World FactbookWikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Department of State Background NotesCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with French-language external linksArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers