For other uses, see Damascus (disambiguation).


Damascus
دمشق


City



From top left to bottom right:
Maktab Anbar, General view, Umayyad Mosque Yard, Minaret of the Bride, Midhat Pasha Souq, mount Qasioun, city view, Mar Taqla monastery, Nur ad-Din mausoleum, Mar Taqla monastery fresco, nightview, Umayyad Square, city view, Tekkiye Mosque







Flag

Seal





Nickname(s): City of Jasmine (مدينة الياسمين)
Al-Fayhaa (الفيحاء)[note 1]









Damascus





Location of Damascus within Syria


Coordinates: 33°30′47″N 36°17′31″E﻿ / ﻿33.51306°N 36.29194°E﻿ / 33.51306; 36.29194Coordinates: 33°30′47″N 36°17′31″E﻿ / ﻿33.51306°N 36.29194°E﻿ / 33.51306; 36.29194


Country
 Syria


Governorates
Damascus Governorate, Capital City


Government


 • Governor
Bishr Al Sabban


Area[2]


 • City
105 km2 (41 sq mi)


 • Urban
77 km2 (29.73 sq mi)


Elevation
680 m (2,230 ft)


Population (2009 est.)[3]


 • City
1,711,000


 • Density
22,220.8/km2 (57,551.3/sq mi)


Demonym(s)
English: Damascene
Arabic: دمشقي Dimashqi‎


Time zone
EET (UTC+2)


 • Summer (DST)
EEST (UTC+3)


Area code(s)
Country code: 963, City code: 11


Geocode
C1001


Climate
BWk


Website
www.damascus.gov.sy






UNESCO World Heritage Site



Official name
Ancient City of Damascus


Type
Cultural


Criteria
i, ii, iii, iv, vi


Designated
1979 (3rd session)


Reference no.
20


State Party
Syria


Region
Arab States








Damascus (Arabic: دمشق‎ Dimashq [diˈmaʃq], Syrian: [dˈməʃe(ː)ʔ]) is the capital and likely the largest city of Syria, following the decline in population of Aleppo due to the battle for the city. It is commonly known in Syria as ash-Sham (Arabic: الشام‎ ash-Shām) and nicknamed as the City of Jasmine (Arabic: مدينة الياسمين‎ Madīnat al-Yāsmīn). In addition to being one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world,[4] Damascus is a major cultural centre of the Levant and the Arab world. The city has an estimated population of 1,711,000 as of 2009[update].[3]
Located in south-western Syria, Damascus is the centre of a large metropolitan area of 2.6 million people (2004).[5] Geographically embedded on the eastern foothills of the Anti-Lebanon mountain range 80 kilometres (50 mi) inland from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean on a plateau 680 metres (2,230 ft) above sea level, Damascus experiences a semi-arid climate because of the rain shadow effect. The Barada River flows through Damascus.
First settled in the second millennium BC, it was chosen as the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate from 661 to 750. After the victory of the Abbasid dynasty, the seat of Islamic power was moved to Baghdad. Damascus saw a political decline throughout the Abbasid era, only to regain significant importance in the Ayyubid and Mamluk periods. Today, it is the seat of the central government and all of the government ministries.



Contents


1 Names and etymology
2 Geography

2.1 Climate


3 History

3.1 Early settlement
3.2 Aram-Damascus
3.3 Greco-Roman period
3.4 Islamic Arab era
3.5 Seljuq and Ayyubid rule
3.6 Mamluk period
3.7 Ottoman rule
3.8 Modern


4 Economy
5 Demographics

5.1 Ethnicity
5.2 Religion

5.2.1 Sufism




6 Historical sites

6.1 Walls and gates of Damascus
6.2 Churches in the old city
6.3 Islamic sites in the old city
6.4 Madrasas
6.5 Khans
6.6 Old Damascene houses
6.7 Threats to the future of the old City

6.7.1 Current state of old Damascus




7 Education
8 Transportation
9 Culture

9.1 Museums
9.2 Sports and leisure
9.3 Nearby attractions


10 Notable people from Damascus
11 See also
12 Notes
13 References

13.1 Bibliography


14 External links



Names and etymology[edit]
See also: Names of Damascus in different languages
The name of Damascus first appeared in the geographical list of Thutmose III as T-m-ś-q in the 15th century BC.[6] The etymology of the ancient name "T-m-ś-q" is uncertain. It is attested as Dimašqa in Akkadian, T-ms-ḳw in Egyptian, Dammaśq (דמשק) in Old Aramaic and Dammeśeq (דמשק) in Biblical Hebrew. The Akkadian spelling is found in the Amarna letters, from the 14th century BC. Later Aramaic spellings of the name often include an intrusive resh (letter r), perhaps influenced by the root dr, meaning "dwelling". Thus, the English and Latin name of the city is "Damascus" which was imported from (Greek: Δαμασκός) originated from "the Qumranic Darmeśeq (דרמשק), and Darmsûq (ܕܪܡܣܘܩ) in Syriac[7][8]", meaning "a well-watered land".[9] In Arabic, the city is called Dimašqu š-Šāmi (دمشق الشام), although this is often shortened to either Dimašq or aš-Šām by the citizens of Damascus, of Syria and other Arab neighbours and Turkey (as Şam). Aš-Šām is an Arabic term for "Levant" and for "Syria"; the latter, and particularly the historical region of Syria, is called Bilādu š-Šāmi (بلاد الشام / "land of the Levant"). Historically, Baalshamin or Ba'al Šamem (Aramaic: ܒܥܠ ܫܡܝܢ‎, translit. Lord of Heaven(s)),[10][11] was a Semitic sky-god in Canaan/Phoenicia and ancient Palmyra.[12][13] Hence, Sham refers to (heaven or sky).
Geography[edit]




Damascus in spring seen from Spot satellite






General view of Damascus


Damascus was built in a strategic site on a plateau 680 m (2,230 ft) above sea level and about 80 km (50 mi) inland from the Mediterranean, sheltered by the Anti-Lebanon mountains, supplied with water by the Barada River, and at a crossroads between trade routes: the north-south route connecting Egypt with Asia Minor, and the east-west cross-desert route connecting Lebanon with the Euphrates river valley. The Anti-Lebanon mountains mark the border between Syria and Lebanon. The range has peaks of over 10,000 ft. and blocks precipitation from the Mediterranean sea, so that the region of Damascus is sometimes subject to droughts. However, in ancient times this was mitigated by the Barada River, which originates from mountain streams fed by melting snow. Damascus is surrounded by the Ghouta, irrigated farmland where many vegetables, cereals and fruits have been farmed since ancient times. Maps of Roman Syria indicate that the Barada river emptied into a lake of some size east of Damascus. Today it is called Bahira Atayba, the hesitant lake, because in years of severe drought it does not even exist.[14]
The modern city has an area of 105 km2 (41 sq mi), out of which 77 km2 (30 sq mi) is urban, while Jabal Qasioun occupies the rest.[15]




One of the rare periods the Barada river is high, seen here next to the Four Seasons hotel in downtown Damascus


The old city of Damascus, enclosed by the city walls, lies on the south bank of the river Barada which is almost dry (3 cm (1 in) left). To the south-east, north and north-east it is surrounded by suburban areas whose history stretches back to the Middle Ages: Midan in the south-west, Sarouja and Imara in the north and north-west. These neighbourhoods originally arose on roads leading out of the city, near the tombs of religious figures. In the 19th century outlying villages developed on the slopes of Jabal Qasioun, overlooking the city, already the site of the al-Salihiyah neighbourhood centred on the important shrine of medieval Andalusian Sheikh and philosopher Ibn Arabi. These new neighbourhoods were initially settled by Kurdish soldiery and Muslim refugees from the European regions of the Ottoman Empire which had fallen under Christian rule. Thus they were known as al-Akrad (the Kurds) and al-Muhajirin (the migrants). They lay 2–3 km (1–2 mi) north of the old city.
From the late 19th century on, a modern administrative and commercial centre began to spring up to the west of the old city, around the Barada, centred on the area known as al-Marjeh or the meadow. Al-Marjeh soon became the name of what was initially the central square of modern Damascus, with the city hall on it. The courts of justice, post office and railway station stood on higher ground slightly to the south. A Europeanised residential quarter soon began to be built on the road leading between al-Marjeh and al-Salihiyah. The commercial and administrative centre of the new city gradually shifted northwards slightly towards this area.




Municipalities of Damascus


In the 20th century, newer suburbs developed north of the Barada, and to some extent to the south, invading the Ghouta oasis.[citation needed] In 1956–1957 the new neighbourhood of Yarmouk became a second home to thousands of Palestinian refugees.[16] City planners preferred to preserve the Ghouta as far as possible, and in the later 20th century some of the main areas of development were to the north, in the western Mezzeh neighbourhood and most recently along the Barada valley in Dummar in the north west and on the slopes of the mountains at Berze in the north-east. Poorer areas, often built without official approval, have mostly developed south of the main city.
Damascus used to be surrounded by an oasis, the Ghouta region (الغوطة al-ġūṭä), watered by the Barada river. The Fijeh spring, west along the Barada valley, used to provide the city with drinking water and various sources to the west are tapped by water contractors. The flow of the Barada has reduced with the rapid expansion of housing and industry in the city and it is almost dry. The lower aquifers are polluted by city's runoff from heavily used roads, industry and sewage.
Climate[edit]
Damascus has a cold desert climate (BWk) in Köppen-Geiger system,[17] due to the rain shadow effect of the Anti-Lebanon mountains[18] and the prevailing ocean currents. Summers are dry and hot with less humidity. Winters are cool and somewhat rainy; snowfall is infrequent. Annual rainfall is around 130 mm (5 in), occurring from October to May.


Climate data for Damascus (Damascus International Airport) 1981–2010


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Record high °C (°F)
24.0
(75.2)
29.0
(84.2)
34.4
(93.9)
38.4
(101.1)
41.0
(105.8)
44.8
(112.6)
46.0
(114.8)
44.6
(112.3)
42.0
(107.6)
37.8
(100)
31.0
(87.8)
25.1
(77.2)
46.0
(114.8)


Average high °C (°F)
12.6
(54.7)
14.5
(58.1)
19.0
(66.2)
24.7
(76.5)
30.1
(86.2)
34.6
(94.3)
37.0
(98.6)
36.8
(98.2)
33.9
(93)
28.1
(82.6)
20.1
(68.2)
14.3
(57.7)
25.5
(77.9)


Daily mean °C (°F)
6.1
(43)
7.7
(45.9)
11.4
(52.5)
16.2
(61.2)
20.8
(69.4)
25.0
(77)
27.3
(81.1)
27.0
(80.6)
24.0
(75.2)
19.0
(66.2)
12.1
(53.8)
7.5
(45.5)
17.0
(62.6)


Average low °C (°F)
0.7
(33.3)
1.9
(35.4)
4.3
(39.7)
7.9
(46.2)
11.4
(52.5)
15.0
(59)
17.9
(64.2)
17.7
(63.9)
14.4
(57.9)
10.3
(50.5)
4.8
(40.6)
1.7
(35.1)
9.0
(48.2)


Record low °C (°F)
−12.2
(10)
−12
(10)
−8
(18)
−7.5
(18.5)
0.6
(33.1)
4.5
(40.1)
9.0
(48.2)
8.6
(47.5)
2.1
(35.8)
−3.0
(26.6)
−8
(18)
−10.2
(13.6)
−12.2
(10)


Average precipitation mm (inches)
25.0
(0.984)
26.0
(1.024)
20.0
(0.787)
7.0
(0.276)
4.0
(0.157)
1.0
(0.039)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.3
(0.012)
6.0
(0.236)
21.0
(0.827)
21.0
(0.827)
131.3
(5.169)


Average precipitation days
8
8
6
3
2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
3
5
7
42.5


Average snowy days
1
1
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.2
2.3


Average relative humidity (%)
76
69
59
50
43
41
44
48
47
52
63
75
56


Mean monthly sunshine hours
164.3
182.0
226.3
249.0
322.4
357.0
365.8
353.4
306.0
266.6
207.0
164.3
3,164.1


Mean daily sunshine hours
5.3
6.5
7.3
8.3
10.4
11.9
11.8
11.4
10.2
8.6
6.9
5.3
8.5


Source #1: Pogoda.ru.net[19]


Source #2: NOAA (sunshine hours, 1961–1990)[20]


History[edit]
See also: Timeline of Damascus
Early settlement[edit]
Carbon-14 dating at Tell Ramad, on the outskirts of Damascus, suggests that the site may have been occupied since the second half of the seventh millennium BC, possibly around 6300 B C.[21] However, evidence of settlement in the wider Barada basin dating back to 9000 BC exists, although no large-scale settlement was present within Damascus walls until the second millennium BC.[22]
Some of the earliest Egyptian records are from the 1350 BC Amarna letters, when Damascus (called Dimasqu) was ruled by king Biryawaza. The Damascus region, as well as the rest of Syria, became a battleground circa 1260 BC, between the Hittites from the north and the Egyptians from the south,[23] ending with a signed treaty between Hattusili and Ramesses II where the former handed over control of the Damascus area to Ramesses II in 1259 BC.[23] The arrival of the Sea Peoples, around 1200 BC, marked the end of the Bronze Age in the region and brought about new development of warfare.[24] Damascus was only the peripheral part of this picture which mostly affected the larger population centres of ancient Syria. However, these events had contributed to the development of Damascus as a new influential center that emerged with the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age.[24]
Damascus is mentioned in Genesis 14:15 as existing at the time of the War of the Kings.[25] According to the 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus in his twenty-one volume Antiquities of the Jews, Damascus (along with Trachonitis), was founded by Uz, the son of Aram.[26] In Antiquities i. 7,[27] Josephus reports:

Nicolaus of Damascus, in the fourth book of his History, says thus: "Abraham reigned at Damascus, being a foreigner, who came with an army out of the land above Babylon, called the land of the Chaldeans: but, after a long time, he got him up, and removed from that country also, with his people, and went into the land then called the land of Canaan, but now the land of Judea, and this when his posterity were become a multitude; as to which posterity of his, we relate their history in another work. Now the name of Abraham is even still famous in the country of Damascus; and there is shown a village named from him, The Habitation of Abraham.

Aram-Damascus[edit]
Main article: Aram-Damascus




Annotated view of Damascus and surroundings from space.[28]


Damascus is not documented as an important city until the arrival of the Aramaeans, a Semitic people from Mesopotamia, in the 11th century BC. By the start of the first millennium BC, several Aramaic kingdoms were formed, as Aramaeans abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and formed federated tribal states. One of these kingdoms was Aram-Damascus, centered on its capital Damascus.[29] The Aramaeans who entered the city without battle, adopted the name "Dimashqu" for their new home. Noticing the agricultural potential of the still-undeveloped and sparsely populated area,[30] they established the water distribution system of Damascus by constructing canals and tunnels which maximized the efficiency of the river Barada. The same network was later improved by the Romans and the Umayyads, and still forms the basis of the water system of the old part of the city today.[31] The Aramaeans initially turned Damascus into an outpost of a loose federation of Aramaean tribes, known as Aram-Zobah, based in the Beqaa Valley.[30]
The city would gain pre-eminence in southern Syria when Ezron, the claimant to Aram-Zobah's throne who was denied kingship of the federation, fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC. Ezron overthrew the city's tribal governor and founded the independent entity of Aram-Damascus. As this new state expanded south, it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east.[30] Under Ezron's grandson, Ben-Hadad I (880–841 BC), and his successor Hazael, Damascus annexed Bashan (modern-day Hauran region), and went on the offensive with Israel. This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria. As a result, he granted Israel trading rights in Damascus.[32]
Another possible reason for the treaty between Aram-Damascus and Israel was the common threat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire which was attempting to expand into the Mediterranean coast. In 853 BC, King Hadadezer of Damascus led a Levantine coalition, that included forces from the northern Aram-Hamath kingdom and troops supplied by King Ahab of Israel, in the Battle of Qarqar against the Neo-Assyrian army. Aram-Damascus came out victorious, temporarily preventing the Assyrians from encroaching into Syria. However, after Hadadzezer was killed by his successor, Hazael, the Levantine alliance collapsed. Aram-Damascus attempted to invade Israel, but was interrupted by the renewed Assyrian invasion. Hazael ordered a retreat to the walled part of Damascus while the Assyrians plundered the remainder of the kingdom. Unable to enter the city, they declared their supremacy in the Hauran and Beqa'a valleys.[32]
By the 8th century BC, Damascus was practically engulfed by the Assyrians and entered a dark age. Nonetheless, it remained the economic and cultural centre of the Near East as well as the Arameaen resistance. In 727, a revolt took place in the city, but was put down by Assyrian forces. After Assyria led by Tiglath-Pileser III went on a wide-scale campaign of quelling revolts throughout Syria, Damascus became totally subjugated by their rule. A positive effect of this was stability for the city and benefits from the spice and incense trade with Arabia. However, Assyrian authority was dwindling by 609–605 BC, and Syria-Palestine was falling into the orbit of Pharaoh Necho II's Egypt. In 572 BC, all of Syria had been conquered by the Neo-Babylonians, but the status of Damascus under Babylon is relatively unknown.[33]
Greco-Roman period[edit]




Ruins of the Jupiter Temple at the entrance of Al-Hamidiyah Souq


Damascus was conquered by Alexander the Great. After the death of Alexander in 323 BC, Damascus became the site of a struggle between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic empires. The control of the city passed frequently from one empire to the other. Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals, made Antioch the capital of his vast empire, which led to the decline of Damascus' importance compared with new Seleucid cities such as Latakia in the north. Later, Demetrius III Philopator rebuilt the city according to the Greek hippodamian system and renamed it "Demetrias".[34]




The Biblical Street called Straight of Damascus


In 64 BC, the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria. The Romans occupied Damascus and subsequently incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis[35] which themselves were incorporated into the province of Syria and granted autonomy.[36]
The city of Damascus was entirely redesigned by the Romans after Pompey conquered the region. Still today the Old Town of Damascus retains the rectangular shape of the Roman city, with its two main axes: the Decumanus Maximus (east-west; known today as the Via Recta) and the Cardo (north-south), the Decumanus being about twice as long. The Romans built a monumental gate which still survives at the eastern end of Decumanus Maximus. The gate originally had three arches: the central arch was for chariots while the side arches were for pedestrians.[14]




Remnants of ancient Damascus


In 23 BC Herod the Great was gifted lands controlled by Zenodorus by Caesar Augustus[37] and some scholars believe that Herod was also granted control of Damascus as well.[38] The control of Damascus reverted to Syria either upon the death of Herod the Great or was part of the lands given to Herod Philip which were given to Syria with his death in 33/34 AD.
Some scholars suggest that control of Damascus was gained by Aretas IV Philopatris of Nabatea between the death of Herod Philip in 33/34 AD and the death of Aretas in 40 AD but there is substantial evidence against Aretas controlling the city before 37 AD and many reasons why it could not have been a gift from Caligula between 37 and 40 AD.[39][40] In fact, all these theories stem not from any actual evidence outside the New Testament but rather "a certain understanding of 2 Cor. 11:32" and in reality "neither from archaeological evidence, secular-historical sources, nor New Testament texts can Nabatean sovereignty over Damascus in the first century AD be proven."[41]
Damascus became a metropolis by the beginning of the 2nd century and in 222 it was upgraded to a colonia by the Emperor Septimius Severus. During the Pax Romana, Damascus and the Roman province of Syria in general began to prosper. Damascus's importance as a caravan city was evident with the trade routes from southern Arabia, Palmyra, Petra, and the silk routes from China all converging on it. The city satisfied the Roman demands for eastern luxuries. Circa 125 CE the Roman emperor Hadrian promoted the city of Damascus to "Metropolis of Coele-Syria".[42][43]
Little remains of the architecture of the Romans, but the town planning of the old city did have a lasting effect. The Roman architects brought together the Greek and Aramaean foundations of the city and fused them into a new layout measuring approximately 1,500 by 750 m (4,920 by 2,460 ft), surrounded by a city wall. The city wall contained seven gates, but only the eastern gate (Bab Sharqi) remains from the Roman period. Roman Damascus lies mostly at depths of up to five meters (16.4 ft) below the modern city.
The old borough of Bab Tuma was developed at the end of the Roman/Byzantine era by the local Eastern Orthodox community. According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Thomas both lived in that neighbourhood. Roman Catholic historians also consider Bab Tuma to be the birthplace of several Popes such as John V and Gregory III.
Islamic Arab era[edit]
Muhammad's first indirect interaction with the people of Damascus was when he sent Shiya bin Wahab to Haris bin Ghasanni, the king of Damascus. In his letter, Muhammad stated: "Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Be informed that my religion shall prevail everywhere. You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command shall remain yours."[44][45]




Courtyard of the Umayyad Mosque


After most of the Syrian countryside was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate during the reign of Caliph Umar, Damascus itself was conquered by the Muslim-Arab general Khalid ibn al-Walid in August - September 634 AD. His army had previously attempted to capture the city in April 634, but without success.[46] With Damascus now in Muslim-Arab hands, the Byzantines, alarmed at the loss of their most prestigious city in the Near East, had decided to wrest back control of it. Under Emperor Heraclius, the Byzantines fielded an army superior to that of the Rashidun in manpower. They advanced into southern Syria during the spring of 636 and consequently Khalid ibn al-Walid's forces withdrew from Damascus to prepare for renewed confrontation.[47] In August, the two sides met along the Yarmouk River where they a fought a major battle which ended in a decisive Muslim victory, solidifying Muslim rule in Syria and Palestine.[48]
While the Muslims administered the city, the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian—Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite—with a growing community of Muslims from Mecca, Medina, and the Syrian Desert.[49] The governor assigned to the city which had been chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria was Mu'awiya I. After the death of Caliph Ali in 661, Mu'awiya was chosen as the caliph of the expanding Islamic empire. Because of the vast amounts of assets his clan, the Umayyads, owned in the city and because of its traditional economic and social links with the Hijaz as well as the Christian Arab tribes of the region, Mu'awiya established Damascus as the capital of the entire Caliphate.[50] With the ascension of Caliph Abd al-Malik in 685, an Islamic coinage system was introduced and all of the surplus revenue of the Caliphate's provinces were forwarded to the treasury of Damascus. Arabic was also established as the official language, giving the Muslim minority of the city an advantage over the Aramaic-speaking Christians in administrative affairs.[51] It is critical to note that, at the time Damascus was conquered by the Muslims, the majority of Arabs were either pagans or Christians. Damascus itself was predominantly Aramaic with Arab speaking people.
Abd al-Malik's successor, al-Walid initiated construction of the Grand Mosque of Damascus (known as the Umayyad Mosque) in 706. The site originally had been the Christian Cathedral of St. John and the Muslims maintained the building's dedication to John the Baptist.[52] By 715, the mosque was complete. Al-Walid died that same year and he was succeeded at first by Suleiman ibn Abd al-Malik and then by Umar II, who each ruled for brief periods before the reign of Hisham in 724. With these successions, the status of Damascus was gradually weakening as Suleiman had chosen Ramla as his residence and later Hisham chose Resafa. Following the murder of the latter in 743, the Caliphate of the Umayyads—which by then stretched from Spain to India— was crumbling as a result of widespread revolts. During the reign of Marwan II in 744, the capital of the empire was relocated to Harran in the northern Jazira region.[53]




The dome of Damascus' treasury in the Umayyad Mosque


On 25 August 750, the Abbasids, having already beaten the Umayyads in the Battle of the Zab in Iraq, conquered Damascus after facing little resistance. With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate, Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad, the new Islamic capital. Within the first six months of Abbasid rule, revolts began erupting in the city, albeit too isolated and unfocused to present a viable threat. Nonetheless, the last of the prominent Umayyads were executed, the traditional officials of Damascus ostracised, and army generals from the city were dismissed. Afterwards, the Umayyad family cemetery was desecrated and the city walls were torn down, reducing Damascus into a provincial town of little importance. It roughly disappeared from written records for the next century and the only significant improvement of the city was the Abbasid-built treasury dome in the Umayyad Mosque in 789. In 811, distant remnants of the Umayyad dynasty staged a strong uprising in Damascus that was eventually put down.[54]
Ahmad ibn Tulun, a dissenting Turkish governor appointed by the Abbasids, conquered Syria, including Damascus, from his overlords in 878-79. In an act of respect for the previous Umayyad rulers, he erected a shrine on the site of Mu'awiya's grave in the city. Tulunid rule of Damascus was brief, lasting only until 906 before being replaced by the Qarmatians who were adherents of Shia Islam. Due to their inability to control the vast amount of land they occupied, the Qarmatians withdrew from Damascus and a new dynasty, the Ikhshidids, took control of the city. They maintained the independence of Damascus from the Arab Hamdanid dynasty of Aleppo and the Baghdad-based Abbasids until 967. A period of instability in the city followed, with a Qarmatian raid in 968, a Byzantine raid in 970, and increasing pressures from the Fatimids in the south and the Hamdanids in the north.[55]
The Shia Fatimids gained control in 970, inflaming hostilities between them and the Sunni Arabs of the city who frequently revolted. A Turk, Alptakin drove out the Fatimids five years later, and through diplomacy, prevented the Byzantines from attempting to annex the city. However, by 977, the Fatimids under Caliph al-Aziz, wrested back control of the city and tamed Sunni dissidents. The Arab geographer, al-Muqaddasi, visited Damascus in 985, remarking that the architecture and infrastructure of the city was "magnificent", but living conditions were awful. Under al-Aziz, the city saw a brief period of stability that ended with the reign of al-Hakim (996–1021). In 998, hundreds of Damascus' citizens were rounded up and executed by him for incitement. Three years after al-Hakim's mysterious disappearance, the Arab tribes of southern Syria formed an alliance to stage a massive rebellion against the Fatimids, but they were crushed by the Fatimid Turkish governor of Syria and Palestine, Anushtakin al-Duzbari, in 1029. This victory gave the latter mastery over Syria, displeasing his Fatimid overlords, but gaining the admiration of Damascus' citizens. He was exiled by Fatimid authorities to Aleppo where he died in 1041.[56] From that date to 1063, there are no known records of the city's history. By then, Damascus lacked a city administration, had an enfeebled economy, and a greatly reduced population.[57]
Seljuq and Ayyubid rule[edit]




The dome of the mausoleum of Nur ad-Din


With the arrival of the Seljuq Turks in the late 11th century, Damascus again became the capital of independent states. It was ruled by Abu Sa'id Taj ad-Dawla Tutush I starting in 1079 and he was succeeded by his son Abu Nasr Duqaq in 1095. The Seljuqs established a court in Damascus and a systematic reversal of Shia inroads in the city. The city also saw an expansion of religious life through private endowments financing religious institutions (madrasas) and hospitals (maristans). Damascus soon became one of the most important centres of propagating Islamic thought in the Muslim world. After Duqaq's death in 1104, his mentor (atabeg), Toghtekin, took control of Damascus and the Burid line of the Seljuq dynasty. Under Duqaq and Toghtekin, Damascus experienced stability, elevated status and a revived role in commerce. In addition, the city's Sunni majority enjoyed being a part of the larger Sunni framework effectively governed by various Turkic dynasties who in turn were under the moral authority of the Baghdad-based Abbasids.[58]
While the rulers of Damascus were preoccupied in conflict with their fellow Seljuqs in Aleppo and Diyarbakir, the Crusaders, who arrived in the Levant in 1097, conquered Jerusalem, Mount Lebanon and Palestine. Duqaq seemed to have been content with Crusader rule as a buffer between his dominion and the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt. Toghtekin, however, saw the Western invaders as a viable threat to Damascus which, at the time, nominally included Homs, the Beqaa Valley, Hauran, and the Golan Heights a part of its territories. With military support from Sharaf al-Din Mawdud of Mosul, Toghtekin managed to halt Crusader raids in the Golan and Hauran. Mawdud was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque in 1109, depriving Damascus of northern Muslim backing and forcing Toghtekin to agree to a truce with the Crusaders in 1110.[59]
Following Tughtakin's death in 1128, his son, Taj al-Din Buri, became the nominal ruler of Damascus. Coincidentally, the Seljuq prince of Mosul, Imad al-Din Zengi, took power in Aleppo and gained a mandate from the Abbasids to extend his authority to Damascus. In 1129, around 6,000 Isma'ili Muslims were killed in the city along with their leaders. The Sunnis were provoked by rumors alleging there was a plot by the Isma'ilis, who controlled the strategic fort at Banias, to aid the Crusaders in capturing Damascus in return for control of Tyre. Soon after the massacre, the Crusaders aimed to take advantage of the unstable situation and launch an assault against Damascus with nearly 60,000 troops. However, Buri allied with Zengi and managed to prevent their army from reaching the city.[60] Buri was assassinated by Isma'ili agents in 1132; he was succeeded by his son, Shams al-Mulk Isma'il who ruled tyrannically until he himself was murdered in 1135 on secret orders from his mother, Safwat al-Mulk Zumurrud; Isma'il's brother, Shihab al-Din Mahmud, replaced him. Meanwhile, Zengi, intent on putting Damascus under his control, married Safwat al-Mulk in 1138. Mahmud's reign then ended in 1139 after he was killed for relatively unknown reasons by members of his family. Mu'in al-Din Unur, his mamluk ("slave soldier") took effective power of the city, prompting Zengi—with Safwat al-Mulk's backing—to lay siege against Damascus the same year. In response, Damascus allied with the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem to resist Zengi's forces. Consequently, Zengi withdrew his army and focused on campaigns against northern Syria.[61]
In 1144 Zengi conquered Edessa, a crusader stronghold, which led to a new crusade from Europe in 1148. In the meantime Zengi was assassinated and his territory was divided among his sons, one of whom, Nur ad-Din, emir of Aleppo, made an alliance with Damascus. When the European crusaders arrived, they and the nobles of Jerusalem agreed to attack Damascus. Their siege, however, was a complete failure. When the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls, and were driven back. By 1154, Damascus was firmly under Nur ad-Din's control.[62]
In 1164, King Amalric of Jerusalem invaded Fatimid Egypt, which requested help from Nur ad-Din. The Nur ad-Din sent his general Shirkuh, and in 1166 Amalric was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein. When Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin, who defeated a joint crusader-Byzantine siege of Damietta.[63] Saladin eventually overthrew the Fatimid caliphs and established himself as Sultan of Egypt. He also began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to begin exerting control over Damascus and Nur ad-Din's other Syrian possessions.[64] In 1177 Saladin was defeated by the crusaders at the Battle of Montgisard, despite his numerical superiority.[65] Saladin also besieged Kerak in 1183, but was forced to withdraw. He finally launched a full invasion of Jerusalem in 1187, and annihilated the crusader army at the Battle of Hattin in July. Acre fell to Saladin soon after, and Jerusalem itself was captured in October. These events shocked Europe, resulting in the Third Crusade in 1189, led by Richard I of England, Philip II of France and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, though the last drowned en route.[66]
The surviving crusaders, joined by new arrivals from Europe, put Acre to a lengthy siege which lasted until 1191. After re-capturing Acre, Richard defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf in 1191 and the Battle of Jaffa in 1192, recovering most of the coast for the Christians, but could not recover Jerusalem or any of the inland territory of the kingdom. The crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192. Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the crusaders to fulfil their vows, after which they all returned home. The native crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.[67]
Saladin died in 1193, and there were frequent conflicts between different Ayyubid sultans ruling in Damascus and Cairo. Damascus was the capital of independent Ayyubid rulers between 1193 and 1201, from 1218 to 1238, from 1239 to 1245, and from 1250 to 1260. At other times it was ruled by the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt. The patterned Byzantine and Chinese silks available through Damascus, one of the Western termini of the Silk Road, gave the English language "damask".
Mamluk period[edit]
Ayyubid rule (and independence) came to an end with the Mongol invasion of Syria in 1260, and following the Mongol defeat at Ain Jalut in the same year, Damascus became a provincial capital of the Mamluk Empire, ruled from Egypt, following the Mongol withdrawal. The Black Death of 1348–1349 killed as much as half of the city's population.[68]
In 1400 Timur, the Turco-Mongol conqueror, besieged Damascus. The Mamluk sultan dispatched a deputation from Cairo, including Ibn Khaldun, who negotiated with him, but after their withdrawal he put the city to sack. The Umayyad Mosque was burnt and men and women taken into slavery. A huge number of the city's artisans were taken to Timur's capital at Samarkand. These were the luckier citizens: many were slaughtered and their heads piled up in a field outside the north-east corner of the walls, where a city square still bears the name burj al-ru'us, originally "the tower of heads".
Rebuilt, Damascus continued to serve as a Mamluk provincial capital until 1516.
Ottoman rule[edit]
See also: Damascus Eyalet and Syria Vilayet




Tekkiye Mosque


In early 1516, the Ottoman Turks, wary of the danger of an alliance between the Mamluks and the Persian Safavids, started a campaign of conquest against the Mamluk sultanate. On 21 September, the Mamluk governor of Damascus fled the city, and on 2 October the khutba in the Umayyad mosque was pronounced in the name of Selim I. The day after, the victorious sultan entered the city, staying for three months. On 15 December, he left Damascus by Bab al-Jabiya, intent on the conquest of Egypt. Little appeared to have changed in the city: one army had simply replaced another. However, on his return in October 1517, the sultan ordered the construction of a mosque, tekkiye and mausoleum at the shrine of Shaikh Muhi al-Din ibn Arabi in al-Salihiyah. This was to be the first of Damascus' great Ottoman monuments. During this time, according to an Ottoman census, Damascus had 10,423 households.[69]
The Ottomans remained for the next 400 years, except for a brief occupation by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt from 1832 to 1840. Because of its importance as the point of departure for one of the two great Hajj caravans to Mecca, Damascus was treated with more attention by the Porte than its size might have warranted—for most of this period, Aleppo was more populous and commercially more important. In 1560 the Tekkiye al-Sulaimaniyah, a mosque and khan for pilgrims on the road to Mecca, was completed to a design by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, and soon afterwards a madrasa was built adjoining it.
Under Ottoman rule, Christians and Jews were considered dhimmis and were allowed to practice their religious precepts. During the Damascus affair of 1840 the false accusation of ritual murder was brought against members of the Jewish community of Damascus. In addition the massacre of Christians in 1860 was also one of the most notorious incidents of these centuries, when fighting between Druze and Maronites in Mount Lebanon spilled over into the city. Several thousand Christians were killed, with many more being saved through the intervention of the Algerian exile Abd al-Qadir and his soldiers (three days after the massacre started), who brought them to safety in Abd al-Qadir's residence and the citadel. The Christian quarter of the old city (mostly inhabited by Catholics), including a number of churches, was burnt down. The Christian inhabitants of the notoriously poor and refractory Midan district outside the walls (mostly Orthodox) were, however, protected by their Muslim neighbours.
American Missionary E.C. Miller records that in 1867 the population of the city was 'about' 140,000, of whom 30,000 were Christians, 10,000 Jews and 100,000 'Mohammedans' with fewer than 100 Protestant Christians.[70]
Modern[edit]
See also: French Mandate of Syria and the Lebanon




The Turkish Hospital in Damascus on 1 October 1918, shortly after the entry of the Australian 4th Light Horse Regiment


In the early years of the 20th century, nationalist sentiment in Damascus, initially cultural in its interest, began to take a political colouring, largely in reaction to the turkicisation programme of the Committee of Union and Progress government established in Istanbul in 1908. The hanging of a number of patriotic intellectuals by Jamal Pasha, governor of Damascus, in Beirut and Damascus in 1915 and 1916 further stoked nationalist feeling, and in 1918, as the forces of the Arab Revolt and the British Imperial forces approached, residents fired on the retreating Turkish troops.




King Faisal of Syria and T.E. Lawrence in Damascus during World War I, 1918.


On 1 October 1918, T. E. Lawrence entered Damascus, the third arrival of the day, the first being the Australian 3rd Light Horse Brigade, led by Major A.C.N. 'Harry' Olden.[71] Two days later, 3 October 1918, the forces of the Arab revolt led by Prince Faysal also entered Damascus.[72] A military government under Shukri Pasha was named and Faisal ibn Hussein was proclaimed king of Syria. Political tension rose in November 1917, when the new Bolshevik government in Russia revealed the Sykes-Picot Agreement whereby Britain and France had arranged to partition the Arab east between them. A new Franco-British proclamation on 17 November promised the "complete and definitive freeing of the peoples so long oppressed by the Turks." The Syrian National Congress in March adopted a democratic constitution. However, the Versailles Conference had granted France a mandate over Syria, and in 1920 a French army commanded by the General Mariano Goybet crossed the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, defeated a small Syrian defensive expedition at the Battle of Maysalun and entered Damascus. The French made Damascus capital of their League of Nations Mandate for Syria.
When in 1925 the Great Syrian Revolt in the Hauran spread to Damascus, the French suppressed with heavy weaponry, bombing and shelling the city on 9 May 1926. As a result, the area of the old city between Al-Hamidiyah Souq and Medhat Pasha Souq was burned to the ground, with many deaths, and has since then been known as al-Hariqa ("the fire"). The old city was surrounded with barbed wire to prevent rebels infiltrating from the Ghouta, and a new road was built outside the northern ramparts to facilitate the movement of armored cars.
On 21 June 1941, 3 weeks into the Allied Syria-Lebanon campaign, Damascus was captured from the Vichy French forces by a mixed British Indian and Free French force. The French agreed to withdraw in 1946, thus leading to the full independence of Syria. Damascus remained the capital.
By January 2012, clashes between the regular army and rebels reached the outskirts of Damascus, reportedly preventing people from leaving or reaching their houses, especially when security operations there intensified from the end of January into February.[73]
By June 2012, bullets and shrapnel shells smashed into homes in Damascus overnight as troops battled the Free Syrian Army in the streets. At least three tank shells slammed into residential areas in the central Damascus neighborhood of Qaboun, according to activists. Intense exchanges of assault-rifle fire marked the clash, according to residents and amateur video posted online.[74]
Economy[edit]




Bank Al-Sharq and the Blue Tower Hotel in Damascus


The historical role that Damascus played as an important trade center has changed in recent years due to political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade.[75] Most goods produced in Damascus, as well as in Syria, are distributed to countries of the Arabian peninsula.[75] Damascus has also held an annual international trade exposition every fall, since 1954.[76]
The tourism industry in Damascus has a lot of potential, however the current civil war has hampered these prospects. The abundance of cultural wealth in Damascus has been modestly employed since the late 1980s with the development of many accommodation and transportation establishments and other related investments.[75] Since the early 2000s, numerous boutique hotels and bustling cafes opened in the old city which attract plenty of European tourists and Damascenes alike.[77]
In 2009 new office space was built and became available on the real estate market.[78] The real-estate sector is stopped due to the terrorism and exodus of the population. Damascus is home to a wide range of industrial activity, such as textile, food processing, cement and various chemical industries.[75] The majority of factories are run by the state, however limited privatization in addition to economic activities led by the private sector, were permitted starting in the early 2000s with the liberalization of trade that took place.[75] Traditional handcrafts and artisan copper engravings are still produced in the old city.[75]
The Damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in March 2009, and the exchange is the only stock exchange in Syria.[79] It is currently located in the Barzeh district, within Syria's financial markets and securities commission. Its final home is to be the upmarket business district of Yaafur.[80]
Demographics[edit]


Historical population


Year
Pop.
±% p.a.


1995
1,751,000
—    


2009
1,711,000
−0.16%


Source[81]






Three Damascene women; lady wearing qabqabs, a Druze, and a peasant, 1873


The estimated population of Damascus in 2011 was 1,711,000. Damascus is the centre of an over-crowded metropolitan area with an estimated population of 5 million. The metropolitan area of Damascus includes the cities of Douma, Harasta, Darayya, Al-Tall and Jaramana.
The majority of the population in Damascus came as a result of rural-urban migration.[citation needed]
Ethnicity[edit]
The vast majority of Damascenes are Syrian Arabs. The Kurds are the largest ethnic minority, with a population of approximately 300,000.[82][better source needed] They reside primarily in the neighborhoods of Wadi al-Mashari ("Zorava" or "Zore Afa" in Kurdish) and Rukn al-Din.[83][84] Other minorities include Armenians, Arameans, Circassians and a small Greek community.
Religion[edit]
Islam is the dominant religion. The majority of Muslims are Sunni while Alawites and Twelver Shi'a comprise sizeable minorities. Alawites live primarily in the Mezzeh districts of Mezzeh 86 and Sumariyah. Twelvers primarily live near the Shia holy sites of Sayyidah Ruqayya and Sayyidah Zaynab. It is believed that there are more than 200 mosques in Damascus, the most well-known being the Umayyad Mosque.[85] Christians represent about 15%–20% of the population.[citation needed] Several Eastern Christian rites have their headquarters in Damascus. The Christian districts in the city are Bab Tuma, Qassaa and Ghassani. Each have many churches, most notably the ancient Chapel of Saint Paul. At the suburb Soufanieh a series of apparitions of the Virgin Mary have reportedly been observed between 1982 and 2004.[86] A smaller Druze minority inhabits the city, notably in the mixed Christian-Druze suburbs of Tadamon,[87] Jaramana,[88] and Sahnaya. The Supreme Church of Syrian Orthodox is based in Damascus, Bab Toma. This church is independent of the Middle Eastern-based Syriac Orthodox Church in Damascus and has its own leadership and structure in India, although both practice the same or similar denomination of Christianity. There are 700,000 Syriac Orthodox members in Syria.




Patriarch John the Tenth leading mass at the Mariamite Cathedral of Damascus


There was a small Jewish community namely in what is called Haret al-Yahud the Jewish quarter. They are the remnants of an ancient and much larger Jewish presence in Syria, dating back at least to Roman times, if not before to the time of King David.[89]
Sufism[edit]
Sufism throughout the second half of the 20th century has been an influential current in the Sunni religious practises, particularly in Damascus. The largest women-only and girls-only Muslim movement in the world happens to be Sufi-oriented and is based in Damascus, led by Munira al-Qubaysi. Syrian Sufism has its stronghold in urban regions such as Damascus, where it also established political movements such as Zayd, with the help of a series of mosques, and clergy such as Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi, Sa'id Hawwa, Abd al-Rahman al-Shaghouri and Muhammad al-Yaqoubi.[90]
Historical sites[edit]
Main article: Ancient City of Damascus




Typical ancient Damascene street


Damascus has a wealth of historical sites dating back to many different periods of the city's history. Since the city has been built up with every passing occupation, it has become almost impossible to excavate all the ruins of Damascus that lie up to 2.4 m (8 ft) below the modern level.[citation needed] The Citadel of Damascus is located in the northwest corner of the Old City. The Damascus Straight Street (referred to in the account of the conversion of St. Paul in Acts 9:11), also known as the Via Recta, was the decumanus (East-West main street) of Roman Damascus, and extended for over 1,500 m (4,900 ft). Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate). Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk. At the end of the Bab Sharqi street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam. A shrine in the mosque is said to contain the body of St. John the Baptist. The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque. Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque, the shrine of the youngest daughter of Husayn ibn Ali, can also be found near the Umayyad Mosque. The ancient district of Amara is also within a walking distance from these sites. Another heavily visited site is Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque, where the tomb of Zaynab bint Ali is located.




Azm Palace dating back to 1750


Shias, Fatemids and Dawoodi Bohras believe that after the battle of Karbala (680 AD), in Iraq, the Umayyad caliph Yezid brought Imam Husain's head to Damascus, where it was first kept in the courtyard of Yezid Mahal, now part of Umayyad Mosque complex. All other remaining members of Imam Husain's family (left alive after Karbala) along with heads of all other companions, who were killed at Karbala, were also brought to Damascus. These members were kept as prisoners on the outskirts of the city (near Bab al-Saghir), where the other heads were kept at the same location, now called "Raous-us-sohda-e-karbala", visited by all Shias. There is a qibla (place of worship) marked at the place, where Imam Ali-Zain-ul-Abedin used to pray while in captivity.[citation needed]
The Harat Al Yehud[91] or Jewish Quarter is a recently restored historical tourist destination popular among Europeans before the outbreak of civil war. Vacationers can enjoy the neighborhood and scenic ancient homes abandoned by the completely departed Syrian Jewish community.[92]
Walls and gates of Damascus[edit]




Bab Tuma gate


The Old City of Damascus with an approximate area of 86.12 hectares[93] is surrounded by ramparts on the northern and eastern sides and part of the southern side. There are seven extant city gates, the oldest of which dates back to the Roman period. These are, clockwise from the north of the citadel:

Bab al-Faradis ("the gate of the orchards", or "of the paradise")
Bab al-Salam ("the gate of peace"), all on the north boundary of the Old City
Bab Tuma ("Touma" or "Thomas's Gate") in the north-east corner, leading into the Christian quarter of the same name,
Bab Sharqi ("eastern gate") in the east wall, the only one to retain its Roman plan
Bab Kisan in the south-east, from which tradition holds that Saint Paul made his escape from Damascus, lowered from the ramparts in a basket; this gate has been closed and turned into Chapel of Saint Paul marking this event,
Bab al-Saghir (The Small Gate)
Bab al-Jabiya at the entrance to Souk Midhat Pasha, in the south-west.

Other areas outside the walled city also bear the name "gate": Bab al-Faraj, Bab Mousalla and Bab Sreija, both to the south-west of the walled city.
Churches in the old city[edit]




Chapel of Saint Paul



Chapel of Saint Paul
House of Saint Ananias
Mariamite Cathedral of Damascus
Cathedral of the Dormition of Our Lady
Saint John the Damascene Church
Saint Paul's Laura
Saint George's Syriac Orthodox Cathedral

Islamic sites in the old city[edit]




Saladin mausoleum



Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Great Mosque of Damascus
Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque
Bab Saghir Cemetery
Mausoleum of Saladin
Nabi Habeel Mosque

Madrasas[edit]

Al-Adiliyah Madrasa
Az-Zahiriyah Library
Nur al-Din Madrasa

Khans[edit]

Khan Jaqmaq
Khan As'ad Pasha
Khan Sulayman Pasha

Old Damascene houses[edit]




Maktab Anbar



Azm Palace, originally built in 1750 as the residence for the Ottoman governor of Damascus As'ad Pasha al-Azm, currently housing the Museum of Arts and Popular Traditions.
Bayt al-Aqqad.
Maktab Anbar, a mid-19th-century Jewish private mansion, restored by the Ministry of Culture in 1976 to serve as a library, exhibition centre, museum and craft workshops.[94]
Beit al-Mamlouka, a 17th-century Damascene house, serving as a luxury boutique hotel within the old city since 2005.

Threats to the future of the old City[edit]




Narrow alley in old Damascus


Due to the rapid decline of the population of Old Damascus (between 1995 and 2009 about 30,000 people moved out of the old city for more modern accommodation)[95], a growing number of buildings are being abandoned or are falling into disrepair. In March 2007, the local government announced that it would be demolishing Old City buildings along a 1,400 m (4,600 ft) stretch of rampart walls as part of a redevelopment scheme. These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world.[96][97] It is hoped that its inclusion on the list will draw more public awareness to these significant threats to the future of the historic Old City of Damascus.
Current state of old Damascus[edit]
In spite of the recommendations of the UNESCO World Heritage Center:[98]

Souq al-Atiq, a protected buffer zone, was destroyed in three days in November 2006;
King Faysal Street, a traditional hand-craft region in a protected buffer zone near the walls of Old Damascus between the Citadel and Bab Touma, is threatened by a proposed motorway.
In 2007, the Old City of Damascus and notably the district of Bab Tuma have been recognized by The World Monument Fund as one of the most endangered sites in the world.[99]

In October 2010, Global Heritage Fund named Damascus one of 12 cultural heritage sites most "on the verge" of irreparable loss and destruction.[100]
Education[edit]




Damascus University


Damascus is the main center of education in Syria. It is home to Damascus University, which is the oldest and largest university in Syria. After the enactment of legislation allowing private higher institutions, several new universities were established in the city and in the surrounding area, including:

Syrian Virtual University
International University for Science and Technology
Syrian Private University
Arab International University
University of Kalamoon
Yarmouk Private University
Wadi International University

The institutes play an important rule in the education, including:

Higher Institute of Business Administration
Higher Institute for Applied Science and Technology
Higher Institute for Dramatic Arts
National Institute of Administration

Transportation[edit]




Al-Hejaz Station


The main airport is Damascus International Airport, approximately 20 km (12 mi) away from the city, with connections to a few Middle Eastern cities. Before the beginning of the Syrian civil war, the Airport had connectivity to many Asian, European, African, and, South American cities. Streets in Damascus are often narrow, especially in the older parts of the city, and speed bumps are widely used to limit the speed of vehicles.
Public transport in Damascus depends extensively on minibuses. There are about one hundred lines that operate inside the city and some of them extend from the city center to nearby suburbs. There is no schedule for the lines, and due to the limited number of official bus stops, buses will usually stop wherever a passenger needs to get on or off. The number of buses serving the same line is relatively high, which minimizes the waiting time. Lines are not numbered, rather they are given captions mostly indicating the two end points and possibly an important station along the line and Taxicab.
Served by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the former main railway station of Damascus was al-Hejaz railway station, about 1 km (5⁄8 mi) west of the old city. The station is now defunct and the tracks have been removed, but there still is a ticket counter and a shuttle to Damacus Kadam station in the south of the city, which now functions as the main railway station.
In 2008, the government announced a plan to construct a Damascus Metro with opening time for the green line scheduled for 2015.[101] The green line will be an essential West-East axis for the future public transportation network, serving Moadamiyeh, Sumariyeh, Mezzeh, Damascus University, Hijaz, the Old City, Abbassiyeen and Qaboun Pullman bus station. A four-line metro network is expected be in operation by 2050.
Culture[edit]




National Museum of Damascus


Damascus was chosen as the 2008 Arab Capital of Culture.[102] The preparation for the festivity began in February 2007 with the establishing of the Administrative Committee for "Damascus Arab Capital of Culture" by a presidential decree.[103]
Museums[edit]

National Museum of Damascus
Azem Palace
Military Museum
October War Panorama Museum
Museum of Arabic Calligraphy
Nur al-Din Bimaristan

Sports and leisure[edit]




Al-Fayhaa sports complex


Popular sports include football, basketball, swimming, tennis, table tennis, equestrian and chess. Damascus is home to many football clubs that participate in the Syrian Premier League including Al-Jaish, Al-Shurta, Al-Wahda and Al-Majd. Many Other sport clubs are located in several districts of the city: Barada SC, Nidal SC, Al-Muhafaza, Qasioun SC, Al-Thawra SC, Al-Fayhaa SC, Dummar SC and Al-Arin SC.
The fifth and the seventh Pan Arab Games were held in Damascus in 1976 and 1992 respectively.
Damascus has quite busy midnights. Coffeehouses, where —in addition to Arabic coffee and tea— nargileh (water pipes) are served, proliferate Damascus. Card games, tables (backgammon variants), and chess are activities frequented in cafés.[104] Current movies can be seen at Cinema City which was previously known as Cinema Dimashq.
Tishreen Park is one of the largest and popular parks in Damascus. It is home to the annual Damascus Flower Show. Other parks include: al-Jahiz, al-Sibbki, al-Tijara, al-Wahda, etc. Damascus' Ghouta (Oasis) is also a popular weekend-destination for recreation. Many recreation centres operate in the city including sport clubs, swimming pools and golf courses. The Syrian Arab Horse Association in Damascus offers a wide range of activities and services for horse breeders and riders.[105]
Nearby attractions[edit]




Zabadani resort near Damascus






Booza being sold in the Bakdash ice cream shop in the Damascus market



Madaya: a small mountainous town well known holiday resort.
Bloudan: a town located 51 km (32 mi) north-west of the Damascus, its moderate temperature and low humidity in summer attracts many visitors from Damascus and throughout Syria, Lebanon and the Persian Gulf.
Zabadani: a city in close to the border with Lebanon. Its mild weather along with the scenic views, made the town a popular resort both for tourists and for visitors from other Syrian cities.
Maaloula: a town dominated by speakers of Western Neo-Aramaic.
Saidnaya: a city located in the mountains, 1,500 metres (4,921 ft) above sea level, it was one of the episcopal cities of the ancient Patriarchate of Antioch.

Notable people from Damascus[edit]

Ibn 'Abd as-Salam medieval expert in Islamic jurisprudence

See also[edit]


Syria portal



List of twin towns and sister cities in Asia#Syria
World Heritage Sites in Danger

Notes[edit]



^ Al-Fayhaa (Arabic: الفيحاء‎), is an adjective which means "spacious".[1]



References[edit]


^ Almaany Team. "معنى كلمة الفَيْحَاءُ في معجم المعاني الجامع والمعجم الوسيط – معجم عربي عربي – صفحة 1". almaany.com. 
^ Albaath.news statement by the governor of Damascus, Syria Archived 16 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine. (in Arabic), April 2010
^ a b Central Bureau of Statistics in Syria: Chapter 2: Population & Demographic Indicators Archived 13 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Table 3: Estimates of Population actually living in Syria on 31 December 2011 by Mohafazat and six (in thousands)
^ Eldredge, Niles & Horenstein, Sidney (2014). Concrete Jungle: New York City and Our Last Best Hope for a Sustainable Future. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-520-27015-2. 
^ Central Bureau of Statistics Syria Syria census 2004 Archived 10 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ List I, 13 in J. Simons, Handbook for the Study of Egyptian Topographical Lists relating to Western Asia, Leiden 1937. See also Y. AHARONI, The Land of the Bible: A Historical Geography, London 1967, p147, No. 13.
^ Paul E. Dion (May 1988). "Ancient Damascus: A Historical Study of the Syrian City-State from Earliest Times Until Its Fall to the Assyrians in 732 BC., Wayne T. Pitard". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research (270): 98. JSTOR 1357008. 
^ Frank Moore Cross (Feb 1972). "The Stele Dedicated to Melcarth by Ben-Hadad of Damascus". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research (205): 40. JSTOR 1356214. 
^ Miller, Catherine; Al-Wer, Enam; Caubet, Dominique; Watson, Janet C.E. (2007). Arabic in the City: Issues in Dialect Contact and Language Variation. Routledge. p. 189. ISBN 113597876X. 
^ Teixidor, Javier (2015). The Pagan God: Popular Religion in the Greco-Roman Near East. Princeton University Press. p. 27. ISBN 9781400871391. Retrieved 14 August 2017. 
^ Beattie, Andrew; Pepper, Timothy (2001). The Rough Guide to Syria. Rough Guides. p. 290. ISBN 9781858287188. Retrieved 14 August 2017. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Dirven, Lucinda (1999). The Palmyrenes of Dura-Europos: A Study of Religious Interaction in Roman Syria. BRILL. p. 76. ISBN 978-90-04-11589-7. Retrieved 17 July 2012. 
^ J.F. Healey (2001). The Religion of the Nabataeans: A Conspectus. BRILL. p. 126. ISBN 9789004301481. Retrieved 14 August 2017. 
^ a b romeartlover, "Damascus: the ancient town"
^ "DMA-UPD Discussion Paper Series No.2" (PDF). Damascus Metropolitan Area Urban Planning and Development. October 2009. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-28. 
^ The palestinian refugees in Syria. Their past, present and future. Dr. Hamad Said al-Mawed, 1999
^ M. Kottek; J. Grieser; C. Beck; B. Rudolf; F. Rubel (2006). "World Map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated". Meteorol. Z. 15: 259–263. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130. Retrieved 1 August 2013. 
^ Tyson, Patrick J. (2010). "SUNSHINE GUIDE TO THE DAMASCUS AREA, SYRIA" (PDF). www.climates.com. Retrieved 26 November 2010. 
^ "The Climate of Damascus 1981–2010" (in Russian). Weather and Climate (Погода и климат). Retrieved 26 April 2017. 
^ "Damascus INTL Climate Normals 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 26 April 2017. 
^ Moore, A.M.T. The Neolithic of the Levant. Oxford, UK: Oxford University, 1978. 192–198. Print.
^ Burns 2005, p. 2
^ a b Burns 2005, pp. 5–6
^ a b Burns 2005, p. 7
^ "Genesis 14:15 (New International Version)". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 25 November 2009. 
^ "The Antiquities of the Jews, by Flavius Josephus, Book 1, Ch. 6, Sect. 4". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 19 September 2014. 
^ "The Antiquities of the Jews, by Flavius Josephus, Book 1, Ch. 7, Sect. 2". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 19 September 2014. 
^ "Damascus, Syria : Image of the Day". nasa.gov. Retrieved 5 April 2015. 
^ Burns 2005, p. 9
^ a b c Burns 2005, p. 10
^ Burns 2005, pp. 13–14
^ a b Burns 2005, p. 11
^ Burns 2005, pp. 21–23
^ Cohen raises doubts about this claim in Cohen, Getzel M; EBSCOhost (2006), The Hellenistic settlements in Syria, the Red Sea Basin, and North Africa, University of California Press, retrieved 26 May 2014  page 137 note 4 - suggeasting the received tradition of the renaming rests on a few writers following Mionnets writings in 1811
^ Warwick Ball (2002). Rome in the East: The Transformation of an Empire. p. 181. 
^ Skolnik, Fred; Michael Berenbaum ( 2007) Encyclopaedia Judaica Volume 5 Granite Hill Publishers pg 527
^ Knoblet, Jerry (2005) Herod the Great University Press of America.
^ Burns, Ross (2007) Damascus: A History Routledge pg 52
^ Riesner, Rainer (1998) Paul's Early Period: Chronology, Mission Strategy, Theology Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing pg 73–89
^ Hengel, Martin (1997) Paul Between Damascus and Antioch: The Unknown Years Westminster John Knox Press pg 130
^ Riesner, Rainer (1998) Paul's Early Period: Chronology, Mission Strategy, Theology Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing pg 83–84, 89
^ Butcher, Kevin (2004). Coinage in Roman Syria: Northern Syria, 64 BC-AD 253. Royal Numismatic Society. p. 220. ISBN 978-0-901405-58-6. 
^ Barclay Vincent Head (1887). "VII. Coele-Syria". Historia Numorum: A Manual of Greek Numismatics. p. 662. 
^ Safiur-Rahman Mubarakpuri, The Sealed Nectar, p. 227
^ Akbar Shāh Ḵẖān Najībābādī, History of Islam, Volume 1, p. 194. Quote: "Again, the Holy Prophet «P sent Dihyah bin Khalifa Kalbi to the Byzantine king Heraclius, Hatib bin Abi Baltaeh to the king of Egypt and Alexandria; Allabn Al-Hazermi to Munzer bin Sawa the king of Bahrain; Amer bin Aas to the king of Oman. Salit bin Amri to Hozah bin Ali— the king of Yamama; Shiya bin Wahab to Haris bin Ghasanni to the king of Damascus"
^ Burns 2005, pp. 98–99
^ Burns 2005, p. 100
^ Burns 2005, pp. 103–104
^ Burns 2005, p. 105
^ Burns 2005, pp. 106–107
^ Burns 2005, pp. 110
^ Burns 2005, p. 113
^ Burns 2005, pp. 121–122
^ Burns 2005, pp. 130–132
^ Burns 2005, pp. 135–136
^ Burns 2005, pp. 137–138
^ Burns 2005, p. 139
^ Burns 2005, pp. 142
^ Burns 2005, p. 147
^ Burns 2005, pp. 148–149
^ Burns 2005, p. 151
^ Phillips, Jonathan (2007). The Second Crusade: Extending the Frontiers of Christendom. Yale University Press. pp. 216–227. 
^ Hans E. Mayer, The Crusades (Oxford University Press, 1965, trans. John Gillingham, 1972), pp. 118–120.
^ Tyerman, Christopher (2006). God's War: A New History of the Crusades. Penguin. p. 350. 
^ Hamilton, Bernard (2000). The Leper King and his Heirs: Baldwin IV and the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem. Cambridge University Press. pp. 132–136. 
^ "The Third Crusade: Richard the Lionhearted and Philip Augustus", in A History of the Crusades, vol. II: The Later Crusades, 1189–1311, ed. R. L. Wolff and H. W. Hazard (Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1969), pp. 45–49.
^ Wolff and Hazard, pp. 67–85.
^ Islamic city. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ "Population and Revenue in the Towns of Palestine in the Sixteenth Century"
^ Ellen Clare Miller, 'Eastern Sketches – notes of scenery, schools and tent life in Syria and Palestine'. Edinburgh: William Oliphant and Company. 1871. page 90. quoting Eli Jones, a Quaker from New England.
^ Barker, A. (1998) "The Allies Enter Damascus", History Today, Volume 48
^ Roberts, P.M., World War I, a Student Encyclopedia, 2006, ABC-CLIO, p.657
^ "Public transportation in Damascus is having an uphill go of it". Archived from the original on 2012-03-21. 
^ "Heavy gunfire in Syria's capital during the weekend". Haaretz. 10 June 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. 
^ a b c d e f "Damascus". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ "Damascus International Fair". Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ Cummins, Chip. "Damascus Revels in Its New Allure to Investors". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ "Report: Office Space Across the World 2009". Cushman & Wakefield. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ "Inauguration of Damascus Stock Exchange". Syrian Enterprise and Business Center. Retrieved 28 November 2009. 
^ "AFP: Syria launches first stock exchange". Google.com. 10 March 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ "200,000 civilians try to escape violence in Syrian city of Aleppo". 
^ Chatty, Dawn (2010). Displacement and Dispossession in the Modern Middle East. Cambridge University Press. p. 267. ISBN 978-0-521-52104-8. 
^ "Kurds of Damascus: Trapped Between Secession and Integration". 
^ "As Fighting Rages in Damascus, Kurds Flee Their Neighborhoods". 
^ Flood, Finbarr Barry (2001). The Great Mosque of Damascus: studies on the makings of an Umayyad visual culture. 33. BRILL. p. 12. ISBN 978-90-04-11638-2. Retrieved 26 November 2009. 
^ Sbalchiero in: Laurentin/ Sbalchiero (2007), p. 1093–1097.
^ "Syria's Alawites Under Siege". 
^ "Despite pressure Druze remain in regime camp". 
^ Katz, Ketsi'ah (1981), Masoret ha-lashon ha-'Ibrit shel Yehude Aram-Tsoba (Ḥalab) bi-qri'at ha-Miqra ve-ha-Mishnah (The Hebrew Language Tradition of the Jews of Aleppo in the Reading of the Bible and Mishnah)
^ "Syrian Sufis Divided As Salafist Influence Grows". 3 October 2013. 
^ http://www.jpost.com/Magazine/Features/Jewish-Quarter-of-Damascus-blooms-again
^ http://www.dailymail.co.uk/travel/article-1327476/Syria-holiday-Stay-Damascuss-Jewish-Quarter-visit-historic-Aleppo.html
^ "Ancient City of Damascus". UNESCO. Retrieved 31 October 2017. 
^ Archnet, Maktab Anbar Restoration
^ Hendawi, Hamza (2009-02-01). "Old Damascus struggles to cope in the new Syria". The San Diego Union-Tribune. The Associated Press. Retrieved 13 August 2017. 
^ World Monuments Fund. "2008 World Monuments Watch List Of 100 Most Endangered Sites" (PDF). World Monuments Fund. World Monuments Fund. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2015. 
^ "2008 Panelists Bios" (PDF). World Monuments Fund. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2009. 
^ "The British Syrian Society". The British Syrian Society. Archived from the original on 2007-06-23. Retrieved 29 May 2009. 
^ "Worldmonuments.org". Worldmonuments.org. Archived from the original on 30 September 2002. Retrieved 6 November 2011. 
^ "GHF". Global Heritage Fund. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2011. 
^ "الخط الأخضر " أهلاً بكم في موقع الخط الأخضر". Damascus-metro.com. Retrieved 29 May 2009. 
^ "دمشق عاصمة الثقافة العربية 2008". Damascus.org.sy. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 27 December 2012. 
^ "مجلس الإدارة و المجلس الاستشاري". Damascus.org.sy. 22 October 2007. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 
^ Beatties and Pepper, 2001, p. 102.
^ "Syrian Arab Horse Association". Saha-sy.org. Retrieved 20 June 2010. 


Bibliography[edit]

See also: Bibliography of the history of Damascus


Aharoni, Yohanan; Avi-Yonah, Michael (1977). The MacMillan Bible Atlas. Carta Ltd. ISBN 0-7318-1071-6. 
Burns, Ross (2005). Damascus: A History. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-27105-9. 
Cammelli, Stefano (2006). "Il Minareto di Gesù". Il Mulino. 
Hamilton, Jill, Duchess of (2002). First to Damascus: The story of the Australian Light Horse and Lawrence of Arabia. ISBN 0-7318-1071-6. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Damascus.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Damascus.



 Macalister, R. A. Stewart (1911). "Damascus". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 







v
t
e


Damascus



Historic and
other landmarks



Temple of Jupiter
Street called Straight
Citadel of Damascus
Jobar Synagogue
Nur al-Din Bimaristan
Mausoleum of Saladin
Azm Palace
Maktab Anbar
Hejaz Train Station
Statue of Saladin
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
Tishreen Palace
Al-Shaab Palace





Madrasas



Al-Adiliyah Madrasa
Al-Shamiyah al-Kubra Madrasa
Al-Fathiyah Madrasa
Al-Mujahidiyah Madrasa
Al-Qilijiyah Madrasa
Al-Rukniyah Madrasa
Al-Sahiba Madrasa
Al-Salimiyah Madrasa
Al-Sibaiyah Madrasa
Al-Zahiriyah Library
Nur al-Din Madrasa





Mosques



Aqsab Mosque
Darwish Pasha Mosque
Hanabila Mosque
Murad Pasha Mosque
Nabi Habeel Mosque
Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque
Sinan Pasha Mosque
Tekkiye Mosque
Umayyad Mosque
Yalbugha Mosque





Church buildings



Chapel of Saint Ananias
Cathedral of Saint George
Chapel of Saint Paul
Mariamite Cathedral
Cathedral of the Dormition
Syriac Catholic cathedral





Historic gates



Bab al-Faradis
Bab al-Jabiyah
Bab al-Saghir
Bab al-Salam
Bab Kisan
Bab Sharqi
Bab Tuma





Souqs and khans



Khan Jaqmaq
Khan As'ad Pasha
Khan Sulayman Pasha
Khan al-Harir
Midhat Pasha Souq
Al-Hamidiyah Souq
Al-Buzuriyah Souq





Culture and
education



National Museum of Damascus
Al-Assad National Library
Damascus Opera House
Damascus University
Syrian Virtual University
International University for Science and Technology
Syrian Private University
Arab International University
Higher Institute of Business Administration
Higher Institute for Applied Science and Technology
Higher Institute for Dramatic Arts
National Institute of Administration
Damascus Community School
Lycée Charles de Gaulle
Russian Embassy School in Damascus
Shami Hospital





Entertainment



Bakdash (ice cream parlor)
Bawabet Dimashq
Havana Cafe
Beit al-Mamlouka Hotel
Blue Tower Hotel
Four Seasons Hotel Damascus





Streets and squares



Baghdad Street
Marjeh Square
Rawda Square
Sabaa Bahrat Square
Umayyad Square
Yusuf al-Azma Square





Nature



Barada River
Pharpar River
Mount Qasioun
Salera Hill
Ghouta





Sport




Venues



Abbasiyyin Stadium
Al-Fayhaa Stadium
Al-Jalaa Stadium
Tishreen Stadium
Al-Muhafaza Stadium
Al-Fayhaa Sports Arena





Clubs



Al-Majd SC
Al-Jaish SC
Al-Shorta SC
Al-Wahda SC
Al-Muhafaza SC
Barada SC
Nidal SC








Municipal districts



Old Damascus
Sarouja
Qanawat
Jobar
Al-Midan
Al-Shaghour
Qadam
Kafr Sousa
Mezzeh
Dummar
Barzeh
Qaboun
Rukn al-Din
Al-Salihiyah
Muhajreen





Historical timeline



List of rulers
Aram Damascus
Siege of Damascus (634)
Jund Dimashq
Burid dynasty
Siege of Damascus (1148)
Damascus Eyalet
Damascus affair
Damascus Protocol
State of Damascus
Battle of Damascus (1941)
Damascus International Airport
1976 Pan Arab Games
World Military Cup 1977
Damascus International Film Festival
1981 Azbakiyah bombing
1986 bombings
1992 Pan Arab Games
Damascus Spring
2002 West Asian Football Federation Championship
2004 WABA Champions Cup
Damascus Declaration
2008 Arab Capital of Culture
2008 Arab League summit
2008 car bombing
2011 bombings
2011–2012 clashes
January 2012 al-Midan bombing
March 2012 bombings
April 2012 bombings
May 2012 bombings
Battle of Damascus (2012)
2012 Damascus bombing
March 2017 Damascus bombings






Category:Damascus










v
t
e


 Cities and towns of Syria



Governorate centres



Aleppo
Damascus
Daraa
Deir ez-Zor
Hama
al-Hasakah
Homs
Idlib
Latakia
Quneitra
Raqqa
Rif Dimashq
as-Suwayda
Tartus








District centres



Abu Kamal
Afrin
Arihah
Atarib
Ayn al-Arab
Azaz
al-Bab
Baniyas
Darayya
Dayr Hafir
Douma
Duraykish
Fiq
al-Haffah
Harem
Izra'
Jableh
Jarabulus
Jisr ash-Shugur
Maarat al-Numaan
al-Malikiyah
Manbij
Masyaf
Mayadin
Mhardeh
al-Mukharram al-Foqani
an-Nabk
Palmyra
Qamishli
Qardaha
Qatana
Qudsaya
al-Qusayr
al-Qutayfah
Ra's al-'Ayn
al-Rastan
as-Safira
Safita
Salamiyah
Salkhad
al-Sanamayn
Shahba
ash-Shaykh Badr
al-Suqaylabiyah
Talkalakh
al-Tall
Tell Abyad
al-Thawrah
Yabroud
Zabadani





Sub-district centres



Abu Qilqil
Abu al-Thuhur
Akhtarin
Amuda
Arbeen
Arima
al-Ariqah
al-Arishah
Armanaz
Arwad
al-Asharah
Assal al-Ward
Awj
Ayn al-Fijah
Ayn Halaqim
Ayn Issa
Ayn al-Nasr
Babbila
Banan
Barri Sharqi
Beit Jinn
Binnish
Bir al-Helu
Bosra
Bulbul
Busayrah
Da'el
al-Dana
Darat Izza
Darkush
al-Darbasiyah
Deir Atiyah
al-Dimas
al-Dumayr
Furqlus
Ghabaghib
Ghandoura
al-Ghariyah
al-Ghizlaniyah
al-Hader
Hadidah
al-Hajar al-Aswad
al-Hajib
Hajin
al-Hamidiyah
al-Hamraa
Harasta
Harbnafsah
Harran al-Awamid
al-Hirak
Hish
Hisyah
al-Hawl
Huraytan
al-Huwash
Ibbin Samaan
Ihsim
Jayrud
al-Jalaa
al-Janudiyah
Jaramana
al-Jarniyah
Jasim
al-Jawadiyah
Jubb al-Jarrah
Jubb Ramlah
Jindires
al-Jiza
al-Qabu
Kafr Batna
Kafr Nabl
Kafr Takharim
Kafr Zita
al-Karamah
al-Kasrah
Kessab
al-Khafsah
Khan Shaykhun
Khasham
Kirnaz
Kuwayris Sharqi
Khanaser
Khirbet Ghazaleh
Khirbet al-Tin Mahmoud
al-Kiswah
Ma'arrat Misrin
Maabatli
Maadan
Ma'loula
Madaya
Mahin
Malah
al-Malihah
al-Mansurah
Mare'
Markada
Mashta al-Helu
Maskanah
al-Masmiyah
al-Mazraa
Muhambal
Muhasan
al-Musayfirah
al-Mushannaf
Muzayrib
al-Nashabiyah
al-Nasirah
Nawa
Nubl
al-Qadmus
al-Qahtaniyah
Qalaat al-Madiq
Qarah
al-Qaryatayn
al-Qurayya
Qurqania
Rajo
Rankus
Rasm Harmil al-Imam
al-Rai
al-Riqama
al-Ruhaybah
al-Saan
Saasaa
Sabburah
al-Sabe' Biyar
al-Sabkhah
Sadad
Sahnaya
Saidnaya
Salqin
Saraqib
Sarmin
Sarrin
Sawran
Sebei
al-Shaddadah
al-Shajara
Shaqqa
Sharran
Shathah
Shaykh al-Hadid
al-Shaykh Maskin
Shayukh Tahtani
Shin
Sinjar
Sirghaya
Slinfah
Suluk
al-Sur
al-Surah al-Saghirah
Suran
al-Susah
al-Sukhnah
al-Tabni
Talbiseh
Taldou
al-Tamanah
Tasil
Tell al-Daman
Tell Hamis
Tell Rifaat
Tell Salhab
Tell Tamer
Tedef
Thiban
Uqayribat
Urum al-Kubra
Wadi al-Oyun
al-Yaarubiyah
al-Zurbah
az-Ziyarah












v
t
e


Capitals of Asia




Dependent territories and states with limited recognition are in italics







North and Central Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West and Southwest Asia





Ashgabat, Turkmenistan
Astana, Kazakhstan*
Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan
Dushanbe, Tajikistan
Moscow, Russia*
Tashkent, Uzbekistan

East Asia

Beijing, China
Hong Kong, Hong Kong (China)
Macau, Macau (China)
Pyongyang, North Korea
Seoul, South Korea
Taipei, Taiwan (ROC)
Tokyo, Japan
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia






Kabul, Afghanistan
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Diego Garcia, BIOT (UK)
Islamabad, Pakistan
Kathmandu, Nepal
Kotte, Sri Lanka
Malé, Maldives
New Delhi, India
Thimphu, Bhutan






Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei
Bangkok, Thailand
Dili, East Timor
Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island (Australia)
Hanoi, Vietnam
Jakarta, Indonesia*
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Manila, Philippines
Naypyidaw, Myanmar
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
Central Area, Singapore
Vientiane, Laos
West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia)






Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Amman, Jordan
Ankara, Turkey*
Baghdad, Iraq
Baku, Azerbaijan*
Beirut, Lebanon
Cairo, Egypt*
Doha, Qatar
Jerusalem, Israel/Palestine †
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Manama, Bahrain






Muscat, Oman
Nicosia, Cyprus*
North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus*
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Sana'a, Yemen
Stepanakert, Artsakh*
Sukhumi, Abkhazia*
Tbilisi, Georgia*
Tehran, Iran
Tskhinvali, South Ossetia*
Yerevan, Armenia*










*Transcontinental country.
† Disputed. See: Positions on Jerusalem.










v
t
e


Decapolis cities



Jordan



Philadelphia (Amman)
Gerasa (Jerash)
Gadara (Umm Qais)
Capitolias (Beit Ras)
Raphana (Qweilbeh)
Pella (Tabaqat Fahl)








Syria



Damascus (Dimashq)
Cathana (Qanwat)





Israel



Hippos (Sussita)
Scythopolis (Beit She'an)












v
t
e


Capitals of Arab countries







Africa
Asia





Algiers, Algeria
Cairo, Egypt
Djibouti, Djibouti
El Aaiun (proclaimed) • Tifariti (de facto), Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic1
Khartoum, Sudan
Mogadishu, Somalia






Moroni, Comoros
Nouakchott, Mauritania
Rabat, Morocco
Tripoli, Libya
Tunis, Tunisia






Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Amman, Jordan
Baghdad, Iraq
Beirut, Lebanon
Damascus, Syria
Doha, Qatar






Jerusalem (proclaimed) • Ramallah (de facto), Palestine1
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Manama, Bahrain
Muscat, Oman
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Sana'a, Yemen












1 An unrecognised or partially-recognised nation












v
t
e


World Heritage Sites in Syria






Ancient City of Aleppo
Ancient City of Bosra
Ancient City of Damascus
Ancient Villages of Northern Syria
Crac des Chevaliers and Qal’at Salah El-Din
Site of Palmyra












v
t
e


Arab Capital of Culture






Cairo 1996 (Egypt)
Tunis 1997 (Tunisia)
Sharjah 1998 (United Arab Emirates)
Beirut 1999 (Lebanon)
Riyadh 2000 (Saudi Arabia)
Kuwait City 2001 (Kuwait)
Amman 2002 (Jordan)
Rabat 2003 (Morocco)
San'a 2004 (Yemen)
Khartoum 2005 (Sudan)
Muscat 2006 (Oman)
Algiers 2007 (Algeria)
Damascus 2008 (Syria)
Jerusalem 2009 (State of Palestine)
Doha 2010 (Qatar)
Sirte 2011 (Libya)
Manama 2012 (Bahrain)
Baghdad 2013 (Iraq)
Tripoli 2014 (Libya)
Constantine 2015 (Algeria)
Sfax 2016 (Tunisia)












v
t
e


Roman colonies in ancient Levant



Colonies of legion veterans



Berytus
Caesarea Maritima 2
Aelia Capitolina 1 3
Ptolemais 1








Colonies of late Empire



Laodicea
Antioch
Seleucia
Emesa
Heliopolis 1
Palmyra 1 3
Damascus 1 3
Arca Caesarea
Sidon
Tyrus 1
Sebaste
Bostra 1 3
Petra 1
Neapolis
Philippopolis
Dura-Europos 2





Possible colonial status



Gaza
Ascalon
Gerasa
Gadara
Emmaus Nicopolis
Neronias





Locations with
modern names




Israel



Jerusalem: Aelia Capitolina
Acre: Ptolemais
Caesarea: Caesarea Maritima
Imwas: Emmaus Nicopolis
Banias: Neronias





Jordan



Petra: Petra
Umm Qais: Gadara
Jerash: Gerasa





Lebanon



Arqa: Arca Caesarea
Beirut: Berytus
Baalbek: Heliopolis
Saida: Sidon
Tyre: Tyrus





Syria



Bosra: Bostra
Damascus: Damascus
Dura-Europos: Dura-Europus
Homs: Emesa
Latakia: Laodicea
Shahba: Philippopolis
Tadmur: Palmyra





Turkey



Antakya: Antioch
Samandağ: Seleucia








Related articles



Colonia (Roman)
Legacy of the Roman Empire






1 UNESCO World Heritage Sites; 2 Proposed; 3 in Danger







Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 238973527
LCCN: n79143055
GND: 4010956-2











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Damascus&oldid=818457261"					Categories: World Heritage Sites in SyriaDamascusCities in SyriaLevantSufi Muslim communities in SyriaCapitals in AsiaDamascus GovernorateAmarna letters locationsArchaeological sites in Rif Dimashq GovernorateCapitals of caliphatesOttoman architecturePopulated places along the Silk RoadPopulated places established in the 7th millennium BC7th-millennium BC establishmentsWorld Heritage Sites in DangerHidden categories: Articles containing Arabic-language textWebarchive template wayback linksArticles with Arabic-language external linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Use dmy dates from April 2013Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Syriac-language textArticles containing Aramaic-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers