For the 1935 Austrian film, see Dance Music (film). For electronic genres of dance music, see Electronic dance music and Dance-pop.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Western culture and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







People dancing to a club DJ's music


Dance music is music composed specifically to facilitate or accompany dancing. It can be either a whole musical piece or part of a larger musical arrangement. In terms of performance, the major categories are live dance music and recorded dance music. While there exist attestations of the combination of dance and music in ancient times (for example Ancient Greek vases sometimes show dancers accompanied by musicians), the earliest Western dance music that we can still reproduce with a degree of certainty are the surviving medieval dances. In the Baroque period, the major dance styles were noble court dances (see Baroque dance). In the classical music era, the minuet was frequently used as a third movement, although in this context it would not accompany any dancing. The waltz also arose later in the classical era. Both remained part of the romantic music period, which also saw the rise of various other nationalistic dance forms like the barcarolle, mazurka, ecossaise, ballade and polonaise.
Modern popular dance music initially emerged from late 19th century's Western ballroom and social dance music. During the early 20th century, ballroom dancing gained popularity among the working class who attended public dance halls. Dance music became enormously popular during the 1920s. In the 1930s, called the Swing era, Swing music was the popular dance music in America. In the 1950s, rock and roll became the popular dance music. The late 1960s saw the rise of soul and R&B music. The rise of disco in the early 1970s led to dance music becoming popular with the public. By the late 1970s, electronic dance music was developing. This music, made using electronics, is a style of popular music commonly played in nightclubs, radio stations, shows and raves. Many subgenres of electronic dance music have evolved.



Contents


1 Origins
2 Historical dance music

2.1 By period


3 Popular dance music

3.1 By genre

3.1.1 Dansband
3.1.2 Disco
3.1.3 Electronic


3.2 By decade

3.2.1 1900s–1910s
3.2.2 1920s
3.2.3 1930s–1940s
3.2.4 1950s
3.2.5 1960s
3.2.6 1970s
3.2.7 1980s
3.2.8 1990s
3.2.9 2000s
3.2.10 2010s




4 Radio formats
5 Dance clubs
6 See also
7 References



Origins[edit]
Folk dance music is music accompanying traditional dance and may be contrasted with historical/classical, and popular/commercial dance music. An example of folk dance music in the United States is the old-time music played at square dances and contra dances.
Historical dance music[edit]
See also: History of dance, History of ballet, and Historical dance
While there exist attestations of the combination of dance and music in ancient times (for example Ancient Greek vases sometimes show dancers accompanied by musicians), the earliest Western dance music that we can still reproduce with a degree of certainty are the surviving medieval dances such as carols and the Estampie. The earliest of these surviving dances are almost as old as Western staff-based music notation.
By period[edit]
The Renaissance dance music was written for instruments such as the lute, viol, tabor, pipe, and the sackbut.
In the Baroque period, the major dance styles were noble court dances (see Baroque dance). Examples of dances include the French courante, sarabande, minuet and gigue. Collections of dances were often collected together as dance suites.
In the classical music era, the minuet was frequently used as a third movement in four-movement non-vocal works such as sonatas, string quartets, and symphonies, although in this context it would not accompany any dancing. The waltz also arose later in the classical era, as the minuet evolved into the scherzo (literally, "joke"; a faster-paced minuet).
Both remained part of the romantic music period, which also saw the rise of various other nationalistic dance forms like the barcarolle, mazurka and polonaise. Also in the romantic music era, the growth and development of ballet extended the composition of dance music to a new height. Frequently, dance music was a part of opera.
Popular dance music[edit]
Modern popular dance music initially emerged from late 19th century's Western ballroom and social dance music.
By genre[edit]
Dance music works often bear the name of the corresponding dance, e.g. waltzes, the tango, the bolero, the can-can, minuets, salsa, various kinds of jigs and the breakdown. Other dance forms include contradance, the merengue (Dominican Republic), and the cha-cha-cha. Often it is difficult to know whether the name of the music came first or the name of the dance.
Ballads are commonly chosen for slow-dance routines. However ballads have been commonly deemed as the opposite of dance music in terms of their tempo. Originally, the ballad was a type of dance as well (hence the name "ballad", from the same root as "ballroom" and "ballet"). Ballads are still danced on the Faeroe Islands.
Dansband[edit]
Main article: Dansband
"Dansband" ("Dance band") is a term in Swedish for bands who play a kind of popular music, "dansbandsmusik" ("Dance band music"), to partner dance to. These terms came into use around 1970, and before that, many of the bands were classified as "pop groups". This type of music is mostly popular in the Nordic countries.
Disco[edit]
Main article: Disco
Disco is a genre of dance music containing elements of funk, soul, pop, and salsa. It was most popular during the mid to late 1970s, though it has had brief resurgences afterwards. It inspired the electronic dance music genre.
Electronic[edit]
Main article: Electronic dance music
By 1981, a new form of dance music was developing. This music, made using electronics, is a style of popular music commonly played in dance music nightclubs, radio stations, shows and raves. During its gradual decline in the late 1970s, disco became influenced by computerization (the first notable fully synthesized disco hit was "I Feel Love" by Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte with lyrics by Donna Summer).[1] Looping, sampling and segueing as found in disco continued to be used as creative techniques within trance music, techno music and especially house music.
Electronic dance music experienced a boom after the proliferation of personal computers in the 1980s, manifest in the dance element of Tony Wilson's Haçienda scene (in Manchester) and London clubs like Delirium, The Trip, and Shoom. The ongoing influence of Shoom can be seen in its 25th anniversary party, held at Cable Nightclub on 8 December 2012, which sold out in four days. The scene rapidly expanded to the Summer Of Love in Ibiza, which became the European capital of house and trance. Clubs like Sundissential and Manumission became household names with British, German and Italian tourists.
Many music genres that made use of electronic instruments developed into contemporary styles mainly due to the MIDI protocol, which enabled computers, synthesizers, sound cards, samplers, and drum machines to interact with each other and achieve the full synchronization of sounds. Electronic dance music is typically composed using computers and synthesizers, and rarely has any physical instruments. Instead, this is replaced by digital or electronic sounds, with a 4/4 beat. Many producers of this kind of music however, such as Darren Tate and MJ Cole, were trained in classical music before they moved into the electronic medium.
Associated with dance music are usually commercial tracks that may not easily be categorized, such as "The Power" by Snap!, "No Limit" by 2 Unlimited, "Gonna Make You Sweat (Everybody Dance Now)" by C+C Music Factory, and the Beatmasters' "Rok Da House" but the term "dance music" is applied to many forms of electronic music, both commercial and non-commercial.
Some of the most popular upbeat genres include house, techno, drum & bass, jungle, hardcore, electronica, industrial, breakbeat, trance, psychedelic trance, UK garage and electro. There are also much slower styles, such as downtempo, chillout and nu jazz.
Many subgenres of electronic dance music have evolved. Subgenres of house include acid house, electro house, hard house, funky house, deep house, tribal house, hip house, tech house and US garage. Subgenres of drum & bass include techstep, hardstep, jump-up, intelligent D&B/atmospheric D&B, liquid funk, sambass, drumfunk, neurofunk and ragga jungle. Subgenres of other styles include progressive breaks, booty bass, Goa trance, hard trance, hardstyle, minimal techno, gabber techno, breakcore, broken beat, trip hop, folktronica and glitch. Speed garage, breakstep, 2-step, bassline, grime, UK funky, future garage and the reggae-inspired dubstep are all subgenres of UK garage.
By decade[edit]
1900s–1910s[edit]
During the early 20th century, ballroom dancing gained popularity among the working class who attended public dance halls.
1920s[edit]
Main article: Jazz Age
Dance music became enormously popular during the 1920s. Nightclubs were frequented by large numbers of people at which a form of jazz, which was characterized by fancy orchestras with strings instruments and complex arrangements, became the standard music at clubs. A particularly popular dance was the fox-trot. At the time this music was simply called jazz, although today people refer to it as "white jazz" or big band.
1930s–1940s[edit]
Main article: Swing era
Genres: Swing music, Western swing
1950s[edit]
Genres: Rock and roll
In 1952, the television show American Bandstand switched to a format where teenagers dance along as records are played. American Bandstand continued to be shown until 1989.
1960s[edit]
In 1960, Chubby Checker released his song "The Twist" setting off a dance craze. The late 1960s saw the rise of soul and R&B music which used lavish orchestral arrangements.
Other genres: Funk
1970s[edit]
Genres: Disco, funk, R&B, hip hop
In 1970, the television show Soul Train premiered featuring famous soul artists who would play or lipsync their hits while the audience danced along. By the mid-1970s disco had become one of the main genres featured. In 1974, Billboard added a Disco Action chart of top hits to its other charts (see List of Billboard number one dance club play songs). Disco was characterized by the use of real orchestral instruments, such as strings, which had largely been abandoned during the 1950s because of rock music. In contrast to the 1920s, however, the use of live orchestras in night clubs was extremely rare due to its expense. Disc jockeys (commonly known as DJs) played recorded music at these new clubs. The disco craze reached its peaked in the late 1970s when the word disco became synonymous with "dance music" and nightclubs were referred to as discos.
1980s[edit]
Genres: New Wave, Italo disco, Euro disco, post-disco, synthpop, dance-pop, funk, contemporary R&B, hip hop, new jack swing, house, acid house, techno, freestyle, Miami bass, electro, Hi-NRG, Madchester, EBM, cosmic disco, Balearic beat, New beat
1990s[edit]
Genres: House, Italo dance, Italo house, Eurodance, Europop, progressive house, French house, techno, trance, alternative dance, new jack swing, contemporary R&B, dancehall, hip hop, G-funk, Miami bass, drum and bass, big beat, breakbeat, breakbeat hardcore, rave, hardcore, happy hardcore, speed garage, UK garage, soca, reggaeton, psytrance, Goa trance
2000s[edit]
Genres: Trance, electropop, dance-pop, snap, crunk, dancehall, reggaeton, dance-punk, nu-disco, electro house, minimal techno, dubstep, grime, bassline, UK funky, contemporary R&B, hip hop, drum and bass, progressive house, hardstyle, funky house
2010s[edit]
Genres: Electropop, synthpop, glitchpop, hip house, nu-disco, New Wave, new rave, trance, house, Hi-NRG, hard NRG, dance-pop, electroclash, electro-industrial, deep house, drum and bass, dubstep, techstep, liquid funk, electro house, glitch house, progressive house, breakbeat, hardstyle, dubstyle, drumstep, hip hop, ghetto house, Jersey club, trap, drill, moombahton, moombahcore, dancehall, chillwave, vaporwave, tropical house, UK garage, Europop
Radio formats[edit]
The Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart tracks the most popular tracks played by radio stations using a "dance music" format. A good example of a dance music radio station would be deephouselounge.com. Dance music is also part of the mix of related formats, such as rhythmic adult contemporary and rhythmic contemporary.
Dance clubs[edit]
The Hot Dance Club Play chart tracks which songs are currently most popular in nightclubs in the United States.
See also[edit]

List of electronic music genres
List of ballroom and social dance albums
Dance competition music

References[edit]



^ http://www.soundonsound.com/sos/oct09/articles/classictracks_1009.htm









v
t
e


Dance






Did you know?
Today's article
Today's biography
Today's picture





Participation



Solo
Partner
Group

Circle
Line
Round
Square







Social context



Ceremonial
Competitive
Concert
Erotic
Fad
Folk
Participation
Sacred
Social
Street
War





Major present-day genres



Acro
Ballet
Ballroom
Belly
Breaking
Contemporary
Country-western
Hip-hop
Jazz
Latin
Modern
Postmodern
Swing
Tap





Technique



Ballet technique
Choreography
Connection
Dance theory
Graham
Lead and follow
Pole dance
Moves (glossary)
Musicality
Pointe
Sequence dance
Spotting
Turnout
Turns





Regional traditions



Arab
Africa
Assyrian
Cambodia
China
Cuba
Denmark
Europe
Georgian
India
Indonesia
Israel
Ireland
Japan
Korea
Kurdish
Middle Eastern
Netherlands
Persian
Philippines
Poland
Romani
Russia
Thailand
Ukraine
United States

African-American


Venezuela





Related



Dance and disability
Dance and health
Dance costume
Dance etiquette
Dance notation
Dance in film
Dance in mythology and religion
Dance on television
Dance research
Dance science
Dance technology
Dancing mania
History of dance
List of dances
Outline of dance
Women in dance






 Portal









						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dance_music&oldid=817721853"					Categories: Dance musicHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with limited geographic scope from September 2009Western culture-centricArticles with multiple maintenance issues