For other people named David Hume, see David Hume (disambiguation).






This article's lead section may be too long for the length of the article. Please help by moving some material from it into the body of the article. Please read the layout guide and lead section guidelines to ensure the section will still be inclusive of all essential details. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (August 2017)





David Hume





Born
David Home
7 May NS [26 April OS] 1711
Edinburgh, Scotland


Died
25 August 1776(1776-08-25) (aged 65)
Edinburgh, Scotland


Nationality
Scottish


Alma mater
University of Edinburgh





Era
18th-century philosophy


Region
Western philosophy


School



Scottish Enlightenment




Naturalism
Skepticism
Empiricism
Sentimentalism
Liberalism






Main interests







Epistemology
Metaphysics






Ethics
Aesthetics



Philosophy of mind
Political philosophy
Philosophy of religion
Classical economics






Notable ideas




Problem of causation
Problem of induction
Constant conjunction
Bundle theory
Association of ideas
Is–ought problem
Hume's fork
Science of man
Moral sentiments







Influences





George Berkeley
Cicero
Thomas Hobbes
Francis Hutcheson
John Locke
Nicolas Malebranche[1]
Isaac Newton
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Adam Smith











Influenced





A. J. Ayer
Simon Blackburn
Gilles Deleuze
Jorge Luis Borges[2]
Daniel Dennett
Albert Einstein
Jerry Fodor
Alexander Hamilton
Edmund Husserl
Thomas Jefferson
William James
Immanuel Kant
J. L. Mackie
James Madison
John Stuart Mill
Karl Popper
Thomas Reid
Bertrand Russell
Arthur Schopenhauer
Adam Smith












David Hume (/hjuːm/; born David Home; 7 May 1711 NS (26 April 1711 OS) – 25 August 1776) was a Scottish philosopher, historian, economist, and essayist, who is best known today for his highly influential system of philosophical empiricism, skepticism, and naturalism.
Hume's empiricist approach to philosophy places him with John Locke, Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes as a British Empiricist.[3] Beginning with his A Treatise of Human Nature (1739), Hume strove to create a total naturalistic science of man that examined the psychological basis of human nature. Against philosophical rationalists, Hume held that passion rather than reason governs human behaviour and argued against the existence of innate ideas, positing that all human knowledge is ultimately founded solely in experience; Hume thus held that genuine knowledge must either be directly traceable to objects perceived in experience, or result from abstract reasoning about relations between ideas which are derived from experience, calling the rest "nothing but sophistry and illusion",[4] a dichotomy later given the name Hume's fork.
In what is sometimes referred to as Hume's problem of induction, he argued that inductive reasoning and belief in causality cannot ultimately be justified rationally; our trust in causality and induction instead results from custom and mental habit and are attributable to only the experience of "constant conjunction" rather than logic: for we can never, in experience, perceive that one event causes another, but only that the two are always conjoined, and to draw any inductive causal inferences from past experience first requires the presupposition that the future will be like the past, a presupposition which cannot be grounded in prior experience without already being presupposed.[5] Hume's anti-teleological opposition to the argument for God's existence from design is generally regarded as the most intellectually significant such attempt to rebut the teleological argument prior to Darwin.
Hume was also a sentimentalist who held that ethics are based on emotion or sentiment rather than abstract moral principle, famously proclaiming that "Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions". Some contemporary scholars view Hume's moral theory as a unique attempt to synthesise the modern sentimentalist moral tradition to which Hume belonged, with the virtue ethics tradition of ancient philosophy, with which Hume concurred in regarding traits of character, rather than acts or their consequences, as ultimately the proper objects of moral evaluation.[6] Hume's moral theory maintained an early commitment to naturalistic explanations of moral phenomena, and is usually taken to have first clearly expounded the is–ought problem, or the idea that a statement of fact alone can never give rise to a normative conclusion of what ought to be done.[6] Hume also influentially denied that humans have an actual conception of the self, positing that we experience only a bundle of sensations, and that the self is nothing more than this bundle of causally-connected perceptions. Hume's compatibilist theory of free will takes causal determinism as fully compatible with human freedom, and has proved extremely influential on subsequent moral philosophy.[7]
Hume has proved extremely influential on subsequent Western thought, especially on utilitarianism, logical positivism, William James, Immanuel Kant, the philosophy of science, early analytic philosophy, cognitive science, theology, and other movements and thinkers. Kant himself credited Hume as the spur to his philosophical thought who had awakened him from his "dogmatic slumbers". Contemporary philosophers have opined that "Hume, rivalled only by Darwin, has done the most to undermine in principle our confidence in arguments from design",[8] that "No man has influenced the history of philosophy to a deeper or more disturbing degree",[9] and that Hume's Treatise is "the founding document of Cognitive Science"[10] and one of the most important philosophical works written in English. Arthur Schopenhauer once declared that "there is more to be learned from each page of David Hume than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart and Schleiermacher taken together." Hume is thus widely regarded as a pivotal figure in the history of philosophical thought.



Contents


1 Biography

1.1 Early life and education
1.2 Career
1.3 Later years


2 Writings

2.1 Impressions and ideas
2.2 Induction and causation
2.3 The self
2.4 Practical reason
2.5 Ethics
2.6 Aesthetics
2.7 Free will, determinism, and responsibility
2.8 Writings on religion

2.8.1 Religious views
2.8.2 Design argument
2.8.3 Problem of miracles


2.9 As historian of England
2.10 Political theory
2.11 Contributions to economic thought


3 Influence
4 Family
5 Works
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 Further reading
11 External links



Biography[edit]
Early life and education[edit]
David Hume was the second of two sons born to Joseph Home of Ninewells, an advocate, and his wife The Hon. Katherine (née Falconer), daughter of Sir David Falconer.[11] He was born on 26 April 1711 (Old Style) in a tenement on the north side of the Lawnmarket in Edinburgh. Hume's father died when Hume was a child, just after his second birthday, and he was raised by his mother, who never remarried.[12] He changed the spelling of his name in 1734, because of the fact that his surname Home, pronounced Hume, was not known in England. Throughout his life Hume, who never married, spent time occasionally at his family home at Ninewells in Berwickshire, which had belonged to his family since the sixteenth century. His finances as a young man were very "slender". His family was not rich, and, as a younger son, he had little patrimony to live on. He was therefore forced to make a living somehow.[13]
Hume attended the University of Edinburgh at the unusually early age of twelve (possibly as young as ten) at a time when fourteen was normal. At first, because of his family, he considered a career in law, but came to have, in his words, "an insurmountable aversion to everything but the pursuits of Philosophy and general Learning; and while [my family] fanceyed I was poring over Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the Authors which I was secretly devouring".[13] He had little respect for the professors of his time, telling a friend in 1735 that "there is nothing to be learnt from a Professor, which is not to be met with in Books".[14] Hume did not graduate.[15]
Aged around 18, he made a philosophical discovery that opened up to him "a new Scene of Thought", which inspired him "to throw up every other Pleasure or Business to apply entirely to it".[16] He did not recount what this scene was, and commentators have offered a variety of speculations.[17] One popular interpretation, prominent in contemporary Hume scholarship, is that the new "scene of thought" was Hume's realization that Francis Hutcheson's "moral sense" theory of morality could be applied to the understanding as well. Due to this inspiration, Hume set out to spend a minimum of ten years reading and writing. He soon came to the verge of a mental breakdown, suffering from what a doctor diagnosed as the "Disease of the Learned". Hume wrote that it started with a coldness, which he attributed to a "Laziness of Temper", that lasted about nine months. Later, some scurvy spots broke out on his fingers. This was what persuaded Hume's physician to make his diagnosis. Hume wrote that he "went under a Course of Bitters and Anti-Hysteric Pills", taken along with a pint of claret every day. Hume also decided to have a more active life to better continue his learning.[18] His health improved somewhat, but, in 1731, he was afflicted with a ravenous appetite and palpitations of the heart. After eating well for a time, he went from being "tall, lean and raw-bon'd" to being "sturdy, robust [and] healthful-like".[19] Indeed, Hume would become well known in his time for his "corpulence", and his fondness for good port and cheese.
Career[edit]
At 25 years of age, Hume, although of noble ancestry, had no source of income and no learned profession. As was common at his time, he became a merchant's assistant, but he had to leave his native Scotland. He travelled via Bristol to La Flèche in Anjou, France. There he had frequent discourse with the Jesuits of the College of La Flèche.[20]
While Hume was derailed in his attempts to start a university career by protests over his "atheism" and bemoaned that his literary debut, A Treatise of Human Nature, 'fell dead-born from the press',[21] he nevertheless found literary success in his lifetime as an essayist, and a career as a librarian at the University of Edinburgh. His tenure there, and the access to research materials it provided, ultimately resulted in Hume's writing the massive six-volume The History of England, which became a bestseller and the standard history of England in its day. Hume described his "love for literary fame" as his "ruling passion"[22] and judged his two late works, the so-called "first" and "second" enquiries, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding and An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, respectively, as his greatest literary and philosophical achievements,[22] asking his contemporaries to judge him on the merits of the later texts alone, rather than the more radical formulations of his early, youthful work, dismissing his philosophical debut as juvenilia: "A work which the Author had projected before he left College."[23] Nevertheless, despite Hume's protestations, a general consensus exists today that Hume's strongest and most important arguments, and most philosophically distinctive doctrines, are found in the original form they take in the Treatise, begun when Hume was just 23 years old and now regarded as one of the most important works in the history of Western philosophy.[6]
He worked for four years on his first major work, A Treatise of Human Nature, subtitled "Being an Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects", completing it in 1738 at the age of 28. Although many scholars today consider the Treatise to be Hume's most important work and one of the most important books in Western philosophy, the critics in Great Britain at the time did not agree, describing it as "abstract and unintelligible".[24] As Hume had spent most of his savings during those four years,[18] he resolved "to make a very rigid frugality supply my deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every object as contemptible except the improvements of my talents in literature".[25] Despite the disappointment, Hume later wrote, "Being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I soon recovered from the blow and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the country."[25] There, in an attempt to make his larger work better known and more intelligible, he published the An Abstract of a Book lately Published as a summary of the main doctrines of the Treatise, without revealing its authorship.[26] Although there has been some academic speculation as to who actually wrote this pamphlet[27] it is generally regarded as Hume's creation.[28]
After the publication of Essays Moral and Political in 1741, which was included in the later edition called Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary, Hume applied for the Chair of Pneumatics and Moral Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh. However, the position was given to William Cleghorn[29] after Edinburgh ministers petitioned the town council not to appoint Hume because he was seen as an atheist.[30]




An engraving of Hume from the first volume of his The History of England, 1754


During the 1745 Jacobite rising, Hume tutored the Marquess of Annandale (1720–92), who was "judged to be a lunatic".[31] This engagement ended in disarray after about a year. However, it was then that Hume started his great historical work The History of England. This took him fifteen years and ran to over a million words. During this time he was also involved with the Canongate Theatre through his friend John Home, a preacher.[32]
In this context, he associated with Lord Monboddo and other Scottish Enlightenment luminaries in Edinburgh. From 1746, Hume served for three years as secretary to General James St Clair, who was envoy to the courts of Turin and Vienna. At that time Hume also wrote Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding, later published as An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Often called the First Enquiry, it proved little more successful than the Treatise, perhaps because of the publishing of his short autobiography, My Own Life, which "made friends difficult for the first Enquiry".[33] In 1749 he went to live with his brother in the countryside.
Hume's religious views were often suspect. It was necessary in the 1750s for his friends to avert a trial against him on the charge of heresy. However, he "would not have come and could not be forced to attend if he said he was not a member of the Established Church".[34] Hume failed to gain the chair of philosophy at the University of Glasgow for his religious views, too. He had published the Philosophical Essays by this time which were decidedly anti-religious. Even Adam Smith, his personal friend who had vacated the Glasgow philosophy chair, was against his appointment out of concern public opinion would be against it.[35]
Hume returned to Edinburgh in 1751. In the following year "the Faculty of Advocates chose me their Librarian, an office from which I received little or no emolument, but which gave me the command of a large library".[36] This resource enabled him to continue historical research for The History of England. Hume's volume of Political Discourses, written in 1749 and published by Kincaid & Donaldson in 1752,[37] was the only work he considered successful on first publication.[38]
Eventually, with the publication of his six volume The History of England between 1754 and 1762, Hume achieved the fame that he coveted.[39] The volumes traced events from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688, and was a bestseller in its day.
Hume was also a longtime friend of bookseller Andrew Millar, who sold Hume's History (after acquiring the rights from Scottish bookseller Gavin Hamilton[40]), although the relationship was sometimes complicated. Letters between them illuminate both men's interest in the success of the History.
Later years[edit]




David Hume's mausoleum by Robert Adam


From 1763 to 1765, Hume was invited to attend Lord Hertford in Paris, where he became secretary to the British embassy.[41] Hume was well received in Paris, and while there he met with Isaac de Pinto[42] In 1766, Hume left Paris to accompany Jean-Jacques Rousseau to England. Once in England, Hume and Rousseau fell out.[43] Hume was sufficiently worried about the damage to his reputation from the quarrel with Rousseau (who is generally believed to have suffered from paranoia) to have authored an account of the dispute, which he titled, appropriately enough "A concise and genuine account of the dispute between Mr. Hume and Mr. Rousseau."[44] In 1765, he served as British Chargé d'affaires, writing "despatches to the British Secretary of State".[45] He wrote of his Paris life, "I really wish often for the plain roughness of The Poker Club of Edinburgh ... to correct and qualify so much lusciousness".[46] In 1766, upon returning to Britain, Hume encouraged Lord Hertford to invest in a number of slave plantations, acquired by George Colebrooke and others in the Windward Islands.[47] In 1767, Hume was appointed Under Secretary of State for the Northern Department. Here he wrote that he was given "all the secrets of the Kingdom". In 1769 he returned to James' Court in Edinburgh, and then lived, from 1771 until his death in 1776, at the southwest corner of St. Andrew's Square in Edinburgh's New Town, at what is now 21 Saint David Street.[48] A popular story, consistent with some historical evidence, suggests the street may have been named after Hume.[49]
In the last year of his life, Hume wrote an extremely brief autobiographical essay titled "My Own Life"[50] which summed up his entire life in "fewer than 5 pages",[51] and notably contains many interesting judgments that have been of enduring interest to subsequent readers of Hume.[52][53] The scholar of 18th century literature Donald Seibert judged it a "remarkable autobiography, even though it may lack the usual attractions of that genre. Anyone hankering for startling revelations or amusing anecdotes had better look elsewhere."[52] Hume here confesses his belief that the"love of literary fame" had served as his "ruling passion" in life, and claims that this desire "never soured my temper, notwithstanding my frequent disappointments." One such disappointment Hume discusses in the mini-autobiography was his disappointment that with the initial literary reception of the Treatise, which he claims to have overcome by means of the success of the Essays: "the work was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment". Perhaps most notable is Hume's revelation of his own retrospective judgment that his philosophical debut's apparent failure "had proceeded more from the manner than the matter." Hume thus suggests that "I had been guilty of a very usual indiscretion, in going to the press too early." Hume provides an unambiguous self-assessment of the relative value of his works: "my Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals; which, in my own opinion (who ought not to judge on that subject) is of all my writings, historical, philosophical, or literary, incomparably the best." Hume also makes a number of self-assessments in the essay, writing of his social relations that "My company was not unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the studious and literary", noting of his complex relation to religion, as well as the state, that "though I wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and religious factions, they seemed to be disarmed in my behalf of their wonted fury", and professing of his character that "My friends never had occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of my character and conduct." Hume concludes the essay with the frank admission: " I cannot say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared and ascertained."[50]
Diarist and biographer James Boswell saw Hume a few weeks before his death, which was from some form of abdominal cancer. Hume told him he sincerely believed it a "most unreasonable fancy" that there might be life after death.[54] This meeting was dramatised in semi-fictional form for the BBC by Michael Ignatieff as Dialogue in the Dark.[55] Hume asked that his body be interred in a "simple Roman tomb". In his will he requests that it be inscribed only with his name and the year of his birth and death, "leaving it to Posterity to add the Rest".[56] It stands, as he wished it, on the southwestern slope of Calton Hill, in the Old Calton Cemetery. Adam Smith later recounted Hume's amusing speculation that he might ask Charon to allow him a few more years of life in order to see "the downfall of some of the prevailing systems of superstition." The ferryman replied, "You loitering rogue, that will not happen these many hundred years ... Get into the boat this instant".[57]
Writings[edit]
In the introduction to A Treatise of Human Nature, Hume wrote, "'Tis evident, that all the sciences have a relation, more or less, to human nature ... Even Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Natural Religion, are in some measure dependent on the science of Man." He also wrote that the science of man is the "only solid foundation for the other sciences" and that the method for this science requires both experience and observation as the foundations of a logical argument.[58] On this aspect of Hume's thought, philosophical historian Frederick Copleston wrote that it was Hume's aim to apply to the science of man the method of experimental philosophy (the term that was current at the time to imply Natural philosophy), and that "Hume's plan is to extend to philosophy in general the methodological limitations of Newtonian physics".[59]
Until recently, Hume was seen as a forerunner of logical positivism; a form of anti-metaphysical empiricism. According to the logical positivists, unless a statement could be verified by experience, or else was true or false by definition (i.e. either tautological or contradictory), then it was meaningless (this is a summary statement of their verification principle). Hume, on this view, was a proto-positivist, who, in his philosophical writings, attempted to demonstrate how ordinary propositions about objects, causal relations, the self, and so on, are semantically equivalent to propositions about one's experiences.[60][not in citation given]
Many commentators have since rejected this understanding of Humean empiricism, stressing an epistemological (rather than a semantic) reading of his project.[61] According to this opposing view, Hume's empiricism consisted in the idea that it is our knowledge, and not our ability to conceive, that is restricted to what can be experienced. Hume thought that we can form beliefs about that which extends beyond any possible experience, through the operation of faculties such as custom and the imagination, but he was sceptical about claims to knowledge on this basis.
Impressions and ideas[edit]
One of the most central doctrines of Hume's philosophy, stated in the very first lines of the Treatise, is his notion that the mind consists of its mental perceptions, or the mental objects which are present to it, and which divide into two categories: impressions and ideas. Hume's Treatise thus opens with the words: 'All the perceptions of the human mind resolve themselves into two distinct kinds, which I shall call IMPRESSIONS and IDEAS." Hume states that "I believe it will not be very necessary to employ many words in explaining this distinction" and commentators have generally taken Hume to mean the distinction between feeling and thinking.[62] Controversially, Hume may regard the difference as in some sense a matter of degree, as he takes "impressions" to be distinguished from ideas, on the basis of their force, liveliness, and vivacity, or what Henry Allison calls the "FLV criterion" in his book on Hume.[63] Ideas are therefore "faint" impressions. For example, experiencing the painful sensation of touching the handle of a hot pan is more forceful than simply thinking about touching a hot pan. According to Hume, impressions are meant to be the original form of all our ideas, and Don Garret has thus coined the term "the copy principle" to refer to Hume's doctrine that all ideas are ultimately all copied from some original impression, whether it be a passion or sensation, from which they derive.[63][64]
After establishing the forcefulness of impressions and ideas, these two categories are further broken down into simple and complex: simple impressions and ideas, and complex impressions and ideas. Hume states that “simple perceptions or impressions and ideas are such as admit of no distinction nor separation,” while “the complex are the contrary to these, and may be distinguished into parts.”[65] When looking at an apple, a person experiences a variety of color-sensations, which Hume sees as a complex impression. Similarly, a person experiences a variety of taste-sensations, tactile-sensations, and smell-sensations when biting into an apple, with the overall sensation again being a complex impression. Thinking about an apple allows a person to form complex ideas, which are made of similar parts as the complex impressions they were developed from, but which are also less forceful. Hume believes that complex perceptions can be broken down into smaller and smaller parts until perceptions are reached that have no parts of their own, and these perceptions are thereby referred to as being simple.
A person’s imagination, regardless of how boundless it may seem, is confined to the mind’s ability to recombine the information it has already acquired from the body’s sensory experience (the ideas that have been derived from impressions). In addition, “as our imagination takes our most basic ideas and leads us to form new ones, it is directed by three principles of association, namely, resemblance, contiguity, and cause and effect."[66] The principle of resemblance refers to the tendency of ideas to become associated if the objects they represent resemble one another. For example, a person looking at an illustration of a flower can conceive of an idea of the physical flower because the idea of the illustrated object is associated with the idea of the physical object. The principle of contiguity describes the tendency of ideas to become associated if the objects they represent are near to each other in time or space, such as when the thought of one crayon in a box leads a person to think of the crayon contiguous to it. Finally, the principle of cause and effect refers to the tendency of ideas to become associated if the objects they represent are causally related, which explains how remembering a broken window can make someone think of the baseball that caused the window to shatter.
Hume elaborates more on this last principle of cause and effect. When a person observes that one object or event consistently produces the same object or event, it results in “an expectation that a particular event (a ‘cause’) will be followed by another event (an ‘effect’) previously and constantly associated with it."[67] Hume calls this principle custom, or habit, saying that “custom…renders our experience useful to us, and makes us expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past."[68] However, even though custom can serve as a guide in life, it still only represents an expectation. In other words, “experience cannot establish a necessary connection between cause and effect, because we can imagine without contradiction a case where the cause does not produce its usual effect…the reason why we mistakenly infer that there is something in the cause that necessarily produces its effect is because our past experiences have habituated us to think in this way."[69] Continuing this idea, Hume argues that “only in the pure realm of ideas, logic, and mathematics, not contingent on the direct sense awareness of reality, [can] causation safely…be applied – all other sciences are reduced to probability."[70] He uses this skepticism to reject metaphysics and many theological views on the basis that they are not grounded in fact and observations, and are therefore beyond the reach of human understanding.
Induction and causation[edit]
The cornerstone of Hume's epistemology is the problem of induction. This may be the area of Hume's thought where his scepticism about human powers of reason is most pronounced.[71] The problem revolves around the plausibility of inductive reasoning, that is, reasoning from the observed behaviour of objects to their behaviour when unobserved. As Hume wrote, induction concerns how things behave when they go "beyond the present testimony of the senses, or the records of our memory".[72] Hume argues that we tend to believe that things behave in a regular manner, meaning that patterns in the behaviour of objects seem to persist into the future, and throughout the unobserved present.[73] Hume's argument is that we cannot rationally justify the claim that nature will continue to be uniform, as justification comes in only two varieties—demonstrative reasoning and probable reasoning[note 1]—and both of these are inadequate. With regard to demonstrative reasoning, Hume argues that the uniformity principle cannot be demonstrated, as it is "consistent and conceivable" that nature might stop being regular.[75] Turning to probable reasoning, Hume argues that we cannot hold that nature will continue to be uniform because it has been in the past. As this is using the very sort of reasoning (induction) that is under question, it would be circular reasoning.[76] Thus, no form of justification will rationally warrant our inductive inferences.
Hume's solution to this problem is to argue that, rather than reason, natural instinct explains the human practice of making inductive inferences. He asserts that "Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable  [sic] necessity has determin'd us to judge as well as to breathe and feel." Agreeing, philosopher John D. Kenyon writes: "Reason might manage to raise a doubt about the truth of a conclusion of natural inductive inference just for a moment ... but the sheer agreeableness of animal faith will protect us from excessive caution and sterile suspension of belief."[77] Commentators such as Charles Sanders Peirce have demurred from Hume's solution,[78] while, some, such as Kant and Karl Popper, saw that Hume's analysis "had posed a most fundamental challenge to all human knowledge claims."[79]
The notion of causation is closely linked to the problem of induction. According to Hume, we reason inductively by associating constantly conjoined events. It is the mental act of association that is the basis of our concept of causation. There are at least three interpretations of Hume's theory of causation represented in the literature: (1) the logical positivist; (2) the sceptical realist; and (3) the quasi-realist.[80]
David Hume acknowledged that there are events constantly unfolding, humanity cannot guarantee that these events are caused by events prior or if they are independent instances. Hume opposed the widely accepted theory of Causation that ‘all events have a specific course or reason.’ Therefore Hume crafted his own theory of causation, which he formed through his empiricist and skeptic beliefs. He split Causation, into two realms “All the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, Relations of Ideas, and Matters of Fact”.[81] Relations of Ideas are a priori, and represent universal bonds between ideas that mark the cornerstones of human thought. Matters of Fact are dependent on the observer and experience. They are often not universally held to be true among multiple persons. Hume was an Empiricist, meaning he believed “causes and effects are discoverable not by reason, but by experience”.[82] Hume later goes onto say that even with the perspective of the past, humanity cannot dictate future events because thoughts of the past are limited, compared to the possibilities for the future. Hume’s separation between Matters of Fact and Relations of Ideas is often referred to as “Hume’s Fork”.[83] Hume explains his theory of Causation and causal inference by division into three different parts. In these three branches he explains his ideas, in addition to comparing and contrasting his views to his predecessors. These branches are the Critical Phase, the Constructive Phase, and Belief.[84] In the Critical Phase, Hume denies his predecessors' theories of causation. Next, Hume uses the Constructive Phase to resolve any doubts the reader may have while observing the Critical Phase. “Habit or Custom” mend the gaps in reasoning that occur without the human mind even realizing it. Associating ideas has become second nature to the human mind. It “makes us expect for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past” [84] However, Hume says that this association cannot be trusted because the span of the human mind to comprehend the past is not necessarily applicable to the wide and distant future. This leads Hume to the third branch of causal inference, Belief. Belief is what drives the human mind to hold that expectancy of the future based on past experience. Throughout his explanation of causal inference, Hume is arguing that the future is not certain to be repetition of the past and the only way to justify induction is through uniformity.
The logical positivist interpretation is that Hume analyses causal propositions, such as "A caused B", in terms of regularities in perception: "A causes B" is equivalent to "Whenever A-type events happen, B-type ones follow", where "whenever" refers to all possible perceptions.[85] In his Treatise of Human Nature, Hume wrote:

power and necessity ... are ... qualities of perceptions, not of objects ... felt by the soul and not perceiv'd externally in bodies.[86]

This view is rejected by skeptical realists, who argue that Hume thought that causation amounts to more than just the regular succession of events.[61] Hume said that when two events are causally conjoined, a necessary connection underpins the conjunction:

Shall we rest contented with these two relations of contiguity and succession, as affording a complete idea of causation? By no means ... there is a necessary connexion to be taken into consideration.[87]

Philosopher Angela Coventry writes that, for Hume, "there is nothing in any particular instance of cause and effect involving external objects which suggests the idea of power or necessary connection" and that "we are ignorant of the powers that operate between objects".[88] However, while denying the possibility of knowing the powers between objects, Hume accepted the causal principle, writing, "I never asserted so absurd a proposition as that something could arise without a cause."[89]
It has been argued that, while Hume did not think causation is reducible to pure regularity, he was not a fully fledged realist either. Philosopher Simon Blackburn calls this a quasi-realist reading.[90] Blackburn writes that "Someone talking of cause is voicing a distinct mental set: he is by no means in the same state as someone merely describing regular sequences.[91] In Hume's words, "nothing is more usual than to apply to external bodies every internal sensation, which they occasion".[92]
The self[edit]




Statue of Hume by Alexander Stoddart on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh


Empiricist philosophers, such as Hume and Berkeley, favoured the bundle theory of personal identity.[93] In this theory, "the mind itself, far from being an independent power, is simply 'a bundle of perceptions' without unity or cohesive quality".[94] The self is nothing but a bundle of experiences linked by the relations of causation and resemblance; or, more accurately, that the empirically warranted idea of the self is just the idea of such a bundle. This view is forwarded by, for example, positivist interpreters, who saw Hume as suggesting that terms such as "self", "person", or "mind" referred to collections of "sense-contents".[95] A modern-day version of the bundle theory of the mind has been advanced by Derek Parfit in his Reasons and Persons.[96]
However, some philosophers have criticised Hume's bundle-theory interpretation of personal identity. They argue that distinct selves can have perceptions that stand in relations of similarity and causality with one another. Thus, perceptions must already come parcelled into distinct "bundles" before they can be associated according to the relations of similarity and causality. In other words, the mind must already possess a unity that cannot be generated, or constituted, by these relations alone. Since the bundle-theory interpretation portrays Hume as answering an ontological question, philosophers, like Galen Strawson, who see Hume as not very concerned with such questions have queried whether the view is really Hume's. Instead, it is suggested by Strawson that Hume might have been answering an epistemological question about the causal origin of our concept of the self.[97] In the Appendix to the Treatise, Hume declares himself dissatisfied with his earlier account of personal identity in Book 1. Philosopher Corliss Swain notes that "Commentators agree that if Hume did find some new problem" when he reviewed the section on personal identity, "he wasn't forthcoming about its nature in the Appendix."[98] One interpretation of Hume's view of the self has been argued for by philosopher and psychologist James Giles. According to his view, Hume is not arguing for a bundle theory, which is a form of reductionism, but rather for an eliminative view of the self. That is, rather than reducing the self to a bundle of perceptions, Hume is rejecting the idea of the self altogether. On this interpretation, Hume is proposing a "no-self theory" and thus has much in common with Buddhist thought.[99] On this point, psychologist Alison Gopnik has argued that Hume was in a position to learn about Buddhist thought during his time in France in the 1730s.[100]
Practical reason[edit]
An essential question of practical reason for Hume was whether or not standards or principles exist (and if they do, what they are) for practical reason, that are also authoritative for all rational beings, dictating people’s intentions and actions. Hume is mainly considered an anti-rationalist, denying the possibility for practical reason as a principle to exist, although other philosophers such as Christine Korsgaard, Jean Hampton, and Elijah Millgram claim that Hume is not so much of an anti-rationalist as he is just a skeptic of practical reason.[101]
Hume denied the existence of practical reason as a principle because he claimed reason does not have any effect on morality, since morality is capable of producing effects in people that reason alone cannot create. As Hume explains in A Treatise of Human Nature (1740): “Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason of itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.”[102]
Since practical reason is supposed to regulate our actions (in theory), Hume denied practical reason on the grounds that reason cannot directly oppose passions. As Hume puts it, “Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.” Reason is less significant than any passion because reason has no original influence, while "A passion is an original existence, or, if you will, modification of existence".[103]
Practical reason is also concerned with the value of actions rather than the truth of propositions,[104] so Hume believed that reason’s shortcoming of affecting morality proved that practical reason could not be authoritative for all rational beings, since morality was essential for dictating people’s intentions and actions.
Ethics[edit]
See also: is–ought problem
Hume's writings on ethics began in the Treatise and were refined in his An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751). His views on ethics are that "[m]oral decisions are grounded in moral sentiment." It is not knowing that governs ethical actions, but feelings.[105] Arguing that reason cannot be behind morality, he wrote:

Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.[106]

Hume's sentimentalism about morality was shared by his close friend Adam Smith,[107][not in citation given] and Hume and Smith were mutually influenced by the moral reflections of their older contemporary Francis Hutcheson.[108] Peter Singer claims that Hume's argument that morals cannot have a rational basis alone "would have been enough to earn him a place in the history of ethics".[109]
Hume also put forward the is–ought problem, later called Hume's Law,[109] denying the possibility of logically deriving what ought to be from what is. He wrote in the Treatise that in every system of morality he has read, the author begins with stating facts about the world, but then suddenly is always referring to what ought to be the case. Hume demands that a reason should be given for inferring what ought to be the case, from what is the case. This because it "seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others".[110]
Hume's theory of ethics has been influential in modern day meta-ethical theory,[111] helping to inspire emotivism,[112] and ethical expressivism and non-cognitivism,[113][not in citation given] as well as Allan Gibbard's general theory of moral judgment and judgments of rationality.[114]
Aesthetics[edit]
Hume's ideas about aesthetics and the theory of art are spread throughout his works, but are particularly connected with his ethical writings, and also the essays Of the Standard of Taste and Of Tragedy. His views are rooted in the work of Joseph Addison and Francis Hutcheson.[115] In the Treatise he wrote of the connection between beauty and deformity and vice and virtue,[116] and his later writings on this subject continue to draw parallels of beauty and deformity in art, with conduct and character.[117]
In Of the Standard of Taste, Hume argues that no rules can be drawn up about what is a tasteful object. However, a reliable critic of taste can be recognised as being objective, sensible and unprejudiced, and having extensive experience.[118] Of Tragedy addresses the question of why humans enjoy tragic drama. Hume was concerned with the way spectators find pleasure in the sorrow and anxiety depicted in a tragedy. He argued that this was because the spectator is aware that he is witnessing a dramatic performance. There is pleasure in realising that the terrible events that are being shown are actually fiction.[119] Furthermore, Hume laid down rules for educating people in taste and correct conduct, and his writings in this area have been very influential on English and Anglo-Saxon aesthetics.[120]
Free will, determinism, and responsibility[edit]
Hume, along with Thomas Hobbes, is cited as a classical compatibilist about the notions of freedom and determinism.[121] The thesis of compatibilism seeks to reconcile human freedom with the mechanist belief that human beings are part of a deterministic universe, whose happenings are governed by physical laws. Hume, to this end, was influenced greatly by the scientific revolution and by in particular Sir Isaac Newton.[122] Hume argued that the dispute about the compatibility of freedom and determinism has been continued over two thousand years by ambiguous terminology. He wrote: "From this circumstance alone, that a controversy has been long kept on foot ... we may presume that there is some ambiguity in the expression", and that different disputants use different meanings for the same terms.[123][124]
Hume defines the concept of necessity as "the uniformity, observable in the operations of nature; where similar objects are constantly conjoined together",[125] and liberty as "a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will".[126] He then argues that, according to these definitions, not only are the two compatible, but liberty requires necessity. For if our actions were not necessitated in the above sense, they would "have so little in connexion with motives, inclinations and circumstances, that one does not follow with a certain degree of uniformity from the other". But if our actions are not thus connected to the will, then our actions can never be free: they would be matters of "chance; which is universally allowed to have no existence".[127] Australian philosopher John Passmore writes that confusion has arisen because "necessity" has been taken to mean "necessary connexion". Once this has been abandoned, Hume argues that "liberty and necessity will be found not to be in conflict one with another".[124]
Moreover, Hume goes on to argue that in order to be held morally responsible, it is required that our behaviour be caused or necessitated, for, as he wrote:

Actions are, by their very nature, temporary and perishing; and where they proceed not from some cause in the character and disposition of the person who performed them, they can neither redound to his honour, if good; nor infamy, if evil.[128]

Hume describes the link between causality and our capacity to rationally make a decision from this an inference of the mind. Human beings assess a situation based upon certain predetermined events and from that form a choice. Hume believes that this choice is made spontaneously. Hume calls this form of decision making the liberty of spontaneity.[129]
Education writer Richard Wright considers that Hume's position rejects a famous moral puzzle attributed to French philosopher Jean Buridan. The Buridan's ass puzzle describes a donkey that is hungry. This donkey has on both sides of him separate bales of hay, which are of equal distances from him. The problem concerns which bale the donkey chooses. Buridan was said to believe that the donkey would die, because he has no autonomy. The donkey is incapable of forming a rational decision as there is no motive to choose one bale of hay over the other. However, human beings are different, because a human who is placed in a position where he is forced to choose one loaf of bread over another will make a decision to take one in lieu of the other. For Buridan, humans have the capacity of autonomy, and he recognises the choice that is ultimately made will be based on chance, as both loaves of bread are exactly the same. However, Wright says that Hume completely rejects this notion, arguing that a human will spontaneously act in such a situation because he is faced with impending death if he fails to do so. Such a decision is not made on the basis of chance, but rather on necessity and spontaneity, given the prior predetermined events leading up to the predicament.[122]
Hume's argument is supported by modern day compatibilists such as R. E. Hobart, a pseudonym of philosopher Dickinson S. Miller.[130] However, P. F. Strawson argued that the issue of whether we hold one another morally responsible does not ultimately depend on the truth or falsity of a metaphysical thesis such as determinism. This is because our so holding one another is a non-rational human sentiment that is not predicated on such theses.[131][132]
Writings on religion[edit]
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy states that Hume "wrote forcefully and incisively on almost every central question in the philosophy of religion." His "various writings concerning problems of religion are among the most important and influential contributions on this topic."[133] His writings in this field cover the philosophy, psychology, history, and anthropology of religious thought. All of these aspects were discussed in Hume's 1757 dissertation, The Natural History of Religion. Here he argued that the monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam all derive from earlier polytheistic religions. He also suggested that all religious belief "traces, in the end, to dread of the unknown."[134] Hume had also written on religious subjects in the first Enquiry, as well as later in the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.[135]
Religious views[edit]
Although he wrote a great deal about religion, Hume's personal views are unclear, and there has been much discussion concerning his religious position.[136] Contemporaries considered him to be an atheist, or at least un-Christian, and the Church of Scotland seriously considered bringing charges of infidelity against him.[137] The fact that contemporaries thought that he may have been an atheist is exemplified by a story Hume liked to tell:

The best theologian he ever met, he used to say, was the old Edinburgh fishwife who, having recognized him as Hume the atheist, refused to pull him out of the bog into which he had fallen until he declared he was a Christian and repeated the Lord's prayer.[138]

However, in works such as Of Superstition and Enthusiasm, Hume specifically seems to support the standard religious views of his time and place. This still meant that he could be very critical of the Catholic Church, dismissing it with the standard Protestant accusations of superstition and idolatry,[139][140] as well as dismissing as idolatry what his compatriots saw as uncivilised beliefs.[141] He also considered extreme Protestant sects, the members of which he called "enthusiasts", to be corrupters of religion.[142] By contrast, in his The Natural History of Religion, Hume presented arguments suggesting that polytheism had much to commend it over monotheism.[143]
Philosopher Paul Russell writes that it is likely that Hume was sceptical about religious belief, but not to the extent of complete atheism. He suggests that perhaps Hume's position is best characterised by the term "irreligion",[144] while philosopher David O'Connor argues that Hume's final position was "weakly deistic". For O'Connor, Hume's "position is deeply ironic. This is because, while inclining towards a weak form of deism, he seriously doubts that we can ever find a sufficiently favourable balance of evidence to justify accepting any religious position." He adds that Hume "did not believe in the God of standard theism ... but he did not rule out all concepts of deity", and that "ambiguity suited his purposes, and this creates difficulty in definitively pinning down his final position on religion".[145]
Design argument[edit]
One of the traditional topics of natural theology is that of the existence of God, and one of the a posteriori arguments for this is the argument from design or the teleological argument. The argument is that the existence of God can be proved by the design that is obvious in the complexity of the world. Encyclopædia Britannica states that this is "the most popular, because [it is] the most accessible of the theistic arguments ... which identifies evidences of design in nature, inferring from them a divine designer ... The fact that the universe as a whole is a coherent and efficiently functioning system likewise, in this view, indicates a divine intelligence behind it."[146][unreliable source?]
In An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Hume wrote that the design argument seems to depend upon our experience, and its proponents "always suppose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and unparalleled".[147] Philosopher Louise E. Loeb notes that Hume is saying that only experience and observation can be our guide to making inferences about the conjunction between events. However, according to Hume, "we observe neither God nor other universes, and hence no conjunction involving them. There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God, as unobserved causes."[148]
Hume also criticised the argument in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779). In this, he suggested that, even if the world is a more or less smoothly functioning system, this may only be a result of the "chance permutations of particles falling into a temporary or permanent self-sustaining order, which thus has the appearance of design."[146]
A century later, the idea of order without design was rendered more plausible by Charles Darwin's discovery that the adaptations of the forms of life are a result of the natural selection of inherited characteristics.[146] For philosopher James D. Madden, it is "Hume, rivaled only by Darwin, [who] has done the most to undermine in principle our confidence in arguments from design among all figures in the Western intellectual tradition."[149]
Finally, Hume discussed a version of the anthropic principle, which is the idea that theories of the universe are constrained by the need to allow for man's existence in it as an observer. Hume has his sceptical mouthpiece Philo suggest that there may have been many worlds, produced by an incompetent designer, whom he called a "stupid mechanic". In his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, Hume wrote:

Many worlds might have been botched and bungled throughout an eternity, ere this system was struck out: much labour lost: many fruitless trials made: and a slow, but continued improvement carried on during infinite ages in the art of world-making.[150]

American philosopher Daniel Dennett has suggested that this mechanical explanation of teleology, although "obviously ... an amusing philosophical fantasy", anticipated the notion of natural selection, the 'continued improvement' being like "any Darwinian selection algorithm."[151]
Problem of miracles[edit]
Main article: Of Miracles
In his discussion of miracles, Hume argues that we should not believe that miracles have occurred and that they do not therefore provide us with any reason to think that God exists.[152] In An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (Section 10), Hume defines a miracle as "a transgression of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent". Hume says that we believe an event that has frequently occurred is likely to occur again, but we also take into account those instances where the event did not occur. Hume wrote:

A wise man [...] considers which side is supported by the greater number of experiments [...] A hundred instances or experiments on one side, and fifty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of any event; though a hundred uniform experiments, with only one that is contradictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree of assurance. In all cases, we must balance the opposite experiments [...] and deduct the smaller number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the superior evidence.[153]

Hume discusses the testimony of those who report miracles. He wrote that testimony might be doubted even from some great authority in case the facts themselves are not credible. "[T]he evidence, resulting from the testimony, admits of a diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less unusual."[154]
Although Hume leaves open the possibility for miracles to occur and be reported, he offers various arguments against this ever having happened in history:[155] He points out that people often lie, and they have good reasons to lie about miracles occurring either because they believe they are doing so for the benefit of their religion or because of the fame that results. Furthermore, people by nature enjoy relating miracles they have heard without caring for their veracity and thus miracles are easily transmitted even where false. Also, Hume notes that miracles seem to occur mostly in "ignorant and barbarous nations"[156] and times, and the reason they do not occur in the civilised societies is such societies are not awed by what they know to be natural events. Finally, the miracles of each religion argue against all other religions and their miracles, and so even if a proportion of all reported miracles across the world fit Hume's requirement for belief, the miracles of each religion make the other less likely.[157]
Hume was extremely pleased with his argument against miracles in his Enquiry. He states "I flatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a like nature, which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check to all kinds of superstitious delusion, and consequently, will be useful as long as the world endures."[158] Thus, Hume's argument against miracles had a more abstract basis founded upon the scrutiny, not just primarily of miracles, but of all forms of belief systems. It is a common sense notion of veracity based upon epistemological evidence, and founded on a principle of rationality, proportionality and reasonability.[157]
The criterion for assessing a belief system for Hume is based on the balance of probability whether something is more likely than not to have occurred. Since the weight of empirical experience contradicts the notion for the existence of miracles, such accounts should be treated with scepticism. Further, the myriad of accounts of miracles contradict one another, as some people who receive miracles will aim to prove the authority of Jesus, whereas others will aim to prove the authority of Muhammad or some other religious prophet or deity. These various differing accounts weaken the overall evidential power of miracles.[159][not in citation given]
Despite all this, Hume observes that belief in miracles is popular, and that "The gazing populace [...] receive greedily, without examination, whatever soothes superstition, and promotes wonder."[160]
Critics have argued that Hume's position assumes the character of miracles and natural laws prior to any specific examination of miracle claims, thus it amounts to a subtle form of begging the question. To assume that testimony is a homogeneous reference group seems unwise- to compare private miracles with public miracles, unintellectual observers with intellectual observers and those who have little to gain and much to lose with those with much to gain and little to lose is not convincing to many. Indeed, many have argued that miracles not only do not contradict the laws of nature, but require the laws of nature to be intelligible as miraculous, and thus subverting the law of nature. For example, William Adams remarks that "there must be an ordinary course of nature before anything can be extraordinary. There must be a stream before anything can be interrupted".[161] They have also noted that it requires an appeal to inductive inference, as none have observed every part of nature nor examined every possible miracle claim, for instance those in the future. This, in Hume's philosophy, was especially problematic.[162]
Little appreciated is the voluminous literature either foreshadowing Hume, in the likes of Thomas Sherlock[163] or directly responding to and engaging with Hume- from William Paley,[164] William Adams,[165] John Douglas,[166] John Leland [167] and George Campbell,[168] among others. Of Campbell, it is rumoured that, having read Campbell's Dissertation, Hume remarked that "the Scotch theologue had beaten him".[169]
Hume's main argument concerning miracles is that miracles by definition are singular events that differ from the established laws of nature. Such natural laws are codified as a result of past experiences. Therefore, a miracle is a violation of all prior experience and thus incapable on this basis of reasonable belief. However, the probability that something has occurred in contradiction of all past experience should always be judged to be less than the probability that either ones senses have deceived one, or the person recounting the miraculous occurrence is lying or mistaken. Hume would say, all of which he had past experience of. For Hume, this refusal to grant credence does not guarantee correctness. He offers the example of an Indian Prince, who, having grown up in a hot country, refuses to believe that water has frozen. By Hume's lights, this refusal is not wrong and the Prince "reasoned justly"; it is presumably only when he has had extensive experience of the freezing of water that he has warrant to believe that the event could occur.[154]
So for Hume, either the miraculous event will become a recurrent event or else it will never be rational to believe it occurred. The connection to religious belief is left unexplained throughout, except for the close of his discussion where Hume notes the reliance of Christianity upon testimony of miraculous occurrences. He makes an ironic remark that anyone who "is moved by faith to assent" to revealed testimony "is conscious of a continued miracle in his own person, which subverts all principles of his understanding, and gives him a determination to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience."[170][171] Hume writes that "All the testimony which ever was really given for any miracle, or ever will be given, is a subject of derision."[154]
As historian of England[edit]




David Hume by Allan Ramsay, 1766


From 1754 to 1762 Hume published The History of England, a 6-volume work, which extends, says its subtitle, "From the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution in 1688". Inspired by Voltaire's sense of the breadth of history, Hume widened the focus of the field away from merely kings, parliaments, and armies, to literature and science as well. He argued that the quest for liberty was the highest standard for judging the past, and concluded that after considerable fluctuation, England at the time of his writing had achieved "the most entire system of liberty that was ever known amongst mankind".[172] It "must be regarded as an event of cultural importance. In its own day, moreover, it was an innovation, soaring high above its very few predecessors."[173]
Hume's coverage of the political upheavals of the 17th century relied in large part on the Earl of Clarendon's History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England (1646–69). Generally, Hume took a moderate royalist position and considered revolution unnecessary to achieve necessary reform. Hume was considered a Tory historian, and emphasised religious differences more than constitutional issues. Laird Okie explains that "Hume preached the virtues of political moderation, but ... it was moderation with an anti-Whig, pro-royalist coloring."[174] For "Hume shared the ... Tory belief that the Stuarts were no more high-handed than their Tudor predecessors".[175] "Even though Hume wrote with an anti-Whig animus, it is, paradoxically, correct to regard the History as an establishment work, one which implicitly endorsed the ruling oligarchy".[176] Historians have debated whether Hume posited a universal unchanging human nature, or allowed for evolution and development.[177]
Robert Roth argues that Hume's histories display his biases against Presbyterians and Puritans. Roth says his anti-Whig pro-monarchy position diminished the influence of his work, and that his emphasis on politics and religion led to a neglect of social and economic history.[178]
Hume was an early cultural historian of science. His short biographies of leading scientists explored the process of scientific change. He developed new ways of seeing scientists in the context of their times by looking at how they interacted with society and each other. He covers over forty scientists, with special attention paid to Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and Isaac Newton. Hume particularly praised William Harvey, writing about his treatise of the circulation of the blood: "Harvey is entitled to the glory of having made, by reasoning alone, without any mixture of accident, a capital discovery in one of the most important branches of science".[179]
The History became a best-seller and made Hume a wealthy man who no longer had to take up salaried work for others.[180] It was influential for nearly a century, despite competition from imitations by Smollett (1757), Goldsmith (1771) and others. By 1894, there were at least 50 editions as well as abridgements for students, and illustrated pocket editions, probably produced specifically for women.[181]
Political theory[edit]


Part of a series on


Utilitarianism




Predecessors



Epicurus
David Hume
Claude Adrien Helvétius
William Godwin
Francis Hutcheson
William Paley









Key proponents



Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Henry Sidgwick
Richard Mervyn Hare
Peter Singer









Types of utilitarianism



Negative
Rule
Act
Two-level
Total
Average
Prior existence
Preference
Classical









Key concepts



Pain
Suffering
Pleasure
Utility
Happiness
Eudaimonia
Consequentialism
Felicific calculus









Problems



Mere addition paradox
Paradox of hedonism
Utility monster









Related topics



Rational choice theory
Game theory
Social choice
Neoclassical economics







Politics portal





v
t
e





It is difficult to categorise Hume's political affiliations. His writings contain elements that are, in modern terms, both conservative and liberal,[182] although these terms are anachronistic. Thomas Jefferson banned the History from University of Virginia, feeling that it had "spread universal toryism over the land".[183] By comparison, Samuel Johnson thought Hume "a Tory by chance ... for he has no principle. If he is anything, he is a Hobbist", a follower of Thomas Hobbes.[184] A major concern of Hume's political philosophy is the importance of the rule of law. He also stresses throughout his political essays the importance of moderation in politics: public spirit and regard to the community.[185]
This outlook needs to be seen within the historical context of eighteenth century Scotland. Here, the legacy of religious civil war, combined with the relatively recent memory of the 1715 and 1745 Jacobite risings, fostered in a historian such as Hume a distaste for enthusiasm and factionalism. These appeared to threaten the fragile and nascent political and social stability of a country that was deeply politically and religiously divided.[186][not in citation given] Hume thought that society is best governed by a general and impartial system of laws; he is less concerned about the form of government that administers these laws, so long as it does so fairly. However, he does write that a republic must produce laws, while "monarchy, when absolute, contains even something repugnant to law."[187]
Hume expressed suspicion of attempts to reform society in ways that departed from long-established custom, and he counselled peoples not to resist their governments except in cases of the most egregious tyranny.[188] However, he resisted aligning himself with either of Britain's two political parties, the Whigs and the Tories. Hume wrote:

My views of things are more conformable to Whig principles; my representations of persons to Tory prejudices.[189]

Canadian philosopher Neil McArthur writes that Hume believed that we should try to balance our demands for liberty with the need for strong authority, without sacrificing either. McArthur characterises Hume as a "precautionary conservative",[190] whose actions would have been "determined by prudential concerns about the consequences of change, which often demand we ignore our own principles about what is ideal or even legitimate."[191][not in citation given] Hume supported the liberty of the press, and was sympathetic to democracy, when suitably constrained. American historian Douglass Adair has argued that Hume was a major inspiration for James Madison's writings, and the essay "Federalist No. 10" in particular.[192]
Hume offered his view on the best type of society in an essay titled "Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth", which lays out what he thought was the best form of government. He hoped that, "in some future age, an opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice, either by a dissolution of some old government, or by the combination of men to form a new one, in some distant part of the world". He defended a strict separation of powers, decentralisation, extending the franchise to anyone who held property of value and limiting the power of the clergy. The system of the Swiss militia was proposed as the best form of protection. Elections were to take place on an annual basis and representatives were to be unpaid.[193] Political philosophers Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, writing of Hume's thoughts about "the wise statesman", note that he "will bear a reverence to what carries the marks of age". Also, if he wishes to improve a constitution, his innovations will take account of the "ancient fabric", in order not to disturb society.[194]
In the political analysis of philosopher George Sabine, the scepticism of Hume extended to the doctrine of government by consent. He notes that "allegiance is a habit enforced by education and consequently as much a part of human nature as any other motive."[195]
In the 1770's, Hume was critical of British policies toward the American colonies and advocated for American independence. He wrote in 1771 that "our union with America... in the nature of things, cannot long subsist".[43]
Contributions to economic thought[edit]




Statues of David Hume and Adam Smith by David Watson Stevenson on the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Edinburgh


Hume noted his views as economist in his Political Discourses, which were incorporated in Essays and Treatises as Part II of Essays, Moral and Political.[196] To what extent he was influenced by Adam Smith is difficult to stress, however both of them had similar principles supported from historical events.[197] At the same time Hume did not demonstrate concrete system of economic theory which could be observed in Smith's Wealth of Nations. However, he introduced several new ideas around which the “classical economics” of the 18th century was built.[198]Through his discussions on politics, Hume developed many ideas that are prevalent in the field of economics. This includes ideas on private property, inflation, and foreign trade.[199] Referring to his essay "Of the Balance of Trade", economist Paul Krugman has remarked that "David Hume created what I consider the first true economic model."[200]
In contrast to Locke, Hume believes that private property is not a natural right. Hume argues it is justified, because resources are limited. Private property would be an unjustified, "idle ceremonial", if all goods were unlimited and available freely.[201] Hume also believed in an unequal distribution of property, because perfect equality would destroy the ideas of thrift and industry. Perfect equality would thus lead to impoverishment.[202][203]
Influence[edit]
Due to Hume's vast influence on contemporary philosophy, a large number of approaches in contemporary philosophy and cognitive science are today called "Humean."[204]
Attention to Hume's philosophical works grew after the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, in his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783), credited Hume with awakening him from his "dogmatic slumber".[205]
According to Schopenhauer, "there is more to be learned from each page of David Hume than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart and Schleiermacher taken together."[206]
A. J. Ayer, while introducing his classic exposition of logical positivism in 1936, claimed: "The views which are put forward in this treatise derive from ... doctrines ... which are themselves the logical outcome of the empiricism of Berkeley and David Hume."[207] Albert Einstein, in 1915, wrote that he was inspired by Hume's positivism when formulating his theory of special relativity.[208]
Hume's problem of induction was also of fundamental importance to the philosophy of Karl Popper. In his autobiography, Unended Quest, he wrote: "Knowledge ... is objective; and it is hypothetical or conjectural. This way of looking at the problem made it possible for me to reformulate Hume's problem of induction". This insight resulted in Popper's major work The Logic of Scientific Discovery.[209] Also, in his Conjectures and Refutations, he wrote:

I approached the problem of induction through Hume. Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that induction cannot be logically justified.[210]

The writings of Scottish philosopher and contemporary of Hume, Thomas Reid, were often criticisms of Hume's scepticism. Reid formulated his common sense philosophy in part as a reaction against Hume's views.[211]
Hume influenced and was influenced by the Christian philosopher Joseph Butler. Hume was impressed by Butler's way of thinking about religion, and Butler may well have been influenced by Hume's writings.[212][213]
Hume's rationalism in religious subjects influenced, via German-Scottish theologian Johann Joachim Spalding, the German neology school and rational theology, and contributed to the transformation of German theology in the age of enlightenment.[214][215] Hume pioneered a comparative history of religion,[216][217] tried to explain various rites and traditions as being based on deception[218][219] and challenged various aspects of rational and natural theology, such as the argument from design.[216]
Danish theologian and philosopher Søren Kierkegaard adopted "Hume's suggestion that the role of reason is not to make us wise but to reveal our ignorance." However, Kierkegaard took this as a reason for the necessity of religious faith, or fideism. The "fact that Christianity is contrary to reason ... is the necessary precondition for true faith." Political theorist Isaiah Berlin, for example, has pointed out the similarities between the arguments of Hume and Kierkegaard against rational theology.[220] Berlin also writes about Hume's influence on what Berlin calls the counter-enlightenment, and German anti-rationalism.[221]
According to philosopher Jerry Fodor, Hume's Treatise is "the founding document of cognitive science".[222]
Hume engaged with contemporary intellectual luminaries such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, James Boswell, and Adam Smith (who acknowledged Hume's influence on his economics and political philosophy).
Isaiah Berlin once said of Hume that "No man has influenced the history of philosophy to a deeper or more disturbing degree."[223]
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy writes that Hume is "[g]enerally regarded as one of the most important philosophers to write in English."[224]
Family[edit]
His nephew and namesake, David Hume of Ninewells (1757–1838) was a co-founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783. He was a Professor of Scots Law at Edinburgh University and rose to be Principal Clerk Of Session in the scottish High court and Baron of the Exchequer. He is buried with his uncle in Old Calton Cemetery.[225]
Works[edit]

A Kind of History of My Life (1734) Mss 23159 National Library of Scotland.[226] A letter to an unnamed physician, asking for advice about "the Disease of the Learned" that then afflicted him. Here he reports that at the age of eighteen "there seem'd to be open'd up to me a new Scene of Thought" that made him "throw up every other Pleasure or Business" and turned him to scholarship.[227]
A Treatise of Human Nature: Being an Attempt to introduce the experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects (1739–40). Hume intended to see whether the Treatise of Human Nature met with success, and if so to complete it with books devoted to Politics and Criticism. However, it did not meet with success. As Hume himself said, "It fell dead-born from the press, without reaching such distinction as even to excite a murmur among the zealots"[25] and so was not completed.
An Abstract of a Book lately Published: Entitled A Treatise of Human Nature etc. (1740) Anonymously published, but almost certainly written by Hume[228] in an attempt to popularise his Treatise. Of considerable philosophical interest, because it spells out what he considered "The Chief Argument" of the Treatise, in a way that seems to anticipate the structure of the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding.
Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary (first ed. 1741–2) A collection of pieces written and published over many years, though most were collected together in 1753–4. Many of the essays are focused on topics in politics and economics, though they also range over questions of aesthetic judgement, love, marriage and polygamy, and the demographics of ancient Greece and Rome, to name just a few of the topics considered. The Essays show some influence from Addison's Tatler and The Spectator, which Hume read avidly in his youth.
A Letter from a Gentleman to His Friend in Edinburgh: Containing Some Observations on a Specimen of the Principles concerning Religion and Morality, said to be maintain'd in a Book lately publish'd, intituled A Treatise of Human Nature etc. Edinburgh (1745). Contains a letter written by Hume to defend himself against charges of atheism and scepticism, while applying for a chair at Edinburgh University.
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748) Contains reworking of the main points of the Treatise, Book 1, with the addition of material on free will (adapted from Book 2), miracles, the Design Argument, and mitigated scepticism. Of Miracles, section X of the Enquiry, was often published separately.
An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751) A reworking of material from Book 3 of the Treatise, on morality, but with a significantly different emphasis. It "was thought by Hume to be the best of his writings".[229]
Political Discourses, (part II of Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary within vol. 1 of the larger Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects) Edinburgh (1752). Included in Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects (1753–56) reprinted 1758–77.
Political Discourses/Discours politiques (1752–1758), My Own life (1776), Of Essay writing, 1742. Bilingual English-French (translated by Fabien Grandjean). Mauvezin, France: Trans-Europ-Repress, 1993, 22 cm, V-260 p. Bibliographic notes, index.
Four Dissertations London (1757). Included in reprints of Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects (above).
The History of England (Sometimes referred to as The History of Great Britain) (1754–62) More a category of books than a single work, Hume's history spanned "from the invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688" and went through over 100 editions. Many considered it the standard history of England in its day.
The Natural History of Religion. Included in "Four Dissertations" (1757)
"Sister Peg" (1760) Hume claimed to have authored an anonymous political pamphlet satirizing the failure of the British Parliament to create a Scottish militia in 1760. Although the authorship of the work is disputed, Hume wrote Dr. Alexander Carlyle in early 1761 claiming authorship. The readership of the time attributed the work to Adam Ferguson, a friend and associate of Hume's who has been sometimes called "the founder of modern sociology." Some contemporary scholars concur in the judgment that Ferguson, not Hume, was the author of this work.
"My Own Life" (1776) Penned in April, shortly before his death, this autobiography was intended for inclusion in a new edition of Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects. It was first published by Adam Smith who claimed that by doing so he had incurred "ten times more abuse than the very violent attack I had made upon the whole commercial system of Great Britain."[230]
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (1779) Published posthumously by his nephew, David Hume the Younger. Being a discussion among three fictional characters concerning the nature of God, and is an important portrayal of the argument from design. Despite some controversy, most scholars agree that the view of Philo, the most sceptical of the three, comes closest to Hume's own.

See also[edit]


Philosophy portal




Age of reason
Contributions to liberal theory
George Anderson
Human science
Hume Studies
Hume's principle
Mencius
Scientific scepticism
The Missing Shade of Blue


Notes[edit]



^ These are Hume's terms. In modern parlance, demonstration may be termed deductive reasoning, while probability may be termed inductive reasoning.[74]



References[edit]


^ Fisher 2011, p. 527–528.
^ Martin Orejana 1991, p. ?.
^ Atherton 1999, p. ?.
^ Hume 1777, p. 166.
^ "Berlin, I.; Hardy, H.,: The Roots of Romanticism (Second edition) (eBook and Paperback)". princeton.edu. 
^ a b c "Hume". google.com.au. 
^ "Hume on Free Will". stanford.edu. 
^ Sennett, James F.; Groothuis, Douglas (2005-10-04). In Defense of Natural Theology: A Post-Humean Assessment. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 9780830827671. 
^ Isaiah Berlin
^ Jerry Fodor
^ http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/humelife.html
^ "David Hume Biography". humesociety.org. 
^ a b Hume 1778, p. 3.
^ Mossner 1958, pp. 30–33, quoted in Wright (2009, p. 10)
^ Harris 2004, p. 35.
^ Hume 1993, p. 346.
^ Johnson 1995, pp. 8–9.
^ a b Mossner 1950, p. 193.
^ Hume 2011, pp. 13–15.
^ Huxley 2011, pp. 7–8.
^ "Texts - My Own Life (1777)". davidhume.org. 
^ a b "Texts - My Own Life (1777)". davidhume.org. 
^ "Texts - Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects, vol. 2 (1777)". davidhume.org. 
^ Mossner 1950, p. 195.
^ a b c Hume 1993, p. 352.
^ Hume 1740.
^ Norton 1993, p. 31.
^ Redman 1997, p. 175, footnote 19.
^ Nobbs 1965, p. 575.
^ "Hume, David: Religion | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". Iep.utm.edu. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ Mossner 1950, p. 172.
^ Fieser 2005, p. xxii.
^ Buckle 1999, p. ?.
^ Emerson 2009, p. 244.
^ Rivers 2000, p. 255.
^ Hume 1778, p. 11.
^ Sher 2008, p. 312.
^ Hume 1778, p. 10.
^ Emerson 2009, p. 98.
^ "The manuscripts, Letter from David Hume to Andrew Millar, 12 April, 1755". www.millar-project.ed.ac.uk. Retrieved 2016-06-01. 
^ Klibansky, Raymond and Mossner, Ernest C. (eds.) (1954). New Letters of David Hume. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.77-79.
^ POPKIN, R. H. (1970). Hume and Isaac de Pinto. Texas Studies in Literature and Language, 12(3), 417–430. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/40754109
^ a b "An Enlightened Friendship", Ruth Scurr, Wall Street Journal, November 4, 2017
^ "A concise and genuine account of the dispute between Mr. Hume and Mr. Rousseau : with the letters that passed between them during their controversy. As also, the letters of the Hon. Mr. Walpole, and Mr. D'Alembert, relative to this extraordinary affair". Internet Archive. 
^ Fieser 2003, p. 59.
^ Mossner 1980, p. 285.
^ Waldmann, Felix (ed.) (2014). Further Letters of David Hume. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Bibliographical Society, 2014, p.65-69; http://www.the-tls.co.uk/articles/private/all-his-remedies/ (paywall)
^ Burton 1846, p. 384–385.
^ Burton 1846, p. 436, footnote 1.
^ a b "David Hume, "My Own Life"". rutgers.edu. 
^ http://www.oliveschreinerletters.ed.ac.uk/StanleyHumePersona.pdf
^ a b http://scholarcommons.sc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1130&context=ssl
^ "Hume's biography and Hume's philosophy". Australasian Journal of Philosophy. 77: 1–25. doi:10.1080/00048409912348781. 
^ Boswell 1970, p. ?.
^ Bassett 2012, p. 272.
^ Mossner 1980, p. 591.
^ Hume 1789, p. xxi.
^ Hume 1739, p. 7.
^ Copleston 1999, pp. 405–406.
^ Ayer 1946, p. 40.
^ a b See e.g. Craig (1987, Ch. 2), Strawson (2014, p. ?), and Wright (1983, p. ?)
^ "Cognition and Commitment in Hume's Philosophy". oup.com. 
^ a b "Custom and Reason in Hume". oup.com. 
^ "Hume". routledge.com. 30 October 2014. 
^ Hume, D. (1896). A Treatise of Human Nature (L. A. Selby-Bigge, Ed.). Wotton-under-Edge: Oxford: Clarendon Press. Retrieved May 4, 2017, from Center for Security Studies.
^ Fieser, J. (2011, July 1). David Hume (1711-1776). In Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved March 8, 2017, from http://www.iep.utm.edu/hume/
^ Norton, D. F. (1999). Hume, David. In R. Audi (Ed.), Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (2nd ed., pp. 398-403). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?p=GVRL&sw=w&u=redm07619&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CCX3450000731&asid=b3a09aea0910e7754a03ceb17f2db610
^ Hume, D. (1990). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. New York, NY: Anchor/Doubleday.
^ Drefcinski, S. (n.d.). A Very Brief Summary of David Hume. Retrieved March 8, 2017, from http://people.uwplatt.edu/~drefcins/humeencyclopediaentry.html
^ An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. (2010). Masterplots, Fourth Edition, 1-3.
^ Kenyon & Craig 1985, p. ?.
^ Hume 1777, p. 26.
^ Atherton 1999, pp. 202–203.
^ Millican 1996, p. ?.
^ Hume 1777, p. 111.
^ Hume 1777, p. 115.
^ Kenyon & Craig 1985, p. 254.
^ Harris 2004, p. 42.
^ Popkin 2014.
^ Read & Richman 2002, pp. 13–14 and 69.
^ . Relatio"Davidhume.org." Texts - An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748, 1777).. Web. 19 Mar. 2017.
^ ."Davidhume.org." Texts - An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748, 1777).. Web. 19 Mar. 2017.
^ Morris, William Edward and Brown, Charlotte R., "David Hume", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)
^ a b "Davidhume.org." Texts - An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748, 1777).. Web. 19 Mar. 2017.
^ For this account of Hume's views on causation cf. Ayer (1946, pp. 40–42)
^ Hume 1739, p. 167.
^ Hume 1739, p. 78, original emphasis
^ Coventry 2006, pp. 91–92.
^ Hume 2011, p. 187.
^ Blackburn 1990, p. ?.
^ Quoted by Dauer (2010, p. 97)
^ Hume 1777, p. 78, fn 17.
^ Dicker 2002, p. 15.
^ Maurer 2013.
^ Ayer 1946, pp. 135–136.
^ Parfit 1984, p. ?.
^ Strawson 2011, p. ?.
^ Swain 2008, p. 142.
^ Giles 1993, p. ?.
^ Gopnik 2009, p. ?.
^ Mason, Michelle (September 2005). "Hume and Humeans on Practical Reason" (PDF). 31 (2). Hume Studies. Retrieved 2016-05-27. 
^ Hume, David (1740). A Treatise of Human Nature (1978 ed.). Oxford: Clarendon P. p. 457. 
^ Hume, David (1740). A Treatise of Human Nature (1978 ed.). Oxford: Clarendon P. p. 415. 
^ Wallace, Jay (2014). "Practical Reason". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 29 April 2016. 
^ Cranston 2014, p. 4.
^ Hume 1739, p. 458.
^ Hume 2013, p. 548.
^ Taylor 1965, p. ?.
^ a b Singer 2015.
^ Hume 1739, p. 470.
^ Edwards 2002, p. 44.
^ Humber 2008, p. 136.
^ Brown 2005, pp. 97–100.
^ Angier 2012, p. 114.
^ Gracyk 2011, ch. 1.
^ Hume 1739, Sect. VII and Sect VIII, pp. 295–304.
^ Costelloe 2013, p. viii.
^ Harris 2013, p. 401.
^ Schmidt 2010, pp. 325–326.
^ Scruton 2014, p. 18.
^ McKenna & Coates 2015, Ch. 3.
^ a b Wright 2010, p. ?.
^ Hume 1777, p. 81.
^ a b Passmore 2013, p. 73.
^ Hume 1777, p. 82.
^ Hume 1777, p. 95.
^ Hume 1777, p. 96.
^ Hume 1777, p. 98, original emphasis
^ Mounce & Mounce 2002, p. 66.
^ See e.g. Hobart (1934, p. ?) and Carroll & Markosian (2010, p. 54, note 11)
^ Strawson 2008, p. ?.
^ Prasad 1995, p. 348.
^ Russell 2014, Hume on Religion.
^ O'Connor 2013, pp. 7–8.
^ Russell 2014, Ch. 1.
^ E.g in Russell (2010), O'Connor (2013), and Norton (1993)
^ Mossner 1980, p. 206.
^ Scharfstein 1998, p. 454, footnote.
^ Hume 1777, p. 51.
^ Hume 1741, p. 70.
^ Hume 1757, p. 34.
^ Hume 1741, pp. 73–76.
^ Hume 1757, p. 63.
^ Russell 2010, pp. 202, 204–205, and 284.
^ O'Connor 2013, pp.11, 19.
^ a b c RE
^ Hume 1777, p. 148.
^ Loeb 2010, p. 118.
^ Madden 2005, p. 150, emphasis removed..
^ Hume 1779, p. 167.
^ Dennett 2009, pp. 620–621.
^ Bailey & O'Brien 2006, p. 101.
^ Hume 1777, pp. 110–111.
^ a b c Hume 1777, p. 113.
^ Hume 1777, pp. 116–131, Part II of Section X
^ Hume 1777, p. 119.
^ a b Bailey & O'Brien 2006, pp. 105–108.
^ Hume 1777, p. 110.
^ Ahluwalia 2008, pp.104–106.
^ Hume 1777, p. 126.
^ "An essay in answer to Mr. Hume's Essay on miracles". Archive.org. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ Levine 1989, p. 3.
^ "The Trial of the Witnesses of the Resurrection of Jesus - Google Books". Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "Paley's Evidences of Christianity: With Notes and Additions - William Paley, Charles Murray Nairne - Google Books". Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "An essay in answer to Mr. Hume's Essay on miracles : Adams, William, 1706-1789 : Free Download & Streaming : Internet Archive". Archive.org. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "The criterion: or, Miracles examined with a view to expose the pretensions ... - John Douglas, John Douglas (bp. of Salisbury.) - Google Books". Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "A view of the principal deistical writers that have appeared in England in ... - John Leland, William Laurence Brown - Google Books". Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "A Dissertation on Miracles: Containing an Examination of the Principles ... - George Campbell - Google Books". Books.google.co.uk. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ George Campbell. "Campbell, George « Library of Historical Apologetics". Historicalapologetics.org. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ Hume 1777, p. 131, emphasis removed
^ MacKie 1982, p. 29.
^ Hume's History of England, vol, 6, p. 531 cited in Kenyon (1984, p. 42)
^ Jessop 2015.
^ Okie 1985, p. 16.
^ Okie 1985, p. 25.
^ Okie 1985, p. 27.
^ Wertz 1975, p. ?.
^ Roth 1991, p. ?.
^ Wertz 1993, p. ?.
^ Morris & Brown 2011, Chapter Life and Works.
^ Phillipson 2012, p. 131.
^ Dees 2010, p. 403.
^ so quoted in Livingston (1965)
^ Hume 1888, note 13 to letter LXXXIV.
^ Forbes 1985, p. 150.
^ Wiley 2012, p. 211.
^ Hume 1741, p. 119.
^ Hume 1739, p. 550.
^ so quoted in Mossner (1980, p. 311), original emphasis
^ McArthur 2007, p. 124.
^ McArthur 2007.
^ Adair 1957, p. ?.
^ Hume 1987.
^ "Strauss, L. and Cropsey, J., ''History of Political Philosophy'', University of Chicago Press, 2012, p. 556". Books.google.com. 2012-06-15. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ Sabine, GH., A History of Political Theory, Dryden Press, 1973 (1937), p. 603.
^ "David Hume | Scottish philosopher". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-11-20. 
^ "David Hume | Scottish philosopher". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-11-20. 
^ "David Hume | Scottish philosopher". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2017-11-20. 
^ Robbins, Lionel A History of Economic Thought: The LSE Lectures edited by Medema and Samuels. Ch 11 and 12
^ Krugman, Paul. "How We Know The Earth Is Old". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 November 2012. 
^ Richards, H. Understanding the Global Economy, Peace Education Books, 2004, p. 322.
^ Hume, David An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (1751)
^ Stewart, JB., Opinion and Reform in Hume's Political Philosophy, Princeton University Press, 2014, pp. 163–164.
^ Garrett, Don, Hume (The Routledge Philosophers), Routledge -Reprint edition, 2014, p. ? ISBN 978-0415283342
^ Kant, I., Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics: 'Introduction'
^ Schopenhauer, A., The World as Will and Representation, Vol. 2, Ch. 46, p. 582.
^ Ayer, AJ., Language, Truth and Logic, London, Preface to First Edition.
^ Einstein, A., in a letter of 14 December 1915, to Moritz Schlick (Papers, A, Vol. 8A, Doc.165)
^ Popper, K., Unended Quest; An Intellectual Autobiography, 1976, pp. 95–96, ISBN 0-415-28590-9
^ Popper, K., Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, Routledge, 2014, . 55.
^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Thomas Reid".
^ Savage, R., Philosophy and Religion in Enlightenment Britain: New Case Studies, Oxford University Press, 2012, p. 170.
^ Paul Russel (17 May 2010). "Hume on Religion". First published October 4, 2005. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2008 Edition). Retrieved 18 September 2010. 
^ Marianne Schröter: Transformationen des Theologiebegriffes in der Aufklärung. In: Evangelische Theologie an Staatlichen Universitäten. Konzepte und Konstellationen Evangelischer Theologie und Religionsforschung. ed. by Stefan Alkier and Hans-Günter Heimbrock. Göttingen 2011, 182–202
^ Hodge, C., Systematic theology, 1873, p. 43.
^ a b Religionsgeschichte als Religionskritik? David Hume und die Folgen (regligious studies as criticism of religion? David Hume's heritage) "Beyond Myth and Enlightenment" lecture of Hans Joas, 14 November 2013 at the Institut für die Wissenschaften vom Menschen thinktank in Vienna
^ Penelhum, T., God and Skepticism, Springer Science & Business Media, 1983.
^ de:Friedrich Wilhelm Graf: Von David Hume ließ er sich nicht die Butter vom Brot nehmen – Ein Ausweis der aufgeklärten protestantischen Theologenelite ist wieder zugänglich: Johann Joachim Spalding in vorzüglicher Edition (Spalding never let Hume get the better of him, about a new edition of a mainstake of the enlighted protestant theological elite), review of Graf of a new edition of Spaldings works, in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Feuilleton, print version Nr. 249 / Page 39, 27 October 2003
^ Whelan, FG., Hume and Machiavelli: Political Realism and Liberal Thought, Lexington Books, 2004, p. 163.
^ Miles, T. "Hume: Kierkegaard and Hume on reason, faith, and the ethics of philosophy", in Stewart, JB. ed., Kierkegaard and the Renaissance and Modern Traditions: Philosophy, Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2009, p.27
^ Berlin, I., "Hume and the Sources of German Anti-Rationalism", in 'Against the Current: Essays in the History of Ideas', Princeton University Press, second edition, 2013, pp. 204–235.
^ "David Hume Biography". Biography Online. 
^ "Impressions of David Hume - Podcasts - Philosophy Now". philosophynow.org. 
^ "David Hume". stanford.edu. 
^ BIOGRAPHICAL INDEX OF FORMER FELLOWS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH 1783 – 2002 (PDF). The Royal Society of Edinburgh. July 2006. ISBN 0 902 198 84 X. 
^ David Fate Norton (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Hume, Cambridge University Press, 1993, pp. 345–350.
^ The Cambridge Companion to Hume. pp. 346.
^ For this see the introduction by J. M. Keynes and P. Sraffa in: Hume, David (1965). An Abstract of A Treatise of Human Nature 1740. Connecticut: Archon Books
^ "Samson, G., ''The Concise Cambridge History of English Literature'', CUP Archive, 1941, p. 548". Books.google.com. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 
^ "Berry, CJ., Paganelli, MP. and Smith, C., ''The Oxford Handbook of Adam Smith'', Oxford University Press, 2013, p. 466". Books.google.com. 2013-05-16. Retrieved 16 March 2017. 


Bibliography[edit]


Adair, Douglass. ""That Politics May Be Reduced to a Science": David Hume, James Madison, and the Tenth Federalist". Huntington Library Quarterly. University of California Press. 20 (4): 343–360. doi:10.2307/3816276. JSTOR 3816276. 
Ahluwalia, Libby (2008). Understanding Philosophy of Religion (illustrated ed.). Folens. ISBN 9781850082644. 
Anderson, R. F. (1966). Hume's First Principles, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Angier, Tom, ed. (2012). Ethics: The Key Thinkers. Key Thinkers. 12. A&C Black. ISBN 9781441149398. 
Atherton, Margaret, ed. (1999). The Empiricists: Critical Essays on Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. Critical essays on the classics. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780847689132. 
Ayer, Alfred Jules (1946). Language, Truth and Logic (reprint ed.). Penguin Books. 
Bailey, Alan; O'Brien, Dan (2006). Hume's 'Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding': A Reader's Guide. Continuum reader's guides. A&C Black. ISBN 9780826485090. 
Bassett, Kate (2012). In Two Minds: a Biography of Jonathan Miller. Oberon Books. ISBN 9781849437387. 
"Great Thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment". BBC History. 14 September 2014. 
Blackburn, Simon (Autumn 1990). "Hume and Thick Connexions". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 50, Supplement: 237–250. JSTOR 2108041. 
Blackburn, Simon (October 1995). "Practical Tortoise Raising". Mind (New Series ed.). Oxford University Press. 104 (416): 695–711. doi:10.1093/mind/104.416.695. JSTOR 2254478. 
Bongie, L. L. (1998). David Hume – Prophet of the Counter-Revolution. Liberty Fund, Indianapolis
Boswell, James (1970). Weis, Charles McC.; Pottle, Frederick A., eds. Boswell in Extremes, 1776–1778. Yale editions of the private papers of James Boswell. Yale University. 
Broackes, Justin (1995). Hume, David, in Ted Honderich (ed.) The Oxford Companion to Philosophy, New York, Oxford University Press
Brown, Stuart, ed. (2005). Dictionary of Twentieth-Century British Philosophers. A&C Black. ISBN 9781843710967. 
Buckle, Stephen (March 1999). "Hume's biography and Hume's philosophy". Australasian Journal of Philosophy. 77 (1): 1–25. doi:10.1080/00048409912348781. 
Burton, John Hill (1846). Life and Correspondence of David Hume. 2. William Tait. 
Carroll, John W.; Markosian, Ned (2010). An Introduction to Metaphysics. Cambridge Introductions to Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521826297. 
Copleston, Frederick (1999). A History of Philosophy. 6. A&C Black. ISBN 9780860122999. 
Costelloe, Timothy M. (2013). Aesthetics and Morals in the Philosophy of David Hume. Routledge Studies in Eighteenth-Century Philosophy. Routledge. ISBN 9781135197872. 
Coventry, Angela M. (2006). Hume's Theory of Causation. Continuum Studies in British Philosophy. A&C Black. ISBN 9781847142221. 
Craig, Edward (1987). The Mind of God and the Works of Man. Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780198249337. 
Cranston, Maurice (16 November 2014). "David Hume – Scottish philosopher. Morals and historical writing". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
Daiches D., Jones P., Jones J. (eds )The Scottish Enlightenment: 1730–1790 A Hotbed of Genius The University of Edinburgh, 1986. In paperback, The Saltire Society, 1996 ISBN 0-85411-069-0
Dauer, Francis Watanabe (2010). "Hume on the Relation of Cause and Effect". In Radcliffe, Elizabeth S. A Companion to Hume. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 89–105. doi:10.1002/9780470696583.ch5. ISBN 9781444337860. 
Dees, Richard H. (2010). "Chapter 21. 'One of the Finest and Most Subtle Inventions': Hume on Government". In Radcliffe, Elizabeth S. A Companion to Hume. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 388–405. doi:10.1002/9780470696583.ch6. ISBN 9781444337860. 
Dennett, Daniel C. (2009). "Chapter 3. Atheism and Evolution". In Zagzebski, Linda; Miller, Timothy D. Readings in Philosophy of Religion: Ancient to Contemporary. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 614–635. ISBN 9781405180924. 
Dicker, Georges (2002). Hume's Epistemology and Metaphysics: An Introduction. Routledge. ISBN 9781134714254. 
Edwards, Peter (2002). "The future of ethics". In Leaman, Oliver. The Future of Philosophy: Towards the Twenty First Century. Routledge. pp. 41–61. ISBN 9781134824571. 
Einstein, A. (1915) Letter to Moritz Schlick, Schwarzschild, B. (trans. & ed.) in The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, vol. 8A, R. Schulmann, A. J. Fox, J. Illy, (eds.) Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1998), p. 220.
Emerson, Roger L. (2009). Essays on David Hume Medical Men and the Scottish Enlightenment: Industry Knowledge and Humanity. Science, Technology and Culture, 1700–1945. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 9780754693383. 
Fieser, James (2003). A Bibliography of Hume's Writings and Early Responses. Thoemmes Press. 
Fieser, James (2005). Early Responses to Hume's Life And Reputation. 9/10. A & C Black. ISBN 9781843711155. 
Fisher, A. R. J. (December 2011). "Causal and Logical Necessity in Malebranche's Occasionalism" (PDF). Canadian Journal of Philosophy. 41 (4): 523–48. doi:10.1353/cjp.2011.0043. ISSN 1911-0820. 
Flew, A. (1986). David Hume: Philosopher of Moral Science, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Fodor, Jerry A. (2003). Hume Variations. Lines of thought. Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780199264056. 
Fogelin, R. J. (1993). Hume's scepticism. In Norton, D. F. (ed.) (1993). The Cambridge Companion to Hume, Cambridge University Press, pp. 90–116.
Forbes, Duncan (1985). Hume's Philosophical Politics. Cambridge paperback library (reprint ed.). CUP Archive. ISBN 9780521319973. 
Garfield, Jay L. (1995) The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way Oxford University Press
Giles, James (April 1993). "The No-Self Theory: Hume, Buddhism, and Personal Identity". Philosophy East and West. University of Hawai'i Press. 43 (2): 175–200. doi:10.2307/1399612. JSTOR 1399612. 
Gopnik, Alison (2009). "Could David Hume Have Known about Buddhism?: Charles François Dolu, the Royal College of La Flèche, and the Global Jesuit Intellectual Network". Hume Studies. Hume Society. 35 (1 and 2): 5–28. ISSN 0319-7336. 
Gracyk, Ted (2011). "Hume's Aesthetics". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Graham, R. (2004). The Great Infidel – A Life of David Hume. John Donald, Edinburgh.
Harris, James A., ed. (2013). The Oxford Handbook of British Philosophy in the Eighteenth Century. Oxford Handbooks in Philosophy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199549023. 
Harris, James A. (2015). Hume: An Intellectual Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521837255. 
Harris, Errol E. (2004). Hypothesis and Perception: The Roots of Scientific Method. 10. Psychology Press. ISBN 9780415296151. 
Harwood, Sterling (1996). "Moral Sensibility Theories", in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Supplement) (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.).
Hobart, R. E. (1934). "Free Will as Involving Determination and Inconceivable Without It". Mind. 43 (169): 1–27. doi:10.1093/mind/XLIII.169.1. JSTOR 2250169. 
Humber, James M. (2008). "Hume". In Arrington, Robert L. The World's Great Philosophers. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 126–137. ISBN 9780470692950. 
Hume, David (1740). An Abstract of a Book lately Published; Entitled, 'A Treatise of Human Nature', &c. Wherein the Chief Argument of that Book is farther Illustrated and Explained. London: C. Borbett. 
Hume, D. (1751). An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. David Hume, Essays Moral, Political, and Literary edited with preliminary dissertations and notes by T.H. Green and T.H. Grose, 1:1–8. London: Longmans, Green 1907.
Hume, David (1777) [1748]. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. London: A. Millar. 
Hume, David (1739). A Treatise of Human Nature. London: John Noon. 
Hume, David (1779). Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. 
Hume, David (1741). Essays, Moral and Political. Edinburgh: A. Kincaid. 

Hume, David (1987). "Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth". In Miller, Eugene F. Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary. Indianapolis: Library Fund, Inc. 

Hume, David (1888). Hill, George Birkbeck Norman, ed. Letters of David Hume to William Strahan. Oxford: Clarendon Press via The Online Library of Liberty. 
Hume, David (1757). "The Natural History of Religion". Four Dissertations. London: A. Millar. 
Hume, David (2013). "Appendix C: From Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759)". In Falkenstein, Lorne; McArthur, Neil. Essays and Treatises on Philosophical Subjects. Broadview editions. Broadview Press. ISBN 9781551118048. 
Hume, David (1993). "A Kind of History of My Life". In Norton, David Fate. The Cambridge Companion to Hume. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521387101. 
Hume, D. (1752–1758). Political Discourses:Bilingual English-French (translated by Fabien Grandjean). Mauvezin, France, Trans-Europ-Repress, 1993, 22 cm, V-260 p. Bibliographic notes, index.
Hume, David (2011). Greig, J.Y.T., ed. The Letters of David Hume: 1727–1765. The Letters of David Hume. 1. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199693245. 
Hume, David (1778). "My Own Life". The History of England, from the Invasion of Julius Cæsar to the Revolution in 1688. 1. London: via Rutgers University, edited by Jack Lynch. pp. 1–21. 
Hume, David (1789). "Letter from Adam Smith, LL.D. to William Strathan, Esq.". The History of England, from the Invasion of Julius Cæsar to the Revolution in 1688. 1. London: Thomas Cadell and Longman. pp. xix–xxiv. 
Husserl, E. (1970). The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, Carr, D. (trans.), Northwestern University Press, Evanston.
Huxley, Thomas Henry (2011). Hume. English Men of Letters. 39. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108034777. 
Jessop, Thomas Edmund (5 May 2015). "David Hume. Scottish philosopher. Significance and influence". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
Johnson, Oliver A. (1995). "The Mind of David Hume". University of Illinois Press: 8–9. 
Kenyon, John D.; Craig, Edward (1985). "Doubts about the Concept of Reason". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes. John Wiley & Sons. 59: 249–267 and 269–283. doi:10.1093/aristoteliansupp/59.1.249. JSTOR 4106756. 
Kenyon, John Philipps (1984). The history men: the historical profession in England since the Renaissance. University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 42. ISBN 9780822959007. 
Klibansky, Raymond and Mossner, Ernest C. (eds.) (1954). New Letters of David Hume. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kolakowski, L. (1968). The Alienation of Reason: A History of Positivist Thought. Doubleday: Garden City.
Korsgaard, Christine M. (January 1996). "Skepticism about Practical Reason". The Journal of Philosophy. Journal of Philosophy, Inc. 83 (1): 5–25. JSTOR 2026464. 
Levine, Michael (1989). Hume and the Problem of Miracles: A Solution. Philosophical Studies Series. 41. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9780792300434. 
Livingston, Donald (1965). "Foreword". David Hume: Prophet of the Counter-revolution. The Online Library of Liberty. 
Loeb, Louis E. (2010). "Chapter 6. Inductive Inference in Hume's Philosophy". In Radcliffe, Elizabeth S. A Companion to Hume. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 106–125. doi:10.1002/9780470696583.ch6. ISBN 9781444337860. 
MacKie, John Leslie (1982). The Miracle of Theism: Arguments for and Against the Existence of God (reprinted ed.). Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780198246824. 
Madden, James D. (2005). "Chapter 8. Giving the devil his due". In Sennett, James F.; Groothuis, Douglas. In Defense of Natural Theology: A Post-Humean Assessment. InterVarsity Press. pp. 150–174. ISBN 9780830827671. 
Magee, Bryan (2000). The Great Philosophers: An Introduction to Western Philosophy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192893222. 
Martin Orejana, Marina (1991). Jorge Luis Borges and David Hume: Their Epistemological Approach to the External World and the Self. University of Virginia. 
Maurer, The Reverend Armand (27 May 2013). "Western philosophy. Basic Science of Human Nature in Hume". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
McArthur, Neil (2007). David Hume's Political Theory: Law, Commerce, and the Constitution of Government. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9780802093356. 
McDowell, John (1981). "Non-cognitivism and rule-following". In Holtzman, Steven H.; Leich, Christopher M. Wittgenstein: To Follow A Rule. International Library of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Method. Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp. 141–162. 
McKenna, Michael; Coates, Justin D. (2015). "Compatibilism". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Millican, Peter (1996). Hume, Induction and Probability (PDF). University of Leeds. 
Morris, William Edward; Brown, Charlotte R. (2011). "David Hume". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Mossner, Ernest Campbell (1958). "Hume at La Flèche, 1735: an unpublished letter". Studies in English. The University of Texas. 37: 30–33. 
Mossner, Ernest Campbell (1950). "Philosophy and Biography: The Case of David Hume". The Philosophical Review. Duke University Press. 59 (2): 184–201. doi:10.2307/2181501. JSTOR 2181501. 
Mossner, Ernest Campbell (1980). The Life of David Hume. Oxford University Press. 
Mounce, Howard; Mounce, H.O. (2002). Hume's Naturalism. Routledge. ISBN 9781134654468. 
Nobbs, Douglas (1965). "The Political Ideas of William Cleghorn, Hume's Academic Rival". Journal of the History of Ideas. University of Pennsylvania Press. 26 (4): 575–86. doi:10.2307/2708501. JSTOR 2708501. 
Norton, David Fate (1993). "Introduction to Hume's thought". In Norton, David Fate. The Cambridge Companion to Hume. Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–32. ISBN 9780521387101. 
O'Connor, David (2013). Routledge Philosophy GuideBook to Hume on Religion. Routledge Philosophy GuideBooks. Routledge. ISBN 9781134634095. 
Okie, Laird (1985). "Ideology and Partiality in David Hume's History of England" (PDF). Hume Studies. Hume Society. 11 (1): 1–32. doi:10.1353/hms.2011.0052. 
Parfit, Derek (1984). Reasons and Persons. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191622441. 
Passmore, John A. (2013). Hume's Intentions. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107697867. 
Penelhum, T. (1993). Hume's moral philosophy. In Norton, D. F. (ed.), (1993). The Cambridge Companion to Hume, Cambridge University Press, pp. 117–147.
Phillipson, N. (1989). Hume, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London.
Phillipson, Nicholas (2012). David Hume: The Philosopher As Historian. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-18166-1. 
Popkin, Richard H. (3 December 2014). "Skepticism. The 18th century". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
Popkin, Richard H. (1993) "Sources of Knowledge of Sextus Empiricus in Hume's Time" Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1. (Jan. 1993), pp. 137–141.
Popkin, R. & Stroll, A. (1993) Philosophy. Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Ltd, Oxford.
Popper. K. (1960). Knowledge without authority. In Miller D. (ed.), (1983). Popper, Oxford, Fontana, pp. 46–57.
Prasad, Rajendra (1995). "Reactive Attitudes, Rationality and Determinism". In Sen, Pranab Kumar; Verma, Roop Rekha. The Philosophy of P.F. Strawson. Allied Publishers. pp. 346–376. ISBN 9788185636160. 
Read, Rupert; Richman, Kenneth, eds. (2002). The New Hume Debate. Routledge. ISBN 9781134555284. 
Redman, Deborah A. (1997). The Rise of Political Economy as a Science: Methodology and the Classical Economists. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ISBN 9780262264259. 
"Arguments for the existence of God. The design (or teleological) argument". Religiouseducation.co.uk. Retrieved 22 April 2015. 
Rivers, Isabel (2000). Reason, Grace, and Sentiment: Volume 2, Shaftesbury to Hume: A Study of the Language of Religion and Ethics in England, 1660–1780. Cambridge Studies in Eighteenth-Century English Literature and Thought. 37. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139425001. 
Robbins, Lionel (1998). A History of Economic Thought: The LSE Lectures. Edited by Steven G. Medema and Warren J. Samuels. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Robinson, Dave & Groves, Judy (2003). Introducing Political Philosophy. Icon Books. ISBN 1-84046-450-X.
Roth, Robert J. (1991). "David Hume on Religion in England". Thought: Fordham University Quarterly. Fordham University. 66 (260): 51–64. doi:10.5840/thought199166142. 
Russell, B. (1946). A History of Western Philosophy. London, Allen and Unwin.
Russell, Paul (2014). "Hume on Religion". In Zalta, Edward N. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Russell, Paul (2010). The Riddle of Hume's Treatise: Skepticism, Naturalism, and Irreligion. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199751525. 
Scharfstein, Ben-Ami (1998). A Comparative History of World Philosophy: From the Upanishads to Kant. EBSCO eBook Collection. SUNY Press. ISBN 9780791436837. 
Schmidt, Claudia M. (2010). David Hume: Reason in History. Penn State Press. ISBN 9780271046976. 
Scruton, Roger (14 December 2014). "Aesthetics: Major concerns of 18th-century aesthetics". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
Sgarbi, M. (2012). "Hume's Source of the 'Impression-Idea' Distinction", Anales del Seminario de Historia de la Filosofía, 2: 561–576
Sher, Richard B. (2008). The Enlightenment and the Book: Scottish Authors and Their Publishers in Eighteenth-Century Britain, Ireland, and America. Chicago Studies in Ethnomusicology Series. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226752549. 
Singer, Peter (4 March 2015). "The climax of moral sense theory: Hutcheson and Hume". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
Smith, Michael Andrew (January 1987). "The Humean Theory of Motivation" (PDF). Mind (New Series ed.). Oxford University Press. 96 (381): 36–61. doi:10.1093/mind/XCVI.381.36. 
Spencer, Mark G., ed. David Hume: Historical Thinker, Historical Writer (Penn State University Press; 2013) 282 pages; Interdisciplinary essays that consider his intertwined work as historian and philosopher
Spiegel, Henry William, (1991). The Growth of Economic Thought, 3rd Ed., Durham: Duke University Press.
Strawson, Galen (2011). The Evident Connexion: Hume on Personal Identity. Oxford Scholarship Online. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199608508.001.0001. ISBN 9780199608508. 
Strawson, Galen (2014). The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and David Hume. Chicago Studies in Ethnomusicology Series. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199605859. 
Strawson, Sir Peter Frederick (2008). Freedom and Resentment and Other Essays. Routledge. ISBN 9781134060870. 
Stroud, B. (1977). Hume, Routledge, London & New York.
Swain, Corliss Gaida (2008). "Personal Identity". In Traiger, Saul. The Blackwell Guide to Hume's Treatise. Blackwell Guides to Great Works. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781405153133. 
Taylor, A. E. (1927). David Hume and the Miraculous, Leslie Stephen Lecture. Cambridge, pp. 53–4.
Taylor, W. L. (1965). Francis Hutcheson and David Hume as Predecessors of Adam Smith. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Waldmann, Felix (2014). Further Letters of David Hume. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Bibliographical Society. 
Wertz, S. K. (1975). "Hume, History, and Human Nature". Journal of the History of Ideas. University of Pennsylvania Press. 36 (3): 481–496. doi:10.2307/2708658. JSTOR 2708658. 
Wertz, S. K. (1993). "Hume and the Historiography of Science". Journal of the History of Ideas. 54 (3): 411–436. doi:10.2307/2710021. JSTOR 2710021. 
Wiley, James (2012). Theory and Practice in the Philosophy of David Hume. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9781137026439. 
Wright, John P. (2009). Hume's 'A Treatise of Human Nature': An Introduction. Cambridge Introductions to Key Philosophical Texts. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521833769. 
Wright, John P. (1983). The Sceptical Realism of David Hume. Studies in intellectual history and the history of philosophy. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719008825. 
Wright, Richard (2010). Understanding Religious Ethics: A Complete Guide for OCR AS and A2. Studies in intellectual history and the history of philosophy. Oxford University Press. 


Further reading[edit]


Ardal, Pall (1966). Passion and Value in Hume's Treatise, Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press.
Bailey, Alan & O'Brien, Dan (eds.) (2012). The Continuum Companion to Hume, New York: Continuum.
Beauchamp, Tom & Rosenberg, Alexander (1981). Hume and the Problem of Causation, New York, Oxford University Press.
Campbell Mossner, Ernest (1980). The Life of David Hume, Oxford University Press.
Gilles Deleuze (1953). Empirisme et subjectivité. Essai sur la Nature Humaine selon Hume, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, trans. Empiricism and Subjectivity, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991)
Demeter, Tamás (2012). Hume's Experimental Method. British Journal for the History of Philosophy 20.
Demeter, Tamás (2014). Natural Theology as Superstition: Hume and the Changing Ideology of Moral Inquiry. In Demeter, T. et al. (eds.), Conflicting Values of Inquiry, Leiden: Brill.
Garrett, Don (1996). Cognition and Commitment in Hume's Philosophy. New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gaskin, J.C.A. (1978). Hume's Philosophy of Religion. Humanities Press International.
James A. Harris (2015). Hume: An Intellectual Biography. Cambridge University Press.
Hesselberg, A. Kenneth (1961). Hume, Natural Law and Justice. Duquesne Review, Spring 1961, pp. 46–47.
Kail, P. J. E. (2007) Projection and Realism in Hume's Philosophy, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kemp Smith, Norman (1941). The Philosophy of David Hume. Macmillan.
Norton, David Fate (1982). David Hume: Common-Sense Moralist, Sceptical Metaphysician. Princeton University Press.
Norton, David Fate & Taylor, Jacqueline (eds.) (2009). The Cambridge companion to Hume, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Radcliffe, Elizabeth S. (ed.) (2008). A Companion to Hume, Malden: Blackwell.
Rosen, Frederick (2003). Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill (Routledge Studies in Ethics & Moral Theory). ISBN 0-415-22094-7
Russell, Paul (1995). Freedom and Moral Sentiment: Hume's Way of Naturalizing Responsibility. New York & Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Stroud, Barry (1977). Hume, Routledge, London & New York. (Complete study of Hume's work parting from the interpretation of Hume's naturalistic philosophical programme).
Wei, Jua. Commerce and Politics in Hume’s History of England (Boydell and Brewer, 2017) 209 pp. online review
Wilson, Fred (2008). The external world and our knowledge of it : Hume's critical realism, an exposition and a defence, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.


External links[edit]


Library resources about
David Hume





Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries




By David Hume




Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





 Media related to David Hume at Wikimedia Commons
 Works written by or about David Hume at Wikisource
 Quotations related to David Hume at Wikiquote
The Hume Society
The David Hume Collection at McGill University Library
Works by David Hume at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about David Hume at Internet Archive
Works by David Hume at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Books by David Hume at the Online Books Page
davidhume.org All of Hume's philosophical works in authoritative searchable editions, with related resources (including articles, bibliography, and the original manuscript of the Dialogues)
David Hume at the Online Library of Liberty
David Hume resources including books, articles, and encyclopedia entries
David Hume readable versions of the Treatise, the Abstract of the Treatise, the two Enquiries, the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, and four essays
Morris, David William. "David Hume". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
A Bibliography of Hume's Early Writings and Early Responses
Peter Millican. Critical Survey of the Literature on Hume and his First Enquiry (Surveys around 250 books and articles on Hume and related topics)
David Hume at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
El Monetarismo Amable de David Hume
David Hume (1711–1776). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.). Liberty Fund. 2008. 







v
t
e


David Hume



Books



A Treatise of Human Nature
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals
Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary
Four Dissertations
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion
The History of England

The History of Great Britain







Criticism



Argument for the existence of God from design
Problem of induction
Is–ought problem





Philosophy



Hume's principle
Hume's law
Hume's fork
The Missing Shade of Blue
"Of Miracles"
Scottish Enlightenment
Empiricism
Price–specie flow mechanism





Related



Hume Studies
A Treatise of Human Nature (Abstract)










Links to related articles











v
t
e


The Age of Enlightenment








Topics










Atheism
Capitalism
Civil liberties
Counter-Enlightenment
Critical thinking
Deism
Democracy
Empiricism
Encyclopédistes
Enlightened absolutism
Free markets
Haskalah
Humanism
Human rights
Liberalism
Liberté, égalité, fraternité
Methodological skepticism
Nationalism
Natural philosophy
Objectivity
Rationality
Rationalism
Reason
Reductionism
Sapere aude
Science
Scientific method
Socialism
Universality
Weimar Classicism
















Thinkers







France



Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Étienne Bonnot de Condillac
Marquis de Condorcet
Denis Diderot
Claude Adrien Helvétius
Baron d'Holbach
Georges-Louis Leclerc
Montesquieu
François Quesnay
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Marquis de Sade
Voltaire





Germany



Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Johann Georg Hamann
Johann Gottfried von Herder
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi
Immanuel Kant
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
Moses Mendelssohn
Friedrich Schiller
Thomas Wizenmann





Greece



Neophytos Doukas
Theoklitos Farmakidis
Rigas Feraios
Theophilos Kairis
Adamantios Korais





Ireland



Robert Boyle
Edmund Burke





Italy



Cesare Beccaria
Gaetano Filangieri
Antonio Genovesi
Pietro Verri





Poland



Tadeusz Czacki
Hugo Kołłątaj
Stanisław Konarski
Ignacy Krasicki
Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz
Stanisław August Poniatowski
Jędrzej Śniadecki
Stanisław Staszic
Józef Wybicki
Andrzej Stanisław Załuski
Józef Andrzej Załuski





Portugal



Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo





Russia



Catherine II





Spain



Charles III
Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro





United Kingdom
(Scotland)



Francis Bacon
Jeremy Bentham
Joseph Black
James Boswell
Adam Ferguson
Edward Gibbon
Robert Hooke
David Hume
Francis Hutcheson
Samuel Johnson
John Locke
Isaac Newton
Thomas Reid
Adam Smith
Mary Wollstonecraft





United States



Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Jefferson
James Madison
George Mason
Thomas Paine


















v
t
e


Classical economists






Francis Hutcheson
Bernard Mandeville
David Hume
Adam Smith
Jean-Baptiste Say
Thomas Malthus
James Mill
Francis Place
David Ricardo
Henry Thornton
John Ramsay McCulloch
James Maitland, 8th Earl of Lauderdale
Jeremy Bentham
Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi
Johann Heinrich von Thünen
John Stuart Mill
Henry Charles Carey
Nassau William Senior
Edward Gibbon Wakefield
John Rae
Frédéric Bastiat
Thomas Tooke
Robert Torrens












v
t
e


Philosophy








Branches







Traditional



Metaphysics

Ontology


Epistemology
Logic
Ethics
Aesthetics





Philosophy of



Action
Art

Culture
Design
Music
Film


Business
Color
Cosmos
Dialogue
Education
Environment
Futility
Happiness
Healthcare
History
Human nature
Humor
Feminism
Language
Life
Literature
Mathematics
Mind

Pain
Psychology


Philosophy of psychiatry
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy
Religion
Science

Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Geography


Sexuality
Social science

Culture
Economics
Justice
Law
Politics
Society


Space and time
Sport
Technology

Artificial intelligence
Computer science
Engineering
Information


War
















Schools of thought







By era



Ancient
Western

Medieval
Renaissance
Early modern
Modern
Contemporary







Ancient




Chinese



Agriculturalism
Confucianism
Legalism
Logicians
Mohism
Chinese naturalism
Neotaoism
Taoism
Yangism
Zen





Greco-Roman



Aristotelianism
Atomism
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Eleatics
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Hermeneutics
Ionian

Ephesian
Milesian


Megarian school
Neoplatonism
Peripatetic
Platonism
Pluralism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism
Neopythagoreanism
Sophistic
Stoicism





Indian



Samkhya
Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Yoga
Mīmāṃsā
Ājīvika
Ajñana
Cārvāka
Jain

Anekantavada
Syādvāda


Buddhist

Śūnyatā
Madhyamaka
Yogacara
Sautrāntika
Svatantrika







Persian



Mazdakism
Zoroastrianism
Zurvanism








Medieval




European



Christian philosophy
Scholasticism
Thomism
Renaissance humanism





East Asian



Korean Confucianism
Edo Neo-Confucianism
Neo-Confucianism





Indian



Vedanta

Acintya bheda abheda
Advaita
Bhedabheda
Dvaita
Dvaitadvaita
Shuddhadvaita
Vishishtadvaita


Navya-Nyāya





Islamic



Averroism
Avicennism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Sufi





Jewish



Judeo-Islamic








Modern




People



Cartesianism
Kantianism
Neo-Kantianism
Hegelianism
Marxism
Spinozism





0



Anarchism
Classical Realism
Liberalism
Collectivism
Conservatism
Determinism
Dualism
Empiricism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Historicism
Holism
Humanism
Idealism

Absolute
British
German
Objective
Subjective
Transcendental


Individualism
Kokugaku
Materialism
Modernism
Monism
Naturalism
Natural law
Nihilism
New Confucianism
Neo-Scholasticism
Pragmatism
Phenomenology
Positivism
Reductionism
Rationalism
Social contract
Socialism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism








Contemporary




Analytic



Applied ethics
Analytic feminism
Analytical Marxism
Communitarianism
Consequentialism
Critical rationalism
Experimental philosophy
Falsificationism
Foundationalism / Coherentism
Generative linguistics
Internalism and Externalism
Logical positivism
Legal positivism
Normative ethics
Meta-ethics
Moral realism
Neo-Aristotelian
Quinean naturalism
Ordinary language philosophy
Postanalytic philosophy
Quietism
Rawlsian
Reformed epistemology
Systemics
Scientism
Scientific realism
Scientific skepticism
Contemporary utilitarianism
Vienna Circle
Wittgensteinian





Continental



Critical theory
Deconstruction
Existentialism
Feminist
Frankfurt School
New Historicism
Hermeneutics
Neo-Marxism
Phenomenology
Postmodernism
Post-structuralism
Social constructionism
Structuralism
Western Marxism





Other



Kyoto School
Objectivism
Russian cosmism
more...



















Positions







Aesthetics



Formalism
Institutionalism
Aesthetic response





Ethics



Consequentialism
Deontology
Virtue





Free will



Compatibilism
Determinism
Libertarianism





Metaphysics



Atomism
Dualism
Monism
Naturalism





Epistemology



Constructivism
Empiricism
Idealism
Particularism
Fideism
Rationalism / Reasonism
Skepticism
Solipsism





Mind



Behaviorism
Emergentism
Eliminativism
Epiphenomenalism
Functionalism
Objectivism
Subjectivism





Normativity



Absolutism
Particularism
Relativism
Nihilism
Skepticism
Universalism





Ontology



Action
Event
Process





Reality



Anti-realism
Conceptualism
Idealism
Materialism
Naturalism
Nominalism
Physicalism
Realism



















Philosophy by region
Philosophy-related lists
Miscellaneous










By region



African
Ethiopian
Aztec
Native America
Eastern
Chinese
Egyptian
Czech
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Japanese
Korean
Vietnam
Pakistani
Western
American
Australian
British
Danish
French
German
Greek
Italian
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Slovene
Spanish
Turkish





Lists



Outline
Index
Years
Problems
Schools
Glossary
Philosophers
Movements
Publications





Miscellaneous



Women in philosophy
Sage (philosophy)














 Portal
 Category
 Book












v
t
e


Epistemology



Epistemologists



Thomas Aquinas
Augustine of Hippo
William Alston
Robert Audi
A. J. Ayer
George Berkeley
Laurence BonJour
René Descartes
John Dewey
Fred Dretske
Edmund Gettier
Roger Gibson
Alvin Goldman
Nelson Goodman
Paul Grice
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Søren Kierkegaard
Saul Kripke
David Lewis
John Locke
G. E. Moore
Robert Nozick
Alvin Plantinga
Plato
Hilary Putnam
Thomas Reid
Gilbert Ryle
P. F. Strawson
Willard Van Orman Quine
Bertrand Russell
Baruch Spinoza
Timothy Williamson
Ludwig Wittgenstein
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Vienna Circle





Theories



Coherentism
Constructivist epistemology
Contextualism
Determinism
Empiricism
Evolutionary epistemology
Fallibilism
Feminist epistemology
Fideism
Foundationalism
Genetic epistemology
Holism
Infinitism
Innatism
Internalism and externalism
Naïve realism
Naturalized epistemology
Phenomenalism
Positivism
Reductionism
Reliabilism
Representative realism
Rationalism
Skepticism
Theory of forms
Transcendental idealism
Uniformitarianism





Concepts



A priori knowledge
Analysis
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Belief
Causality
Common sense
Descriptive knowledge
Exploratory thought
Gettier problem
Justification
Knowledge
Induction
Objectivity
Problem of induction
Problem of other minds
Perception
Proposition
Regress argument
Simplicity
Speculative reason
Truth
more...





Related articles



Outline of epistemology
Alethiology
Faith and rationality
Formal epistemology
Meta-epistemology
Philosophy of perception
Philosophy of science
Social epistemology








Portal
Category
Task Force
Stubs
Discussion












v
t
e


Philosophy of religion



Concepts in religion



Afterlife
Euthyphro dilemma
Faith
Intelligent design
Miracle
Problem of evil
Religious belief
Soul
Spirit
Theodicy
Theological veto





Conceptions of God







Aristotelian view
Brahman
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Egoism
Holy Spirit
Misotheism
Pandeism
Personal god
Process theology
Supreme Being
Unmoved mover





God in



Abrahamic religions
Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Mormonism
Sikhism
Bahá'í Faith
Wicca








Existence of God




For



Beauty
Christological
Consciousness
Cosmological

Kalam
Contingency


Degree
Desire
Experience
Fine-tuning of the Universe
Love
Miracles
Morality
Necessary existent
Ontological
Pascal's Wager
Proper basis
Reason
Teleological

Natural law
Watchmaker analogy


Transcendental





Against



747 gambit
Atheist's Wager
Evil
Free will
Hell
Inconsistent revelations
Nonbelief
Noncognitivism
Occam's razor
Omnipotence
Poor design
Russell's teapot








Theology



Acosmism
Agnosticism
Animism
Antireligion
Atheism
Creationism
Dharmism
Deism
Demonology
Divine command theory
Dualism
Esotericism
Exclusivism
Existentialism

Christian
Agnostic
Atheistic


Feminist theology

Thealogy
Womanist theology


Fideism
Fundamentalism
Gnosticism
Henotheism
Humanism

Religious
Secular
Christian


Inclusivism
Theories about religions
Monism
Monotheism
Mysticism
Naturalism

Metaphysical
Religious
Humanistic


New Age
Nondualism
Nontheism
Pandeism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Perennialism
Polytheism
Possibilianism
Process theology
Religious skepticism
Spiritualism
Shamanism
Taoic
Theism
Transcendentalism
more...





Religious language



Eschatological verification
Language-game
Logical positivism
Apophatic theology
Verificationism





Problem of evil



Augustinian theodicy
Best of all possible worlds
Euthyphro dilemma
Inconsistent triad
Irenaean theodicy
Natural evil
Theodicy






Philosophers
of religion

(by date active)




Ancient
and
Medieval



Anselm of Canterbury
Augustine of Hippo
Avicenna
Averroes
Boethius
Erasmus
Gaunilo of Marmoutiers
Pico della Mirandola
Heraclitus
King James VI and I
Marcion of Sinope
Thomas Aquinas
Maimonides





Enlightenment



Augustin Calmet
René Descartes
Blaise Pascal
Baruch Spinoza
Nicolas Malebranche
Gottfried W Leibniz
William Wollaston
Thomas Chubb
David Hume
Baron d'Holbach
Immanuel Kant
Johann G Herder





1800
1850



Friedrich Schleiermacher
Karl C F Krause
Georg W F Hegel


William Whewell
Ludwig Feuerbach
Søren Kierkegaard
Karl Marx
Albrecht Ritschl
Afrikan Spir





1880
1900



Ernst Haeckel
W. K. Clifford
Friedrich Nietzsche
Harald Høffding
William James


Vladimir Solovyov
Ernst Troeltsch
Rudolf Otto
Lev Shestov
Sergei Bulgakov
Pavel Florensky
Ernst Cassirer
Joseph Maréchal





1920
postwar



George Santayana
Bertrand Russell
Martin Buber
René Guénon
Paul Tillich
Karl Barth
Emil Brunner
Rudolf Bultmann
Gabriel Marcel
Reinhold Niebuhr


Charles Hartshorne
Mircea Eliade
J L Mackie
Walter Kaufmann
Martin Lings
Peter Geach
George I Mavrodes
William Alston
Antony Flew





1970
1990
2010



William L Rowe
Dewi Z Phillips
Alvin Plantinga
Anthony Kenny
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Richard Swinburne
Robert Merrihew Adams


Peter van Inwagen
Daniel Dennett
Loyal Rue
Jean-Luc Marion
William Lane Craig
Ali Akbar Rashad


Alexander Pruss








Related topics



Criticism of religion
Ethics in religion
Exegesis
History of religions
Religion
Religious language
Religious philosophy
Relationship between religion and science
Political science of religion
Faith and rationality
more...








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Social and political philosophy



Philosophers



Ambedkar
Arendt
Aristotle
Augustine
Aurobindo
Aquinas
Aron
Averroes
Azurmendi
Badiou
Bakunin
Baudrillard
Bauman
Benoist
Bentham
Berlin
Bonald
Bosanquet
Burke
Judith Butler
Camus
Chanakya
Chomsky
Cicero
Comte
Confucius
De Beauvoir
Debord
Du Bois
Durkheim
Emerson
Engels
Foucault
Fourier
Franklin
Gandhi
Gehlen
Gentile
Al-Ghazali
Gramsci
Grotius
Habermas
Han Fei
Hayek
Hegel
Heidegger
Hobbes
Hume
Irigaray
Jefferson
Kant
Kierkegaard
Kirk
Kropotkin
Laozi
Le Bon
Le Play
Leibniz
Lenin
Locke
Luxemburg
Machiavelli
Maistre
Malebranche
Mao
Marcuse
Maritain
Marsilius
Marx
Mencius
Michels
Mill
Mises
Montesquieu
Möser
Mozi
Muhammad
Negri
Niebuhr
Nietzsche
Nozick
Oakeshott
Ortega
Paine
Pareto
Pettit
Plamenatz
Plato
Polanyi
Popper
Radhakrishnan
Rand
Rawls
Renan
Rothbard
Rousseau
Royce
Russell
Sade
Santayana
Sarkar
Sartre
Schmitt
Searle
Shang
Simonović
Skinner
Smith
Socrates
Sombart
Spann
Spencer
Spinoza
Spirito
Stirner
Strauss
Sun
Sun Tzu
Taine
Taylor
Thucydides
Thoreau
Tocqueville
Vivekananda
Voltaire
Walzer
Weber
Žižek





Social theories



Ambedkarism
Anarchism
Authoritarianism
Collectivism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conflict theories
Confucianism
Consensus theory
Conservatism
Contractualism
Cosmopolitanism
Culturalism
Fascism
Feminist political theory
Gandhism
Individualism
Legalism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Mohism
National liberalism
Republicanism
Social constructionism
Social constructivism
Social Darwinism
Social determinism
Socialism
Utilitarianism
Vaisheshika





Social concepts



Civil disobedience
Democracy
Four occupations
Justice
Law
Mandate of Heaven
Peace
Property
Revolution
Rights
Social contract
Society
War
more...





Related articles



Jurisprudence
Philosophy and economics
Philosophy of education
Philosophy of history
Philosophy of love
Philosophy of sex
Philosophy of social science
Political ethics
Social epistemology








Category
Portal
Task Force












v
t
e


Aesthetics topics



Philosophers



Abhinavagupta
Theodor W. Adorno
Leon Battista Alberti
Thomas Aquinas
Hans Urs von Balthasar
Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten
Clive Bell
Bernard Bosanquet
Edward Bullough
R. G. Collingwood
Ananda Coomaraswamy
Arthur Danto
John Dewey
Denis Diderot
Hubert Dreyfus
Curt John Ducasse
Thierry de Duve
Roger Fry
Nelson Goodman
Clement Greenberg
Georg Hegel
Martin Heidegger
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Paul Klee
Susanne Langer
Theodor Lipps
György Lukács
Jean-François Lyotard
Joseph Margolis
Jacques Maritain
Thomas Munro
Friedrich Nietzsche
José Ortega y Gasset
Dewitt H. Parker
Stephen Pepper
David Prall
Jacques Rancière
Ayn Rand
George Lansing Raymond
I. A. Richards
George Santayana
Friedrich Schiller
Arthur Schopenhauer
Roger Scruton
Irving Singer
Rabindranath Tagore
Giorgio Vasari
Morris Weitz
Johann Joachim Winckelmann
Richard Wollheim
more...





Theories



Classicism
Evolutionary aesthetics
Historicism
Modernism
New Classical
Postmodernism
Psychoanalytic theory
Romanticism
Symbolism
more...





Concepts



Aesthetic emotions
Aesthetic interpretation
Art manifesto
Avant-garde
Axiology
Beauty
Boredom
Camp
Comedy
Creativity
Cuteness
Disgust
Ecstasy
Elegance
Entertainment
Eroticism
Gaze
Harmony
Judgement
Kama
Kitsch
Life imitating art
Magnificence
Mimesis
Perception
Quality
Rasa
Reverence
Style
Sublime
Taste
Work of art





Related topics



Aesthetics of music
Applied aesthetics
Architecture
Art
Arts criticism
Feminist aesthetics
Gastronomy
History of painting
Humour
Japanese aesthetics
Literary merit
Mathematical beauty
Mathematics and architecture
Mathematics and art
Music theory
Neuroesthetics
Painting
Patterns in nature
Philosophy of design
Philosophy of film
Philosophy of music
Poetry
Sculpture
Theory of painting
Theory of art
Tragedy
Visual arts








Index
Outline
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Ethics



Theories



Casuistry
Consequentialism
Deontology

Kantian ethics


Ethics of care
Existentialist ethics
Meta-ethics
Particularism
Pragmatic ethics
Role ethics
Virtue ethics





Concepts



Autonomy
Axiology
Belief
Conscience
Consent
Equality
Care
Free will
Good and evil
Happiness
Ideal
Justice
Morality
Norm
Freedom
Principles
Suffering or Pain
Stewardship
Sympathy
Trust
Value
Virtue
Wrong
full index...





Philosophers



Laozi
Plato
Aristotle
Diogenes
Valluvar
Cicero
Confucius
Augustine of Hippo
Mencius
Mozi
Xunzi
Thomas Aquinas
Baruch Spinoza
David Hume
Immanuel Kant
Georg W. F. Hegel
Arthur Schopenhauer
Jeremy Bentham
John Stuart Mill
Søren Kierkegaard
Henry Sidgwick
Friedrich Nietzsche
G. E. Moore
Karl Barth
Paul Tillich
Dietrich Bonhoeffer
Philippa Foot
John Rawls
John Dewey
Bernard Williams
J. L. Mackie
G. E. M. Anscombe
William Frankena
Alasdair MacIntyre
R. M. Hare
Peter Singer
Derek Parfit
Thomas Nagel
Robert Merrihew Adams
Charles Taylor
Joxe Azurmendi
Christine Korsgaard
Martha Nussbaum
more...





Applied ethics



Bioethics
Business ethics
Discourse ethics
Environmental ethics
Legal ethics
Media ethics
Medical ethics
Nursing ethics
Professional ethics
Sexual ethics
Ethics of eating meat
Ethics of technology





Related articles



Christian ethics
Descriptive ethics
Ethics in religion
Evolutionary ethics
Feminist ethics
History of ethics
Ideology
Islamic ethics
Jewish ethics
Normative ethics
Philosophy of law
Political philosophy
Social philosophy








Portal
Category












v
t
e


Criticism of religion



By religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Christianity

Catholic

Opus Dei


Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Protestantism
Seventh-day Adventist
Unification Church
Westboro Baptist Church


Hinduism
Islam

Islamism
Twelver Shia Islam
Wahhabism


Jainism
Judaism
Monotheism
New religious movement
Scientology
Sikhism
Yazdânism
Zoroastrianism





Religious texts



Bible
Quran
Hadiths
Mormon sacred texts

Book of Mormon


Talmud





Religious figures



Aisha
Charles Taze Russell
Ellen White
Jesus
Moses
Muhammad
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad
Saul





Religious violence



Buddhism
Christianity

Mormonism


Judaism
Islam
Terrorism

Christian
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish


Persecution

Christian thought on persecution and tolerance


War

In Islam
In Judaism


Sectarian violence
By country

India

Anti-Christian violence
In Odisha


Nigeria
Pakistan







Books



Atheist Manifesto
Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon
Christianity Unveiled
God in the Age of Science?
God Is Not Great
God: The Failed Hypothesis
Letter to a Christian Nation
The Age of Reason
The Blind Watchmaker
The Caged Virgin
The End of Faith
The God Delusion
The Rage Against God
Why I Am Not a Christian
Why I Am Not a Muslim





Movements



Agnosticism
Antitheism
Atheism
Criticism of atheism
Cārvāka
New Atheism
Nontheistic religions
Parody religion














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 49226972
LCCN: n79054039
ISNI: 0000 0001 2131 8235
GND: 118554735
SELIBR: 207871
SUDOC: 02692840X
BNF: cb11908035f (data)
BIBSYS: 90100245
ULAN: 500319802
NLA: 35213218
NDL: 00444013
NKC: jn19990003749
BNE: XX876354
IATH: w6s75k8w











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Hume&oldid=817089935"					Categories: David Hume1711 births1776 deathsAlumni of the University of EdinburghBritish classical liberalsBritish scepticsBurials at Old Calton CemeteryCritics of religionsEarly Modern philosophersEpistemologistsHistorians of EnglandMembers of the Philosophical Society of EdinburghMoral philosophersPeople from EdinburghPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of religionPhilosophers of scienceScottish economistsScottish essayistsScottish historiansScottish librariansScottish philosophersVirtue ethicistsBritish social commentatorsPreclassical economistsCritics of the Catholic ChurchHidden categories: Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyEngvarB from July 2014Use British English from December 2014Use dmy dates from September 2015Articles with hCardsAll articles with failed verificationArticles with failed verification from March 2015All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from April 2015Articles with failed verification from April 2015Articles with failed verification from August 2015Articles with failed verification from October 2015Articles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with Internet Archive linksArticles with LibriVox linksArticles with DMOZ linksArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Hebrew-language textArticles containing Latin-language textAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with ULAN identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers