A decree is a rule of law usually issued by a head of state (such as the president of a republic or a monarch), according to certain procedures (usually established in a constitution). It has the force of law. The particular term used for this concept may vary from country to country. The executive orders made by the President of the United States, for example, are decrees (although a decree is not exactly an order). In non-legal English usage, however, the term refers to any authoritarian decision.[dubious – discuss] Documents or archives in the format of royal decrees or farming were issued by rulers .



Contents


1 Decree by jurisdiction

1.1 Belgium
1.2 France
1.3 Catholic Church
1.4 Holy See
1.5 Italy
1.6 Portugal
1.7 Iran
1.8 Russia
1.9 Saudi Arabia
1.10 Spain
1.11 United States


2 Other uses of the term
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links



Decree by jurisdiction[edit]
Belgium[edit]
Main article: Decree (Belgium)
In Belgium, a decree is a law of a community or regional parliament, e.g. the Flemish Parliament.
France[edit]

See Government of France.

The word décret, literally "decree", is an old legal usage in France and is used to refer to orders issued by the French President or Prime Minister. Any such order must not violate the French Constitution or Code of Law of France, and a party has the right to request an order be nullified in the French Council of State. Orders must be ratified by Parliament before they can be modified into legislative Acts. Special orders known as décret-loi, literally "decree-act" or "decree-law",[1][2] usually considered an illegal practice under the 3rd and 4th Republic, were finally abolished and replaced by the ordinances under the 1958 Constitution.
Except for the reserve powers of the President (as stated in Art. 16 of the 1958 Constitution, exercised only once so far), the executive can issue decrees in areas that the Constitution grants as the responsibility of Parliament only if a law authorizes it to do so. In other cases, orders are illegal and, should anyone sue for the order's nullification, it would be voided by the Council of State. There exists a procedure for the Prime Minister to issue ordinances in such areas, but this procedure requires Parliament's express consent (see Art 38 of the 1958 Constitution).
Orders issued by the Prime Minister take two forms:

Orders (décrets simples);
Orders-in-council (décrets en Conseil d'État), when a statute mandates the advisory consultation of the Conseil d'État.

Sometimes, people refer to décrets en Conseil d'État improperly as décrets du Conseil d'État. This would imply that it is the Conseil d'État that takes the decree, whereas the power of decreeing is restricted to the President or Prime Minister; the role of the administrative sections of the Conseil is purely advisory.
Decrees may be classified into:

Regulations, which may be:

Application decrees (décrets d'application), each of which must be specifically authorized by one or more statutes to determine some implementation conditions of this or these statutes; these constitute secondary legislation and are roughly equivalent to British statutory instruments;
Autonomous regulations (règlement autonomes), which may be taken only in areas where the Constitution of France does not impose statute law (passed by the Legislature); these constitute primary legislation;


Particular measures, such as the nomination of high-level civil servants.

Only the prime minister may issue regulatory or application decrees. Presidential decrees are generally nominations, or exceptional measures where law mandates a presidential decree, such as the dissolution of the French National Assembly and the calling of new legislative elections.
Decrees are published in the Journal Officiel de la République Française or "French Gazette".
Catholic Church[edit]





Part of a series on the


Jurisprudence of
Catholic canon law





Current law


1983 Code of Canon Law

Omnium in mentem


Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
Ad tuendam fidem
Ex corde Ecclesiae
Indulgentiarum Doctrina
Pastor bonus

Pontificalis Domus


Universi Dominici gregis
Custom








Legal history


1917 Code of Canon Law

Corpus Juris Canonici

Decretist
Regulæ Juris
Decretals of Gregory IX

Decretalist


Decretum Gratiani
Extravagantes
Liber Septimus

Ancient Church Orders

Didache
The Apostolic Constitutions

Canons of the Apostles



Collections of ancient canons

Collectiones canonum Dionysianae
Collectio canonum quadripartita
Collectio canonum Quesnelliana
Collectio canonum Wigorniensis

Other

Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals
Benedictus Deus (Pius IV)
Contractum trinius
Defect of Birth








Oriental law


Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches
Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII
Nomocanon
Archeparchy

Eparchy










Liturgical law


Ecclesia Dei
Mysterii Paschalis
Sacrosanctum concilium

Musicam sacram


Summorum Pontificum
Tra le sollecitudini








Sacramental law


Canon 844
Ex opere operato
Omnium in mentem
Valid but illicit

Holy Orders

Impediment (canon law)

Abstemius


Clerical celibacy (Catholic Church)
Nullity of Sacred Ordination
Dimissorial letters
Approbation

Confession

Apostolic Penitentiary
Complicit absolution
Canon penitentiary
Internal forum
Paenitentiale Theodori
Penitential canons
Seal of the Confessional

Eucharist

Eucharistic discipline
Canon 915








Matrimonial law


Affinity
Banns of Marriage
Declaration of Nullity

Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis


Defender of the Bond
Impediments to Marriage

Impediment of crime
Disparity of Cult
Ligamen


Matrimonial Dispensation

Ratum sed non consummatum


Natural marriage
Pauline privilege
Petrine privilege








Trials and tribunals


Tribunals

Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura
Tribunal of the Roman Rota
Apostolic Penitentiary



Tribunal Officers

Judicial Vicar/Officialis
Auditor
Advocatus Diaboli
Defender of the Bond

Tribunal Procedure

Appeal as from an abuse
Presumption








Canonical structures
Particular churches

Particular churches sui juris

Latin Church
Eastern Catholic Churches


Local particular churches

Abbacy nullius

Abbot nullius


Apostolic vicariate

Apostolic vicar


Apostolic administration

Apostolic administrator


Archdiocese
Diocese

Aeque principaliter
Cathedraticum
In persona episcopi
Chancery


Archeparchy
Eparchy
Deanery

Vicar forane


Military ordinariate
Mission sui juris
Personal ordinariate

Anglicanorum Coetibus


Personal Prelature



Juridic persons

Parish
Roman Curia

Dicastery
Congregation
Pontifical council










Jurisprudence


Canonical coronation

Canonically crowned images


Computation of time
Custom
Delegata potestas non potest delegari
Derogation
Dispensation

Taxa Innocentiana


Indult
Impediment
Interpretation

Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts


Jurisdiction
Peritus
Obreption & subreption
Obrogation
Promulgation
Resignation of the Roman Pontiff
Sede vacante
Vacatio legis
Valid but illicit








Philosophy, theology, and
fundamental theory


Theology

Ecclesiology


Treatise on Law

Determinatio










Law of persons


Person (canon law)
Canonical age
Canonical faculties
Clerics and public office
Clerical celebacy
Consecrated life
Defect of Birth
Emancipation
Juridic & physical persons
Jus patronatus
Laicization (dispensation)








Canonical documents


Notary (canon law)

Protonotary apostolic


Apostolic constitution
Canon
Concordat
Decree
Decretal
Encyclical
Motu proprio
Ordinance
Papal brief
Papal bull
Penitential
Positive law
Rescript








Penal law


Canon 1324
Canon 1398
Excommunication
Interdict
Internal forum
Laicization (penal)
Latae sententiae






 Catholicism portal





v
t
e





Main articles: Decree (canon law) and Canon law (Catholic Church)
See also: Decretal and Decretum Gratiani
A decree (Latin: decretum) in the usage of the canon law of the Catholic Church, it has various meanings. Any papal Bull, Brief, or Motu Proprio is a decree inasmuch as these documents are legislative acts of the Pope. In this sense the term is quite ancient. The Roman Congregations were formerly empowered to issue decrees in matters which come under their particular jurisdiction, but were forbidden from continuing to do so under Pope Benedict XV in 1917.[3] Each ecclesiastical province, and also each diocese may issue decrees in their periodical synods within their sphere of authority.
Canon 29 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law offers a definition of general decrees:

General decrees, by which a competent legislator makes common provisions for a community capable of receiving a law, are true laws and are regulated by the provisions of the canons on laws.[4]

Holy See[edit]
Main articles: Law of Vatican City, Decretal, and Decree (canon law)
See also: Canon law (Catholic Church)
The Holy See uses decrees from the pope such as papal bull, papal brief or motu proprio as legislative acts.[5]
Italy[edit]
Main article: Law of Italy
According clause 77 of the Italian Constitution, "the Government may not, without an enabling act from the Houses, issue decrees having the force of ordinary law. When in extraordinary cases of necessity and urgency the Government adopts provisional measures having the force of law, it must on the same day present said measures for confirmation to the Houses which, even if dissolved, shall be summoned especially for this purpose and shall convene within five days. The decrees lose effect from their inception if they are not confirmed within sixty days from their publication. The Houses may however regulate by law legal relationships arising out of not confirmed decrees."
The effectiveness for sixty days produces the effects immediately, giving rights or expectations whose legal basis was in fact precarious, especially when the conversion law never intervened.[6]
Portugal[edit]
Main article: Law of Portugal
In Portugal, there are several types of decrees (Portuguese: "decretos", singular "decreto") issued by the various bodies of sovereignty or by the bodies of self-government of autonomous regions.
Currently, there are the following types of decrees:

Decree-law (decreto-lei): is a legislative act issued by the Government of Portugal under its legislative powers defined by Article 198 of the Portuguese Constitution;
Regional legislative decree (decreto legislativo regional): is a regional law, issued by the legislative assembly of an autonomous region, within its powers defined by articles 227 and 233 of the Constitution ;
Decree of the President of the Republic (decreto do Presidente da República): is a decree issued by the President of Portugal, for the ratification of international treaties, the appointment or dismissal of members of the Government or to exercise other presidential powers defined in the Constitution;
Decree (decreto): is an act issue by the Government of Portugal to an approve international agreement whose approval is not within the competence of the Assembly of the Republic or has not been submitted to it or within the Government administrative jurisdiction laid down in Article 199 of the Constitution in relation to a statute that requires this decree;
Regulatory decree (decreto regulamentar): is an act issued by the Government of Portugal, under its administrative jurisdiction laid down in Article 199 of the Constitution, to make the necessary regulations for the proper execution of the laws and to take all actions and decisions necessary to promote economic and social development and to meet the community needs;
Regional regulatory decree (decreto regulamentar regional): is an act issued by the legislature or the government of an autonomous region, regulating the proper implementation of regional legislative decrees;
Decree from the representative of the Republic (decreto do representante da República): is decree of appointment or removal of members of the government of an autonomous region, issued by the representative of the Republic for that region.

Iran[edit]




9 October 1981, Jamaran, Tehran; Ruhollah Khomeini as supreme leader of iran sings presidential decree of Ali Khamenei.


According to the article 110 of the constitution, the supreme leader delineates the general policies of the Islamic Republic.
Russia[edit]
Main article: Decree of the President of Russia
After the Russian Revolution, a government proclamation of wide meaning was called a "decree" (Russian: декрет, dekret); more specific proclamations were called ukaz. Both terms are usually translated as 'decree'.
According to the Russian Federation's 1993 constitution, an Ukaz is a Presidential decree. Such ukazes have the power of laws, but may not alter the Russian constitution or the regulations of existing laws, and may be superseded by laws passed by the Federal Assembly.
The Government of Russia can also issue decrees formally called Decisions (Постановления) or Orders (Распоряжения) and may not contradict the constitution/laws or presidential decrees.
Saudi Arabia[edit]
Royal decrees are the source of law in Saudi Arabia.
Spain[edit]
In Spain, decrees come in a number of forms:

Royal decree
Royal Decree-Law
Royal Legislative Decree

United States[edit]
Main article: Law of the United States
In US legal usage, during the 19th and early 20th centuries, a decree was an order of a court of equity determining the rights of the parties to a suit, according to equity and good conscience. Since the 1938 procedural merger of law and equity in the federal courts under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the term judgment (the parallel term in common law) has generally replaced decree. This is now true also in most state courts.[7] The term decree has had a similar usage in admiralty, probate, and divorce law.[8]
A decree is often a final determination, but there are also interlocutory decrees. A final decree fully and finally disposes of the whole litigation, determining all questions raised by the case, and it leaves nothing that requires further judicial action; it is also appealable. An interlocutory decree is a provisional or preliminary decree that is not final and does not fully determine the suit, so that some further proceedings are required before entry of a final decree.[9] It is usually not appealable, although preliminary injunctions by federal courts are appealable even though interlocutory.[10]
Other uses of the term[edit]
In some jurisdictions, certain types of court orders by judges are referred to as decrees, e.g. a divorce decree.
See also[edit]

Consent decree
Edict
Official Communications of the Chinese Empire

Memorial to the throne


Proclamation
Rule by decree
Rescript
Soviet Decree
Ukase
Firman

Notes[edit]


^ "decree-law" in the Random House Dictionary.
^ "decree-law" in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary.
^ René Metz, What is Canon Law?
^ Canon 29, 1983 Code of Canon Law; accessed 30 March 2016.
^ "Decree". Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2007-02-17. 
^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2000). "Sanatoria del condono decaduto: a favore dei centri di recupero ma a rischio di incostituzionalità". Diritto&Giustizia edizione online.   – via Questia (subscription required)
^ West's Encyclopedia of American Law (2d ed. 2008).
^ Law.com.
^ Black's Law Dictionary Free Online Legal Dictionary 2d ed.
^ Cornell Law School, Legal Information Institute.


References[edit]

Executive decree authority, John M. Carey and Matthew Soberg Shugart, Eds., Cambridge University Press, 1998, ISBN 0-521-59722-6

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Decrees.


All external sites in French unless otherwise noted.

1946 Constitution of the 4th Republic
1958 Constitution of the 5th Republic







v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal









Authority control



GND: 4136807-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decree&oldid=816232824"					Categories: Sources of lawDecreesHidden categories: Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from June 2013Articles containing Portuguese-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiers