





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)








Environment




Human impact (on the climate)
Issues
Environmentalism
Environmental studies






Environment in


Education
Humanities
Law
Policy
Science
Social science






Article index
Lists
Portal






 Category
 Commons







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Green politics







Core topics


Green politics
Green party
List of topics








Four Pillars


Ecological wisdom
Social justice
Grassroots democracy
Nonviolence








Perspectives


Bright green environmentalism
Deep ecology
Eco-capitalism
Eco-feminism
Eco-nationalism
Eco-socialism
Green anarchism
Green conservatism
Green left
Green liberalism
Green libertarianism
Social ecology
Green Zionism








Organizations


Asia Pacific Greens Federation
European Green Party
Federation of Green Parties of Africa
Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas
Federation of Young European Greens
Global Greens
Global Young Greens








Related topics


Anti-environmentalism
Climate change politics
Conservation movement
Eco-terrorism
Ecocentrism
Ecological modernization
Environmental issues
Environmental justice
Environmental movement
Environmentalism
Localism









v
t
e





Deep ecology is an ecological and environmental philosophy promoting the inherent worth of living beings regardless of their instrumental utility to human needs, plus a radical restructuring of modern human societies in accordance with such ideas.
Deep ecology argues that the natural world is a subtle balance of complex inter-relationships in which the existence of organisms is dependent on the existence of others within ecosystems.[1] Human interference with or destruction of the natural world poses a threat therefore not only to humans but to all organisms constituting the natural order.
Deep ecology's core principle is the belief that the living environment as a whole should be respected and regarded as having certain inalienable legal rights to live and flourish, independent of its utilitarian instrumental benefits for human use. Deep ecology is often framed in terms of the idea of a much broader sociality; it recognizes diverse communities of life on Earth that are composed not only through biotic factors but also, where applicable, through ethical relations, that is, the valuing of other beings as more than just resources. It describes itself as "deep" because it regards itself as looking more deeply into the actual reality of humanity's relationship with the natural world arriving at philosophically more profound conclusions than that of the prevailing view of ecology as a branch of biology.[2] The movement does not subscribe to anthropocentric environmentalism (which is concerned with conservation of the environment only for exploitation by and for human purposes) since deep ecology is grounded in a quite different set of philosophical assumptions. Deep ecology takes a more holistic view of the world human beings live in and seeks to apply to life the understanding that the separate parts of the ecosystem (including humans) function as a whole. This philosophy provides a foundation for the environmental, ecology, and green movements and has fostered a new system of environmental ethics advocating wilderness preservation, human population control, and simple living.[3]



Contents


1 Origins
2 Principles
3 Development
4 Environmental education
5 Sources

5.1 Scientific
5.2 Spiritual
5.3 Philosophical roots

5.3.1 Spinoza




6 Criticism, debate, and response

6.1 Knowledge of non-human interests
6.2 "Deepness"
6.3 Bookchin's criticisms
6.4 Botkin's criticism
6.5 Response


7 Ecofeminist response
8 Links with other philosophies
9 Early influences
10 Notable advocates of deep ecology
11 Relevant journals
12 See also
13 References
14 Bibliography
15 Further reading



Origins[edit]
In his original 1972/73 deep ecology paper, Arne Næss claims the deep ecology movement arose from scientists – ecologists who were out in the field studying the biodiversity and wild ecosystems throughout the world. They were also doing the work of philosophers, laying the foundations for the Age of Ecology and a new ecological worldview to replace the anthropocentric, mastery of Nature, and modernist worldview arising in the 17th and 18th centuries. Three of the most influential ecological spokespersons of the 1960s were Rachel Carson, David Brower, and Paul R. Ehrlich.[4] Some consider the publication of Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring (1962) as the beginning of the contemporary, long-range deep ecology movement. When her book appeared there was a long-standing movement for conservation of land and resources, as well as support for creating parks and other areas devoted to preserving wilderness and spectacular nature. Carson's writings were especially influential because they clearly showed how human well-being depends on the condition of whole biotic communities. She explained in practical terms how living beings are interrelated within ecosystems. She explained how pesticides used to control mosquitoes and other insects led to declines in some bird populations. Silent Spring helped show how complex food webs and networks of biotic relationships function. Since humans are at the top of many food chains, exposure to chemicals becomes more concentrated as these move up the chains. The chemicals also can be stored in human tissues and gradually accumulate over time, adversely affecting health. Carson showed the need for deep changes in human practices and ways of living.
The 1960s was a decade of vigorous social activism in the United States, Canada, Western Europe, and Australia. Some activism focused on war and peace and the issue of nuclear weapons. A well-known early environmental organization started with a focus on nuclear tests and their environmental hazards. Some people in British Columbia, Canada, were opposed to the test of a nuclear weapon by the US government on Amchitka Island. They hired a fishing vessel and sailed towards the nuclear test site in protest. This action led to the founding of Greenpeace, which became more identified with environmental issues as time went by. These great movements were further catalyzed by the now iconic images of the whole Earth floating in space taken during the return of the Apollo space missions from their journey to the moon. Among the astronauts that witnessed seeing the whole Earth firsthand was Edgar D. Mitchell, who in 1971, during the return mission of Apollo 14, had an epiphany that what is needed to solve the eco-crisis "is a transformation of consciousness".[5]
Principles[edit]
Proponents of deep ecology believe that the world does not exist as a resource to be freely exploited by humans. If material goods do not guarantee happiness beyond a very moderate level, and over-consumption is endangering the biosphere, defining a new non-consumptive paradigm of well-being seems primordial, such a paradigm would be non-acquisitive/non-consumerist and non-hierarchical in relation to our place on Earth.[6] The ethics of deep ecology hold that the survival of any part is dependent upon the well-being of the whole. Proponents of deep ecology offer an eight-tier platform to elucidate their claims:[7]


The well-being and flourishing of human and nonhuman life on Earth have value in themselves. These values are independent of the usefulness of the nonhuman world for human purposes.
Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of these values and are also values in themselves
Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to satisfy vital human needs
The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a substantial decrease of the human population. The flourishing of nonhuman life requires such a decrease.
Present human interference with the nonhuman world is excessive, and the situation is rapidly worsening
Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs will be deeply different from the present.
The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality (dwelling in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an increasingly higher standard of living. There will be a profound awareness of the difference between big and great.
Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation directly or indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes.


These principles can be reduced to three simple propositions:

Wilderness and biodiversity preservation
Human population control
Simple living (or treading lightly on the planet).[3]

Development[edit]
The phrase "deep ecology" was coined by the Norwegian philosopher Arne Næss in 1973.[8] Næss rejected the idea that beings can be ranked according to their relative value. For example, judgments on whether an animal has an eternal soul, whether it uses reason or whether it has consciousness (or indeed higher consciousness) have all been used to justify the ranking of the human animal as superior to other animals. Næss states that from an ecological point of view "the right of all forms [of life] to live is a universal right which cannot be quantified. No single species of living being has more of this particular right to live and unfold than any other species."
This metaphysical idea is elucidated in Warwick Fox's claim that humanity and all other beings are "aspects of a single unfolding reality".[9] As such deep ecology would support the view of Aldo Leopold in his book A Sand County Almanac that humans are "plain members of the biotic community". They also would support Leopold's land ethic: "a thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise." Daniel Quinn, in his novel Ishmael, showed that an anthropocentric myth underlies our current view of the world.[10]
The ecological problems faced by the world today are partly due to the loss of traditional knowledge, values, and ethics of behavior that celebrate the intrinsic value and sacredness of the natural world and that give the preservation of Nature prime importance. Correspondingly, the assumption of human superiority to other life forms, as if we were granted royalty status over Nature; the idea that Nature is mainly here to serve human will and purpose.[5] Deep ecology had a response to the anthropocentric view and several different actors played a role in its development. Prominent among them is Joseph W. Meeker, who in 1973 told George Sessions about Arne Næss, whom Meeker knew personally.[11] As Warwick Fox related, "One of the things that initially interested Sessions about Næss was Næss's strong interest in, and innovative approach to, the work of Spinoza. Sessions says that he had himself 'arrived at Spinoza as the answer to the process of teaching history of philosophy by about 1972 and independently of being in contact with Næss.'"[citation needed] Sessions therefore wrote to Næss at this time, beginning a lifelong association. Meeker's (1972, 1997) book The Comedy of Survival: Studies in Literary Ecology emerged through the work of scholars seeking an environmental ethic. That book represents Meeker's founding work in literary ecology and ecocriticism, which demonstrates the relationship between the literary arts and scientific ecology, especially humankind's consideration of comedy and tragedy. It reminds readers that adaptive behaviors (comedy) promote survival, whereas tragedy estranges from other life forms. This thesis rests on Meeker's study of comparative literature, his work with biologist Konrad Lorenz, and his work as a field ecologist in the National Park service in Alaska, Oregon, and California.[5]
Deep ecology offers a philosophical basis for environmental advocacy which may, in turn, guide human activity against perceived self-destruction. Deep ecology and environmentalism hold that the science of ecology shows that ecosystems can absorb only limited change by humans or other dissonant influences. Further, both hold that the actions of modern civilization threaten global ecological well-being. Ecologists have described change and stability in ecological systems in various ways, including homeostasis, dynamic equilibrium, and "flux of nature".[12] Regardless of which model is most accurate, environmentalists[citation needed] contend that massive human economic activity has pushed the biosphere far from its "natural" state through reduction of biodiversity, climate change, and other influences. As a consequence, civilization is causing mass extinction at a rate between 100 species a day and possibly 140,000 species a year, which is 10,000 times the background rate of extinction. Deep ecologists hope to influence social and political change through their philosophy. Næss has proposed, as Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke writes, "that the earth’s human population should be reduced to about 100 million."[13]
Environmental education[edit]
Ecology in the narrow sense refers to the biological science of ecology. However, ecological paradigms and principles are being developed and applied in almost all disciplines, and these paradigms have to do with the way we approach understanding the relationships and inter-connections within and between living beings which give to each its special place and identity. Human ecology, e.g., must certainly take account of the role of our subjective lives and spiritual needs, as well as our biological ones, in terms of their ecological effects. Ecology in this sense is not a reductionist undertaking, but a movement toward a more whole (or holistic) vision and understanding of world processes.[14] Deep ecology seeks to look into all levels of existence and might be viewed as radical by some; for them a more anthropocentric view is appropriated because it put humans at the center. Learning how to live in harmony with our surroundings is beneficial because stopping the global extinction crisis and achieving true ecological sustainability will require rethinking our values as a society. In that way education seems to be the best way to start. Sustainability education aims to help learners understand their interconnectedness with all life, to become creative problem solvers and active citizens, and to engage personally and intellectually in shaping our common future. Experiential learning and critical pedagogy are central to providing opportunities for learners to engage in transformative sustainability learning. The “Environment” broadly defined, remains somewhat neglected within development studies, despite a substantial increase in contributions to the field over the fifteen years since 2000. Undergraduate and postgraduate courses (with some notable exceptions) often “add on” environmental issues as special lectures or modules, and there remains a tendency for those who are grounded in the material and discursive struggles that define the discipline to consider the environment as an exotic special interest, a problem that manifests itself in societies that have the leisure to care about the natural world. Development of a modern education model promoting patriotism and civic responsibility, active social position and healthy lifestyle is closely linked to the development of environmental responsibility in the younger generation. Development of environmentally responsible personality in individual is of particular importance for graduates of educational institutions. Environmental education could be integrated in different curriculum in most fields: education for sustainable development in the context of ecopedagogy.
Ecopedagogy calls for the remaking of capitalist practices and seeks to re-engage democracy to include multispecies interests in the face of our current global ecological crisis. It does so by using different ideas that challenge the way we see education. In Critical Pedagogy, Ecoliteracy and Planetary Crisis: The Ecopedagogy Movement, Richard Kahn (2010) reformulates Herbert Marcuse’s critical theories of society, and supports the kind of education that seizes the power of radical environmental activists and supports the earth democracy in which multispecies interests are represented. The destruction of habitats and threats to biodiversity resulting from expansion of human population and consumption is rarely addressed in a way that confronts students with the necessity to consider moral implications of such destruction.[15] Pedagogically, a return to education associated with significant life experiences, such as hiking in wilderness areas as a youth; as well as strategically significant education, action competence, social learning, and variations and combinations of those and many other pedagogical approaches developed in the past 40 years. Some of these pedagogical approaches have been disputed—for example, the belief that experiencing environment first hand is an essential component of engaging people in conservation has been disputed by arguments that these education efforts have been informed by behaviorist socio-psychology models that assumed a linear causality between education experience and pro-environmental behavior.[16] Rather, the critics have argued that people’s environmental behaviors are too complex and contextually dependent to be captured by a simple casual model. The process of environmental education of schoolchildren has the following methodological characteristics:
· Goal-setting as the projected results reflects a model of environmentally responsible personality, taking into account trends in the development of key elements of education system; all natural sciences are involved in the development of basic ecological concepts.
· The introduction of interactive training methods takes place at the high school level in teaching self-reflection, hypothesizing, predicting; school natural science education is rebuilt on the basis of system approach in accordance with the planned ecologization results. Implementation of relevant methodology will promote successful development of environmentally responsible personality in high school graduates.[17]
In higher education, the analysis of students’ individual writing assignments after viewing films/documentaries presents an interesting case of using radical ‘messages’ within the aims of environmental education in order to trigger both student’s engagement and critical thinking. The case study “If a Tree Falls and Everybody Hears the Sound” provides an example of how environmental advocacy and the objective of pluralistic education can be combined as mutually supportive means of achieving both democratic learning in which students’ individual opinions are seen as extremely valuable, and simultaneously provide an example of the type of ecopedagogy that supports learning for environmental sustainability. The role of environmental advocacy can be crucially important if the interests of all planetary citizens—and not just one species—are to be taken seriously.[15]
In her book Wild Children — Domesticated Dreams: Civilization and the Birth of Education, Layla AbdelRahim argues that the current institutions responsible for the construction and transmission of civilized epistemology are driven by the destructive premises at the foundation of civilization and human predatory culture.[18] In order to return to a viable socio-environmental culture, AbdelRahim calls for the rewilding of our anthropology (i.e. our place among other species) and of pedagogical culture, which in civilization is based on the same domestication methods of other animals.[18][19]
Sources[edit]
Scientific[edit]




Old-growth forest in Biogradska Gora National Park, Montenegro


Næss and Fox do not claim to use logic or induction to derive the philosophy directly from scientific ecology[20] but rather hold that scientific ecology directly implies the metaphysics of deep ecology, including its ideas about the self and further, that deep ecology finds scientific underpinnings in the fields of ecology and system dynamics.
In their 1985 book Deep Ecology,[21] Bill Devall and George Sessions describe a series of sources of deep ecology. They include the science of ecology itself, and cite its major contribution as the rediscovery in a modern context that "everything is connected to everything else." They point out that some ecologists and natural historians, in addition to their scientific viewpoint, have developed a deep ecological consciousness—for some a political consciousness and at times a spiritual consciousness. This is a perspective beyond the strictly human viewpoint, beyond anthropocentrism. Among the scientists they mention specifically are Rachel Carson, Aldo Leopold, John Livingston, Paul R. Ehrlich and Barry Commoner, together with Frank Fraser Darling, Charles Sutherland Elton, Eugene Odum and Paul Sears.
A further scientific source for deep ecology adduced by Devall and Sessions is the "new physics", which they describe as shattering Descartes's and Newton's vision of the universe as a machine explainable in terms of simple linear cause and effect. They propose that Nature is in a state of constant flux and reject the idea of observers as existing independent of their environment. They refer to Fritjof Capra's The Tao of Physics and The Turning Point for their characterisation of how the new physics leads to metaphysical and ecological views of interrelatedness, which, according to Capra, should make deep ecology a framework for future human societies. Devall and Sessions also credit the American poet and social critic Gary Snyder—with his devotion to Buddhism, Native American studies, the outdoors, and alternative social movements—as a major voice of wisdom in the evolution of their ideas.
The Gaia hypothesis was also an influence on the development of deep ecology.
Spiritual[edit]
The central spiritual tenet of deep ecology is that the human species is a part of the Earth, not separate from it, and as such human existence is dependent on the diverse organisms within the natural world each playing a role in the natural economy of the biosphere. Coming to an awareness of this reality involves a transformation of an outlook that presupposes humanity's superiority over the natural world. This self-realisation or "re-earthing"[22] is used for an individual to intuitively gain an ecocentric perspective. The notion is based on the idea that the more we expand the self to identify with "others" (people, animals, ecosystems), the more we realize ourselves. Transpersonal psychology has been used by Warwick Fox to support this idea. Deep ecology has influenced the development of contemporary Ecospirituality.[23]
A number of spiritual and philosophical traditions including Native American, Buddhist and Jain are drawn upon in a continuing critique of the philosophical assumptions of the modern European mind which has enabled and led to what is seen as an increasingly unsustainable level of disregard towards the rights and needs of the natural world and its ability to continue to support human life. In relation to the Judeo-Christian tradition, Næss offers the following criticism: "The arrogance of stewardship [as found in the Bible] consists in the idea of superiority which underlies the thought that we exist to watch over nature like a highly respected middleman between the Creator and Creation."[24] This theme had been expounded in Lynn Townsend White, Jr.'s 1967 article "The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis",[25] in which however he also offered as an alternative Christian view of man's relation to nature that of Saint Francis of Assisi, who he says spoke for the equality of all creatures, in place of the idea of man's domination over creation. Næss' further criticizes the reformation's view of creation as property to be put into maximum productive use: a view used frequently in the past to exploit and dispossess native populations. Many Protestant sects today regard the Bible's call for man to have stewardship of the earth as a call for the care for creation, rather than for exploitation.
The original Christian teachings on property support the Franciscan/stewardship interpretation of the Bible. Against this view, Martin Luther condemned church ownership of lands because "they did not want to use that property in an economically productive fashion. At best they used it to produce prayers. Luther, and other Reformation leaders insisted that it should be used, not to relieve men from the necessity of working, but as a tool for making more goods. The attitude of the Reformation was practically, "not prayers, but production." And production, not for consumption, but for more production." This justification was offered to support secular takings of church endowments and properties.[26]
Anthropologist Layla AbdelRahim sees the root of the anthropogenic degradation of the biosphere in the anthropology that constructs the human animal as the supreme predator. The ontological explanation offered for Human Supremacy by both science and religion, she says, alienate the human being from the community of life and allow for an immoral control and destruction of the wilderness, which, according to her contains the spirit and intelligence of life.[19]
Philosophical roots[edit]
Spinoza[edit]
Arne Næss, who first wrote about the idea of deep ecology, from the early days of developing this outlook conceived Baruch Spinoza as a philosophical source.[27]
Others have followed Naess' inquiry, including Eccy de Jonge, in Spinoza and Deep Ecology: Challenging Traditional Approaches to Environmentalism,[28] and Brenden MacDonald, in Spinoza, Deep Ecology, and Human Diversity—Realization of Eco-Literacies[citation needed].
One of the topical centres of inquiry connecting Spinoza to Deep Ecology is "self-realization." See Arne Næss in The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology movement and Spinoza and the Deep Ecology Movement for discussion on the role of Spinoza's conception of self-realization and its link to deep ecology.
Criticism, debate, and response[edit]
Knowledge of non-human interests[edit]
Animal rights activists state that for an entity to require rights and protection intrinsically, it must have interests.[29] Deep ecology is criticised for assuming that living things such as plants, for example, have their own interests as they are manifested by the plant's behavior—for instance, self-preservation being considered an expression of a will to live. Deep ecologists claim to identify with non-human nature, and in doing so, deny those who claim that non-human (or non-sentient) lifeforms' needs or interests are nonexistent or unknowable. The criticism is that the interests that a deep ecologist attributes to non-human organisms such as survival, reproduction, growth, and prosperity are really human interests. This is sometimes construed as a pathetic fallacy or anthropomorphism, in which "the earth is endowed with 'wisdom', wilderness equates with 'freedom', and life forms are said to emit 'moral' qualities."[30][31]
"Deepness"[edit]
Deep ecology is criticised for its claim to being deeper than alternative theories, which by implication are shallow. When Arne Næss coined the term deep ecology, he compared it favourably with shallow environmentalism which he criticized for its utilitarian and anthropocentric attitude to nature and for its materialist and consumer-oriented outlook.[32] Against this is Arne Næss's own view that the "depth" of deep ecology resides in the persistence of its penetrative questioning, particularly in asking "Why?" when faced with initial answers.
Writer William D. Grey believes that developing a non-anthropocentric set of values is "a hopeless quest". He seeks an improved "shallow" view, writing, "What's wrong with shallow views is not their concern about the well-being of humans, but that they do not really consider enough in what that well-being consists. We need to develop an enriched, fortified anthropocentric notion of human interest to replace the dominant short-term, sectional and self-regarding conception."[33]
Bookchin's criticisms[edit]
Some critics, particularly social ecologist Murray Bookchin, have interpreted deep ecology as being hateful toward humanity, due in part to the characterization of humanity by some deep ecologists, such as David Foreman of Earth First!, as a pathological infestation on the Earth.[13] Bookchin[34][35] therefore asserts that "deep ecology, formulated largely by privileged male white academics, has managed to bring sincere naturalists like Paul Shepard into the same company as patently antihumanist and macho mountain men like David Foreman who preach a gospel that humanity is some kind of cancer in the world of life."[34] Bookchin mentions that some, like Foreman, defend seemingly anti-human measures, such as severe population control and the claim regarding the Third World that "the best thing would be to just let nature seek its own balance, to let the people there just starve".[34] However, Bookchin himself later admitted that "statements made by Earth First! activists are not to be confused with those made by deep ecology theorists".[36] Ecophilosopher Warwick Fox similarly "warns critics not to commit the fallacy of 'misplaced misanthropy.' That is, just because deep ecology criticizes an arrogant anthropocentrism does not mean that deep ecology is misanthropic."[36] Likewise, The Deep Ecology Movement: An Introductory Anthology attempts to clarify that "deep ecologists have been the strongest critics of anthropocentrism, so much so that they have often been accused of a mean-spirited misanthropy"; however, "deep ecology is actually vitally concerned with humans realizing their best potential" and "is explicit in offering a vision of an alternative way of living that is joyous and enlivening."[37]
Bookchin's second major criticism is that deep ecology fails to link environmental crises with authoritarianism and hierarchy. Social ecologists like him believe that environmental problems are firmly rooted in the manner of human social interaction, and suggest that deep ecologists fail to recognise the potential for human beings to solve environmental issues through a change of cultural attitudes. According to Bookchin, it is a social reconstruction alone that "can spare the biosphere from virtual destruction."[34] Though some deep ecologists may reject the argument that ecological behavior is rooted in the social paradigm (which, according to their view, would be an anthropocentric fallacy), others in fact embrace this argument, such as the adherents to the deep ecologist movement Deep Green Resistance.
Botkin's criticism[edit]
Daniel Botkin[38] has likened deep ecology to its antithesis, the wise use movement, when he says that they both "misunderstand scientific information and then arrive at conclusions based on their misunderstanding, which are in turn used as justification for their ideologies. Both begin with an ideology and are political and social in focus." Elsewhere, though, he asserts that deep ecology must be taken seriously in the debate about the relationship between humans and nature because it challenges the fundamental assumptions of Western philosophy. Botkin has also criticized Næss's restatement and reliance upon the balance of nature idea and the perceived contradiction between his argument that all species are morally equal and his disparaging description of pioneering species.
Response[edit]
Some writers have misunderstood Naess, taking his ecosophy T, with its self-realization norm, as something meant to characterize the whole deep ecology movement as part of a single philosophy called "deep ecology". Naess was not doing either of these. He emphasized that movements cannot be precisely defined, but only roughly characterized by very general statements. They are often united internationally by means of such principles as found in the United Nations (UN) Earth Charter (1980), and in UN documents about basic human rights. Naess was doing something more subtle than many thought. He was not putting forth a single worldview and philosophy of life that everyone should adhere to in support of the international ecology movement. Instead, he was making an empirical claim based on overwhelming evidence that global social movements, from the grass roots up, consist of people with very diverse religious, philosophical, cultural, and personal orientations. Nonetheless, they can agree on certain courses of action and certain broad principles, especially at the international level. As supporters of a given movement, they can treat one another with mutual respect. Because of these misunderstandings Naess introduced an apron diagram to clearly illustrate his subtle distinctions.[39] The apron diagram is meant to illustrate logical, as distinct from genetic, relations between views and their connection with social movements, policies and practical actions. By "logical relations" this means verbally articulated relations between the premises and conclusions.[39] There is collective cooperation on global concerns, and yet a great variety of ultimate premises from which each person or group acts locally. Within global movements there is diversity at the local level because each place and community is different and must adapt to its unique setting. Thus, Naess stressed that his ecosophy T is not meant to hold for everyone, since it is tailored to his very modest lifestyle suitable to a place such as Tvergastein. The ultimate premises for his whole view might be conceptually incompatible with those in someone else's whole views. But even if this is true, they could both support the platform principles of the deep ecology movement and other social-political global movements, such as for peace and social justice. In recognizing the principle that all living beings have intrinsic worth, there is an acknowledgement that they are good for their own sake. This does not mean committing to biocentric equality or egalitarianism between species. Within the vast diversity of living beings, there are complex relationships the range of which is predation, competition, cooperation, and symbiosis. Many think that symbiosis and complementarity are important values to embrace as they are consistent with global cooperation, community life, and support for the deep ecology movement platform.
Ecofeminist response[edit]
Ecofeminism and deep ecology have been in dialogue for some time now, and while the debate between them has been very fruitful over the years, the exploration of their relationship remains important. As valuable as our individually reconnecting with the natural world may be, and as much as such experiences should be encouraged, some have questioned whether this approach is sufficient, given the magnitude of the threat that human encroachment poses to the nonhuman world. With this in mind, the call has been made for a broader challenge to the dominant culture than deep ecological experience may offer. This call has come most forcefully from another school of environmental ethics: ecofeminism. While sharing with deep ecologists a general concern for biocentrism and an appreciation for personal interaction with nonhuman reality, ecofeminists have also offered some harsh criticism of Leopold, Callicott, and advocates of the deep ecological approach, as well as extensionists like Singer and Regan.[40] Like deep ecology, ecofeminism is not a singular theory, and covers a broad range of thought; in rough terms, its criticism of other forms of nature ethics is grounded in an attempt to synthesize the insights of environmental ethics and animal advocacy with a feminist analysis of Western ethics and culture.[41] The resulting attempt to rethink our relationship to the animal and nature casts speciesism and anthropocentrism as symptoms of a deeper patriarchy in the Western tradition that needs to be deconstructed before a successful animal ethic can be produced. As Josephine Donovan details, there is evidence to suggest a strong emotional and philosophical affinity among Anglo-American antivivisectionists and suffragettes, who viewed their causes as common responses to Enlightenment rationalism and scientism, and jointly sought a “feminizing” of culture that would liberate human and animal alike.[40] Ecological feminism began as a critique and rejection of the western cultural worldview with its overemphasis on rationality, and linearity.[42] It argued against a Cartesian science which elevated the material and objective above the spiritual and the subjective as appropriate ways of knowing the world. Like deep ecology, ecological feminism stresses the importance of experience, and personal experience at that. However, the ecofeminists seem to be talking about experience in a sense more related to bioregionalism than deep ecology.
Both ecofeminism and deep ecology put forward a new conceptualization of the self. Some ecofeminists, such as Marti Kheel,[43] argue that self-realization and identification with all nature places too much emphasis on the whole, at the expense of the independent being. Similarly, some ecofeminists place more emphasis on the problem of androcentrism rather than anthropocentrism. To others, like Karen J. Warren, the domination of women is tethered conceptually and historically to the domination of nature. Ecofeminism denies abstract individualism and embraces the interconnectedness of the living world; relationships, including our relationship with non-human nature, are not extrinsic to our identity and are essential in defining what it means to be human. Warren argues that hierarchical classifications in general, such as racism or speciesism, are all forms of discrimination and are no different from sexism. Thus, anthropocentrism is simply another form of discrimination as a result of our flawed value structure and should be abolished.[44]
Experiential deep ecologist Joanna Macy has attempted to avoid these conflicts and criticisms through her Work that Reconnects. By focussing deep ecology on the experience of the consciousness of personal depth within the participant, she speaks of "the greening of the self", which is part of the epochal journey of our times from an egoic or egotistical self to an ecological self.
Links with other philosophies[edit]
Parallels have been drawn between deep ecology and other philosophies, in particular those of the animal rights movement, Earth First!, Deep Green Resistance, and anarcho-primitivism.
Peter Singer's 1975 book Animal Liberation critiqued anthropocentrism and put the case for animals to be given moral consideration. This can be seen as a part of a process of expanding the prevailing system of ethics to wider groupings. However, Singer has disagreed with deep ecology's belief in the intrinsic value of nature separate from questions of suffering, taking a more utilitarian stance.[45] The feminist and civil rights movements also brought about expansion of the ethical system for their particular domains. Likewise deep ecology brought the whole of nature under moral consideration.[46] The links with animal rights are perhaps the strongest, as "proponents of such ideas argue that 'All life has intrinsic value'".[47]
Many in the radical environmental direct-action movement Earth First! claim to follow deep ecology, as indicated by one of their slogans No compromise in defence of mother earth. In particular, David Foreman, the co-founder of the movement, has also been a strong advocate for deep ecology, and engaged in a public debate with Murray Bookchin on the subject.[48][49] Judi Bari was another prominent Earth Firster who espoused deep ecology. Many Earth First! actions have a distinct deep ecological theme; often these actions will be to save an area of old growth forest, the habitat of a snail or an owl, even individual trees. Actions are often symbolic or have other political aims. At one point Arne Næss also engaged in environmental direct action, though not under the Earth First! banner, when he chained himself to rocks in front of Mardalsfossen, a waterfall in a Norwegian fjord, in a successful protest against the building of a dam.[50]
There are also anarchist currents in the movement, especially in the United Kingdom. For example, Robert Hart, pioneer of forest gardening in temperate climates, wrote the essay "Can Life Survive?" in Deep Ecology & Anarchism.[51]
Robert Greenway and Theodore Roszak have employed the deep ecology platform as a means to argue for ecopsychology.[citation needed] Although ecopsychology is a highly differentiated umbrella that encompasses many practices and perspectives, its ethos is generally consistent with deep ecology.[citation needed] As this now almost forty-year-old "field" expands and continues to be reinterpreted by a variety of practitioners, social and natural scientists, and humanists, "ecopsychology" may change to include these novel perspectives.
Heidegger’s critique of technology[citation needed] has certainly inspired environmentalist and postmodernist of our time. Deep ecologists, like Heidegger[citation needed], allege that certain metaphysical presuppositions are responsible for ecological destruction, and also contend that any transformation can be brought about only through a renewed awareness about the world. Then the key to environmental crisis, require an ontological shift: from an anthropocentric and utilitarian understanding of world to an understanding which lets things be. A non-anthropocentric humanity would probably initiate attitudes, practices, and institutions that would exhibit respect and care for all beings.
Early influences[edit]





Mary Hunter Austin
Rachel Carson
Ralph Waldo Emerson
D.H.Lawrence
Aldo Leopold




John Muir
Henry David Thoreau
Friedrich Nietzsche
Baruch Spinoza
Leo Tolstoy





Notable advocates of deep ecology[edit]





Layla AbdelRahim
David Abram
Michael Asher
Judi Bari
Thomas Berry
Wendell Berry
Leonardo Boff
Fritjof Capra
Savitri Devi[13]
Michael Dowd
Vivienne Elanta
David Foreman
Warwick Fox
Chellis Glendinning
Edward Goldsmith
Félix Guattari
Paul Hawken
Martin Heidegger
Julia Butterfly Hill
Derrick Jensen
Bernie Krause
Satish Kumar
Dolores LaChapelle
Gilbert LaFreniere




Pentti Linkola
John Livingston
Joanna Macy
Jerry Mander
Freya Mathews
Terence McKenna
W. S. Merwin
Arne Næss
Peter Newman
David Orton
Val Plumwood
Theodore Roszak
John Seed
George Sessions
Elena Sharoykina
Paul Shepard
Vandana Shiva
Gary Snyder
Timothy Sprigge
Richard Sylvan
Douglas Tompkins
Oberon Zell-Ravenheart
John Zerzan





Relevant journals[edit]

Environmental Ethics
Environmental Values
Resurgence & Ecologist

See also[edit]


Sustainable development portal
Ecology portal
Environment portal
Evolutionary biology portal







ANCEP
ATWA
Biocentrism (ethics)
Biophilia hypothesis
Coupled human-environment system
Earth liberation
Ecocentrism
Eco-communalism
Ecotheology
Ecosophy
Ecosystem-based management
Environmental psychology




Gaianism
Human ecology
Intrinsic value (animal ethics)
Negative Population Growth
Neotribalism
Pantheism
Population Connection
Spiritual ecology
Sustainable development
The Revenge of Gaia
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement





References[edit]


^ Ecosystems are also considered to be dependent on other ecosystems within the biosphere.
^ "Deep Ecology: What is Said and (to be) Done?: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-04. 
^ a b John Barry; E. Gene Frankland (2002). International Encyclopedia of Environmental Politics. Routledge. p. 161. ISBN 9780415202855. 
^ "Deep Ecology, New Conservation, and the Anthropocene Worldview.: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-07. 
^ a b c "The Deep Ecology Movement: Origins, Development, and Future Prospects (Towa...: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-04. 
^ "Earth Education, Interbeing, and Deep Ecology.: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-07. 
^ Devall and Sessions, op. cit., p. 70.
^ Næss, Arne (1973) 'The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movement.' Inquiry 16: 95-100
^ Fox, Warwick, (1990) Towards a Transpersonal Ecology (Shambhala Books)
^ Quinn, Daniel (1995), "Ishmael: An Adventure of the Mind and Spirit" (Bantam)
^ Jacob, Merle. "Sustainable development and deep ecology: An analysis of competing traditions". Environmental Management. 18 (4): 477. doi:10.1007/BF02400853. ISSN 0364-152X. 
^ Botkin, Daniel B. (1990). Discordant Harmonies: A New Ecology for the Twenty-First Century. Oxford Univ. Press, NY, NY. ISBN 0-19-507469-6.
^ a b c Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke (1998). Hitler's Priestess: Savitri Devi, the Hindu-Aryan Myth, and Neo-Nazism. NY: New York University Press, ISBN 0-8147-3110-4
^ "Deep Ecology: What is Said and (to be) Done?: Start Your Search!". eds.a.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-04. 
^ a b Kopnina, Helen (2015-03-01). "If a Tree Falls and Everybody Hears the Sound: Teaching Deep Ecology to Business Students". Journal of Education for Sustainable Development. 9 (1): 101–116. doi:10.1177/0973408215569119. ISSN 0973-4082. 
^ "Ecopedagogy and Citizenship in the Age of Globalisation: connections betwee...: Start Your Search!". eds.a.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-04. 
^ "Ecopedagogy and Citizenship in the Age of Globalisation: connections betwee...: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-07. 
^ a b Layla., AbdelRahim, (2013). Wild children--domesticated dreams : civilization and the birth of education. Winnipeg: Fernwood Pub. ISBN 9781552665480. OCLC 829422058. 
^ a b 1964-, AbdelRahim, Layla,. Children's literature, domestication, and social foundation : narratives of civilization and wilderness. New York. ISBN 9780415661102. OCLC 897810261. 
^ The Shallow and the Deep, Long Range Ecology movements A summary by Arne Naess (contains added words and commas to the original which can by misleading)
^ Devall, Bill; Template:Sessions George (1985). Deep Ecology. Gibbs M. Smith. ISBN 0-87905-247-3.  pp. 85-88
^ "Deep Ecology & re-earthing ~ Q&A". users.on.net/~arachne/index.html. Retrieved 9 December 2011. 
^ Aburrow, Yvonne. "Eco-spirituality and theology". Sermons from the Mound. Pantheos. Retrieved 7 January 2014. 
^ Næss, Arne. (1989). Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy. p. 187. ISBN 0-521-34873-0
^ White, Jr, Lynn Townsend (March 1967). "The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis". Science. 155 (3767): 1203–1207. doi:10.1126/science.155.3767.1203. PMID 17847526.  (HTML copy, PDF copy).
^ Schlatter, Richard (1951). Private Property: the History of an Idea. (Rutgers Press)
^ Naess, A. (1977). "Spinoza and ecology". Philosophia. 7: 45–54. doi:10.1007/BF02379991. 
^ de Jonge, Eccy (April 28, 2004). Spinoza and Deep Ecology: Challenging Traditional Approaches to Environmentalism (Ashgate New Critical Thinking in Philosophy). Routledge. ISBN 978-0754633273. 
^ Feinberg, Joel. "The Rights of Animals and Future Generations". Retrieved 2006-04-25. 
^ Joff (2000). "The Possibility of an Anti-Humanist Anarchism". Retrieved 2006-04-25. 
^ Pister, E. Phil (1995). "The Rights of Species and Ecosystems". Fisheries. 20 (4). Archived from the original on 2006-08-22. Retrieved 2006-04-25. 
^ Great River Earth Institute. "Deep Ecology: Environmentalism as if all beings mattered". Retrieved 2006-04-25. 
^ Anthropocentrism and Deep Ecology by William Grey
^ a b c d Bookchin, Murray (1987). "Social Ecology versus Deep Ecology: A Challenge for the Ecology Movement". Green Perspectives/Anarchy Archives. 
^ AtKisson, Allan (1989). "Introduction To Deep Ecology: Deep ecology is a new way to think about our relationship to the Earth - and thinking is a prelude to action". Context Institute. 
^ a b Zimmerman, Michael E (1993). "Rethinking the Heidegger-Deep Ecology Relationship" (PDF). Environmental Ethics. 
^ Alan Drengson and Yuichi Inoue, ed. (1995). The Deep Ecology Movement. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books. p. 262. ISBN 9781556431982. 
^ Botkin, Daniel B. (2000). No Man's Garden: Thoreau and a New Vision for Civilization and Nature. Shearwater Books. pp. 42, 39. ISBN 1-55963-465-0. 
^ a b "The Deep Ecology Movement: Origins, Development, and Future Prospects (Towa...: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-07. 
^ a b "The Self of Stars and Stone: Ecofeminism, Deep Ecology, and the Ecological ...: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-08. 
^ "Ways of Knowing: Acceptable Understandings Within Bioregionalism, Deep Ecol...: Start Your Search!". eds.b.ebscohost.com. Retrieved 2016-11-08. 
^ Fellenz, Marc R. "The Moral Menagerie". 
^ Kheel, Marti. (1990): Ecofeminism and Deep Ecology; reflections on identity and difference from: Diamond, Irene. Orenstein. Gloria (editors), Reweaving the World; The emergence of ecofeminism. Sierra Club Books. San Francisco. pp 128-137. ISBN 0-87156-623-0
^ Warren, Karen J. (2008). "The Power and the Promise of Ecological Feminism". In Pojman, Louis P.; Pojman, Paul. Environmental Ethics: Readings in Theory and Application (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth. pp. 33–48. ISBN 978-0-495-09503-3. 
^ Kendall, Gillian (May 2011 ). The Greater Good: Peter Singer On How To Live An Ethical Life. Sun Magazine, The Sun Interview, Issue 425. Retrieved on: 2011-12-02
^ Alan AtKisson. "Introduction To Deep Ecology, an interview with Michael E. Zimmerman". In Context (22). Retrieved 2006-05-04. 
^ Wall, Derek (1994). Green History. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-07925-X. 
^ David Levine, ed. (1991). Defending the Earth: a dialogue between Murray Bookchin and Dave Foreman. 
^ Bookchin, Murray; Graham Purchace; Brian Morris; Rodney Aitchtey; Robert Hart; Chris Wilbert (1993). Deep Ecology and Anarchism. Freedom Press. ISBN 0-900384-67-0. 
^ J. Seed, J. Macy, P. Flemming, A. Næss, Thinking like a mountain: towards a council of all beings, Heretic Books (1988), ISBN 0-946097-26-7, ISBN 0-86571-133-X.
^ Deep Ecology & Anarchism. Freedom Press. 1993. 


Bibliography[edit]

Bender, F. L. 2003. The Culture of Extinction: Toward a Philosophy of Deep Ecology Amherst, New York: Humanity Books.
Devall, W. and G. Sessions. 1985. Deep Ecology: Living As if Nature Mattered Salt Lake City: Gibbs M. Smith, Inc.
Drengson, Alan. 1995. The Deep Ecology Movement
Katz, E., A. Light, et al. 2000. Beneath the Surface: Critical Essays in the Philosophy of Deep Ecology Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
LaChapelle, D. 1992. Sacred Land, Sacred Sex: Rapture of the Deep Durango: Kivakí Press.
Næss, A. 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy Translated by D. Rothenberg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, C. 2006. Ecofeminism vs. Deep Ecology, Dialogue, San Antonio, TX: Saint Mary's University Dept. of Philosophy.
Passmore, J. 1974. Man’s Responsibility for Nature London: Duckworth.
Sessions, G. (ed) 1995. Deep Ecology for the Twenty-first Century Boston: Shambhala.
Taylor, B. and M. Zimmerman. 2005. Deep Ecology" in B. Taylor, ed., Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature, v 1, pp. 456–60, London: Continuum International.
GECEVSKA, Valentina, Vancho DONEV, and Radmil POLENAKOVIK. "A Review Of Environmental Tools Towards Sustainable Development." Annals Of The Faculty Of Engineering Hunedoara - International Journal of Engineering 14.1 (2016): 147-152.
Clark, John P. "What Is Living In Deep Ecology?." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 30.2 (2014): 157-183.
Smith, Mick. "Deep Ecology: What Is Said And (To Be) Done?." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 30.2 (2014): 141-156.
HOLY-LUCZAJ, MAGDALENA. "Heidegger's Support For Deep Ecology Reexamined Once Again." Ethics & The Environment 20.1 (2015): 45-66.
Hawkins, Ronnie. "Why Deep Ecology Had To Die." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 30.2 (2014): 206-273.
Drengson, Alan, Bill Devall, and Mark A. Schroll. "The Deep Ecology Movement: Origins, Development, And Future Prospects (Toward A Transpersonal Ecosophy)." International Journal of Transpersonal Studies 30.1/2 (2011): 101-117.
Kopnina, Helen. "If A Tree Falls And Everybody Hears The Sound: Teaching Deep Ecology To Business Students." Journal of Education for Sustainable Development 9.1 (2015): 101-116.
Kopnina, Helen. "Future Scenarios And Environmental Education." Journal of Environmental Education 45.4 (2014): 217.
Ponomarenko, Yelena, et al. "Modern Methodology And Techniques Aimed At Developing The Environmentally Responsible Personality." International Journal of Environmental & Science Education 11.9 (2016): 2877-2885.
Ehresman, Timothy, and Chukwumerije Okereke. "Environmental Justice And Conceptions Of The Green Economy." International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law & Economics 15.1 (2015): 13-27.
Marc R., Fellenz. "9. Ecophilosophy: Deep Ecology And Ecofeminism." The Moral Menagerie : Philosophy and Animal Rights. 158. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2007.
Diehm, Christian. "The Self Of Stars And Stone: Ecofeminism, Deep Ecology, And The Ecological Self." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 19.3 (2003): 31-45. Humanities International Complete.
Booth, Annie. "Ways Of Knowing: Acceptable Understandings Within Bioregionalism, Deep Ecology, Ecofeminism, And Native American Cultures." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 16.1 (2000): 1-14.
Vira, Bhaskar. "Taking Natural Limits Seriously: Implications For Development Studies And The Environment." Development & Change 46.4 (2015): 762-776.
Burns, Heather L. "Going Deep: Reflections On Teaching Deep Ecology In Costa Rica." Transformative Dialogues: Teaching & Learning Journal 8.2 (2015): 1-14.
Fox, W. (1990). Toward a transpersonal ecology: Developing new foundations for environmentalism. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Misiaszek, Greg William. "Ecopedagogy And Citizenship In The Age Of Globalisation: Connections Between Environmental And Global Citizenship Education To Save The Planet." European Journal of Education 50.3 (2015): 280-292.
Sessions, George. "Deep Ecology, New Conservation, And The Anthropocene Worldview." Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy 30.2 (2014): 106-114.

Further reading[edit]

Abram, David 1996. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than-Human World. Pantheon Books.
Conesa-Sevilla, J. 2006. The Intrinsic Value of the Whole: Cognitive and utilitarian evaluative processes as they pertain to ecocentric, deep ecological, and ecopsychological "valuing." The Trumpeter, 22(2): 26-42.
Curry, Patrick. 2011. Ecological Ethics: An Introduction. Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-5125-5.
Glasser, Harold (ed.) 2005. The Selected Works of Arne Næss, Volumes 1-10. Springer, ISBN 1-4020-3727-9. (review)

Griffin, Susan. Woman and Nature.Harper Collins 1978.

Keulartz, Jozef 1998. Struggle for nature : a critique of radical ecology, London [etc.] : Routledge.
Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011). Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, Chapter 12, “The Need for a Different World View”, New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044.
Kull, Kalevi 2011. Foundations for ecosemiotic deep ecology. In: Peil, Tiina (ed.), The Space of Culture – the Place of Nature in Estonia and Beyond. (Approaches to Culture Theory 1.) Tartu: Tartu University Press, 69–75.
Linkola, Pentti 2011. Can Life Prevail? UK: Arktos Media, 2nd Revised ed. ISBN 1907166637
Merchant, Carolyn 1990. The Death of Nature, HarperOne. ISBN 0-06-250595-5, ISBN 978-0-06-250595-8.
Sylvan, Richard 1985a. "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part I." Radical Philosophy 40: 2–12.
Sylvan, Richard 1985b. "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part II." Radical Philosophy 41: 1–22.
Tobias, Michael (ed.) 1988 (1984). Deep Ecology. Avant Books. ISBN 0-932238-13-0.
Turner, Jack 1996. The Abstract Wild. Tucson, Univ of Arizona Press.
de Steiguer, J.E. 2006. The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought. University of Arizona Press 246 pp.







v
t
e


Environmental humanities



Art



Crop art
Environmental art
Environmental sculpture
Land art
Landscape painting
Photography

conservation
landscape
nature
wildlife


Sculpture trail
Site-specific art
Sustainable art








Culture



Cultural ecology
Cultural landscape
Ecolinguistics
Ecological anthropology
Ecosemiotics
Environmental anthropology
Ethnoecology
Traditional ecological knowledge





Literature



Ecocomposition
Ecocriticism
Ecopoetry
Geocriticism
Nature writing
Outdoor literature
Zoopoetics





Philosophy



Aesthetics of nature
Constructivism
Cosmology
Critical realism
Deep ecology
Ecofeminism
Ecophenomenology
Ecosophy
Environmental ethics
Environmental justice
Environmental philosophy
Materialism
Natural philosophy
Philosophy of mind
Philosophy of science
Social ecology





Religion



Ecotheology
Environmental theology
Religion and environmentalism
Spiritual ecology
Stewardship





Other



Anthrozoology
Ecomusicology
Environmental communication
Environmental education

adult
arts-based


Environmental history
Environmental interpretation
Environmental journalism
Environmental law
Outdoor education
Psychogeography
Thematic interpretation





Related



Animal studies
Bioethics
Biophilia hypothesis
Do it yourself (ethic)
Natural history (museums)
Popular science
Property theory (common property)
Science, technology and society

science studies


Simple living
Slow food
Spirit of place
Sustainability studies





Applied



Arts and Crafts movement
Acoustic ecology
Biomimicry
Ecodesign
Ecological design
Ecomuseum
Educational trail
Environmental design
Landscape architecture

assessment
planning


Nature center
New Urbanism
Sustainable architecture
Sustainable design
Sustainable fashion
Themed walk
Urban acupuncture








 Environment portal
 Category
 Commons
Journals
Degrees
Institutions












v
t
e


Environmental social science



Fields



Ecological anthropology
Ecological economics
Environmental anthropology
Environmental economics
Environmental communication
Environmental history
Environmental politics
Environmental psychology
Environmental sociology
Human ecology
Human geography
Political ecology
Regional science








Related



Agroecology
Anthrozoology
Behavioral geography
Community studies
Demography
Design

ecological
environmental


Ecological humanities
Economics

energy
thermo


Environmental

education
ethics
law
science
studies


Ethnobiology

botany
ecology
zoology


Forestry
Industrial ecology
Integrated geography
Permaculture
Rural sociology
Science, technology and society

science studies


Sustainability

science
studies


Systems ecology
Urban

ecology
geography
metabolism
studies







Applied



Architecture

landscape
sustainable


Ecopsychology
Engineering

ecological
environmental


Green criminology
Health

environmental
epidemiology
occupational
public


Management

environmental
fisheries
forest
natural resource
waste


Planning

environmental
land use
regional
spatial
urban


Policy

energy
environmental










 Environment portal
 Category
Concepts
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes
Scholars












v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration












v
t
e


Sustainability



Principles



Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development





Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons





Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth





Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable





Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species





Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable
Energy poverty





Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture





Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed





Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield





Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism





Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste





Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals








Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees












v
t
e


Simple living



Practices



Barter
Cord-cutting
DIY ethic
Downshifting
Dry toilet
Forest gardening
Freeganism
Frugality
Gift economy
Intentional community
Local currency
Low-impact development
Minimalism
No frills
Off-the-grid
Permaculture
Self-sufficiency
Subsistence agriculture
Sustainable living
Sustainable sanitation
Veganism
Vegetarianism
War tax resistance
WWOOF





Religious and spiritual



Asceticism
Aparigraha
Cynicism
Detachment
Distributism
Jesus movement
Mendicant
Mindfulness
Monasticism
New Monasticism
Plain dress
Plain people
Quakers
Rastafari
Temperance
Testimony of simplicity
Tolstoyan movement





Secular movements



Back-to-the-land
Car-free
Compassionate living
Environmental
Hippie
Slow
Small house
Transition town
Open Source Ecology





Notable writers



Wendell Berry
Ernest Callenbach
G. K. Chesterton
Duane Elgin
Mahatma Gandhi
Richard Gregg
Tom Hodgkinson
Harlan Hubbard
Satish Kumar
Helen Nearing
Scott Nearing
Peace Pilgrim
Vicki Robin
Nick Rosen
Dugald Semple
E. F. Schumacher
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy





Modern-day adherents



Mark Boyle
Jim Merkel
Suelo
Thomas





Media



"Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral"
Escape from Affluenza
The Good Life
The Moon and the Sledgehammer
Mother Earth News
The Power of Half
Small Is Beautiful
Walden





Related topics



Affluenza
Agrarianism
Anarcho-primitivism
Anti-consumerism
Appropriate technology
Bohemianism
Consumerism
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Ecological footprint
Food miles
Green anarchism
The good life
Global warming
Hedonophobia
Intentional living
Itinerant
Low-technology
Nonviolence
Peak oil
Sustainability
Work–life balance












v
t
e


Veganism and vegetarianism



Perspectives




Veganism



Animal-free agriculture
Fruitarianism
History
Juice fasting
Low-carbon diet
Raw veganism
Nutrition
Vegan organic gardening





Vegetarianism



Economic vegetarianism
Environmental vegetarianism
History
Lacto vegetarianism
Ovo vegetarianism
Ovo-lacto vegetarianism
Cuisine
Vegetarian Diet Pyramid
Ecofeminism
Nutrition
By country





Semi-vegetarianism



Macrobiotic diet
Pescetarianism





Lists



Vegans
Vegetarians
Vegetarian festivals
Vegetarian organizations
Vegetarian restaurants








Ethics




Secular



Animal rights
Animal welfare
Carnism
Deep ecology
Environmental vegetarianism
Ethics of eating meat
Meat paradox
Nonviolence
Speciesism
Tirukkuṛaḷ





Religious



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism

Sattvic
Ahimsa


Sikhism
Rastafari
Jainism
Judaism
Pythagorean diet








Food,
drink



Agar
Agave nectar
Meat analogue

List of meat substitutes


Miso
Mochi
Mock duck
Nutritional yeast
Plant cream
Plant milk
Quinoa
Quorn
Seitan
Soy yogurt
Tempeh
Tofu
Tofurkey
Cheese
Hot dog
Vegetarian mark
Sausage
Beer
Wine
Veggie burger





Groups,
events,
companies




Vegan



American Vegan Society
Beauty Without Cruelty
Food Empowerment Project
Go Vegan
Movement for Compassionate Living
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
Plamil Foods
Vegan Awareness Foundation
Vegan flag
Vegan Ireland
Vegan Outreach
Vegan Prisoners Support Group
The Vegan Society
Veganz
World Vegan Day





Vegetarian



American Vegetarian Party
Boston Vegetarian Society
Christian Vegetarian Association
European Vegetarian Union
Hare Krishna Food for Life
International Vegetarian Union
Jewish Veg
Linda McCartney Foods
Meat-free days

Meatless Monday


Swissveg
Toronto Vegetarian Association
Vegetarian Society
Vegetarian Society (Singapore)
Veggie Pride
Viva! Health
World Esperantist Vegetarian Association
World Vegetarian Day








Books,
reports



Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903)
The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927)
Diet for a Small Planet (1971)
Moosewood Cookbook (1977)
Fit for Life (1985)
Diet for a New America (1987)
The China Study (2004)
Raw Food Made Easy for 1 or 2 People (2005)
Skinny Bitch (2005)
Livestock's Long Shadow (2006)
Eating Animals (2009)
The Kind Diet (2009)
Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009)
Eat & Run (2012)
Meat Atlas (annual)





Films



Meet Your Meat (2002)
Peaceable Kingdom (2004)
Earthlings (2005)
A Sacred Duty (2007)
Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010)
Planeat (2010)
Forks Over Knives (2011)
Vegucated (2011)
Live and Let Live (2013)
Cowspiracy (2014)
What the Health (2017)
Carnage (2017)





Magazines



Naked Food
Vegetarian Times
VegNews





Physicians,
academics



Neal D. Barnard
T. Colin Campbell
Caldwell Esselstyn
Gary L. Francione
Joel Fuhrman
Michael Greger
Melanie Joy
Michael Klaper
John A. McDougall
Reed Mangels
Dean Ornish
Richard H. Schwartz









Authority control



GND: 4689428-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deep_ecology&oldid=817556905"					Categories: Deep ecologyEnvironmental ethicsSubfields of ecologyEnvironmental social science conceptsSpinoza studiesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles with unsourced statements from October 2007Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers