For other uses, see DIA (disambiguation).

Defense Intelligence Agency


Seal of the Defense Intelligence Agency



Agency overview


Formed
October 1, 1961; 56 years ago (1961-10-01)[1]


Headquarters
DIA Headquarters, Joint Base Anacostia–Bolling, Washington, D.C.[2]


Motto
Committed to Excellence in Defense of the Nation


Employees
Classified
Approx. 17,000 (75% civilian and 25% military)


Annual budget
Classified


Agency executives



LTG Robert P. Ashley, Jr., USA,
Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency
Melissa A. Drisko,
Deputy Director[3]





Parent agency
Department of Defense


Website
www.dia.mil


The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) is an external intelligence service of the United States federal government specializing in defense and military intelligence.
A component of the Department of Defense (DoD) and the United States Intelligence Community (IC), DIA informs national civilian and defense policymakers about the military intentions and capabilities of foreign governments and non-state actors. It also provides intelligence assistance, integration and coordination across uniformed military service intelligence components, which remain structurally separate from DIA.[4] The agency's role encompasses the collection and analysis of military-related foreign political, economic, industrial, geographic, and medical and health intelligence.[5] DIA produces approximately one-fourth of all intelligence content that goes into the President's Daily Brief.[6]
DIA's intelligence operations extend beyond the zones of combat, and approximately half of its employees serve overseas at hundreds of locations and U.S. Embassies in 140 countries.[7] The agency specializes in collection and analysis of human-source intelligence (HUMINT), both overt and clandestine, while also handling U.S. military-diplomatic relations abroad.[8] DIA concurrently serves as the national manager for the highly technical measurement and signature intelligence (MASINT) and the Defense Department manager for counterintelligence programs. The agency has no law enforcement authority, but it is sometimes portrayed so in American popular culture.
DIA is a national-level intelligence organization that does not belong to a single military element or the traditional chain of command, instead answering to the Secretary of Defense directly through the USDI. Three-quarters of the agency's 17,000 employees are career civilians who are experts in various fields of defense and military interest or application;[9][10] although no formal military background is required, 48% of agency employees have some past military service.[11] DIA has a tradition of marking unclassified deaths of its employees on the organization's Memorial Wall.
Established in 1961 under President John F. Kennedy by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, DIA has been involved in U.S. intelligence efforts throughout the Cold War and rapidly expanded, both in size and scope, since the September 11 attacks. Because of the sensitive nature of its work, the spy organization has been embroiled in numerous controversies including those related to its intelligence-gathering activities, its role in torture as well as attempts to expand its activities on U.S. soil.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Comparison to Other Intelligence Community Members

2.1 CIA
2.2 DIA and the Military Services


3 Organization
4 Employment requirements and polygraph
5 Budget and personnel
6 Notable cases of espionage

6.1 Spying for DIA
6.2 Spying against DIA


7 Controversies

7.1 Alleged torture with drugs, gay porn and loud music
7.2 Skinny Puppy Controversy
7.3 Attempts to expand domestic activities
7.4 9/11 and Able Danger
7.5 German Neo-Nazi Murders


8 History

8.1 DIA begins operation
8.2 Years of transition
8.3 1980s
8.4 Post–Cold War transformation


9 Memorial wall
10 DIA in popular culture
11 Seal
12 See also
13 References
14 External links



Overview[edit]
The Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency is an intelligence officer who, upon nomination by the President and confirmation by the Senate, serves as the nation's highest-ranking military intelligence officer. He or she is the primary intelligence adviser to the Secretary of Defense and also answers to the Director of National Intelligence. The Director is also the Commander of the Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance, a subordinate command of United States Strategic Command, which is co-located with DIA. Additionally, he or she chairs the Military Intelligence Board, which coordinates activities of the entire defense intelligence community.[12]




Bird's eye view of DIA HQ from the Potomac in Washington, DC











The 450,000 sq ft (42,000 m2) south wing of DIA HQ (left), one of DIA's 24/7 watch centers (right).


DIA is headquartered in Washington, D.C. on Joint Base Anacostia–Bolling with major operational activities at the Pentagon at each Unified Combatant Command as well as in more than a hundred U.S. Embassies around the world where it deploys alongside other government partners (e.g. CIA) and also operates the U.S. Defense Attache Offices.[13] Additionally, the agency has staff deployed at the Col. James N. Rowe Building at Rivanna Station in Charlottesville, Virginia, National Center for Medical Intelligence (NCMI) in Fort Detrick, Maryland, Missile and Space Intelligence Center (MSIC) in Huntsville, Alabama, Russell-Knox Building on Marine Corps Base Quantico, National Center for Credibility Assessment at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, and Defense Intelligence Support Center (DISC) in Reston, Virginia. DIA is also in the process of building a new campus in Bethesda, Maryland, which will serve as the new location of the National Intelligence University as well as a facility for DIA and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.[14][15]
Comparison to Other Intelligence Community Members[edit]
CIA[edit]
DIA and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) are distinct organizations with different functions. DIA focuses on national level defense-military topics, while CIA is concentrated on broader, more general intelligence needs of the President and his Cabinet. Additionally, due to DIA's designation as a combat support agency, it has special responsibilities in meeting intelligence requirements specifically for the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Combatant Commanders, both in peace and at war. Although there are misconceptions in the media and public about the DIA–CIA rivalry, the two agencies have a mutually beneficial relationship and division of labor. According to a former senior U.S official who worked with both agencies, "the CIA doesn't want to be looking for surface-to-air missiles in Libya" while it is also tasked with evaluating the Syrian opposition.[8] CIA and DIA Operations Officers all go through the same type of clandestine training at an interagency Defense installation under CIA administration, best known in popular culture by its CIA nickname "The Farm".[8]
DIA and the Military Services[edit]
DIA is not a collective of all U.S. military intelligence units and the work it performs is not in lieu of that falling under intelligence components of individual services. Unlike the Russian GRU, which encompasses equivalents of nearly all joint U.S. military intelligence operations, DIA assists and coordinates the activities of individual service-level intelligence units (i.e. 25 AF, INSCOM, etc.), but they nevertheless remain separate entities. As a general rule, DIA handles national-level, long term and strategic intelligence needs, whereas service-level intelligence components handle tactical, short-term goals pertinent to their respective services.[16] DIA does, however, lead coordination efforts with the military intelligence units and with the national DOD intelligence services (NSA, NGA, NRO) in its role as chair of the Military Intelligence Board and through the co-located Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance.
Organization[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



DIA is organized into four directorates and five regional centers[17]

Directorate of Operations:

Defense Clandestine Service (DCS): DCS conducts clandestine espionage activities around the world and is the executive agent for human intelligence operations throughout the Department of Defense.[18] Staffed by civilian and military personnel, the DCS is a consolidation of the former Defense Human Intelligence Service and works in conjunction with the Central Intelligence Agency's Directorate of Operations, among other national HUMINT entities. It globally deploys teams of case officers, interrogation experts, field analysts, linguists, technical specialists, and special operations forces.
Defense Attache System (DAS): DAS represents the United States in defense and military-diplomatic relations with foreign governments worldwide. It also manages and conducts overt human intelligence collection activities. Defense Attaches serve from Defense Attache Offices (DAO) co-located at more than a hundred United States Embassies in foreign nations, represent the Secretary of Defense in diplomatic relations with foreign governments and militaries, and coordinate military activities with partner nations.


Defense Cover Office (DCO) – DCO is a DIA component responsible for executing cover programs for agency's intelligence operatives, as well as those for the entire Department of Defense.[19][20][21]

Directorate for Analysis: The Directorate of Analysis manages the all-source analysis elements of DIA. Analysts analyze and disseminate finalized intelligence products, focusing on national, strategic and tactical-level military issues that may arise from worldwide political, economic, medical, natural or other related processes. Analysts contribute to the President's Daily Brief and the National Intelligence Estimates. Analysts serve DIA in all of the agency's facilities as well as globally in the field.
Directorate for Science and Technology: The Directorate for Science and Technology manages DIA's technical assets and personnel. These assets gather and analyze Measurement and Signature Intelligence, which is a technical intelligence discipline that serves to detect, track, identify or describe the signatures (distinctive characteristics) of fixed or dynamic target sources. This often includes radar intelligence, acoustic intelligence, nuclear intelligence, and chemical and biological intelligence. DIA is designated the national manager for MASINT collection within the United States Intelligence Community, coordinating all MASINT gathering across agencies. DIA is also the national manager of the Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System (JWICS), the central Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) processing network for the United States, and Stone Ghost, a network for US and partner nations.
Directorate for Mission Services: The Directorate for Mission Services provides administrative, technical, and programmatic support to the agency's domestic and global operations and analytic efforts. This includes providing counterintelligence to the agency as well as serving as the counterintelligence executive agent for the Department of Defense.
Centers: DIA is divided into four regional centers and one functional center which manage the agency's efforts in these areas of responsibility. These centers are the Americas Center, the Asia/Pacific Center, the Europe/Eurasia Center, the Middle East/Africa Center, and the Defense Combating Terrorism Center. DIA also manages Community-wide centers such as the National Center for Medical Intelligence, the Missile and Space Intelligence Center, the National Media Exploitation Center, and the Underground Facilities Analysis Center (UFAC).
Further, DIA is responsible for administering the JIOCEUR and various Joint Intelligence Centers which serve and are co-located with each of the Unified Combatant Commands. Additionally, DIA manages the Directorate for Intelligence, Joint Staff (J2) which advises and supports the Joint Chiefs of Staff with foreign military intelligence for defense policy and war planning.
DIA also currently runs the National Intelligence University (NIU) on behalf of the Intelligence Community and houses the John T. Hughes Library at the Headquarters facility. DIA will be relinquishing management of the NIU to the Office of the Director of National Intelligence in 2014 and the university will be moving from DIA Headquarters to a new campus in Bethesda, Maryland.[22]
Employment requirements and polygraph[edit]




Department of Defense polygraph brochure distributed to applicants by DIA and NSA, among other intelligence components.


Due to the sensitive nature of DIA's work, all of its personnel, including interns and contractors, are subject to the same security standards and must obtain a Top Secret clearance with Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) access.[23] Collateral Top Secret clearances granted by the DoD are not sufficient to grant access to DIA's SCI information. Additionally, the SCI access granted by other intelligence agencies, such as CIA or NSA, do not transfer to DIA and vice versa.
In addition to the rigorous background investigations, psychological and drug screening, as well as security interviews, DIA requires that its applicants pass the agency polygraph. In fact, DIA exercises operational control over the National Center for Credibility Assessment (NCCA), which establishes polygraphing standards and trains polygraphers for placement across the entire intelligence community. In 2008, the agency started expanding its polygraph program in an attempt to screen 5,700 prospective and current employees every year.[24] This was a several fold increase from 2002 when, according to information provided to Congress, DIA conducted 1,345 polygraphs. According to the unclassified DIA document cited in the news report, since the mid-2000s the agency started hiring contract polygraphers in addition to the permanent DIA polygraphers, and added 13 polygraphing studios to those the spy organization already operated. This expanded polygraph screening at DIA continued notwithstanding documented technical problems discovered in the Lafayette computerized polygraph system used by the agency; the organization allegedly refused to change the flawed Lafayette polygraph but declined to comment as to the reasoning.[25]
Unlike the CIA and NSA polygraphs, DIA polygraphs are only of Counterintelligence Scope (CI), rather than Full Scope (FS) (also known as Expanded Scope Screening or ESS), which is ostensibly more intrusive as far as one's personal life is concerned. DIA administered only a handful of FS polygraphs and only for those personnel who were to be detailed to the CIA. Additionally, DIA conducted a handful of FS polygraphs on its personnel remaining overseas in excess of 6.5 years, although this practice appeared to be outside the scope of DIA's authorization at the time.[26]
Like with other intelligence agencies, failing to pass the DIA polygraph is a virtual guarantee that an applicant will be judged unsuitable for agency employment. In fact, according to a report published by the Office of the Undersecretary of Defense of Intelligence, while the usually more stringent NSA is willing to give its applicants several shots at passing the polygraph, DIA tends to give one or at most two opportunities to clear the test, after which the employment offer is rescinded.[27] The same report recommended that DIA seek permanent authority to conduct more intrusive Expanded Scope Screenings due to their supposed usefulness in eliciting admissions from applicants.[28]
Budget and personnel[edit]
DIA's budget and exact personnel numbers are classified. The agency does reveal that currently it has approximately 17,000 employees, two-thirds of whom are civilians[9] and approximately 50% of whom work at more than 141 overseas locations.[7] In 1994, it was revealed that DIA requested approximately $4 billion in funding for the period of 1996–2001 ($6.3 billion inflation adjusted), averaging $666 million per year ($1.05 billion inflation adjusted).[29] The agency, however, has nearly doubled in size since then and also assumed additional responsibilities from various intelligence elements from across the Department of Defense, CIA and wider intelligence community. In 2006, at the height of Donald Rumsfeld's push to further expand the scope of military intelligence beyond tactical considerations, DIA was estimated to receive up to $3 billion annually.[30]
According to classified documents leaked by Edward Snowden and published by the Washington Post in 2013, the National Intelligence Program (NIP) component of the overall US intelligence budget contained approximately $4.4 billion/year for the General Defense Intelligence Program (GDIP), which is managed by DIA, even as it is not exclusively for the agency's use.[31] The numbers exclude the Military Intelligence Component (MIP) of the overall US intelligence budget, which by itself has averaged more than $20 billion per year in the past decade.
Notable cases of espionage[edit]
DIA is one of a few U.S. federal organizations, such as the CIA and FBI, that rely on human espionage to collect information. For this reason, the agency has been involved in numerous espionage events over the course of decades.
Spying for DIA[edit]

Lawrence A. Corcoran – a DIA officer stationed in Santiago, Chile since 1972, who allegedly paid $50,000 dollars per piece for the 17 missiles used to bombard the La Moneda Palace as part of the U.S.-supported 1973 Chilean coup d'état.[32]





Igor Sutyagin



Victor Kaliadin (Russian: Виктор Калядин) – a CEO of a Russian company "Elers Electron", who in 2001 was sentenced to 14 years in prison for selling a ring run by a DIA agent technical information on Arena, the Russian active protection system for tanks. He died of his fourth heart attack in 2004.[33]
Igor Sutyagin – Russian arms control and nuclear weapons specialist convicted in 2004 of spying for DIA. Released in 2010 in exchange for Russian spies arrested in the U.S. during the break-up of the Illegals Program. Denies any involvement in spying.
Edmond Pope – A retired intelligence officer-turned-"businessman", sentenced by a Russian court in 2000 to 20 years for buying-up and smuggling classified military equipment out of the country as scrap metal.[34] He was soon pardoned by newly elected Vladimir Putin but continues to assert that the Russian authorities used him as a scapegoat for their broken system.[35] In the same interview with Larry King, however, he spoke of a plot by unspecified people in the U.S., as part of which Pope was being slowly poisoned in the Lefortovo Prison, with the hopes that he would eventually have to be transferred to a hospital, abducted on his way and smuggled out of the country; he claims that his representatives stopped the plot.
Jerzy Strawa – a Polish engineer and an employee of the Ministry of Foreign Trade executed in 1968 at Mokotów Prison for passing industrial and defense information to DIA agents while on official trips in Austria and West Germany.[36]
Natan Sharansky – a former high ranking Israeli politician and Soviet dissident who, during his life in Russia, was sentenced to 13 years of prison with hard labor for spying for DIA. The prosecution alleged that he gave a DIA agent in journalist's disguise—Robert Toth—a list of people who had access to military and other secrets.[37] Sharansky was released in 1986 following a spy exchange that took place on the Glienicke Bridge between the USSR and the Western allies. In 2006, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.





Ana Montes



Charles Dennis McKee – a DIA officer who, along with CIA's Matthew Gannon, died as a result of the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing.[38] The incident gave birth to numerous conspiracy theories that the flight was bombed because the officers were aware of illicit U.S. intelligence drug activities or that the case was related to them trying to secure the release of American hostages in Lebanon. He is notably absent from DIA's memorial wall (below)

Spying against DIA[edit]

Ana Belen Montes – a senior DIA analyst arrested in 2001 for spying for the Intelligence Directorate of Cuba and sentenced to 25 years in prison. Prosecutors alleged that she started spying in the mid-1980s, around the same time when CIA's Aldrich Ames started his interaction with the KGB.
Ronald Montaperto – a senior DIA intelligence analyst who in 2006 pleaded guilty to giving Chinese intelligence officers classified information. Montaperto claimed that he was tricked and served only 3-months in jail due to letters of support from other pro-China intelligence analysts, pejoratively known as the "Red Team", who "harshly [criticize] anyone who raises questions about the threat posed by Beijing's communist regime".[39] One of such supporters, Lonnie Henley, was initially reprimanded by the ODNI for his support of Montaperto but was later promoted to acting national intelligence officer for East Asia.[40]
Waldo H. Dubberstein – a senior DIA intelligence officer for the Middle East and an associate of CIA arms smuggler Edwin P. Wilson who was indicted in 1983 for selling DIA secrets to Libya. The day after being charged, he was found dead in what was ruled a suicide.[41]

Controversies[edit]
Alleged torture with drugs, gay porn and loud music[edit]




A declassified FBI correspondence alleging DIA misconduct


In 2003, the Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld's "Working Group" on interrogations requested that DIA come up with prisoner interrogation techniques for the group's consideration. According to the 2008 US Senate Armed Services Committee report on the treatment of detainees in U.S. custody, DIA began drawing up the list of techniques with the help of its civilian employee, a former Guantanamo Interrogation Control Element (ICE) Chief David Becker. Becker claimed that the Working Group members were particularly interested in aggressive methods and that he "was encouraged to talk about techniques that inflict pain."[42]
It is unknown to what extent the agency's recommendations were used or for how long, but according to the same Senate report, the list drawn up by DIA included the use of "drugs such as sodium pentothal and demerol", humiliation via female interrogators and sleep deprivation. Becker claimed that he recommended the use of drugs due to rumors that another intelligence agency, the name of which was redacted in the Senate report, had successfully used them in the past.[43] According to the analysis of the Office of Defense Inspector General, DIA's cited justification for the use of drugs was to "[relax] detainee to cooperative state" and that mind-altering substances were not used.[44]
Some of the more lurid revelations of DIA's alleged harsh interrogations came from FBI officers, who conducted their own screenings of detainees in Guantanamo along with other agencies. According to one account, the interrogators of what was then DIA's Defense Humint Service (referenced in FBI correspondence as DHS[45]), forced subjects to watch gay porn, draped them with the Israeli Flag and interrogated them in rooms lit by strobe lights for 16–18 hours, all the while telling prisoners that they were from FBI.[46]
The real FBI operatives were concerned that DIA's harsh methods and impersonation of FBI agents would complicate the Bureau's ability to do its job properly, saying "The next time a real Agent tries to talk to that guy, you can imagine the result."[46] A subsequent military inquiry countered FBI's allegations by saying that the prisoner treatment was degrading but not inhuman, without addressing the allegation of DIA staff regularly impersonating FBI officers—usually a felony offense.[47]
Similar activities transpired at the hands of DIA operatives in Bagram, where as recently as 2010 the organization ran the so-called "Black Jail". According to a report published by The Atlantic, the jail was manned by DIA's DCHC staff, who were accused of beating and sexually humiliating high-value targets held at the site.[48] The detention center outlived the black sites run by the Central Intelligence Agency, with DIA allegedly continuing to use "restricted" interrogation methods in the facility under a secret authorization. It is unclear what happened to the secret facility after the 2013 transfer of the base to Afghan authorities following several postponements.[49]
DIA's harsh interrogation methods at times paled in comparison to those of some U.S. special operations forces. In 2004, interrogations by Joint Special Operations Command's high-value targets special operations task forces (including Task Force 6-26) were so heavy-handed and physical with the detainees that two DIA officials complained, as a result of which they were threatened and put under surveillance by abusive military interrogators. The two DIA officials managed to share their accounts of abuse with the agency leadership, prompting DIA Director Lowell Jacoby to write a memo on this topic to the Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence.[50]
Skinny Puppy Controversy[edit]




Skinny Puppy billed DIA for allegedly using its music in torture


In 2014, a Canadian electronic music group Skinny Puppy sent the Defense Intelligence Agency a symbolic bill of $666,000, after finding out that the agency had used their music in Guantanamo during enhanced interrogation sessions.[51] Their music was originally heard at GTMO by a guard, who happened to be a fan of Skinny Puppy and could not understand how his favorite music was being used in such a manner: "[Skinny Puppy's] songs are characterized by ... lyrics that call out corporate wrongdoing. The songs I heard at GTMO were heavily distorted, almost to the point of inaudibility. Even so, I would never have imagined that Skinny Puppy's music would, or could, be used for enhanced interrogation". The officer conducting interrogation sessions allegedly stated that the Canadian group's songs—which are "characterized by relentless drumbeats, panicked, convulsive riffs, synth samples"—were very effective for enhanced interrogation.
Attempts to expand domestic activities[edit]
Since mid-2000s, DIA has come under scrutiny for requesting new powers "to covertly approach and cultivate "U.S. persons" and even recruit them as informants" without disclosing they are doing so on behalf of the U.S. government.[52] George Peirce, DIA's general counsel, told The Washington Post that his agency is "not asking for the moon" and that DIA officers "only want to assess their [individual U.S. citizens'] suitability as a source, person to person", while protecting the ID and security of the agency operatives.[53] The provision allowing DIA to covertly approach U.S. citizens was reportedly removed from the bill at the request of Senator Ron Wyden.[54] It is unclear if the agency has received any additional powers since but it is known that until at least 2005 and possibly later, DIA's "personnel stationed in major U.S. cities [have been] ... monitoring the movements and activities—through high-tech equipment—of individuals and vehicles"; this occurred parallel to the NSA's warrantless surveillance that was of similarly dubious legality.[55]
In 2008, with the consolidation of the new Defense Counterintelligence and Human Intelligence Center (DCHC), DIA secured an additional authority to conduct "offensive counterintelligence", which entails conducting clandestine operations, domestically and abroad, "to thwart what the opposition is trying to do to us and to learn more about what they're trying to get from us."[56] While the agency remained vague about the exact meaning of offensive counterintelligence, experts opined that it "could include planting a mole in a foreign intelligence service, passing disinformation to mislead the other side, or even disrupting enemy information systems", suggesting strong overlap between CI and traditional HUMINT operations.[57]
According to the agency, Americans spying for a foreign intelligence service would not be covered under this mechanism and that DIA would coordinate in such cases with the FBI which, unlike any DIA components at the time, is designated a law enforcement agency. The media showed particular interest in the domestic aspect of DIA's counterintelligence efforts due to the fact that agency's newly created DCHC had absorbed the former Counterintelligence Field Activity, which had become infamous for storing data on American peace activists in the controversial TALON database that was eventually shut down.[57]
9/11 and Able Danger[edit]
Anthony Shaffer, a former DIA officer, has claimed that DIA was aware of and failed to adequately act against one of the organizers of the September 11 attacks prior to the event, in what became known as the Able Danger controversy. Shaffer's claims were rejected and later his security clearance revoked, with the Pentagon denying any wrongdoing. Later Shaffer published his book Operation Dark Heart but, upon complaints from DIA and NSA that it included national security information, the Defense Department went as far as to buy and destroy the initial 10,000 copies of the book, causing the Streisand effect.[58]
German Neo-Nazi Murders[edit]
In 2011, Germany uncovered a far-right terrorist group named National Socialist Underground, which had been linked to series of murders, including the murder of a police officer. A report by Stern magazine stated that German BfV and DIA officers had witnessed the murder of a policewoman during their surveillance of the "Sauerland" group—an Islamist organization that planned attacks on U.S. military installations in Germany—but that neither of the agencies reported it, thus enabling subsequent violent acts by the same criminal entities. The magazine cited an alleged DIA report that confirmed the agency's officers were at the site of the incident.[59][60]
The authenticity of the alleged DIA observation protocol, on which the Stern Magazine based its report was swiftly denied by the BfV, while DIA refused to comment. An unnamed U.S. "insider expert" for intelligence matters told Der Spiegel he deemed it unlikely that DIA could be involved in that type of operation at all; the "expert", however, erroneously described DIA as an analytic organization,[61] when in fact the agency has been involved in clandestine operations for decades. Der Spiegel report, for its part, noted that security organizations prefer not to disclose the details of their work or the nature of their cooperation with other intelligence organizations, implying that DIA and German agencies could be denying involvement to maintain secrecy.[61]
History[edit]




Robert McNamara, founder of DIA


From World War II until the creation of DIA in 1961, the three Military Departments collected, produced and distributed their intelligence for individual use. This turned out to be duplicative, costly, and ineffective as each department provided their own, often conflicting estimates to the Secretary of Defense and other Federal agencies.[62] While the Defense Reorganization Act of 1958 aimed to correct these deficiencies, the intelligence responsibilities remained unclear, the coordination was poor and the results fell short of national reliability and focus. As a result of this poor organization, President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed the Joint Study Group in 1960 to find better ways for organizing the nation's military intelligence activities.[62]
Acting on the recommendations of the Joint Study Group, Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara advised the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) of his decision to establish the DIA in February 1961. He ordered them to develop a plan that would integrate all the military intelligence of the DoD, a move that met strong resistance from the service intelligence units, whose commanders viewed DIA as undesirable encroachment on their turf. Despite this resistance, during the spring and summer of 1961, as Cold War tensions flared over the Berlin Wall, Air Force Lieutenant General Joseph Carroll took the lead in planning and organizing this new agency. The JCS published Directive 5105.21, "Defense Intelligence Agency" on August 1, and DIA began operations with a handful of employees in borrowed office space on October 1, 1961.[62]
DIA originally reported to the Secretary through the JCS. The new agency's mission was the continuous task of collecting, processing, evaluating, analyzing, integrating, producing, and disseminating military intelligence for DoD and related national stakeholders. Other objectives included more efficiently allocating scarce intelligence resources, more effectively managing all DoD intelligence activities, and eliminating redundancies in facilities, organizations, and tasks.[62]
DIA begins operation[edit]




A U-2 reconnaissance plane discovered Soviet missiles in Cuba based on a flight path selected by DIA analysts


Following DIA's establishment, the Services reluctantly transferred intelligence functions and resources to it on a time-phased basis to avoid rapidly degrading the overall effectiveness of defense intelligence. A year after its formation, in October 1962, the agency faced its first major intelligence test during the superpower confrontation that developed after Soviet missiles were discovered at bases in Cuba by Air Force spy planes.[62]
In late 1962, DIA established the Defense Intelligence School (now the National Intelligence University), and on January 1, 1963, it activated a new Production Center. Several Service elements were merged to form this production facility, which occupied the "A" and "B" Buildings at Arlington Hall Station, Virginia.[62]
The agency also added an Automated Data Processing (ADP) Center on February 19, a Dissemination Center on March 31, and a Scientific and Technical Intelligence Directorate on April 30, 1963. DIA assumed the staff support functions of the J-2, Joint Staff, on July 1, 1963. Two years later, on July 1, 1965, DIA accepted responsibility for the Defense Attaché System—the last function the Services transferred to DIA.[62]
During the 1960s, DIA analysts focused on China's detonation of an atomic bomb and the launching of its Cultural Revolution; increasing unrest among African and South Asian nations; fighting in Cyprus and Kashmir; and the missile gap between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. In the late 1960s, crises that tested intelligence responsiveness included: the Tet Offensive in Vietnam; the Six-Day War between Egypt and Israel; continuing troubles in Africa, particularly Nigeria; North Korea's seizure of the USS Pueblo; and the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia.[62]
Years of transition[edit]
The early 1970s were transitional years as the agency shifted its focus from consolidating its functions to establishing itself as a credible producer of national-level intelligence. This proved difficult at first since sweeping manpower decrements between 1968 and 1975 had reduced agency manpower by 31 percent and precipitated mission reductions and a broad organizational restructuring. Challenges facing DIA at this time included the rise of Ostpolitik in Germany; the emergence of the Palestine Liberation Organization in the Middle East; and the U.S. incursion into Cambodia from South Vietnam.[62]




DIA sets intelligence requirements for numerous installations, such as T-AGM-23, which checks compliance with strategic arms treaties worldwide.


The agency's reputation grew considerably by the mid-1970s, as decision makers increasingly recognized the value of its products. Agency analysts in 1972 concentrated on Lebanon, President Richard Nixon's visit to China, the 1973 Chilean coup d'état, the formation of Sri Lanka, and the prisoners of war being held in Southeast Asia. Subsequent challenges involved: détente; the development of arms control agreements; the Paris peace talks (Vietnam); the Yom Kippur War; and global energy concerns.[62]
Intense Congressional review during 1975–76 created turbulence within the Intelligence Community. The Murphy and Rockefeller Commission investigations of charges of intelligence abuse ultimately led to an Executive Order that modified many Intelligence Community functions. At the same time, with U.S. involvement in Vietnam ending, defense intelligence faced a significant decline in resources. During this period, DIA conducted numerous studies on ways of improving its intelligence products. Despite these and other Community-wide efforts to improve intelligence support, the loss of resources during the 1970s limited the Community's ability to collect and produce timely intelligence and ultimately contributed to intelligence shortcomings in Iran, Afghanistan, and other strategic areas.[62]
Special DIA task forces were set up to monitor crises such as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the overthrow of Iranian monarchy, and the taking of American hostages from the U.S. embassy in Tehran in 1979. Also, of serious concern were the Vietnamese takeover in Phnom Penh, the China-Vietnam border war, the overthrow of Idi Amin in Uganda, the North-South Yemen dispute, troubles in Pakistan, border clashes between Libya and Egypt, the Sandinista takeover in Nicaragua, and the Soviet movement of combat troops to Cuba during the signing of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II.[62]
Following the promulgation in 1979 of Executive Order 12036, which restructured the Intelligence Community and better outlined DIA's national and departmental responsibilities, the agency was reorganized around five major directorates: production, operations, resources, external affairs, and J-2 support.
1980s[edit]




President Ronald Reagan unveiling the first copy of Soviet Military Power, one of DIA's serialized publications


By the 1980s, DIA had transformed into a fully integrated national-level intelligence agency. Its 1981 flagship publication Soviet Military Power, the most comprehensive overview of Soviet military strength and capabilities at the time, was met with wide acclaim; SMP continued to be produced by DIA as a serialized publication roughly over the next decade. In 1983, in order to research the flow of technology to the Soviet Union, the Reagan Administration created Project Socrates within the agency. Over the following years Project Socrates's scope broadened to include monitoring of foreign advanced technology as a whole. Project Socrates ended in 1990 with Michael Sekora, the project's director, leaving in protest when the Bush Administration reduced funding.
In 1984, the Clandestine Services organization, designated STAR WATCHER, was created under DIA with the mission of conducting intelligence collection on perceived areas of conflict and against potential adversaries in developing countries. A critical objective was to create a Joint Services career path for case officers, since individual Services were inconsistent in their support of clandestine operations, and case officers were routinely sacrificed during reductions in force. Ultimately, the organization was created to balance CIA's espionage operations which primarily targeted Soviet KGB/GRU officers, but ignored and were dismissive of Third World targets in areas of potential military conflict.[62]




In the 1980s, DIA moved into the newly built Defense Intelligence Agency Headquarters (seen here in 1988), which now represents only one wing of the sprawling complex.


Although there were previous attempts to establish such a DoD level espionage organization, there was no authorization document by which it could be established. This changed when Gregory Davis, a military intelligence officer, defined and established a clandestine services program under the U.S Southern Command's "Plan Green". The program was then authorized by JCS Chairman John Vessey, and sanctioned by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI), with the sponsorship of Senator Jesse Helms (R-NC) and Senator Barry Goldwater (R-AZ). The Goldwater–Nichols DoD Reorganization Act was crafted partly to force military officers to serve in a Joint Services assignment in order to qualify for flag rank—ensuring the future of case officers from each Service. The clandestine organization within DIA grew and flourished, and was cited by the SSCI for its intelligence achievements. Personnel selection and training were rigorous, and the case officers were notable for their advanced educations, area knowledge, and multilingual capabilities. The program was partially gutted under President Bill Clinton as he foresaw no conflict which would justify its existence, but, it was resurrected under President George W. Bush.[62]
Designated a combat support agency under the Goldwater–Nichols Act, DIA moved to increase cooperation with the Unified & Specified Commands and to begin developing a body of joint intelligence doctrine. Intelligence support to U.S. allies in the Middle East intensified as the Iran–Iraq War spilled into the Persian Gulf. DIA provided significant intelligence support to Operation Earnest Will while closely monitoring incidents such as the Iraqi rocket attack on the USS Stark, the destruction of Iranian oil platforms, and Iranian attacks on Kuwaiti oil tankers. The "Toyota War" between Libya and Chad and the turmoil in Haiti added to DIA's heavy production workload, as did unrest in other parts of Latin America, Somalia, Ethiopia, Burma, Pakistan, and the Philippines.[62]
Post–Cold War transformation[edit]
With the end of the Cold War, defense intelligence began a period of reevaluation following the fall of the Soviet system in many Eastern European countries, the reunification of Germany, and ongoing economic reforms in the region. In response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, DIA set up an extensive, 24-hour, crisis management cell designed to tailor national-level intelligence support to the coalition forces assembled to expel Iraq from Kuwait.




President George H.W. Bush being briefed by DIA during the US invasion of Panama


By the time Operation Desert Storm began, some 2,000 agency personnel were involved in the intelligence support effort. Most of them associated in some way with the national-level Joint Intelligence Center (JIC), which DIA established at The Pentagon to integrate the intelligence being produced throughout the Community. DIA sent more than 100 employees into the Kuwaiti Theater of Operations to provide intelligence support.
The Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center (AFMIC), and the Missile and Space Intelligence Center (MSIC), associated with the Army for over 20 and 50 years respectively, became part of DIA in January 1992. This was part of the continuing effort to consolidate intelligence production and make it more efficient.[62]
On September 11, 2001, seven DIA employees lost their lives[63] along with 118 other victims at the Pentagon in a terrorist attack when American Airlines Flight 77 piloted by five Al-Qaeda hijackers plowed into the western side of the building, as part of the September 11 attacks. The death of seven employees at once was the largest combined loss in DIA's history. On September 11, 2009, DIA dedicated a memorial to the seven employees lost in the terrorist attacks on the Pentagon. The memorial is located in the garden at the Defense Intelligence Agency Analysis Center in Washington D.C.[63]




Defense Clandestine Service recruitment poster


Since the September 11 attacks, DIA has been active in nuclear proliferation intelligence collection and analysis with particular interests in North Korea and Iran as well as counter-terrorism. DIA was also involved with the intelligence build-up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and was a subject in the Senate Report of Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq. After the invasion, DIA led the Iraq Survey Group to find the alleged Weapons of Mass Destruction. The agency has conflicted with the CIA in collection and analysis on the existence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and has often represented the Pentagon in the CIA–DoD intelligence rivalry due to DIA's own Clandestine HUMINT collection.[62]
In 2012, DIA announced an expansion of clandestine collection efforts. The newly consolidated Defense Clandestine Service (DCS) would absorb the Defense HUMINT Service and expand DIA's overseas espionage apparatus to complement the work of corresponding elements at CIA. DCS would focus on military intelligence concerns—issues that the CIA has been unable to manage due to lack of personnel, expertise or time—and would initially deal with Islamist militia groups in Africa, weapons transfers between North Korea and Iran, and Chinese military modernization. The DCS works in conjunction with CIA's Directorate of Operations and the Joint Special Operations Command in overseas operations.[64]
In October 2015, the Pentagon said that DIA appointed a British Royal Air Force officer as its first deputy director in charge of improving integration between U.S. intelligence units and spy agencies of other English-speaking countries in the Five Eyes alliance. This was the first time that a foreign national was appointed to a senior position at a U.S. intelligence agency.[65][66]
Memorial wall[edit]
Main article: DIA Memorial Wall




DIA's memorial wall


A memorial wall at the DIA headquarters is dedicated to those agency employees who lost their lives in the line of their intelligence work[67] and whose deaths are not classified. The wall was first dedicated on December 14, 1988 by Director Leonard Perroots. It "commemorates the profound individual sacrifices made on behalf of the United States by DIA members and acts as a reminder of the selflessness, dedication, and courage required to confront national challenges..."[67]
DIA also maintains a memorial in the headquarters courtyard dedicated to personnel lost in the attacks of 9/11 on the Pentagon. Additionally, the agency maintains the Torch Bearers Wall at its Headquarters. The Torch Bearers award is the highest honor bestowed to former DIA employees and recognizes their exceptional contributions to the agency's mission.
DIA in popular culture[edit]
Main article: DIA in popular culture
Less known than its civilian equivalent or its cryptologic counterpart,[68] DIA and its personnel have at times been portrayed in works of American popular culture. As with other U.S. foreign intelligence organizations, the agency's role has occasionally been confused with those of law enforcement agencies. DIA's parent organization, the Department of Defense, features in fiction and media much more prominently due to the public's greater awareness of its existence and the general association of military organizations with warfare, rather than spycraft.
Seal[edit]


The flaming torch and its gold color represent knowledge, i.e., intelligence, and the dark background represents the unknown—"the area of the truth" still sought by the worldwide mission of the agency.[69] The two red atomic ellipses symbolize the scientific and technical aspects of intelligence today and of the future. The 13 stars and the wreath are adopted from the Department of Defense seal and mean glory and peace, respectively, which the DoD secures as part of its work.[70]
See also[edit]


DIA in popular culture
Central Intelligence Agency
National Security Agency
Director of National Intelligence
GRU
Coast Guard Intelligence Center
Defense Attaché System
JFCC ISR (US Strategic Command)
Marine Corps Intelligence Activity
Missile and Space Intelligence Center
National Intelligence University
Office of Naval Intelligence
Strategic Support Branch
G-2 (intelligence)
Australian Government Department of Defence Strategic Policy and Intelligence Group


References[edit]


^ DIA Public Web Page, Overview of the Origins of DIA, 1960's
^ "Careers". www.dia.mil. 
^ http://www.dia.mil/About/Leadership/Article-View/Article/915985/melissa-a-drisko.aspx
^ The Defense Clandestine Service. Defense Intelligence Agency Retrieved: May 5, 2013
^ Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). AllGov.Com: Everything our Government Really Does. Retrieved: May 5, 2013
^ Miller, Greg. Pentagon's plans for a spy service to rival the CIA have been pared back, Washington Post, November 1, 2014
^ a b Defense Intelligence Agency. "Get Ready: DIA Is Ready for a Changing World (Video)", September 10, 2013
^ a b c DIA sending hundreds more spies overseas The Washington Post December 1, 2012
^ a b Defense Intel Alumni Association Log. November 2009, page 5.
^ Knight, Judson. "Defense Intelligence Agency" Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence and Security, Cengage Learning (Gale publishing), 2003
^ Defense Intelligence Agency Official Facebook Page, Retrieved: March 24, 2016
^ DIA Public Web Page, This Is DIA
^ DIA:Locations, Defense Intelligence Agency, Updated: February 5, 2013. Retrieved: September 28, 2013.
^ Residents Pleased With Intelligence Campus Designs, November 13, 2012
^ Construction of intelligence campus in Bethesda underway, June 21, 2013
^ Daggett, Stephen. The U.S. Intelligence Budget: A Basic Overview, Congressional Research Service via the Federation of American Scientists, September 24, 2004
^ About DIA: Organization, Defense Intelligence Agency, Updated: April 1, 2013. Retrieved: September 28, 2013
^ Pellerin, Cheryl (August 15, 2012). "Flynn: Integrated Intelligence System Provides Advantage". United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. 
^ Richelson, Jeffrey T. The US Intelligence Community, Westview Press: July 26, 2011; p. 67
^ In the Human Domain, Geospatial Intelligence Forum, MGT 2009 Volume: 7 Issue: 1 (January/February), 2009
^ Iannotta, Ben. Purple through and through, Defense News, November 1, 2010
^ Cacas, Max. (October 1, 2012) Writing a New Spy School Syllabus | SIGNAL Magazine. Afcea.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-21.
^ Employment Criteria, Defense Intelligence Agency. Updated: January 25, 2013. Retrieved: September 28, 2013.
^ Pentagon's Intelligence Arm Steps Up Lie Detecting Efforts on Employees, Fox News, August 24, 2008.
^ Glitch in widely used polygraph can skew results McClatchy Washington Bureau, May 20, 2013
^ Department of Defense Polygraph Program Process and Compliance Study Office of the Undersecretary of Defense of Intelligence, December 19, 2011, p 20
^ Department of Defense Polygraph Program Process and Compliance Study Office of the Undersecretary of Defense of Intelligence, December 19, 2011, p 29/32
^ Department of Defense Polygraph Program Process and Compliance Study Office of the Undersecretary of Defense of Intelligence, December 19, 2011, p 10
^ "Report Reveals Spy Agencies' Budget Plans", Associated Press via the Los Angeles Times, August 29, 1994
^ McManus, Doyle; Spiegel, Peter. "Spy Czar, Rumsfeld in a Turf War", Los Angeles Times, May 6, 2006
^ Gellman, Barton; Greg Miller (August 29, 2013). "U.S. spy network's successes, failures and objectives detailed in 'black budget' summary". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2013. 
^ Axelsson, Sun Chili, le Dossier Noir. (Chile: The Black File) Paris, France: Gallimard, 1974, p. 87
^ Осужденный за шпионаж Виктор Калядин скончался в липецкой больнице Lenta.ru, Published:September 17, 2004. Last Retrieved:April 25, 2013.
^ Valeri Falunin (General, FSB). "Secret Operations of the Military Counterintelligence". (Russian: Тайные операции военной контрразведки), Federal Security Service (originally published by Moskovskij Komsomolets), December 19, 2001
^ Larry King Edmond Pope:Arrested and imprisoned for espionage in Russia Archived December 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. CNN, November 5, 2001
^ "Feier für Feinde", Der Spiegel, April 1968
^ Natan Sharansky. Fear No Evil. PublicAffairs, November 27, 1998, p.163
^ Lockerbie: The Inside Story and the Lessons. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001, p.144
^ "Ex-DIA analyst admits passing secrets to China", Washington Post, June 23, 2006. Retrieved: October 1, 2013.
^ "Inside the Ring: Spy Release' Washington Post, Published: February 23, 2007. Retrieved: April 28, 2013.
^ "The Last Battle of an Old War Horse". Washington Post, May 8, 1983
^ United States Senate Committee on Armed Services "INQUIRY INTO THE TREATMENT OF DETAINEES IN U.S. CUSTODY" November 20, 2008, p 111
^ United States Senate Committee on Armed Services "INQUIRY INTO THE TREATMENT OF DETAINEES IN U.S. CUSTODY" November 20, 2008, p 112
^ Deputy Inspector General for Intelligence "Investigation of Allegations of the Use of Mind-Altering Drugs to Facilitate Interrogations of Detainees" September 23, 2009, p 10
^ White, Josh. FBI Interrogators in Cuba Opposed Aggressive Tactics, Washington Post, February 24, 2006
^ a b American Civil Liberties Union Email [parties redacted] re GTMO, 7/31
^ Lewis, Neil. "Report Discredits F.B.I. Claims of Abuse at Guantánamo Bay", New York Times, July 14, 2005
^ Ambinder, Marc. "Inside the Secret Interrogation Facility at Bagram", The Atlantic, May 14, 2010
^ Rodriguez, Alex. "U.S. hands over control of Bagram prison to Afghan government", Los Angeles Times, March 25, 2013
^ Lewis, Neil. "Memos Say 2 Officials Who Saw Prison Abuse Were Threatened", New York Times, December 7, 2004
^ Holdbrooks, Terry C. "Why Skinny Puppy asked Gitmo to pay up", Al Jazeera, February 12, 2014
^ Michael Isikoff & Mark Hosenball. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved August 25, 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) Newsweek, October 5, 2005
^ Pincus, Walter. "Request for Domestic Covert Role Is Defended", The Washington Post, October 8, 2005
^ Pincus, Walter. "Pentagon Expanding Its Domestic Surveillance Activity" The Washington Post, November 27, 2005
^ Eggen, Dan. "Bush Authorized Domestic Spying", The Washington Post, December 16, 2005
^ Pincus, Walter. "New Unit of DIA Will Take the Offensive On Counterintelligence" The Washington Post, August 18, 2008
^ a b Hess, Pamela. "DIA's new mission adds to intel arsenal" Associated Press via Fox News, August 5, 2008
^ Shane, Scott (September 10, 2010). "Pentagon Plan: Buying Books to Keep Secrets". The New York Times. p. A16. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved April 19, 2012. 
^ "Heilbronner Polizistinnenmord: Waren Verfassungsschützer Zeuge beim Mord an Michèle Kiesewetter?". Stern. November 30, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2012. 
^ Florian Rötzer. "Verbindung zwischen rechter Terrorzelle und Sauerland-Gruppe?". Heise.de. Retrieved September 11, 2012. 
^ a b Diehl, Jörg. Musharbash, Yassin. Verfassungsschützer dementieren Präsenz bei Polizistenmord Der Spiegel. Retrieved August 5, 2012.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q A History of the Defense Intelligence Agency. DIA Office of Historical Research, 2007. Retrieved: September 25, 2013.
^ a b "Patriots Memorial". Defense Intelligence Agency. 
^ Miller, Greg (December 2, 2012). "DIA to send hundreds more spies overseas". The Washington Post. 
^ "Pentagon spy agency hires first British deputy director". Reuters. October 30, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2015. 
^ "Pentagon recruits Briton to spy agency". The Times. October 31, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2015. 
^ a b Defense Intelligence Agency Patriots Memorial, Retrieved: March 25, 2016
^ Editor's Note : History of the Defense Intelligence Agency Archived October 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.. The Intelligencer. Association of Former Intelligence Officers, 2011.
^ The DIA Seal, August 7, 2013
^ Department of Defense Historical Office Retrieved: August 22, 2013


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Defense Intelligence Agency.



Official website







v
t
e


Defense Intelligence Agency



Subordinate organizations



Defense Clandestine Service
Defense Attaché System
Defense Cover Office
Missile and Space Intelligence Center
National Center for Medical Intelligence
National Media Exploitation Center
Joint Intelligence Operations Center Europe Analytic Center/Joint Intelligence Center
National Intelligence University
Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance








Projects, operations, and programs



Project Socrates
Stargate Project
Able Danger
Iraq Survey Group
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
Soviet Military Power





Oversight



United States Secretary of Defense
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
Military Intelligence Board
Director of National Intelligence
United States Intelligence Community
United States Department of Defense
SSCI
HPSCI





People



Robert McNamara
Directors





Facilities



Defense Intelligence Agency Headquarters
The Pentagon
DIA Memorial Wall










Links to related articles











v
t
e


Directors of the Defense Intelligence Agency






Carroll
Bennett
de Poix
Graham
Wilson
Tighe
Williams
Perroots
Soyster
Nagy (acting)
Clapper
Minihan
Hughes
Wilson
Jacoby
Maples
Burgess
Flynn
Shedd (acting)
Stewart















v
t
e


United States Department of Defense






Headquarters: The Pentagon


James Mattis, Secretary of Defense
Patrick M. Shanahan, Deputy Secretary of Defense










Office of the Secretary of Defense
(including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities)







Deputy Secretary of Defense



Deputy's Advisory Working Group
Office of Net Assessment
Special Access Program Oversight Committee





Under Secretary of Defense
for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics



Director, Defense Research and Engineering
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Missile Defense Agency
Defense Contract Management Agency
Defense Logistics Agency
Defense Technical Information Center
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
Office of Economic Adjustment
Defense Acquisition University
Defense Acquisition Board





Under Secretary of Defense for Policy



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency
Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee





Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)



Defense Contract Audit Agency
Defense Finance and Accounting Service





Under Secretary of Defense
for Personnel and Readiness



Defense Commissary Agency
Department of Defense Education Activity
DoD Human Resources Activity
Military Health System
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute





Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence



Defense Intelligence Agency
Defense Security Service
Defense Information Systems Agency
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Director)





Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs



Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel)





General Counsel of the Department of Defense



Defense Legal Services Agency





Director of Administration and Management



Pentagon Force Protection Agency
Washington Headquarters Services



















Military Departments







Department of the Army



Secretary of the Army
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army
Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology
Assistant Secretary for Civil Works
Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment
Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs
General Counsel of the Army
The Administrative Assistant
The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army
Vice Chief of Staff of the Army
Sergeant Major of the Army
Deputy Chief of Staff G-8
Chief of Chaplains
Judge Advocate General
Provost Marshal General
Surgeon General
U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army





Department of the Navy



Secretary of the Navy
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs)
Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions)
General Counsel of the Navy
Judge Advocate General
Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Naval Inspector General
Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps
Chaplain
U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps
Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations
Vice Chief of Naval Operations
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy
Director of Naval Reactors
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Naval Personnel
Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy





Department of the Air Force



Secretary of the Air Force
The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics)
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs)
General Counsel of the Air Force
Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force
Chief of Chaplains
Chief of Safety
Chief Scientist
Judge Advocate General
Surgeon General
U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands
Direct Reporting Units
Field Operating Agencies
















Joint Chiefs of Staff






Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman
Joint Requirements Oversight Council
Director of the Joint Staff
Joint Staff
National Military Command Center
Alternate National Military Command Center
National Defense University













Combatant Commands






Africa Command
Central Command
European Command
Northern Command
Pacific Command
Southern Command
Special Operations Command
Strategic Command (Cyber Command)
Transportation Command













National Guard Bureau






Chief of the National Guard Bureau
Air National Guard
Army National Guard













Office of the Inspector General






Defense Criminal Investigative Service















v
t
e


United States Intelligence Community



Intelligence
Community




Defense



Defense Intelligence Agency (Defense Clandestine Service • Defense Attaché System • National Intelligence University • Missile and Space Intelligence Center • National Center for Medical Intelligence • Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance)
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Central Security Service, Special Collection Service)




Armed Forces



Army Intelligence and Security Command
Marine Corps Intelligence
Office of Naval Intelligence
Twenty-Fifth Air Force
Coast Guard Intelligence (Homeland Security)








Civilian



Bureau of Intelligence and Research (State)
Central Intelligence Agency (Directorate of Operations • Special Activities Division • Open Source Center • Directorate of Science and Technology • CIA University)
Drug Enforcement Administration (Justice)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Justice)
Office of Intelligence and Analysis (Homeland Security)
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Treasury)
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (Energy)











Director of
National
Intelligence



Director of National Intelligence
National Counterterrorism Center
National Counterproliferation Center
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
National Intelligence Council
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
Joint Intelligence Community Council
Chief Information Officer





Executive Office
of the President



National Security Advisor
National Security Council
President's Intelligence Advisory Board
Homeland Security Council
Homeland Security Advisor
President's Daily Brief





Other



Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
Army Intelligence Support Activity
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
Intellipedia





Oversight



United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
Office of Management and Budget





Defunct



Contingency Fund for Foreign Intercourse
Counterintelligence Field Activity
Military Information Division
Military Intelligence Division
Military Intelligence Service
Office of Strategic Services
Office of Special Plans
Strategic Support Branch












v
t
e


National intelligence agencies



Foreign
intelligence



Afghanistan: NDS
Albania: SHISH
Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Armenia: SNB
Australia: ASIS
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bahrain: NSA
Bangladesh: NSI
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA
Brazil: ABIN
Brunei: BRD
Bulgaria: NRS
Cameroon: BMM
Canada: CSIS
Chad: ANS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Cuba: DI
Czech Republic: ÚZSI
Denmark: FE
Djibouti: BSRG
Ecuador: SENAIN
Egypt: Mukhabarat
Estonia: EFIS
France: DGSE
Gambia: SIS
Georgia: GIS
Germany: BND
Ghana: BNI, BGU, RDU
Greece: EYP
Hungary: IH
India: RAW
Indonesia: BIN
Iran: VAJA
Iraq: GSD
Ireland: G2
Israel: Mossad
Italy: AISE
Ivory Coast: NSC
Japan: NPA
CIRO
Jordan: GID
Kazakhstan: Syrbar
Kenya: NIS
Kyrgyzstan: SNB
Kuwait: KSS
Latvia: SAB
Lithuania: VSD
Lebanon: GDGS
Libya: MJ
Republic of Macedonia: UBK
Malaysia: MEIO
Maldives: NSS
Mexico: CISEN
Mongolia: GIA
Montenegro: ANB
Morocco: DGST
Mozambique: SISE
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: NIA
North Korea: RGB
Norway: E-tjenesten
Oman: Palace Office
Pakistan: ISI
Papua New Guinea: NIO
Philippines: NICA
Poland: AW
Portugal: SIED
Qatar: QSS
Romania: SIE
Russia: SVR
Saudi Arabia: Al Mukhabarat Al A'amah
Serbia: BIA
Sierra Leone: CISU
Singapore: SID
Slovakia: SIS
Slovenia: SOVA
Somalia: NISA
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: NIS
Spain: CNI
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sudan: JAWM
Sweden: KSI
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: NSB
Tajikistan: MoS
Thailand: NIA
Togo: NIA
Tunisia: TIA
Turkey: MİT
Turkmenistan: KNB
Uganda: ISO
Ukraine: SZRU
United Arab Emirates: UAEI
United Kingdom: SIS (MI6)
United States: CIA
Uzbekistan: SNB
Vietnam: TC2





Domestic
intelligence



Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Australia: ASIO
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bangladesh: SB
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: VS/SE
Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA
Brazil: PF
Brunei: IRD
Canada: CSIS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Czech Republic: BIS
Denmark: PET
Egypt: EHS
Estonia: KAPO
Finland: Supo
France: DGSI
Germany: BfV
Ghana: GPS, CID
Greece: EYP
Hungary: AH
India: IB, CBI, NSC, AIRMS
Iran: VAJA, IRGC, PAVA
Ireland: CSB, SDU, NSU
Israel: Shin Bet
Italy: AISI
Kazakhstan: NSC
Kenya: NIS
Latvia: DP
Lithuania: STT
Republic of Macedonia: IA
Malaysia: SB
Japan: NPA, PSIA
Netherlands: NCTb
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: SSS
Norway: PST
North Korea: SSD
Oman: ISS
Pakistan: IB, FIA
Philippines: NBI
Poland: ABW
Portugal: SIS
Romania: SRI
Russia: FSB
Saudi Arabia: Mabahith
Serbia: BIA
Singapore: ISD
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: SPO
Spain: CITCO
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sweden: SÄPO
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: MJIB
Thailand: ISOC, SB
Turkey: KDGM
Ukraine: SBU
United Kingdom: Security Service (MI5), NDEDIU, NCA, NBIS
United States: FBI
Uzbekistan: SNB
Venezuela: SEBIN
Vietnam: TC5
Zimbabwe: CIO





Military
intelligence



Australia: DIO
Bangladesh: DGFI
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Brazil: DIE
Canada: Int Branch
China: MID
Croatia: VSOA
Czech Republic: VZ
Denmark: FE
Egypt: DMISR
Finland: PE TIEDOS
France: DRM, DGSE
Germany: MAD
Ghana: MIU
Hungary: KNBSZ
Iran: General Staff, SAHEFAJA, SAHEFASA, SAHEFAVEDJA
India: DMI, DIA
Indonesia: BAIS
Ireland: G2
Israel: Aman
Italy: CII
Japan: MIC
Kazakhstan: NSC
Lithuania: AOTD
Republic of Macedonia: MSSI
Malaysia: DSID
Morocco: DGED
Netherlands: MIVD
New Zealand: DDIS
Norway: E-tjenesten
Pakistan: MI, NI, AI
Philippines: ISAFP
Poland: SKW, SWW
Portugal: CISMIL
Romania: DGIA
Russia: GRU
Serbia: VOA, VBA
Singapore: MIO
Slovakia: VSS
Slovenia: OVS
South Africa: SANDF-ID
South Korea: DSC
Spain: Armed Forces Intelligence Center
Sri Lanka: DMI
Sweden: MUST
Switzerland: MND
Syria: MI, AFID
Taiwan: MND
Thailand: AFSC
Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B., JİTEM
Ukraine: HUR MO
United Kingdom: DI
United States: DIA
Venezuela: DGCIM
Vietnam: TC2





Signals
intelligence



Australia: ASD
Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD
Canada: CSE
China: SIGINT
Croatia: OTC
Finland: PVTIEDL
France: DGSE
Germany: BND
Ghana: RDU
India: JCB,NTRO
Indonesia: LEMSANEG
Ireland: CIS
Israel: 8200
Japan: DIH
Kazakhstan: NSC
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: GCSB
Pakistan: JSIB
Russia: Spetssvyaz
South Africa: SSA
Sweden: FRA
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: MI
Turkey: MİT-ETİB, MİT-SİB
Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok
United Kingdom: GCHQ
United States: NSA





Imagery
intelligence



Australia: AGO
Finland: PVTIEDL
India: DAI
Israel: Air Intelligence Group
New Zealand: GEOINT NZ
Portugal: CIGeoE
Russia: TsVTI GRU
United Kingdom: DGIFC
United States: NGA





Related
topics



Espionage
Global surveillance disclosures

Chelsea Manning
Snowden leaks
WikiLeaks


Great Firewall of China

Mass surveillance in China


Law enforcement
Surveillance

Big Brother
Call detail record
Carnivore
Dishfire
ECHELON
PRISM
Stone Ghost
Turbulence (NSA programme)


National security
Surveillance issues in smart cities












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 97134306
LCCN: n79151208
ISNI: 0000 0004 0377 7608
GND: 1082898-9








Government of the United States portal
Intelligence portal
Mass surveillance portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Defense_Intelligence_Agency&oldid=816985411"					Categories: Defense Intelligence AgencyGovernment agencies established in 1961Military intelligence agenciesUnited States Department of Defense agenciesUnited States intelligence agenciesHidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language textWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownUse mdy dates from July 2016Pages using infobox government agency with unknown parametersArticles needing additional references from September 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers