






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In parliamentary systems and presidential systems of government, primary legislation and secondary legislation, the latter also called delegated legislation or subordinate legislation,[1] are two forms of law, created respectively by the legislative and executive branches of government. Primary legislation generally consists of statutes, also known as "acts", that set out broad outlines and principles, but delegate specific authority to an executive branch to make more specific laws under the aegis of the principal act. The executive branch can then issue secondary legislation (mainly via its regulatory agencies), creating legally-enforceable regulations and the procedures for implementing them.



Contents


1 United Kingdom

1.1 Primary legislation
1.2 Secondary legislation


2 United States

2.1 Primary legislation
2.2 Regulatory law


3 Civil law jurisdictions
4 European Union
5 Notes
6 References
7 External links
8 See also



United Kingdom[edit]
Primary legislation[edit]
In the United Kingdom, and other Commonwealth nations, primary legislation can take a number of different forms:

An Act of Parliament.
An Order in Council made under the Royal Prerogative
Church of England Measures – the instruments by which changes are made to legislation relating to the administration and organisation of the Church (UK only).



"primary legislation" means any—

(a) public general Act;
(b) local and personal Act;
(c) private Act;
(d) Measure of the Church Assembly;
(e) Measure of the General Synod of the Church of England;
(f) Order in Council—

(i) made in exercise of Her Majesty's Royal Prerogative;
(ii) made under section 38(1)(a) of the M3Northern Ireland Constitution Act 1973 or the corresponding provision of the Northern Ireland Act 1998; or
(iii) amending an Act of a kind mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);



and includes an order or other instrument made under primary legislation (otherwise than by the Welsh Ministers, the First Minister for Wales, the Counsel General to the Welsh Assembly Government, a member of the Scottish Executive, a Northern Ireland Minister or a Northern Ireland department) to the extent to which it operates to bring one or more provisions of that legislation into force or amends any primary legislation...
— Parliament of the United Kingdom, Section 21(1), Human Rights Act 1998[2]


Secondary legislation[edit]
Main article: Delegated legislation in the United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, secondary legislation (also referred to as delegated legislation or subordinate legislation) is law made by an executive authority under powers delegated from by an enactment of primary legislation, which grants the executive agency power to implement and administer the requirements of that primary legislation.[3]
Forms of secondary legislation in the United Kingdom include:[4]

Statutory instruments – made in a variety of forms, most commonly Orders in Council, regulations, rules and orders. The form to be adopted is usually set out in the enabling Act.
Special Procedure Orders – a form of delegated legislation to which special parliamentary procedure applies. Part of this procedure gives those people or bodies who are especially affected by the order to petition against it to either House.
An Act of the Scottish Parliament, Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales or Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Hybrid instruments – statutory instruments which need to be approved by both Houses and affect some members of a group (whether individuals or bodies) more than others in the same group.[5]



“subordinate legislation” means any—

(a) Order in Council other than one—

(i) made in exercise of Her Majesty’s Royal Prerogative;
(ii) made under section 38(1)(a) of the Northern Ireland Constitution Act 1973 or the corresponding provision of the Northern Ireland Act 1998; or
(iii) amending an Act of a kind mentioned in the definition of primary legislation;


(b) Act of the Scottish Parliament;
(ba) Measure of the National Assembly for Wales;
(bb) Act of the National Assembly for Wales;
(c) Act of the Parliament of Northern Ireland;
(d) Measure of the Assembly established under section 1 of the Northern Ireland Assembly Act 1973;
(e) Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly;
(f) order, rules, regulations, scheme, warrant, byelaw or other instrument made under primary legislation (except to the extent to which it operates to bring one or more provisions of that legislation into force or amends any primary legislation);
(g) order, rules, regulations, scheme, warrant, byelaw or other instrument made under legislation mentioned in paragraph (b), (c), (d) or (e) or made under an Order in Council applying only to Northern Ireland;
(h) order, rules, regulations, scheme, warrant, byelaw or other instrument made by a member of the Scottish Welsh Ministers, the First Minister for Wales, the Counsel General to the Welsh Assembly Government, a Northern Ireland Minister or a Northern Ireland department in exercise of prerogative or other executive functions of Her Majesty which are exercisable by such a person on behalf of Her Majesty;

— Parliament of the United Kingdom, Section 21(1), Human Rights Act 1998[6]

United States[edit]
Primary legislation[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2015)



In the United States, primary legislation is, at the federal level, an Act of Congress, and the statute that delegates authority is called an authorizing statute or delegation of rule making authority.
Regulatory law[edit]
Main article: Regulatory law
A law promulgated by the executive branch agency of the United States Government as the result of primary legislation is called a regulatory law, as legislation is used only to refer to acts of the legislative branch, never the executive or the judicial branches. The body of law that governs the agency's exercise of rule making and adjudication powers is called "administrative law," primarily the Administrative Procedure Act.
In a 2013 majority opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States, Associate Justice Antonin Scalia stated that

[Legislative power] is vested exclusively in Congress [and judicial power] in the “one supreme Court” and “such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish”.... Agencies make rules... and conduct adjudications... and have done so since the beginning of the Republic. These activities take “legislative” and “judicial” forms, but they are exercises of—indeed, under our constitutional structure they must be exercises of—the “executive Power.”[7]

Civil law jurisdictions[edit]
Civil law systems are almost universal in Europe, with the exceptions of England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Ireland, and in Central and South America.
In all cases a parliament will issue primary legislation, with lesser bodies granted powers to issue delegated legislation. A judicial review may be provided by a constitutional court.[a]
European Union[edit]
Each member state of the European Union (EU) has its own laws, and there is also overall EU law. The founding treaty, the 1957 Treaty of Rome, and all subsequent treaties, such as the Maastricht Treaty, Nice Treaty, and Lisbon Treaty, are the main primary legislation.[9] The Treaty of Rome gives powers to make secondary legislation.[citation needed]
Member states must surrender some national jurisdiction powers to the European Union; these delegated powers are exercised by the Commission, Council and European Parliament acting in concert, having consulted the European Economic and Social Committee and the European Committee of the Regions.[citation needed] The powers are exercised via binding Regulations, Directives, Decisions, and non-binding Recommendations and Opinions.

A Regulation[10] is a law which is binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States without needing national implementation. EU citizens may have standing to pursue breaches of regulations and treaties, as in Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen.
A Directive[10] is an order to Member States to pass legislation. It is "binding as to the result to be achieved", but Member States can choose their own form of implementation. EU citizens may have standing to pursue failures to implement, as in Francovich v Italy.
A Decision[10] is a law that addresses a specific issue. Addressees may challenge a decision via Judicial Review.

The Commission may take executive action in pursuance of policy, and may even act quasi-judicially in matters of EU competition law, a power defined in Article 101 and Article 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Privileged parties, such as Member States, EU Institutions, and those with specific standing, may initiate litigation. For example, the Commission may sue Member States for breaches of EU obligations, and Member States may sue Institutions or other Member States for breach of EU law.
Notes[edit]



^ In 2015, Italy's Constitutional Court for the first time involved itself in the core of parliamentary procedure, issuing a judgment (n. 32/2014) protecting the balance of power from the combined effects of maxi-amendments and confidence being asked of it by the government.[clarification needed][8]



References[edit]



^ "What is subordinate legislation?". Queensland Government. Retrieved 2017-01-24. 
^ Parliament of the United Kingdom (1998). "Human Rights Act 1998". legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 31 October 2015. 
^ "Delegated Legislation". lawteacher.net. Retrieved 18 September 2012. 
^ "Secondary Legislation". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 9 February 2016. 
^ "Hybrid instruments". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 9 February 2016. 
^ Parliament of the United Kingdom (1998). "Human Rights Act 1998". legislation.gov.uk. Retrieved 31 October 2015. 
^ City of Arlington v. FCC, 569 U.S. __, __, n.4 (2013) (slip op. at 13) (emphasis in original).
^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2015). "Negoziazione politica e Parlamento… Non solo risate". Avanti Online (in Italian).   – via Questia (subscription required)
^ "Sources of European Union law". Europa (Web portal). 28 August 2010. 
^ a b c European Union (26 October 2012). "Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, PART SIX - INSTITUTIONAL AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS, TITLE I - INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS, Chapter 2 - Legal acts of the Union, adoption procedures and other provisions, Section 1 - The legal acts of the Union, Article 288". EUR-Lex. Retrieved 9 February 2016. 



 This article incorporates text published under the British Open Government Licence: Parliament of the United Kingdom. "Secondary Legislation". Retrieved 31 October 2015. 
External links[edit]

Public general Acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom
Secondary legislation at the Parliament of the United Kingdom

See also[edit]

Executive order (United States)
Rulemaking






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primary_and_secondary_legislation&oldid=813752657"					Categories: Administrative lawHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2016CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Subscription required using viaPages containing links to subscription-only contentArticles with limited geographic scope from November 2015Articles needing additional references from November 2015All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles to be expanded from October 2015All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Open Government Licence attribution