"Democrat Party (United States)" redirects here. For the implied slur in that appellation, see Democrat Party (epithet).



Democratic Party






Chairperson
Tom Perez (MD)


Secretary
Jason Rae (WI)


Deputy Chair
Keith Ellison (MN)


Senate leader
Minority Leader
Chuck Schumer (NY)


House leader
Minority Leader
Nancy Pelosi (CA)


Chair of Governors Association
Dan Malloy (CT)


Founded
January 8, 1828; 189 years ago (1828-01-08)[1]


Preceded by
Democratic-Republican Party


Headquarters
430 South Capitol St. SE,
Washington, D.C., 20003


Student wing
College Democrats of America


Youth wing
Young Democrats of America


Women's wing
National Federation of Democratic Women


Overseas wing
Democrats Abroad


LGBT wing
Stonewall Democrats


Membership (2017)
44,706,349[2]


Ideology
Majority:
 •  Modern liberalism[3][4]
 •  Social liberalism[5]
Factions:
 • Centrism[6][7]
 •  Conservatism[7]
 •  Left-wing populism[8][9][10]
 •  Progressivism[11]
 •  Social democracy[12]


Colors
     Blue


Seats in the Senate

47 / 100







Seats in the House

193 / 435







Governorships

15 / 50







State Upper House Seats

805 / 1,972







State Lower House Seats

2,320 / 5,411







Territorial Governorships

2 / 6







Territorial Upper Chamber Seats

31 / 97







Territorial Lower Chamber Seats

0 / 91







Website


www.democrats.org





Politics of United States
Political parties
Elections







Part of a series on


Progressivism




History


Atomic Age
Enlightenment
Industrial Age
Information Age
Jet Age
Machine Age
Progressive Era
Space Age








Ideas


Economic development

Broad measures
Economic growth


Empirical evidence
Direct democracy
Freedom of movement
Human enhancement
Idea of Progress
Industrialisation
Linear history
Modernity
Philosophical progress
Progressive education

in Latin America


Progressive rationalism
Reform movement
Social organization
Social progress

List of countries


Scientific progress
Social change
Sustainable design

Ecological engineering


Self-determination
Scientific management
Scientific method
Sustainable development
Technological change
Techno-progressivism
Welfare
Women's suffrage








People


Edith Abbott
Grace Abbott
Jane Addams
Sophonisba Breckinridge
William Jennings Bryan
Marquis de Condorcet
Charles Evans Hughes
Robert M. La Follette, Sr.
Immanuel Kant
John Stuart Mill
Theodore Roosevelt
Al Smith
William Howard Taft
Woodrow Wilson
Long Yun








By region


In the Muslim world
In South Korea
In the United States








 Philosophy portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





The Democratic Party is one of the two major contemporary political parties in the United States, along with the Republican Party (GOP). Tracing its heritage back to Thomas Jefferson and James Madison's Democratic-Republican Party, the modern-day Democratic Party was founded around 1828 by supporters of Andrew Jackson, making it the world's oldest political party.[13]
The Democrats' dominant worldview was once social conservatism and economic liberalism, while—especially in the rural South—populism was its leading characteristic. In 1912, Theodore Roosevelt ran as a third-party candidate in the Progressive ("Bull Moose") Party, leading to a switch of political platforms between the Democratic and Republican Party and Woodrow Wilson being elected as the first fiscally progressive Democrat. Since Franklin D. Roosevelt and his New Deal coalition in the 1930s, the Democratic Party has also promoted a social liberal platform,[3] supporting social justice.[14]
Today, the House Democratic caucus is composed mostly of progressives and centrists,[6] with a smaller minority of conservative Democrats. The party's philosophy of modern liberalism advocates social and economic equality, along with the welfare state.[15] It seeks to provide government intervention and regulation in the economy.[16] These interventions, such as the introduction of social programs, support for labor unions, affordable college tuitions, moves toward universal health care and equal opportunity, consumer protection and environmental protection form the core of the party's economic policy.[15][17] The party has united with smaller liberal regional parties throughout the country, such as the Farmer–Labor Party in Minnesota and the Nonpartisan League in North Dakota.
Well into the 20th century, the party had conservative pro-business and Southern conservative-populist anti-business wings. The New Deal Coalition of 1932–1964 attracted strong support from voters of recent European extraction—many of whom were Catholics based in the cities.[18][19][20] After Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal of the 1930s, the pro-business wing withered outside the South. After the racial turmoil of the 1960s, most Southern whites and many Northern Catholics moved into the Republican Party at the presidential level. The once-powerful labor union element became smaller and less supportive after the 1970s. White Evangelicals and Southerners became heavily Republican at the state and local level in the 1990s. Racial and ethnic minorities in the U.S., such as Jewish Americans, Hispanic Americans, Arabic Americans and African Americans, tend to support the Democratic Party much more than they support the rival Republican Party, giving the Democratic Party its current membership lead over the Republicans.
15 Democrats have served as President under 16 administrations: the first was seventh President Andrew Jackson, who served from 1829 to 1837; Grover Cleveland served two nonconsecutive terms from 1885 to 1889 and 1893 to 1897; and thus is counted twice (as the 22nd and 24th President). The most recent was the 44th President Barack Obama, who held the office from 2009 to 2017.
Currently, the Democrats are the opposition party, due to having the minority of seats in both the House of Representatives and the Senate, as well as having the minority of governorships and state legislatures (full control of 13/50, split control of five others). However, they control the mayoralty of major U.S. cities such as New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Houston, and Washington, D.C.



Contents


1 History

1.1 1828–1860
1.2 1860–1900
1.3 1900–1930
1.4 1930–1960
1.5 1960–1980
1.6 1980–present


2 Name and symbols
3 Current structure and composition

3.1 National committee
3.2 State parties
3.3 Major party groups


4 Ideology

4.1 Centrists
4.2 Conservatives
4.3 Liberals
4.4 Progressives


5 Political positions

5.1 Economic issues

5.1.1 Fiscal policy
5.1.2 Minimum wage
5.1.3 Health care
5.1.4 Education
5.1.5 Environment
5.1.6 Renewable energy and fossil fuels
5.1.7 Trade agreements


5.2 Social issues

5.2.1 Equal opportunity
5.2.2 Voting rights
5.2.3 Abortion and reproductive rights
5.2.4 Immigration
5.2.5 LGBT rights
5.2.6 Civil Rights – United States Citizens in Puerto Rico


5.3 Legal issues

5.3.1 Gun control
5.3.2 Death penalty
5.3.3 Torture
5.3.4 Patriot Act
5.3.5 Right to privacy


5.4 Foreign policy issues

5.4.1 Iraq War
5.4.2 Iran sanctions
5.4.3 Invasion of Afghanistan
5.4.4 Israel




6 Voter base

6.1 Professionals
6.2 Academia
6.3 Youth
6.4 Women
6.5 Relation to marital status and parenthood
6.6 LGBTQ Americans
6.7 Labor
6.8 Working class
6.9 Secular Americans
6.10 African Americans
6.11 Hispanic and Latino Americans
6.12 Native Americans
6.13 Jewish Americans
6.14 Arab and Muslim Americans
6.15 Asian Americans


7 Democratic presidents
8 Recent electoral history

8.1 In presidential elections: 1828–present


9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links

12.1 Organizations
12.2 Platforms, charter, and bylaws





History
Main article: History of the United States Democratic Party
See also: Democratic Party (United States) § Recent electoral history




Andrew Jackson was the first Democratic President of the United States


The Democratic Party traces its origins to the inspiration of the Democratic-Republican Party, founded by Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and other influential opponents of the Federalists in 1792. That party also inspired the Whigs and modern Republicans. Organizationally, the modern Democratic Party truly arose in the 1830s, with the election of Andrew Jackson. Since the nomination of William Jennings Bryan in 1896, the party has generally positioned itself to the left of the Republican Party on economic issues. They have been more liberal on civil rights issues since 1948. On foreign policy both parties changed position several times.[21]
1828–1860
The Democratic Party evolved from the Jeffersonian Republican or Democratic-Republican Party organized by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison in opposition to the Federalist Party of Alexander Hamilton and John Adams. The party favored republicanism, a weak federal government, states' rights, agrarian interests (especially Southern planters) and strict adherence to the Constitution; it opposed a national bank, close ties to Great Britain and business and banking interests. The Democratic-Republican Party, came to power in the election of 1800.
After the War of 1812 the Federalists virtually disappeared and the only national political party left was the Democratic-Republicans. The era of one-party rule in the United States, known as the Era of Good Feelings, lasted from 1816 until the early 1830s, when the Whig Party became a national political group to rival the Democratic-Republicans. The Democratic-Republican party still had its own internal factions, however. They split over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe, and the party faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the modern Democratic Party. As Norton explains the transformation in 1828:

Jacksonians believed the people's will had finally prevailed. Through a lavishly financed coalition of state parties, political leaders, and newspaper editors, a popular movement had elected the president. The Democrats became the nation's first well-organized national party ... and tight party organization became the hallmark of nineteenth-century American politics.[22]

Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small but decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s, when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery. In 1854, angry with the Kansas–Nebraska Act, anti-slavery Democrats left the party and joined Northern Whigs to form the Republican Party.[23][24]
Behind the platforms issued by state and national parties stood a widely shared political outlook that characterized the Democrats:

The Democrats represented a wide range of views but shared a fundamental commitment to the Jeffersonian concept of an agrarian society. They viewed the central government as the enemy of individual liberty. The 1824 "corrupt bargain" had strengthened their suspicion of Washington politics. ... Jacksonians feared the concentration of economic and political power. They believed that government intervention in the economy benefited special-interest groups and created corporate monopolies that favored the rich. They sought to restore the independence of the individual—the artisan and the ordinary farmer—by ending federal support of banks and corporations and restricting the use of paper currency, which they distrusted. Their definition of the proper role of government tended to be negative, and Jackson's political power was largely expressed in negative acts. He exercised the veto more than all previous presidents combined. Jackson and his supporters also opposed reform as a movement. Reformers eager to turn their programs into legislation called for a more active government. But Democrats tended to oppose programs like educational reform mid the establishment of a public education system. They believed, for instance, that public schools restricted individual liberty by interfering with parental responsibility and undermined freedom of religion by replacing church schools. Nor did Jackson share reformers' humanitarian concerns. He had no sympathy for American Indians, initiating the removal of the Cherokees along the Trail of Tears.[25]

1860–1900
The Democrats split over the choice of a successor to President James Buchanan along Northern and Southern lines; factions of the party provided two separate candidacies for president in the election of 1860, in which the Republican Party gained ascendancy. The radical pro-slavery Fire-Eaters led a walkout at both the April Democratic convention in Charleston's Institute Hall and the June convention in Baltimore when the national party would not adopt a resolution supporting the extension of slavery into territories even if the voters of those territories did not want it. These Southern Democrats nominated the pro-slavery incumbent vice president, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, for president and General Joseph Lane, former Governor of Oregon, for vice president. The Northern Democrats nominated Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois for president and former Governor of Georgia Herschel V. Johnson for vice president, while some southern Democrats joined the Constitutional Union Party, backing its nominees (who had both been prominent Whig leaders), former Senator, Speaker of the House, and Secretary of War John Bell of Tennessee for president and the politician, statesman, and educator Edward Everett of Massachusetts for vice president. This fracturing of the Democrats led to a Republican victory, and Abraham Lincoln was elected the 16th President of the United States.
As the American Civil War broke out, Northern Democrats were divided into War Democrats and Peace Democrats. The Confederate States of America, whose political leadership, mindful of the welter prevalent in antebellum American politics and with a pressing need for unity, largely viewed political parties as inimical to good governance; consequently the Confederacy had none, or at least none with the wide organization inherent to other American parties. Most War Democrats rallied to Republican President Abraham Lincoln and the Republicans' National Union Party in the election of 1864, which featured Andrew Johnson on the Republican ticket even though he was a Democrat from the South. Johnson replaced Lincoln in 1865, but stayed independent of both parties. The Democrats benefited from white Southerners' resentment of Reconstruction after the war and consequent hostility to the Republican Party. After Redeemers ended Reconstruction in the 1870s, and following the often extremely violent disenfranchisement of African Americans led by such white supremacist Democratic politicians as Benjamin Tillman of South Carolina in the 1880s and 1890s, the South, voting Democratic, became known as the "Solid South". Though Republicans won all but two presidential elections, the Democrats remained competitive. The party was dominated by pro-business Bourbon Democrats led by Samuel J. Tilden and Grover Cleveland, who represented mercantile, banking, and railroad interests; opposed imperialism and overseas expansion; fought for the gold standard; opposed bimetallism; and crusaded against corruption, high taxes, and tariffs. Cleveland was elected to non-consecutive presidential terms in 1884 and 1892.[26]
1900–1930




The three leaders of the Democratic Party during the first half of the 20th century on June 14, 1913: President Woodrow Wilson (nominated in 1912 and 1916); Secretary of State William J. Bryan (nominated in 1896, 1900 and 1908); Josephus Daniels; Breckinridge Long; William Phillips; and Franklin D. Roosevelt (nominated for Vice President in 1920 and for President in 1932, 1936, 1940 and 1944)


Agrarian Democrats demanding free silver overthrew the Bourbon Democrats in 1896 and nominated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency (a nomination repeated by Democrats in 1900 and 1908). Bryan waged a vigorous campaign attacking Eastern moneyed interests, but he lost to Republican William McKinley. The Democrats took control of the House in 1910 and elected Woodrow Wilson as President in 1912 and 1916. Wilson effectively led Congress to put to rest the issues of tariffs, money and antitrust, which had dominated politics for 40 years, with new progressive laws.
1930–1960




Franklin D. Roosevelt, 32nd President of the United States (1933–1945)


The Great Depression in 1929 that occurred under Republican President Herbert Hoover and the Republican Congress set the stage for a more liberal government; the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives nearly uninterrupted from 1930 until 1994 and won most presidential elections until 1968. Franklin D. Roosevelt, elected to the presidency in 1932, came forth with government programs called the New Deal. New Deal liberalism meant the regulation of business (especially finance and banking) and the promotion of labor unions, as well as federal spending to aid to the unemployed, help distressed farmers, and undertake large-scale public works projects. It marked the start of the American welfare state.[27] The opponents, who stressed opposition to unions, support for business, and low taxes, started calling themselves "conservatives".[28]
Until the 1980s, the Democratic Party was a coalition of two parties divided by the Mason–Dixon line: liberal Democrats in the North and culturally conservative voters in the South, who though benefitting from many of the New Deal public works projects, opposed increasing Civil Rights initiatives advocated by Northeastern liberals. The polarization grew stronger after Roosevelt died. Southern Democrats formed a key part of the bipartisan conservative coalition in an alliance with most of the Midwestern Republicans. The economically activist philosophy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, which has strongly influenced American liberalism, shaped much of the party's economic agenda after 1932. From the 1930s to the mid-1960s, the liberal New Deal coalition usually controlled the Presidency while the conservative coalition usually controlled Congress.[29]
Issues facing parties and the United States after World War II included the Cold War and the Civil Rights Movement. Republicans attracted conservatives and white Southerners from the Democratic coalition with their use of the Southern strategy and resistance to New Deal and Great Society liberalism. African Americans had traditionally supported the Republican Party because of the anti-slavery policies of Abraham Lincoln and the civil rights policies of his successors, such as Ulysses S. Grant. But they began supporting Democrats following the ascent of the Franklin D. Roosevelt administration, the New Deal, the integration of the military and embrace of proposed civil rights legislation by President Harry Truman in 1947–48, and the postwar Civil Rights movement. The Democratic Party's main base of support shifted to the Northeast, marking a dramatic reversal of history.
1960–1980




John F. Kennedy, 35th President of the United States (1961–1963)


The election of President John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts in 1960 was a partial reflection of this shift. In the campaign, Kennedy attracted a new generation of younger voters. In his agenda dubbed the New Frontier, Kennedy introduced a host of social programs and public works projects, along with enhanced support of the space program, proposing a manned spacecraft trip to the moon by the end of the decade. He pushed for civil rights initiatives and proposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but with his assassination in November 1963, was not able to see its passage.




Lyndon B. Johnson, 36th President of the United States (1963–1969)


Kennedy's successor Lyndon B. Johnson was able to persuade the largely conservative Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and, with a more progressive Congress in 1965, passed much of the Great Society, which consisted of an array of social programs designed to help the poor. Kennedy and Johnson's advocacy of civil rights further solidified black support for the Democrats, but had the effect of alienating southern whites, who would eventually gravitate towards the Republican party, particularly after the election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency in 1980. The United States' involvement in the Vietnam War in the 1960s was another divisive issue that further fractured the fault lines of the Democrats' coalition. After the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, President Johnson committed a large contingency of combat troops to Vietnam, but the escalation failed to drive the Viet Cong from South Vietnam, resulting in an increasing quagmire, which by 1968 had become the subject of widespread anti-war protests in the United States and elsewhere. With increasing casualties and nightly news reports bringing home troubling images from Vietnam, the costly military engagement became increasingly unpopular, alienating many of the kinds of young voters that the Democrats had attracted the early 1960s. The protests that year along with assassinations of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (younger brother of John F. Kennedy) climaxed in turbulence at the hotly contested Democratic National Convention that summer in Chicago (which, amongst the ensuing turmoil inside and outside of the convention hall, nominated Vice President Hubert Humphrey), in a series of events that proved to mark a significant turning point in the decline of the Democratic party's broad coalition.
Republican presidential nominee Richard Nixon was able to capitalize on the Democrat's confusion that year and won the 1968 election to become the 37th president, and would win again in 1972 against Democratic nominee George McGovern, who like Robert Kennedy reached out to the younger anti-war and counterculture voters, but unlike Kennedy, was not able to appeal to the party's more traditional white working class constituencies. During Nixon's second term, his presidency was rocked by the Watergate scandal, which forced him to resign in 1974, being succeeded by vice president Gerald Ford, who served a brief tenure. Watergate offered the Democrats an opportunity to recoup, and their nominee Jimmy Carter won the 1976 presidential election. With the initial support of evangelical Christian voters in the South, Carter was temporarily able to re-unite the disparate factions within the party, but inflation and the Iran Hostage Crisis of 1979–1980 took their toll, resulting in a landslide victory for Republican presidential nominee Ronald Reagan in 1980, which shifted the tectonic plates of the political landscape in favor of the Republicans for years to come.
1980–present




Bill Clinton, 42nd President of the United States (1993–2001)


With the ascendancy of the Republicans under Ronald Reagan, the Democrats searched for ways to respond, but were unable to succeed by running traditional candidates, such as former Vice President and Democratic presidential nominee Walter Mondale who lost to Reagan in the 1984 presidential election. Many Democrats attached their hopes to the future star of Gary Hart, who had challenged Mondale in the 1984 primaries running on a theme of "New Ideas", and in the subsequent 1988 primaries, he became the de facto front-runner and virtual "shoe-in" for the Democratic presidential nomination, before his campaign was ended by a sex scandal. The party nevertheless began to seek out a younger generation of leaders, who like Hart had been inspired by the pragmatic idealism of John F. Kennedy.
Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was one such figure, who was elected President in 1992 as the Democratic nominee. He labeled himself and governed as a "New Democrat". The party adopted a centrist economic but socially progressive agenda, with the voter base after Reagan having shifted considerably to the right. In an effort to appeal to both liberals and fiscal conservatives, Democrats began to advocate for a balanced budget and market economy tempered by government intervention (mixed economy), along with a continued emphasis on social justice and affirmative action. The economic policy adopted by the Democratic Party, including the former Clinton administration, has been referred to as "Third Way". The Democrats lost control of Congress in the election of 1994 to the Republican Party. Re-elected in 1996, Clinton was the first Democratic President since Franklin Roosevelt to be elected to two terms. Following twelve years of Republican rule, the Democrats regained majority control of both the House and the Senate in the 2006 elections.




Barack Obama, 44th President of the United States (2009–2017)


In the wake of the 2001 World Trade Center terrorist attacks and with growing concern over global warming, some of the party's key issues in the early 21st century have included the methods of how to combat terrorism, homeland security, expanding access to health care, labor rights, environmentalism, and the preservation of liberal government programs.[30] Barack Obama won the Democratic Party's nomination and was elected as the first African American president in 2008. The Democrats gained control of both chambers of Congress in the wake of the 2007 economic recession. The Democratic Party under the Obama presidency moved forward reforms including an Economic Stimulus package, the Dodd-Frank financial reform act, and the Affordable Care Act. In the 2010 elections, the Democratic Party lost control of the House and lost its majority in state legislatures and state governorships. In the 2012 elections, President Obama was re-elected but the party kept its minority in the House of Representatives, and in 2014 the party lost control of the Senate for the first time since 2006. After the 2016 election of Donald Trump, the Democratic Party transitioned into the role of an opposition party and currently hold neither the Presidency nor a majority in the House or Senate.
According to a Pew Research poll, the Democratic Party has become more socially liberal and secular compared to how it was in 1987.[31] Based on a poll conducted in 2014, Gallup found that 30% of Americans identified as Democrats, 23% as Republicans, and 45% as Independents.[32] In the same poll, a survey of registered voters stated that 47% identified as Democrats or leaned towards the party; the same poll found that 40% of registered voters identified as Republicans or leaned towards the Republican party.
Name and symbols




"A Live Jackass Kicking a Dead Lion" by Thomas Nast. Harper's Weekly, January 19, 1870.



The donkey party logo is still a well-known symbol for the Democratic Party, despite not being the official logo of the party.



The Democratic donkey party logo in a modernized "kicking donkey" form



The Democratic-Republican Party splintered in 1824 into the short-lived National Republican Party, and the Jacksonian movement, which in 1828 became the Democratic Party. Under the Jacksonian era, the term "The Democracy" was in use by the party; the name "Democratic Party" was eventually settled upon[33] and became the official name in 1844.[34] Members of the party are called "Democrats" or "Dems".
The term "Democrat Party" has also been in local use but has usually been used by opponents since 1952 as a disparaging term.
The most common mascot symbol for the party has been the donkey, or jackass.[35] Andrew Jackson's enemies twisted his name to "jackass" as a term of ridicule regarding a stupid and stubborn animal. However, the Democrats liked the common-man implications and picked it up too, so the image persisted and evolved.[36] Its most lasting impression came from the cartoons of Thomas Nast from 1870 in Harper's Weekly. Cartoonists followed Nast and used the donkey to represent the Democrats, and the elephant to represent the Republicans.
In the early 20th century, the traditional symbol of the Democratic Party in Indiana, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Ohio was the rooster, as opposed to the Republican eagle. This symbol still appears on Oklahoma, Kentucky, Indiana, and West Virginia[37] ballots. The rooster was adopted as the official symbol of the national Democratic party.[38] In New York, the Democratic ballot symbol is a five-pointed star.[39]
Although both major political parties (and many minor ones) use the traditional American colors of red, white, and blue in their marketing and representations, since election night 2000, blue has become the identifying color for the Democratic Party, while red has become the identifying color for the Republican Party. That night, for the first time, all major broadcast television networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: blue states for Al Gore (Democratic nominee) and red states for George W. Bush (Republican nominee). Since then, the color blue has been widely used by the media to represent the party. This is contrary to common practice outside of the United States where blue is the traditional color of the right and red the color of the left.[40] For example, in Canada, red represents the Liberals, while blue represents the Conservatives. In the United Kingdom, red denotes the Labour Party and blue symbolizes the Conservative Party. Blue has also been used both by party supporters for promotional efforts—ActBlue, BuyBlue, BlueFund, as examples—and by the party itself in 2006 both for its "Red to Blue Program", created to support Democratic candidates running against Republican incumbents in the midterm elections that year, and on its official website.
In September 2010, the Democratic Party unveiled its new logo, which featured a blue D inside a blue circle. It was the party's first official logo, as the donkey logo had only been semi-official.
Jefferson-Jackson Day is the annual fundraising event (dinner) held by Democratic Party organizations across the United States.[41] It is named after Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson, whom the party regards as its distinguished early leaders.
The song "Happy Days Are Here Again" is the unofficial song of the Democratic Party. It was used prominently when Franklin D. Roosevelt was nominated for president at the 1932 Democratic National Convention and remains a sentimental favorite for Democrats today. For example, Paul Shaffer played the theme on the Late Show with David Letterman after the Democrats won Congress in 2006. "Don't Stop" by Fleetwood Mac was adopted by Bill Clinton's presidential campaign in 1992, and has endured as a popular Democratic song. Also, the emotionally similar song "Beautiful Day" by the band U2 has become a favorite theme song for Democratic candidates. John Kerry used the song during his 2004 presidential campaign, and several Democratic Congressional candidates used it as a celebratory tune in 2006.[42][43]
The 2016 campaign of US Democratic Party presidential candidate Bernie Sanders used the hopeful Simon & Garfunkel song "America" for one of its campaign advertisements,[44] with the complete permission[45] of the still-active duo of popular American musicians. As a traditional anthem for its Presidential nominating convention, Aaron Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" is traditionally performed at the beginning of the Democratic National Convention.
Current structure and composition
National committee
The Democratic National Committee (DNC) is responsible for promoting Democratic campaign activities. While the DNC is responsible for overseeing the process of writing the Democratic Platform, the DNC is more focused on campaign and organizational strategy than public policy. In presidential elections, it supervises the Democratic National Convention. The national convention is, subject to the charter of the party, the ultimate authority within the Democratic Party when it is in session, with the DNC running the party's organization at other times. The DNC is chaired by former U.S. Labor Secretary Tom Perez.[46]
State parties
Main article: List of state parties of the Democratic Party (United States)
Each state also has a state committee, made up of elected committee members as well as ex-officio committee members (usually elected officials and representatives of major constituencies), which in turn elects a chair. County, town, city, and ward committees generally are composed of individuals elected at the local level. State and local committees often coordinate campaign activities within their jurisdiction, oversee local conventions and in some cases primaries or caucuses, and may have a role in nominating candidates for elected office under state law. Rarely do they have much funding, but in 2005, DNC Chairman Dean began a program (called the "50 State Strategy") of using DNC national funds to assist all state parties and pay for full-time professional staffers.[47]
Major party groups
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) assists party candidates in House races; its current chairman (selected by the party caucus) is Rep. Ben Ray Lujan of New Mexico. Similarly, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC), headed by Senator Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, raises large sums for Senate races. The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee (DLCC), chaired by Mike Gronstal of Iowa, is a smaller organization with much less funding that focuses on state legislative races. The DNC sponsors the College Democrats of America (CDA), a student-outreach organization with the goal of training and engaging a new generation of Democratic activists. Democrats Abroad is the organization for Americans living outside the United States; they work to advance the goals of the party and encourage Americans living abroad to support the Democrats. The Young Democrats of America (YDA) is a youth-led organization that attempts to draw in and mobilize young people for Democratic candidates, but operates outside of the DNC. The Democratic Governors Association (DGA), chaired by Governor Dan Malloy of Connecticut, is an organization supporting the candidacies of Democratic gubernatorial nominees and incumbents. Likewise, the mayors of the largest cities and urban centers convene as the National Conference of Democratic Mayors.
Ideology
Further information: Factions in the Democratic Party (United States) § Ideological wings


Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





Upon foundation, the Democratic Party supported agrarianism, and the Jacksonian democracy movement of President Andrew Jackson, representing farmers and rural interests, and traditional Jeffersonian democrats.[48] Since the 1890s, the party has favored liberal positions (the term "liberal" in this sense describes modern liberalism, rather than classical liberalism or economic liberalism). In recent exit polls, the Democratic Party has had broad appeal across all socio-ethno-economic demographics.[49][50][51]
Historically, the party has represented farmers, laborers, labor unions, and religious and ethnic minorities; it has opposed unregulated business and finance, and favored progressive income taxes. In foreign policy, internationalism (including interventionism) was a dominant theme from 1913 to the mid-1960s. In the 1930s, the party began advocating welfare spending programs targeted at the poor. The party had a fiscally conservative, pro-business wing, typified by Grover Cleveland and Al Smith, and a Southern conservative wing that shrank after President Lyndon B. Johnson supported the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The major influences for liberalism were labor unions (which peaked in the 1936–1952 era), and the African American wing, which has steadily grown since the 1960s. Since the 1970s, environmentalism has been a major new component.
The Democratic Party, once dominant in the Southeastern United States, is now strongest in the Northeast (Mid-Atlantic and New England), Great Lakes region, and the West Coast (including Hawaii). The Democrats are also very strong in major cities (regardless of region).
Social scientists Theodore Caplow et al. argue, "the Democratic party, nationally, moved from left-center toward the center in the 1940s and 1950s, then moved further toward the right-center in the 1970s and 1980s."[52] According to historian Walter Scheidel, both major political parties shifted towards promoting free market capitalism in the 1970s, with Republicans moving further to the political right than Democrats to the political left. He contends Democrats played a significant role in the financial deregulation of the 1990s and have pushed social welfare issues to the periphery while increasingly focusing on issues pertaining to identity politics.[53]
Centrists
Centrist Democrats, or New Democrats, are an ideologically centrist faction within the Democratic Party that emerged after the victory of Republican George H. W. Bush in the 1988 presidential election. They are an economically liberal and "Third Way" faction which dominated the party for around 20 years starting in the late 1980s after the US populace turned much further to the political right. They are represented by organizations such as the New Democrat Network and the New Democrat Coalition.
The New Democrat Coalition is a pro-business, pro-growth, and fiscally conservative congressional coalition.[54] Compared to other Democratic factions, they are mostly more supportive of the use of military force, including the war in Iraq, are more supportive of free trade, and are more willing to reduce government welfare, as indicated by their support for welfare reform and tax cuts.[citation needed]
One of the most influential centrist groups was the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), a nonprofit organization that advocated centrist positions for the party. The DLC hailed President Bill Clinton as proof of the viability of "Third Way" politicians and a DLC success story; the DLC disbanded in 2011. Much of the former DLC is now represented in the think tank Third Way.[55]
While not representing a majority of the Democratic Party electorate, a decent amount of Democratic elected officials have self-declared as being centrists. Some of these Democrats are former President Bill Clinton, former Vice President Al Gore, Senator Mark Warner, former Pennsylvania governor Ed Rendell, former senator Jim Webb, Vice President Joe Biden, congresswoman Ann Kirkpatrick and former congressman Dave McCurdy.[56][57]
The New Democrat Network supports socially moderate, fiscally conservative Democratic politicians and operates the congressional New Democrat Coalition in the House and Senate.[58] Congressman Ron Kind is the chairperson of the coalition[56] and former senator and 2016 Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton was a member while in Congress.[59] Before he became president, Senator Barack Obama was self-described as a New Democrat.[60]
Conservatives
Main article: Conservative Democrat
A Conservative Democrat is a member of the Democratic Party with conservative political views, or with views relatively conservative with respect to those of the national party. While such members of the Democratic Party can be found throughout the nation, actual elected officials are disproportionately found within the Southern states, and to a lesser extent within rural regions of the United States generally, more commonly in the West. Historically, Southern Democrats were generally much more ideologically conservative than conservative Democrats are now.
Many conservative Southern Democrats defected to the Republican Party, beginning with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the general leftward shift of the party. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, Billy Tauzin of Louisiana, Kent Hance and Ralph Hall of Texas, and Richard Shelby of Alabama are examples of this. The influx of conservative Democrats into the Republican Party is often cited as a reason for the GOP's shift further to the right during the late 20th century, as well as the shift of its base from the Northeast and Midwest to the South.
The Democratic Party had a conservative element, mostly from the South and Border regions, into the 1980s. Their numbers declined sharply as the Republican Party built up its Southern base. They were sometimes humorously called "Yellow dog Democrats," or "boll weevils," "Dixiecrats." In the House, they form the Blue Dog Coalition, a caucus of fiscal conservatives and social conservatives and moderates, primarily southerners, willing to broker compromises with the Republican leadership. They have acted as a unified voting bloc in the past, giving its forty plus members some ability to change legislation.
There was a split vote among many conservative Southern Democrats in the 1970s and 1980s. Some supported local and statewide conservative Democrats while simultaneously voting for Republican presidential candidates.[61]
Liberals
See also: Modern liberalism in the United States




Eleanor Roosevelt at the 1956 Democratic National Convention in Chicago


Social liberals (modern liberals) and progressives constitute the majority of the Democratic voter base. Liberals thereby form the largest united demographic within the Democratic base. According to the 2012 exit poll results, liberals constituted 25% of the electorate, and 86% of American liberals favored the candidate of the Democratic Party.[62] White-collar college-educated professionals were mostly Republican until the 1950s; they now compose a vital component of the Democratic Party.[63]
A large majority of liberals favor universal health care, with many supporting a single-payer system. A majority also favor diplomacy over military action, stem cell research, the legalization of same-sex marriage, stricter gun control, and environmental protection laws as well as the preservation of abortion rights. Immigration and cultural diversity is deemed positive; liberals favor cultural pluralism, a system in which immigrants retain their native culture in addition to adopting their new culture. They tend to be divided on free trade agreements and organizations such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Most liberals oppose increased military spending and the mixing of church and state.[64]
This ideological group differs from the traditional organized labor base. According to the Pew Research Center, a plurality of 41% resided in mass affluent households and 49% were college graduates, the highest figure of any typographical group. It was also the fastest growing typological group between the late 1990s and early 2000s.[64] Liberals include most of academia[65] and large portions of the professional class.[49][50][51]
Progressives
See also: Progressivism in the United States
Progressives are a left-leaning, pro-labor union faction in the party who have long supported a strong regulation of business, social-welfare programs, and workers' rights.[66][67] Many progressive Democrats are descendants of the New Left of Democratic presidential candidate Senator George McGovern of South Dakota; others were involved in the 2016 presidential candidacy of Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders.
In 2014, progressive Senator Elizabeth Warren set out an "Eleven Commandments of Progressivism", being tougher regulation on corporations, affordable education, scientific investment and environmentalism, network neutrality, increased wages, equal pay, collective bargaining rights, defending social safety-net programs, marriage equality, immigration reform, and unabridged access to reproductive healthcare.[68] Additionally, progressives strongly oppose political corruption, and therefore seek to advance electoral reform including campaign finance reform and voting rights.[69] Today many progressives have made a fight against economic inequality their top priority.[70] Progressives are generally considered to be synonymous with Liberals; however, the two groups differ on a variety of issues.[71]
The Congressional Progressive Caucus is a caucus of progressive Democrats, and is the single largest Democratic caucus in the House of Representatives. Its current chairs are Mark Pocan of Wisconsin and Raúl Grijalva of Arizona. Its members have included Representatives Dennis Kucinich of Ohio, John Conyers of Michigan, Jim McDermott of Washington, John Lewis of Georgia, Barbara Lee of California, and the late Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota. Senators Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, and Ed Markey of Massachusetts were all members of the caucus when in the House of Representatives. Today, no Democratic Senators belong to the Progressive Caucus; however, Independent Senator Bernie Sanders is a member.
Political positions
Main article: Political positions of the Democratic Party
Economic policy:

Expand social security and safety net programs.[72]
Increase top capital gains tax and dividend tax rates to above 28%.[73]
Across the board tax-cuts for the low and middle class and small businesses.[74]
Change tax rules to not encourage shipping jobs overseas.[74]
Increase federal minimum wage.
Modernize and expand access to public education, and provide universal preschool education.[75][76]
Support for universal health care.[77]
Greater investment in infrastructure development.[76]
Increase investments in scientific and technological research and development.[78]
Expand the use of renewable energy and diminish the use of fossil fuels.[79]
Implement a carbon tax.[80]
Uphold labor protections and the right to unionize.[81][82]
Reform the student loan system and allow for refinancing student loans.[83]
Mandate equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, race, or ethnicity.[84]

Social policy:

Uphold network neutrality.[85]
Implement campaign finance reform and electoral reform.[86]
Uphold voting rights and easy access to voting.[87][88]
Supports for same-sex marriage and civil unions.
Allow legal access to abortions and women's reproductive health care.
Reform the immigration system and allow for a pathway to citizenship.
Support for gun background checks and stricter gun control regulations.
Improve privacy laws and curtail government surveillance.
Opposition to the use of torture.[89][90]
Recognize and defend Internet freedom[disambiguation needed] worldwide.[74]

Economic issues
Equal economic opportunity, a base social safety net provided by the welfare state, and strong labor unions have historically been at the heart of Democratic economic policy.[15] The welfare state supports a progressive tax system, higher minimum wages, social security, universal health care, public education, and public housing.[15] They also support infrastructure development and government sponsored employment programs in an effort to achieve economic development and job creation, while stimulating private sector job creation.[91] Additionally however, since the 1990s the party has at times supported centrist economic reforms, which cut the size of government and reduced market regulations.[92] The party has continuously rejected laissez-faire economics as well as market socialism, instead favoring Keynesian economics within a capitalist market-based system.
Fiscal policy
Democrats support a more progressive tax structure to provide more services and reduce economic inequality by making sure that the wealthiest Americans pay the highest amount in taxes.[93] Democrats support more government spending on social services while spending less on the military.[94][95] They oppose the cutting of social services, such as Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and various other welfare programs,[96] believing it to be harmful to efficiency and social justice. Democrats believe the benefits of social services, in monetary and non-monetary terms, are a more productive labor force and cultured population, and believe that the benefits of this are greater than any benefits that could be derived from lower taxes, especially on top earners, or cuts to social services. Furthermore, Democrats see social services as essential towards providing positive freedom, i.e. freedom derived from economic opportunity. The Democratic-led House of Representatives reinstated the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) budget rule at the start of the 110th Congress.[97]
Minimum wage
See also: United States minimum wage
The Democratic Party favors raising the minimum wage. They call for a $10.10/hour national minimum wage and think the minimum wage should be adjusted regularly.[98] The Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007 was an early component of the Democrats' agenda during the 110th Congress. In 2006, the Democrats supported six state ballot initiatives to increase the minimum wage; all six initiatives passed.[99] In May 2017, senate Democrats introduced the Raise the Wage Act, which would raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2024, and marks a leftward turn in Democratic economic policies.[100]
Health care




President Barack Obama signing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law at the White House on March 23, 2010


Democrats call for "affordable and quality health care," and many advocate an expansion of government intervention in this area. Democrats favor national health insurance or universal health care in a variety of forms to address the rising costs of modern health insurance. Some Democrats, such as Representatives John Conyers and John Dingell, have called for a single-payer program of Medicare for All. The Progressive Democrats of America, a group operating inside the Democratic Party, has made single-payer universal health care one of their primary policy goals.[101] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law by President Obama on March 23, 2010, has been one of the most significant pushes for universal health care to become a reality. By April 2014, more than 10 million Americans had enrolled in healthcare coverage since the launch of the Affordable Care Act.[102]
Education
Democrats favor improving public education by raising school standards and reforming the head start program. They also support universal preschool and expanding access to primary education, including through charter schools. They call for slashes in student loan debt and support reforms to force down tuition fees.[103] Other proposed reforms have included nationwide universal preschool education, tuition-free college, and reform of standardized testing. Democrats have the long-term aim of having low-cost, publicly funded college education with low tuition fees (like in much of Europe and Canada), which should be available to every eligible American student. Alternatively, they encourage expanding access to post-secondary education by increasing state funding for student financial aid such as Pell Grants and college tuition tax deductions.[104]
Environment
Main article: Environmental policy of the United States
Democrats believe that the government should protect the environment and have a history of environmentalism. In more recent years, this stance has had as its emphasis alternative energy generation as the basis for an improved economy, greater national security, and general environmental benefits.[105]
The Democratic Party also favors expansion of conservation lands and encourages open space and rail travel to relieve highway and airport congestion and improve air quality and economy; it "believe[s] that communities, environmental interests, and government should work together to protect resources while ensuring the vitality of local economies. Once Americans were led to believe they had to make a choice between the economy and the environment. They now know this is a false choice."[106]
The most important environmental concern of the Democratic Party is climate change. Democrats, most notably former Vice President Al Gore, have pressed for stern regulation of greenhouse gases. On October 15, 2007, he won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to build greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and laying the foundations for the measures needed to counteract these changes asserting that "the climate crisis is not a political issue, it is a moral and spiritual challenge to all of humanity."[107]
Renewable energy and fossil fuels
Democrats have supported increased domestic renewable energy development, including wind and solar power farms, in an effort to reduce carbon pollution. The party's platform calls for an "all of the above" energy policy including clean energy, natural gas and domestic oil, with the desire of becoming energy independent.[99] The party has supported higher taxes on oil companies and increased regulations on coal power plants, favoring a policy of reducing long-term reliance on fossil fuels.[108][109] Additionally, the party supports stricter fuel emissions standards to prevent air pollution.
Trade agreements
Many Democrats support fair trade policies when it comes to the issue of international trade agreements, and some in the party have started supporting free trade in recent decades.[110] In the 1990s, the Clinton administration and a number of prominent Democrats pushed through a number of agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Since then, the party's shift away from free trade became evident in the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) vote, with 15 House Democrats voting for the agreement and 187 voting against.[111][112]
Social issues




Shirley Chisholm was the first major party African-American candidate to run nationwide primary campaigns


The modern Democratic party emphasizes egalitarianism and social equality through liberalism. They support voting rights and minority rights, including LGBT rights, multiculturalism, and religious secularism. A longstanding social policy is upholding civil rights, which affect ethnic and racial minorities and includes voting rights, equal opportunity, and racial equality. The party championed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which for the first time outlawed segregation. Democrats made civil rights and anti-racism a core party philosophy. Carmines and Stimson say, "the Democratic Party appropriated racial liberalism and assumed federal responsibility for ending racial discrimination."[113][114][115]
Ideological social elements in the party include cultural liberalism, civil libertarianism, and feminism. Other Democratic social policies are internationalism, open immigration, electoral reform, and women's reproductive rights.
Equal opportunity
The Democratic Party supports equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of sex, age, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, creed, or national origin. Many Democrats support affirmative action programs to further this goal. Democrats also strongly support the Americans with Disabilities Act to prohibit discrimination against people based on physical or mental disability. As such, the Democrats pushed as well the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, a legal expansion that became law.[116]
Voting rights
The party is very supportive of improving voting rights as well as election accuracy and accessibility.[117] They support ending voter ID laws and increasing voting time, including making election day a holiday. They support reforming the electoral system to eliminate gerrymandering as well as passing comprehensive campaign finance reform.[86] They supported the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and as a party have often been pioneers for democracy in the United States.[88]
Abortion and reproductive rights
See also: Abortion law in the United States
The Democratic Party believe that all women should have access to birth control, and support public funding of contraception for poor women. The Democratic Party, in its national platforms from 1992 to 2004, has called for abortion to be "safe, legal and rare"—namely, keeping it legal by rejecting laws that allow governmental interference in abortion decisions, and reducing the number of abortions by promoting both knowledge of reproduction and contraception, and incentives for adoption. The wording changed in the 2008 platform. When Congress voted on the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003, Congressional Democrats were split, with a minority (including former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid) supporting the ban, and the majority of Democrats opposing the legislation.[118]
The Democratic Party opposes attempts to reverse the 1973 Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade, which declared abortion covered by the constitutionally protected individual right to privacy under the Ninth Amendment, and Planned Parenthood v. Casey, which lays out the legal framework in which government action alleged to violate that right is assessed by courts. As a matter of the right to privacy and of gender equality, many Democrats believe all women should have the ability to choose to abort without governmental interference. They believe that each woman, conferring with her conscience, has the right to choose for herself whether abortion is morally correct.
Former Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid identified himself as 'pro-life', while President Barack Obama and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi self-identify as 'pro-choice'. Groups such as Democrats for Life of America represent the pro-life faction of the party, while groups such as EMILY's List represent the pro-choice faction. A Newsweek poll from October 2006 found that 25% of Democrats were pro-life while a 69% majority was pro-choice.[119]
Immigration
See also: Immigration to the United States and Illegal immigration to the United States




President Lyndon B. Johnson signs the Immigration Act of 1965 as Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Senators Edward M. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy and others look on


Many Democratic politicians have called for systematic reform of the U.S. immigration system such that residents that have come into the U.S. illegally have a pathway to legal citizenship. President Obama remarked in November 2013 that he felt it was "long past time to fix our broken immigration system", particularly to allow "incredibly bright young people" that came over as students to become full citizens. The Public Religion Research Institute found in a late 2013 study that 73% of Democrats supported the pathway concept, compared to 63% of Americans as a whole.[120]
In 2013, Democrats in the Senate passed S.744, which would reform immigration policy to allow citizenship for illegal immigrants in the US and improve the lives of all immigrants currently living in the United States.[121]
LGBT rights
The Democratic Party is supportive of LGBT rights. Most support for same-sex marriage in the United States has come from Democrats, although some favor civil unions instead or oppose same-sex marriage. Support for same-sex marriage has increased in the past decade according to ABC News. An April 2009 ABC News/Washington Post public opinion poll put support among Democrats at 62%,[122] while a June 2008 Newsweek poll found that 42% of Democrats support same-sex marriage while 23% support civil unions or domestic partnership laws and 28% oppose any legal recognition at all.[123] A broad majority of Democrats have supported other LGBT-related laws such as extending hate crime statutes, legally preventing discrimination against LGBT people in the workforce, and repealing Don't ask, don't tell. A 2006 Pew Research Center poll of Democrats found that 55% supported gays adopting children with 40% opposed while 70% support gays in the military with only 23% opposed.[124] Gallup polling from May 2009 stated that 82% of Democrats support open enlistment.[125]
The 2004 Democratic National Platform stated that marriage should be defined at the state level and it repudiated the Federal Marriage Amendment.[126] The 2008 platform, while not stating support of same-sex marriage, called for repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act, which banned federal recognition of same-sex marriage and removed the need for interstate recognition, supported antidiscrimination laws and the extension of hate crime laws to LGBT people, and opposed the don't ask, don't tell military policy.[127] The 2012 platform included support for same-sex marriage and for the repeal of DOMA.[128]
On May 9, 2012, Barack Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to say he supports same-sex marriage.[129][130] Previously, he had opposed restrictions on same-sex marriage such as the Defense of Marriage Act, which he promised to repeal,[131] California's Prop 8,[132] and a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage (which he opposed saying that "decisions about marriage should be left to the states as they always have been."[133]) but also stated that he personally believed marriage to be between a man and a woman and that he favored civil unions that would "give same-sex couples equal legal rights and privileges as married couples".[131] Earlier, when running for the Illinois Senate in 1996, he said that he "unequivocally support(ed) gay marriage" and "favor(ed) legalizing same-sex marriages, and would fight efforts to prohibit such marriages."[134] Senator John Kerry, Democratic presidential candidate in 2004, did not support same-sex marriage. Former presidents Bill Clinton[135] and Jimmy Carter[136] and former vice presidents Joe Biden, Al Gore,[137] and Walter Mondale[138] also support gay marriage.
Civil Rights – United States Citizens in Puerto Rico
The 2016 Democratic Party Platform declares: We are committed to addressing the extraordinary challenges faced by our fellow citizens in Puerto Rico. Many stem from the fundamental question of Puerto Rico's political status. Democrats believe that the people of Puerto Rico should determine their ultimate political status from permanent options that do not conflict with the Constitution, laws, and policies of the United States. Democrats are committed to promoting economic opportunity and good-paying jobs for the hardworking people of Puerto Rico. We also believe that Puerto Ricans must be treated equally by Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs that benefit families. Puerto Ricans should be able to vote for the people who make their laws, just as they should be treated equally. All American citizens, no matter where they reside, should have the right to vote for the President of the United States. Finally, we believe that federal officials must respect Puerto Rico's local self-government as laws are implemented and Puerto Rico's budget and debt are restructured so that it can get on a path towards stability and prosperity.[139]
Legal issues
Gun control
With a stated goal of reducing crime and homicide, the Democratic Party has introduced various gun control measures, most notably the Gun Control Act of 1968, the Brady Bill of 1993, and Crime Control Act of 1994. However, some Democrats, especially rural, Southern, and Western Democrats, favor fewer restrictions on firearm possession and warned the party was defeated in the 2000 presidential election in rural areas because of the issue.[140] In the national platform for 2008, the only statement explicitly favoring gun control was a plan calling for renewal of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban.[141]
Death penalty
The Democratic Party supports the death penalty far less than the Republican Party. Though most Democrats in Congress have never seriously moved to overturn the rarely used federal death penalty, both Russ Feingold and Dennis Kucinich have introduced such bills with little success. Democrats have led efforts to overturn state death penalty laws, particularly in New Jersey and in New Mexico. They have also sought to prevent reinstatement of the death penalty in those states which prohibit it, including Massachusetts and New York. During the Clinton administration, Democrats led the expansion of the federal death penalty. These efforts resulted in the passage of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, signed into law by President Clinton; the law heavily limited appeals in death penalty cases.
In 1992, 1993, and 1995, Democratic Texas Congressman Henry González unsuccessfully introduced the Death Penalty Abolition Amendment which prohibited the use of capital punishment in the United States. Democratic Missouri Congressman William Lacy Clay, Sr. cosponsored the amendment in 1993.
During his Illinois Senate career, former President Barack Obama successfully introduced legislation intended to reduce the likelihood of wrongful convictions in capital cases, requiring videotaping of confessions. When campaigning for the presidency, Obama stated that he supports the limited use of the death penalty, including for people who have been convicted of raping a minor under the age of 12, having opposed the Supreme Court's ruling in Kennedy v. Louisiana that the death penalty was unconstitutional in child rape cases.[142] Obama has stated that he thinks the "death penalty does little to deter crime", and that it is used too frequently and too inconsistently.[143]
In June 2016, the Democratic Platform Drafting Committee unanimously adopted an amendment to abolish the death penalty, marking the first time the party had done so in its history.[144]
Torture
Many Democrats are opposed to the use of torture against individuals apprehended and held prisoner by the U.S. military, and hold that categorizing such prisoners as unlawful combatants does not release the U.S. from its obligations under the Geneva Conventions. Democrats contend that torture is inhumane, decreases the United States' moral standing in the world, and produces questionable results. Democrats largely spoke out against waterboarding.[citation needed]
Torture became a very divisive issue in the party after Barack Obama was elected president. Many centrist Democrats and members of the party's leadership supported the use of torture while the liberal wings continued to be steadfastly opposed to it.[145]
Patriot Act
Many Democrats are opposed to the Patriot Act, however when the law was passed most Democrats were supportive of it and all but two Democrats in the U.S. Senate voted for the original Patriot Act legislation in 2001. The lone nay vote was from Russ Feingold of Wisconsin; Mary Landrieu of Louisiana did not vote.[146] In the House the Democrats voted for the Act by 145 yea and 62 nay. Democrats split on the renewal in 2006. In the Senate, Democrats voted 34 for the 2006 renewal, and 9 against. In the House, Democrats voted 66 voted for the renewal, and 124 against.[citation needed]
Right to privacy
The Democratic Party believes that individuals should have a right to privacy. For example, many Democrats have opposed the NSA warrantless surveillance of U.S. citizens.
Some Democratic officeholders have championed consumer protection laws that limit the sharing of consumer data between corporations. Most Democrats oppose sodomy laws and believe that government should not regulate consensual noncommercial sexual conduct among adults as a matter of personal privacy.[147]
Foreign policy issues
The foreign policy of the voters of the two major parties has largely overlapped since the 1990s. A Gallup poll in early 2013 showed broad agreement on the top issues, albeit with some divergence regarding human rights and international cooperation through agencies such as the UN.[148]
In June 2014, the Quinnipiac Poll asked Americans which foreign policy they preferred:

A) The United States is doing too much in other countries around the world, and it is time to do less around the world and focus more on our own problems here at home.
B) The United States must continue to push forward to promote democracy and freedom in other countries around the world because these efforts make our own country more secure.

Democrats chose A over B by 65% to 32%; Republicans chose A over B by 56% to 39%; independents chose A over B by 67% to 29%.[149]
Iraq War
See also: Iraq War
In 2002, Congressional Democrats were divided on the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq: 147 voted against it (21 in the Senate and 126 in the House) and 110 voted for it (29 in the Senate, 81 in the House). Since then, many prominent Democrats, such as former Senator John Edwards, have expressed regret about this decision, and have called it a mistake, while others, such as Senator Hillary Clinton have criticized the conduct of the war but not repudiated their initial vote for it (though Clinton later went on to repudiate her stance during the 2008 primaries). Referring to Iraq, in April 2007 Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid declared the war to be "lost" while other Democrats (especially during the 2004 presidential election cycle) accused the president of lying to the public about WMDs in Iraq. Among lawmakers, Democrats are the most vocal opponents of Operation Iraqi Freedom and campaigned on a platform of withdrawal ahead of the 2006 midterm elections.
A March 2003 CBS News poll taken a few days before the invasion of Iraq found that 34% of Democrats nationwide would support it without United Nations backing, 51% would support it only with its backing, and 14% would not support it at all.[150] The Los Angeles Times stated in early April 2003 that 70% of Democrats supported the decision to invade while 27% opposed it.[151] The Pew Research Center stated in August 2007 that opposition increased from 37% during the initial invasion to 74%.[152] In April 2008, a CBS News poll found that about 90% of Democrats disapprove of the Bush administration's conduct and want to end the war within the next year.[153]
Democrats in the House of Representatives near-unanimously supported a non-binding resolution disapproving of President Bush's decision to send additional troops into Iraq in 2007. Congressional Democrats overwhelmingly supported military funding legislation that included a provision that set "a timeline for the withdrawal of all US combat troops from Iraq" by March 31, 2008, but also would leave combat forces in Iraq for purposes such as targeted counter-terrorism operations.[154][155] After a veto from the president, and a failed attempt in Congress to override the veto,[156] the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 was passed by Congress and signed by the president after the timetable was dropped. Criticism of the Iraq War subsided after the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 led to a dramatic decrease in Iraqi violence. The Democratic-controlled 110th Congress continued to fund efforts in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Presidential candidate Barack Obama advocated a withdrawal of combat troops within Iraq by late 2010 with a residual force of peacekeeping troops left in place.[157] He stated that both the speed of withdrawal and the amount of troops left over would be "entirely conditions-based."[157]
On February 27, 2009, President Obama announced, "As a candidate for president, I made clear my support for a timeline of 16 months to carry out this drawdown, while pledging to consult closely with our military commanders upon taking office to ensure that we preserve the gains we've made and protect our troops ... Those consultations are now complete, and I have chosen a timeline that will remove our combat brigades over the next 18 months."[158] Around 50,000 non-combat-related forces will remain.[158] Obama's plan drew wide bipartisan support, including that of defeated Republican presidential candidate Senator John McCain.[158][needs update]
Iran sanctions
See also: U.S. sanctions against Iran
The Democratic Party has been critical of the Iran's nuclear weapon program and supported economic sanctions against the Iranian government. In 2013, the Democratic led administration worked to reach a diplomatic agreement with the government of Iran to halt the Iranian nuclear weapon program in exchange for international economic sanction relief.[159] As of 2014 negotiations had been successful and the party called for more cooperation with Iran in the future.[160] In 2015, the Obama administration agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which provides sanction relief in exchange for international oversight of the Iranian nuclear program.
Invasion of Afghanistan
See also: Afghanistan – United States relations and International public opinion on the war in Afghanistan
Democrats in the House of Representatives and in the Senate near-unanimously voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists against "those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the United States" in Afghanistan in 2001, supporting the NATO coalition invasion of the nation. Most elected Democrats continue to support the Afghanistan conflict, and some, such as a Democratic National Committee spokesperson, have voiced concerns that the Iraq War shifted too many resources away from the presence in Afghanistan.[161][162][163] Since 2006, Democratic candidate Barack Obama has called for a "surge" of troops into Afghanistan and, since 2008, Republican candidate John McCain has also called for a "surge".[163] As President, Obama sent a "surge" force of additional troops to Afghanistan. Troop levels were 94,000 in December 2011, and are falling, with a target of 68,000 by fall 2012. Obama plans to bring all the troops home by 2014.[164]
Support for the war among the American people has diminished over time, and many Democrats have changed their opinion and now oppose a continuation of the conflict.[165][166] In July 2008, Gallup found that 41% of Democrats called the invasion a "mistake" while a 55% majority disagreed; in contrast, Republicans were more supportive of the war. The survey described Democrats as evenly divided about whether or not more troops should be sent—56% support it if it would mean removing troops from Iraq and only 47% support it otherwise.[166] A CNN survey in August 2009 stated that a majority of Democrats now oppose the war. CNN polling director Keating Holland said, "Nearly two thirds of Republicans support the war in Afghanistan. Three quarters of Democrats oppose the war."[165] An August 2009 Washington Post poll found similar results, and the paper stated that Obama's policies would anger his closest supporters.[167]
Israel
See also: Israel – United States relations
The Democratic Party has both recently and historically supported Israel.[168][169] Former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said in 2009, "When it comes to Israel, Republicans and Democrats speak with one voice."[170] A 2008 Gallup poll found that 64% say that they have a favorable image of Israel while only 16% say that they have a favorable image of the Palestinian Authority.[168] Within the party, the majority view is held by the Democratic leadership although some members such as John Conyers Jr., George Miller, Nick Rahall, Dave Obey, Pete Stark, Dennis Kucinich, and Jim McDermott as well as former President Jimmy Carter are less or not supportive of Israel.[169] The party leadership refers to the few Democrats unsympathetic to Israel as a "fringe".[169]
The 2008 Democratic Party Platform acknowledges a "special relationship with Israel, grounded in shared interests and shared values, and a clear, strong, fundamental commitment to the security of Israel, our strongest ally in the region and its only established democracy." It also included:

It is in the best interests of all parties, including the United States, that we take an active role to help secure a lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with a democratic, viable Palestinian state dedicated to living in peace and security side by side with the Jewish State of Israel. To do so, we must help Israel identify and strengthen those partners who are truly committed to peace, while isolating those who seek conflict and instability, and stand with Israel against those who seek its destruction. The United States and its Quartet partners should continue to isolate Hamas until it renounces terrorism, recognizes Israel's right to exist, and abides by past agreements. Sustained American leadership for peace and security will require patient efforts and the personal commitment of the President of the United States. The creation of a Palestinian state through final status negotiations, together with an international compensation mechanism, should resolve the issue of Palestinian refugees by allowing them to settle there, rather than in Israel. All understand that it is unrealistic to expect the outcome of final status negotiations to be a full and complete return to the armistice lines of 1949. Jerusalem is and will remain the capital of Israel. The parties have agreed that Jerusalem is a matter for final status negotiations. It should remain an undivided city accessible to people of all faiths.[171]

A January 2009 Pew Research Center study found that, when asked "which side do you sympathize with more", 42% of Democrats and 33% of liberals (a plurality in both groups) sympathize most with the Israelis. Around half of all political moderates or independents sided with Israel.[172]
Recent years[when?] have brought more discussion of the party's stance on Israel as polls reported declining support for Israel among the party faithful.[173] Gallup suggested that the decline in support might be due to tensions between Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Barack Obama.[citation needed]
Voter base
Further information: Factions in the Democratic Party (United States) § Voter base




Self-identified Democrats (blue) versus self-identified Republicans (red) (January–June 2010 data)


Professionals
Professionals, those who have a college education, and those whose work revolves around the conceptualization of ideas have supported the Democratic Party by a slight majority since 2000. Between 1988 and 2000, professionals favored Democrats by a 12-percentage point margin. While the professional class was once a stronghold of the Republican Party, it has become increasingly split between the two parties, leaning in favor of the Democratic Party. The increasing support for Democratic candidates among professionals may be traced to the prevalence of social liberal values among this group.[174]


“
Professionals, who are, roughly speaking, college-educated producers of services and ideas, used to be the most staunchly Republican of all occupational groups ... now chiefly working for large corporations and bureaucracies rather than on their own, and heavily influenced by the environmental, civil-rights, and feminist movements—began to vote Democratic. In the four elections from 1988 to 2000, they backed Democrats by an average of 52 percent to 40 percent.
”


A study on the political attitudes of medical students, for example, found that "U.S. medical students are considerably more likely to be liberal than conservative and are more likely to be liberal than are other young U.S. adults. Future U.S. physicians may be more receptive to liberal messages than current ones, and their political orientation may profoundly affect their health system attitudes."[175] Similar results are found for professors, who are more strongly inclined towards liberalism and the Democratic Party than other occupational groups.[65] The Democratic Party also has strong support among scientists, with 55% identifying as Democrats, 32% as independents, and 6% as Republicans and 52% identifying as liberal, 35% as moderate, and 9% as conservative.[176]
Academia
See also: Higher education in the United States
Academics, intellectuals, and the highly educated overall constitute an important part of the Democratic voter base. Academia in particular tends to be progressive. In a 2005 survey, nearly 72% of full-time faculty members identified as liberal, while 15% identified as conservative. The social sciences and humanities were the most liberal disciplines while business was the most conservative. Male professors at more advanced stages of their careers as well as those at elite institutions tend to be the most liberal.[65] Another survey by UCLA conducted in 2001/02, found 47.6% of scholars identifying as liberal, 34.3% as moderate, and 18% as conservative.[177] Percentages of professors who identified as liberal ranged from 49% in business to over 80% in political science and the humanities.[65] Social scientists, such as Brett O'Bannon of DePauw University, have claimed that the "liberal" opinions of professors seem to have little, if any, effect on the political orientation of students.[178][179]
Those with graduate education, have become increasingly Democratic beginning in the 1992,[180] 1996,[180] 2000,[49] 2004,[50] and 2008[181] elections. Intellectualism, the tendency to constantly reexamine issues, or in the words of Edwards Shields, the "penetration beyond the screen of immediate concrete experience," has also been named as an explanation why academia is strongly democratic and liberal.[182][183]
In the past, a self-identified Republican was more likely to have a 4-year college degree; however, according to some recent surveys, similar percentages of Republicans and Democrats are likely to have 4-year college degrees, and Democrats are more likely to hold post-graduate degrees.[184]
An analysis of 2008 through 2012 survey data from the General Social Survey, the National Election Studies, and the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press led to a slightly different assessment of the overall educational status of self-identified Democrats and Republicans:

On average, self-identified Republicans have more years of education (4 to 8 months each, depending on the survey) and are probably more likely to hold, at the least, a 4-year college degree. (One major survey indicates that they are more likely, while the results of another survey are statistically insignificant.) It also appears that Republicans continue to out-test Democrats in surveys that assess political knowledge and/or current events. With respect to post-graduate studies, the educational advantage is shifting towards self-identified Democrats. They are now more likely to hold post-graduate college degrees. (One major survey indicates that they are more likely, while the results of another survey are statistically insignificant.)[185]

Youth
Studies have shown that younger voters tend to vote mostly for Democratic candidates in recent years. Despite supporting Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush, the young have voted in favor of the Democratic presidential candidate in every election since Bill Clinton in 1992, and are more likely to identify as liberals than the general population.[186] In the 2004 presidential election, Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry received 54% of the vote from voters of the age group 18–29, while Republican George W. Bush received 45% of the vote from the same age group. In the 2006 midterm elections, the Democrats received 60% of the vote from the same age group.[50][51] Polls suggest that younger voters tend to be more liberal than the general population and have more liberal views than the public on same-sex marriage and universal healthcare, helping Barack Obama carry 66% of their votes in 2008. The Young Democrats of America are an affiliated organization of members of the party younger than 36 that advocates for youth issues and works for youth voter turnout.
Women




Jerry Brown at a campaign rally in Sacramento two days before the election


Although the gender gap has varied over many years, women of all ages are more likely than men to identify as Democrats. Recent polls have indicated that 41% of women identify as Democrats while only 25% of women identify as Republicans and 26% as independents, while 32% of men identify as Democrats, 28% as Republicans and 34% as independents. Among ethnic minorities, women also are more likely than males to identify as Democrats. Also, American women that identified as single, living with a domestic partner, divorced, separated, or widowed are more likely than men in these categories to vote Democratic, in contrast to married Americans, which split about equally between Democrat and Republican. Again, women in these categories are significantly more likely than males in these categories to vote Democratic.[187] The National Federation of Democratic Women is an affiliated organization meant to advocate for women's issues. The Woman's National Democratic Club works to promote the Democratic party. National women's organizations that support Democratic candidates are Emily's List, which aims to help elect pro-choice Democratic female candidates to office, and often but not always the National Organization for Women.
Relation to marital status and parenthood
Americans that identify as single, living with a domestic partner, divorced, separated, or widowed are more likely to vote Democratic, in contrast to married Americans, which split about equally between Democrat and Republican.[187]
GSS surveys of more than 11,000 Democrats and Republicans conducted between 1996 and 2006 came to the result that the differences in fertility rates are not statistically significant between these parties, with the average Democrat having 1.94 children and the average Republican having 1.91 children.[188] However, there is a significant difference in fertility rates between the two related groups liberals and conservatives, with liberals reproducing at a much lower rate than conservatives.[188]
LGBTQ Americans




"Gay Rights are Human Rights", a quote by Democratic Secretary of State and U.S. Senator from New York Hillary Clinton



LGBT votes for Democratic presidential candidates

Year[189][190]
Candidate
Vote


1996
Bill Clinton
71%


2000
Al Gore
70%


2004
John Kerry
77%


2008
Barack Obama
70%


2012
Barack Obama
76%


2016
Hillary Clinton
78%


LGBT Americans typically vote Democratic in national elections within the 70–77% range, according to national media exit polling. In heavily gay precincts in large cities across the nation, the average was higher, ranging from 85–94%. This trend has continued since 1996, when Bill Clinton won 71% of the LGBT vote compared to Bob Dole's 16% and 13% for others. In 2000, Al Gore won 70% to George W. Bush's 25% with 5% for others, in 2004 John Kerry won 77% to George W. Bush's 23%, in 2008 Barack Obama won 70% to John McCain's 27% with 3% to others and in 2012 Barack Obama won 76% to Mitt Romney's 22% with 2% to others. Patrick Egan, a professor of politics at New York University specializing in LGBT voting patterns, calls this a "remarkable continuity". Saying "about three-fourths vote Democratic and one-fourth Republican from year to year."[189] Notable LGBT Democrats include current Senator Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin and current Representatives Jared Polis of Colorado and David Cicilline of Rhode Island. The late activist and San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk was a Democrat as is former Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts. The National Stonewall Democrats is an LGBT advocacy group associated with the Democratic Party. The LGBT Equality Caucus is a congressional caucus of 97 Democrats and 3 Republicans that work and advocate for LGBT rights within the House of Representatives.[191]
Labor







Since the 1930s, a critical component of the Democratic Party coalition has been organized labor. Labor unions supply a great deal of the money, grass roots political organization, and voting base of support for the party. Democrats are far more likely to be represented by unions, although union membership has declined, in general, during the last few decades. This trend is depicted in the following graph from the book, Democrats and Republicans—Rhetoric and Reality.[192] It is based on surveys conducted by the National Election Studies (NES).
The historic decline in union membership over the past half century has been accompanied by a growing disparity between public sector and private sector union membership percentages. The three most significant labor groupings in the Democratic coalition today are the AFL-CIO and Change to Win labor federations, as well as the National Education Association, a large, unaffiliated teachers' union. Both the AFL-CIO and Change to Win have identified their top legislative priority for 2007 as passage of the Employee Free Choice Act. Other important issues for labor unions include supporting industrial policy (including protectionism) that sustains unionized manufacturing jobs, raising the minimum wage and promoting broad social programs such as Social Security and universal health care.
Working class
Further information: Social class in the United States
While the American working class has lost much of its political strength with the decline of labor unions,[193] it remains a stronghold of the Democratic Party and continues as an essential part of the Democratic base. Today, roughly a third of the American public is estimated to be working class with around 52% being either members of the working or lower classes.[194][195] Yet, as those with lower socioeconomic status are less likely to vote, the working and lower classes are underrepresented in the electorate. The working class is largely distinguished by highly routinized and closely supervised work. It consists mainly of clerical and blue-collar workers.[194] Even though most in the working class are able to afford an adequate standard of living, high economic insecurity and possible personal benefit from an extended social safety net, make the majority of working class person left-of-center on economic issues. Most working class Democrats differ from most liberals, however, in their more socially conservative views. Working class Democrats tend to be more religious and likely to belong to an ethnic minority. Socially conservative and disadvantaged Democrats are among the least educated and lowest earning ideological demographics. In 2005, only 15% had a college degree, compared to 27% at the national average and 49% of liberals, respectively. Together socially conservative and the financially disadvantaged comprised roughly 54% of the Democratic base.[64] The continued importance of the working class votes manifests itself in recent CNN exit polls, which shows that the majority of those with low incomes and little education vote for the Democratic Party.[49][50][51]
However, since at least 1980,[196] there has been a noticeable decline in support for the Democratic Party among white working class voters.[197][198][199][200][201][202] In the 2008 presidential election, Barack Obama carried 40% of white voters without college degrees to John McCain carrying 58%.[203] In the 2010 midterms, Democratic candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives only carried 33% of the white working class vote compared to 63% for the Republican candidates.[204] In the 2012 presidential election, Barack Obama carried 36% of white working class voters to Mitt Romney carrying 61%.[205] In the 2014 midterms, Democratic candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives carried 34% of the white working class vote compared to 64% for the Republican candidates.[206] In the 2016 presidential election, Hillary Clinton only carried 28% of white working class voters to Donald Trump carrying 67%.[207][208][209]
Secular Americans
Main article: Irreligion in the United States
The Democratic Party receives support from secular organizations such as the Secular Coalition for America,[210] and many agnostic and atheist Americans. Exit polls from the 2008 election showed that voters with a religious affiliation of "none" accounted for the 12% of the electorate and overwhelmingly voted for Obama by a 75–25% margin.[211] In his inaugural address, Obama acknowledged atheists by saying that the United States is not just "Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus but non-believers as well."[212] In the 2012 election cycle, Obama has moderate to high rankings with the Secular Coalition for America, whereas the majority of the Republican candidates have ratings in the low-to-failing range.[213]
Atheists and secular people, although a diverse group themselves, may include individuals who are fiscally conservative. In this case, fiscally conservative atheists and secularists will come together due to their opposition to the religiously bound social policies of the Christian right.[214]
There is still a social stigma relating to atheism in the nation and polls show that a majority of the American people would be more comfortable voting for a Muslim or gay candidate than an atheist.[215]
African Americans




Bill Clinton at a Democratic "Get out the vote" rally in Los Angeles


From the end of the Civil War, African Americans primarily favored the Republican Party due to its overwhelming political and more tangible efforts in achieving the abolition of slavery, particularly through President Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation.[216] The south had long been a Democratic stronghold, favoring a state's right to legal slavery. In addition, the ranks of the fledgling Ku Klux Klan were composed almost entirely of white Democrats who were angry over the poor treatment they had received at the hands of northerners and who were also bent on reversing the policies of Reconstruction.[217] However, African Americans began drifting to the Democratic Party when Franklin Roosevelt was elected president.[216] Support for the Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s by Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson helped give the Democrats even larger support among the African-American community, which consistently vote between 85-95% Democratic.[216]
Prominent modern-day African-American Democratic politicians include Jim Clyburn, Elijah Cummings, Maxine Waters, John Lewis, Barbara Lee, Charles Rangel, John Conyers, Senator Cory Booker, and the former President of the United States, Barack Obama, who managed to net over 95% of the African-American vote in the 2008 election.[218] Despite being unaffiliated, the NAACP often participates in organizing and voter turnout drives and advocates for progressive causes, especially those that affect people of color.[219] Within the House of Representatives, the Congressional Black Caucus, consisting of 44 black Democrats, serves to represent the interests of African Americans and advocate on issues that affect them.
Hispanic and Latino Americans
The Hispanic population, particularly the large Mexican American population in the Southwest and the large Puerto Rican and Dominican populations in the Northeast, have been strong supporters of the Democratic Party. In the 1996 presidential election, Democratic President Bill Clinton received 72% of the Hispanic vote.[220] In following years, however, the Republican Party gained increasing support from the Hispanic community, especially among Hispanic Protestants and Pentecostals. With his much more liberal views on immigration, President Bush was the first Republican president to gain 40% of the Hispanic vote (he did so in the 2004 presidential election). Yet the Republican Party's support among Hispanics eroded in the 2006 midterm elections, dropping from 44% to 30%, with the Democrats gaining in the Hispanic vote from 55% in 2004 to 69% in 2006.[50][51] Democrats increased their share of the Hispanic vote in the 2008 presidential election, with Barack Obama receiving 67%. According to exit polls by Edison Research, Obama increased his support again in 2012, winning 71% of Hispanic voters.[221]
Cuban Americans still tend to vote Republican, though there has been a noticeable change starting with the 2008 elections. During the 2008 elections Barack Obama received 47% of the Cuban American vote in Florida.[222] According to Bendixen's exit polls, 84% of Miami-Dade Cuban American voters 65 or older backed McCain, while 55% of those 29 or younger backed Obama,[223] showing that the younger Cuban-American generation has become more liberal.
Throughout the decade of the 2000s, 60% or more of Hispanic Roman Catholics who were registered to vote identified as either Democratic or leaning towards the Party.[224]
Unaffiliated Hispanic advocacy groups that often support progressive candidates and causes include the National Council of La Raza and the League of United Latin American Citizens. In the House of Representatives, the Democratic caucus of Hispanic Americans is the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.
Native Americans




Carl Venne, Crow Indian Tribal Chairman, shows support for Democratic Presidential nominee Barack Obama in 2008


The Democratic Party also has strong support among the Native American population, particularly in Arizona, New Mexico, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Washington, Alaska, Idaho, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oklahoma[225] and North Carolina. Though now a small percentage of the population (virtually non-existent in some regions), most Native American precincts vote Democratic in margins exceeded only by African-Americans.[226]
Modern-day Democratic Native American politicians include former Congressman Brad Carson of Oklahoma and Lieutenant Governor Byron Mallott of Alaska, as well as Principal Chief Bill John Baker of the Cherokee Nation and Governor Bill Anoatubby of the Chickasaw Nation.
Jewish Americans
See also: National Jewish Democratic Council




Democratic President Barack Obama at a Conference with Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations


Jewish American communities tend to be a stronghold for the Democratic Party, with more than 70% of Jewish voters having cast their ballots for the Democrats in the 2004 and 2006 elections.[50][51] Al Gore received 79% of the Jewish votes in 2000, and Barack Obama won about 77% of the Jewish vote in 2008.[227] Support tends to vary among specific sectarian groups. For example, only 13% of Orthodox Jews supported Barack Obama in 2008 while around 60% of Conservative Jews and Reform Jews did so.[228] A 2010 poll by the Pew Research Center found that 60% of self-described Jews identified as Democratic or leaning towards the party, compared to 33% with those feelings towards Republicans.[224]
Jews as an important Democratic constituency are especially politically active and influential in large cities such as New York City, Los Angeles, Boston, Chicago; and play critical roles in large cities within presidential swing states, such as Philadelphia, Miami, and Las Vegas. Many prominent national Democrats in recent decades have been Jewish, including Chuck Schumer, Carl Levin, Abraham Ribicoff, Ben Cardin, Henry Waxman, Martin Frost, Joseph Lieberman, Bernie Sanders, Dianne Feinstein, Barney Frank, Barbara Boxer, Paul Wellstone, Rahm Emanuel, Russ Feingold, Herb Kohl, and Howard Metzenbaum.[228]
Arab and Muslim Americans
Arab Americans and Muslim Americans have leaned Democratic since the Iraq War.[229] Zogby found in June 2007 that 39% of Arab Americans identify as Democrats, 26% as Republicans, and 28% as independents.[229]
Arab Americans, who are in general socially conservative, but with more diverse economic views, historically voted Republican until recent years, having supported George W. Bush over Al Gore in 2000.[230]
A 2012 poll found that 68% of Muslim Americans surveyed support Barack Obama.[231]
Asian Americans
The Democratic Party also has considerable support in the small but growing Asian American population. The Asian American population had been a stronghold of the Republican Party until the United States presidential election of 1992 in which George H. W. Bush won 55% of the Asian American vote, compared to Bill Clinton winning 31%, and Ross Perot winning 15% of the Asian vote. Originally, the vast majority of Asian Americans consisted of strongly anti-communist, pro-democracy Vietnamese refugees, Chinese Americans, Taiwanese Americans, Korean Americans, and socially conservative Filipinos who fled Ferdinand Marcos in the 1960s through the 1980s, and the general Republican Party's socially conservative, fervently anti-communist position strongly resonated with this original demographic. The Democratic party made gains among the Asian American population starting with 1996 and in 2006, won 62% of the Asian American vote. Exit polls after the 2008 presidential election indicated that Democratic candidate, Barack Obama won 62% of the Asian American vote nationwide.[232] In the 2012 Presidential election, 73% of the Asian American electorate voted for Obama's re-election.[233]
Barack Obama has the support of 85% of Indian Americans, 68% of Chinese Americans, and 57% of Filipino Americans.[234] The Asian American community's increasing number of young voters has also helped to erode traditionally reliably Republican voting blocs such as Vietnamese and Filipino Americans, leading to an increase in support for Democrats. Prominent Asian-American Democrats include Senators Tammy Duckworth, Daniel Inouye, Daniel Akaka and Mazie Hirono, former Governor and Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke, and Representatives Mike Honda, Judy Chu, Doris Matsui, and Norman Mineta.
Democratic presidents
As of 2017, there have been a total of 15 Democratic Party presidents:


#
Name
Portrait
State
Presidency
start date
Presidency
end date


7
Andrew Jackson

Tennessee
March 4, 1829
March 4, 1837


8
Martin Van Buren

New York
March 4, 1837
March 4, 1841


11
James K. Polk

Tennessee
March 4, 1845
March 4, 1849


14
Franklin Pierce

New Hampshire
March 4, 1853
March 4, 1857


15
James Buchanan

Pennsylvania
March 4, 1857
March 4, 1861


17
Andrew Johnson

Tennessee
April 15, 1865
March 4, 1869


22
Grover Cleveland

New York
March 4, 1885
March 4, 1889


24
March 4, 1893
March 4, 1897


28
Woodrow Wilson

New Jersey
March 4, 1913
March 4, 1921


32
Franklin D. Roosevelt

New York
March 4, 1933
April 12, 1945


33
Harry S. Truman

Missouri
April 12, 1945
January 20, 1953


35
John F. Kennedy

Massachusetts
January 20, 1961
November 22, 1963


36
Lyndon B. Johnson

Texas
November 22, 1963
January 20, 1969


39
Jimmy Carter

Georgia
January 20, 1977
January 20, 1981


42
Bill Clinton

Arkansas
January 20, 1993
January 20, 2001


44
Barack Obama

Illinois
January 20, 2009
January 20, 2017


Recent electoral history






This article may overuse or misuse color, making it hard to understand for color-blind users. Please remove or fix instances of distracting or hard-to-read colors. See the category page and WP:COLOR for guidelines. (October 2017)





House of Representatives

President

Senate


Election
year
# of
seats won
+/–
# of
seats won
+/–
Election
year


1950

235 / 435





 28
Harry S. Truman

49 / 96





 5
1950


1952

213 / 435





 22
Dwight D. Eisenhower

47 / 96





 2
1952


1954

232 / 435





 19

49 / 96





 2
1954


1956

234 / 435





 2

49 / 96





 0
1956


1958

283 / 435





 49

64 / 98





 15
1958


1960

262 / 435





 21
John F. Kennedy

64 / 100





 1
1960


1962

258 / 435





 4

66 / 100





 3
1962


1964

295 / 435





 37
Lyndon B. Johnson

68 / 100





 2
1964


1966

248 / 435





 47

64 / 100





 3
1966


1968

243 / 435





 5
Richard Nixon

57 / 100





 5
1968


1970

255 / 435





 12

54 / 100





 3
1970


1972

242 / 435





 13

56 / 100





 2
1972


1974

291 / 435





 49
Gerald Ford

60 / 100





 4
1974


1976

292 / 435





 1
Jimmy Carter

61 / 100





 0
1976


1978

277 / 435





 15

58 / 100





 3
1978


1980

243 / 435





 34
Ronald Reagan

46 / 100





 12
1980


1982

269 / 435





 26

46 / 100





 1
1982


1984

253 / 435





 16

47 / 100





 2
1984


1986

258 / 435





 5

55 / 100





 8
1986


1988

260 / 435





 2
George H.W. Bush

55 / 100





 1
1988


1990

267 / 435





 7

56 / 100





 1
1990


1992

258 / 435





 9
Bill Clinton

57 / 100





 0
1992


1994

204 / 435





 54

48 / 100





 8
1994


1996

206 / 435





 2

45 / 100





 2
1996


1998

211 / 435





 5

45 / 100





 0
1998


2000

212 / 435





 1
George W. Bush

50 / 100





 4[235]
2000


2002

204 / 435





 7

49 / 100





 2
2002


2004

202 / 435





 2

45 / 100





 4
2004


2006

233 / 435





 31

51 / 100





 6[236]
2006


2008

257 / 435





 21
Barack Obama

59 / 100





 8[236]
2008


2010

193 / 435





 63

53 / 100





 6[236]
2010


2012

201 / 435





 8

55 / 100





 2[236]
2012


2014

188 / 435





 13

46 / 100





 9[236]
2014


2016

194 / 435





 6
Donald Trump

48 / 100





 2[236]
2016


In presidential elections: 1828–present
Note: When "in the Electoral College" is mentioned that means that while the Republicans secured a victory in the Electoral College, they did not receive the most popular votes.


Election
Candidates
Votes
Vote %
Electoral votes
+/-
Outcome of election


1828
Andrew Jackson
642,553
56.0

178 / 261





178
Democratic victory


1832
Andrew Jackson
701,780
54.2

219 / 286





41
Democratic victory


1836
Martin Van Buren
764,176
50.83

170 / 294





49
Democratic victory


1840
Martin Van Buren
1,128,854
46.8

60 / 294





110
Whig victory


1844
James K. Polk
1,339,494
49.5

170 / 275





110
Democratic victory


1848
Lewis Cass
1,223,460
42.5

127 / 290





43
Whig victory


1852
Franklin Pierce
1,607,510
50.8

254 / 296





127
Democratic victory


1856
James Buchanan
1,836,072
45.3

174 / 296





80
Democratic victory


1860
Stephen A. Douglas
1,380,202
29.5

12 / 303





162
Republican victory


1864
George B. McClellan
1,812,807
45.0

21 / 233





9
Republican victory


1868
Horatio Seymour
2,706,829
47.3

80 / 294





59
Republican victory


1872
Horace Greeley (Liberal Republican)
2,834,761
43.8

69 / 352





11
Republican victory, supported Liberal Republican candidate


1876
Samuel J. Tilden
4,288,546
50.9

184 / 369





115
Republican victory (in Electoral College)


1880
Winfield Scott Hancock
4,444,260
48.25

155 / 369





29
Republican victory


1884
Grover Cleveland
4,914,482
48.9

219 / 401





64
Democratic victory


1888
Grover Cleveland
5,534,488
48.6

168 / 401





51
Republican victory (in Electoral College)


1892
Grover Cleveland
5,556,918
46.0

277 / 444





109
Democratic victory


1896
William Jennings Bryan
6,509,052
46.70

176 / 447





101
Republican victory


1900
William Jennings Bryan
6,370,932
45.5

155 / 447





21
Republican victory


1904
Alton B. Parker
5,083,880
37.6

140 / 476





15
Republican victory


1908
William Jennings Bryan
6,408,984
43.0

162 / 483





22
Republican victory


1912
Woodrow Wilson
6,296,284
41.8

435 / 531





273
Democratic victory


1916
Woodrow Wilson
9,126,868
49.2

277 / 531





158
Democratic victory


1920
James M. Cox
9,139,661
34.2

127 / 531





150
Republican victory


1924
John W. Davis
8,386,242
28.8

136 / 531





9
Republican victory


1928
Al Smith
15,015,464
40.8

87 / 531





49
Republican victory


1932
Franklin D. Roosevelt
22,821,277
57.4

472 / 531





385
Democratic victory


1936
Franklin D. Roosevelt
27,747,636
60.8

523 / 531





51
Democratic victory


1940
Franklin D. Roosevelt
27,313,945
54.7

449 / 531





74
Democratic victory


1944
Franklin D. Roosevelt
25,612,916
53.4

432 / 531





17
Democratic victory


1948
Harry S. Truman
24,179,347
49.6

303 / 531





129
Democratic victory


1952
Adlai Stevenson
27,375,090
44.3

89 / 531





214
Republican victory


1956
Adlai Stevenson
26,028,028
42.0

73 / 531





16
Republican victory


1960
John F. Kennedy
34,220,984
49.72

303 / 537





230
Democratic victory


1964
Lyndon B. Johnson
43,127,041
61.1

486 / 538





183
Democratic victory


1968
Hubert Humphrey
31,271,839
42.7

191 / 538





295
Republican victory


1972
George McGovern
29,173,222
37.5

17 / 538





174
Republican victory


1976
Jimmy Carter
40,831,881
50.1

297 / 538





280
Democratic victory


1980
Jimmy Carter
35,480,115
41.0

49 / 538





248
Republican victory


1984
Walter Mondale
37,577,352
40.6

13 / 538





36
Republican victory


1988
Michael Dukakis
41,809,074
45.6

111 / 538





98
Republican victory


1992
Bill Clinton
44,909,806
43.0

370 / 538





259
Democratic victory


1996
Bill Clinton
47,401,185
49.2

379 / 538





9
Democratic victory


2000
Al Gore
50,999,897
48.4

266 / 538





113
Republican victory (in Electoral College)


2004
John Kerry
59,028,444
48.3

251 / 538





15
Republican victory


2008
Barack Obama
69,498,516
52.9

365 / 538





114
Democratic victory


2012
Barack Obama
65,915,795
51.1

332 / 538





33
Democratic victory


2016
Hillary Clinton
65,844,610
48.0

227 / 538





105
Republican victory (in Electoral College)


See also


Liberalism portal
Politics portal
United States portal



Democratic Party (United States) organizations
List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets
Political party strength in U.S. states
Politics of the United States

References


^ Donald B. Cole, Jacksonian Democracy in New Hampshire, Harvard University Press, 1970, p. 69.
^ "MID-2017 VOTER REGISTRATION TOTALS". Ballot Access News. Retrieved November 12, 2017. 
^ a b Arnold, N. Scott (2009). Imposing values: an essay on liberalism and regulation. Florence: Oxford University Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-495-50112-3. Modern liberalism occupies the left-of-center in the traditional political spectrum and is represented by the Democratic Party in the United States. 
^ "President Obama, the Democratic Party, and Socialism: A Political Science Perspective". The Huffington Post. June 29, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2015. 
^ Paul Starr. "Center-Left Liberalism". Princeton University. Retrieved June 9, 2014. 
^ a b Hale, John (1995). The Making of the New Democrats. New York City: Political Science Quarterly. p. 229. Second, insofar as Democrats in Congress are roughly split into liberal and centrist wings. 
^ a b Dewan, Shaila; Kornblut, Anne E. (October 30, 2006). "In Key House Races, Democrats Run to the Right". The New York Times. Retrieved January 28, 2017. 
^ Goldfarb, Zachary A (November 30, 2013). "More liberal, populist movement emerging in Democratic Party ahead of 2016 elections". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 25, 2017. 
^ Etzioni, Amitai (January 8, 2015). "The Left's Unpopular Populism". The Atlantic. Retrieved March 25, 2017. 
^ Shahid, Waleed (December 15, 2016). "America in Populist Times: An Interview With Chantal Mouffe". The Nation. Retrieved March 25, 2017. 
^ Ball, Molly. "The Battle Within the Democratic Party". The Atlantic. Retrieved January 28, 2017. 
^ Raza, Syed Ali (2012), Social Democratic System, Global Peace Trust, p. 91 
^ "The Democratic Party, founded in 1828, is the world's oldest political party" states Kenneth Janda; Jeffrey M. Berry; Jerry Goldman (2010). The Challenge of Democracy: American Government in Global Politics. Cengage Learning. p. 276. 
^ Grigsby, Ellen (2008). Analyzing Politics: An Introduction to Political Science. Florence: Cengage Learning. pp. 106–107. ISBN 0-495-50112-3. In the United States, the Democratic Party represents itself as the liberal alternative to the Republicans, but its liberalism is for the most part the later version of liberalism—modern liberalism. 
^ a b c d Larry E. Sullivan. The SAGE glossary of the social and behavioral sciences (2009) p 291, "This liberalism favors a generous welfare state and a greater measure of social and economic equality. Liberty thus exists when all citizens have access to basic necessities such as education, health care, and economic opportunities."
^ Levy, Jonah (2006). The State after Statism: New State Activities in the Age of Liberalization. Florence: Harvard University Press. p. 198. ISBN 0-495-50112-3. In the corporate governance area, the center-left repositioned itself to press for reform. The Democratic Party in the United States used the postbubble scandals and the collapse of share prices to attack the Republican Party ... Corporate governance reform fit surprisingly well within the contours of the center-left ideology. The Democratic Party and the SPD have both been committed to the development of the regulatory state as a counterweight to managerial authority, corporate power, and market failure. 
^ "A Mixed Economy: The Role of the Market". Retrieved March 27, 2017. 
^ Prendergast, William B. (1999). The Catholic Voter in American Politics. The Passing of the Democratic Monolith. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University. ISBN 978-0-87840-724-8. 
^ Marlin, George J. (2004). The American Catholic Voter. 200 Years of Political Impact. South Bend, Indiana: St. Augustine. ISBN 978-1-58731-029-4. 
^ Michael Corbett et al. Politics and Religion in the United States (2nd ed. 2013).
^ Arthur Paulson, Realignment and Party Revival: Understanding American Electoral Politics at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century (2000) pp 46-72.
^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (Houghton Mifflin, 2007) p 287
^ Galbraith Schlisinger, Of the People: The 200 Year History of the Democratic Party (1992) ch 1–3
^ Robert Allen Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (U. of Missouri Press, 1995) ch 1–4
^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (2007) pp 287–88
^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch 5–6
^ Ellen Russell (2007). New Deal Banking Reforms and Keynesian Welfare State Capitalism. Routledge. pp. 3–4. 
^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch 7
^ Paul Finkelman and Peter Wallenstein, eds. The Encyclopedia Of American Political History (CQ Press, 2001) pp. 124–126
^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch 8
^ "Partisan Polarization Surges in Bush, Obama Years". U.S. Politics & Policy. Pew Research Center. June 4, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2015. 
^ "Party Affiliation | Gallup Historical Trends". Gallup.com. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ Appleby, Joyce (2003). Thomas Jefferson. p. 4. ISBN 0-521-64841-6. 
^ "Democratic Party". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ see "History of the Democratic Donkey"
^ John William Ward (1962). Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age. Oxford Up. pp. 87–88. 
^ "Barbour County, West Virginia General Election Ballot" (PDF). November 4, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 24, 2008. 
^ "The Rooster as the Symbol of the U.S. Democratic Party". Ithaca College. June 12, 2010. Retrieved January 30, 2017. 
^ Tomas Lopez (October 23, 2014). "Poor Ballot Design Hurts New York's Minor Parties…Again". Brennan Center for Justice. 
^ Farhi, Paul (November 2, 2004). "Elephants Are Red, Donkeys Are Blue". Washington Post. p. C01. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved October 11, 2016. 
^ Trotter, Bill (February 11, 2008). "Obama sets sights on November battle". Bangor Daily News. Archived from the original on February 28, 2008. Retrieved February 12, 2008. 
^ Gruss, Michael (November 21, 2006). "Local roast becomes political pep rally for Democrats". The Virginian-Pilot. Retrieved April 15, 2007. 
^ Scherer, Michael (November 8, 2006). "'The Democrats are ready to lead'". Salon.com. Retrieved March 18, 2007. 
^ "New Sanders Ad Uses Simon & Garfunkel Classic 'America'". NBC News. January 21, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2016. 
^ Corasaniti, Nick (January 23, 2016). "No Split Between Simon and Garfunkel Over Bernie Sanders's Use of Their Song". The New York Times. Retrieved January 26, 2016. 
^ Przybyla, Heidi (February 25, 2017). "Democrats elect Tom Perez, former Labor secretary, as new party leader". USA Today. 
^ Gilgoff, Dan (July 16, 2006). "Dean's List". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2007. 
^ John Ashworth, "Agrarians" & "aristocrats": Party political ideology in the United States, 1837–1846(1983)
^ a b c d "CNN. (2000). Exit Poll". Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007. 
^ a b c d e f g "CNN. (2004). Exit Poll". Retrieved July 11, 2007. 
^ a b c d e f "CNN. (2006). Exit Poll". Retrieved July 11, 2007. 
^ Theodore Caplow; Howard M. Bahr; Bruce A. Chadwick; John Modell (1994). Recent Social Trends in the United States, 1960-1990. McGill-Queen's Press. p. 337.  They add: "The Republican party, nationally, moved from right-center toward the center in 1940s and 1950s, then moved right again in the 1970s and 1980s.
^ Scheidel, Walter (2017). The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century. Princeton University Press. p. 416. ISBN 978-0691165028. 
^ "About Us - New Democrat Coalition". Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. 
^ "How the DLC Does It", Robert Dreyfuss, American Prospect, April 23, 2001
^ a b "Members - New Democrat Coalition". Archived from the original on September 7, 2016. 
^ Hale, Jon F. (January 1, 1995). "The Making of the New Democrats". Political Science Quarterly. 110 (2): 207–232. doi:10.2307/2152360. JSTOR 2152360. 
^ "NDN - A Progressive Think Tank and Advocacy Organization". 
^ "Senate New Democrat Coalition Members". Archive.org. August 26, 2002. Archived from the original on August 26, 2002. Retrieved April 16, 2017. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Obama: 'I am a New Democrat'". Politico.com. Retrieved April 16, 2017. 
^ Roger Chapman, Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia (2010) vol 1 Page 136
^ "President Exit Polls - Election 2012 - NYTimes.com". Elections.nytimes.com. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ Judis, John B. (July 11, 2003). "The trouble with Howard Dean". Salon. Salon.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2007. 
^ a b c "Pew Research Center. (May 10, 2005). Beyond Red vs. Blue, p. 1 of 8". Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2007. 
^ a b c d Kurtz, Howard (March 29, 2005). "College Faculties A Most Liberal Lot, Study Finds". The Washington Post. Washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2007. 
^ "Progressivism". Columbia Encyclopaedia. 2007. Archived from the original on June 29, 2008. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "Important Examples of Progressive Reforms". University of MIchigan. 
^ "Elizabeth Warren's 11 Commandments of Progressivism". National Journal. n.d. 
^ "Issues". Pdacommunity.org. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ "The Invisible Primary Against Hillary Clinton". National Journal. February 3, 2014. 
^ Sirotam David (May 25, 2011). "What's the Difference Between a Liberal and a Progressive?". Huffington Post. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ Sargent, Greg (March 13, 2014). "Push to expand Social Security (not cut it) gets another boost". Washington Post. 
^ [1] Mufson, Steven (January 2015). "Obama's budget proposal will take aim at the wealthy". Washingtonpost.com. 
^ a b c "On The Issues : Every Issue - Every Politician". Ontheissues.org. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "Education". Democrats.org. 
^ a b "Congressional Progressive Caucus : Back to Work Budget". Cpc.grijalva.house.gov. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "Health Care". Democrats.org. 
^ "Science & Technology". Democrats.org. 
^ Meg Handley. "6 Energy Policy Highlights from the Democratic Party Platform". US News & World Report. 
^ Zack Colman. "Democrats circulate carbon tax bill". TheHill. 
^ "THE ALLIANCE OF U.S. LABOR UNIONS AND THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY" (PDF). Scholarsstrategynetwork.org. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "Worker Rights". Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. 
^ Asma Khalid (June 9, 2014). "Obama Endorses Sen. Warren's Student Loan Refinancing Bill". wbur. 
^ "Democrats highlight equal pay in political push". CNN. April 7, 2014. 
^ Wyatt, Edward (November 10, 2014). "Obama Net Neutrality". The New York Times. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ a b "Democratic Party on Government Reform". Ontheissues.org. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "A Call for Election Reform, Beginning with New York". The Huffington Post. June 15, 2013. 
^ a b "Voting Rights". Democrats.org. 
^ "For Torture and Surveillance Commission via H.R. 104, Target The Congressional Progressive Caucus". Irregular Times. 
^ "Democratic Party on Crime". Ontheissues.org. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ "Jobs and the Economy". Democrats.org. 
^ Dan Roberts. "Wall Street deregulation pushed by Clinton advisers, documents reveal". the Guardian. 
^ "How High Should Taxes Be?". Economics.about.com. June 12, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ Saturday, November 17, 2007 12:01 A.M. EST (November 17, 2007). "The Wall Street Journal Online - Hot Topic". Opinionjournal.com. Retrieved June 17, 2010. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Cox, Wendell. "Budget Resolution Calls for Massive Tax Hikes and Spending Increases". Heritage.org. Archived from the original on March 12, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ "U.S. GOVERNMENT > Social Support > The Social Safety Net". Archived from the original on April 10, 2008. 
^ "Day Two: House passes new budget rules". Associated Press. January 5, 2007. Retrieved January 5, 2007. 
^ Burgess Everett. "Harry Reid slates minimum wage vote". POLITICO. 
^ a b "The Democratic Party Platform". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ Kulwin, Noah (May 25, 2017). "Democrats just united on a $15-an-hour minimum wage". Vice. Retrieved May 29, 2017. 
^ "Progressive Democrats of America - Priorities (Health Care for All)". Pdamerica.org. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ "Medicaid Enrollments Bring Obamacare Enrollment to More Than 10 Million". Newsweek. Reuters. April 4, 2014. 
^ http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/papers_pdf/101962.pdf
^ "Clinton Joins Key Senate Democrats to Release Report on "The College Cost Crunch"". clinton.senate.gov. June 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved November 25, 2006. 
^ "Agenda — Environment". Archived from the original on March 15, 2007. Retrieved March 18, 2007. 
^ "Democratic Party on Environment". Retrieved October 24, 2007. 
^ John Nicols (October 12, 2007). "Al Gore Wins Nobel Peace Prize". The Nation. 
^ "Energy Independence". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on 2010-09-20. 
^ Sullivan, Sean (June 2, 2014). "Coal state Democrats to Obama: Curb emissions? Um, no thanks". Washington Post. 
^ Rorty, R. (1997). Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought In Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00312-8
^ Weisman, Jonathan (July 6, 2005). "CAFTA Reflects Democrats' Shift From Trade Bills". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 10, 2006. 
^ Nichols, John (July 28, 2005). "CAFTA Vote Outs "Bush Democrats"". The Nation. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved December 15, 2006. 
^ Carmines, Edward G.; Stimson, James A. (1982). "Racial Issues and The Structure of Mass Belief Systems". Journal of Politics. 44 (1): 2–20. JSTOR 2130281. 
^ Talmadge Anderson; James Benjamin Stewart (2007). Introduction to African American Studies: Transdisciplinary Approaches and Implications. Black Classic Press. p. 205. 
^ Jeffrey M. Stonecash (2010). New Directions in American Political Parties. Routledge. p. 131. 
^ "Civil Rights". Democrats.org. 
^ Deborah White. "Liberalism 101: Democratic Party Agenda on Electoral Reform". About. 
^ "House Votes on 2003-530". Ontheissues.org. October 2, 2003. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ "Abortion". Pollingreport.com. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ Frumin, Aliyah (November 25, 2013). "Obama: 'Long past time' for immigration reform". MSNBC.com. Retrieved January 26, 2014. 
^ "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home > Votes > Roll Call Vote". Senate.gov. Retrieved March 18, 2014. 
^ "Changing Views on Social Issues" (PDF). April 30, 2009. Retrieved May 14, 2009. 
^ "Civil Rights". pollingreport.com. 
^ Less Opposition to Gay Marriage, Adoption and Military Service. Pew Research Center. March 22, 2006.
^ Morales, Lymari (June 5, 2009). "Conservatives Shift in Favor of Openly Gay Service Members". Gallup.com. 
^ "The 2004 Democratic National Platform" (PDF). Archived from the original on June 23, 2009. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)  (111 KB)
^ Garcia, Michelle (April 22, 2012). "Is This the Year Democrats Embrace Marriage Equality?". Advocate.com. Retrieved October 2, 2013. 
^ All Things Considered (September 4, 2012). "Democratic Platform Endorses Gay Marriage". Npr.org. Retrieved October 2, 2013. 
^ "Obama backs same-sex marriage". CBS News. May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 9, 2012. 
^ Sam Stein (May 9, 2012). "Obama Backs Gay Marriage". The Huffington Post. 
^ a b "Same-sex Marriage - Issues - Election Center 2008 - CNN.com". Cnn.com. Retrieved January 19, 2015. 
^ Obama Opposes Gay Marriage Ban. The Washington Post. By Perry Bacon Jr. July 2, 2008.
^ Obama Statement on Vote Against Constitutional Amendment to Ban Gay Marriage Archived December 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.. United States Senate Official Website. June 7, 2006.
^ Linkins, Jason (January 13, 2009). "Obama Once Supported Same-Sex Marriage 'Unequivocally'". Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ "Video: Clinton shifts on gay marriage". CNN. September 25, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2010. 
^ Raushenbush, Paul (March 19, 2012). "President Jimmy Carter Authors New Bible Book, Answers Hard Biblical Questions". The Huffington Post. Retrieved June 26, 2012. 
^ "Gay men and women should have the same rights // Current". Current.com. January 17, 2008. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ Mondale, Walter (May 16, 2013). "Mondale and Dukakis Back Marriage Equality". ThinkProgress. Retrieved June 20, 2013. 
^ "Democratic Party Platform 2016" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 10, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2016. 
^ Abramsky, Sasha (April 18, 2005). "Democrat Killer?". The Nation. Archived from the original on September 30, 2005. Retrieved October 10, 2006. 
^ "THE DRAFT 2008 DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL PLATFORM: RENEWING AMERICA'S PROMISE" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2012. Retrieved February 4, 2014. 
^ "Obama Backs Death Penalty for Child Rapists". Newser, June 26, 2008. Retrieved June 10, 2009.
^ "The Candidates on the Death Penalty". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on July 4, 2008. Retrieved July 26, 2009. 
^ "Democratic Platform Drafting Meeting Concludes". DNCC. June 25, 2016. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. 
^ Kenneth T. Walsh. "Obama and Democrats' Torture Problem". US News & World Report. 
^ Senate roll call on passage of the PATRIOT Act
^ Ashtari, Shadee (November 6, 2013). "Here's The Medieval-Sounding Sodomy Law That Helped Ken Cuccinelli Lose In Virginia". Huffington Post. 
^ Inc., Gallup,. "Republicans, Democrats Agree on Top Foreign Policy Goals". Gallup.com. Retrieved April 16, 2017. 
^ See "July 3, 2014 - Iraq - Getting In Was Wrong; Getting Out Was Right, U.S. Voters Tell Quinnipiac University National Poll" Quinnipiac University Poll item #51
^ "Archive page #16 of polls". Pollingreport.com. June 1, 2003. Retrieved October 2, 2013. 
^ "Archive page #15 of polls". Pollingreport.com. Retrieved October 2, 2013. 
^ Pew Research Center: Along the Iraq-Vietnam Parallel. Pew Research Center. August 28, 2007.
^ Recent polls from Pollingreport.
^ Flaherty, Anne (April 26, 2007). "Congress passes Iraq bill, veto awaits". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 29, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007. 
^ "US Democrats push for 2008 Iraq exit". Reuters. April 26, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007. 
^ "Democrats fail to override Bush on war funding". International Herald Tribune. May 2, 2007. Archived from the original on May 4, 2007. Retrieved May 2, 2007. 
^ a b Obama says conditions to dictate final Iraq force. Reuters. July 27, 2008.
^ a b c Top Republicans embrace Iraq plan. The Politico. February 27, 2009.
^ Gordon, Michael R. (November 23, 2013). "Accord Reached With Iran to Halt Nuclear Program". The New York Times. 
^ "Jewish Democratic donors urge Congress: Back off Iran sanctions". Haaretz.com. February 28, 2014. 
^ "Pelosi, Schumer Express Support for Troop Surge in Afghanistan" CNS News. August 1, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2008. Archived September 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Democrats say McCain forgot Afghanistan". Boston Globe. July 24, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Archived August 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "John McCain & Barack Obama urge Afghanistan surge". New York Daily News. July 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008.
^ "U.S. plans major shift to advisory role in Afghanistan," Los Angeles Times, December 13, 2011
^ a b Most Americans oppose Afghanistan war: poll. The Australian. August 7, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ a b "Afghan War Edges Out Iraq as Most Important for U.S." by Frank Newport. Gallup. July 30, 2008. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ Public Opinion in U.S. Turns Against Afghan War. By Jennifer Agiesta and Jon Cohen. Washington Post. August 20, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009.
^ a b Americans' Most and Least Favored Nations. By Lydia Saad. Gallup. March 3, 2008.
^ a b c Left could push pro-Israel voters to GOP. By Jennifer Rubin. The Politico. July 18, 2007.
^ Glazov, Jamie (July 24, 2009). "Alan Dershowitz vs. Melanie Phillips". FrontPage Magazine. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2009. 
^ "Renewing America's Promise: Democratic Party Platform, 2008". Democrats.org. Archived from the original on June 16, 2010. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ "Ideological Gaps Over Israel on Both Sides of Atlantic". PewGlobal.org. January 29, 2009. Retrieved April 16, 2017. 
^ Kendall Breitman (February 23, 2015). "Gallup poll: Democrats losing sympathy for Israel". POLITICO. 
^ Judis, J. B.; Teixeira, R. (June 19, 2007). "Back to the Future". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on July 12, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007. 
^ Frank, E., Carrera, J. & Dharamsi, S. (February 9, 2007). "Political Self-characterization of U.S. Medical Students". Journal of General Internal Medicine. 22: 514–517. doi:10.1007/s11606-007-0108-5. Retrieved September 26, 2007. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Public Praises Science; Scientists Fault Public, Media Section 4: Scientists, Politics and Religion.
^ "Shea, C. (October 12, 2003). What liberal academia? The Boston Globe". The Boston Globe. December 10, 2003. Retrieved August 19, 2007. 
^ "O'Bannon, B. R. (August 27, 2003). In Defense of the 'Liberal' Professor. Indianapolis Star". Archived from the original on June 12, 2007. Retrieved July 2, 2007. 
^ "George, D. L. & Medler, J. F. (1996). College Faculty as an Inconsequential Agent of Political Socialization. Department of Political Science, Cal Poly State University, San Louis Obispo". Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved September 25, 2007. 
^ a b "Exit Polls - Election Results 2008". The New York Times. November 5, 2008. Retrieved October 2, 2013. 
^ "Local Exit Polls - Election Center 2008 - Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Retrieved May 1, 2010. 
^ Shields, E (1958). "The Intellectuals and the Powers: Some Perspectives for Comparative Analysis". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 1 (5). 
^ Lipset, S. M.; Ladd, E. C. (1972). "The Politics of American Sociologists". American Journal of Sociology. 78 (67): 67–104. 
^ Edsall, Thomas B. (April 1, 2012). "The Politics of Going to College". The New York Times. Retrieved September 18, 2012. 
^ "Educational differences between Democrats and Republicans". Archived from the original on December 11, 2013. 
^ "Nagourney, A. (June 27, 2007). Young Americans are leaning left, new poll finds. The New York Times". Retrieved April 5, 2007. 
^ a b "Women More Likely to Be Democrats, Regardless of Age". Gallup.com. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ a b Page 16 in: Fried, Joseph. (2008). Democrats and Republicans--rhetoric and reality : comparing the voters in statistics and anecdote. New York: Algora Pub. ISBN 978-0-87586-603-1. 
^ a b "press". Law.ucla.edu. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on December 9, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2010. 
^ Cohen, Micah (November 15, 2012). "Gay Vote Proved a Boon for Obama". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2012. 
^ "LGBT Equality Caucus Membership List". Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011. 
^ Fried, Joseph, Democrats and Republicans: Rhetoric and Reality (New York: Algora Publishing, 2008), 126.
^ Zweig, Michael (2004). What's Class Got To Do With It, American Society in the Twenty-First Century. New York, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0-8014-8899-0. 
^ a b Gilbert, Dennis (1998). The American Class Structure. New York: Wadsworth Publishing. ISBN 0-534-50520-1. 
^ Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey (2005). Society in Focus. Boston, MA: Pearson. ISBN 0-205-41365-X. 
^ Tyson, Alec; Maniam, Shiva (November 9, 2016). "Behind Trump's victory: Divisions by race, gender and education". Pew Research Center. Retrieved July 9, 2017. 
^ Cohn, Nate (June 11, 2012). "Obama's Problem With White, Non-College Educated Voters is Getting Worse". The New Republic. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ Edsall, Thomas B. (November 11, 2014). "The Demise of the White Democratic Voter". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ Drum, Kevin (November 13, 2014). "Can We Talk? Here's Why the White Working Class Hates Democrats". Mother Jones. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ Bouie, Jamelle (November 14, 2014). "Why Democrats Can't Win Over White Working-Class Voters". Slate. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ Teixeira, Ruy (January 2, 2015). "Democrats' Problem: White, Working-Class Voters" (Interview). Interview with Steve Inskeep. NPR. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ Judis, John B. (January 31, 2015). "The Emerging Republican Advantage". National Journal. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ "Local Exit Polls 2008 - Election Center 2008 Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ "Senate, House, Governor Races - Election Center 2010 - Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ Teixeira, Ruy; Halpin, John (December 2012). "The Obama Coalition in the 2012 Election and Beyond" (PDF). Center for American Progress. p. 5. Retrieved May 5, 2015. 
^ "U.S. House results -- 2014 Election Center -- Elections and Politics from CNN.com". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ "Exit Polls 2016". CNN. November 23, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ "Election 2016: Exit Polls". The New York Times. November 8, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ "2016 Election News, Candidates & Polls - NBC News". NBC News. November 13, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2017. 
^ "Secular Coalition Flunks U.S. House on Religious Freedom Issues". secular.org. 
^ "Local Exit Polls - Election Center 2008 - Elections & Politics from CNN.com". CNN. 
^ "An inaugural first: Obama acknowledges 'non-believers'". USA Today. January 22, 2009. 
^ "2012 Presidential Primary Candidate Scorecard". secular.org. 
^ Austin Cline. "Atheists & Voting: How Can Atheists Vote to Positively Influence Government?". About.com Religion & Spirituality. 
^ Austin Cline. "Polls & Other Surveys on American Attitudes Towards Atheists". About.com Religion & Spirituality. 
^ a b c Jackson, Brooks. "Blacks and the Democratic Party". FactCheck.org. Retrieved October 30, 2011. 
^ "Ku Klux Klan - History". Anti-Defamation League. Archived from the original on February 12, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2011. 
^ Teixeira, Ruy (November 11, 2008). "Digging into the 2008 Exit Polls". Taking Note. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2011. 
^ "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People". encyclopedia.com. Retrieved October 31, 2011. 
^ Cillizza, Chris (September 18, 2011). "With Hispanic support for Obama waning, could Latino vote be up for grabs in 2012?". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 30, 2011. 
^ "Latino vote key to Obama's re-election". CNN. November 9, 2012. 
^ Cave, Damien (April 21, 2009). "U.S. Overtures Find Support Among Cuban-Americans". The New York Times. 
^ Woods, Casey. (November 6, 2008) Presidential and Congressional Candidate Cuba Watch: Analysis of Cuban American vote. Candidatecubawatch.blogspot.com. Retrieved on July 15, 2013.
^ a b "Growing Number of Americans Say Obama is a Muslim: Religion, Politics and the President (5 Sections)". Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. People-press.org. August 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved August 9, 2011. 
^ "Paying Attention to the Native American Vote". www.pbs.org. Retrieved January 2, 2016. 
^ Dems woo Native American vote. Politico. May 29, 2008.
^ "Barack Obama wins 77 percent of Jewish vote, exit polls show". Haaretz Daily. November 5, 2008.
^ a b Survey. American Jewish Committee September 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2009.
^ a b Arab-American Voters Say Iraq Top Issue in 2008 Campaign. By Mohamed Elshinnawi. Voice of America. July 23, 2007, Archived March 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Mideast, Civil Liberties Concern Arab-Americans Archived August 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.. By James Q. Lynch. The Gazette (Cedar Rapids-Iowa City). Reprinted by the Arab-American Institute. July 19, 2003 Archived August 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "American Muslims supported Obama: poll". Business Standard. October 25, 2012.
^ "Dissecting the 2008 Electorate: Most Diverse in U.S. History". Pew Research Center. April 30, 2009
^ "Presidential Race - 2012 Election Center - President: Full Results - Exit Polls". CNN. November 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 17, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2012. 
^ "85% Indian-Americans support Obama for second term: Survey". The Times Of India. May 6, 2012.
^ Vice President Dick Cheney provided tie breaking vote, giving Republicans a majority
^ a b c d e f Includes two Independents caucusing with the Democrats.



Further reading


Baker, Jean H. Affairs of party: The political culture of northern Democrats in the mid-nineteenth century (Fordham UP, 1998).
Bartlett, Bruce (2008). Wrong on Race: The Democratic Party's Buried Past. New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Bass Jr, Harold F. Historical dictionary of United States political parties (Scarecrow Press, 2009).
Black, Merle (2004). "The transformation of the southern Democratic Party". Journal of Politics. 66 (4): 1001–1017. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2508.2004.00287.x. 
Burner, David. The Politics of Provincialism: The Democratic Party in Transition, 1918–1932 (Knopf, 1968).
Congressional Quarterly. National Party Conventions, 1831–2000 (2001).
Craig, Douglas. "Newton D. Baker and the Democratic Malaise, 1920–1937." Australasian Journal of American Studies (2006): 49-64. in JSTOR
Dowe, Pearl K. Ford, et al. Remaking the Democratic Party: Lyndon B. Johnson as a Native-Son Presidential Candidate (University of Michigan Press, 2016).
Feller, David. "Politics and Society: Toward a Jacksonian Synthesis" Journal of the Early Republic 10#2 (1990), pp. 135–161 in JSTOR
Frymer, Paul. Black and blue: African Americans, the labor movement, and the decline of the Democratic party (Princeton UP, 2008).
Gerring, John. "A chapter in the history of American party ideology: The nineteenth-century Democratic Party (1828–1892)." Polity 26.4 (1994): 729-768. online
Landis, Michael Todd. Northern Men with Southern Loyalties: The Democratic Party and the Sectional Crisis. (Cornell University Press, 2014).
Lawrence, David G. The collapse of the democratic presidential majority: Realignment, dealignment, and electoral change from Franklin Roosevelt to Bill Clinton. (Westview Press, 1997).
McGuire, John Thomas (2014). "Beginning an 'Extraordinary Opportunity': Eleanor Roosevelt, Molly Dewson, and the expansion of women's boundaries in the Democratic Party, 1924–1934". Women's History Review. 23 (6): 922–937. doi:10.1080/09612025.2014.906841. 
Maisel, L. Sandy, and Jeffrey M. Berry, eds. The Oxford handbook of American political parties and interest groups (Oxford UP, 2010).
Neal, Steven. Happy Days are Here Again: The 1932 Democratic Convention, the Emergence of FDR--and how America was Changed Forever (Harper Collins, 2010).
Remini, Robert V. Martin Van Buren and the making of the Democratic Party (Columbia UP, 1961).
Savage, Sean J. Roosevelt: The Party Leader, 1932–1945 (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).
Savage, Sean J. JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party (SUNY Press, 2012).
Savage, Sean J. Truman and the Democratic Party (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).
Woods, Randall B. Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (Basic Books, 2016).


External links

Find more aboutDemocratic Party (United States)at Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity


Organizations

Democrats.org – Official website of the Democratic National Committee
Democratic Senate Caucus
Democratic House Caucus
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Attorneys General Association
National Conference of Democratic Mayors
National Federation of Democratic Women
College Democrats of America
Young Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
Progressive Democrats of America
Democrats.com —–"Aggressive Progressive" Democrats, not to be confused with the official Democratic Party site Democrats.org

Platforms, charter, and bylaws

"2016 National Platform" (PDF). , HTML version
"2012 National Platform" (PDF). , HTML version
"2008 National Platform" (PDF).  (434 KB), HTML version
"2004 National Platform" (PDF). Archived from the original on June 23, 2009. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)  (111 KB), HTML version
Charter and Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States, as amended through August 28, 2015

Previous "Charter & Bylaws" (PDF).  (1.63 MB) as amended through December 3, 2005


Democratic Party at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


United States Democratic Party



Chairpersons
of the DNC



Hallett
McLane
Smalley
Belmont
Schell
Hewitt
Barnum
Brice
Harrity
Jones
Taggart
Mack
McCombs
McCormick
Cummings
White
Hull
Shaver
Raskob
Farley
Flynn
Walker
Hannegan
McGrath
Boyle
McKinney
Mitchell
Butler
Jackson
Bailey
O'Brien
Harris
O'Brien
Westwood
Strauss
Curtis
White
Manatt
Kirk
Brown
Wilhelm
DeLee
Dodd/Fowler
Romer/Grossman
Rendell/Andrew
McAuliffe
Dean
Kaine
Wasserman Schultz
Perez





Presidential
tickets



Jackson/Calhoun
Jackson/Van Buren
Van Buren/R. Johnson
Van Buren/None
Polk/Dallas
Cass/Butler
Pierce/King
Buchanan/Breckinridge
Douglas/H. Johnson (Breckinridge/Lane, SD)
McClellan/Pendleton
Seymour/Blair
Greeley/Brown
Tilden/Hendricks
Hancock/English
Cleveland/Hendricks
Cleveland/Thurman
Cleveland/Stevenson I
W. Bryan/Sewall
W. Bryan/Stevenson I
Parker/H. Davis
W. Bryan/Kern
Wilson/Marshall (twice)
Cox/Roosevelt
J. Davis/C. Bryan
Smith/Robinson
Roosevelt/Garner (twice)
Roosevelt/Wallace
Roosevelt/Truman
Truman/Barkley
Stevenson II/Sparkman
Stevenson II/Kefauver
Kennedy/L. Johnson
L. Johnson/Humphrey
Humphrey/Muskie
McGovern/(Eagleton, Shriver)
Carter/Mondale (twice)
Mondale/Ferraro
Dukakis/Bentsen
B. Clinton/Gore (twice)
Gore/Lieberman
Kerry/Edwards
Obama/Biden (twice)
H. Clinton/Kaine





State/
Territorial
Parties



Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
District of Columbia
Guam
Puerto Rico





Conventions

(List)



1832 (Baltimore)
1835 (Baltimore)
1840 (Baltimore)
1844 (Baltimore)
1848 (Baltimore)
1852 (Baltimore)
1856 (Cincinnati)
1860 (Baltimore)
1864 (Chicago)
1868 (New York)
1872 (Baltimore)
1876 (Saint Louis)
1880 (Cincinnati)
1884 (Chicago)
1888 (Saint Louis)
1892 (Chicago)
1896 (Chicago)
1900 (Kansas City)
1904 (Saint Louis)
1908 (Denver)
1912 (Baltimore)
1916 (Saint Louis)
1920 (San Francisco)
1924 (New York)
1928 (Houston)
1932 (Chicago)
1936 (Philadelphia)
1940 (Chicago)
1944 (Chicago)
1948 (Philadelphia)
1952 (Chicago)
1956 (Chicago)
1960 (Los Angeles)
1964 (Atlantic City)
1968 (Chicago)
1972 (Miami Beach)
1976 (New York)
1980 (New York)
1984 (San Francisco)
1988 (Atlanta)
1992 (New York)
1996 (Chicago)
2000 (Los Angeles)
2004 (Boston)
2008 (Denver)
2012 (Charlotte)
2016 (Philadelphia)





Affiliated
groups




Fundraising



Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee
Democratic Governors Association
Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee
National Conference of Democratic Mayors





Sectional



College Democrats of America
Democrats Abroad
National Federation of Democratic Women
Stonewall Democrats
Young Democrats of America
High School Democrats of America








Related articles



History
Primaries
Debates
Party factions
Superdelegate
2005 chairmanship election
2017 chairmanship election








 Liberalism portal












v
t
e


 National political parties in the United States




List of political parties in the United States



Major parties



Democratic
Republican








Third parties




Larger 1



Green
Libertarian
Constitution





Smaller 2



African People's Socialist
All-African People's Revolutionary
America's
American (1969)
American Delta
American Freedom
American Party of Labor
American Populist
American Reform
American Solidarity
Black Riders Liberation
Christian Liberty
Citizens
Communist
Freedom Road Socialist
Freedom Socialist
Humane
Independent American
Justice
Legal Marijuana Now
Marijuana
Modern Whig
National Socialist Movement
New Afrikan Black Panther
New Black Panther
Objectivist
Pacifist
Peace and Freedom
Pirate
Progressive Labor
Prohibition
Reform
Revolutionary Communist
Socialism and Liberation
Socialist (1973)
Socialist Action
Socialist Alternative
Socialist Equality
Socialist Workers
Traditionalist Worker
Unity
Veterans
Working Families
Workers World
World Socialist








Former parties



America First
American (Know Nothing)
American (1924)
American Falangist
American Nazi
American Vegetarian
Americans Elect
Anti-Masonic
Black Panther
Boston Tea
Citizens
Commonwealth Land
Constitution (1952)
Constitutional Union
Democratic-Republican
Farmer–Labor
Federalist
Free Soil
Gold Democrats
Greenback
Independence (2007)
Labor (1919)
Labor (1996)
Liberal Republican
Liberty
National Republican
National Socialist
National States' Rights
National Union (1864)
Natural Law
New Alliance
New Union
Nullifier
Opposition
Populist (People's)
Personal Choice
Progressive (1912)
Progressive (1924)
Progressive (1948)
Radical Democracy
Raza Unida
Readjuster
Silver
Silver Republican
Socialist (1901)
Socialist Labor
States Rights (Dixiecrat)
Unconditional Union
Union (1936)
Unionist (1850s/60s)
U.S. Labor
Whig
Youth International








1 Recognized as a major national party by the FEC
2 Not recognized as a major national party by the FEC



 State and local political parties (without national body)
Presidential nominating conventions
Politics of the United States
Politics portal















v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_Party_(United_States)&oldid=818520488"					Categories: Democratic Party (United States)1828 establishments in the United StatesLiberal parties in the United StatesPolitical parties established in 1828Political parties in the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse American English from December 2014All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from October 2017Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2016All articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016Wikipedia articles with colour accessibility problemsArticles prone to spam from March 2017Articles with DMOZ links