This is a Chinese name; the family name is Deng.



Deng Xiaoping


邓小平








Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission of the Communist Party of China


In office
13 September 1982 – 2 November 1987


Deputy
Bo Yibo


General Secretary
Hu Yaobang
Zhao Ziyang (acting)


Preceded by
Post established


Succeeded by
Chen Yun


Chairman of the Central Military Commission


In office
Party Commission:
28 June 1981 – 9 November 1989
State Commission:
18 June 1983 – 19 March 1990


Deputy
Ye Jianying
Zhao Ziyang
Yang Shangkun


Preceded by
Hua Guofeng


Succeeded by
Jiang Zemin


Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference


In office
8 March 1978 – 17 June 1983


Preceded by
Zhou Enlai
vacant (1976–1978)


Succeeded by
Deng Yingchao


Minister of Finance


In office
September 1953 – June 1954


Premier
Zhou Enlai


Preceded by
Rong Zihe
acting (1952–1953)


Succeeded by
Li Xiannian





Personal details


Born
(1904-08-22)22 August 1904
Guang'an, Sichuan, Qing Empire


Died
19 February 1997(1997-02-19) (aged 92)
Beijing, China


Nationality
Chinese


Political party
Communist Party of China
All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)


Spouse(s)
Zhang Xiyuan (张锡瑗) (1928–1929)
Jin Weiying (金维映) (1931–1939)
Zhuo Lin (卓琳) (1939–1997)


Children
Deng Lin
Deng Pufang
Deng Nan
Deng Rong
Deng Zhifang




Central institution membership

1981–1989: 11th, 12th, 13th Central Military Commission
1975–1987: 10th, 11th, 12th Politburo Standing Committee
1956–1967: 8th Politburo Standing Committee
1975–1987: 10th, 11th, 12th Politburo
1956–1967: 8th Politburo
1945–1987: 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th, 12th Central Committee
1978–1997: 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th National People's Congress
1959–1964: 2nd National People's Congress




Other political offices held

1977–1982: Vice Chairman, Central Committee
1977–1980: 1st-ranked Vice Premier
1975–1976: Vice Chairman, Central Committee
1975–1976: 1st-ranked Vice Premier
1956–1966: Secretary-General, Central Secretariat
1964–1965: Head, Organization Department
1953–1954: Minister, Finance
1953–1954: Director, Office of Communications




Military offices held

1977–1981: Vice Chairman, Central Military Commission
1977–1980: Head, General Staff Department
1975–1976: Head, General Staff Department
1975–1976: Vice Chairman, Central Military Commission
1954–1966: Vice Chairman, National Defense Commission


Paramount Leader of
the People's Republic of China


← Hua Guofeng
Jiang Zemin →











Deng Xiaoping



"Deng Xiaoping" in Simplified (top) and Traditional (bottom) Chinese characters



Simplified Chinese
邓小平


Traditional Chinese
鄧小平





Transcriptions


Standard Mandarin


Hanyu Pinyin
Dèng Xiǎopíng


Wade–Giles
Teng4 Hsiao3-p'ing2


Yale Romanization
Deng Syauping


IPA
[tə̂ŋ ɕjàu.pʰǐŋ] ( listen)


Hakka


Romanization
Thèn Séu-phìn


Yue: Cantonese


Yale Romanization
Dahng Síu-pèhng


IPA
[tɐ̀ŋ sǐːu.pʰɛ̏ːŋ]


Jyutping
Dang6 Siu2-peng4


Southern Min


Tâi-lô
Tēng Siáu-pêng









Deng Xiaoping (22 August 1904 – 19 February 1997),[1] courtesy name Xixian (希贤)[2] was a Chinese revolutionary and politician. He was the paramount leader of the People's Republic of China from 1978 until his retirement in 1989. After Chairman Mao Zedong's death, Deng led his country through far-reaching market-economy reforms. While Deng never held office as the head of state, head of government or General Secretary (that is, the leader of the Communist Party), he nonetheless was responsible for economic reforms and an opening to the global economy. His official state positions are Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference from 1978–1983 and Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the People's Republic of China from 1983–1990, while his official party positions are Vice Chairman of the Communist Party of China from 1977–1982 and Chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Communist Party of China from 1981–1989.
Born into a peasant background in Guang'an, Sichuan province, Deng studied and worked in France in the 1920s, where he was convinced of Marxism–Leninism. He joined the Communist Party of China in 1923. Upon his return to China he joined the party organization in Shanghai, then was a political commissar for the Red Army in rural regions and by the late 1930s was considered a "revolutionary veteran" because he participated in the Long March.[3] Following the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, Deng worked in Tibet and the southwest region to consolidate Communist control.
As the party's Secretary General in the 1950s, Deng presided over anti-rightist campaigns and became instrumental in China's economic reconstruction following the Great Leap Forward of 1957–1960. However, his economic policies were at odds with Mao's political ideologies and he was purged twice during the Cultural Revolution. Following Mao's death in 1976, Deng outmanoeuvred Mao's chosen successor Hua Guofeng in December 1978. Inheriting a country beset with social conflict, disenchantment with the Communist Party and institutional disorder resulting from the leftist policies of the Mao era, Deng became the paramount figure of the "second generation" of party leadership. Some called him "the architect"[4] of a new brand of thinking that combined socialist ideology with pragmatic market economy whose slogan was "socialism with Chinese characteristics". Deng opened China to foreign investment and the global market, policies that are credited with developing China into one of the fastest-growing economies in the world for several generations and raising the standard of living of hundreds of millions.[5] Deng was also criticized for ordering the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, but praised for his reaffirmation of the reform program in his Southern Tour of 1992 and the reversion of Hong Kong to Chinese control in 1997. He was the first Chinese leader and the second communist leader to be the Time Person of the Year in 1978 and 1985. He died in February 1997, aged 92.



Contents


1 Early life and family

1.1 Education and early career
1.2 Return to China


2 Political rise

2.1 Activism in Shanghai and Wuhan
2.2 Military campaign in Guangxi
2.3 At the Jiangxi Soviet
2.4 The Long March
2.5 Japanese Invasion
2.6 Resumed war against the Nationalists


3 Political career under Mao

3.1 As Mayor of Chongqing
3.2 Political rise in Beijing
3.3 Target of two purges

3.3.1 Cultural Revolution
3.3.2 'Criticize Deng' campaign




4 Re-emergence post-Cultural Revolution

4.1 Opening up
4.2 Economic reforms

4.2.1 Export focus


4.3 Role in the Tiananmen Square protests


5 Resignation and 1992 southern tour
6 Death and reaction
7 Memorials
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Early life and family[edit]




Deng Xiaoping at age 16, studying in France.


Deng possibly has ancestry from ethnically Hakka Han family in the village of Paifang (牌坊村), in the township of Xiexing (协兴镇), Guang'an County in Sichuan province,[6][7] approximately 160 km (99 mi) from Chongqing (formerly spelled Chungking). Deng's ancestors can be traced back to Mei County, Guangdong,[7] a prominent ancestral area for the Hakka people, and had been settled in Sichuan for several generations.[8] Deng Xiaoping's daughter Deng Rong wrote in the book "My father Deng Xiaoping" (我的父亲邓小平) that his ancestry was probably but not definitely Hakka. Sichuan was originally the origin of the Deng lineage until one of them was hired as an official in Guangdong during the Ming dynasty but during the Qing plan to increase the population in 1671 they came to Sichuan again. Deng Xiaoping was born in Sichuan.[9]
Deng's father, Deng Wenming, was a middle-level landowner and had studied at the University of Law and Political Science in Chengdu. His mother, surnamed Dan, died early in Deng's life, leaving Deng, his three brothers and three sisters.[10] At the age of five Deng was sent to a traditional Chinese-style private primary school, followed by a more modern primary school at the age of seven.
Deng's first wife, one of his schoolmates from Moscow, died aged 24 a few days after giving birth to Deng's first child, a baby girl who also died. His second wife, Jin Weiying, left him after Deng came under political attack in 1933. His third wife Zhuo Lin was the daughter of an industrialist in Yunnan Province. She became a member of the Communist Party in 1938, and married Deng a year later in front of Mao's cave dwelling in Yan'an. They had five children: three daughters (Deng Lin, Deng Nan and Deng Rong) and two sons (Deng Pufang and Deng Zhifang).
Education and early career[edit]




Deng's name is spelled "Teng Hi Hien" on this employment card from the Hutchinson shoe factory in Châlette-sur-Loing, France. Deng worked there on two occasions as seen from the dates, eight months in 1922 and again in 1923 when he was fired after one month. The bottom annotation reads "refused to work, do not take him back".


When Deng first attended school, his tutor objected to his having the given name "Xiānshèng", calling him "Xixian", which includes the characters "to aspire to" and "goodness", with overtones of wisdom.[11]
In the summer of 1919, Deng Xiaoping graduated from the Chongqing School. He and 80 schoolmates travelled by ship to France (travelling steerage) to participate in the Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement, a work-study program in which 4,001 Chinese would participate by 1927. Deng, the youngest of all the Chinese students in the group, had just turned 15.[12] Wu Yuzhang, the local leader of the Movement in Chongqing, enrolled Deng and his paternal uncle, Deng Shaosheng, in the program. Deng's father strongly supported his son's participation in the work-study abroad program.[13] The night before his departure, Deng's father took his son aside and asked him what he hoped to learn in France. He repeated the words he had learned from his teachers: "To learn knowledge and truth from the West in order to save China." Deng was aware that China was suffering greatly, and that the Chinese people must have a modern education to save their country.[14]
In December 1920 a French packet ship, the André Lyon, sailed into Marseille with 210 Chinese students aboard including Deng. The sixteen-year-old Deng briefly attended middle schools in Bayeux and Châtillon, but he spent most of his time in France working. His first job was as a fitter at the Le Creusot Iron and Steel Plant in La Garenne-Colombes, a south-western suburb of Paris where he moved in April 1921. Coincidentally, when Deng Xiaoping's later political fortunes were down and he was sent to work in a tractor factory in 1974 he found himself a fitter again and proved to still be a master of the skill.[15]
In La Garenne-Colombes Deng met Zhou Enlai, Nie Rongzhen, Cai Hesen, Zhao Shiyan and Li Wenhai.[15] Under the influence of these older Chinese students in France, Deng began to study Marxism and engaged in political dissemination work. In 1921 he joined the Chinese Communist Youth League in Europe. In the second half of 1924, he joined the Chinese Communist Party and became one of the leading members of the General Branch of the Youth League in Europe. In 1926 Deng traveled to the Soviet Union and studied at Moscow Sun Yat-sen University, where one of his classmates was Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Chiang Kai-shek.[16]
Return to China[edit]
In late 1927, Deng left Moscow to return to China, where he joined the army of Feng Yuxiang, a military leader in northwest China, who had requested assistance from the Soviet Union in his struggle with other local leaders in the region. At that time, the Soviet Union, through the Comintern, an international organization supporting the communist movements, supported the Communists' alliance with the Nationalists of the Kuomintang (KMT) party founded by Sun Yat-sen.
He arrived in Xi'an, the stronghold of Feng Yuxiang, in March 1927. He was part of the Fengtian clique's attempt to prevent the break of the alliance between the KMT and the Communists. This split resulted in part from Chiang Kai-shek's forcing them to flee areas controlled by the KMT. After the breakup of the alliance between communists and nationalists, Feng Yuxiang stood on the side of Chiang Kai-shek, and the Communists who participated in their army, such as Deng Xiaoping, were forced to flee. In 1929 Deng led the Baise Uprising in Guangxi province against the Kuomintang (KMT) government. The uprising failed and Deng went to the Central Soviet Area in Jiangxi province.
Political rise[edit]
Although Deng got involved in the Marxist revolutionary movement in China, the historian Mobo Gao has argued that "Deng Xiaoping and many like him [in the Chinese Communist Party] were not really Marxists, but basically revolutionary nationalists who wanted to see China standing on equal terms with the great global powers. They were primarily nationalists and they participated in the Communist revolution because that was the only viable route they could find Chinese nationalism."[17]
Activism in Shanghai and Wuhan[edit]
After leaving the army of Feng Yuxiang in the northwest, Deng ended up in the city of Wuhan, where the Communists at that time had their headquarters. At that time, he began using the nickname "Xiaoping" and occupied prominent positions in the party apparatus. He participated in the historic emergency session on 7 August 1927 in which, by Soviet instruction, the Party dismissed its founder Chen Duxiu, and Qu Qiubai became the secretary general. In Wuhan, Deng first established contact with Mao Zedong, who was then little valued by militant pro-Soviet leaders of the party.
Between 1927 and 1929, Deng lived in Shanghai, where he helped organize protests that would be harshly persecuted by the Kuomintang authorities. The death of many Communist militants in those years led to a decrease in the number of members of the Communist Party, which enabled Deng to quickly move up the ranks. During this stage in Shanghai, Deng married a woman he met in Moscow, Zhang Xiyuan.
Military campaign in Guangxi[edit]
Beginning in 1929, he participated in the struggle against the Kuomintang in Guangxi. The superiority of the forces of Chiang Kai-shek caused a huge number of casualties in the Communist ranks. The confrontational strategy of the party leadership was a failure that killed many militants. The response to this defeat catalyzed one of the most confusing episodes in the biography of Deng: in March 1931, he left the Communist Army seventh battalion to appear sometime later in Shanghai.
His official biography states that Deng had been charged by his superiors with deserting from the battle zone before fleeing to Shanghai, where there were leaders of the underground Communist Party. Although he was not punished in Shanghai, this episode in his biography remains unclear and would be used against him to question his devotion to the Communist Party during the Cultural Revolution era.
At the Jiangxi Soviet[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



After returning to Shanghai, Deng discovered that his wife and daughter had died during childbirth. In addition, he discovered that many of his former comrades had died as a result of the Kuomintang's crackdown against the Communists.
The campaigns against the Communists in the cities represented a setback for the party and in particular to the Comintern Soviet advisers, who saw the mobilization of the urban proletariat as the force for the advancement of communism. Contrary to the urban vision of the revolution, based on the Soviet experience, the Communist leader Mao Zedong saw the rural peasants as the revolutionary force in China. In a mountainous area of Jiangxi province, where Mao went to establish a communist system, there developed the embryo of a future state of China under communism, which adopted the official name of the Chinese Soviet Republic, but was better known as the "Jiangxi Soviet".
In one of the most important cities in the Soviet zone, Ruijin, Deng took over as secretary of the Party Committee in the summer of 1931. In the winter of 1932, Deng went on to play the same position in the nearby district of Huichang. In 1933 he became director of the propaganda department of the Provincial Party Committee in Jiangxi. It was then that he married a young woman he had met in Shanghai named Jin Weiying.
The successes of the Soviet in Jiangxi made the party leaders decide to move to Jiangxi from Shanghai. The confrontation among Mao, the party leaders, and their Soviet advisers was increasingly tense and the struggle for power between the two factions led to the removal of Deng, who favored the ideas of Mao, from his position in the propaganda department. Despite the strife within the party, the Jiangxi Soviet became the first successful experiment of communist rule in rural China. It even issued stamps and paper money under the letterhead of the Soviet Republic of China, and the army of Chiang Kai-shek finally decided to attack the communist area.
The Long March[edit]
Main article: Long March




Deng Xiaoping in NRA uniform, 1937


Surrounded by the more powerful army of the Republic of China, the Communists fled Jiangxi in October 1934. Thus began the epic movement that would mark a turning point in the development of Chinese communism. The evacuation was difficult because the Army of the Republic had taken positions in all areas occupied by the Communists. Advancing through remote and mountainous terrain, some 100,000 men managed to escape Jiangxi, starting a long strategic retreat through the interior of China, which ended one year later when between 8,000 and 9,000 survivors reached the northern province of Shaanxi.
During the Zunyi Conference at the beginning of the Long March, the so-called 28 Bolsheviks, led by Bo Gu and Wang Ming, were ousted from power and Mao Zedong, to the dismay of the Soviet Union, had become the new leader of the Communist Party of China. The pro-Soviet Communist Party of China had ended and a new rural-inspired party emerged under the leadership of Mao. Deng had once again become a leading figure in the party when the north ended up winning the civil war against the Kuomintang.
The confrontation between the two parties was temporarily interrupted, however, by the Japanese invasion, forcing the Kuomintang to form an alliance for the second time with the Communists to defend the nation against external aggression.
Japanese Invasion[edit]
The invasion of Japanese troops in 1937 marked the beginning of the Second Sino-Japanese War. During the invasion, Deng remained in the area controlled by the Communists in the north, where he assumed the role of deputy political director of the three divisions of the restructured Communist army. From September 1937 until January 1938, he lived in Buddhist monasteries and temples in the Wutai Mountains. In January 1938, he was appointed as Political Commissar of the 129th division of the Eighth Route Army commanded by Liu Bocheng, starting a long-lasting partnership with Liu.
Deng stayed for most of the conflict with the Japanese in the war front in the area bordering the provinces of Shanxi, Henan and Hebei, then traveled several times to the city of Yan'an, where Mao had established the basis for Communist Party leadership. In one of his trips to Yan'an in 1939, he married, for the third and last time in his life, Zhuo Lin, a young native of Kunming, who, like other young idealists of the time, had traveled to Yan'an to join the Communists.
Resumed war against the Nationalists[edit]




Liu Bocheng (right) and Deng Xiaoping's (left) army and the Kuomintang army fighting.


After Japan's defeat in World War II, Deng traveled to Chongqing, the city in which Chiang Kai-shek established his government during the Japanese invasion, to participate in peace talks between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. The results of those negotiations were not positive and military confrontation between the two antagonistic parties resumed shortly after the meeting in Chongqing.
While Chiang Kai-shek re-established the government in Nanjing, the capital of the Republic of China, the Communists were fighting for control in the field. Following up with guerrilla tactics from their positions in rural areas against cities under the control of the government of Chiang and their supply lines, the Communists were increasing the territory under their control, and incorporating more and more soldiers who had deserted the Nationalist army.
In the final phase of the war, Deng again exercised a key role as political leader and propaganda master as Political Commissar of the 2nd Field Army commanded by Liu Bocheng. He also participated in disseminating the ideas of Mao Zedong, which turned into the ideological foundation of the Communist Party. His political and ideological work, along with his status as a veteran of the Long March, placed him in a privileged position within the party to occupy positions of power after the Communist Party managed to defeat Chiang Kai-shek and founded the People's Republic of China.
Political career under Mao[edit]


Part of a series on


Communism







Concepts


Class struggle
Class consciousness
Classless society
Collective leadership
Common ownership
Commune
Communist society
Free association
From each according to his ability,
to each according to his needs
Gift economy
Proletarian internationalism
Stateless society
Workers' self-management
World revolution








Aspects


Communist state
Communist party
Communist revolution
Communist symbolism
History of communism








Variants


Anarchist
Council
European
Chinese
Juche
Left
Leninist
Marxist
Marxist-Leninist
Maoist
Marxist-Leninist-Maoist
Trotskyist
Pre-Marxist
Primitive
Religious

Christian
Islamic


National
National-Bolshevist
World
List of communist ideologies








Internationals


Communist League
First
Second
Third
Fourth








People


Thomas More
Tommaso Campanella
Henri Saint-Simon
Charles Fourier
Robert Owen
Karl Marx
Friedrich Engels
Peter Kropotkin
Vladimir Lenin
Rosa Luxemburg
Antonie Pannekoek
Joseph Stalin
Leon Trotsky
György Lukács
Nikolai Bukharin
Amadeo Bordiga
Ho Chi Minh
Antonio Gramsci
Josip Broz Tito
Farabundo Martí
Mao Zedong
José Carlos Mariátegui
Deng Xiaoping
Enver Hoxha
Kim Il-sung
Fidel Castro
Che Guevara
Enrico Berlinguer








By region


Colombia
Kerala
Korea
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Russia
Sumatra
Vietnam
List of communist parties








Related topics


Anarchism
Anti-capitalism
Anti-communism
Anti-communist mass killings
Third-Worldism
Mass killings under Communist regimes
Cold War
Communitarianism
Criticisms of communist party rule
Left-wing politics
List of communist parties




New Class
New Left


First Red Scare
Red Scare
Socialism
Socialist mode of production
Socialist economics
Syndicalism






 Communism portal





v
t
e





As Mayor of Chongqing[edit]
On 1 October 1949, Deng attended the proclamation of the People's Republic of China in Beijing. At that time, the Communist Party controlled the entire north, but there were still parts of the south held by the Kuomintang regime. He became responsible for leading the annexation of southwest China, in his capacity as the first secretary of the Department of the Southwest. This organization had the task of managing the final takeover of that part of the country still held by the Kuomintang; Tibet remained independent for another year.
The Kuomintang government was being forced to leave Guangzhou, and established Chongqing as a new provisional capital. There, Chiang Kai-shek and his son Chiang Ching-kuo, a former classmate of Deng in Moscow, wanted to stop the advance of the Communist Party forces.
Under the political control of Deng, the Communist army took over Chongqing in late November 1949 and entered Chengdu, the last bastion of power of Chiang Kai-shek, a few days later. At that time Deng became mayor of Chongqing, while he simultaneously was the leader of the Communist Party in the southwest, where the Communist army, now proclaiming itself the People's Liberation Army, suppressed resistance loyal to the old Kuomintang regime. In 1950, the Communist Party-ruled state also seized control over Tibet.
Deng Xiaoping would spend three years in Chongqing, the city where he had studied in his teenage years before going to France. In 1952 he moved to Beijing, where he occupied different positions in the central government.
Political rise in Beijing[edit]
Main articles: Anti-Rightist Movement and Great Leap Forward




Deng Xiaoping (far left) met with the 14th Dalai Lama (third from left) in 1954.


In July 1952, Deng came to Beijing to assume the posts of Vice Premier and Deputy Chair of the Committee on Finance. Soon after, he took the posts of Minister of Finance and Director of the Office of Communications. In 1954, he was removed from all these positions, holding only the post of Deputy Premier. In 1956, he became Head of the Communist Party's Organization Department and member of the Central Military Commission.
After officially supporting Mao Zedong in his Anti-Rightist Movement of 1957, Deng acted as Secretary General of the Secretariat and ran the country's daily affairs with President Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou Enlai. Deng and Liu's policies emphasized economics over ideological dogma, an implicit departure from the mass hysteria of the Great Leap Forward.
Both Liu and Deng supported Mao in the mass campaigns of the 1950s, in which they attacked the bourgeois and capitalists, and promoted Mao's ideology. However, the economic failure of the Great Leap Forward was seen as an indictment on the ability of Mao to manage the economy. Peng Dehuai openly criticized Mao, while Liu Shaoqi and Deng, though more cautious, began to take charge of economic policy, leaving Mao out of day-to-day affairs of the party and state. Mao agreed to cede the presidency of the People's Republic of China (China's de jure head of state position) to Liu Shaoqi, while retaining his positions as leader of the party and the army.
In 1963, Deng traveled to Moscow to lead a meeting of the Chinese delegation with Stalin's successor, Nikita Khrushchev. Relations between the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union had worsened since the death of Stalin. After this meeting, no agreement was reached and the Sino–Soviet split was consummated; there was an almost total suspension of relations between the two major communist powers of the time.
Liu and Deng's economic reforms of the early 1960s were generally popular and restored many of the economic institutions previously dismantled during the Great Leap Forward. Mao, sensing his loss of prestige, took action to regain control of the state. Appealing to his revolutionary spirit, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution, which encouraged the masses to root out the right-wing capitalists who have "infiltrated the party". Deng was labelled the second-in-command of the "capitalist-roaders" faction (Zouzipai).
Target of two purges[edit]
Main article: Cultural Revolution
Cultural Revolution[edit]
Mao feared that the reformist economic policies of Deng and Liu could lead to restoration of capitalism and end the Chinese Revolution.[18] For this and other reasons, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution in 1966, during which Deng fell out of favor and was forced to retire from all his positions.
During the Cultural Revolution, he and his family were targeted by Red Guards, who imprisoned Deng's eldest son, Deng Pufang. Deng Pufang was tortured and jumped out, or was thrown out, of the window of a four-story building in 1968, becoming a paraplegic. In October 1969 Deng Xiaoping was sent to the Xinjian County Tractor Factory in rural Jiangxi province to work as a regular worker.[19] In his four years there,[20] Deng spent his spare time writing. He was purged nationally, but to a lesser scale than President Liu Shaoqi.
After Lin Biao was killed in an air crash (according to official reports he was trying to flee from China after unsuccessfully trying to stage a coup against Mao), Deng Xiaoping (who had been political commissar of the 2nd Field Army during the civil war) became the most influential of the remaining army leaders.[18] When Premier Zhou Enlai fell ill with cancer, Deng became Zhou's choice as successor, and Zhou was able to convince Mao to bring Deng back into politics in 1974 as First Vice-Premier, in practice running daily affairs. Deng focused on reconstructing the country's economy and stressed unity as the first step by raising production.[citation needed] He remained careful, however, to avoid contradicting Maoist ideology, at least on paper.




Deng Xiaoping (center) with U.S. president Gerald Ford (left), 1975.


The Cultural Revolution was not yet over, and a radical leftist political group known as the Gang of Four, led by Mao's wife Jiang Qing, competed for power within the Party. The Gang saw Deng as their greatest challenge to power.[21] Mao, too, was suspicious that Deng would destroy the positive reputation of the Cultural Revolution, which Mao considered one of his greatest policy initiatives. Beginning in late 1975, Deng was asked to draw up a series of self-criticisms. Although he admitted to having taken an "inappropriate ideological perspective" while dealing with state and party affairs, he was reluctant to admit that his policies were wrong in essence. His antagonism with the Gang of Four became increasingly clear, and Mao seemed to sway in the Gang's favour. Mao refused to accept Deng's self-criticisms and asked the party's Central Committee to "discuss Deng's mistakes thoroughly".
'Criticize Deng' campaign[edit]
Zhou Enlai died in January 1976, to an outpouring of national grief. Zhou was a very important figure in Deng's political life, and his death eroded his remaining support within the Party's Central Committee. After delivering Zhou's official eulogy at the state funeral, the Gang of Four, with Mao's permission, began the so-called Criticize Deng and Oppose the Rehabilitation of Right-leaning Elements campaign. Hua Guofeng, not Deng, was selected to become Zhou's successor.
On 2 February 1976, the Central Committee issued a Top-Priority Directive, officially transferring Deng to work on "external affairs" and thus removing Deng from the party's power apparatus. Deng stayed at home for several months, awaiting his fate. The political turmoil halted the economic progress Deng had laboured for in the past year.[citation needed] On 3 March, Mao issued a directive reaffirming the legitimacy of the Cultural Revolution and specifically pointed to Deng as an internal, rather than external, problem. This was followed by a Central Committee directive issued to all local party organs to study Mao's directive and criticize Deng.
Deng's reputation as a reformer suffered a severe blow when the Qingming Festival, after the mass public mourning of Zhou on a traditional Chinese holiday, culminated in the Tiananmen Incident of 1976, an event the Gang of Four branded as counter-revolutionary and threatening to their power. Furthermore, the Gang deemed Deng the mastermind behind the incident, and Mao himself wrote that "the nature of things has changed".[22] This prompted Mao to remove Deng from all leadership positions, although he retained his party membership.
Re-emergence post-Cultural Revolution[edit]
Following Mao's death on 9 September 1976 and the purge of the Gang of Four in October 1976, Deng gradually emerged as the de facto leader of China. Prior to Mao's death, the only governmental position he held was that of First Vice Premier of the State Council,[23] but Hua Guofeng wanted to rid the Party of extremists and successfully marginalised the Gang of Four. On 22 July 1977, Deng was restored to the posts of Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee, Vice-Chairman of the Military Commission and Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.[24]
By carefully mobilizing his supporters within the party, Deng outmaneuvered Hua, who had pardoned him, then ousted Hua from his top leadership positions by 1980. In contrast to previous leadership changes, Deng allowed Hua to retain membership in the Central Committee and quietly retire, helping to set the precedent that losing a high-level leadership struggle would not result in physical harm.
Deng repudiated the Cultural Revolution and, in 1977, launched the "Beijing Spring", which allowed open criticism of the excesses and suffering that had occurred during the period. Meanwhile, he was the impetus for the abolition of the class background system. Under this system, the CPC removed employment barriers to Chinese deemed to be associated with the former landlord class; its removal allowed a faction favoring the restoration of the private market to enter the Communist Party.
Deng gradually outmaneuvered his political opponents. By encouraging public criticism of the Cultural Revolution, he weakened the position of those who owed their political positions to that event, while strengthening the position of those like himself who had been purged during that time. Deng also received a great deal of popular support. As Deng gradually consolidated control over the CPC, Hua was replaced by Zhao Ziyang as premier in 1980, and by Hu Yaobang as party chief in 1981, despite the fact that Hua was Mao Zedong's designated successor as the "paramount leader" of the Communist Party of China and the People's Republic of China.
Important decisions were always taken in Deng's home with a caucus of eight senior party cadres, called "Eight Elders", especially with Chen Yun and Li Xiannian. Deng ruled as "paramount leader" although he never held the top title of the party, and was able to successively remove three party leaders, including Hu Yaobang.[25] Deng remained the most influential of the CPC cadre, although after 1987 his only official posts were as chairman of the state and Communist Party Central Military Commissions.
Deng's elevation to China's new number-one figure meant that the historical and ideological questions around Mao Zedong had to be addressed properly. Because Deng wished to pursue deep reforms, it was not possible for him to continue Mao's hard-line "class struggle" policies and mass public campaigns. In 1982 the Central Committee of the Communist Party released a document entitled On the Various Historical Issues since the Founding of the People's Republic of China. Mao retained his status as a "great Marxist, proletarian revolutionary, militarist, and general", and the undisputed founder and pioneer of the country and the People's Liberation Army. "His accomplishments must be considered before his mistakes", the document declared. Deng personally commented that Mao was "seven parts good, three parts bad." The document also steered the prime responsibility of the Cultural Revolution away from Mao (although it did state that "Mao mistakenly began the Cultural Revolution") to the "counter-revolutionary cliques" of the Gang of Four and Lin Biao.
Opening up[edit]




Deng Xiaoping (left) and his wife Zhuo Lin (right) are briefed by Johnson Space Center director Christopher C. Kraft (extreme right)


In November 1978, after the country had stabilized following political turmoil, Deng visited Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore and met with Singapore's Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. Deng was very impressed with Singapore's economic development, greenery and housing, and later sent tens of thousands of Chinese to Singapore and countries around the world to learn from their experiences and bring back their knowledge. Lee, on the other hand, advised Deng to stop exporting Communist ideologies to Southeast Asia, advice that Deng later followed.[26][27]
Thanks to the support of other party leaders who had already recovered their official positions, in 1978 the rise to power of Deng was inevitable. Even though Hua Guofeng formally monopolized the top positions in the People's Republic, his position, with little support, was becoming increasingly difficult. In December 1978, during the Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Congress of the Communist Party of China, Deng took over the reins of power.
Beginning in 1979, the economic reforms accelerated the market model, while the leaders maintained old Communist-style rhetoric. The commune system was gradually dismantled and the peasants began to have more freedom to manage the land they cultivated and sell their products on the market. At the same time, China's economy opened to foreign trade. On 1 January of that year, the United States recognized the People's Republic of China, leaving the Republic of China's Nationalist government to one side, and business contacts between China and the West began to grow. In late 1978, the aerospace company Boeing announced the sale of 747 aircraft to various airlines in the PRC, and the beverage company Coca-Cola made public their intention to open a production plant in Shanghai.




Deng Xiaoping and Jimmy Carter at the arrival ceremony.


In early 1979, Deng undertook an official visit to the United States, meeting President Jimmy Carter in Washington as well as several Congressmen. The Chinese insisted that ex-President Richard Nixon be invited to the formal White House reception, a symbolic indication of their assertiveness on the one hand, and their desire to continue with the Nixon initiatives on the other. During the visit, Deng visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston, as well as the headquarters of Coca-Cola and Boeing in Atlanta and Seattle, respectively. With these visits so significant, Deng made it clear that the new Chinese regime's priorities were economic and technological development.
Sino-Japanese relations also improved significantly.[28] Deng used Japan as an example of a rapidly progressing power that set a good example for China economically.
True to his famous July 1962 pronouncement at the Communist youth league conference [29] "it doesn't matter whether a cat is black or white, if it catches mice it is a good cat", which had caused so much criticism, Deng, along with his closest collaborators, such as Zhao Ziyang, who in 1980 relieved Hua Guofeng as premier, and Hu Yaobang, who in 1981 did the same with the post of party chairman, took the reins of power and the purpose of advancing the "four modernizations" (economy, agriculture, scientific and technological development and national defense), and announced an ambitious plan of opening and liberalizing the economy.[30][31] The last position of power retained by Hua Guofeng, chairman of the Central Military Commission, was taken by Deng in 1981.[32]




A model reconstruction of Deng Xiaoping's 1984 meeting with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, Shenzhen.


From 1980, Deng led the expansion of the economy and in political terms, took over negotiations with the United Kingdom to return the territory of Hong Kong, meeting personally with British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The result of these negotiations was the Sino-British Joint Declaration, signed on 19 December 1984, which formally outlined the United Kingdom's return of Hong Kong to China by 1997. The Chinese government pledged to respect the economic system and civil liberties of the then British colony for 50 years after the return.
In 1987, Portugal, under pressure from the Chinese authorities, agreed to arrange the return of its colony of Macau by 1999, with an agreement roughly equal to that of Hong Kong. The return of these two territories was based on political principle formulated by Deng himself called "one country, two systems", which refers to the coexistence under one political authority areas with different economic systems, communism and capitalism. Although this theory was applied to the cases of Hong Kong and Macau, it seems that Deng intended to also present it as an attractive option to the people of Taiwan for eventual incorporation of that island, claimed as Chinese territory.
China's rapid economic growth presented several problems. The 1982 population census revealed the extraordinary growth of the population, which already exceeded one billion people. Deng continued the plans initiated by Hua Guofeng to restrict birth to only one child, limiting women to one child under pain of administrative penalty.[33] Around this time, Deng launched his first “strike hard” anti-crime campaign in August 1983. It was reported that the government set quotas for 5,000 executions by mid-November and sources in Taiwan claimed that as many as 60,000 people were executed in that time,[34] although more recent estimates have placed the number at 24,000 executed by firing squad within the first year of the campaign.[35] Yet increasing economic freedom was being translated into a greater freedom of opinion and critics began to arise with the system, including the famous dissident Wei Jingsheng, who coined the term "fifth modernization" in reference to democracy as a missing element in the renewal plans of Deng Xiaoping. In late 1980s, dissatisfaction with the authoritarian regime and the growing inequalities caused the biggest crisis to Deng's leadership.
In October 1987, at the Plenary Session of the National People's Congress, Deng was re-elected as Chairman of Central Military Commission, but he resigned as Chairman of the Central Advisory Commission and he was succeeded by Chen Yun. He continued to chair and developed the reform and opening up as the main policy, put forward the three steps suitable for China's economic development strategy within 70 years: the first step, to double the 1980 GNP and ensure that the people have enough food and clothing, was attained by the end of the 1980s; second step, to quadruple the 1980 GNP by the end of the 20th century, was achieved in 1995 ahead of schedule; the third step, to increase per capita GNP to the level of the medium-developed countries by 2050, at which point, the Chinese people will be fairly well-off and modernization will be basically realized.[36]
Deng, however, did little to improve relations with the Soviet Union; he continued to adhere the Maoist line of the Sino–Soviet split era that the Soviet Union was a superpower as "hegemonic" as the United States, but even more threatening to China because of its geographic proximity.[37]
Economic reforms[edit]
Main articles: Chinese economic reform and Socialist market economy
Improving relations with the outside world was the second of two important philosophical shifts outlined in Deng's program of reform termed Gaige Kaifang (lit. Reforms and Openness). China's domestic social, political, and most notably, economic systems would undergo significant changes during Deng's time as leader. The goals of Deng's reforms were summed up by the Four Modernizations, those of agriculture, industry, science and technology, and the military.
The strategy for achieving these aims of becoming a modern, industrial nation was the socialist market economy. Deng argued that China was in the primary stage of socialism and that the duty of the party was to perfect so-called "socialism with Chinese characteristics", and "seek truth from facts". (This somewhat resembles the Leninist theoretical justification of the New Economic Policy (NEP) in the 1920s, which argued that the Soviet Union had not gone deeply enough into the capitalist phase and therefore needed limited capitalism in order to fully evolve its means of production.)
This interpretation of Maoism reduced the role of ideology in economic decision-making. Downgrading communitarian values, but not necessarily the criticising the ideology of Marxism-Leninism, Deng emphasized that "socialism does not mean shared poverty". His theoretical justification for allowing market forces was given as such:

"Planning and market forces are not the essential difference between socialism and capitalism. A planned economy is not the definition of socialism, because there is planning under capitalism; the market economy happens under socialism, too. Planning and market forces are both ways of controlling economic activity."[38]

Unlike Hua Guofeng, Deng believed that no policy should be rejected outright simply because it was not associated with Mao. Unlike more conservative leaders such as Chen Yun, Deng did not object to policies on the grounds that they were similar to ones that were found in capitalist nations.
This political flexibility towards the foundations of socialism is strongly supported by quotes such as:

We mustn't fear to adopt the advanced management methods applied in capitalist countries (...) The very essence of socialism is the liberation and development of the productive systems (...) Socialism and market economy are not incompatible (...) We should be concerned about right-wing deviations, but most of all, we must be concerned about left-wing deviations.[39]

Although Deng provided the theoretical background and the political support to allow economic reform to occur, it is in general consensus amongst historians that few of the economic reforms that Deng introduced were originated by Deng himself. Premier Zhou Enlai, for example, pioneered the Four Modernizations years before Deng. In addition, many reforms would be introduced by local leaders, often not sanctioned by central government directives. If successful and promising, these reforms would be adopted by larger and larger areas and ultimately introduced nationally. An often cited example is the household-responsibility system, which was first secretly implemented by a poor rural village at the risk of being convicted as "counter-revolutionary." This experiment proved very successful.[40] Deng openly supported it and it was later adopted nationally. Many other reforms were influenced by the experiences of the East Asian Tigers.[41]
This is in sharp contrast to the pattern in the perestroika undertaken by Mikhail Gorbachev in which most of the major reforms were originated by Gorbachev himself. The bottom-up approach of the Deng reforms, in contrast to the top-down approach of perestroika, was likely a key factor in the success of the former.[42]
Deng's reforms actually included the introduction of planned, centralized management of the macro-economy by technically proficient bureaucrats, abandoning Mao's mass campaign style of economic construction. However, unlike the Soviet model, management was indirect through market mechanisms. Deng sustained Mao's legacy to the extent that he stressed the primacy of agricultural output and encouraged a significant decentralization of decision making in the rural economy teams and individual peasant households. At the local level, material incentives, rather than political appeals, were to be used to motivate the labor force, including allowing peasants to earn extra income by selling the produce of their private plots at free market.
Export focus[edit]
In the move toward market allocation, local municipalities and provinces were allowed to invest in industries that they considered most profitable, which encouraged investment in light manufacturing. Thus, Deng's reforms shifted China's development strategy to an emphasis on light industry and export-led growth. Light industrial output was vital for a developing country coming from a low capital base. With the short gestation period, low capital requirements, and high foreign-exchange export earnings, revenues generated by light manufacturing were able to be reinvested in technologically more advanced production and further capital expenditures and investments.
However, in sharp contrast to the similar, but much less successful reforms in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the People's Republic of Hungary, these investments were not government mandated. The capital invested in heavy industry largely came from the banking system, and most of that capital came from consumer deposits. One of the first items of the Deng reforms was to prevent reallocation of profits except through taxation or through the banking system; hence, the reallocation in state-owned industries was somewhat indirect, thus making them more or less independent from government interference. In short, Deng's reforms sparked an industrial revolution in China.[43]
These reforms were a reversal of the Maoist policy of economic self-reliance. China decided to accelerate the modernization process by stepping up the volume of foreign trade, especially the purchase of machinery from Japan and the West. By participating in such export-led growth, China was able to step up the Four Modernizations by attaining certain foreign funds, market, advanced technologies and management experiences, thus accelerating its economic development. Deng attracted foreign companies to a series of Special Economic Zones, where foreign investment and market liberalization were encouraged.
The reforms sought to improve labor productivity. New material incentives and bonus systems were introduced. Rural markets selling peasants' homegrown products and the surplus products of communes were revived. Not only did rural markets increase agricultural output, they stimulated industrial development as well. With peasants able to sell surplus agricultural yields on the open market, domestic consumption stimulated industrialization as well and also created political support for more difficult economic reforms.
There are some parallels between Deng's market socialism especially in the early stages, and Vladimir Lenin's NEP as well as those of Nikolai Bukharin's economic policies, in that both foresaw a role for private entrepreneurs and markets based on trade and pricing rather than central planning. An interesting anecdote on this note is the first meeting between Deng and Armand Hammer. Deng pressed the industrialist and former investor in Lenin's Soviet Union for as much information on the NEP as possible.
Role in the Tiananmen Square protests[edit]
Main article: Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
The Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, culminating in the June Fourth Massacre, were a series of demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square in the People's Republic of China (PRC) between 15 April and 4 June 1989, a year in which many other socialist governments collapsed.
The protests were sparked by the death of Hu Yaobang, a reformist official backed by Deng but ousted by the Eight Elders and the conservative wing of the politburo. Many people were dissatisfied with the party's slow response and relatively subdued funeral arrangements. Public mourning began on the streets of Beijing and universities in the surrounding areas. In Beijing this was centered on the Monument to the People's Heroes in Tiananmen Square. The mourning became a public conduit for anger against perceived nepotism in the government, the unfair dismissal and early death of Hu, and the behind-the-scenes role of the "old men". By the eve of Hu's funeral, the demonstration had reached 100,000 people on Tiananmen Square. While the protests lacked a unified cause or leadership, participants raised the issue of corruption within the government and some voiced calls for economic liberalization[44] and democratic reform[44] within the structure of the government while others called for a less authoritarian and less centralized form of socialism.[45][46]
During the demonstrations, Deng's pro-market ally general secretary Zhao Ziyang supported the demonstrators and distanced himself from the Politburo. Martial law was declared on 20 May by the socialist hardliner Li Peng, but the initial military advance on the city was blocked by residents. The movement lasted seven weeks. On 3–4 June, over two hundred thousand soldiers in tanks and helicopters were sent into the city to quell the protests by force, resulting in hundreds of casualties. Many ordinary people in Beijing believed that Deng had ordered the intervention, but political analysts do not know who was actually behind the order.[47] However, Deng's daughter defends the actions that occurred as a collective decision by the party leadership.[48]
To purge sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators, the Communist Party initiated a one-and-a-half-year-long program similar to Anti-Rightist Movement. Old-timers like Deng Fei aimed to deal "strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois liberalization" and more than 30,000 communist officers were deployed to the task.[49]
Zhao was placed under house arrest by hardliners and Deng himself was forced to make concessions to them.[47] He soon declared that "the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of international capital and onto the capitalist road". A few months later he said that the "United States was too deeply involved" in the student movement, referring to foreign reporters who had given financial aid to the student leaders and later helped them escape to various Western countries, primarily the United States through Hong Kong and Taiwan.[47]
Although he at first made concessions to the socialist hardliners, he soon resumed his reforms after his 1992 southern tour. After his tour, he was able to stop the attacks of the socialist hardliners on the reforms through their "named capitalist or socialist?" campaign.[50]
Deng privately told Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau that factions of the Communist Party could have grabbed army units and the country had risked a civil war.[49][page needed] Two years later, Deng endorsed Zhu Rongji, a Shanghai Mayor, as a vice-premier candidate. Zhu Rongji had refused to declare martial law in Shanghai during the demonstrations even though socialist hardliners had pressured him.[47][page needed]
Resignation and 1992 southern tour[edit]




A billboard showing Deng in Shenzhen, one of the Special Economic Zones created under his leadership. Interestingly, this billboard has to be changed every time a new building is constructed in Shenzhen that changed the downtown skyline.


Officially, Deng decided to retire from top positions when he stepped down as Chairman of the Central Military Commission in 1989, and retired from the political scene in 1992. China, however, was still in the era of Deng Xiaoping. He continued to be widely regarded as the "paramount leader" of the country, believed to have backroom control. Deng was recognized officially as "the chief architect of China's economic reforms and China's socialist modernization". To the Communist Party, he was believed to have set a good example for communist cadres who refused to retire at old age. He broke earlier conventions of holding offices for life. He was often referred to as simply Comrade Xiaoping, with no title attached.




A patrol boat in use during Deng Xiaoping's southern tour.


Because of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, Deng's power had been significantly weakened and there was a growing formalist faction opposed to Deng's reforms within the Communist Party. To reassert his economic agenda, in the spring of 1992, Deng made his famous southern tour of China, visiting Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai and spending the New Year in Shanghai, using his travels as a method of reasserting his economic policy after his retirement from office.
On his tour, Deng made various speeches and generated large local support for his reformist platform. He stressed the importance of economic reform in China, and criticized those who were against further reform and opening up. Although there was a debate on whether or not Deng actually said it,[51] his perceived catchphrase, "To get rich is glorious" (致富光荣), unleashed a wave of personal entrepreneurship that continues to drive China's economy today. He stated that the "leftist" elements of Chinese society were much more dangerous than "rightist" ones. Deng was instrumental in the development of Shanghai's Pudong New Area, revitalizing the city as China's economic hub.
His southern tour was at first ignored by the Beijing and national media, which were then under the control of Deng's political rivals. Jiang Zemin, General Secretary of the Communist Party of China since 1989, showed little support. Challenging their media control, Shanghai's Liberation Daily newspaper published several articles supporting reforms authored by "Huangfu Ping", which quickly gained support amongst local officials and populace. Deng's new wave of policy rhetoric gave way to a new political storm between factions in the Politburo. Jiang eventually sided with Deng, and the national media finally reported Deng's southern tour several months after it occurred. Observers suggest that Jiang's submission to Deng's policies had solidified his position as Deng's heir apparent. Behind the scenes, Deng's southern tour aided his reformist allies' climb to the apex of national power, and permanently changed China's direction toward economic development. In addition, the eventual outcome of the southern tour proved that Deng was still the most powerful man in China.[52]
Deng's insistence on economic openness aided in the phenomenal growth levels of the coastal areas, especially the "Golden Triangle" region surrounding Shanghai. Deng reiterated that "some areas must get rich before others", and asserted that the wealth from coastal regions will eventually be transferred to aid economic construction inland. The theory, however, faced numerous challenges when put into practice, as provincial governments moved to protect their own interests.
Death and reaction[edit]




Deng Xiaoping's ashes lie in state in Beijing, February 1997. The banner reads Memorial Service of Comrade Deng Xiaoping.


Deng died on 19 February 1997, aged 92 from a lung infection and Parkinson's disease. Even though his successor Jiang Zemin was in firm control, government policies maintained Deng's political and economic philosophies. Officially, Deng was eulogized as a "great Marxist, great Proletarian Revolutionary, statesman, military strategist, and diplomat; one of the main leaders of the Communist Party of China, the People's Liberation Army of China, and the People's Republic of China; The great architect of China's socialist opening-up and modernized construction; the founder of Deng Xiaoping Theory".[53]
Although the public was largely prepared for Deng's death, as rumors had been circulating for a long time, the death of Deng was followed by the greatest publicly sanctioned display of grief for any Chinese leader since Mao Zedong. However, in contrast, Deng's death in the media was announced without any titles attached (Mao was called the Great Leader and teacher, Deng was simply "Comrade"), or any emotional overtones from the news anchors that delivered the message.
At 10:00 on the morning of 24 February, people were asked by Premier Li Peng to pause in silence for three minutes. The nation's flags flew at half-mast for over a week. The nationally televised funeral, which was a simple and relatively private affair attended by the country's leaders and Deng's family, was broadcast on all cable channels. Jiang's tearful eulogy to the late reformist leader declared, "The Chinese people love, thank, mourn and cherish the memory of Comrade Deng Xiaoping because he devoted his life-long energies to the Chinese people, performed immortal feats for the independence and liberation of the Chinese nation." Jiang vowed to continue Deng's policies.
After the funeral, his organs were donated to medical research, the remains were cremated, and his ashes were subsequently scattered at sea, according to his wishes. For the next two weeks, Chinese state media ran news stories and documentaries related to Deng's life and death, with the regular 19:00 National News program in the evening lasting almost two hours over the regular broadcast time.
Certain segments of the Chinese population, notably the modern Maoists and radical reformers (the far left and the far right), had negative views on Deng. In the year that followed, songs like "Story of Spring" by Dong Wenhua, which were created in Deng's honour shortly after Deng's southern tour in 1992, once again were widely played.
There was a significant amount of international reaction to Deng's death: UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan said Deng was to be remembered "in the international community at large as a primary architect of China's modernization and dramatic economic development". French President Jacques Chirac said "In the course of this century, few men have, as much as Deng, led a vast human community through such profound and determining changes"; British Prime Minister John Major commented about Deng's key role in the return of Hong Kong to Chinese control; Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien called Deng a "pivotal figure" in Chinese history. The Kuomintang chair in Taiwan also sent its condolences, saying it longed for peace, cooperation, and prosperity. The Dalai Lama voiced regret.[54]
Memorials[edit]




Statue of Deng in Shenzhen


When compared to the memorials of other CPC leaders, those dedicated to Deng have been low profile, in keeping with Deng's pragmatism. Likewise, he was cremated, as opposed to being embalmed like Mao.
There are a few public displays of Deng in the country. A bronze statue of Deng was erected on 14 November 2000, at the grand plaza of Lianhua Mountain Park (Chinese: 莲花山公园, Liánhuāshān Gōngyuán) in Shenzhen. This statue is dedicated to Deng's role as a planner and contributor to the development of the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, starting in 1979. The statue is 6 metres (20 ft) high, with an additional 3.68-meter base. The statue shows Deng striding forward confidently. Many CPC high level leaders visit the statue. In addition, in coastal areas and on the island province of Hainan, Deng is seen on roadside billboards with messages emphasizing economic reform or his policy of One country, two systems.







Deng Xiaoping billboard in Shenzhen









Deng Xiaoping billboard in Qingdao









Deng Xiaoping billboard in Dujiangyan, Sichuan









Deng Xiaoping billboard in Lijiang, Yunnan




Another bronze statue of Deng was dedicated 13 August 2004 in the city of Guang'an, Deng's hometown, in southwest China's Sichuan Province. The statue was erected to commemorate Deng's 100th birthday. The statue shows Deng, dressed casually, sitting on a chair and smiling. The Chinese characters for "Statue of Deng Xiaoping" are inscribed on the pedestal. The original calligraphy was written by Jiang, then Chairman of the Central Military Commission.[55]
Deng Xiaoping's Former Residence in his hometown of Paifang Village in Sichuan province has been preserved as a museum telling Deng's life story.
In Bishkek, capital of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, there is a six-lane boulevard, 25 metres (82 ft) wide and 3.5 kilometres (2 mi) long, the Deng Xiaoping Prospekt, which was dedicated on 18 June 1997. A two-meter high red granite monument stands at the east end of this route. The epigraph in memory of Deng is written in Chinese, Russian and Kirghiz.[56][57]

A documentary on Deng entitled Deng Xiaoping was released by CCTV in January 1997 that chronicles his life from his days as a student in France to his "Southern Tour" of 1993.[58] In 2014, a TV series commemorating Deng entitled Deng Xiaoping at History's Crossroads was released by CCTV in anticipation of the 110th anniversary of his birth.
See also[edit]

Deng Xiaoping Theory

Notes[edit]


^ Profile of Deng Xiaoping
^ Xia, Zhengnong (2003). 大辭海哲學卷. Shanghai: Shanghai Dictionary publishing house. p. 38. ISBN 9787532612369. 
^ Cheng Li (2001). China's leaders. Rowman & Littlefield. 
^ "Deng Xiaoping Is Dead at 92; Architect of Modern China". The New York Times. 20 February 1997. 
^ Robert Dernberger (1993). China in the Era of Deng Xiaoping. Sharpe. Retrieved 13 March 2010. 
^ "Luodai, a Hakkanese town in Sichuan Province". GOV.cn. 14 January 2008. Retrieved 16 November 2009. 
^ a b "The arrival of the Hakkas in Sichuan Province". Asiawind.com. 29 December 1997. Retrieved 13 March 2010. 
^ "Luodai, a Hakkanese town in Sichuan Province". GOV.cn. 14 January 2008. Retrieved 14 May 2010. 
^ Yingcong Dai (2009). The Sichuan Frontier and Tibet: Imperial Strategy in the Early Qing. University of Washington Press. pp. 25–. ISBN 978-0-295-98952-5. 
^ "Deng Xiaoping – Childhood". China.org.cn. Retrieved 14 May 2010. 
^ Evans, Sir Richard. Deng Xiaoping and the Making of Modern China. Penguin Books, 1995. Second Edition. Page 5. ISBN 0-14-013945-1
^ Spence 1999, 310
^ Vogel (2011), p. 18–20.
^ Stewart, Whitney, Deng Xiaoping: Leader in a Changing China, 2001
^ a b [1], Wang Song. "Chinese Revolutionaries in France".
^ "Exiled son who saved the state". Times Higher Education. 22 March 2002. Retrieved 2 December 2010. 
^ Gao 2008. p. 46.
^ a b Minqi Li (December 2008). "Socialism, capitalism, and class struggle: The Political economy of Modern china". Economic & Political Weekly. 
^ "Deng Xiaoping − The Years of Hardship and Danger". People.com.cn. 10 July 2007. 
^ "Film makers flock to tractor factory to shoot Deng's stories". News Guandong. 26 July 2004. 
^ "Deng Rong's Memoirs: Chpt 49". Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. 
^ "Deng Rong's Memoirs: Chapter 53". Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. 
^ 1975–1976 and 1977–1980, Europa Publications (2002) "The People's Republic of Chine: Introductory Survey" The Europa World Year Book 2003 volume 1, (44th edition) Europa Publications, London, p. 1075, col. 1, ISBN 1-85743-227-4; and Bo, Zhiyue (2007) China's Elite Politics: Political Transition and Power Balancing World Scientific, Hackensack, New Jersey, p. 59, ISBN 981-270-041-2
^ "1977: Deng Xiaoping back in power". BBC News. 22 July 1977. Retrieved 21 July 2011. 
^ Xiang, Lanxin (20 April 2012). "Bo Xilai probe shows up China's outdated system of government". South China Morning Post
^ "MFA, Singapore Press Release". App.mfa.gov.sg. 29 December 2005. Retrieved 27 November 2011. 
^ Lee Kuan Yew, From Third World to First: The Singapore Story, 1965–2000, Volume 2, (HarperCollins: 2000), pp. 595–603
^ (Article 2) "The Contracting Parties declare that neither of them should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in any other region and that each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony." MOFA: Treaty of Peace and Friendship between Japan and the People's Republic of China
^ "In quotes : Deng Xiaoping". Peoples Daily, China. 20 August 2014. Retrieved 24 October 2017. 
^ "In quotes - Deng Xiaoping". China Daily. 20 August 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2017. 
^ Fengbo Zhang
^ "Reformer with an iron fist". CNN. Retrieved 26 June 2017. 
^ Cited by Graziella Caselli, Gillaume Wunsch, Jacques Vallin in Demography: Analysis and Synthesis, Four Volume Set: A Treatise in Population, Volume 1, Oxford, 2005. ISBN 978-0-12-765660-1
^ http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/1985/06/in-human-rights-china-remains-in-the-maoist-era
^ https://www.economist.com/news/china/21582557-most-worlds-sharp-decline-executions-can-be-credited-china-strike-less-hard
^ "The Three-Step Development Strategy". china.org.cn. Retrieved 28 November 2010. 
^ Cited by Michael E. Marti in China and the Legacy of Deng Xiaoping, p. 19, Brassy's Inc., United States, 2002. ISBN 1-57488-416-6
^ Cited by John Gittings in The Changing Face of China, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2005. ISBN 0-19-280612-2
^ Cited by António Caeiro in Pela China Dentro (translated), Dom Quixote, Lisboa, 2004. ISBN 972-20-2696-8
^ Dali Yang, Calamity and Reform in China, Stanford University Press, 1996
^ Cited by David Shambaugh in Deng Xiaoping: portrait of a Chinese statesman, Oxford University, Oxford, 1995. ISBN 0-19-828933-2
^ Cited by Susan L. Shirk in The Political Logic of Economic Reform in China, University of California, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1993. ISBN 0-520-07706-7
^ FlorCruz, Jaime (19 December 2008) "Looking back over China's last 30 years" CNN
^ a b Nathan, Andrew J. (January–February 2001). "The Tiananmen Papers". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. 
^ "Voices for Tiananmen Square: Beijing Spring and the Democracy Movement". Socialanarchism.org. 8 February 2006. Retrieved 13 March 2010. 
^ Palmer, Bob (8 February 2006). Voices for Tiananmen Square: Beijing Spring and the Democracy Movement. Social Anarchism. 20.
^ a b c d The Politics of China By Roderick MacFarquhar
^ Deng Xiaoping's daughter defends his Tiananmen Square massacre decision. Taipei Times. 25 June 2007.
^ a b The Legacy of Tiananmen By James A. R. Miles
^ Miles, James (1997). The Legacy of Tiananmen: China in Disarray. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-08451-7.
^ Iritani, Evelyn (9 September 2004). "Great Idea but Don't Quote Him; Deng Xiaoping's famous one-liner started China on the way to capitalism. The only problem is there's no proof he actually said it". Los Angeles Times. p. A1. Retrieved 13 March 2010 – via Pqasb.pqarchiver.com. 
^ Deng Xiaoping's Southern Tour: Elite Politics in Post-Tiananmen China, Suisheng Zhao, Asian Survey 1993 University of California Press
^ CNN: China officially mourns Deng Xiaoping 24 February 1997
^ CNN:World leaders praise Deng's economic legacy 24 February 1997
^ "China Daily article "Deng Xiaoping statue unveiled"". China Daily. Retrieved 13 March 2010. 
^ "Turkistan-Newsletter Volume: 97-1:13, 20 June 1997". Google. Archived from the original on 4 October 2007. Retrieved 2 December 2010. 
^ Pomfret, John "In Its Own Neighborhood, China Emerges as a Leader". Washington Post, 18 October 2001. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 26 January 2002. Retrieved 18 August 2013. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) as quoted in Taiwan Security Research
^ "文献纪录片《邓小平》". CCTV. 


References[edit]


Clark, Paul (2008). The Chinese Cultural Revolution: A History. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87515-8. *
Gao, Mobo (2008). The Battle for China's Past: Mao and the Cultural Revolution. London: Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-2780-8. 
MacFarquhar, Roderick and Schoenhals, Michael (2006). Mao's Last Revolution. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02332-1. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Spence, Jonathan D. "A Road is Made." In The Search for Modern China. 310. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 1999. (ISBN 0-393-97351-4)
Spence, Jonathan D. "Century's End." In The Search for Modern China. 725. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 1999. (ISBN 0-393-97351-4)
Evans, Sir Richard (1995). Deng Xiaoping and the Making of Modern China (Second ed.). Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-013945-1. 
Vogel, Ezra F. (2011). Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-05544-5. 


Further reading[edit]


Baum, Richard (1996). Burying Mao: Chinese Politics in the Age of Deng Xiaoping (updated ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-03637-3. 
Maomao (1995). Deng Xiaoping: My Father. New York: BasicBooks. ISBN 0-465-01625-1. 
Meisner, Maurice J. (1996). The Deng Xiaoping Era: An Inquiry into the Fate of Chinese Socialism, 1978–1994. New York: Hill and Wang. ISBN 0-8090-7815-5. 
Yang, Benjamin and Yang, Bingzhang. Deng: A Political Biography. M.E. Sharpe, 1998. ISBN 978-1-56324-722-4
"Fifth Plenary Session of 11th C.C.P. Central Chinese Committee", Beijing Review, No. 10 (10 March 1980), pp. 3–22, which describes the official Liu rehabilitation measures and good name restoration.
Foreign Relations Series. Includes State Department reports:

1977–1980, CHINA, US State Dept, published 2013.
1969–1976, CHINA, US State Dept, published 2008




External links[edit]

Find more aboutDeng Xiaopingat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Ezra Vogel, author of Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China, speaking in 2011 on Deng's efforts to build China. (Video on YouTube)
The New York Times obituary on Deng Xiaoping
The Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping
Build Socialism with Chinese Characteristics, speeches by Deng Xiaoping from 1982 to 1984.





Offices and distinctions of Deng Xiaoping







Party political offices


Preceded by
Rao Shushi
Head of the CPC Central Organization Department
1954–1956
Succeeded by
An Ziwen


Preceded by
Mao Zedong
Secretariat chairman
Secretary General of the Secretariat of the Communist Party of China
1956–1966
Succeeded by
Hu Yaobang
Abolished until 1980


Preceded by
Zhou Enlai
Kang Sheng
Li Desheng
Ye Jianying
Wang Hongwen
Vice Chairman of the Communist Party of China
Along with: Zhou Enlai, Hua Guofeng, Kang Sheng, Li Desheng, Ye Jianying, Wang Hongwen
1975–1976
Succeeded by
Hua Guofeng
Ye Jianying
Wang Hongwen


Preceded by
Ye Jianying
Vice Chairman of the Communist Party of China
Along with: Li Xiannian, Wang Dongxing, Chen Yun, Ye Jianying, Zhao Ziyang, Hua Guofeng
1977–1982
Post abolished


Preceded by
Hua Guofeng
Chairman of the CPC Central Military Commission
1981–1989
Succeeded by
Jiang Zemin


New title
Chairman of the CPC Central Advisory Commission
1982–1987
Succeeded by
Chen Yun


Political offices


Preceded by
Bo Yibo
Minister of Finance of the People's Republic of China
1953–1954
Succeeded by
Li Xiannian


Preceded by
Lin Biao
First-ranking Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China
1975–1976
Succeeded by
Zhang Chunqiao


Preceded by
Li Xiannian
First-ranking Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China
1977–1980
Succeeded by
Wan Li


Preceded by
Zhou Enlai
Vacant since 1976
Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference
1978–1983
Succeeded by
Deng Yingchao


New title
Chairman of the PRC Central Military Commission
1983–1990
Succeeded by
Jiang Zemin


Military offices


Preceded by
Huang Yongsheng
Vacant since 1971
Head of the People's Liberation Army General Staff Department
1975–1976
Vacant


Vacant
Head of the People's Liberation Army General Staff Department
1977–1980
Succeeded by
Yang Dezhi


Order of precedence


Preceded by
Zhao Ziyang
General Secretary of the Party (1st ranked)
Orders of precedence in the People's Republic of China
Chairman of the Central Military Commission (2nd ranked)
Succeeded by
Yang Shangkun
President of China (3rd ranked)


Orders of precedence in the People's Republic of China
Chairman of the Central Military Commission (2nd ranked)
Succeeded by
Li Xiannian
President of China (3rd ranked)


Preceded by
Hu Yaobang
General Secretary of the Party (1st ranked)
Orders of precedence in the People's Republic of China
Chairman of the Central Military Commission (2nd ranked)
Succeeded by
Zhao Ziyang
Premier of China (3rd ranked)


Preceded by
Ye Jianying
Vice Chairman of the CMC (2nd ranked)
Orders of precedence in the People's Republic of China
Chairman of the Central Military Commission (3rd ranked)
Succeeded by
Zhao Ziyang
Premier of China (4th ranked)











Navigation templates by offices held by Deng Xiaoping











v
t
e


Paramount leaders of the People's Republic of China






Mao Zedong
Hua Guofeng
Deng Xiaoping
Jiang Zemin
Hu Jintao
Xi Jinping












v
t
e


Chairmen of the Central Military Commission



Party CMC Chairmen



Mao Zedong
Hua Guofeng
Deng Xiaoping
Jiang Zemin
Hu Jintao
Xi Jinping








State CMC Chairmen



Deng Xiaoping
Jiang Zemin
Hu Jintao
Xi Jinping












v
t
e


Chairmen of the National Committee of the CPPCC






Mao Zedong
Zhou Enlai
Deng Xiaoping
Deng Yingchao
Li Xiannian
Li Ruihuan
Jia Qinglin
Yu Zhengsheng












v
t
e


Vice Premiers of the People's Republic of China (list)



Provisional Cabinet



Dong Biwu
Chen Yun
Guo Moruo
Huang Yanpei
Deng Xiaoping (added 1952)








1st Cabinet



Chen Yun
Lin Biao
Peng Dehuai
Deng Xiaoping
Deng Zihui
He Long
Chen Yi
Ulanhu
Li Fuchun
Li Xiannian
Nie Rongzhen (added 1956)
Bo Yibo (added 1956)





2nd Cabinet



Chen Yun
Lin Biao
Peng Dehuai
Deng Xiaoping
Deng Zihui
He Long
Chen Yi
Ulanhu
Li Fuchun
Li Xiannian
Nie Rongzhen
Bo Yibo
Tan Zhenlin
Lu Dingyi
Luo Ruiqing
Xi Zhongxun





3rd Cabinet



Lin Biao (died 1971)
Chen Yun (purged 1969)
Deng Xiaoping (purged 1968, reinstated 1973)
He Long (died 1969)
Chen Yi (died 1972)
Ke Qingshi (died 1965)
Ulanhu (purged 1968)
Li Fuchun (died 1975)
Li Xiannian
Tan Zhenlin
Nie Rongzhen
Bo Yibo (purged 1967)
Lu Dingyi (purged 1966)
Luo Ruiqing (purged 1966)
Tao Zhu (died 1969)
Xie Fuzhi (died 1972)





4th Cabinet



Deng Xiaoping (purged 1976, reinstated 1977)
Zhang Chunqiao (purged 1977)
Li Xiannian
Chen Xilian
Ji Dengkui
Hua Guofeng
Chen Yonggui
Wu Guixian (resigned 1977)
Wang Zhen
Yu Qiuli
Gu Mu
Sun Jian





5th Cabinet (1978)



Deng Xiaoping
Li Xiannian
Xu Xiangqian
Ji Dengkui
Yu Qiuli
Chen Xilian
Geng Biao
Chen Yonggui
Fang Yi
Wang Zhen
Gu Mu
Kang Shi'en
Chen Muhua
Wang Renzhong (added 1979)
Chen Yun (added 1979)





5th Cabinet (1980)



Yu Qiuli
Geng Biao
Fang Yi
Gu Mu
Kang Shi'en
Chen Muhua
Bo Yibo
Yao Yilin
Ji Pengfei
Zhao Ziyang (promoted to premier)
Wan Li
Yang Jingren
Zhang Aiping
Huang Hua





5th Cabinet (1982)



Wan Li
Yao Yilin





6th Cabinet



Wan Li
Yao Yilin
Li Peng
Tian Jiyun
Qiao Shi (added 1986)





7th Cabinet



Yao Yilin
Tian Jiyun
Wu Xueqian
Zou Jiahua (added 1991)
Zhu Rongji (added 1991)





8th Cabinet



Zhu Rongji
Zou Jiahua
Qian Qichen
Li Lanqing
Wu Bangguo (added 1995)
Jiang Chunyun (added 1995)





9th Cabinet



Li Lanqing
Qian Qichen
Wu Bangguo
Wen Jiabao





10th Cabinet



Huang Ju (died 2007)
Wu Yi
Zeng Peiyan
Hui Liangyu





11th Cabinet



Li Keqiang
Hui Liangyu
Zhang Dejiang
Wang Qishan





12th Cabinet



Zhang Gaoli
Liu Yandong
Wang Yang
Ma Kai












v
t
e


First Vice Premiers of the People's Republic of China






Chen Yun
Lin Biao
Deng Xiaoping
Wan Li
Yao Yilin
Zhu Rongji
Li Lanqing
Huang Ju
Wu Yi (acting)
Li Keqiang
Zhang Gaoli












v
t
e


12th Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China



General Secretary



1. Hu Yaobang (until 1987)
1. Zhao Ziyang (appointed 1987)





Other members



2. Ye Jianying (until 1985)
3. Deng Xiaoping
4. Zhao Ziyang
5. Li Xiannian
6. Chen Yun












v
t
e


Ministers of Finance of the People's Republic of China






Bo Yibo
Rong Zihe (acting)
Deng Xiaoping
Li Xiannian
Yin Chengzhen
Zhang Jingfu
Wu Bo
Wang Bingqian
Liu Zhongli
Xiang Huaicheng
Jin Renqing
Xie Xuren
Lou Jiwei
Xiao Jie












v
t
e


People's Liberation Army Chiefs of General Staff






Su Yu
Huang Kecheng
Luo Ruiqing
Yang Chengwu (acting)
Huang Yongsheng
vacant
Deng Xiaoping
Yang Dezhi
Chi Haotian
Zhang Wannian
Fu Quanyou
Liang Guanglie
Chen Bingde
Fang Fenghui















Links to related articles











v
t
e


The Cultural Revolution



Major events



Socialist Education Movement
Lushan Conference
Down to the Countryside Movement
February Countercurrent
Wuhan Incident
9th Party Congress
Project 571
10th Party Congress
Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius
Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend
Tiananmen Incident
3rd Plenum of the 11th Central Committee





Key figures



Mao Zedong
Liu Shaoqi
Zhou Enlai
Lin Biao
Deng Xiaoping
Gang of Four (Jiang Qing
Zhang Chunqiao
Yao Wenyuan
Wang Hongwen)
Peng Dehuai
Wu Han
Peng Zhen
Tao Zhu
Chen Boda
Wang Dongxing
Xie Fuzhi
Ji Dengkui
Wang Li
Qi Benyu
Wu Faxian
Qiu Huizuo
Yang Chengwu
Chen Zaidao
Kang Sheng
Mao Yuanxin
Hua Guofeng
Ye Jianying





Documents



Bombard the Headquarters
Quotations from Chairman Mao
Hai Rui Dismissed from Office





Concepts



Four Olds
Struggle session
Feudal fascism
Big-character poster
One Divides Into Two
Democracy Wall
Eight model plays
Capitalist roader
Learn from Daqing in industry
Learn from Dazhai in agriculture
Scar literature





Groups



Red Guards
Five Man Group
Cultural Revolution Group
Central Case Examination Group
Central Organization and Propaganda Leading Group
Revolutionary committee
Shanghai People's Commune
8341 Special Regiment
Sent-down youth
61 Renegades
Barefoot doctor
Stinking Old Ninth
Five Black Categories
Five Red Categories
Worker-Peasant-Soldier student
May Seventh Cadre School





Related topics



Maoism
Great Leap Forward
Class struggle
Sino-Soviet split
Ultra-Leftism
Peaceful Evolution theory
Two Whatevers






History portal










v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


Revolutions of 1989



Internal
background



Era of Stagnation
Communism
Anti-communism
Criticism of communist party rule
Eastern Bloc
Eastern Bloc economies
Eastern Bloc politics
Eastern Bloc media and propaganda
Eastern Bloc emigration and defection
KGB
Nomenklatura
Shortage economy
Totalitarianism
Eastern European anti-Communist insurgencies





International
background



Active measures
Cold War
List of socialist states
Predictions of the dissolution of the Soviet Union
Reagan Doctrine
Soviet Empire
Terrorism and the Soviet Union
Vatican Opposition
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
People Power Revolution





Reforms



Uskoreniye
Perestroika

Democratization in the Soviet Union
Khozraschyot
500 Days
Sinatra Doctrine


Glasnost
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Đổi mới





Government
leaders



Ramiz Alia
Nicolae Ceaușescu
Mikhail Gorbachev
Károly Grósz
Erich Honecker
János Kádár
Miloš Jakeš
Egon Krenz
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Slobodan Milošević
Mathieu Kérékou
Mengistu Haile Mariam
Ne Win
Denis Sassou Nguesso
Heng Samrin
Deng Xiaoping
Todor Zhivkov
Siad Barre





Opposition
methods



Civil resistance
Demonstrations
Human chains
Magnitizdat
Polish underground press
Protests
Samizdat
Strike action





Opposition
leaders



Lech Wałęsa
Václav Havel
Alexander Dubček
Ion Iliescu
Liu Gang
Wu'erkaixi
Chai Ling
Wang Dan
Feng Congde
Tank Man
Joachim Gauck
Sali Berisha
Sanjaasürengiin Zorig
Vladimir Bukovsky
Boris Yeltsin
Viacheslav Chornovil
Vytautas Landsbergis
Zianon Pazniak
Zhelyu Zhelev
Aung San Suu Kyi
Meles Zenawi
Isaias Afwerki
Ronald Reagan
George H. W. Bush
Pope John Paul II





Opposition
movements



Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation
Charter 77
New Forum
Civic Forum
Democratic Party of Albania
Democratic Russia
Initiative for Peace and Human Rights
Sąjūdis
Peaceful Revolution
People's Movement of Ukraine
Solidarity
Popular Front of Latvia
Popular Front of Estonia
Public Against Violence
Belarusian Popular Front
National League for Democracy
National Salvation Front
Unification Church political activities
Union of Democratic Forces





Events
by location




Central and Eastern Europe



Albania
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia





Soviet Union



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Chechnya
Estonia
Georgia
Latvia
Lithuania
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Moldova
Russia
Tajikstan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan





Elsewhere



Afghanistan
Angola
Benin
Burma
Cambodia
China
Congo-Brazzaville
Ethiopia
Mongolia
Mozambique
Somalia
South Yemen








Individual
events



1988 Polish strikes
April 9 tragedy
Black January
Baltic Way
1987–89 Tibetan unrest
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria
Polish Round Table Agreement
Hungarian Round Table Talks
Pan-European Picnic
Monday Demonstrations
Alexanderplatz demonstration
Malta Summit
German reunification
January Events in Lithuania
January Events in Latvia
1991 protests in Belgrade
August Coup
Dissolution of the Soviet Union





Later events



Colour revolution
Decommunization
Lustration
Democratization
Economic liberalization
Post-Soviet conflicts
Neo-Sovietism
Neo-Stalinism
Post-communism
Yugoslav Wars












v
t
e


Tiananmen Square protests of 1989



Background



May Fourth Movement
Tiananmen Incident of 1976
Beijing Spring
1986 Chinese Student Demonstrations
Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign
Corruption
Economic reform
Household-responsibility system
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Criticism of communism





Chronology



April 26 Editorial
April 27 demonstrations
The Students' Hunger Strike
Dialogue between students and government
Gifts and donations from outside Mainland China
Mao portrait incident
Sino-Soviet Summit
June 9 Deng speech
Military involvement





Communist Party




Elders



Deng Xiaoping
Chen Yun
Yang Shangkun
Li Xiannian
Wang Zhen
Peng Zhen
Bo Yibo





Standing Committee



Zhao Ziyang
Li Peng
Qiao Shi
Hu Qili
Yao Yilin





Regional leaders



Li Ximing
Chen Xitong
Jiang Zemin
Zhu Rongji
Hu Jintao





Others



Bao Tong
Hu Yaobang
Luo Gan
Yan Mingfu
Yuan Mu
Wan Li
Wen Jiabao
Wu Xueqian








Dissidents




Leading figures



Bei Dao
Chai Ling
Cui Jian
Dai Qing
Ding Zilin
Fang Lizhi
Fang Zheng
Feng Congde
Liu Gang
Han Dongfang
Hou Dejian
Li Lu
Liu Xianbin
Liu Xiaobo
Qin Benli
Shen Tong
Tang Baiqiao
Wang Bingzhang
Wang Dan
Wang Youcai
Wu'erkaixi
Xiong Yan
Yan Jiaqi
Yu Dongyue
Zhang Boli
Zhao Changqing
Zhou Yongjun





Groups



Beijing Workers' Autonomous Federation
Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation








Military




Generals



Liu Huaqing
Chi Haotian
Yang Baibing
Zhao Nanqi
Qin Jiwei
Hong Xuezhi
Liang Guanglie
Xu Qinxian





Army units



12th
15th
20th
24th
26th
27th
28th
38th
39th
40th
54th
63rd
64th
65th
67th








Works



Almost a Revolution
A Tiananmen Journal
Collection of June Fourth Poems
The Critical Moment
Escape from China
Execution
The Gate of Heavenly Peace
A Heart for Freedom
Prisoner of the State
Quelling the People
Sunrise Over Tiananmen Square
Tiananmen Papers
Hong Kong Goddess of Democracy
Pillar of Shame





Human rights groups



China Support Network
Democracy Party of China
Hong Kong Alliance
Human Rights in China
Information Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
Operation Yellowbird
Tiananmen Mothers





Anniversaries



1st (1990)
5th (1994)
10th (1999)
20th (2009)
21st (2010)
24th (2013)
25th (2014)





Icons



Goddess of Democracy
"Nothing to My Name"
Tank Man
June 4th Museum





Related



Arrest and trial of Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao












v
t
e


Time Persons of the Year



1927–1950



Charles Lindbergh (1927)
Walter Chrysler (1928)
Owen D. Young (1929)
Mohandas Gandhi (1930)
Pierre Laval (1931)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932)
Hugh S. Johnson (1933)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934)
Haile Selassie (1935)
Wallis Simpson (1936)
Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937)
Adolf Hitler (1938)
Joseph Stalin (1939)
Winston Churchill (1940)
Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941)
Joseph Stalin (1942)
George Marshall (1943)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944)
Harry S. Truman (1945)
James F. Byrnes (1946)
George Marshall (1947)
Harry S. Truman (1948)
Winston Churchill (1949)
The American Fighting-Man (1950)





1951–1975



Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951)
Elizabeth II (1952)
Konrad Adenauer (1953)
John Foster Dulles (1954)
Harlow Curtice (1955)
Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956)
Nikita Khrushchev (1957)
Charles de Gaulle (1958)
Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959)
U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960)
John F. Kennedy (1961)
Pope John XXIII (1962)
Martin Luther King Jr. (1963)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1964)
William Westmoreland (1965)
The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966)
Lyndon B. Johnson (1967)
The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968)
The Middle Americans (1969)
Willy Brandt (1970)
Richard Nixon (1971)
Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972)
John Sirica (1973)
King Faisal (1974)
American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975)





1976–2000



Jimmy Carter (1976)
Anwar Sadat (1977)
Deng Xiaoping (1978)
Ayatollah Khomeini (1979)
Ronald Reagan (1980)
Lech Wałęsa (1981)
The Computer (1982)
Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983)
Peter Ueberroth (1984)
Deng Xiaoping (1985)
Corazon Aquino (1986)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1987)
The Endangered Earth (1988)
Mikhail Gorbachev (1989)
George H. W. Bush (1990)
Ted Turner (1991)
Bill Clinton (1992)
The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993)
Pope John Paul II (1994)
Newt Gingrich (1995)
David Ho (1996)
Andrew Grove (1997)
Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998)
Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999)
George W. Bush (2000)





2001–present



Rudolph Giuliani (2001)
The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002)
The American Soldier (2003)
George W. Bush (2004)
The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005)
You (2006)
Vladimir Putin (2007)
Barack Obama (2008)
Ben Bernanke (2009)
Mark Zuckerberg (2010)
The Protester (2011)
Barack Obama (2012)
Pope Francis (2013)
Ebola Fighters: Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr. Kent Brantly / Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014)
Angela Merkel (2015)
Donald Trump (2016)
The Silence Breakers (2017)






 Book










v
t
e


Asian of the Century The Big Five






Deng Xiaoping
Akio Morita
Akira Kurosawa
Charles K. Kao
Mohandas K. Gandhi














Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 120735493
LCCN: n81021998
ISNI: 0000 0001 1456 2686
GND: 118621297
SELIBR: 48803
SUDOC: 028041798
BNF: cb12988100v (data)
BIBSYS: 90149515
NLA: 36730148
NDL: 00317835
NKC: jx20070904003
IATH: w6k0776b








China portal
Politics portal
Communism portal
Biography portal
1980s portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deng_Xiaoping&oldid=817424128"					Categories: Vice Premiers of the People's Republic of ChinaDeng XiaopingDeng Xiaoping family1904 births1997 deathsChinese communistsChinese expatriates in the Soviet UnionChinese diplomatsChinese guerrillasChinese people of World War IIChinese reformersChinese revolutionariesCommunist rulersMarxist theoristsMembers of the Secretariat of the Communist Party of ChinaMinisters of Finance of the People's Republic of ChinaPeople of the Chinese Civil WarPeople's Liberation Army Chiefs of General StaffVictims of the Cultural RevolutionCommunist Party of China politicians from SichuanChinese politicians of Hakka descentHakka writersPeople's Republic of China politicians from SichuanChinese expatriates in FrancePeople from Guang'anCommunist University of the Toilers of the East alumniMoscow Sun Yat-sen University alumniDeaths from Parkinson's disease20th-century Chinese writers20th-century Chinese heads of governmentHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownUse dmy dates from May 2014Articles containing Chinese-language textPages using infobox officeholder with an atypical party valueArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles needing additional references from April 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2012Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2017CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers