For other uses, see Destroyer (disambiguation).




USS Winston S. Churchill, an Arleigh Burke-class guided missile destroyer of the United States Navy


In naval terminology, a destroyer is a fast, maneuverable long-endurance warship intended to escort larger vessels in a fleet, convoy or battle group and defend them against smaller powerful short-range attackers. They were originally developed in the late 19th century as a defence against torpedo boats, and by the time of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, these "torpedo boat destroyers" (TBDs) were "large, swift, and powerfully armed torpedo boats designed to destroy other torpedo boats."[1] Although the term "destroyer" had been used interchangeably with "TBD" and "torpedo boat destroyer" by navies since 1892, the term "torpedo boat destroyer" had been generally shortened to simply "destroyer" by nearly all navies by the First World War.[2]
Before World War II, destroyers were light vessels with little endurance for unattended ocean operations; typically a number of destroyers and a single destroyer tender operated together. After the war, the advent of the guided missile allowed destroyers to take on the surface combatant roles previously filled by battleships and cruisers. This resulted in larger and more powerful guided missile destroyers more capable of independent operation.
At the start of the 21st century, destroyers are the global standard for surface combatant ships, with only two nations (United States and Russia) operating the heavier class cruisers, with no battleships or true battlecruisers remaining.[3] Modern destroyers, also known as guided missile destroyers, are equivalent in tonnage but vastly superior in firepower to cruisers of the World War II era, and are capable of carrying nuclear tipped cruise missiles. At 510 feet (160 m) long, a displacement of 9200 tons, and with armament of more than 90 missiles,[4] guided missile destroyers such as the Arleigh Burke class are actually larger and more heavily armed than most previous ships classified as guided missile cruisers.
Some European navies, such as the French, Spanish, or German, use the term "frigate" for their destroyers, which leads to some confusion.



Contents


1 Origins

1.1 Early designs
1.2 Torpedo gunboat


2 Development of the modern destroyer

2.1 Subsequent improvements


3 Early use and World War I

3.1 Combat


4 1918–1945

4.1 Combat


5 Post-World War II
6 Operators
7 Future development
8 Preserved destroyers
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Origins[edit]




The introduction of the Whitehead torpedo revolutionized naval warfare. Torpedo's general profile: A. war-head B. air-flask. B'. immersion-chamber CC'. after-body C. engine-room DDDD. drain-holes E. shaft-tube F. steering-engine G. bevel-gear box H. depth-index I. tail K. charging and stop-valves L. locking-gear M. engine bed-plate P. primer-case R. rudder S. steering-rod tube T. guide-stud UU. propellers V. valve-group W. war-nose Z. strengthening-band


The emergence and development of the destroyer was related to the invention of the self-propelled torpedo in the 1860s. A navy now had the potential to destroy a superior enemy battle fleet using steam launches to fire torpedoes. Cheap, fast boats armed with torpedoes called torpedo boats were built and became a threat to large capital ships near enemy coasts. The first seagoing vessel designed to launch the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was the 33-ton HMS Lightning in 1876. She was armed with two drop collars to launch these weapons; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow. By the 1880s, the type had evolved into small ships of 50–100 tons, fast enough to evade enemy picket boats.
At first, the threat of a torpedo boat attack to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor, but as faster and longer-range torpedoes were developed, the threat extended to cruising at sea. In response to this new threat, more heavily gunned picket boats called "catchers" were built which were used to escort the battle fleet at sea. They needed significant seaworthiness and endurance to operate with the battle fleet, and as they necessarily became larger, they became officially designated "torpedo boat destroyers", and by the First World War were largely known as "destroyers" in English. The anti-torpedo boat origin of this type of ship is retained in its name in other languages, including French (contre-torpilleur), Italian (cacciatorpediniere), Portuguese (contratorpedeiro), Czech (torpédoborec), Greek (antitorpiliko,αντιτορπιλικό), Dutch (torpedobootjager) and, up until the Second World War, Polish (kontrtorpedowiec, now obsolete).[5]
Once destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage, it was realized that they were also ideal to take over the role of torpedo boats themselves, so they were fitted with torpedo tubes as well as guns. At that time, and even into World War I, the only function of destroyers was to protect their own battle fleet from enemy torpedo attacks and to make such attacks on the battleships of the enemy. The task of escorting merchant convoys was still in the future.
Early designs[edit]




The Imperial Japanese Navy's Kotaka (1887)


An important development came with the construction of HMS Swift in 1884, later redesignated TB 81.[6] This was a large (137 ton) torpedo boat with four 47 mm quick-firing guns and three torpedo tubes. At 23.75 knots (43.99 km/h; 27.33 mph), while still not fast enough to engage enemy torpedo boats reliably, the ship at least had the armament to deal with them.
Another forerunner of the torpedo boat destroyer was the Japanese torpedo boat[7] Kotaka (Falcon), built in 1885.[8] Designed to Japanese specifications and ordered from the London Yarrow shipyards in 1885, she was transported in parts to Japan, where she was assembled and launched in 1887. The 165-foot (50 m) long vessel was armed with four 1-pounder (37 mm) quick-firing guns and six torpedo tubes, reached 19 knots (35 km/h), and at 203 tons, was the largest torpedo boat built to date. In her trials in 1889, Kotaka demonstrated that she could exceed the role of coastal defense, and was capable of accompanying larger warships on the high seas. The Yarrow shipyards, builder of the parts for the Kotaka, "considered Japan to have effectively invented the destroyer".[9]
Torpedo gunboat[edit]
Main article: Torpedo gunboat




HMS Spider, an early model of torpedo gunboat


The first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat. Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats. By the end of the 1890s torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the torpedo boat destroyers, which were much faster.
The first example of this was HMS Rattlesnake, designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885, and commissioned in response to the Russian War scare.[10] The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats. Exactly 200 feet (61 m) long and 23 feet (7.0 m) in beam, she displaced 550 tons. Built of steel, Rattlesnake was un-armoured with the exception of a ​3⁄4-inch protective deck. She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four 14-inch (360 mm) torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo dropping carriages on either side. Four torpedo reloads were carried.[10]
A number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the Grasshopper class, the Sharpshooter class, the Alarm class and the Dryad class - all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s.
Fernando Villaamil, second officer of the Ministry of the Navy of Spain, designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat.[11] He asked several British shipyards to submit proposals capable of fulfilling these specifications. In 1885 the Spanish Navy chose the design submitted by the shipyard of James and George Thomson of Clydebank. Destructor (Destroyer in Spanish) was laid down at the end of the year, launched in 1886, and commissioned in 1887.
She displaced 348 tons, and was equipped with triple-expansion engines generating 3,784 ihp (2,822 kW), for a maximum speed of 22.6 knots (41.9 km/h),[12] which made her one of the faster ships in the world in 1888.[13] She was armed with one 90 mm (3.5 in) Spanish-designed Hontoria breech-loading gun,[14] four 57 mm (2.2 in) (6-pounder) Nordenfelt guns, two 37 mm (1.5 in) (3-pdr) Hotchkiss cannons and two 15-inch (38 cm) Schwartzkopff torpedo tubes.[12] The ship carried three torpedoes per tube.[14] She was manned by a crew of 60.[12]
In terms of gunnery, speed and dimensions, the specialised design to chase torpedo boats and her high seas capabilities, Destructor was an important precursor to the torpedo boat destroyer.[15]
Development of the modern destroyer[edit]




HMS Havock the first modern destroyer, commissioned in 1894


The first ships to bear the formal designation "torpedo boat destroyer" (TBD) were the Daring class of two ships and Havock class of two ships of the Royal Navy.
Early torpedo gunboat designs lacked the range and speed to keep up with the fleet they were supposed to protect. In 1892, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral John "Jacky" Fisher ordered the development of a new type of ships equipped with the then novel water-tube boilers and quick-firing small calibre guns. Six ships to the specifications circulated by the Admiralty were ordered initially, comprising three different designs each produced by a different shipbuilder: HMS Daring and HMS Decoy from John I. Thornycroft & Company, HMS Havock and HMS Hornet from Yarrows, and HMS Ferret and HMS Lynx from Laird, Son & Company.[16]
These torpedo boat destroyers all featured a turtleback (i.e. rounded) forecastle that was characteristic of early British TBDs. HMS Daring and HMS Decoy were both built by Thornycroft, displaced 260 tons (287.8 tons full load) and were 185 feet in length. They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount abaft the two funnels. Later the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added instead. They produced 4,200 hp from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet. In common with subsequent early Thornycroft boats, they had sloping sterns and double rudders.[17]
The French navy, an extensive user of torpedo boats, built its first torpedo boat destroyer in 1899, with the Durandal-class 'torpilleur d'escadre'. The United States commissioned its first torpedo boat destroyer, USS Bainbridge, Destroyer No. 1, in 1902 and by 1906 there were 16 destroyers in service with the US Navy.[18]
Subsequent improvements[edit]




Builders' plans for the British Charger class, built 1894-5.


Torpedo boat destroyer designs continued to evolve around the turn of the 20th century in several key ways. The first was the introduction of the steam turbine. The spectacular unauthorized demonstration of the turbine powered Turbinia at the 1897 Spithead Navy Review, which, significantly, was of torpedo boat size, prompted the Royal Navy to order a prototype turbine powered destroyer, HMS Viper of 1899. This was the first turbine warship of any kind and achieved a remarkable 36 knots (67 km/h) on sea trials. By 1910 the turbine had been widely adopted by all navies for their faster ships.
The second development was the replacement of the torpedo-boat-style turtleback foredeck by a raised forecastle for the new River-class destroyers built in 1903, which provided better sea-keeping as well as more space below deck.
The first warship to use only fuel oil propulsion was the Royal Navy's torpedo boat destroyer HMS Spiteful, after experiments in 1904, although the obsolescence of coal as a fuel in British warships was delayed by its availability.[19][20] Other navies also adopted oil, for instance the USN with the Paulding class of 1909. In spite of all this variety, destroyers adopted a largely similar pattern. The hull was long and narrow, with a relatively shallow draft. The bow was either raised in a forecastle or covered under a turtleback; underneath this were the crew spaces, extending 1/4 to 1/3 the way along the hull. Aft of the crew spaces was as much engine space as the technology of the time would allow: several boilers and engines or turbines. Above deck, one or more quick-firing guns were mounted in the bows, in front of the bridge; several more were mounted amidships and astern. Two tube mountings (later on, multiple mountings) were generally found amidships.
Between 1892 and 1914 destroyers became markedly larger: initially 420 tons with a length of 250 feet (76 m) for the US Navy's first Bainbridge class of torpedo boat destroyers,[21] up to the First World War with 300-foot (91 m) long destroyers displacing 1000 tons was not unusual. However, construction remained focused on putting the biggest possible engines into a small hull, resulting in a somewhat flimsy construction. Often hulls were built of steel only 1/8 in thick.
By 1910 the steam-driven displacement (that is, not hydroplaning) torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type. Germany nevertheless continued to build such boats until the end of World War I, although these were effectively small coastal destroyers. In fact Germany never distinguished between the two types, giving them pennant numbers in the same series and never giving names to destroyers. Ultimately the term torpedo boat came to be attached to a quite different vessel – the very fast hydroplaning motor driven MTB.
Early use and World War I[edit]
Navies originally built torpedo boat destroyers to protect against torpedo boats, but admirals soon appreciated the flexibility of the fast, multi-purpose vessels that resulted. Vice-Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker laid down destroyer duties for the Royal Navy:[22]

screening the advance of a fleet when hostile torpedo craft are about
searching a hostile coast along which a fleet might pass
watching an enemy's port for the purpose of harassing his torpedo craft and preventing their return
attacking an enemy fleet

Early destroyers were extremely cramped places to live, being "without a doubt magnificent fighting vessels... but unable to stand bad weather".[23] During the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, the commander of the torpedo boat destroyer IJN Akatsuki[24][25][26] described "being in command of a destroyer for a long period, especially in wartime... is not very good for the health". Stating that he had originally been strong and healthy, he continued, "life on a destroyer in winter, with bad food, no comforts, would sap the powers of the strongest men in the long run. A destroyer is always more uncomfortable than the others, and rain, snow, and sea-water combine to make them damp; in fact, in bad weather there is not a dry spot where one can rest for a moment."[27]
The Japanese destroyer-commander finished with, "Yesterday I looked at myself in a mirror for a long time; I was disagreeably surprised to see my face thin, full of wrinkles, and as old as though I were fifty. My clothes (uniform) cover nothing but a skeleton, and my bones are full of rheumatism."[27]
In 1898 by the US Navy officially classified USS Porter, a 175-foot (53 m) long all steel vessel displacing 165 tons, as a torpedo boat. But her commander, LT. John C. Fremont, described her as "...a compact mass of machinery not meant to keep the sea nor to live in... as five sevenths of the ship are taken up by machinery and fuel, whilst the remaining two sevenths, fore and aft, are the crew's quarters; officers forward and the men placed aft. And even in those spaces are placed anchor engines, steering engines, steam pipes, etc. rendering them unbearably hot in tropical regions."[28]
Combat[edit]




HMS Loyal, of the Laforey class.


The torpedo boat destroyer's first major use in combat came during the Japanese surprise-attack on the Russian fleet anchored in Port Arthur at the opening of the Russo-Japanese War on 8 February 1904.
Three destroyer divisions attacked the Russian fleet in port, firing a total of 18 torpedoes. However, only two Russian battleships were seriously damaged due to the proper deployment of torpedo nets. The Russian flagship, the battleship Tsesarevich, which had her nets deployed, had at least four enemy torpedoes "hung up" in them,[29] and other warships were similarly saved from further damage.[30]
While capital ship engagements were scarce in World War I, destroyer units engaged almost continually in raiding and patrol actions. The first shot of the war at sea was fired on 5 August 1914 by a destroyer of the 2nd Flotilla, HMS Lance, in an engagement with the German auxiliary minelayer SS Königin Luise.
Destroyers were involved in the skirmishes that prompted the Battle of Heligoland Bight, and filled a range of roles in the Battle of Gallipoli, acting as troop transports and as fire-support vessels, as well as their fleet-screening role. Over 80 British destroyers and 60 German torpedo-boats took part in the Battle of Jutland, which involved pitched small-boat actions between the main fleets, and several foolhardy attacks by unsupported destroyers on capital ships. Jutland also concluded with a messy night action between the German High Seas Fleet and part of the British destroyer screen.




USS Wickes, a Wickes-class destroyer


The threat evolved by World War I with the development of the submarine, or U-boat. The submarine had the potential to hide from gunfire and close underwater to fire torpedoes. Early-war destroyers had the speed and armament to intercept submarines before they submerged, either by gunfire or by ramming. Destroyers also had a shallow enough draft that torpedoes would find it difficult to hit them.




HMS Badger was the first destroyer to successfully ram a submarine.


The desire to attack submarines underwater led to rapid destroyer evolution during the war; they were quickly equipped with strengthened bows for ramming, depth charges and hydrophones for identifying submarine targets. The first submarine casualty to a destroyer was the German U-19, rammed by HMS Badger on 29 October 1914. While U-19 was only damaged, the next month Garry successfully sank U-18. The first depth-charge sinking was on 4 December 1916, when UC-19[31] was sunk by HMS Llewellyn.
The submarine threat meant that many destroyers spent their time on anti-submarine patrol; once Germany adopted unrestricted submarine warfare in January 1917, destroyers were called on to escort merchant convoys. US Navy destroyers were among the first American units to be dispatched upon the American entry to the war, and a squadron of Japanese destroyers even joined Allied patrols in the Mediterranean. Patrol duty was far from safe; of the 67 British destroyers lost in the war, collisions accounted for 18, while 12 were wrecked.
At the end of the war the state-of-the-art was represented by the British W-class.
1918–1945[edit]
See also: List of destroyers of the Second World War




The Italian scout cruiser Nibbio in 1919 (ordered by Romania in 1913 as destroyer), one year before being sold to Romania as Mărășești and re-rated as destroyer






V-class destroyer, HMS Velox


The trend during World War I had been towards larger destroyers with heavier armaments. A number of opportunities to fire at capital ships had been missed during the War, because destroyers had expended all their torpedoes in an initial salvo. The British V and W classes of the late war had sought to address this by mounting six torpedo tubes in two triple mounts, instead of the four or two on earlier models. The 'V' and 'W's set the standard of destroyer building well into the 1920s.
The two Romanian destroyers Mărăști and Mărășești, on the other hand, had the greatest firepower of all destroyers in the world throughout the first half of the 1920's. This was largely due to the fact that, between their commissioning in 1920 and 1926, they retained the armament that they had while serving in the Italian Navy as scout cruisers (esploratori). When initially ordered by Romania in 1913, the Romanian specifications envisioned three 120 mm guns, a caliber which would eventually be adopted as the standard for future Italian destroyers. Armed with three 152 mm and four 76 mm guns after being completed as scout cruisers, the two warships were officially re-rated as destroyers by the Romanian Navy. The two Romanian warships were thus the destroyers with the greatest firepower in the world until 1926, when they were rearmed with five 120 mm guns and two 76 mm guns, their new main guns being surpassed by the five 130 mm guns of the French destroyer Chacal, also commissioned in 1926.




Fubuki-class destroyer, Uranami


The next major innovation came with the Japanese Fubuki class or 'special type', designed in 1923 and delivered in 1928. The design was initially noted for its powerful armament of six five-inch (127 mm) guns and three triple torpedo mounts. The second batch of the class gave the guns high-angle turrets for anti-aircraft warfare, and the 24-inch (61 cm) oxygen-fueled 'Long Lance' Type 93 torpedo. The later Hatsuharu class of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure, allowing reloading within 15 minutes.
Most other nations replied with similar larger ships. The US Porter class adopted twin five-inch (127 mm) guns, and the subsequent Mahan class and Gridley class (the latter of 1934) increased the number of torpedo tubes to 12 and 16 respectively.




France's Fantasque class, the fastest destroyer class ever built.


In the Mediterranean, the Italian Navy's building of very fast light cruisers of the Condottieri class prompted the French to produce exceptional destroyer designs. The French had long been keen on large destroyers, with their Chacal class of 1922 displacing over 2,000 tons and carrying 130 mm guns; a further three similar classes were produced around 1930. The Fantasque class of 1935 carried five 138 millimetres (5.4 in) guns and nine torpedo tubes, but could achieve speeds of 45 knots (83 km/h; 52 mph), which remains the record speed for a steamship and for any destroyer.[citation needed] The Italians' own destroyers were almost as swift, most Italian designs of the 1930s being rated at over 38 knots (70 km/h), while carrying torpedoes and either four or six 120 mm guns.
Germany started to build destroyers again during the 1930s as part of Hitler's rearmament program. The Germans were also fond of large destroyers, but while the initial Type 1934 displaced over 3,000 tons, their armament was equal to smaller vessels. This changed from the Type 1936 onwards, which mounted heavy 150 millimetres (5.9 in) guns. German destroyers also used innovative high-pressure steam machinery: while this should have helped their efficiency, it more often resulted in mechanical problems.
Once German and Japanese rearmament became clear, the British and American navies consciously focused on building destroyers that were smaller but more numerous than those used by other nations. The British built a series of destroyers (the A class to I class) which were about 1,400 tons standard displacement, had four 4.7-inch (119 mm) guns and eight torpedo tubes; the American Benson class of 1938 similar in size, but carried five 5-inch (127 mm) guns and ten torpedo tubes. Realizing the need for heavier gun armament, the British built the Tribal class of 1936 (sometimes called Afridi after one of two lead ships). These ships displaced 1,850 tons and were armed with eight 4.7-inch (119 mm) guns in four twin turrets and four torpedo tubes. These were followed by the J-class and L-class destroyers, with six 4.7-inch (119 mm) guns in twin turrets and eight torpedo tubes.
Anti-submarine sensors included sonar (or ASDIC), although training in their use was indifferent. Anti-submarine weapons changed little, and ahead-throwing weapons, a need recognized in World War I, had made no progress.
Combat[edit]




USS McGowan, a Fletcher-class destroyer during World War II


Further information: American World War II destroyers, British World War II destroyers, French World War II destroyers, German World War II destroyers, Italian World War II destroyers, Japanese World War II destroyers, Soviet World War II destroyers, and Romanian World War II destroyers
During the 1920s and 1930s destroyers were often deployed to areas of diplomatic tension or humanitarian disaster. British and American destroyers were common on the Chinese coast and rivers, even supplying landing parties to protect colonial interests.
By World War II the threat had evolved once again. Submarines were more effective, and aircraft had become important weapons of naval warfare; once again the early-war fleet destroyers were ill-equipped for combating these new targets. They were fitted with new light anti-aircraft guns, radar, and forward-launched ASW weapons, in addition to their existing dual-purpose guns, depth charges, and torpedoes. In most cases torpedo and/or dual-purpose gun armament was reduced to accommodate new anti-air and anti-submarine weapons. By this time the destroyers had become large, multi-purpose vessels, expensive targets in their own right. As a result, casualties on destroyers were among the highest.
The need for large numbers of anti-submarine ships led to the introduction of smaller and cheaper specialized anti-submarine warships called corvettes and frigates by the Royal Navy and destroyer escorts by the USN. A similar programme was belatedly started by the Japanese (see Matsu-class destroyer). These ships had the size and displacement of the original torpedo boat destroyers that the contemporary destroyer had evolved from.
Post-World War II[edit]




Polish destroyer ORP Błyskawica, currently preserved as a museum ship in Gdynia.


Some conventional destroyers were completed in the late 1940s and 1950s which built on wartime experience. These vessels were significantly larger than wartime ships and had fully automatic main guns, unit Machinery, radar, sonar, and antisubmarine weapons such as the Squid mortar. Examples include the British Daring class, US Forrest Sherman class, and the Soviet Kotlin-class destroyers.
Some World War II–vintage ships were modernized for anti-submarine warfare, and to extend their service lives, to avoid having to build (expensive) brand-new ships. Examples include the US FRAM I programme and the British Type 15 frigates converted from fleet destroyers.
The advent of surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles, such as the Exocet, in the early 1960s changed naval warfare. Guided missile destroyers (DDG in the US Navy) were developed to carry these weapons and protect the fleet from air, submarine and surface threats. Examples include the Soviet Kashin class, the British County class, and the US Charles F. Adams class.
21st Century destroyers tend to display features such as large, slab sides without complicated corners and crevices to keep the radar cross-section small, vertical launch systems to carry a large number of missiles at high readiness to fire and helicopter flight decks and hangars.
Operators[edit]

 Argentine Navy Operates four Almirante Brown-class destroyers and a single modified Type 42 destroyer.
 Royal Australian Navy Operates a single Hobart-class destroyer with two more to be commissioned. They are the first Australian warships to use the AEGIS Combat System and are based on Spain's Alvaro de Bazan-class destroyers.





A Chinese Navy Luyang II class (Type 052C) destroyer



 People's Liberation Army Navy Operates the Luyang I, Luyang II and Luzhou classes. The latter two are armed with long range air defense missiles, the indigenous HQ-9 and the Russian S-300 respectively. China also operates thirteen Luyang III-class destroyers, six Luda-class destroyers, two Luhu-class destroyers, and one Luhai-class destroyer.


The People's Liberation Army Navy operates the Sovremenny class, a class of large multi-purpose missile destroyers. They are powered by pressure-fired boilers, making them capable of speeds in excess of 30 knots (56 km/h). Their armament consists of eight SS-N-22 Sunburn anti-ship missiles, launchers for SA-N-7 Gadfly anti-air missiles and two AK-130 twin-barreled 130 mm automatic naval guns which can fire laser-guided shells. While they also carry 533 mm torpedo tubes and RBU-6000 rocket launchers for use against submarines, their primary mission is to attack surface ships. Their anti-aircraft missiles have a surface attack mode, and both the 130 mm guns and the torpedoes are useful against ships at close range.


 Republic of China Navy (Taiwan) Operates four Kidd-class destroyers, purchased from the United States.
 Egyptian Navy Operates a single FREMM multipurpose frigate purchased from France, with the hull classification FFG for guided missile frigate.[32] Egypt also operates a single Z-class destroyer for training use.
 French Navy Operates two Horizon-class frigates and operate new FREMM multipurpose frigates. These stealthy ships are armed with anti-ship missiles and Aster surface-to-air missiles. The French navy also operates six Georges Leygues-class frigates and two Cassard-class frigates. The French Navy applies the term "first-class frigate" to Georges Leygues, Cassard, Horizon, and FREMM class ships and uses the NATO hull classification symbol "D 6xx" to place them in the destroyer type.
 German Navy Operates three Sachsen-class frigates and one F125-class frigate. These ships are classified by Germany as frigates, but are destroyers in terms of size and strength, and are usually labeled as such by other navies.[33]
 Hellenic Navy The HS Velos (D-16), a Fletcher-class destroyer, remains ceremonially in commission due to her historical significance.





INS Kolkata guided missile destroyer of the Indian Navy.



 Indian Navy Operates three Kolkata-class destroyers. These ships are armed with Brahmos missiles, which have a range of 300 kilometres (190 mi), in the anti-ship role. (Barak-8) system is installed to counter airborne threats. Along with the Kolkata class, Indian Navy operates, the Delhi and Rajput-class destroyers. These destroyers also carry anti-submarine rockets and torpedoes. The destroyers have the capability to carry two Sea King helicopters. The Kolkata class will be augmented by the new P15B class of destroyers (Visakhapatnam-class destroyer) the construction of which was started in 2014.
 Islamic Republic of Iran Navy Operates two Moudge-class frigates. These ships are internationally regarded as frigates or destroyer escorts, but are classified as destroyers by Iran.[34]
 Marina Militare Operates two Horizon-class frigates and operate new FREMM multipurpose frigates. These stealthy ships are armed with anti-ship missiles and Aster surface-to-air missiles. The Italian navy also operates two Durand de la Penne-class destroyers. Italy classifies the FREMM with the NATO designation of "F" for frigate.





Japan's Maritime Self-Defense Force Akizuki



 Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force Operates the Atago-class and Kongō-class destroyers which both employ the Aegis combat system. Japan also operates two Hatakaze-class destroyers, four Akizuki-class destroyers, five Takanami-class destroyers, nine Murasame-class destroyers, eight Asagiri-class destroyers, three Hatsuyuki-class destroyers, six Abukuma-class destroyers, and three Shimayuki-class destroyers for training use.
 Republic of Korea Navy Operates several classes of destroyers including the Sejong the Great class (KDX-III), the Chungmugong Yi Sun-shin class (KDX-II) and Gwanggaeto the Great class (KDX-I) of destroyers. The KDX-III is equipped with the Aegis combat system, Goalkeeper CIWS, Hyunmoo cruise missile and the Hae Sung anti-ship missile.
 Royal Moroccan Navy Operates a single FREMM multipurpose frigate.
 Royal Netherlands Navy Operates four De Zeven Provincien-class frigates. These ships are classified by the Netherlands as frigates, but are destroyers in "all but name."[35]
 Royal Norwegian Navy Operates five Fridtjof Nansen-class frigates. These ships are classified by Norway as frigates, but they are more capable than a ship the US Navy would classify as a frigate.[36] These ships are a subclass of Spain's Alvaro de Bazan-class frigates and carry the AEGIS Combat System.
 Philippine Navy Operates a single Cannon-class destroyer escort, purchased from the United States.
 Polish Navy The Grom-class destroyer, ORP Blyskawica remains ceremonially in commission due to her historical significance.
 Romanian Naval Forces The Mărășești was classified as a destroyer by Romania until 2001, when she was reclassified as a frigate, but there was never a change in armament, and remains in her 2001 state.





A Russian Navy Udaloy-class destroyer



 Russian Navy Operate the Sovremenny class, a class of large multi-purpose missile destroyers. They are powered by pressure-fired boilers, making them capable of speeds in excess of 30 knots (56 km/h). Their armament consists of eight SS-N-22 Sunburn anti-ship missiles, launchers for SA-N-7 Gadfly anti-air missiles and two AK-130 twin-barreled 130 mm automatic naval guns which can fire laser-guided shells. While they also carry 533 mm torpedo tubes and RBU-6000 rocket launchers for use against submarines, their primary mission is to attack surface ships. Their anti-aircraft missiles have a surface attack mode, and both the 130 mm guns and the torpedoes are useful against ships at close range.


The modern Udaloy-class destroyer destroyers of the Russian Navy can displace about 7,900 tonnes, can travel at 35 knots (65 km/h), and have a maximum range of 10,500 nm (19,450 km) at 14 knots (26 km/h). The original class (Udaloy I) was designed for anti-submarine warfare, which can be seen in their two quadruple launchers of the Metel Anti-Ship Complex (SS-N-14), two quadruple 533 millimetres (21 in) launchers equipped with either the Type 53 torpedo on the Udaloy I class or RPK-2 Viyuga (SS-N-15) on the Udaloy II class, and the two RBU-6000 anti-submarine launchers. The II class is Russia's only multipurpose destroyer. The armament of the class has been modified. The Metal Anti-Ship Complex is replaced with eight P-270 Moskit (SS-N-22 Sunburn) supersonic sea-skimming anti-ship missile. For air defense, each Udaloy is armed with four AK-630 CIWSs, mounted parallel to each other mid ship. They also have two Kashtan CIWSs, each capable of engaging six targets automatically by either its armament of two GSh-6-30 Gatling guns or four 9M311 (SA-N-11) surface-to-air missiles. Finally, 64 3K95 Kinzhal (SA-N-9) medium-range point defense SAMs can be fired from vertical launching system. Russia also operates a single Kashin-class destroyer.


 Spanish Navy Operates five Álvaro de Bazán-class frigates. These ships are classified as frigates by Spain and carry the NATO hull classification symbol "F 1xx" for frigate, but are described destroyers by other navies.[37] The design of these ships were inspired by the United States's Arleigh Burke-class destroyers and carry the AEGIS Combat System.
 Royal Thai Navy operates a single Cannon-class destroyer escort purchased from the United States for training use.





HMS Daring, a Type 45 guided missile destroyer of the Royal Navy.



 Royal Navy Operates the Type 45, or Daring class, stealth destroyer which displaces roughly 8,000 tonnes. Six ships of the class are operational. They are equipped with the UK variant of the Principal Anti-Air Missile System (PAAMS) and BAE Systems SAMPSON radar. The Royal Navy also operates a Type 82 destroyer for training use.
 United States Navy Fleet destroyers operate in support of carrier battle groups, surface action groups, amphibious groups and replenishment groups. The destroyers currently in use by the US Navy are the Arleigh Burke class. Destroyers (with a DD hull classification symbol) primarily perform anti-submarine warfare duty while guided missile destroyers (DDGs) are multi-mission (anti-submarine, anti-aircraft and anti-surface warfare) surface combatants, with an emphasis on anti-surface warfare.


The addition of cruise missile launchers has greatly expanded the role of the destroyer in strike and land-attack warfare. As the expense of heavier surface combatants has generally removed them from the fleet, destroyer tonnage has grown (a modern Arleigh Burke-class destroyer has the same tonnage as a World War II light cruiser). Many modern destroyer designs delegate their anti-submarine role to embarked helicopters, which in addition to anti-submarine warfare can also be used for maritime rescue and vertical replenishment.


In October 2013 the first of three U.S. Zumwalt class of destroyers left dry dock, the destroyer built with specific structural angles and a superstructure wrapped in a carbon fiber composite canopy to reduce its radar detectability by a factor of 50.[38] The ship, with 80 missiles and a crew of 150, will include two Advanced Gun Systems (AGS) that can fire rocket-powered, computer-guided shells to destroy targets 63 miles (101 km) away.[38]

Future development[edit]




The "Baden-Württemberg", an F125-class frigate of the German Navy; currently the biggest frigates worldwide. In size and role they are qualified as destroyers








The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



 Royal Australian Navy is currently building three Hobart-class destroyers. These ships are to replace the aging Adelaide-class frigates. Their design is similar to that of the Arleigh Burke-class destroyer and the Alvaro de Bazan-class destroyer. They will also use the AEGIS Combat System. The first unit, HMAS Hobart (DDGH 39), was commissioned on September 23, 2017.
 Royal Canadian Navy has begun development into its Canadian Surface Combatant project. These ships are to replace the Iroquois-class destroyers and the Halifax-class frigates. The design of these ships is due to be chosen in 2017.[39]
 People's Liberation Army Navy is currently adding up to 18 ships of the Type 052D destroyer class. Four more units scheduled to be delivered by the end of 2017. Serial construction has also begun for the larger and more powerful Type 055 destroyer. These ships carry an integrated naval complex comparable to the AEGIS combat system.
 French Navy is adding six more FREMM multipurpose frigates to their fleet, while also negotiating plans to export a number of units to the Hellenic Navy and attempting to sell units to the Royal Canadian Navy.[40]
 German Navy is currently building four F125-class frigates. Although classified by Germany as frigates, they are destroyers in terms of size and strength.[citation needed] They are to replace the aging Bremen-class frigates. The first unit, FGS Baden-Wurttemberg F125, will be commissioned in 2016 with "F" being the NATO hull classification for a frigate.
In addition, six multimission surface combat ships are planned under the name 'Mehrzweckkampfschiff 180' (MKS 180), which will have destroyer-size and corresponding capabilities[41]
 Indian Navy is constructing the Visakhapatnam class which is an improved version of the Kolkata class.
 Islamic Republic of Iran Navy is currently adding four more Moudge-class frigates to its fleet. Iran is also building six Khalije Fars-class destroyers, these ships are to become the largest vessels in the Islamic Republic of Iran Navy and are expected to enter service in the coming years.
 Israeli Navy is due to receive two Sachsen-class frigates from Germany within the coming years.[42]
 Marina Militare is adding six more FREMM multipurpose frigates to their fleet, while also negotiating plans to export a number of units to the Hellenic Navy and attempting to sell units to the Royal Canadian Navy.[40]
 Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force is currently developing plans for its 25DD destroyers[43] and its DDR Destroyer Revolution Project. Japan is also planning the construction of four new AEGIS equipped destroyers, whose class is yet to be named.[44] Additionally, plans have been laid out for Japan's new 30FF anti-submarine destroyer. These ships are expected to enter service between 2018-2019.[45] Japan also recently launched JDS Asahi (DD-119), the lead ship of her new class of destroyers. She will be commissioned in 2018.
 Republic of Korea Navy has begun development of its KDX-IIA destroyers. These ships are to be a subclass of South Korea's Chungmugong Yi Sun-shin class destroyers. The first unit is expected to enter service in 2019. Additionally, three more Sejong the Great-class destroyers are being built.
 Royal Norwegian Navy is planning construction of an additional five Fridtjof Nansen-class frigates.[46]
 Russian Navy has begun development into its Leader-class destroyer. These ships will be the first destroyers built in Russia since the collapse of the Soviet Union and will be nuclear powered. The first unit is expected to enter service in 2023, with 11 more units to follow in the coming years.[47] Additionally, Russia is also developing it's Yuschchenko-class destroyers.[48] These ships are expected to be multi purpose destroyers tasked with reinforcing a modern Russian surface combat fleet.
 Royal Saudi Navy is currently negotiating plans to receive a number of Arleigh Burke-class destroyers from the United States.[49]




USS Zumwalt, the lead ship of the DD(X) class.


 United States Navy The last Spruance-class destroyer in service, USS Cushing, was decommissioned on September 21, 2005. The Zumwalt class is planned to replace them; on November 1, 2001, the US Navy announced the issuance of a revised Request for Proposal (RFP) for the Future Surface Combatant Program. Formerly known as DD 21, the program was renamed DD(X) (and later renamed to DDG-1000) to more accurately reflect the program purpose, which is to produce a family of advanced technology surface combatants, not a single ship class. DD(X), also called Zumwalt class, is much larger than traditional destroyers, nearly three thousand tons heavier than a Ticonderoga-class cruiser (15,610 long tons,[50] larger than most heavy cruisers from the World War II era). It will potentially employ advanced weaponry and an all-electric Integrated Power System; however, the construction program was subsequently reduced to just two vessels, and there is currently only funding for three in total. With the retirement of the Spruance class, the US Navy began commissioning an advanced variant of the Arleigh Burke class with expanded ASW capabilities, the Arleigh Burke Flight IIA, beginning with USS Oscar Austin. As of 2012[update], 34 of these vessels are in service, with more under construction.
Preserved destroyers[edit]
A number of countries have destroyers preserved as museum ships. These include:

ARA Santisima Trinidad is currently being restored and will be preserved in Puerto Belgrano, Argentina.
HMAS Vampire (D11) in Sydney, New South Wales.
BNS Bauru, formerly the USS McAnn (DE-179) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
HMCS Haida (G63) in Hamilton, Ontario.
Chinese destroyer Anshan (101) in Qingdao, China.
Chinese destroyer Changchun (103) in Rushan, China
Chinese destroyer Taiyuan (104) in Dalian, China
Chinese Luda-class destroyers, Jinan, Yinchuan, Nanjing, Nanchang, & Xining - on display in China.
ARC Boyaca (DE-16), formerly USS Hartley (DE-1029) in Guatape, Colombia.
French destroyer Maille-Breze (D627) in Nantes, France.
German destroyer Mölders (D186) in Wilhelmshaven, Germany.
HS Velos (D-16), formerly USS Charrette (DD-581) in Palaio Faliro, Greece.[51]
ORP Blyskawica in Gdynia, Poland. The oldest preserved destroyer in the world.[52]
ROKS Jeong Buk (DD-916), formerly USS Everett F. Larson (DD-830) in Gangneung, South Korea.
ROKS Jeong Ju (DD-925), formerly USS Rogers (DD-876) in Dangjin, South Korea.
HSwMS Smaland (J19) in Gothenburg, Sweden.
ROCS Lo Yang (DD-14), formerly, USS Taussig (DD-746) in Taiwan
ROCS Shen Yang (DDG-923), formerly, USS Power (DD-839) in Taiwan
ROCS Te Yang (DDG-925), formerly USS Sarsfield (DD-837) in Taiwan
TCG Gayret (D352), formerly USS Eversole (DD-789) in Izmit, Turkey.
HMS Cavalier (R73) in Chatham, Kent.
USS Cassin Young (DD-793) in Boston, Massachusetts.
USS The Sullivans (DD-537) in Buffalo, New York.
USS Kidd (DD-661) in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
USS Slater (DE-766) in Albany, New York.
USS Stewart (DE-238) in Galveston, Texas.
USS Orleck (DD-886) in Lake Charles, Louisiana.
USS Turner Joy (DD-951) in Bremerton, Washington.
USS Charles F. Adams (DDG-2) in Jacksonville, Florida.
USS Laffey (DD-724) in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
USS Edson (DD-946) in Bay City, Michigan.
USS Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. (DD-850) in Fall River, Massachusetts.

See also[edit]

List of destroyer classes
United States Navy 1975 ship reclassification
Bombardment of Cherbourg
List of destroyers of the Second World War

References[edit]


^ Gove p. 2412
^ Lyon p. 8, 9
^ Although the Russian Kirov class are sometimes classified as battlecruisers, due to their displacement they are described by Russia as large missile cruisers.
^ Northrop Grumman christened its 28th Aegis guided missile destroyer, William P. Lawrence (DDG 110) April 19, 2010. Retrieved August 29, 2014.
^ Lyon p. 8
^ "Torpedo Boats". Battleships-Cruisers.co.uk. 
^ Jentschura p. 126
^ Evans and Peattie, David C. and Mark R. (1997). Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1887–1941. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 0-87021-192-7. 
^ Howe, Christopher (1996). The Origins of Japanese Trade Supremacy: Development and Technology in Asia from 1540 to the Pacific War. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-35485-7. 
^ a b Lyon & Winfield. "10". The Sail and Steam Navy List. pp. 82–3. 
^ "Villaamil". 
^ a b c Contratorpedero Destructor (in Spanish)
^ Illustrated Naval and Military Magazine: A monthly journal devoted to all subjects connected with Her Majesty's land and sea forces, 1888, v 9, page 280
^ a b Fitzsimmons, Bernard: The Illustrated encyclopedia of 20th century weapons and warfare. Columbia House, 1978, v. 8, page 835
^ From an article about the American Greyhounds
^ Captain T.D. Manning (1961). The British Destroyer. Putnam and Co. 
^ Lyon, David (1996). The First Destroyers. ISBN 1-84067-364-8. 
^ Simpson p. 151
^ Anon. (1904). "The British Admiralty .." Scientific American. 91 (2). ISSN 0036-8733. 
^ Dahl, E.J. (2001). "Naval innovation: From coal to oil" (PDF). Joint Force Quarterly (Winter 2000–01): 50–6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2017. 
^ Lyon p. 121
^ Brett, Bernard: "History of World Sea Power", Deans International (London) 1985. ISBN 0-603-03723-2
^ Grant p. 136
^ Grant, image, frontispiece
^ Lyon p. 58
^ Jentschura p. 132 (Akatsuki built by Yarrow & Co. in 1902; 224' long, displaced 415 tons, two 18", two 3" guns, four 57 mm Quick Firing Guns, complement 60 officers/men. Sunk by mine at Port Arthur on 17 May 1904)
^ a b Grant p. 102, 103
^ Simpson p. 100
^ Grant p. 42
^ Grant p. 33, 34, 40
^ U-Boats Destroyed, Paul Kemp (1997), ISBN 1-85409-515-3
^ The FREMM multipurpose frigate is classified as a destroyer by France and a frigate by Italy, but both are the same ship with the same capabilities, leaving the true type of this ship subject to debate.
^ http://www.helis.com/database/sys/172_F_124_Sachsen_class
^ "Iran's New, Ahem, Destroyer". 20 February 2010. 
^ De Zeven Provincien Class Guided Missile Frigate - Luchtverdedigings- en Commando Fregat - Royal Netherlands Navy
^ "U.S. Studies Norwegians For Manning Mindset". 
^ http://www.defence.gov.au/media/download/2007/Mar/20070314/index.htm
^ a b Shaughnessy, Larry (October 29, 2013). "Bigger, Lighter, Deadlier! Navy launches new stealth destroyer". CNN. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. 
^ Some bidders not happy with approach on Canadian Surface Combatant, says top procurement official | Ottawa Citizen
^ a b "Video feature: Showboat - DCNS showcases FREMM frigate to Canada". 
^ http://www.bundeswehr-journal.de/2017/zwei-weitere-mks-180-fuer-die-deutsche-marine/
^ "Report: Germany to sell Israel 2 destroyers for 1 billion euros". 
^ Boring, War Is (7 March 2014). "Japan's New Destroyers Are Intentional Missile-Magnets: 'Suzutsuki,' 'Fuyuzuki' and their sisters are meant to deflect enemy attacks away from other ships". 
^ "Japan eyes two new Aegis destroyers to counter N. Korea missile threat". 7 July 2013 – via Japan Times Online. 
^ "Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Unveiled 30FF or DEX Next Generation Vessel Concept for the JMSDF". 
^ https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/upload/fd/temadokumenter/acquisitions-2012-2020_juni-2012.pdf
^ Pike, John. "New Construction Destroyer". 
^ Severnoe PDB :: News and publications :: Publications
^ Koenig, Seth; Staff, B. D. N. "Could Saudi Arabia be Bath Iron Works' next big customer?". 
^ Destroyers – DDG fact file. U.S. Navy, 4 April 2013.
^ Velos is still a commissioned warship within the Hellenic Navy, but is strictly ceremonial and no longer sees action.
^ Blyskawica is still a commissioned warship within the Polish Navy, but is strictly ceremonial and no longer sees action.


Further reading[edit]

Evans, David C. Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1887–1941, Mark R. Peattie. Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland ISBN 0-87021-192-7
Gardiner, Robert (Editor). Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships (1860–1905): Naval Institute Press, 1985.
Gove, Philip Babock (Editor in Chief). Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged. (2002) Merriam-Webster Inc., Publishers, Massachusetts, USA.
Grant, R. Captain. Before Port Arthur in a Destroyer; The Personal Diary of a Japanese Naval Officer. London, John Murray; first and second editions published in 1907.
Howe, Christopher. Origins of Japanese Trade Supremacy: Development and Technology in Asia from 1540 to the Pacific War, The University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-35485-7
Jentschura, Hansgeorg. Warships of the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1869–1945. United States Naval Institute, Annapolis, Maryland, 1977. ISBN 0-87021-893-X.
Lyon, David, The First Destroyers. Chatham Publishing, 1 & 2 Faulkner's Alley, Cowcross St. London, Great Britain; 1996. ISBN 1-55750-271-4.
Sanders, Michael S. (2001) The Yard: Building a Destroyer at the Bath Iron Works, HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-06-092963-3
Simpson, Richard V. Building The Mosquito Fleet, The US Navy's First Torpedo Boats. Arcadia Publishing, (2001); Charleston, South Carolina, USA. ISBN 0-7385-0508-0.
Preston, Anthony. Destroyers, Bison Books (London) 1977. ISBN 0-600-32955-0
Van der Vat, Dan. The Atlantic Campaign.
DD-963 Spruance-class
Navy Designates Next-Generation Zumwalt Destroyer

External links[edit]



Look up destroyer in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Destroyers.








v
t
e


Naval ships and warships in the Late Modern period






Naval ship classes in service

submarine
auxiliary


Operational zones

Blue-water navy
Brown-water navy
Green-water navy


Gun placement

Broadside
Central battery/casemate
Turretes







Aircraft carriers



Aircraft cruiser
Amphibious assault ship
Anti-submarine warfare carrier
Balloon carrier
CAM ship
Escort carrier
Fighter catapult ship
Fleet carrier
Helicopter carrier
Light aircraft carrier
Merchant aircraft carrier
Seaplane tender
Submarine aircraft carrier
Supercarrier





Battleships



Coastal defence ship
Dreadnought
Fast battleship
Pre-dreadnought battleship
Super-dreadnought (Standard-type battleship)
Treaty battleship





Cruisers



Armored cruiser
Battlecruiser
Flight deck cruiser
Heavy cruiser

Pocket battleship


Light cruiser
Merchant raider
Protected cruiser
Strike cruiser
Torpedo cruiser
Unprotected cruiser





Escort



Aviso
Convoy rescue ship
Destroyer
Destroyer escort
Destroyer leader
Escort destroyer
Frigate
Guided missile destroyer
Kaibōkan
Sloop





Transport



Amphibious transport dock
Amphibious warfare ship
Attack transport
Dock landing ship
Landing craft
Landing craft carrier
Landing Craft Support
Landing Ship Heavy
Landing ship, infantry
Landing Ship Medium
Landing Ship, Tank
Landing Ship Vehicle
Troopship





Patrol craft



Armed boarding steamer
Armed yacht
Coastal Motor Boat
Corvette
Gunboat
Harbour Defence Motor Launch
Motor Launch
Naval drifter
Naval trawler
Ocean boarding vessel
Patrol boat
Q-ship
Steam Gun Boat
Submarine chaser
Torpedo boat





Fast attack craft



E-boat
MAS
MGB
Missile boat
MTB
MTM
MTSM
PT boat
Shin'yō





Mine warfare



Danlayer
Destroyer minesweeper
Mine countermeasures vessel
Mine planter
Minehunter
Minelayer
Minesweeper





Command and support



Amenities ship
Ammunition ship
Auxiliary repair dock
Auxiliary ship
Collier
Combat stores ship
Command ship
Crane vessel
Depot ship
Destroyer tender
Dispatch boat
Fast combat support ship
General stores issue ship
Hospital ship
Naval tugboat
Net laying ship
Repair ship
Replenishment oiler
Submarine tender





Submarines



Attack submarine
Ballistic missile submarine
Coastal submarine
Cruise missile submarine
Cruiser submarine
Deep-submergence vehicle

DSRV


Fleet submarine
Midget submarine
U-boat





Miscellaneous



Arsenal ship
Barracks ship
Breastwork monitor
Capital ship
Flagship
Guard ship
Littoral combat ship
Monitor
River monitor
Training ship









Authority control



LCCN: sh85037249
GND: 4127755-7
BNF: cb11950685r (data)
NDL: 00567070
KulturNav: 9704a49d-b557-4a6f-8a51-650b8a96387b











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Destroyer&oldid=817503499"					Categories: DestroyersShip typesHidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language external linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2008Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers