For other uses, see Detective (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Allan Pinkerton, in 1850, was a detective of the Chicago Police Department and, in 1851, the founder of the Pinkerton Detective Agency. Photograph circa 1861.


A detective is an investigator, usually a member of a law enforcement agency. Some are private persons, and may be known as private investigators, as "The Eye That Never Sleeps", the motto of the Pinkerton Detective Agency or shortened to simply "private eyes".
Informally, and primarily in fiction, a detective is a licensed or unlicensed person who solves crimes, including historical crimes, by examining and evaluating clues and personal records in order to uncover the identity and/or whereabouts of the criminal.
In some police departments, a detective position is achieved by passing a written test after a person completes the requirements for being a police officer. In many other police systems, detectives are college graduates who join directly from civilian life without first serving as uniformed officers. Some people[who?] argue that detectives do a completely different job and therefore require completely different training, qualifications, qualities and abilities than uniformed officers. The opposing argument is that without previous service as a uniformed patrol officer, a detective cannot have a great enough command of standard police procedures and problems and will find it difficult to work with uniformed colleagues.



Contents


1 Overview

1.1 Organization
1.2 Private detectives


2 History
3 Techniques

3.1 Street work
3.2 Forensic evidence
3.3 Records investigation


4 Across the world

4.1 United Kingdom
4.2 United States


5 See also
6 References



Overview[edit]




H Division, of police detectives, including Frederick Abberline (left, with cane), at Leman Street police station, of the London Metropolitan Police, two years before the Jack the Ripper serial killer murders of 1888. Photograph circa 1886


Organization[edit]
The detective branch in most large police agencies is organized into several squads or departments, each of which specializes in investigation into a particular type of crime or a particular type of undercover operation, which may include: homicide, robbery, burglary, auto theft, organized crimes, missing persons, juvenile crime, fraud, narcotics, vice, criminal intelligence, aggravated assault/battery, sexual assault, computer crime, domestic violence, surveillance, and arson, among others.
Private detectives[edit]
See also: Private investigator
In some countries, the practice of a detective is not yet recognized in courts and judicial processes. One of these countries is Portugal, where the proof presented loses all significance when collected by a private detective[clarification needed]. Even under this circumstance, the practice of this activity is in demand and ruled by a code of conduct.[1] Some private detectives also disguise themselves as other people so that no one could recognize them. Private detectives are also showcased in many fictions.
History[edit]
See also: History of criminal justice
Before the 19th century, there were few municipal police departments, though the first had been created in Paris in 1667. As police activities moved from appointees helped by volunteers to professionals, the idea of dedicated detectives did not immediately arise. The first private detective agency was founded by Eugène François Vidocq in Paris in the early 1800s, who had also headed a police agency in addition to being a criminal himself. Police detective activities were pioneered in England by the Bow Street Runners and later the Metropolitan Police Service in Greater London.[2] The first police detective unit in the United States was formed in 1846 in Boston.[3]
Techniques[edit]
Street work[edit]
Detectives have a wide variety of techniques available in conducting investigations. However, the majority of cases are solved by the interrogation of suspects and the interviewing of witnesses, which takes time. Besides interrogations, detectives may rely on a network of informants they have cultivated over the years. Informants often have connections with persons a detective would not be able to approach formally. Evidence collection and preservation can also help in identifying a potential suspect(s).




Edward Bonney, an American bounty hunter and amateur detective, from Iowa, in 1845, infiltrated, the "Banditti of the Prairie", wrote the 1850 book, The Banditti of the Prairies: or, The murderer's doom, a tale of Mississippi Valley and the Far West; woodcut from 1850.


Criminal investigation: the investigation of criminal activity is conducted by the police. Criminal activity can relate to road use such as speeding, drunk driving, or to matters such as theft, drug distribution, assault, fraud, etc. When the police have concluded their investigation, a decision on whether to charge somebody with a criminal offence will often be made by prosecuting counsel having considered the evidence produced by the police.
In criminal investigations, once a detective has suspects in mind, the next step is to produce evidence that will stand up in a court of law. The best way is to obtain a confession from the suspect; usually, this is done by developing rapport and at times by seeking information in exchange for potential perks available through the attorney's office, such as entering for a lesser sentence in exchange for usable information. Detectives may lie, mislead and psychologically pressure a suspect into an admission or confession as long as they do this within procedural boundaries and without the threat of violence or promises outside their control.
Forensic evidence[edit]
Physical forensic evidence in an investigation may provide leads to closing a case. Forensic science (often shortened to forensics) is the application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to the legal system. This may be in relation to a crime or to a civil action. Many major police stations in a city, county, or state, maintain their own forensic laboratories while others contract out the services.
Records investigation[edit]
Detectives may use public and private records to provide background information on a subject. Police detectives can search through files of fingerprint records. Police maintain records of people who have committed felonies and some misdemeanors. Detectives may search through records of criminal arrests and convictions, photographs or mug shots, of persons arrested, ands, hotel registration information, credit reports, answering machine messages, phone conversations, surveillance camera footage, and technology used for communication.
Across the world[edit]
United Kingdom[edit]
Prospective British police detectives must have completed at least two years as a uniformed officer before applying to join the Criminal Investigation Department. UK Police must also pass the National Investigators' Examination in order to progress to subsequent stages of the Initial Crime Investigators Development Programme in order to qualify as a Detective.[4]
United States[edit]




Detective escorting gangster, Meyer Lansky, in 1958, to the 54th Street police station, in New York City


Before becoming a police detective, one must attend a law enforcement academy, providing the officer with a foundation of education with 16 to 24 college units in criminal justice or administration of criminal justice. After graduation from the law enforcement academy, the officer undergoes job training with a field training officer for a period specified by the law enforcement agency and continues to work while on a probationary period, ranging from one to two years.
During the probationary period the officer is assigned to look for evidence. During this time the officer is supervised and mentored by a sergeant with years of experience. Some officers further their college education by attending a two- or four-year college or university, attaining a degree in criminal justice or administration of criminal justice. Colleges have options for a concentration or certificate in a specialized field of criminal investigation.
Through years of on-the-job training or college education, officers may participate in a competitive examination, testing their knowledge, skills and abilities regarding criminal investigation, criminal procedure, interview and interrogation, search and seizure, collection and preservation of evidence, investigative report writing, criminal law, court procedure and providing testimony in court. Competitive examinations are conducted by selected senior law enforcement officials. Following testing, a list of results is provided by the department. At the department's discretion some, or all, of the officers on the list are promoted to the rank of detective. Some departments have classes of detectives which increase the detective's rank after successful experience.
Private investigators are licensed by the state in which they work (some states do not require licensing, but most do). In addition to the state examination, applicants testing for a private investigation license must also meet stringent requirements, which include college education, a range of two to four years of full-time investigation experience and the successful adjudication of a criminal and civil background check conducted by state investigators. Private investigators are licensed to conduct civil and criminal investigations in the state in which they are licensed, and are protected by statutes of that state. In states requiring licensure, statutes make it unlawful for any person to conduct a criminal investigation without a license, unless exempted by the statute (i.e., law enforcement officers or agents, attorneys, paralegals, claims adjusters).
See also[edit]


law portal



Hotel detective
Inspector
Investigator (disambiguation)
Law enforcement agency
Police rank
Private investigator
Special agent
Detective fiction

References[edit]



^ http://detectiveprivado.com.pt/index.php/codigo-deontologico.html
^ "The First English Detectives - History Today". Retrieved 29 October 2016. 
^ "The incredible untold story of America's first police detectives - The Boston Globe". Retrieved 29 October 2016. 
^ "West Yorkshire Police - West Yorkshire Police". 






Wikimedia Commons has media related to Detectives.





Authority control



NDL: 00572701











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Detective&oldid=818422690"					Categories: Detectives and criminal investigatorsCriminal investigationPolice ranksLaw enforcementHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from October 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2015