



World map by quartiles of Human Development Index in 2017.[citation needed]
  Very High
  High
  Medium
  Low
  Data unavailable







  Developing economies according to the IMF
  Developing economies out of scope of the IMF
  Graduated to developed economy
  Newly industrialized countries
(As of 2014[update])[citation needed]







  
Least Developed Countries
  
Graduated to developing economies


A developing country, also called a less developed country or an underdeveloped country, is a nation or a sovereign state with a less developed industrial base and a low Human Development Index (HDI) relative to other countries.[1] There are no universally agreed-upon criteria for what makes a country developing versus developed and which countries fit these two categories,[2] although there are general reference points such as a nation's GDP per capita compared with other nations. Also the general term less-developed country should not be confused with the specific least developed country. The term "developing" describes a currently observed situation and not a dynamic or expected direction of progress. Since the late 1990s developing countries tended to demonstrate higher growth rates than the developed ones.[3][4] An alternative measurement that has been suggested is that of gross national happiness. Countries on the boundary between developed and developing are often categorized under the term newly industrialized countries.[5][6][7][8]
According to authors such as Walt Whitman Rostow developing countries are in transition from traditional lifestyles towards the modern lifestyle which began in the Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th centuries.
In the 2016 edition of its World Development Indicators, the World Bank made a decision to no longer distinguish between “developed” and “developing” countries in the presentation of its data.



Contents


1 Definition
2 Measure and concept of development
3 Trends

3.1 Priority health risks in developing countries
3.2 Future trends and emerging issues
3.3 Factors stimulating growth
3.4 Factors hindering growth
3.5 Prevention of negative factors


4 Typology of countries
5 Criticism of the term "developing country"
6 List of developing economies according to UNDP
7 List of countries or region(s) that are graduated developed economies according to the IMF
8 See also
9 References
10 External links



Definition[edit]
Various terms are used for whatever is not a developed country. Terms used include less developed country or less economically developed country, and for the more extreme, least developed country or least economically developed country.
Criteria for what is not a developed country can be obtained by inverting the factors that define a developed country:

people have lower life expectancy
people have less education and literacy rate
people have less money (income)
women have higher fertility rate and pregnancy

Kofi Annan, former Secretary General of the United Nations, defined a developed country as "one that allows all its citizens to enjoy a free and healthy life in a safe environment."[9] But according to the United Nations Statistics Division,

There is no established convention for the designation of "developed" and "developing" countries or areas in the United Nations system.[2]
The designations "developed" and "developing" are intended for statistical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgment about the stage reached by a particular country or area in the development process.[10]

The UN also notes,

In common practice, Japan in Asia, Canada and the United States in northern America, Australia and New Zealand in Oceania and western Europe are considered "developed" regions or areas. In international trade statistics the Southern African Customs Union is also treated as a developed region and Israel as a developed country. The countries emerging from the former Yugoslavia are generally treated as developing countries and countries of Central Europe and of the Commonwealth of Independent States (code 172) in Europe are not included under either developed.[2]

On the other hand according to the classification from International Monetary Fund (IMF) before April 2004, all countries of Central and Eastern Europe (including Central European countries that still belongs to the "Eastern Europe Group" in the UN institutions) as well as the former Soviet Union (USSR) countries in Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan) and Mongolia, were not included under either developed or developing regions, but rather were referred to as "countries in transition". They are however widely regarded (in the international reports) as "developing countries".
The IMF uses a flexible classification system that considers "(1) per capita income level, (2) export diversification—so oil exporters that have high per capita GDP would not make the advanced classification because around 70% of its exports are oil, and (3) degree of integration into the global financial system."[11]
The World Bank classifies countries into four income groups. These are set each year on July 1. Economies were divided according to 2016 GNI per capita using the following ranges of income:[12]

Low income countries had GNI per capita of US$1,025 or less.
Lower middle income countries had GNI per capita between US$1,026 and US$4,035.
Upper middle income countries had GNI per capita between US$4,036 and US$12,236.
High income countries had GNI per capita above US$12,237.

Since 2016 the World Bank no longer divide countries into two groups according to the out-dated concept of developed and developing [12]
Along with the current level of development, countries may be classified by how much this has changed over some amount of time.[13] This may be by absolute numbers or country ranking.

countries that were more less-developed, and are less less-developed (also developing country)
countries that were less-developed, and are about the same (developing country)
countries that were less less-developed, and are more less-developed (developing country)

Measure and concept of development[edit]




  Least developed economies according to ECOSOC
  Least developed economies out of scope of the ECOSOC
  Graduated to developing economy

[when?][citation needed]






Newly industrialized countries as of 2013[update].[citation needed]


The development of a country is measured with statistical indexes such as income per capita (per person), (gross domestic product) per capita, life expectancy, the rate of literacy, freedom index and others. The UN has developed the Human Development Index (HDI), a compound indicator of some above statistics, to gauge the level of human development for countries where data is available. The UN sets Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) from a blueprint developed by all of the world's countries and leading development institutions, in order to evaluate growth.[14]
Developing countries are, in general, countries that have not achieved a significant degree of industrialization relative to their populations, and have, in most cases, a medium to low standard of living. There is a strong association between low income and high population growth.
The terms utilized when discussing developing countries refer to the intent and to the constructs of those who utilize these terms. Other terms sometimes used are less developed countries (LDCs), least economically developed countries (LEDCs), "underdeveloped nations" or Third World nations, and "non-industrialized nations". Conversely, developed countries, most economically developed countries (MEDCs), First World nations and "industrialized nations" are the opposite end of the spectrum.
To moderate the euphemistic aspect of the word developing, international organizations have started to use the term less economically developed country (LEDCs) for the poorest nations—which can, in no sense, be regarded as developing. That is, LEDCs are the poorest subset of LDCs. This may moderate against a belief that the standard of living across the entire developing world is the same.
The concept of the developing nation is found, under one term or another, in numerous theoretical systems having diverse orientations — for example, theories of decolonization, liberation theology, Marxism, anti-imperialism, and political economy.
Another important indicator is the sectoral changes that have occurred since the stage of development of the country. On an average, countries with a 50% contribution from the Secondary sector of Manufacturing have grown substantially. Similarly countries with a tertiary Sector stronghold also see greater rate of Economic Development.
Some researchers in development economics, such as Theodore Schultz who won a Nobel Prize in 1979, have found that literate farmers in developing countries are more productive than illiterate farmers. They therefore recommend investing in human capital (education, health, etc.) as an effective tool for economic development. Others, such as Mohammed Tamim, believe that economic development is measurable in educational level from primary school to the university. They noticed that wherever the educational level is raised, the level of development is also raised. They conclude that the percentage of the schooled population is proportional to the economic growth rate and inversely proportional in the demographic growth rate. The Take-Off of Walt Whitman Rostow can start in a country if its population is completely schooled. It is therefore necessary for the organization of a worldwide education program, itself conditioned by another worldwide program of birth control and the establishment of a worldwide organization for the implementation of this development strategy.[15]
Trends[edit]






This section is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this section to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (September 2016)



Priority health risks in developing countries[edit]

Unsafe water
Indoor smoke
Tropical and infectious diseases
Air pollution
Climate change
Road traffic accidents
Unintentional poisoning[16]

Future trends and emerging issues[edit]

Population growth in the urban areas of poor countries.
Rapid environmental and health hazards.
Traffic fatalities and air pollution.
Non communicable diseases.
Physical inactivity leading to death.
Increased and intensified industrial and agricultural production and emission of toxic chemicals directly into the soil, air, and water.
Unsustainable use of energy resources.
Climate change-related health impacts leading to the loss of biodiversity and affecting the ecosystem.
High dependency on natural resources for livelihood, leading to unsustainable exploitation or depletion of those resources
Least access to clean water.[17][unreliable source?]

Factors stimulating growth[edit]

Human Capital [18][19][further explanation needed]
Trade Policy: Countries with more restrictive policies have not grown as fast as countries with open and less distorted trade policies.[19][20]
Investment: Investment has a positive effect on growth.[19]
Knowledge Gap [19][further explanation needed]

Factors hindering growth[edit]

Illness/Disease (malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS, etc.): Illness imposes high and regressive cost burdens on families in developing countries.[21]
Malnutrition/Underdevelopment of the body and brain: More than 200 million children under five years of age in developing countries do not reach their developmental potential.[22]
Knowledge gap [19]
Political instability [19]
Political corruption[23]
Child Marriage
Climate change


Prevention of negative factors[edit]

Mobile Health Units: Costing $1.26 per patient, mobile health units help control malaria and sanitation of water. The estimated cost per infant and child death averted was $200–$250.[24]
Education [25]

Typology of countries[edit]




  Countries described as Advanced Economies by the IMF in 2016.[26]



There are several terms used to classify countries into rough levels of development. Classification of any given country differs across sources, and sometimes these classifications or the specific terminology used is considered disparaging. Use of the term "market" instead of "country" usually indicates specific focus on the characteristics of the countries' capital markets as opposed to the overall economy.

Developed countries and developed markets
Developing countries include in decreasing order of economic growth or size of the capital market:

Newly industrialized countries
Emerging markets
Frontier markets
Least developed countries



Developing countries can also be categorized by geography:

Small Island Developing States
Landlocked Developing Countries

Other classifications include:

Heavily indebted poor countries, a definition by a program of the IMF and World Bank
Transition economy, moving from a centrally planned to market-driven economy
Multi-dimensional clustering system: with the understanding that different countries have different development priorities and levels of access to resources and institutional capacities[27] and to offer a more nuanced understanding of developing countries and their characteristics, scholars have categorised them into five distinct groups based on factors such as levels of poverty and inequality, productivity and innovation, political constraints and dependence on external flows.[28][29]

Criticism of the term "developing country"[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



There is some criticism of the use of the term "developing country". The term implies inferiority of a "developing country" or "undeveloped country" compared with a "developed country", which many countries dislike. It is criticized for being too positive and too negative.
It assumes a desire to "develop" along the traditional Western model of economic development, which a few countries, such as Cuba and Bhutan, choose not to follow.[4]
The concept of "development" rests on the assumption that Modernization theory holds. Modernization theory, as the dominant development theory of the late 19th and 20th centuries, has largely contributed to the definition of "development". In short, it argues that there is only one way to achieve "modernity" and "development" - that of "Western" nation-states. Largely challenged today, modernization theory still holds an important role in defining "development".
The term "developing" implies mobility and does not acknowledge that development may be in decline or static in some countries, particularly in southern African states worst affected by HIV/AIDS. In such cases, the term "developing country" may be considered a euphemism. The term implies homogeneity between such countries, which vary widely. The term also implies homogeneity within such countries when wealth (and health) of the most and least affluent groups varies widely. Similarly, the term "developed country" incorrectly implies a lack of continuing economic development/growth in more-developed countries.
In general, development entails a modern infrastructure (both physical and institutional), and a move away from low value added sectors such as agriculture and natural resource extraction. Developed countries, in comparison, usually have economic systems based on continuous, self-sustaining economic growth in the tertiary sector of the economy and quaternary sector of the economy and high material standards of living. However, there are notable exceptions, as some countries considered developed have a significant component of primary industries in their national economies, e.g., Norway, Canada, Australia. The USA and Western Europe have a very important agricultural sector, and are major players in international agricultural markets. Also, natural resource extraction can be a very profitable industry (high value added), e.g., oil extraction.
An alternative measurement that has been suggested is that of gross national happiness, measuring the actual satisfaction of people as opposed to how fiscally wealthy a country is.
During the late 20th century, and with the advance of World-systems theory, the notions of "developed country" and "developing country" have started to slowly be replaced by the less-controversial, trade-based, notions of "core country", "semi-periphery country" and "periphery country".
List of developing economies according to UNDP[edit]
The following are considered developing economies according to the International Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook Report, April 2015.[30][31]


 Afghanistan
 Albania
 Algeria
 Angola
 Argentina
 Armenia
 Azerbaijan
 Bahamas
 Bahrain
 Bangladesh
 Barbados
 Belarus
 Belize
 Benin
 Bhutan
 Bolivia
 Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Botswana
 Brazil
 Brunei
 Bulgaria
 Burkina Faso
 Burundi
 Cambodia
 Cameroon
 Cape Verde
 Central African Republic
 Chad
 China
 Colombia
 Comoros
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Republic of the Congo
 Costa Rica
 Croatia
 Djibouti
 Dominica
 Dominican Republic
 Ecuador
 Egypt
 El Salvador
 Equatorial Guinea
 Eritrea
 Ethiopia
 Fiji
 Gabon
 The Gambia
 Georgia
 Ghana
 Grenada
 Guatemala
 Guinea
 Guinea-Bissau
 Guyana
 Haiti
 Honduras
 Hungary
 India
 Indonesia
 Iran
 Iraq
 Ivory Coast
 Jamaica
 Jordan
 Kazakhstan
 Kenya
 Kiribati
 Kosovo
 Kuwait
 Kyrgyzstan
 Laos
 Lebanon
 Lesotho
 Liberia
 Libya
 Macedonia
 Madagascar
 Malawi
 Malaysia
 Maldives
 Mali
 Marshall Islands
 Mauritania
 Mauritius
 Mexico
 Federated States of Micronesia
 Moldova
 Mongolia
 Montenegro
 Morocco
 Mozambique
 Myanmar
 Namibia
   Nepal
 Nicaragua
 Niger
 Nigeria
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Palau
 Panama
 Papua New Guinea
 Paraguay
 Peru
 Philippines
 Poland
 Qatar
 Romania
 Russia
 Rwanda
 Saint Kitts and Nevis
 Saint Lucia
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
 Samoa
 São Tomé and Príncipe
 Saudi Arabia
 Senegal
 Serbia
 Seychelles
 Sierra Leone
 Solomon Islands
 Somalia
 South Africa
 South Sudan
 Sri Lanka
 Sudan
 Suriname
 Swaziland
 Syria
 Tajikistan
 Tanzania
 Thailand
 Timor-Leste
 Togo
 Tonga
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Tunisia
 Turkey
 Turkmenistan
 Tuvalu
 Uganda
 Ukraine
 United Arab Emirates
 Uruguay
 Uzbekistan
 Vanuatu
 Venezuela
 Vietnam
 Yemen
 Zambia
 Zimbabwe

Countries not listed by IMF

 Cuba
 Nauru
 North Korea


List of countries or region(s) that are graduated developed economies according to the IMF[edit]
The following, including the Four Asian Tigers and new Eurozone European countries, were considered developing countries until the '90s, and are now listed as advanced economies (developed countries) by the IMF. Time in brackets is the time to be listed as advanced economies.

 Hong Kong, China (since 1997)[32]
 Israel (since 1997)[32]
 Singapore (since 1997)[32]
 South Korea (since 1997)[32]
 Republic of China (since 1997)[32]
 Cyprus (since 2001)[33]
 Slovenia (since 2007)[34]
 Malta (since 2008)[35]
 Czech Republic (since 2009,[36] since 2006 by World Bank)[37]
 Slovakia (since 2009)[36]
 Estonia (since 2011)[38]
 Latvia (since 2014)[39]
 Lithuania (since 2015)[40]

Three economies lack data before being listed as advanced economies. Because of the lack of data, it is difficult to judge whether they are advanced economies or developing economies before being listed as advanced economies.

 San Marino (since 2012)[41]
 Puerto Rico (since 2016)[42]
 Macau, China (since 2016)[42]

See also[edit]

Dependency Theory
Financial deepening
First World
First World privilege
First World problem
Second World
Third World
Fourth World
National wealth
List of countries by wealth per adult
Globalization
Global South
Multinational corporation
North-South divide
Colonialism
Neo Colonialism
Imperialism

References[edit]


^ O'Sullivan, Arthur; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 471. ISBN 0-13-063085-3. 
^ a b c "Composition of macro geographical (continental) region". 
^ Korotayev A., Zinkina J. [http://cliodynamics.ru/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=361&Itemid= developing country. The term implies inferiority of a developing country or undeveloped country compared with a developed country, which many countries dislike. It assumes a desire to develop along the traditional Western model of economic development which a few countries, such as Cuba and Bhutan, choose not to follow.
^ a b Karma Ura. "The Bhutanese development story" (PDF). Retrieved 17 September 2012. 
^ Paweł Bożyk (2006). "Newly Industrialized Countries". Globalization and the Transformation of Foreign Economic Policy. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 0-7546-4638-6. 
^ Mauro F. Guillén (2003). "Multinationals, Ideology, and Organized Labor". The Limits of Convergence. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11633-4. 
^ Waugh, David (2000). "Manufacturing industries (chapter 19), World development (chapter 22)". Geography, An Integrated Approach (3rd ed.). Nelson Thornes Ltd. pp. 563, 576–579, 633, and 640. ISBN 0-17-444706-X. 
^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (2007). Principles of Economics (4th ed.). ISBN 0-324-22472-9. 
^ G_05_00 Archived 2009-08-08 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "United Nations Statistics Division- Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications (M49)". Unstats.un.org. Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ "Q. How does the WEO categorize advanced versus emerging and developing economies?". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved July 20, 2009. 
^ a b http://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/2016-edition-world-development-indicators-out-three-features-you-won-t-want-miss. Retrieved October 22, 2016.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Least Developed Countries Report 2012 - Unctad" (PDF). 
^ United Nations Millennium Development Goals
^ Mohammed Tamim, Le Spectre du tiers-monde, L'Harmattan, 2002
^ "Environment and health in developing countries". Priority environment and health risks. World Health Organization. 8 September 2016. 
^ "Difference between Developed and Developing Countries - ResearchPedia.Info". 2015-08-16. Retrieved 2016-09-06. 
^ Schultz, Theodore W. 1961. "Investment in human capital." American Economic Review 51, no. 1 (March): 1-17.
^ a b c d e f Edwards, S. "Trade Orientation, Distortions and Growth In Developing Countries." (n.d.): n. pag. 1-37
^ Harrison, Ann. "Openness and Growth: A Time-series, Cross-country Analysis for Developing Countries." Journal of Development Economics 48.2 (1996): 419-47. Web.
^ Russel S. The economic burden of illness for households in developing countries: a review of studies focusing on malaria, tuberculosis, and human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2004
^ Grantham-McGregor, Sally et al., the International Child Development Steering Group. “Developmental Potential in the First 5 Years for Children in Developing Countries.” Lancet 369.9555 (2007): 60–70. PMC. Web. 28 Nov. 2014.
^ Political factors that affect development | Make Wealth History
^ Walsh, J., and K. Warren. "Control of Infectious Disease in Developing Countries." New England Journal of Medicine 304.1 (1981): n. pag. 967-974
^ Verspoor, Adriaan. "Pathways to Change: Improving the Quality of Education in Developing Countries. World Bank Discussion Papers 53." (n.d.):
^ April 2008 World Economic Outlook
^ Koch, Svea (2015-06-01). "From Poverty Reduction to Mutual Interests? The Debate on Differentiation in EU Development Policy". Development Policy Review. 33 (4): 479–502. doi:10.1111/dpr.12119. ISSN 1467-7679. 
^ Vázquez, Sergio Tezanos; Sumner, Andy (2013-12-01). "Revisiting the Meaning of Development: A Multidimensional Taxonomy of Developing Countries". The Journal of Development Studies. 49 (12): 1728–1745. doi:10.1080/00220388.2013.822071. ISSN 0022-0388. 
^ Taeihagh, Araz (2017-06-19). "Crowdsourcing, Sharing Economies, and Development". Journal of Developing Societies. doi:10.1177/0169796x17710072. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2015, pp.150-153" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-06-26. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, Database—WEO Groups and Aggregates Information, April 2015". Retrieved 2015-06-26. 
^ a b c d e "IMF Advanced Economies List. World Economic Outlook, May 1998, p. 134" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2001, p.157" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2007, p.204" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2008, p.236" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ a b "World Economic Outlook, April 2009, p.184" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ Velinger, Jan (28 February 2006). "World Bank Marks Czech Republic's Graduation to 'Developed' Status". Radio Prague. Retrieved 22 January 2007. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2011, p.172" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-15. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2014, p.160" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-05-21. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, April 2015, p.48" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-04-11. 
^ "World Economic Outlook, October 2012, p.180" (PDF). Retrieved 2016-08-04. 
^ a b "World Economic Outlook, April 2016, p.148" (PDF). Retrieved 2016-06-25. 


External links[edit]


Library resources about
Developing country





Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries





Privatization of Third World from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives







v
t
e


Economic classification of countries






Developed country
Developing country
Least Developed Countries
World Bank high-income economy
Newly industrialized country
Heavily indebted poor countries





Three-World Model



First World
Second World
Third World
Fourth World





Gross domestic product (GDP)




Nominal



By country

past and projected

per capita


per capita







Purchasing
power parity (PPP)



By country

future estimates

per capita


per capita
per hour worked
per person employed










Gross national income (GNI)



(Nominal, Atlas method) per capita
(PPP) per capita





Wages



Average wage

Europe by monthly average wage


Employee compensation (per hour)
List of countries by median wage
Minimum wages

Canada
Europe
United States







Wealth



Wealth per adult





Other national accounts



Gross National Happiness
Net material product
Research and development spending





Human development



Human Development Index

by country
inequality-adjusted


Human Poverty Index
Percentage living in poverty
Social Progress Index





Digital divide



ICT Development Index
Number of broadband Internet subscriptions
Number of Internet users
Smartphone penetration





Net international
investment position (NIIP)



Per capita









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 259366441
GND: 4014954-7
NDL: 00566724











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Developing_country&oldid=818531251"					Categories: Economic country classificationsInternational developmentEconomic geographyEuphemismsHuman geographyLists of countriesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from June 2016Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013Articles needing cleanup from September 2016All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from September 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from September 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2017Articles needing additional references from March 2013All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers