This article is about the mineral. For the gemstone, see Diamond (gemstone). For other uses, including the shape ◊, see Diamond (disambiguation).


Diamond



The slightly misshapen octahedral shape of this rough diamond crystal in matrix is typical of the mineral. Its lustrous faces also indicate that this crystal is from a primary deposit.



General


Category
Native minerals


Formula
(repeating unit)
C


Strunz classification
1.CB.10a


Dana classification
1.3.6.1


Crystal system
Cubic


Crystal class
Hexoctahedral (m3m)
H-M symbol: (4/m 3 2/m)


Identification


Formula mass
6998120100000000000♠12.01 g/mol


Color
Typically yellow, brown, or gray to colorless. Less often blue, green, black, translucent white, pink, violet, orange, purple, and red.


Crystal habit
Octahedral


Twinning
Spinel law common (yielding "macle")


Cleavage
111 (perfect in four directions)


Fracture
Conchoidal (shell-like)


Mohs scale hardness
10 (defining mineral)


Luster
Adamantine


Streak
Colorless


Diaphaneity
Transparent to subtransparent to translucent


Specific gravity
7000352000000000000♠3.52±0.01


Density
3.5–7003353000000000000♠3.53 g/cm3


Polish luster
Adamantine


Optical properties
Isotropic


Refractive index
2.418 (at 500 nm)


Birefringence
None


Pleochroism
None


Dispersion
0.044


Melting point
Pressure dependent


References
[1][2]


Diamond ( /ˈdaɪəmənd/ or /ˈdaɪmənd/) is a metastable allotrope of carbon, where the carbon atoms are arranged in a variation of the face-centered cubic crystal structure called a diamond lattice. Diamond is less stable than graphite, but the conversion rate from diamond to graphite is negligible at standard conditions. Diamond is renowned as a material with superlative physical qualities, most of which originate from the strong covalent bonding between its atoms. In particular, diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any bulk material. Those properties determine the major industrial application of diamond in cutting and polishing tools and the scientific applications in diamond knives and diamond anvil cells.
Because of its extremely rigid lattice, it can be contaminated by very few types of impurities, such as boron and nitrogen. Small amounts of defects or impurities (about one per million of lattice atoms) color diamond blue (boron), yellow (nitrogen), brown (lattice defects), green (radiation exposure), purple, pink, orange or red. Diamond also has relatively high optical dispersion (ability to disperse light of different colors).
Most natural diamonds are formed at high temperature and pressure at depths of 140 to 190 kilometers (87 to 118 mi) in the Earth's mantle. Carbon-containing minerals provide the carbon source, and the growth occurs over periods from 1 billion to 3.3 billion years (25% to 75% of the age of the Earth). Diamonds are brought close to the Earth's surface through deep volcanic eruptions by magma, which cools into igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites. Diamonds can also be produced synthetically in a HPHT method which approximately simulates the conditions in the Earth's mantle. An alternative, and completely different growth technique is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Several non-diamond materials, which include cubic zirconia and silicon carbide and are often called diamond simulants, resemble diamond in appearance and many properties. Special gemological techniques have been developed to distinguish natural diamonds, synthetic diamonds, and diamond simulants. The word is from the ancient Greek ἀδάμας – adámas "unbreakable".



Contents


1 History
2 Geology

2.1 Formation in cratons
2.2 Transport from mantle
2.3 Space diamonds
2.4 Misconception about diamonds forming from compressed coal


3 Material properties

3.1 Crystal habit
3.2 Hardness
3.3 Pressure resistance
3.4 Electrical conductivity
3.5 Surface property
3.6 Chemical stability
3.7 Color
3.8 Identification


4 Industry

4.1 Gem-grade diamonds

4.1.1 Cutting
4.1.2 Marketing


4.2 Industrial-grade diamonds
4.3 Mining

4.3.1 Political issues




5 Synthetics, simulants, and enhancements

5.1 Synthetics
5.2 Simulants
5.3 Enhancements
5.4 Identification


6 Stolen diamonds
7 See also
8 References
9 Books
10 External links



History
See also: Diamond (gemstone)
The name diamond is derived from the ancient Greek αδάμας (adámas), "proper", "unalterable", "unbreakable", "untamed", from ἀ- (a-), "un-" + δαμάω (damáō), "I overpower", "I tame".[3] Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India, where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner, Krishna and Godavari. Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3,000 years but most likely 6,000 years.[4]
Diamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India. Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history.[5][6] The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques, growth in the world economy, and innovative and successful advertising campaigns.[7]
In 1772, the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon.[8] Later in 1797, the English chemist Smithson Tennant repeated and expanded that experiment.[9] By demonstrating that burning diamond and graphite releases the same amount of gas, he established the chemical equivalence of these substances.[10]
The most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment, a use which dates back into antiquity, and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials. The dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds. In the 20th century, experts in gemology developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem. Four characteristics, known informally as the four Cs, are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are carat (its weight), cut (quality of the cut is graded according to proportions, symmetry and polish), color (how close to white or colorless; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue), and clarity (how free is it from inclusions).[11] A large, flawless diamond is known as a paragon.
Geology
The formation of natural diamond requires very specific conditions—exposure of carbon-bearing materials to high pressure, ranging approximately between 45 and 60 kilobars (4.5 and 6 GPa), but at a comparatively low temperature range between approximately 900 and 1,300 °C (1,650 and 2,370 °F). These conditions are met in two places on Earth; in the lithospheric mantle below relatively stable continental plates, and at the site of a meteorite strike.[12]
Formation in cratons




Geologic provinces of the world. The pink and orange areas are shields and platforms, which together constitute cratons.


The conditions for diamond formation to happen in the lithospheric mantle occur at considerable depth corresponding to the requirements of temperature and pressure. These depths are estimated between 140 and 190 kilometers (87 and 118 mi) though occasionally diamonds have crystallized at depths about 300 km (190 mi).[13] The rate at which temperature changes with increasing depth into the Earth varies greatly in different parts of the Earth. In particular, under oceanic plates the temperature rises more quickly with depth, beyond the range required for diamond formation at the depth required. The correct combination of temperature and pressure is only found in the thick, ancient, and stable parts of continental plates where regions of lithosphere known as cratons exist. Long residence in the cratonic lithosphere allows diamond crystals to grow larger.[13]
Through studies of carbon isotope ratios (similar to the methodology used in carbon dating, except with the stable isotopes C-12 and C-13), it has been shown that the carbon found in diamonds comes from both inorganic and organic sources. Some diamonds, known as harzburgitic, are formed from inorganic carbon originally found deep in the Earth's mantle. In contrast, eclogitic diamonds contain organic carbon from organic detritus that has been pushed down from the surface of the Earth's crust through subduction (see plate tectonics) before transforming into diamond. These two different source of carbon have measurably different 13C:12C ratios. Diamonds that have come to the Earth's surface are generally quite old, ranging from under 1 billion to 3.3 billion years old. This is 22% to 73% of the age of the Earth.[13]
Transport from mantle




Schematic diagram of a volcanic pipe


Diamond-bearing rock is carried from the mantle to the Earth's surface by deep-origin volcanic eruptions. The magma for such a volcano must originate at a depth where diamonds can be formed[13]—150 km (93 mi) or more (three times or more the depth of source magma for most volcanoes). This is a relatively rare occurrence. These typically small surface volcanic craters extend downward in formations known as volcanic pipes.[13] The pipes contain material that was transported toward the surface by volcanic action, but was not ejected before the volcanic activity ceased. During eruption these pipes are open to the surface, resulting in open circulation; many xenoliths of surface rock and even wood and fossils are found in volcanic pipes. Diamond-bearing volcanic pipes are closely related to the oldest, coolest regions of continental crust (cratons). This is because cratons are very thick, and their lithospheric mantle extends to great enough depth that diamonds are stable. Not all pipes contain diamonds, and even fewer contain enough diamonds to make mining economically viable.[13]
The magma in volcanic pipes is usually one of two characteristic types, which cool into igneous rock known as either kimberlite or lamproite.[13] The magma itself does not contain diamond; instead, it acts as an elevator that carries deep-formed rocks (xenoliths), minerals (xenocrysts), and fluids upward. These rocks are characteristically rich in magnesium-bearing olivine, pyroxene, and amphibole minerals[13] which are often altered to serpentine by heat and fluids during and after eruption. Certain indicator minerals typically occur within diamantiferous kimberlites and are used as mineralogical tracers by prospectors, who follow the indicator trail back to the volcanic pipe which may contain diamonds. These minerals are rich in chromium (Cr) or titanium (Ti), elements which impart bright colors to the minerals. The most common indicator minerals are chromium garnets (usually bright red chromium-pyrope, and occasionally green ugrandite-series garnets), eclogitic garnets, orange titanium-pyrope, red high-chromium spinels, dark chromite, bright green chromium-diopside, glassy green olivine, black picroilmenite, and magnetite. Kimberlite deposits are known as blue ground for the deeper serpentinized part of the deposits, or as yellow ground for the near surface smectite clay and carbonate weathered and oxidized portion.[13]
Once diamonds have been transported to the surface by magma in a volcanic pipe, they may erode out and be distributed over a large area. A volcanic pipe containing diamonds is known as a primary source of diamonds. Secondary sources of diamonds include all areas where a significant number of diamonds have been eroded out of their kimberlite or lamproite matrix, and accumulated because of water or wind action. These include alluvial deposits and deposits along existing and ancient shorelines, where loose diamonds tend to accumulate because of their size and density. Diamonds have also rarely been found in deposits left behind by glaciers (notably in Wisconsin and Indiana); in contrast to alluvial deposits, glacial deposits are minor and are therefore not viable commercial sources of diamond.[13]
Space diamonds
Main article: Extraterrestrial diamonds
Not all diamonds found on Earth originated on Earth. Primitive interstellar meteorites were found to contain carbon possibly in the form of diamond.[14] A type of diamond called carbonado that is found in South America and Africa may have been deposited there via an asteroid impact (not formed from the impact) about 3 billion years ago. These diamonds may have formed in the intrastellar environment, but as of 2008, there was no scientific consensus on how carbonado diamonds originated.[15][16]
Diamonds can also form under other naturally occurring high-pressure conditions. Very small diamonds of micrometer and nanometer sizes, known as microdiamonds or nanodiamonds respectively, have been found in meteorite impact craters. Such impact events create shock zones of high pressure and temperature suitable for diamond formation. Impact-type microdiamonds can be used as an indicator of ancient impact craters.[12] Popigai crater in Russia may have the world's largest diamond deposit, estimated at trillions of carats, and formed by an asteroid impact.[17]
Scientific evidence indicates that white dwarf stars have a core of crystallized carbon and oxygen nuclei. The largest of these found in the universe so far, BPM 37093, is located 50 light-years (4.7×1014 km) away in the constellation Centaurus. A news release from the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics described the 2,500-mile (4,000 km)-wide stellar core as a diamond.[18]
Misconception about diamonds forming from compressed coal
Few diamonds are formed from highly compressed coal. More than 99% of diamonds ever mined have formed in the conditions of extreme heat and pressure about 90 miles (140 km) below the Earth's surface. Coal is formed from prehistoric plants buried much closer to the surface and is unlikely to migrate below 2 miles (3.2 km) through common geological processes. Most diamonds that have been dated are older than the first land plants and are therefore older than coal. It is possible that diamonds can form from coal in subduction zones and in meteoroid impacts, but diamonds formed in this way are rare, and the carbon source is more likely carbonate rocks and organic carbon in sediments, rather than coal.[19][20]
Material properties
Main articles: Material properties of diamond and Crystallographic defects in diamond




Theoretically predicted phase diagram of carbon






Diamond and graphite are two allotropes of carbon: pure forms of the same element that differ in structure.


A diamond is a transparent crystal of tetrahedrally bonded carbon atoms in a covalent network lattice (sp3) that crystallizes into the diamond lattice which is a variation of the face-centered cubic structure. Diamonds have been adapted for many uses because of the material's exceptional physical characteristics. Most notable are its extreme hardness and thermal conductivity (900–7003232000000000000♠2320 W·m−1·K−1),[21] as well as wide bandgap and high optical dispersion.[22] Above 7003197315000000000♠1700 °C (7003197300000000000♠1973 K / 7003224592777777777♠3583 °F) in vacuum or oxygen-free atmosphere, diamond converts to graphite; in air, transformation starts at ~7002973150000000000♠700 °C.[23] Diamond's ignition point is 720–7003107315000000000♠800 °C in oxygen and 850–7003127315000000000♠1000 °C in air. Naturally occurring diamonds have a density ranging from 3.15 to 7003353000000000000♠3.53 g/cm3, with pure diamond close to 7003352000000000000♠3.52 g/cm3.[1] The chemical bonds that hold the carbon atoms in diamonds together are weaker than those in graphite. In diamonds, the bonds form an inflexible three-dimensional lattice, whereas in graphite, the atoms are tightly bonded into sheets, which can slide easily over one another, making the overall structure weaker.[24] In a diamond, each carbon atom is surrounded by neighboring four carbon atoms forming a tetrahedral shaped unit.
Crystal habit




One face of an uncut octahedral diamond, showing trigons (of positive and negative relief) formed by natural chemical etching


Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as macles. As diamond's crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms, they have many facets that belong to a cube, octahedron, rhombicosidodecahedron, tetrakis hexahedron or disdyakis dodecahedron. The crystals can have rounded off and unexpressive edges and can be elongated. Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in nyf, an opaque gum-like skin.[25]
Hardness
Diamond is the hardest known natural material on both the Vickers scale and the Mohs scale. Diamond's great hardness relative to other materials has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name.
Diamond hardness depends on its purity, crystalline perfection and orientation: hardness is higher for flawless, pure crystals oriented to the <111> direction (along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice).[26] Therefore, whereas it might be possible to scratch some diamonds with other materials, such as boron nitride, the hardest diamonds can only be scratched by other diamonds and nanocrystalline diamond aggregates.
The hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone. Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well. Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching—perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.




The extreme hardness of diamond in certain orientations makes it useful in materials science, as in this pyramidal diamond embedded in the working surface of a Vickers hardness tester.


The hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia. These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds. Their hardness is associated with the crystal growth form, which is single-stage crystal growth. Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages, which produce inclusions, flaws, and defect planes in the crystal lattice, all of which affect their hardness. It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.[27]
Somewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property toughness, which is a material's ability to resist breakage from forceful impact. The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 7.5–10 MPa·m1/2.[28][29] This value is good compared to other ceramic materials, but poor compared to most engineering materials such as engineering alloys, which typically exhibit toughnesses over 100 MPa·m1/2. As with any material, the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage. Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others. Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones, prior to faceting.[30] "Impact toughness" is one of the main indexes to measure the quality of synthetic industrial diamonds.
Pressure resistance
Used in so-called diamond anvil experiments to create high-pressure environments, diamonds are able to withstand crushing pressures in excess of 600 gigapascals (6 million atmospheres).[31]
Electrical conductivity
Other specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators.[32] The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity. Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.[32]
Substantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition. This conductivity is associated with hydrogen-related species adsorbed at the surface, and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments.[33][34]
Surface property
Diamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds' surface cannot be wet by water, but can be easily wet and stuck by oil. This property can be utilized to extract diamonds using oil when making synthetic diamonds. However, when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions, they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature.[35]
The surface of diamonds is partially oxidized. The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow. That is to say, this heat treatment partially removes oxygen-containing functional groups. But diamonds (sp3C) are unstable against high temperature (above about 400 °C (752 °F)) under atmospheric pressure. The structure gradually changes into sp2C above this temperature. Thus, diamonds should be reduced under this temperature.[36]
Chemical stability
Diamonds are not very reactive. Under room temperature diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases. A diamond's surface can only be oxidized at temperatures above about 850 °C (1,560 °F) in air. Diamond also reacts with fluorine gas above about 700 °C (1,292 °F).
Color
Main article: Diamond color




Brown diamonds at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.






The most famous colored diamond, the Hope Diamond


Diamond has a wide bandgap of 6981881197067849999♠5.5 eV corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225 nanometers. This means that pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal. Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities. The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong, and only atoms of nitrogen, boron and hydrogen can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations (up to atomic percents). Transition metals nickel and cobalt, which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by high-pressure high-temperature techniques, have been detected in diamond as individual atoms; the maximum concentration is 0.01% for nickel[37] and even less for cobalt. Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation.[38]
Nitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds. Boron is responsible for the blue color.[22] Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds, and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice. Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown[39] and perhaps pink and red diamonds.[40] In order of increasing rarity, yellow diamond is followed by brown, colorless, then by blue, green, black, pink, orange, purple, and red.[30] "Black", or Carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance. Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless. Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice, known as a carbon flaw. The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present.[30] The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the normal color range, and applies a grading scale from "D" (colorless) to "Z" (light yellow). Diamonds of a different color, such as blue, are called fancy colored diamonds and fall under a different grading scale.[30]
In 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a 35.56-carat (7.112 g) blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over US$24 million at a Christie's auction.[41] In May 2009, a 7.03-carat (1.406 g) blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10.5 million Swiss francs (6.97 million euros, or US$9.5 million at the time).[42] That record was, however, beaten the same year: a 5-carat (1.0 g) vivid pink diamond was sold for $10.8 million in Hong Kong on December 1, 2009.[43]
Identification
Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity. Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity. Diamonds cut glass, but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it. Diamonds can scratch other diamonds, but this can result in damage to one or both stones. Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical gemology because of their potentially destructive nature.[44] The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly, using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones;[10] these tend to result in extremely flat, highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges. Diamonds also possess an extremely high refractive index and fairly high dispersion. Taken together, these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most diamantaires still rely upon skilled use of a loupe (magnifying glass) to identify diamonds "by eye".[45]
Industry


A round brilliant cut diamond set in a ring


See also: Diamonds as an investment and Clean Diamond Trade Act
The diamond industry can be separated into two distinct categories: one dealing with gem-grade diamonds and another for industrial-grade diamonds. Both markets value diamonds differently.




Diamond exports by country (2014) from Harvard Atlas of Economic Complexity


Gem-grade diamonds
Main article: Diamond (gemstone)
A large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists. Although most gem-grade diamonds are sold newly polished, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g. pawnbroking, auctions, second-hand jewelry stores, diamantaires, bourses, etc.). One hallmark of the trade in gem-quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration: wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations; in 2003, 92% of the world's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat, India.[46] Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are the Antwerp diamond district in Belgium, where the International Gemological Institute is based, London, the Diamond District in New York City, the Diamond Exchange District in Tel Aviv, and Amsterdam. One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large-pit mine that can produce between 12,500,000 and 15,000,000 carats (2,500 and 3,000 kg) of diamonds per year[47]). Secondary alluvial diamond deposits, on the other hand, tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers (e.g., alluvial deposits in Brazil).
The production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players, and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers, the most important being Antwerp, where 80% of all rough diamonds, 50% of all cut diamonds and more than 50% of all rough, cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled.[48] This makes Antwerp a de facto "world diamond capital".[49] The city of Antwerp also hosts the Antwerpsche Diamantkring, created in 1929 to become the first and biggest diamond bourse dedicated to rough diamonds.[50] Another important diamond center is New York City, where almost 80% of the world's diamonds are sold, including auction sales.[48]
The De Beers company, as the world's largest diamond mining company, holds a dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British imperialist Cecil Rhodes. De Beers is currently the world's largest operator of diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds. The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines. De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40% of annual world diamond production. For most of the 20th century over 80% of the world's rough diamonds passed through De Beers,[51] but by 2001–2009 the figure had decreased to around 45%,[52] and by 2013 the company's market share had further decreased to around 38% in value terms and even less by volume.[53] De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s – early 2000s[54] and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale).[55] This was well documented in the press[56] but remains little known to the general public.
As a part of reducing its influence, De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased, at the end of 2008, purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa.[57] As of January 2011, De Beers states that it only sells diamonds from the following four countries: Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Canada.[58] Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis,[59] but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009.[60] Apart from Alrosa, other important diamond mining companies include BHP Billiton, which is the world's largest mining company;[61] Rio Tinto Group, the owner of the Argyle (100%), Diavik (60%), and Murowa (78%) diamond mines;[62] and Petra Diamonds, the owner of several major diamond mines in Africa.




Diamond polisher in Amsterdam


Further down the supply chain, members of The World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange, trading both polished and rough diamonds. The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the USA, Europe and Asia.[30] In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts. WFDB's additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the International Diamond Council (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.
Once purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones ('industrial' stones are regarded as a by-product of the gemstone market; they are used for abrasives).[63] The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide.[63] Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp, Amsterdam, Johannesburg, New York City, and Tel Aviv. Recently, diamond cutting centers have been established in China, India, Thailand, Namibia and Botswana.[63] Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America. The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.[48]
Diamonds prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called bourses. There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world.[64] Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer. Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset ("loose"). According to the Rio Tinto Group, in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US$9 billion as rough diamonds, US$14 billion after being cut and polished, US$28 billion in wholesale diamond jewelry, and US$57 billion in retail sales.[65]
Cutting
Main articles: Diamond cutting and Diamond cut




The Darya-I-Nur Diamond—an example of unusual diamond cut and jewelry arrangement


Mined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi-step process called "cutting". Diamonds are extremely hard, but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow. Therefore, diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience. Its final goal is to produce a faceted jewel where the specific angles between the facets would optimize the diamond luster, that is dispersion of white light, whereas the number and area of facets would determine the weight of the final product. The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50%.[66] Several possible shapes are considered, but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific, but also practical considerations. For example, the diamond might be intended for display or for wear, in a ring or a necklace, singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape.[67] Some of them may be considered as classical, such as round, pear, marquise, oval, hearts and arrows diamonds, etc. Some of them are special, produced by certain companies, for example, Phoenix, Cushion, Sole Mio diamonds, etc.[68]
The most time-consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone. It needs to address a large number of issues, bears much responsibility, and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds. The following issues are considered:

The hardness of diamond and its ability to cleave strongly depend on the crystal orientation. Therefore, the crystallographic structure of the diamond to be cut is analyzed using X-ray diffraction to choose the optimal cutting directions.
Most diamonds contain visible non-diamond inclusions and crystal flaws. The cutter has to decide which flaws are to be removed by the cutting and which could be kept.
The diamond can be split by a single, well calculated blow of a hammer to a pointed tool, which is quick, but risky. Alternatively, it can be cut with a diamond saw, which is a more reliable but tedious procedure.[67][69]

After initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing. Unlike cutting, which is a responsible but quick operation, polishing removes material by gradual erosion and is extremely time consuming. The associated technique is well developed; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians.[70] After polishing, the diamond is reexamined for possible flaws, either remaining or induced by the process. Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques, such as repolishing, crack filling, or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry. Remaining non-diamond inclusions are removed through laser drilling and filling of the voids produced.[44]
Marketing




Diamond Balance Scale 0.01 - 25 Carats Jewelers Measuring Tool


Marketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity.
N. W. Ayer & Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market. And the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before. N. W. Ayer's marketing included product placement, advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand, and associations with celebrities and royalty. Without advertising the De Beers brand, De Beers was advertising its competitors' diamond products as well,[71] but this was not a concern as De Beers dominated the diamond market throughout the 20th century. De Beers' market share dipped temporarily to 2nd place in the global market below Alrosa in the aftermath of the global economic crisis of 2008, down to less than 29% in terms of carats mined, rather than sold.[72] The campaign lasted for decades but was effectively discontinued by early 2011. De Beers still advertises diamonds, but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands, or licensed product lines, rather than completely "generic" diamond products.[72] The campaign was perhaps best captured by the slogan "a diamond is forever".[7] This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers,[73] a jewelry firm which is a 50%/50% joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH, the luxury goods conglomerate.
Brown-colored diamonds constituted a significant part of the diamond production, and were predominantly used for industrial purposes. They were seen as worthless for jewelry (not even being assessed on the diamond color scale). After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986, and marketing, brown diamonds have become acceptable gems.[74][75] The change was mostly due to the numbers: the Argyle mine, with its 35,000,000 carats (7,000 kg) of diamonds per year, makes about one-third of global production of natural diamonds;[76] 80% of Argyle diamonds are brown.[77]
Industrial-grade diamonds




A scalpel with synthetic diamond blade






Close-up photograph of an angle grinder blade with tiny diamonds shown embedded in the metal






A diamond knife blade used for cutting ultrathin sections (typically 70 to 350 nm) for transmission electron microscopy.


Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as the 4 Cs, irrelevant for most applications. 80% of mined diamonds (equal to about 135,000,000 carats (27,000 kg) annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones and are used industrially.[78] In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; another 570,000,000 carats (114,000 kg) of synthetic diamond is produced annually for industrial use (in 2004; in 2014 it is 4,500,000,000 carats (900,000 kg), 90% of which is produced in China). Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.[79]
The boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some lower-grade stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use). Within the category of industrial diamonds, there is a sub-category comprising the lowest-quality, mostly opaque stones, which are known as bort.[80]
Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools. As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds. Common industrial applications of this property include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws, and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive. Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds, known as bort, with more flaws and poorer color than gems, are used for such purposes.[81] Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds, as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives.[82]
Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high-pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows.[80] With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds, future applications are becoming feasible. The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics.[83]
Mining
See also: List of diamond mines and Exploration diamond drilling
Approximately 130,000,000 carats (26,000 kg) of diamonds are mined annually, with a total value of nearly US$9 billion, and about 100,000 kg (220,000 lb) are synthesized annually.[84]
Roughly 49% of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia.[79] They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes, which can bring diamond crystals, originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form, to the surface. The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of blood diamonds or conflict diamonds by African paramilitary groups.[85] The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.
Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care is required not to destroy larger diamonds, and then sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help of X-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use of X-rays became commonplace,[66] the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.[30]




Siberia's Udachnaya diamond mine


Historically, diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India.[86] India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC[4][87] to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725.[4] Currently, one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna.[88]
Diamond extraction from primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond Fields in South Africa.[89] Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of 4,500,000,000 carats (900,000 kg) have been mined since that date.[90] Twenty percent of that amount has been mined in the last five years, and during the last 10 years, nine new mines have started production; four more are waiting to be opened soon. Most of these mines are located in Canada, Zimbabwe, Angola, and one in Russia.[90]
In the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Montana.[91][92] In 2004, the discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S. led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana. The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public, and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds.[92]
Today, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Sakha Republic, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.[93] In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, according to the British Geological Survey. Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe, with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42 metric tons per year in the 1990s.[91][94] There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil.[79] Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.
Political issues


Play media


Unsustainable diamond mining in Sierra Leone


Main articles: Kimberley Process, Blood diamond, and Child labour in the diamond industry
In some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations. Diamonds sold through this process are known as conflict diamonds or blood diamonds.[85]
In response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa, the United Nations, the diamond industry and diamond-trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002.[95] The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups. This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities. Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market, some still find their way in. According to the International Diamond Manufacturers Association, conflict diamonds constitute 2–3% of all diamonds traded.[96] Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered "clean".[95]
The Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct[97] to help authenticate Canadian diamonds. This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the "conflict free" label of Canadian diamonds.[98]
Synthetics, simulants, and enhancements
Synthetics
Main article: Synthetic diamond




Synthetic diamonds of various colors grown by the high-pressure high-temperature technique


Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth. The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones. This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century. However, in recent years it has become possible to produce gem-quality synthetic diamonds of significant size.[13] It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that, on a molecular level, are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference.[99]
The majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so-called high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) processes.[100] The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities. Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink, which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.[101]




Colorless gem cut from diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition


Another popular method of growing synthetic diamond is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The growth occurs under low pressure (below atmospheric pressure). It involves feeding a mixture of gases (typically 1 to 99 methane to hydrogen) into a chamber and splitting them to chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves, hot filament, arc discharge, welding torch or laser.[102] This method is mostly used for coatings, but can also produce single crystals several millimeters in size (see picture).[84]
As of 2010, nearly all 5,000 million carats (1,000 tonnes) of synthetic diamonds produced per year are for industrial use. Around 50% of the 133 million carats of natural diamonds mined per year end up in industrial use.[99][103] Mining companies' expenses average $40 to $60 per carat for natural colorless diamonds, while synthetic manufacturers' expenses average $2,500 per carat for synthetic, gem-quality colorless diamonds.[99]:79 However, a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy-colored diamond because nearly all synthetic diamonds are fancy-colored, while only 0.01% of natural diamonds are.[104]
Simulants
Main article: Diamond simulant




Gem-cut synthetic silicon carbide set in a ring


A diamond simulant is a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond, and may be referred to as diamante. Cubic zirconia is the most common. The gemstone moissanite (silicon carbide) can be treated as a diamond simulant, though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia. Both are produced synthetically.[105]
Enhancements
Main article: Diamond enhancement
Diamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds (usually those already cut and polished into a gem), which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways. These include laser drilling to remove inclusions, application of sealants to fill cracks, treatments to improve a white diamond's color grade, and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond.[106]
Coatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more "diamond-like" appearance. One such substance is diamond-like carbon—an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties similar to those of the diamond. Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond-like properties to the coated stone, hence enhancing the diamond simulant. Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment.[107]
Identification
Early diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond. This test is destructive, as a diamond can scratch another diamond, and is rarely used nowadays. Instead, diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity. Electronic thermal probes are widely used in the gemological centers to separate diamonds from their imitations. These probes consist of a pair of battery-powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip. One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip: if the stone being tested is a diamond, it will conduct the tip's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop. This test takes about 2–3 seconds.[108]
Whereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants, distinguishing between various types of diamond, for example synthetic or natural, irradiated or non-irradiated, etc., requires more advanced, optical techniques. Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants, such as silicon carbide, which pass the thermal conductivity test. Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds. They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds.[109] "Perfect" crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.[110]
Laboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy, microscopy and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond's origin.[109] They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process. Two screening instruments are the DiamondSure and the DiamondView, both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA.[111]
Several methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond. CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence. D-J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute's[112] Diamond Spotter. Stones in the D-Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer, a tool developed by De Beers.[110] Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.
Screening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic. Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab. Examples of commercial screening devices are D-Screen (WTOCD / HRD Antwerp) and Alpha Diamond Analyzer (Bruker / HRD Antwerp).
Stolen diamonds
Occasionally large thefts of diamonds take place. In February 2013 armed robbers carried out a raid at Brussels Airport and escaped with gems estimated to be worth $50m (£32m; 37m euros). The gang broke through a perimeter fence and raided the cargo hold of a Swiss-bound plane. The gang have since been arrested and large amounts of cash and diamonds recovered.[113]
The identification of stolen diamonds presents a set of difficult problems. Rough diamonds will have a distinctive shape depending on whether their source is a mine or from an alluvial environment such as a beach or river—alluvial diamonds have smoother surfaces than those that have been mined. Determining the provenance of cut and polished stones is much more complex.
The Kimberley Process was developed to monitor the trade in rough diamonds and prevent their being used to fund violence. Before exporting, rough diamonds are certificated by the government of the country of origin. Some countries, such as Venezuela, are not party to the agreement. The Kimberley Process does not apply to local sales of rough diamonds within a country.
Diamonds may be etched by laser with marks invisible to the naked eye. Lazare Kaplan, a US-based company, developed this method. However, whatever is marked on a diamond can readily be removed.[114][115]
See also


Gemology and Jewelry portal



Diamondoid
List of diamonds

List of largest rough diamonds


List of minerals
Lonsdaleite
Superhard material

References


^ a b "Diamond". Mindat. Retrieved July 7, 2009. 
^ "Diamond". WebMineral. Retrieved July 7, 2009. 
^ Liddell, H.G.; Scott, R. "Adamas". A Greek-English Lexicon. Perseus Project. 
^ a b c Hershey, W. (1940). The Book of Diamonds. New York: Hearthside Press. pp. 22–28. ISBN 1-4179-7715-9. 
^ Pliny the Elder (2004). Natural History: A Selection. Penguin Books. p. 371. ISBN 0-14-044413-0. 
^ "Chinese made first use of diamond". BBC News. May 17, 2005. Retrieved March 21, 2007. 
^ a b Epstein, E.J. (1982). "Have You Ever Tried To Sell a Diamond?". The Atlantic. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ See:

Lavoisier (1772) "Premier mémoire sur la destruction du diamant par le feu" (First memoir on the destruction of diamond by fire), Histoire de l'Académie royale des sciences. Avec les Mémoires de Mathématique & de Physique (History of the Royal Academy of Sciences. With the Memoirs of Mathematics and Physics), part 2, 564-591.
Lavoisier (1772) "Second mémoire sur la destruction du diamant par le feu" (Second memoir on the destruction of diamond by fire), Histoire de l'Académie royale des sciences. Avec les Mémoires de Mathématique & de Physique, part 2, 591-616.


^ Smithson Tennant (1797) "On the nature of the diamond," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 87 : 123-127.
^ a b Hazen, R. M. (1999). The diamond makers. Cambridge University Press. pp. 7–10. ISBN 0-521-65474-2. 
^ Hesse, R. W. (2007). Jewelrymaking through history. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 42. ISBN 0-313-33507-9. 
^ a b Carlson, R.W. (2005). The Mantle and Core. Elsevier. p. 248. ISBN 0-08-044848-8. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k Erlich, E.I.; Dan Hausel, W. (2002). Diamond Deposits. Society for Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration. pp. 74–94. ISBN 0-87335-213-0. 
^ Lewis, Roy S.; Ming, Tang; Wacker, John F.; Steel, Eric (1987). "Interstellar Diamonds in Meteorites". Abstracts of the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 18: 550. Bibcode:1987LPI....18..550L. 
^ Garai, J.; Haggerty, S.E.; Rekhi, S.; Chance, M. (2006). "Infrared Absorption Investigations Confirm the Extraterrestrial Origin of Carbonado Diamonds". Astrophysical Journal. 653 (2): L153–L156. arXiv:physics/0608014 . Bibcode:2006ApJ...653L.153G. doi:10.1086/510451. 
^ "Diamonds from Outer Space: Geologists Discover Origin of Earth's Mysterious Black Diamonds". National Science Foundation. January 8, 2007. Retrieved October 28, 2007. 
^ Deutsch, Alexander; Masaitis, V.L.; Langenhorst, F.; Grieve, R.A.F. (2000). "Popigai, Siberia—well preserved giant impact structure, national treasury, and world's geological heritage" (PDF). Episodes. 23 (1): 3–12. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 21, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2008. 
^ "This Valentine's Day, Give The Woman Who Has Everything The Galaxy's Largest Diamond". Center for Astrophysics. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ King, Hobart (2012). "How do diamonds form? They don't form from coal!". Geology and Earth Science News and Information. geology.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2012. 
^ Pak-Harvey, Amelia (Oct 31, 2013). "10 common scientific misconceptions". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved August 30, 2017. 
^ Wei, L.; Kuo, P. K.; Thomas, R. L.; Anthony, T.; Banholzer, W. (1993). "Thermal conductivity of isotopically modified single crystal diamond". Physical Review Letters. 70 (24): 3764–3767. Bibcode:1993PhRvL..70.3764W. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.70.3764. PMID 10053956. 
^ a b Walker, J. (1979). "Optical absorption and luminescence in diamond" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics. 42 (10): 1605–1659. Bibcode:1979RPPh...42.1605W. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/42/10/001. 
^ John, P.; Polwart, N.; Troupe, C. E.; Wilson, J. I. B. (2002). "The oxidation of (100) textured diamond". Diamond and Related Materials. 11 (3–6): 861. Bibcode:2002DRM....11..861J. doi:10.1016/S0925-9635(01)00673-2. 
^ Gray, Theodore (September 2009). "Gone in a Flash". Popular Science: 70. 
^ Webster, R.; Read, P.G. (2000). Gems: Their sources, descriptions and identification (5th ed.). Great Britain: Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 17. ISBN 0-7506-1674-1. 
^ Neves, A. J.; Nazaré, M. H. (2001). Properties, Growth and Applications of Diamond. Institution of Engineering and Technology. pp. 142–147. ISBN 0-85296-785-3. 
^ Boser, U. (2008). "Diamonds on Demand". Smithsonian. 39 (3): 52–59. 
^ Lee, J.; Novikov, N. V. (2005). Innovative superhard materials and sustainable coatings for advanced manufacturing. Springer. p. 102. ISBN 0-8493-3512-4. 
^ Marinescu, I. D.; Tönshoff, H. K.; Inasaki, I. (2000). Handbook of ceramic grinding and polishing. William Andrew. p. 21. ISBN 0-8155-1424-7. 
^ a b c d e f Harlow, G.E. (1998). The nature of diamonds. Cambridge University Press. p. 223;230–249. ISBN 0-521-62935-7. 
^ Improved diamond anvil cell allows higher pressures Physics World November 2012.
^ a b Collins, A. T. (1993). "The Optical and Electronic Properties of Semiconducting Diamond". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A. 342 (1664): 233–244. Bibcode:1993RSPTA.342..233C. doi:10.1098/rsta.1993.0017. 
^ Landstrass, M. I.; Ravi, K. V. (1989). "Resistivity of chemical vapor deposited diamond films". Applied Physics Letters. 55 (10): 975–977. Bibcode:1989ApPhL..55..975L. doi:10.1063/1.101694. 
^ Zhang, W.; Ristein, J.; Ley, L. (2008). "Hydrogen-terminated diamond electrodes. II. Redox activity". Physical Review E. 78 (4): 041603. Bibcode:2008PhRvE..78d1603Z. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.78.041603. 
^ Wissner-Gross, A. D.; Kaxiras, E. (2007). "Diamond stabilization of ice multilayers at human body temperature" (PDF). Physical Review E. 76: 020501. Bibcode:2007PhRvE..76b0501W. doi:10.1103/physreve.76.020501. 
^ Fujimoto, A.; Yamada, Y.; Koinuma, M.; Sato, S. (2016). "Origins of sp3C peaks in C1s X-ray Photoelectron Spectra of Carbon Materials". Analytical Chemistry. 88: 6110. doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01327. 
^ Collins, A. T.; Kanda, Hisao; Isoya, J.; Ammerlaan, C. A. J.; Van Wyk, J. A. (1998). "Correlation between optical absorption and EPR in high-pressure diamond grown from a nickel solvent catalyst". Diamond and Related Materials. 7 (2–5): 333–338. Bibcode:1998DRM.....7..333C. doi:10.1016/S0925-9635(97)00270-7. 
^ Zaitsev, A. M. (2000). "Vibronic spectra of impurity-related optical centers in diamond". Physical Review B. 61 (19): 12909. Bibcode:2000PhRvB..6112909Z. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.61.12909. 
^ Hounsome, L. S.; Jones, R.; Shaw, M. J.; Briddon, P. R.; Öberg, S.; Briddon, P.; Öberg, S. (2006). "Origin of brown coloration in diamond". Physical Review B. 73 (12): 125203. Bibcode:2006PhRvB..73l5203H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.73.125203. 
^ Wise, R. W. (2001). Secrets Of The Gem Trade, The Connoisseur's Guide To Precious Gemstones. Brunswick House Press. pp. 223–224. ISBN 978-0-9728223-8-1. 
^ Khan, Urmee (December 10, 2008). "Blue-grey diamond belonging to King of Spain has sold for record 16.3 GBP". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010. 
^ Nebehay, S. (May 12, 2009). "Rare blue diamond sells for record $9.5 million". Reuters. Retrieved May 13, 2009. 
^ Pomfret, James (December 1, 2009). "Vivid pink diamond sells for record $10.8 million". Reuters. 
^ a b Read, P. G. (2005). Gemmology. Butterworth-Heinemann. pp. 165–166. ISBN 0-7506-6449-5. 
^ O'Donoghue, M. (1997). Synthetic, Imitation and Treated Gemstones. Gulf Professional Publishing. pp. 34–37. ISBN 0-7506-3173-2. 
^ Adiga, A. (April 12, 2004). "Uncommon Brilliance". Time. Retrieved November 3, 2008. 
^ "Jwaneng". Debswana. Archived from the original on March 17, 2012. Retrieved March 9, 2012. 
^ a b c Tichotsky, J. (2000). Russia's Diamond Colony: The Republic of Sakha. Routledge. p. 254. ISBN 90-5702-420-9. 
^ "Jews Surrender Gem Trade to Indians". Spiegel Online. May 15, 2006. 
^ "The history of the Antwerp Diamond Center". Antwerp World Diamond Center. 
^ "Commission Decision of 25 July 2001 declaring a concentration to be compatible with the common market and the EEA Agreement". Case No COMP/M.2333 – De Beers/LVMH. EUR-Lex. 2003. 
^ "Business: Changing facets; Diamonds". The Economist. 382 (8517): 68. 2007. 
^ "Certainty in the Diamond Industry? Watch Out For Tipping Points - IDEX`s Memo". idexonline.com. Retrieved September 24, 2014. 
^ "The Elusive Sparcle". The Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council. Archived from the original on June 16, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ Even-Zohar, C. (November 6, 2008). "Crisis Mitigation at De Beers". DIB online. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ Even-Zohar, C. (November 3, 1999). "De Beers to Halve Diamond Stockpile". National Jeweler. Archived from the original on July 5, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ "Judgment of the Court of First Instance of 11 July 2007 – Alrosa v Commission". EUR-Lex. 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2009. 
^ "Mining operations". The De Beers Group. 2007. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2011. 
^ "Diamond producer Alrosa to resume market diamond sales in May". RIA Novosti. May 6, 2009. Retrieved May 25, 2009. 
^ "Media releases – Media Centre – Alrosa". Alrosa. December 22, 2009. Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2011. 
^ "Another record profit for BHP". ABC News. August 22, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2007. 
^ "Our Companies". Rio Tinto web site. Rio Tinto. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2009. 
^ a b c Broadman, H. G.; Isik, G. (2007). Africa's silk road. World Bank Publications. pp. 297–299. ISBN 0-8213-6835-4. 
^ "Bourse listing". World Federation of Diamond Bourses. Retrieved February 12, 2012. 
^ "North America Diamond Sales Show No Sign of Slowing". A&W diamonds. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ a b Pierson, Hugh O. (1993). Handbook of carbon, graphite, diamond, and fullerenes: properties, processing, and applications. William Andrew. p. 280. ISBN 0-8155-1339-9. 
^ a b James, Duncan S. (1998). Antique jewellery: its manufacture, materials and design. Osprey Publishing. pp. 82–102. ISBN 0-7478-0385-4. 
^ "The Classical and Special Shapes of Diamonds". kristallsmolensk.com. Retrieved July 14, 2015. 
^ Prelas, Mark Antonio; Popovici, Galina; Bigelow, Louis K. (1998). Handbook of industrial diamonds and diamond films. CRC Press. pp. 984–992. ISBN 0-8247-9994-1. 
^ "Gem Cutting". Popular Mechanics. Hearst Magazines. 74 (5): 760–764. 1940. ISSN 0032-4558. 
^ Rapaport, Martin. "Keep the Diamond Dream Alive". Rapaport Magazine. Diamonds.net. Retrieved September 9, 2012. 
^ a b JCK Staff (January 26, 2011). "10 Things Rocking the Industry". JCK. Jckonline.com. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2012. 
^ Bates, Rob (January 14, 2011). "Interview with Forevermark CEO". JCK. Jckonline.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved September 9, 2012. 
^ Harlow, George E. (1998). The nature of diamonds. Cambridge University Press. p. 34. ISBN 0-521-62935-7. 
^ Kogel, Jessica Elzea (2006). Industrial minerals & rocks. Society for Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration (U.S.). p. 416. ISBN 0-87335-233-5. 
^ "The Australian Diamond Industry". Archived from the original on July 16, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2009. 
^ Erlich, Edward; Dan Hausel, W. (2002). Diamond deposits: origin, exploration, and history of discovery. SME. p. 158. ISBN 0-87335-213-0. 
^ "Diamond: The mineral Diamond information and pictures". minerals.net. Retrieved September 24, 2014. 
^ a b c "Industrial Diamonds Statistics and Information". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ a b Spear, K.E; Dismukes, J.P. (1994). Synthetic Diamond: Emerging CVD Science and Technology. Wiley–IEEE. p. 628. ISBN 0-471-53589-3. 
^ Holtzapffel, C. (1856). Turning And Mechanical Manipulation. Holtzapffel & Co. pp. 176–178. ISBN 1-879335-39-5. 
^ Coelho, R. T.; Yamada, S.; Aspinwall, D. K.; Wise, M. L. H. (1995). "The application of polycrystalline diamond (PCD) tool materials when drilling and reaming aluminum-based alloys including MMC". International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture. 35 (5): 761–774. doi:10.1016/0890-6955(95)93044-7. 
^ Sakamoto, M.; Endriz, J.G.; Scifres, D.R. (1992). "120 W CW output power from monolithic AlGaAs (800 nm) laser diode array mounted on diamond heatsink". Electronics Letters. 28 (2): 197–199. doi:10.1049/el:19920123. 
^ a b Yarnell, A. (2004). "The Many Facets of Man-Made Diamonds". Chemical and Engineering News. 82 (5): 26–31. doi:10.1021/cen-v082n005.p026. 
^ a b "Conflict Diamonds". United Nations. March 21, 2001. Archived from the original on March 9, 2010. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ Catelle, W. R. (1911). The Diamond. John Lane Company. p. 159. 
^ Ball, V. (1881). "Chapter 1". Diamonds, Gold and Coal of India. London: Trübner & Co. p. 1.  Ball was a geologist in British service.
^ "Biggest diamond found in Panna". Mail Today. July 1, 2010. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. 
^ Shillington, K. (2005). Encyclopedia of African history. CRC Press. p. 767. ISBN 1-57958-453-5. 
^ a b Janse, A. J. A. (2007). "Global Rough Diamond Production Since 1870". Gems & Gemology. 43 (2): 98–119. doi:10.5741/GEMS.43.2.98. 
^ a b Lorenz, V. (2007). "Argyle in Western Australia: The world's richest diamantiferous pipe; its past and future". Gemmologie, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gemmologischen Gesellschaft. 56 (1–2): 35–40. 
^ a b Cooke, Sarah (October 17, 2004). "Microscopic diamond found in Montana". The Montana Standard. Archived from the original on January 21, 2005. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ Marshall, S.; Shore, J. (2004). "The Diamond Life". Guerrilla News Network. Archived from the original on January 26, 2007. Retrieved March 21, 2007. 
^ Shigley, James E.; Chapman, John; Ellison, Robyn K. (2001). "Discovery and Mining of the Argyle Diamond Deposit, Australia" (PDF). Gems & Gemology. Gemological Institute of America. 37 (1): 26–41. doi:10.5741/GEMS.37.1.26. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 30, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2010. 
^ a b Basedau, M.; Mehler, A. (2005). Resource politics in Sub-Saharan Africa. GIGA-Hamburg. pp. 305–313. ISBN 3-928049-91-7. 
^ World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) and International Diamond Manufacturers Association: Joint Resolution of 19 July 2000. World Diamond Council. July 19, 2000. ISBN 978-90-04-13656-4. Retrieved November 5, 2006. 
^ "Voluntary Code of Conduct For Authenticating Canadian Diamond Claims" (PDF). Canadian Diamond Code Committee. 2006. Retrieved October 30, 2007. 
^ Kjarsgaard, B. A.; Levinson, A. A. (2002). "Diamonds in Canada". Gems and Gemology. 38 (3): 208–238. doi:10.5741/GEMS.38.3.208. 
^ a b c "The Global Diamond Industry: Lifting the Veil of Mystery" (PDF). Bain & Company. Retrieved January 14, 2012. 
^ 1Shigley, J.E.; Abbaschian, Reza; Shigley, James E. (2002). "Gemesis Laboratory Created Diamonds". Gems & Gemology. 38 (4): 301–309. doi:10.5741/GEMS.38.4.301. 
^ Shigley, J.E.; Shen, Andy Hsi-Tien; Breeding, Christopher M.; McClure, Shane F.; Shigley, James E. (2004). "Lab Grown Colored Diamonds from Chatham Created Gems". Gems & Gemology. 40 (2): 128–145. doi:10.5741/GEMS.40.2.128. 
^ Werner, M.; Locher, R (1998). "Growth and application of undoped and doped diamond films". Reports on Progress in Physics. 61 (12): 1665. Bibcode:1998RPPh...61.1665W. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/61/12/002. 
^ Pisani, Bob (August 27, 2012). "The Business of Diamonds, From Mining to Retail". CNBC. 
^ Kogel, J. E. (2006). Industrial Minerals & Rocks. SME. pp. 426–430. ISBN 0-87335-233-5. 
^ O'Donoghue, M.; Joyner, L. (2003). Identification of gemstones. Great Britain: Butterworth-Heinemann. pp. 12–19. ISBN 0-7506-5512-7. 
^ Barnard, A. S. (2000). The diamond formula. Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 115. ISBN 0-7506-4244-0. 
^ Shigley, J.E. (2007). "Observations on new coated gemstones". Gemmologie: Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gemmologischen Gesellschaft. 56 (1–2): 53–56. 
^ US 4488821, Wenckus, J. F., "Method and means of rapidly distinguishing a simulated diamond from natural diamond", published December 18, 1984,  assigned to Ceres Electronics Corporation ; U.S. Patent 4,488,821
^ a b Edwards, H. G. M.; Chalmers, G. M (2005). Raman spectroscopy in archaeology and art history. Royal Society of Chemistry. pp. 387–394. ISBN 0-85404-522-8. 
^ a b Welbourn, C. (2006). "Identification of Synthetic Diamonds: Present Status and Future Developments". Gems and Gemology. 42 (3): 34–35. 
^ Donahue, P.J. (April 19, 2004). "DTC Appoints GIA Distributor of DiamondSure and DiamondView". Professional Jeweler Magazine. Retrieved March 2, 2009. 
^ "SSEF diamond spotter and SSEF illuminator". SSEF Swiss Gemmological Institute. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. 
^ "Arrests over $50m Belgium airport diamond heist". BBC News. May 8, 2013. 
^ "Who, What, Why: How do you spot a stolen diamond?". BBC News. February 21, 2013. 
^ "Brussels diamond robbery nets 'gigantic' haul". BBC News. February 19, 2013. 


Books

C. Even-Zohar (2007). From Mine to Mistress: Corporate Strategies and Government Policies in the International Diamond Industry (2nd ed.). Mining Journal Press. 
G. Davies (1994). Properties and growth of diamond. INSPEC. ISBN 0-85296-875-2. 
M. O'Donoghue (2006). Gems. Elsevier. ISBN 0-7506-5856-8. 
M. O'Donoghue and L. Joyner (2003). Identification of gemstones. Great Britain: Butterworth-Heinemann. ISBN 0-7506-5512-7. 
A. Feldman and L.H. Robins (1991). Applications of Diamond Films and Related Materials. Elsevier. 
J.E. Field (1979). The Properties of Diamond. London: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-255350-0. 
J.E. Field (1992). The Properties of Natural and Synthetic Diamond. London: Academic Press. ISBN 0-12-255352-7. 
W. Hershey (1940). The Book of Diamonds. Hearthside Press New York. ISBN 1-4179-7715-9. 
S. Koizumi, C.E. Nebel and M. Nesladek (2008). Physics and Applications of CVD Diamond. Wiley VCH. ISBN 3-527-40801-0. 
L.S. Pan and D.R. Kani (1995). Diamond: Electronic Properties and Applications. Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-7923-9524-7. 
Pagel-Theisen, Verena (2001). Diamond Grading ABC: the Manual. Antwerp: Rubin & Son. ISBN 3-9800434-6-0. 
R.L. Radovic, P.M. Walker and P.A. Thrower (1965). Chemistry and physics of carbon: a series of advances. New York: Marcel Dekker. ISBN 0-8247-0987-X. 
M. Tolkowsky (1919). Diamond Design: A Study of the Reflection and Refraction of Light in a Diamond. London: E. & F.N. Spon. 
R.W. Wise (2016). Secrets of the Gem Trade: The Connoisseur's Guide to Precious Gemstones (Second Edition). Brunswick House Press. ISBN 9780972822329. 
A.M. Zaitsev (2001). Optical Properties of Diamond: A Data Handbook. Springer. ISBN 3-540-66582-X. 

External links

Find more aboutDiamondat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote



Properties of diamond: Ioffe database
"A Contribution to the Understanding of Blue Fluorescence on the Appearance of Diamonds". (2007) Gemological Institute of America (GIA)
Tyson, Peter (November 2000). "Diamonds in the Sky". Retrieved March 10, 2005.
Have You Ever Tried to Sell a Diamond?







v
t
e


Allotropes of carbon



sp3 forms



Diamond (cubic)
Lonsdaleite (hexagonal diamond)





sp2 forms



Graphite
Graphene
Fullerenes (Buckminsterfullerene, C70, Higher fullerenes, Lower fullerenes, Nanotubes, Nanobuds, Nanoscrolls)
Glassy carbon





sp forms



Linear acetylenic carbon





mixed sp3/sp2 forms



Amorphous carbon
Carbon nanofoam
Carbide-derived carbon
Q-carbon





other forms



C
1
C
2
C
3





hypothetical forms



C
3
C
6
C
8
Chaoite
Haeckelites
Cubic carbon
Metallic carbon
Penta-graphene





related



Activated carbon
Carbon black
Charcoal
Carbon fiber
Aggregated diamond nanorod












v
t
e


Jewellery



Forms



Anklet
Barrette
Belt buckle
Belly chain
Bindi
Bolo tie
Bracelet
Brooch
Chatelaine
Collar pin
Crown
Cufflink
Earring
Ferronnière
Lapel pin
Necklace
Pectoral
Pendant
Ring
Tiara
Tie chain
Tie clip
Tie pin
Toe ring
Watch

pocket
strap







Making




People



Bench jeweler
Clockmaker
Goldsmith
Silversmith
Jewelry designer
Lapidary
Watchmaker





Processes



Carving
Casting

centrifugal
lost-wax
vacuum


Enameling
Engraving
Filigree
Kazaziye
Metal clay
Plating
Polishing
Repoussé and chasing
Soldering
Stonesetting
Wire sculpture
Wire wrapped jewelry





Tools



Draw plate
File
Hammer
Mandrel
Pliers








Materials




Precious metals



Gold
Palladium
Platinum
Rhodium
Silver





Precious metal alloys



Britannia silver
Colored gold
Crown gold
Electrum
Shakudō
Shibuichi
Sterling silver
Tumbaga





Base metals



Brass
Bronze
Copper
Mokume-gane
Pewter
Stainless steel
Titanium
Tungsten





Mineral gemstones



Aventurine
Agate
Amethyst
Beryl
Carnelian
Chrysoberyl
Diamond
Diopside
Emerald
Garnet
Jade
Jasper
Lapis lazuli
Larimar
Malachite
Marcasite
Moonstone
Obsidian
Onyx
Opal
Pearl
Peridot
Prasiolite
Quartz
Ruby
Sapphire
Sodalite
Spinel
Sunstone
Tanzanite
Tiger's eye
Topaz
Tourmaline
Turquoise
Zircon





Organic gemstones



Abalone
Amber
Ammolite
Copal
Coral
Ivory
Jet
Nacre





Other natural objects



Bog-wood
Hair
Shell jewelry
Toadstone








Terms



Carat (mass)
Carat (purity)
Finding
Millesimal fineness
Art jewelry








Related topics
Body piercing
Fashion
Gemology
Phaleristics
Metalworking
Wearable art












v
t
e


Gemstones




Gemmological Classifiactions by E. Ya. Kievlenko, 1980, updated



Jewelry stones




1st order



Diamond
Ruby
Emerald
Blue Sapphire
Alexandrite
Natural marine pearls





2nd order



Pink sapphire
Demantoid
Tsavorite
Spinel
Precious Black Opal
Tanzanite





3rd order



Yellow, Green, Violet Sapphires
Aquamarine
Orange topaz (Imperial)
Rubellite
Precious White and Fire Opal





4th order



Tourmaline — Verdelite
Indicolite, polychromous
Beryl — Heliodor, pink, yellow-green
Topaz yellow, blue, pink
Peridot
Garnets — Spessartine (malaya), Rhodolite, Almandine, Pyrope
Amethyst
Citrine
Blue Turquoise








Jewelry-Industrial
stones




1st order



Lazurite
Jadeite
Nephrite
Malachite
Amber (Baltic amber)
Chrysoprase
Charoite





2nd order



Agate
Amazonite
Rhodonite
Colorless, smoky and pink quartz
Hematite
Common opal
Opaque iridescent feldspars








Industrial stones



Jasper
Graphic granite
Petrified wood
Cacholong (Porouse opal)
Marble onyx
Obsidian
Listwanite (green mica)
Jet
Selenite
Fluorite
Serpentinite
Aventurine quartzite
Ophicalcite (Serpentine/Calcite)
Pagodite (Pyrophyllite/Talc)









Authority control



GND: 4012069-7
NDL: 00561237











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diamond&oldid=814804639"					Categories: DiamondAbrasivesCubic mineralsEconomic geologyImpact event mineralsNative element mineralsGroup IV semiconductorsTransparent materialsLuminescent mineralsIndustrial mineralsHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse American English from October 2015All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishUse mdy dates from February 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersFeatured articlesArticles containing video clips