"Digestive system" and "alimentary system" redirect here. For digestive systems of non-human animals, see Digestion.


Human digestive system



Human digestive system



Details


Identifiers


Latin
Systema digestorium


MeSH
D004064


TA
A05.0.00.000


FMA
7152


Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]



The human digestive system consists of the gastrointestinal tract plus the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue, salivary glands, pancreas, liver, and gallbladder).[1] In this system, the process of digestion has many stages, the first of which starts in the mouth. Digestion involves the breakdown of food into smaller and smaller components, until they can be absorbed and assimilated into the body.
Chewing, in which food is mixed with saliva begins the process of digestion. This produces a bolus which can be swallowed down the esophagus and into the stomach. Here it is mixed with gastric juice until it passes into the duodenum where it is mixed with a number of enzymes produced by the pancreas. Saliva also contains a catalytic enzyme called amylase which starts to act on food in the mouth. Another digestive enzyme called lingual lipase is secreted by some of the lingual papillae on the tongue and also from serous glands in the main salivary glands. Digestion is helped by the mastication of food by the teeth and also by the muscular actions of peristalsis and segmentation contractions. Gastric juice in the stomach is essential for the continuation of digestion as is the production of mucus in the stomach.
Peristalsis is the rhythmic contraction of muscles that begins in the esophagus and continues along the wall of the stomach and the rest of the gastrointestinal tract. This initially results in the production of chyme which when fully broken down in the small intestine is absorbed as chyle into the lymphatic system. Most of the digestion of food takes place in the small intestine. Water and some minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon of the large intestine. The waste products of digestion (feces) are defecated from the anus via the rectum.



Contents


1 Components

1.1 Mouth

1.1.1 Salivary glands

1.1.1.1 Saliva


1.1.2 Tongue

1.1.2.1 Taste


1.1.3 Teeth
1.1.4 Epiglottis


1.2 Pharynx
1.3 Esophagus
1.4 Diaphragm
1.5 Stomach
1.6 Spleen
1.7 Liver

1.7.1 Bile
1.7.2 Gallbladder


1.8 Pancreas
1.9 Lower gastrointestinal tract

1.9.1 Small intestine
1.9.2 Cecum
1.9.3 Large intestine




2 Blood supply
3 Nerve supply
4 Development
5 Clinical significance

5.1 In pregnancy


6 See also
7 References



Components[edit]




Historical depiction of the digestive system, 17th century Persia


There are several organs and other components involved in the digestion of food. The organs known as the accessory digestive glands are the liver, gall bladder and pancreas. Other components include the mouth, salivary glands, tongue, teeth and epiglottis.
The largest structure of the digestive system is the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). This starts at the mouth and ends at the anus, covering a distance of about nine (9) metres.[2]
The largest part of the GI tract is the colon or large intestine. Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste matter is stored prior to defecation.[1]
Most of the digestion of food takes place in the small intestine.
A major digestive organ is the stomach. Within its mucosa are millions of embedded gastric glands. Their secretions are vital to the functioning of the organ.
There are many specialised cells of the GI tract. These include the various cells of the gastric glands, taste cells, pancreatic duct cells, enterocytes and microfold cells.
Some parts of the digestive system are also part of the excretory system.

Mouth[edit]
The mouth is the first part of the gastrointestinal tract and is equipped with several structures that begin the first processes of digestion.[3] These include salivary glands, teeth and the tongue. The mouth consists of two regions, the vestibule and the oral cavity proper. The vestibule is the area between the teeth, lips and cheeks,[4] and the rest is the oral cavity proper. Most of the oral cavity is lined with oral mucosa, a mucous membrane that produces a lubricating mucus, of which only a small amount is needed. Mucous membranes vary in structure in the different regions of the body but they all produce a lubricating mucus, which is either secreted by surface cells or more usually by underlying glands. The mucous membrane in the mouth continues as the thin mucosa which lines the bases of the teeth. The main component of mucus is a glycoprotein called mucin and the type secreted varies according to the region involved. Mucin is viscous, clear, and clinging. Underlying the mucous membrane in the mouth is a thin layer of smooth muscle tissue and the loose connection to the membrane gives it its great elasticity.[5] It covers the cheeks, inner surfaces of the lips, and floor of the mouth.[6]:1186
The roof of the mouth is termed the palate and it separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavity. The palate is hard at the front of the mouth since the overlying mucosa is covering a plate of bone; it is softer and more pliable at the back being made of muscle and connective tissue, and it can move to swallow food and liquids. The soft palate ends at the uvula.[7] The surface of the hard palate allows for the pressure needed in eating food, to leave the nasal passage clear.[8] The lips are the mouth's front boundary and the fauces (the passageway between the tonsils, also called the throat),[6]:686 mark its posterior boundary.
At either side of the soft palate are the palatoglossus muscles which also reach into regions of the tongue. These muscles raise the back of the tongue and also close both sides of the fauces to enable food to be swallowed.[6]:1208 Mucus helps in the mastication of food in its ability to soften and collect the food in the formation of the bolus.
Salivary glands[edit]




Oral cavity


There are three pairs of main salivary glands and between 800 and 1,000 minor salivary glands, all of which mainly serve the digestive process, and also play an important role in the maintenance of dental health and general mouth lubrication, without which speech would be impossible.[9] The main glands are all exocrine glands, secreting via ducts. All of these glands terminate in the mouth. The largest of these are the parotid glands—their secretion is mainly serous. The next pair are underneath the jaw, the submandibular glands, these produce both serous fluid and mucus. The serous fluid is produced by serous glands in these salivary glands which also produce lingual lipase. They produce about 70% of the oral cavity saliva. The third pair are the sublingual glands located underneath the tongue and their secretion is mainly mucous with a small percentage of saliva.
Within the oral mucosa (a mucous membrane) lining the mouth and also on the tongue and palates and mouth floor, are the minor salivary glands; their secretions are mainly mucous and are innervated by the facial nerve (the seventh cranial nerve).[10] The glands also secrete amylase a first stage in the breakdown of food acting on the carbohydrate in the food to transform the starch content into maltose. There are other glands on the surface of the tongue that encircle taste buds on the back part of the tongue and these also produce lingual lipase. Lipase is a digestive enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of lipids (fats). These glands are termed Von Ebner's glands which have also been shown to have another function in the secretion of histatins which offer an early defense (outside of the immune system) against microbes in food, when it makes contact with these glands on the tongue tissue.[9][11] Sensory information can stimulate the secretion of saliva providing the necessary fluid for the tongue to work with and also to ease swallowing of the food.

Saliva[edit]
Main article: Saliva
Saliva functions initially in the digestive system to moisten and soften food into the formation of a bolus. The bolus is further helped by the lubrication provided by the saliva in its passage from the mouth into the esophagus. Also of importance is the presence in saliva of the digestive enzymes amylase and lipase. Amylase starts to work on the starch in carbohydrates, breaking it down into the simple sugars of maltose and dextrose that can be further broken down in the small intestine. Saliva in the mouth can account for 30% of this initial starch digestion. Lipase starts to work on breaking down fats. Lipase is further produced in the pancreas where it is released to continue this digestion of fats. The presence of salivary lipase is of prime importance in young babies whose pancreatic lipase has yet to be developed.[12]
As well as its role in supplying digestive enzymes, saliva has a cleansing action for the teeth and mouth.[13] It also has an immunological role in supplying antibodies to the system, such as immunoglobulin A.[14] This is seen to be key in preventing infections of the salivary glands, importantly that of parotitis.







Saliva also contains a glycoprotein called haptocorrin which is a binding protein to vitamin B12.[15] It binds with the vitamin in order to carry it safely through the acidic content of the stomach. When it reaches the duodenum, pancreatic enzymes break down the glycoprotein and free the vitamin which then binds with intrinsic factor.
Tongue[edit]
Food enters the mouth where the first stage in the digestive process takes place, with the action of the tongue and the secretion of saliva. The tongue is a fleshy and muscular sensory organ, and the very first sensory information is received via the taste buds in the papillae on its surface. If the taste is agreeable the tongue will go into action, manipulating the food in the mouth which stimulates the secretion of saliva from the salivary glands. The liquid quality of the saliva will help in the softening of the food and its enzyme content will start to break down the food whilst it is still in the mouth. The first part of the food to be broken down is the starch of carbohydrates (by the enzyme amylase in the saliva).
The tongue is attached to the floor of the mouth by a ligamentous band called the frenum[16] and this gives it great mobility for the manipulation of food (and speech); the range of manipulation is optimally controlled by the action of several muscles and limited in its external range by the stretch of the frenum. The tongue's two sets of muscles, are four intrinsic muscles that originate in the tongue and are involved with its shaping, and four extrinsic muscles originating in bone that are involved with its movement.
Taste[edit]
Main article: Taste




Cross section of circumvallate papilla showing arrangement of nerves and taste buds


Taste is a form of chemoreception that takes place in the specialised taste receptors, contained in structures called taste buds in the mouth. Taste buds are mainly on the upper surface (dorsum) of the tongue. The function of taste perception is vital to help prevent harmful or rotten foods from being consumed. There are also taste buds on the epiglottis and upper part of the esophagus. The taste buds are innervated by a branch of the facial nerve the chorda tympani, and the glossopharyngeal nerve. Taste messages are sent via these cranial nerves to the brain. The brain can distinguish between the chemical qualities of the food. The five basic tastes are referred to as those of saltiness, sourness, bitterness, sweetness, and umami. The detection of saltiness and sourness enables the control of salt and acid balance. The detection of bitterness warns of poisons—many of a plant's defences are of poisonous compounds that are bitter. Sweetness guides to those foods that will supply energy; the initial breakdown of the energy-giving carbohydrates by salivary amylase creates the taste of sweetness since simple sugars are the first result. The taste of umami is thought to signal protein-rich food. Sour tastes are acidic which is often found in bad food. The brain has to decide very quickly whether the food should be eaten or not. It was the findings in 1991, describing the first olfactory receptors that helped to prompt the research into taste. The olfactory receptors are located on cell surfaces in the nose which bind to chemicals enabling the detection of smells. It is assumed that signals from taste receptors work together with those from the nose, to form an idea of complex food flavours.[17]
Teeth[edit]
Main article: Human tooth
Teeth are complex structures made of materials specific to them. They are made of a bone-like material called dentin, which is covered by the hardest tissue in the body—enamel.[18] Teeth have different shapes to deal with different aspects of mastication employed in tearing and chewing pieces of food into smaller and smaller pieces. This results in a much larger surface area for the action of digestive enzymes. The teeth are named after their particular roles in the process of mastication—incisors are used for cutting or biting off pieces of food; canines, are used for tearing, premolars and molars are used for chewing and grinding. Mastication of the food with the help of saliva and mucus results in the formation of a soft bolus which can then be swallowed to make its way down the upper gastrointestinal tract to the stomach.[19] The digestive enzymes in saliva also help in keeping the teeth clean by breaking down any lodged food particles.
Epiglottis[edit]
Main article: Epiglottis







The epiglottis is a flap of elastic cartilage attached to the entrance of the larynx. It is covered with a mucous membrane and there are taste buds on its lingual surface which faces into the mouth.[20] Its laryngeal surface faces into the larynx. The epiglottis functions to guard the entrance of the glottis, the opening between the vocal folds. It is normally pointed upward during breathing with its underside functioning as part of the pharynx, but during swallowing, the epiglottis folds down to a more horizontal position, with its upper side functioning as part of the pharynx. In this manner it prevents food from going into the trachea and instead directs it to the esophagus, which is behind. During swallowing, the backward motion of the tongue forces the epiglottis over the glottis' opening to prevent any food that is being swallowed from entering the larynx which leads to the lungs; the larynx is also pulled upwards to assist this process. Stimulation of the larynx by ingested matter produces a strong cough reflex in order to protect the lungs.
Pharynx[edit]
Main article: Pharynx
The pharynx is a part of the conducting zone of the respiratory system and also a part of the digestive system. It is the part of the throat immediately behind the nasal cavity at the back of the mouth and above the esophagus and larynx. The pharynx is made up of three parts. The lower two parts—the oropharynx and the laryngopharynx are involved in the digestive system. The laryngopharynx connects to the esophagus and it serves as a passageway for both air and food. Air enters the larynx anteriorly but anything swallowed has priority and the passage of air is temporarily blocked. The pharynx is innervated by the pharyngeal plexus of the vagus nerve.[21] Muscles in the pharynx push the food into the esophagus. The pharynx joins the esophagus at the oesophageal inlet which is located behind the cricoid cartilage.
Esophagus[edit]
Main article: Esophagus
The esophagus, commonly known as the gullet, is an organ which consists of a muscular tube through which food passes from the pharynx to the stomach. The esophagus is continuous with the laryngeal part of the pharynx. It passes through the posterior mediastinum in the thorax and enters the stomach through a hole in the thoracic diaphragm—the esophageal hiatus, at the level of the tenth thoracic vertebra (T10). Its length averages 25 cm, varying with height. It is divided into cervical, thoracic and abdominal parts. The pharynx joins the esophagus at the esophageal inlet which is behind the cricoid cartilage.
At rest the esophagus is closed at both ends, by the upper and lower esophageal sphincters. The opening of the upper sphincter is triggered by the swallowing reflex so that food is allowed through. The sphincter also serves to prevent back flow from the esophagus into the pharynx. The esophagus has a mucous membrane and the epithelium which has a protective function is continuously replaced due to the volume of food that passes inside the esophagus. During swallowing, food passes from the mouth through the pharynx into the esophagus. The epiglottis folds down to a more horizontal position so as to prevent food from going into the trachea, instead directing it to the esophagus.
Once in the esophagus, the bolus travels down to the stomach via rhythmic contraction and relaxation of muscles known as peristalsis. The lower esophageal sphincter is a muscular sphincter surrounding the lower part of the esophagus. The junction between the esophagus and the stomach (the gastroesophageal junction) is controlled by the lower esophageal sphincter, which remains constricted at all times other than during swallowing and vomiting to prevent the contents of the stomach from entering the esophagus. As the esophagus does not have the same protection from acid as the stomach, any failure of this sphincter can lead to heartburn. The esophagus has a mucous membrane of epithelium which has a protective function as well as providing a smooth surface for the passage of food. Due to the high volume of food that is passed over time, this membrane is continuously renewed.




An illustration of the digestive system in an adult.


Diaphragm[edit]







The diaphragm is an important part of the body's digestive system. The muscular diaphragm separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity where most of the digestive organs are located. The suspensory muscle attaches the ascending duodenum to the diaphragm. This muscle is thought to be of help in the digestive system in that its attachment offers a wider angle to the duodenojejunal flexure for the easier passage of digesting material. The diaphragm also attaches to, and anchors the liver at its bare area. The esophagus enters the abdomen through a hole in the diaphragm at the level of T10.
Stomach[edit]
Main article: Stomach




Areas of the stomach


The stomach is a major organ of the gastrointestinal tract and digestive system. It is a consistently J-shaped organ joined to the esophagus at its upper end and to the duodenum at its lower end. Gastric acid (informally gastric juice), produced in the stomach plays a vital role in the digestive process, and mainly contains hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride. A peptide hormone, gastrin, produced by G cells in the gastric glands, stimulates the production of gastric juice which activates the digestive enzymes. Pepsinogen is a precursor enzyme (zymogen) produced by the gastric chief cells, and gastric acid activates this to the enzyme pepsin which begins the digestion of proteins. As these two chemicals would damage the stomach wall, mucus is secreted by innumerable gastric glands in the stomach, to provide a slimy protective layer against the damaging effects of the chemicals.
At the same time that protein is being digested, mechanical churning occurs through the action of peristalsis, waves of muscular contractions that move along the stomach wall. This allows the mass of food to further mix with the digestive enzymes. Gastric lipase secreted by the chief cells in the fundic glands in the gastric mucosa of the stomach, is an acidic lipase, in contrast with the alkaline pancreatic lipase. This breaks down fats to some degree though is not as efficient as the pancreatic lipase.
The pylorus, the lowest section of the stomach which attaches to the duodenum via the pyloric canal, contains countless glands which secrete digestive enzymes including gastrin. After an hour or two, a thick semi-liquid called chyme is produced. When the pyloric sphincter, or valve opens, chyme enters the duodenum where it mixes further with digestive enzymes from the pancreas, and then passes through the small intestine, where digestion continues. When the chyme is fully digested, it is absorbed into the blood. 95% of absorption of nutrients occurs in the small intestine. Water and minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon of the large intestine, where the environment is slightly acidic. Some vitamins, such as biotin and vitamin K produced by bacteria in the gut flora of the colon are also absorbed.
The parietal cells in the fundus of the stomach, produce a glycoprotein called intrinsic factor which is essential for the absorption of vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin), is carried to, and through the stomach, bound to a glycoprotein secreted by the salivary glands - transcobalamin I also called haptocorrin, which protects the acid-sensitive vitamin from the acidic stomach contents. Once in the more neutral duodenum, pancreatic enzymes break down the protective glycoprotein. The freed vitamin B12 then binds to intrinsic factor which is then absorbed by the enterocytes in the ileum.
The stomach is a distensible organ and can normally expand to hold about one litre of food.[22] This expansion is enabled by a series of gastric folds in the inner walls of the stomach. The stomach of a newborn baby will only be able to expand to retain about 30 ml.
Spleen[edit]
Main article: Spleen
The spleen breaks down both red and white blood cells that are spent. This is why it is sometimes known as the 'graveyard of red blood cells'. A product of this digestion is the pigment bilirubin, which is sent to the liver and secreted in the bile. Another product is iron, which is used in the formation of new blood cells in the bone marrow.[5] Medicine treats the spleen solely as belonging to the lymphatic system, though it is acknowledged that the full range of its important functions is not yet understood.[23]
Liver[edit]
Main article: Liver








The liver is the second largest organ (after the skin) and is an accessory digestive gland which plays a role in the body's metabolism. The liver has many functions some of which are important to digestion. The liver can detoxify various metabolites; synthesise proteins and produce biochemicals needed for digestion. It regulates the storage of glycogen which it can form from glucose (glycogenesis). The liver can also synthesise glucose from certain amino acids. Its digestive functions are largely involved with the breaking down of carbohydrates. It also maintains protein metabolism in its synthesis and degradation. In lipid metabolism it synthesises cholesterol. Fats are also produced in the process of lipogenesis. The liver synthesises the bulk of lipoproteins. The liver is located in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen and below the diaphragm to which it is attached at one part, This is to the right of the stomach and it overlies the gall bladder. The liver produces bile, an important alkaline compound which aids digestion.

Bile[edit]
Bile produced by the liver is made up of water (97%), bile salts, mucus and pigments, 1% fats and inorganic salts.[24] Bilirubin is its major pigment. Bile acts partly as a surfactant which lowers the surface tension between either two liquids or a solid and a liquid and helps to emulsify the fats in the chyme. Food fat is dispersed by the action of bile into smaller units called micelles. The breaking down into micelles creates a much larger surface area for the pancreatic enzyme, lipase to work on. Lipase digests the triglycerides which are broken down into two fatty acids and a monoglyceride. These are then absorbed by villi on the intestinal wall. If fats are not absorbed in this way in the small intestine problems can arise later in the large intestine which is not equipped to absorb fats. Bile also helps in the absorption of vitamin K from the diet. Bile is collected and delivered through the common hepatic duct. This duct joins with the cystic duct to connect in a common bile duct with the gallbladder. Bile is stored in the gallbladder for release when food is discharged into the duodenum and also after a few hours.[25]
Gallbladder[edit]
The gallbladder is a hollow part of the biliary tract that sits just beneath the liver, with the gallbladder body resting in a small depression.[26] It is a small organ where the bile produced by the liver is stored, before being released into the small intestine. Bile flows from the liver through the bile ducts and into the gall bladder for storage. The bile is released in response to cholecystokinin (CCK) a peptide hormone released from the duodenum. The production of CCK (by endocrine cells of the duodenum) is stimulated by the presence of fat in the duodenum.[27]
It is divided into three sections, a fundus, body and neck. The neck tapers and connects to the biliary tract via the cystic duct, which then joins the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct. At this junction is a mucosal fold called Hartmann's pouch, where gallstones commonly get stuck. The muscular layer of the body is of smooth muscle tissue that helps the gallbladder contract, so that it can discharge its bile into the bile duct. The gallbladder needs to store bile in a natural, semi-liquid form at all times. Hydrogen ions secreted from the inner lining of the gallbladder keep the bile acidic enough to prevent hardening. To dilute the bile, water and electrolytes from the digestion system are added. Also, salts attach themselves to cholesterol molecules in the bile to keep them from crystallising. If there is too much cholesterol or bilirubin in the bile, or if the gallbladder doesn't empty properly the systems can fail. This is how gallstones form when a small piece of calcium gets coated with either cholesterol or bilirubin and the bile crystallises and forms a gallstone. The main purpose of the gallbladder is to store and release bile, or gall. Bile is released into the small intestine in order to help in the digestion of fats by breaking down larger molecules into smaller ones. After the fat is absorbed, the bile is also absorbed and transported back to the liver for reuse.
Pancreas[edit]
Main article: Pancreas




Action of digestive hormones






Pancreas, duodenum and bile duct


The pancreas is a major organ functioning as an accessory digestive gland in the digestive system. It is both an endocrine gland and an exocrine gland.[28] The endocrine part secretes insulin when the blood sugar becomes high; insulin moves glucose from the blood into the muscles and other tissues for use as energy. The endocrine part releases glucagon when the blood sugar is low; glucagon allows stored sugar to be broken down into glucose by the liver in order to re-balance the sugar levels. The pancreas produces and releases important digestive enzymes in the pancreatic juice that it delivers to the duodenum. The pancreas lies below and at the back of the stomach. It connects to the duodenum via the pancreatic duct which it joins near to the bile duct's connection where both the bile and pancreatic juice can act on the chyme that is released from the stomach into the duodenum. Aqueous pancreatic secretions from pancreatic duct cells contain bicarbonate ions which are alkaline and help with the bile to neutralise the acidic chyme that is churned out by the stomach.
The pancreas is also the main source of enzymes for the digestion of fats and proteins. Some of these are released in response to the production of CKK in the duodenum. (The enzymes that digest polysaccharides, by contrast, are primarily produced by the walls of the intestines.) The cells are filled with secretory granules containing the precursor digestive enzymes. The major proteases, the pancreatic enzymes which work on proteins, are trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen. Elastase is also produced. Smaller amounts of lipase and amylase are secreted. The pancreas also secretes phospholipase A2, lysophospholipase, and cholesterol esterase. The precursor zymogens, are inactive variants of the enzymes; which avoids the onset of pancreatitis caused by autodegradation. Once released in the intestine, the enzyme enteropeptidase present in the intestinal mucosa activates trypsinogen by cleaving it to form trypsin; further cleavage results in chymotripsin.
Lower gastrointestinal tract[edit]
Main article: Gastrointestinal tract
The lower gastrointestinal tract (GI), includes the small intestine and all of the large intestine.[29] The intestine is also called the bowel or the gut. The lower GI starts at the pyloric sphincter of the stomach and finishes at the anus. The small intestine is subdivided into the duodenum, the jejunum and the ileum. The cecum marks the division between the small and large intestine. The large intestine includes the rectum and anal canal.[1]
Small intestine[edit]




Lower GI tract - 3) Small intestine; 5) Cecum; 6) Large intestine






Duodenum


Food starts to arrive in the small intestine one hour after it is eaten, and after two hours the stomach has emptied. Until this time the food is termed a bolus. It then becomes the partially digested semi-liquid termed chyme.
In the small intestine, the pH becomes crucial; it needs to be finely balanced in order to activate digestive enzymes. The chyme is very acidic, with a low pH, having been released from the stomach and needs to be made much more alkaline. This is achieved in the duodenum by the addition of bile from the gall bladder combined with the bicarbonate secretions from the pancreatic duct and also from secretions of bicarbonate-rich mucus from duodenal glands known as Brunner's glands. The chyme arrives in the intestines having been released from the stomach through the opening of the pyloric sphincter. The resulting alkaline fluid mix neutralises the gastric acid which would damage the lining of the intestine. The mucus component lubricates the walls of the intestine.
When the digested food particles are reduced enough in size and composition, they can be absorbed by the intestinal wall and carried to the bloodstream. The first receptacle for this chyme is the duodenal bulb. From here it passes into the first of the three sections of the small intestine, the duodenum. (The next section is the jejunum and the third is the ileum). The duodenum is the first and shortest section of the small intestine. It is a hollow, jointed C-shaped tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. It starts at the duodenal bulb and ends at the suspensory muscle of duodenum. The attachment of the suspensory muscle to the diaphragm is thought to help the passage of food by making a wider angle at its attachment.
Most food digestion takes place in the small intestine. Segmentation contractions act to mix and move the chyme more slowly in the small intestine allowing more time for absorption (and these continue in the large intestine). In the duodenum, pancreatic lipase is secreted together with a co-enzyme, colipase to further digest the fat content of the chyme. From this breakdown, smaller particles of emulsified fats called chylomicrons are produced. There are also digestive cells called enterocytes lining the intestines (the majority being in the small intestine). They are unusual cells in that they have villi on their surface which in turn have innumerable microvilli on their surface. All these villi make for a greater surface area, not only for the absorption of chyme but also for its further digestion by large numbers of digestive enzymes present on the microvilli.
The chylomicrons are small enough to pass through the enterocyte villi and into their lymph capillaries called lacteals. A milky fluid called chyle, consisting mainly of the emulsified fats of the chylomicrons, results from the absorbed mix with the lymph in the lacteals.[clarification needed] Chyle is then transported through the lymphatic system to the rest of the body.
The suspensory muscle marks the end of the duodenum and the division between the upper gastrointestinal tract and the lower GI tract. The digestive tract continues as the jejunum which continues as the ileum. The jejunum, the midsection of the small intestine contains circular folds, flaps of doubled mucosal membrane which partially encircle and sometimes completely encircle the lumen of the intestine. These folds together with villi serve to increase the surface area of the jejunum enabling an increased absorption of digested sugars, amino acids and fatty acids into the bloodstream. The circular folds also slow the passage of food giving more time for nutrients to be absorbed.
The last part of the small intestine is the ileum. This also contains villi and vitamin B12; bile acids and any residue nutrients are absorbed here. When the chyme is exhausted of its nutrients the remaining waste material changes into the semi-solids called feces, which pass to the large intestine, where bacteria in the gut flora further break down residual proteins and starches.[30]
Cecum[edit]




Cecum and beginning of ascending colon


The cecum is a pouch marking the division between the small intestine and the large intestine.[31] The cecum receives chyme from the last part of the small intestine, the ileum, and connects to the ascending colon of the large intestine. At this junction there is a sphincter or valve, the ileocecal valve which slows the passage of chyme from the ileum, allowing further digestion. It is also the site of the appendix attachment.
Large intestine[edit]
In the large intestine,[1] the passage of the digesting food in the colon is a lot slower, taking from 12 to 50 hours until it is removed by defecation. The colon mainly serves as a site for the fermentation of digestible matter by the gut flora. The time taken varies considerably between individuals. The remaining semi-solid waste is termed feces and is removed by the coordinated contractions of the intestinal walls, termed peristalsis, which propels the excreta forward to reach the rectum and exit via defecation from the anus. The wall has an outer layer of longitudinal muscles, the taeniae coli, and an inner layer of circular muscles. The circular muscle keeps the material moving forward and also prevents any back flow of waste. Also of help in the action of peristalsis is the basal electrical rhythm that determines the frequency of contractions.[32] The taeniae coli can be seen and are responsible for the bulges (haustra) present in the colon. Most parts of the GI tract are covered with serous membranes and have a mesentery. Other more muscular parts are lined with adventitia.
Blood supply[edit]




Blood supply to the digestive organs[33]






Arteries and veins around the pancreas and spleen


The digestive system is supplied by the celiac artery. The celiac artery is the first major branch from the abdominal aorta, and is the only major artery that nourishes the digestive organs.
There are three main divisions – the left gastric artery, the common hepatic artery and the splenic artery.
The celiac artery supplies the liver, stomach, spleen and the upper 1/3 of the duodenum (to the sphincter of Oddi) and the pancreas with oxygenated blood. Most of the blood is returned to the liver via the portal venous system for further processing and detoxification before returning to the systemic circulation via the hepatic portal vein.
The next branch from the abdominal aorta is the superior mesenteric artery, which supplies the regions of the digestive tract derived from the midgut, which includes the distal 2/3 of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and the proximal 2/3 of the transverse colon.
The final branch which is important for the digestive system is the inferior mesenteric artery, which supplies the regions of the digestive tract derived from the hindgut, which includes the distal 1/3 of the transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum, and the anus above the pectinate line.
Nerve supply[edit]




Dietary life rules, Japan, Edo period.


The enteric nervous system consists of some one hundred million neurons[34] that are embedded in the peritoneum, the lining of the gastrointestinal tract extending from the esophagus to the anus.[35] These neurons are collected into two plexuses - the myenteric (or Auerbach's) plexus that lies between the longitudinal and the smooth muscle layers, and the submucosal (or Meissner's) plexus that lies between the circular smooth muscle layer and the mucosa.[36][37][38]
Parasympathetic innervation to the ascending colon is supplied by the vagus nerve. Sympathetic innervation is supplied by the splanchnic nerves that join the celiac ganglia. Most of the digestive tract is innervated by the two large celiac ganglia, with the upper part of each ganglion joined by the greater splanchnic nerve and the lower parts joined by the lesser splanchnic nerve. It is from these ganglia that many of the gastric plexuses arise.
Development[edit]
Main article: Development of the digestive system
Early in embryonic development, the embryo has three germ layers and abuts a yolk sac. During the second week of development, the embryo grows and begins to surround and envelop portions of this sac. The enveloped portions form the basis for the adult gastrointestinal tract. Sections of this foregut begin to differentiate into the organs of the gastrointestinal tract, such as the oesophagus, stomach, and intestines.[39]
During the fourth week of development, the stomach rotates. The stomach, originally lying in the midline of the embryo, rotates so that its body is on the left. This rotation also affects the part of the gastrointestinal tube immediately below the stomach, which will go on to become the duodenum. By the end of the fourth week, the developing duodenum begins to spout a small outpouching on its right side, the hepatic diverticulum, which will go on to become the biliary tree. Just below this is a second outpouching, known as the cystic diverticulum, that will eventually develop into the gallbladder.[39]
Clinical significance[edit]
Main article: Gastrointestinal disease
Each part of the digestive system is subject to a wide range of disorders many of which can be congenital. Mouth diseases can also be caused by pathogenic bacteria, viruses and fungi. Mouth diseases include tongue diseases and salivary gland diseases. A common gum disease in the mouth is gingivitis which is caused by bacteria in plaque. The most common viral infection of the mouth is gingivostomatitis caused by herpes simplex. A common fungal infection is candidiasis commonly known as thrush which affects the mucous membranes of the mouth.
There are a number of esophageal diseases such as the development of Schatzki rings that can restrict the passageway, causing difficulties in swallowing. They can also completely block the esophagus.[40]
Stomach diseases are often chronic conditions and include gastroparesis, gastritis, and peptic ulcers.
A number of problems including malnutrition and anemia can arise from malabsorption, the abnormal absorption of nutrients in the GI tract. Malabsorption can have many causes ranging from infection, to enzyme deficiencies such as exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. It can also arise as a result of other gastrointestinal diseases such as coeliac disease. Coeliac disease is an autoimmune disorder of the small intestine. This can cause vitamin deficiencies due to the improper absorption of nutrients in the small intestine. The small intestine can also be obstructed by a volvulus, a loop of intestine that becomes twisted enclosing its attached mesentery. This can cause mesenteric ischemia if severe enough.
A common disorder of the bowel is diverticulitis. Diverticula are small pouches that can form inside the bowel wall, which can become inflamed to give diverticulitis. This disease can have complications if an inflamed diverticulum bursts and infection sets in. Any infection can spread further to the lining of the abdomen (peritoneum) and cause potentially fatal peritonitis.[41]
Crohn's disease is a common chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), which can affect any part of the GI tract,[42] but it mostly starts in the terminal ileum.
Ulcerative colitis an ulcerative form of colitis, is the other major inflammatory bowel disease which is restricted to the colon and rectum. Both of these IBDs can give an increased risk of the development of colorectal cancer. Ulcerative coliltis is the most common of the IBDs[43]
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is the most common of the functional gastrointestinal disorders. These are idiopathic disorders that the Rome process has helped to define.[44]
Giardiasis is a disease of the small intestine caused by a protist parasite Giardia lamblia. This does not spread but remains confined to the lumen of the small intestine.[45] It can often be asymptomatic, but as often can be indicated by a variety of symptoms. Giardiasis is the most common pathogenic parasitic infection in humans.[46]
There are diagnostic tools mostly involving the ingestion of barium sulphate to investigate disorders of the GI tract.[47] These are known as upper gastrointestinal series that enable imaging of the pharynx, larynx, oesophagous, stomach and small intestine and lower gastrointestinal series for imaging of the colon.
In pregnancy[edit]
Gestation can predispose for certain digestive disorders. Gestational diabetes can develop in the mother as a result of pregnancy and while this often presents with few symptoms it can lead to pre-eclampsia.
See also[edit]

Gastrointestinal physiology
Gut–brain axis
Neurogastroenterology

References[edit]


^ a b c d "Large intestine". Encyclopedia Britannica. 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. 
^ Kong F, Singh RP (June 2008). "Disintegration of solid foods in human stomach". J. Food Sci. 73 (5): R67–80. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3841.2008.00766.x. PMID 18577009. 
^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1993). Human Biology and Health. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, US: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-981176-1. 
^ Pocock, Gillian (2006). Human Physiology (Third ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 382. ISBN 978-0-19-856878-0. 
^ a b Black's Medical Dictionary 1999
^ a b c consultants Daniel Albert et al. (2012). Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary (32nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier. ISBN 978-1-4160-6257-8. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Ten Cate's Oral Histology, Nanci, Elsevier, 2007, page 321
^ Brittanica Concise Encyclopedia 2007
^ a b Ten Cate's Oral Histology, Nanci, Elsevier, 2013, page 275-276
^ Illustrated Anatomy of the Head and Neck, Fehrenbach and Herring, Elsevier, 2012, p. 157
^ Piludu, M; Lantini, MS; et al. (November 2006). "Salivary histatins in human deep posterior lingual glands (of von Ebner)". Arch Biol. 51: 967–73. doi:10.1016/j.archoralbio.2006.05.011. PMID 16859632. 
^ Maton, Anthea. Human Biology and Health. Prentice Hall 1993. ISBN 0-13-981176-1. 
^ Edgar, WM (1992). "Saliva:its secretion, composition and functions". Br.Dent J. 172: 305–12. doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4807861. PMID 1591115. 
^ S Fagarasan; T Honjo (2003). "Intestinal IgA Synthesis: Regulation of Front-line Body Defenses". Nature Reviews Immunology. 3 (1): 63–72. doi:10.1038/nri982. PMID 12511876. 
^ Pettit, John D.; Paul Moss (2006). Essential Haematology 5e (Essential). Blackwell Publishing Professional. p. 44. ISBN 1-4051-3649-9. 
^ Black's Medical Dictionary.1999
^ Bradbury, Jane (March 2004). "Taste Perception Cracking the code". PLOS Biology. 2 (3): E64. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020064. PMC 368160 . PMID 15024416. 
^ Britannica Concise Encyclopedia 2007
^ "Prehension, Mastication and Swallowing". 
^ Jowett, Shrestha (1998). "Mucosa and taste buds of the human epiglottis". Journal of Anatomy. 193 (4): 617–618. doi:10.1046/j.1469-7580.1998.19340617.x. PMC 1467887 . PMID 10029195. 
^ "pharyngeal plexus (anatomy)". GPnotebook. 
^ Sherwood, Lauralee (1997). Human physiology: from cells to systems. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Pub. Co. ISBN 0-314-09245-5. OCLC 35270048. 
^ Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Elsevier Saunders 2012. ISBN 978-1-4160-6257-8. 
^ Guyton and Hall (2011). Textbook of Medical Physiology. U.S.: Saunders Elsevier. p. 784. ISBN 978-1-4160-4574-8. 
^ Black's Medical Dictionary 39th Ed.1999
^ Drake, Richard L.; Vogl, Wayne; Tibbitts, Adam W.M. Mitchell; illustrations by Richard; Richardson, Paul (2005). Gray's anatomy for students. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone. p. 287. ISBN 978-0-8089-2306-0.
^ "Histology guide". Retrieved 22 May 2015. 
^ Ahrens, Thomas; Prentice, Donna (1998). Critical care certification: preparation, review & practice exams. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange. p. 265. ISBN 0-8385-1474-X. 
^ Lower Gastrointestinal Tract at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
^ Cummings, JH; Macfarlane, GT (November 1997). "Role of intestinal bacteria in nutrient metabolism". JPEN. Journal of parenteral and enteral nutrition. 21 (6): 357–65. doi:10.1177/0148607197021006357. PMID 9406136. 
^ O.D.E. 2nd. Edition 2005
^ Wood, Jackie D. (2009), "Gastrointestinal Physiology", in Rhoades, Rodney A.; Bell, David R., Medical Physiology: Principles for Clinical Medicine (3 ed.), Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 463–496 
^ Essential Clinical Anatomy. K.L. Moore & A.M. Agur. Lippincott, 2 ed. 2002. Page 150
^ Boron, Walter F.; Boulpaep, Emile L. (2005). Medical Physiology. Elsevier Saunders. p. 883. ISBN 978-1-4160-2328-9. 
^ Hall, John E. (2011). "General Principles of Gastrointestinal Function". Guyton and Hal Textbook of Medical Physiology (12 ed.). Saunders Elsevier. p. 755. ISBN 978-1416045748. 
^ "The Enteric Nervous System". Retrieved 2008-11-29. 
^ Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, Vol. 194: Sensory Nerves, Brendan J. Canning, Domenico Spina. Springer. Page 341.
^ Costa, M; Brookes, S J H; Hennig, G W (2000). "Anatomy and physiology of the enteric nervous system". Gut. 47: iv15–iv19. doi:10.1136/gut.47.suppl_4.iv15. PMC 1766806 . PMID 11076898. 
^ a b Gary C. Schoenwolf; et al. (2009). Larsen's human embryology (Thoroughly rev. and updated 4th ed.). Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier. pp. "Development of the Gastrointestinal Tract". ISBN 978-0-443-06811-9. 
^ Cotran, Ramzi S.; Kumar, Vinay; Fausto, Nelson; Nelso Fausto; Robbins, Stanley L.; Abbas, Abul K. (2005). Robbins and Cotran pathologic basis of disease. St. Louis, Mo: Elsevier Saunders. p. 800. ISBN 0-7216-0187-1. 
^ Morris, AM; Regenbogen, SE; Hardiman, KM; Hendren, S (Jan 15, 2014). "Sigmoid diverticulitis: a systematic review". JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association. 311 (3): 287–97. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.282025. PMID 24430321. 
^ "Crohn's Disease". National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NDDIC). July 10, 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2014. 
^ Danese, S. & Fiocci, C. (2011). Ulcerative colitis. The New England Journal of Medicine, 365:1713-1725.
^ Thompson WG, Longstreth GL, Drossman DA et al. (2000). Functional Bowel Disorders. In: Drossman DA, Corazziari E, Talley NJ et al. (eds.), Rome II: The Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders. Diagnosis, Pathophysiology and Treatment. A Multinational Consensus. Lawrence, KS: Allen Press. ISBN 0-9656837-2-9.
^ Harrison's Internal Medicine, Harrison's Online Chapter 199 Protozoal intestinal infections and trochomoniasis
^ Esch KJ, Petersen CA (January 2013). "Transmission and epidemiology of zoonotic protozoal diseases of companion animals". Clin Microbiol Rev. 26 (1): 58–85. doi:10.1128/CMR.00067-12. PMC 3553666 . PMID 23297259. 
^ Boland, Giles W (2013). Gastrointestinal imaging : the requisites (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders. ISBN 9780323101998. 








v
t
e


Anatomy of the mouth



Lip



Upper
Lower
Vermilion border
Frenulum of lower lip
Labial commissure of mouth
Philtrum





Cheek



Buccal fat pad





Roof



Hard palate
Soft palate
Palatine raphe
Incisive papilla





Gums



Interdental papilla
Gingival sulcus
Gingival margin
Gingival fibers
Junctional epithelium
Mucogingival junction
Sulcular epithelium
Stippling
Periodontium

Cementum
Gingiva
Periodontal ligament







Glands



Parotid gland

duct


Submandibular gland

duct


Sublingual gland

duct







Teeth



see tooth anatomy





Tongue



Top

Taste bud
Median sulcus
Terminal sulcus
Foramen cecum
Lingual tonsils


Underside

Frenulum
Fimbriated fold
Sublingual caruncle
Glossoepiglottic folds
Lingual septum







Back of mouth



Oropharynx
fauces
Plica semilunaris of the fauces
Uvula
Palatoglossal arch
Palatopharyngeal arch
Tonsillar fossa
Palatine tonsil












v
t
e


Anatomy of the gastrointestinal tract, excluding the mouth



Upper




Pharynx



Muscles
Spaces

peripharyngeal
retropharyngeal
parapharyngeal
retrovisceral
danger
prevertebral


Pterygomandibular raphe
Pharyngeal raphe
Buccopharyngeal fascia
Pharyngobasilar fascia
Piriform sinus





Esophagus



Sphincters

upper
lower


glands





Stomach



Curvatures

greater
lesser
Angular incisure


Cardia
Body
Fundus
Pylorus

antrum
canal
sphincter


Gastric mucosa
Gastric folds
Microanatomy

Gastric pits
Gastric glands
Cardiac glands
Fundic glands
Pyloric glands
Foveolar cell
Parietal cell
Gastric chief cell
Enterochromaffin-like cell










Lower




Small intestine




Microanatomy



Intestinal villus
Intestinal gland
Enterocyte
Enteroendocrine cell
Goblet cell
Paneth cell





Duodenum



Suspensory muscle
Major duodenal papilla
Minor duodenal papilla
Duodenojejunal flexure
Brunner's glands





Jejunum



No substructures





Ileum



Ileocecal valve
Peyer's patches
Microfold cell








Large intestine




Cecum



Appendix





Colon



Ascending colon
Hepatic flexure
Transverse colon
Splenic flexure
Descending colon
Sigmoid colon
Continuous

taenia coli
haustra
epiploic appendix







Rectum



Transverse folds
Ampulla





Anal canal



Anus
Anal columns
Anal valves
Anal sinuses
Pectinate line
Internal anal sphincter
Intersphincteric groove
External anal sphincter











Wall



Serosa / Adventitia
Subserosa
Muscular layer
Submucosa
Circular folds
Mucosa
Muscularis mucosa












v
t
e


Anatomy of the liver, pancreas and biliary tree



Liver



Bare area
Cantlie line
Ligamentum venosum
Porta hepatis
Round ligament
Lobes of liver

Caudate
Quadrate


Fibrous capsule of Glisson
Perisinusoidal space
Liver sinusoid

Periportal space


Portal triad
Lobules of liver
Liver segment
Microanatomy

Hepatocyte
Hepatic stellate cell
Kupffer cell







Biliary tract




Bile ducts



Intrahepatic bile ducts

Bile canaliculus
Canals of Hering
Interlobular


Left hepatic duct
Right hepatic duct
Common hepatic duct





Gallbladder



Cystic duct
Common bile duct
Ampulla of Vater

Sphincter of Oddi


Cells

Cholecystocyte










Pancreas



Gross

Tail
Body
Neck
Head (Uncinate process)


Ducts

main
accessory


Microanatomy

Pancreatic islets
Centroacinar cell
Stellate cell














v
t
e


Physiology of the gastrointestinal system



GI tract




Upper




Exocrine



Chief cells

Pepsinogen


Parietal cells

Gastric acid
Intrinsic factor


Foveolar cells

HCO3−
Mucus


Goblet cells

Mucus







Processes



Swallowing
Vomiting





Fluids



Saliva
Gastric acid








Lower




Enteric nervous system



Submucous plexus
Myenteric plexus





Endocrine/paracrine







G cells

gastrin


D cells

somatostatin


ECL cells

Histamine







enterogastrone:



I cells

CCK


K cells

GIP


S cells

secretin










Enteroendocrine cells
Enterochromaffin cell
APUD cell








Fluids



Intestinal juice





Processes



Segmentation contractions
Migrating motor complex
Borborygmus
Defecation








Either/both




Processes



Peristalsis (Interstitial cell of Cajal
Basal electrical rhythm)
Gastrocolic reflex
Digestion











Accessory




Fluids



Bile
Pancreatic juice





Processes



Enterohepatic circulation








Abdominopelvic



Peritoneal fluid












v
t
e


Diseases of the digestive system (primarily K20–K93, 530–579)



Upper GI tract




Esophagus



Esophagitis

Candidal
Eosinophilic
Herpetiform


Rupture

Boerhaave syndrome
Mallory-Weiss syndrome


UES

Zenker's diverticulum


LES

Barrett's esophagus


Esophageal motility disorder

Nutcracker esophagus
Achalasia
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)


Laryngopharyngeal reflux (LPR)
Esophageal stricture
Megaesophagus





Stomach



Gastritis

Atrophic
Ménétrier's disease
Gastroenteritis


Peptic (gastric) ulcer

Cushing ulcer
Dieulafoy's lesion


Dyspepsia
Pyloric stenosis
Achlorhydria
Gastroparesis
Gastroptosis
Portal hypertensive gastropathy
Gastric antral vascular ectasia
Gastric dumping syndrome
Gastric volvulus








Lower GI tract:
Intestinal/
Enteropathy




Small intestine
(Duodenum/Jejunum/Ileum)



Enteritis

Duodenitis
Jejunitis
Ileitis


Peptic (duodenal) ulcer

Curling's ulcer


Malabsorption: Coeliac
Tropical sprue
Blind loop syndrome
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth syndrome
Whipple's
Short bowel syndrome
Steatorrhea
Milroy disease
Bile acid malabsorption





Large intestine
(Appendix/Colon)



Appendicitis
Colitis

Pseudomembranous
Ulcerative
Ischemic
Microscopic
Collagenous
Lymphocytic


Functional colonic disease

IBS
Intestinal pseudoobstruction / Ogilvie syndrome


Megacolon / Toxic megacolon
Diverticulitis/Diverticulosis





Large and/or small



Enterocolitis

Necrotizing


Gastroenterocolitis
IBD

Crohn's disease


Vascular: Abdominal angina
Mesenteric ischemia
Angiodysplasia
Bowel obstruction: Ileus
Intussusception
Volvulus
Fecal impaction
Constipation
Diarrhea

Infectious


Intestinal adhesions





Rectum



Proctitis

Radiation proctitis


Proctalgia fugax
Rectal prolapse
Anismus





Anal canal



Anal fissure/Anal fistula
Anal abscess
Hemorrhoid
Anal dysplasia
Pruritus ani








GI bleeding/BIS



Upper

Hematemesis
Melena


Lower

Hematochezia







Accessory




Liver



Hepatitis

Viral hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Alcoholic hepatitis


Cirrhosis

PBC


Fatty liver

NASH


Vascular

Budd-Chiari syndrome
Hepatic veno-occlusive disease
Portal hypertension
Nutmeg liver


Alcoholic liver disease
Liver failure

Hepatic encephalopathy
Acute liver failure


Liver abscess

Pyogenic
Amoebic


Hepatorenal syndrome
Peliosis hepatis
Metabolic disorders

Wilson's disease
Hemochromatosis







Gallbladder



Cholecystitis
Gallstones/Cholecystolithiasis
Cholesterolosis
Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses
Postcholecystectomy syndrome
Porcelain gallbladder





Bile duct/
Other biliary tree



Cholangitis

Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Secondary sclerosing cholangitis
Ascending


Cholestasis/Mirizzi's syndrome
Biliary fistula
Haemobilia
Gallstones/Cholelithiasis


Common bile duct

Choledocholithiasis
Biliary dyskinesia


Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction





Pancreatic



Pancreatitis

Acute
Chronic
Hereditary
Pancreatic abscess


Pancreatic pseudocyst
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Pancreatic fistula








Abdominopelvic




Hernia



Diaphragmatic

Congenital


Hiatus


Inguinal

Indirect
Direct


Umbilical
Femoral
Obturator
Spigelian


Lumbar

Petit's
Grynfeltt-Lesshaft




Undefined location

Incisional
Internal hernia
Richter's







Peritoneal



Peritonitis

Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis


Hemoperitoneum
Pneumoperitoneum















v
t
e


Development of the digestive system



Foregut



Stomodeum
Buccopharyngeal membrane
Rathke's pouch
Tracheoesophageal septum
Pancreatic bud
Hepatic diverticulum





Midgut



Midgut





Hindgut



Urorectal septum
Proctodeum
Cloaca

Cloacal membrane














v
t
e


Surgical procedures involving the digestive system (ICD-9-CM V3 42–54, ICD-10-PCS 0D)



Digestive tract




Upper GI tract




SGs / Esophagus



Esophagectomy
Heller myotomy
Sialography
Impedance–pH monitoring
Esophageal pH monitoring
Esophageal motility study





Stomach



Bariatric surgery

Adjustable gastric band
Gastric bypass surgery
Sleeve gastrectomy
Vertical banded gastroplasty surgery


Collis gastroplasty
Gastrectomy

Billroth I
Billroth II
Roux-en-Y


Gastroenterostomy
Gastropexy
Gastrostomy

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy


Hill repair
Nissen fundoplication
Pyloromyotomy





Medical imaging



Endoscopy: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Barium swallow
Upper gastrointestinal series








Lower GI tract




Small bowel



Bariatric surgery

Duodenal switch
Jejunoileal bypass


Bowel resection
Ileostomy
Intestine transplantation
Jejunostomy
Partial ileal bypass surgery
Strictureplasty





Large bowel



Appendicectomy
Colectomy
Colonic polypectomy
Colostomy
Hartmann's operation





Rectum



Abdominoperineal resection / Miles operation
Lower anterior resection
Total mesorectal excision





Anal canal



Anal sphincterotomy
Anorectal manometry
Lateral internal sphincterotomy
Rubber band ligation
Transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization





Medical imaging



Endoscopy: Colonoscopy
Anoscopy
Capsule endoscopy
Enteroscopy
Proctoscopy
Sigmoidoscopy


Abdominal ultrasonography
Defecography
Double-contrast barium enema
Endoanal ultrasound
Enteroclysis
Lower gastrointestinal series
Small-bowel follow-through
Transrectal ultrasonography
Virtual colonoscopy





Stool tests



Fecal fat test
Fecal pH test
Stool guaiac test











Accessory




Liver



Artificial extracorporeal liver support

Bioartificial liver devices
Liver dialysis


Hepatectomy
Liver biopsy
Liver transplantation
Portal hypertension

Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt [TIPS]
Distal splenorenal shunt procedure







Gallbladder, bile duct



Cholecystectomy
Cholecystostomy
ERCP
Hepatoportoenterostomy


Medical imaging: Cholangiography

IV
MRCP
PTC


Cholecystography
Cholescintigraphy





Pancreas



Frey's procedure
Pancreas transplantation
Pancreatectomy
Pancreaticoduodenectomy
Puestow procedure








Abdominopelvic




Peritoneum



Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
Intraperitoneal injection
Laparoscopy
Omentopexy
Paracentesis
Peritoneal dialysis





Hernia



Hernia repair: Inguinal hernia surgery
Femoral hernia repair








Other



Laparotomy

Exploratory laparotomy


Rapid urease test / Urea breath test





CPRs



MELD
PELD
UKELD
Child–Pugh score
Ranson criteria
Milan criteria












v
t
e


Human systems and organs



Musculoskeletal




Skeletal system



Bone

Carpus
Collar bone (clavicle)
Thigh bone (femur)
Fibula
Humerus
Mandible
Metacarpus
Metatarsus
Ossicles
Patella
Phalanges
Radius
Skull
Tarsus
Tibia
Ulna
Rib
Vertebra
Pelvis
Sternum


Cartilage





Joints



Fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint
Synovial joint





Muscular system



Muscle
Tendon
Diaphragm








Circulatory system




Cardiovascular system



peripheral

Artery
Vein
Lymphatic vessel


Heart





Lymphatic system



primary

Bone marrow
Thymus


secondary

Spleen
Lymph node


CNS equivalent

Glymphatic system










Nervous system





Brain
Spinal cord
Nerve


Sensory system

Ear
Eye







Integumentary system



Skin
Subcutaneous tissue
Breast

Mammary gland







Immune system



Myeloid

Myeloid immune system


Lymphoid

Lymphoid immune system







Respiratory system



Upper

Nose
Nasopharynx
Larynx


Lower

Trachea
Bronchus
Lung







Digestive system



Mouth

Salivary gland
Tongue


upper GI

Oropharynx
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Stomach


lower GI

Small intestine
Appendix
Colon
Rectum
Anus


accessory

Liver
Biliary tract
Pancreas







Urinary system



Genitourinary system
Kidney
Ureter
Bladder
Urethra





Reproductive system



Female

Uterus
Vagina
Vulva
Ovary
Placenta


Male

Scrotum
Penis
Prostate
Testicle
Seminal vesicle







Endocrine system



Pituitary
Pineal
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Adrenal
Islets of Langerhans








Medicine portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_digestive_system&oldid=818268840"					Categories: Organ systemsDigestive systemMetabolismHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2016