





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Digital Spy





Type of site

Entertainment, media, news


Owner
Hearst Magazines UK


Created by
Digital Spy Ltd


Website
digitalspy.com


Alexa rank
 2,837 (September 2014[update])[1]


Commercial
Yes


Launched
1999


Current status
Online


Digital Spy is a British entertainment and media news website launched in 1999. The site focuses on reporting breaking entertainment news related to movies, music, television and showbiz. In addition to news articles there are regular reviews posted on popular films, theatre, and concerts.




Original Digital Spy logo used from 1999 until 2013.


On 9 April 2008 it was announced that the website had been purchased by magazine publisher Hachette Filipacchi UK, a subsidiary of the Lagardère Group[2] for a "significant" sum.[3] On 1 August 2011, ownership of Hachette UK was sold to Hearst Magazines UK.[4]
As well as articles, the site also features forums, which went live in March 2000 and give readers the opportunity to discuss various topics. Representatives of several major companies, including Top Up TV, Joost, BSkyB, Goodmans, and Amstrad CEO Lord Alan Sugar[3][5] are registered members who have posted on the forums.



Contents


1 History

1.1 digiNEWS and ONfaq
1.2 The digiNEWS network
1.3 Expansion
1.4 Digital Spy


2 References



History[edit]
digiNEWS and ONfaq[edit]
In early January 1999, Iain Chapman launched the digiNEWS website, providing news, rumours and information on Sky's new digital satellite platform SkyDigital. At the same time, Chris Butcher launched the ONfaq website, offering similar news and information on the UK's new digital terrestrial platform ONdigital. Both sites proved to be popular, attracting a lot of attention from visitors eager for more news about these rapidly developing TV platforms.
Very quickly, Iain and Chris discussed the idea of a merger of the two sites, to create the digiNEWS Network.
The digiNEWS network[edit]
On 28 February 1999 digiNEWS and ONfaq merged and were rebranded as sites of the new digiNEWS network.
Both sites were redesigned with common branding, and new header graphics identifying the digiNEWS network.
Expansion[edit]
More sites continued to join the network – Chris Norris's cablenews:uk (covering NTL and TeleWest cable services), Mark Hughes' DVDNews (DVD news and reviews) and Neil Wilkes' TV:uk (TV news and gossip).
The network was growing, but technically it was still disjointed, served from personal webspace from ISPs such as Freeserve. Discussions with website guru Jose Cardoso began, and work started on integrating the multitude of sites into a single portal.
It was important for the new site to be easily accessible, so a .COM address was preferable, unfortunately the diginews.com address was already taken, so a new name was needed. After many many emails back and forth, the name Digital Spy was chosen and more importantly the .COM was available.
Digital Spy[edit]
The new Digital Spy forums went live on 1 March 2000. They were built on the UBB forum platform.
The new Digital Spy news portal went live on 19 May 2001, running on a custom-built content management system developed by Jose and called RAMS (Remote Article Management System).
Digital Spy Limited was incorporated in late 2001[6] by Alan Jay, Neil Wilkes and Mark Hughes, Ian Chapman, Jose Cardoso and James Welsh would join the company later as shareholders.
In November 2015, Digital Spy hired ex editor of Heat Julian Linley in the role of editor-in-chief as the website attempts to challenge BuzzFeed and Mashable.[7]
References[edit]



^ "Digitalspy.co.uk Site Info". Alexa Internet. Retrieved 20 September 2014. 
^ "Lagardere buys UK web portal Digitalspy.co.uk". Forbes. Thomson Financial News. 9 April 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2008. 
^ a b Byrne, Ciar (28 April 2008). "Hachette spies a good match with a digital duo". The Independent. London. Retrieved 29 April 2008. 
^ Rusche, Dominic (28 March 2011). "Hearst buys Elle rights in $651m Lagardère deal". The Guardian. 
^ "Alan Sugar". Retrieved 16 February 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ "Companies House Incorporation for Digital Spy". UK: Registrar of Companies. 
^ Mark Sweney. "Digital Spy hires ex-Heat editor in battle with BuzzFeed and Mashable". The Guardian. 









v
t
e


Hearst Communications



Daily newspapers



The Advocate
Times Union
Beaumont Enterprise
Connecticut Post
The Courier (Conroe, Texas)
Edwardsville Intelligencer
Greenwich Time
The Hour
Houston Chronicle
Huron Daily Tribune
Journal-Courier
Laredo Morning Times
Manistee News Advocate
The Middletown Press
Midland Daily News
Midland Reporter-Telegram
New Haven Register
The News-Times
The Pioneer
Plainview Daily Herald
The Register Citizen
San Antonio Express-News
San Francisco Chronicle
seattlepi.com
The Telegraph
Connecticut Magazine





Weekly newspapers



Cleveland Advocate
Eastex Advocate
Examiner Newspapers (Bellaire, Memorial, River Oaks, West University)
The Lake Houston Observer
The Potpourri (Magnolia and Tomball)
Sugar Land Sun
The Villager (The Woodlands, Texas)
La Voz de Houston





Magazines




United States



Car and Driver
Cosmopolitan
Country Living
Elle
Elle Decor
Esquire
Food Network Magazine
Good Housekeeping
Harper's Bazaar

harper by Harper's Bazaar


House Beautiful
Marie Claire (US)
O, The Oprah Magazine
Popular Mechanics
Redbook
Road & Track
Seventeen
Town & Country
Woman's Day
CDS Global
Hearst Magazines Digital Media

ELLEgirl.com
espin
Lenny Letter
Shondaland.com







International



All About Soap
Company
Digital Spy
Elle
Esquire
Inside Soap
Psychologies
Quo
Sugar











Hearst TV
Television stations
by affiliation







ABC



KETV
KHBS / KHOG
KMBC
KOAT
KOCO
KSBW-DT2
WAPT
WCVB
WISN
WJCL
WMUR
WMTW
WPBF
WTAE





The CW



KCWE
KHBS-DT2 / KHOG-DT2
WCWG
WKCF
WPTZ-DT2





Other



CBS

KCCI
WLKY


Independent

WMOR


MyNetworkTV

KQCA
KCCI-DT3







NBC



KCRA
KSBW
WBAL
WDSU
WESH
WGAL
WLWT
WPTZ / WNNE
WVTM
WXII
WYFF





Acquisitions



Pulitzer, Inc.








Radio stations



WBAL
WIYY





Entertainment
and syndication



A&E Networks (50%)
AwesomenessTV (25%)
Cosmopolitan Television (part owner)
DailyINK
ESPN Inc. (20%)
Esquire Network (50%)
King Features Syndicate
Light TV
Litton Entertainment (major)
NorthSouth Productions (50%)
Reed Brennan Media Associates
Texture (partial)
Verizon Hearst Media Partners (50%)

Complex Networks







Business media



Black Book
First Databank
Fitch Ratings (80%)

BMI Research


Motor





Real estate



Hearst Tower
Hearst Service Center
Hearst Ranch











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_Spy&oldid=808993075"					Categories: Entertainment websitesBritish news websitesInternet forumsInternet properties established in 19991999 establishments in the United KingdomBritish websitesEntertainment in the United KingdomHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing additional references from August 2017All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from October 2017EngvarB from October 2017Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2014All articles containing potentially dated statements