





This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (October 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Digital Photography Review





Type of site

Online digital camera reviews


Available in
English


Owner
Amazon.com


Website
www.dpreview.com


Alexa rank
 1,385 (January 7th 2016[update])[1]


Launched
November 1998


Current status
Online


Digital Photography Review, also known as DPReview, is a website about digital cameras and digital photography, established in November 1998. The website provides comprehensive reviews of digital cameras, lenses and accessories, buying guides, user reviews, and active forums for individual cameras, as well as general photography forums. The website also has a large database with information about individual digital cameras, lenses, printers and imaging applications. Originally based in London, Digital Photography Review and most of its team relocated to Seattle, Washington, in 2010.[2] It is currently owned by Amazon.
DPReview is one of the top 2,000 most visited websites on the Internet, according to Alexa Internet.[1]



Contents


1 Main site features
2 Ownership history
3 References
4 External links



Main site features[edit]
Camera reviews: DPReview has regularly published thorough, technically orientated camera reviews since the website launched in 1998. The content and scope of the reviews have changed over time, but the basic formula (extensive descriptions of controls and menus, consistent, repeatable studio tests, side-by-side pixel-level comparisons) has remained unchanged since the earliest days. In 2004, a shorter "concise" review format was introduced for compact cameras,[3] and group tests were added in 2008.[4] The website's camera reviews have always offered side-by-side comparison images and test results from competing cameras. In 2010, an interactive comparison widget was introduced that allowed visitors to compare studio results from any camera in the site's database.[5] Later widgets added the ability to compare other test results (such as noise and dynamic range) between cameras. Extensive real-world sample galleries are available for all reviewed (and some unreviewed) cameras and lenses.
Until February 2010, DPReview did not score cameras numerically, but used an often controversial six-level rating system (from best to worst: Highly Recommended, Recommended, Above Average, Average, Below Average, Poor). The site now scores all cameras and lenses using up to 11 categories (which in turn are based on "nearly 60 aspects of camera performance and specification").[6] Two new discretionary awards ('Gold' and 'Silver') were introduced at the same time as the scoring system.
Lens reviews: DPReview introduced lens reviews in 2008.[7]
Other reviews: Although the vast majority of its published reviews are of digital cameras, DPReview also publishes occasional reviews of printers, software / apps, photography books, accessories and mobile imaging devices.
Product database: DPReview has a comprehensive database of digital cameras, lenses, printers and desktop imaging software packages. Camera product pages contain full specifications, product and sample images, user reviews and links to other internal and external resources. The product database offers browse, search and compare features.
'Forums and Community features: DPReviews active discussion forums contain over 33 million messages. The website also has commenting (on some, but not all content types), user-created articles and product reviews, photographic challenges and free personal galleries. A simple personal messaging system is available to registered users.
Other features: DPReview publishes occasional non-review articles, covering imaging science and technology, photographic techniques, interviews with photographers and industry figures, and buying guides. In 2012, DPReview added a Link Directory that allows registered users to view and subscribe to RSS and Twitter updates from external resources without leaving the site.
Ownership history[edit]
Digital Photography Review was founded in December 1998 in the United Kingdom by Philip and Joanna Askey.[8] On May 14, 2007, it was acquired by Amazon.com.[9]
The original founder, Phil Askey, is no longer involved in the day-to-day running of the site.[10] The company directly employs 14 full-time staff.[11] The current editor is Simon Joinson, who has held the role since 2010. Joinson joined the company in 2004, having previously founded and edited several UK digital photography magazines, including What Digital Camera.
References[edit]



^ a b "dpreview.com Site Info". Alexa Internet. Retrieved 2016-01-07. 
^ "New beginners' guides and Site news: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "Just posted! HP PhotoSmart R707 review: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "Budget Compact Camera Group Test: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ [1]
^ Featured articles (2013-01-28). "Camera Scores & Ratings Explained: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "Dpreview launches lens reviews: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "Digital Photography Review - About Us". Digital Photography Review. 2007-10-30. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "Amazon.com acquires dpreview.com". Digital Photography Review. May 14, 2007. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "About this site: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. 2007-10-30. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 
^ "About this site: Digital Photography Review". Digital Photography Review. 2007-10-30. Retrieved 2013-03-27. 



External links[edit]

Official website







v
t
e


Amazon



People




Current



Jeff Bezos
Tony Hsieh
Werner Vogels
Gregg Zehr





Former



Rick Dalzell
Brian McBride
Ram Shriram
Tom Szkutak
Brian Valentine
Christopher North








Facilities



Doppler
Day 1
HQ2





Products
and services




Websites



A9.com
AbeBooks
Amazon.com
Alexa Internet
Book Depository
BookFinder
China
Curse
Digital Photography Review
Fresh
Goodreads
IMDb

Box Office Mojo
Withoutabox


Junglee.com
Local
Marketplace
Payments
Twitch.tv
Wireless
Woot.com
Zappos
Souq.com





Web services



AMI
CloudFront
DynamoDB
EBS
EC2
MTurk
Neptune
Product Advertising API
RDS
S3
SES
SimpleDB
SQS
VPC
Silk
Glacier
Storywriter





Digital



Alexa
Appstore
Audible
ComiXology
Amazon Drive
Video
Prime

Key


Kindle Store
Music
Reflexive Entertainment
Fire OS
Amazon Digital Game Store





Devices



Blink Home
Cloud Cam
Dash buttons
Dash wand
Echo

Show


Kindle
Kindle Fire

Fire HD
Fire HDX


Fire TV

Stick


Fire Phone





Technology



1-Click
Amazon Game Studios
Amazon Robotics
Carbonado
Dynamo
Graphiq
Gurupa
Lab126
Double Helix Games
Obidos
Liquavista





Publishing



Amazon Publishing
Amazon Studios
Breakthrough Novel Award
Best Books of the Year
Kindle Direct Publishing





Retail



Amazon Books
Amazon Go
Whole Foods Market





Logistics



Amazon Air
Amazon Prime Air





Former



43 Things
Askville
Amapedia
Amie Street (Songza)
CDNow
Diapers.com
Endless.com
Lexcycle
LivingSocial
LoveFilm
Mobipocket
PlanetAll
Sellaband
Shelfari








Other



Amazon Light
ASIN
Controversies (tax)
Fishbowl
Locker
Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc.
Statistically improbable phrase
Vine
List of Amazon brands
List of Amazon locations
List of mergers and acquisitions by Amazon
List of Amazon products and services
LibraryThing











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_Photography_Review&oldid=814250397"					Categories: Amazon.com acquisitionsInternet forumsPhotography websitesInternet properties established in 1998American websitesHidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from October 2013All articles lacking reliable referencesPages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from January 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsOfficial website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia