





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2006) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)








Part of a series on


E-commerce


Online goods and services




Digital distribution
E-books
Software
Streaming media




Retail services




Banking
DVD-by-mail
Flower delivery
Food ordering
Grocery
Pharmacy
Travel




Marketplace services




Advertising
Auctions
Comparison shopping
Social commerce
Trading communities
Wallet




Mobile commerce




Payment
Ticketing




Customer service




Call centre
Help desk
Live support software




E-procurement


Purchase-to-pay





v
t
e





Digital distribution (also referred to as content delivery, online distribution, or electronic software distribution (ESD), among others) is the delivery or distribution of media content such as audio, video, software and video games.[1] The term is generally used to describe distribution over an online delivery medium, such as the Internet, thus bypassing physical distribution methods, such as paper, compact discs, and VHS videocassettes. The term online distribution is typically applied to freestanding products; downloadable add-ons for other products are more commonly known as downloadable content. With the advancement of network bandwidth capabilities, online distribution became prominent in the 21st century.
Content distributed online may be streamed or downloaded, and often consists of books, films and television programs, music, software, and video games. Streaming involves downloading and using content at a user's request, or "on-demand", rather than allowing a user to store it permanently. In contrast, fully downloading content to a hard drive or other form of storage media may allow offline access in the future.
Specialist networks known as content delivery networks help distribute content over the Internet by ensuring both high availability and high performance. Alternative technologies for content delivery include peer-to-peer file sharing technologies. Alternatively, content delivery platforms create and syndicate content remotely, acting like hosted content management systems.
However, the term is also used in film distribution to describe distribution of content through physical media, in opposition to distribution by analog media such as photographic film and magnetic tape (see digital cinema).



Contents


1 Basis
2 Impact on traditional retail

2.1 Music
2.2 Videos
2.3 Books
2.4 Video games


3 Challenges
4 See also
5 References



Basis[edit]
A primary characteristic of online distribution is its direct nature. To make a commercially successful work, artists usually must enter their industry’s publishing chain. Publishers help artists advertise, fund and distribute their work to retail outlets. In some industries, particularly video games, artists find themselves bound to publishers, and in many cases unable to make the content they want; the publisher might not think it will profit well. This can quickly lead to the standardization of the content and to the stifling of new, potentially risky ideas.
By opting for online distribution, an artist can get their work into the public sphere of interest easily with potentially minimum business overhead. This often leads to cheaper goods for the consumer, increased profits for the artists, as well as increased artistic freedom. Online distribution platforms often contain or act as a form of digital rights management.
Online distribution also opens the door to new business models (e.g., the Open Music Model). For instance, an artist could release one track from an album or one chapter from a book at a time instead of waiting for them all to be completed. This either gives them a cash boost to help continue their projects or warns that their work is not financially viable. This is hopefully done before they have spent excessive money and time on a project deemed unviable. Video games have increased flexibility in this area, demonstrated by micropayment models. A clear result of these new models is their accessibility to smaller artists or artist teams who do not have the time, funds, or expertise to make a new product in one go.
An example of this can be found in the music industry. Indie artists may access the same distribution channels as major record labels, with potentially fewer restrictions and manufacturing costs.[1] There is a growing collection of 'Internet labels' that offer distribution to unsigned or independent artists directly to online music stores, and in some cases marketing and promotion services. Further, many bands are able to bypass this completely, and offer their music for sale via their own independently controlled websites.
An issue is the large number of incompatible formats in which content is delivered, restricting the devices that may be used, or making data conversion necessary.
Impact on traditional retail[edit]
The rise of online distribution has provided controversy for the traditional business models and resulted in challenges as well as new opportunities for traditional retailers and publishers. Online distribution affects all of the traditional media markets including music, press, and broadcasting. In Britain, the iPlayer, a software application for streaming television and radio, accounts for 5% of all bandwidth used in the United Kingdom.[2]
Music[edit]
The move towards online distribution led to a dip in sales in the 2000s when CD sales were nearly cut in half.[3] One such example of online distribution taking its toll on a retailer is the iconic Canadian music chain Sam the Record Man who blamed online distribution for having to close a number of its traditional retail venues in 2007–08.[4] One main reason that sales took such a big hit was that unlicensed downloads of digital music was very accessible. With copyright infringement affecting sales, the music industry realized it needed to change its business model to keep up with the rapidly changing technology.[5] The step that was taken to move the music industry into the online space has been successful for several reasons. The development of lossy audio compression file formats such as MP3, allows users to compress music files into a high quality format, compressed down to usually a 3-megabyte (MB) file. The lossless FLAC format may require only a few megabytes more. In comparison, the same song might require 30–40 megabytes of storage on a CD.[5] The smaller file size yields much greater Internet transfer speeds.
The transition into the online space has boosted sales, and profit for some artists. It has also allowed for potentially lower expenses such as lower coordination costs, lower distribution costs, as well as the possibility for redistributed total profits.[5] These lower costs have aided new artists in breaking onto the scene and gaining recognition. In the past, some emerging artists have struggled to find a way to market themselves and compete in the various distribution channels. The Internet may give artists more control over their music in terms of ownership, rights, creative process, pricing, and more. In addition to providing global users with easier access to content, online stores allow users to choose the songs they wish instead of having to purchase an entire album from which there may only be one or two titles that the buyer enjoys.
The number of downloaded single tracks rose from 160 million in 2004 to 795 million in 2006 which accounted for a revenue boost from US$397 million to US$2 billion.[5]
Videos[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Many traditional network television shows, movies and other video content is now available online, either from the content owner directly or from third party services. YouTube, Netflix, Hulu, Synaptop, Amazon Video, FlickRocket and other Internet-based video services allow content owners to let users access their content on computers, smart phones, tablets or by using appliances such as video game consoles, set-top boxes or Smart TVs.
Many film distributors also include a Digital Copy, also called Digital HD, with Blu-ray disc or a DVD.
Books[edit]
Some companies, such as Bookmasters Distribution, which invested US$4.5 million in upgrading its equipment and operating systems, have had to direct capital toward keeping up with the changes in technology. The phenomenon of books going digital has given users the ability to access their books on handheld digital book readers. One benefit of electronic book readers is that they allow users to access additional content via hypertext links. These electronic book readers also give users portability for their books since a reader can hold multiple books depending on the size of its hard drive.[6] Companies that are able to adapt and make changes to capitalize on the digital media market have seen sales surge. Vice President of Perseus Books Group stated that since shifting to electronic books (e-books), it saw sales rise by 68%. Independent Publishers Group experienced a sales boost of 23% in the first quarter of 2012 alone.[7]
Tor Books, a major publisher of science fiction and fantasy books, started to sell e-books DRM-free by July 2012.[8] One year later the publisher stated that they will keep this model as removing DRM was not hurting their digital distribution ebook business.[9] Smaller e-book publishers such as O'Reilly Media, Carina Press[10] and Baen Books had already forgone DRM previously.
Video games[edit]
Main article: Digital distribution in video games
Online distribution is changing the structure of the video game industry.[citation needed] Gabe Newell, creator of the digital distribution service Steam, formulated the advantages over physical retail distribution as such:

The worst days [for game development] were the cartridge days for the NES. It was a huge risk – you had all this money tied up in silicon in a warehouse somewhere, and so you’d be conservative in the decisions you felt you could make, very conservative in the IPs you signed, your art direction would not change, and so on. Now it’s the opposite extreme: we can put something up on Steam, deliver it to people all around the world, make changes. We can take more interesting risks.[...] Retail doesn’t know how to deal with those games. On Steam [a digital distributor] there’s no shelf-space restriction.
— Gabe Newell, Rock, Paper, Shotgun[11]

Since the 2000s, there has been an increasing number of smaller and niche titles available and commercially successful, like e.g. remakes of classic games.[12][13] The new possibility of the digital distribution stimulated also the creation of game titles of very small video game producers like Independent game developer[14][15] and Modders (e.g. Garry's Mod[16]), which were before not commercially feasible.
The years after 2004 saw the rise of many digital distribution services on the PC, such as Amazon Digital Services, Desura, GameStop, Games for Windows – Live, Impulse, Steam, Origin, Direct2Drive, GOG.com, and GamersGate. The offered properties differ significantly: while most of these digital distributors don't allow reselling of bought games, Green Man Gaming allows this. Another example is gog.com which has a strict non-DRM policy[17] while most other services allow various (strict or less strict) forms of DRM.
Next important thing is that the digital distributions is greener than physical. Optical disc is made of polycarbonate plastic and aluminum. The creation of 30 CDs requires the use of 300 cubic feet of natural gas, 2 cups of oil and 24 gallons of water. The boxes for CDs are made from polyvinyl chloride (PVC), which increases the risk of cancer.[18]
Challenges[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A general issue is the large number of incompatible data formats in which content is delivered, possibly restricting the devices that may be used, or making data conversion necessary. Streaming services can have several drawbacks: requiring a constant Internet connection to use content; the restriction of some content to never be stored locally; the restriction of content from being transferred to physical media; and the enabling of greater censorship at the discretion of owners of content, infrastructure, and consumer devices.
See also[edit]


Application store
Online shopping
Cloud gaming
Comparison of online music stores
Content delivery network
Digital distribution in video games
E-book
Electronic publishing
Electronic commerce
Film distribution
Film distributor
Internet pornography
List of Internet television providers
List of mobile software distribution platforms
Streaming media
Video on demand
Uberisation


References[edit]


^ a b "Digital Distribution Law & Legal Definition". Legal Definitions. USLegal. Retrieved 25 April 2012. 
^ Kern, Philippe. "The Impact of Digital Distribution – A Contribution" (PDF). Think Tank. Retrieved 26 April 2012. 
^ Sen, Abhijit (Spring 2010). "Music in the Digital Age: Musicians and Fans Around the World "Come Together" on the Net". Global Media Journal. 9 (16).  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Canadian Press (2007-05-29). "Sam the Record Man to shut its Yonge St. doors". Entertainment section. The Toronto Star. Retrieved 2009-01-18. 
^ a b c d Janssens, Jelle; Stijn Vandaele; Tom Vander Beken (2009). "The Music Industry on (the) Line? Surviving Music Piracy in a Digital Era". European Journal of Crime. 77 (96). doi:10.1163/157181709X429105. 
^ MacInnes, Ian. "Impediments to Digital Distribution for Software and Books" (PDF). ProQuest. Retrieved 8 May 2012. [permanent dead link]
^ Rosen, Judith (2012-04-16). "Distribution in a Digital Age". Publishers Weekly. 
^ "Tor/Forge E-book Titles to Go DRM-Free". Tor.com. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Geuss, Megan (2013-05-04). "Tor Books says cutting DRM out of its e-books hasn't hurt the business - A look at the sci-fi publisher a year after it announced it would do away with DRM". Arstechnica. Retrieved 2013-07-07. Early this week, Tor Books, a subsidiary of Tom Doherty Associates and the world's leading publisher of science fiction, gave an update on how its decision to do away with Digital Rights Management (DRM) schemes has impacted the company. Long story short: it hasn't, really. 
^ "Tor/Forge Plans DRM-Free e-Books By July". Publishers Weekly. 24 April 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012. 
^ Walker, John (2007-11-22). "RPS Exclusive: Gabe Newell Interview". Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Retrieved 2013-06-28. The worst days [for game development] were the cartridge days for the NES. It was a huge risk – you had all this money tied up in silicon in a warehouse somewhere, and so you’d be conservative in the decisions you felt you could make, very conservative in the IPs you signed, your art direction would not change, and so on. Now it’s the opposite extreme: we can put something up on Steam, deliver it to people all around the world, make changes. We can take more interesting risks. [...] Retail doesn’t know how to deal with those games. On Steam [a digital distributor] there’s no shelf-space restriction. It’s great because they’re a bunch of old, orphaned games. 
^ "The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition Tech Info". GameSpot. Retrieved November 15, 2011. 
^ Onyett, Charles (June 2, 2009). "E3 2009: The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition Preview". IGN. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2011. 
^ Garr, Brian (17 April 2011). "Download distribution opening new doors for independent game developers". Statesman.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2011. 
^ Stuart, Keith (27 January 2010). "Back to the bedroom: how indie gaming is reviving the Britsoft spirit". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 November 2012. 
^ Senior, Tom (2012-03-16). "Garry's Mod has sold 1.4 million copies, Garry releases sales history to prove it". PCGamer. Retrieved 2013-06-28. 
^ Caron, Frank (2008-09-09). "First look: GOG revives classic PC games for download age". Ars Technica. Retrieved 2012-12-27. [...] [Good Old Games] focuses on bringing old, time-tested games into the downloadable era with low prices and no DRM. 
^ "Why digital is greener than the boxed video games?". CodesWholesale.com. 2016-04-22. Retrieved 2016-08-04. 








v
t
e


E-book digital distribution platforms



Active



Amazon Kindle
Archive of Our Own
Barnes & Noble Nook
FanFiction.Net
Google Play Books
Hoopla Digital
iBooks Store
Kindle Direct Publishing
Kindle Store
Kobo
Lulu
NoiseTrade
OverDrive, Inc.
Playster
PocketBook Reader
Pronoun
Scribd
Smashwords
Wattpad
Wikibooks





Discontinued



Sony Reader
Oyster












v
t
e


Music digital distribution platforms






Digital library
Music download
Online music store
Streaming media





Active



7digital
8tracks.com
Amazon Music
Anghami
Apple Music
Baidu Music
Bandcamp
Bandit.fm
Beatport
Bleep.com
CD Baby
Classical Archives
Claro Música
Deezer
Digitally Imported
Ditto Music
Djshop
Electric Jukebox
eMusic
Gaana.com
Google Play Music
HDtracks
Hoopla
Icecast
iHeartRadio
iTunes Store
Jamendo
Joox
Juno Records
KKBox
KuGou
Last.fm
Line Music
Live365
Magnatune
Melon
Mixcloud
Murfie
MusicStation
Music Glue
Mziiki
Napster
NetEase Music
Nimbit
NoiseTrade
ONErpm
OverDrive, Inc.
Pandora
Patari
PayPlay.FM
PlayStation Music
Playster
Pono
Qobuz
QQ Music
Raaga.com
Radical.fm
Radionomy
Saavn
Sellaband
Slacker
Spinlet
Spotify
SoundCloud
Shazam
Style Jukebox
Tidal
Twine
WiMP
YouTube





Discontinued



Amie Street
Aupeo
Beats Music
BlackBerry World
Blinkbox Music
BuyMusic
Clowdy
GhostTunes
GoMusicNow
Groove Music
Grooveshark
Guvera
Internet Underground Music Archive
imeem
iMesh
Kazaa
Mixcrate
Mog
MP3.com
Music Unlimited
Nokia Store
MixRadio
PlayNow Arena
PressPlay
Puretracks
rara
Rdio
Simfy
Songza
Spinner
SpiralFrog
Stardock Central
Streamwaves
Ubetoo
Wowloud
Yahoo! Music Radio/LAUNCHcast
Yahoo! Music Unlimited
Zune Marketplace












v
t
e


Software distribution platforms and content delivery networks






App store
Cloud gaming
Digital library
Online game store
Package manager
Software distribution
Streaming media





Active




Personal
computer



Allmyapps
Amazon Digital Game Store
Battle.net
Big Fish Games
Chrome Web Store
Digital River
Direct2Drive
DotEmu
GOG.com
GameHouse
GameShadow
GamersGate
Games for Windows – Live
Game Jolt
GNOME Software
Green Man Gaming
Humble Store
Mac Games Arcade
itch.io
Mac App Store
MacUpdate
Metaboli/GamesPlanet
Microsoft Store
MSN Games
Origin
Playism
Playster
Pogo.com
Pokki
Steam
Ubuntu Software Center
Uplay
WildTangent





Video game
consoles



GameFly
Microsoft Store
Nintendo eShop
PlayStation Now
PlayStation Store
Wii Shop Channel
Xbox Store
Xbox Live Arcade





Mobile



Amazon Appstore
Appsfire
Apple App Store
Aptoide
BlackBerry World
Cafe Bazaar
Cydia
F-Droid
GamersGate
GetJar
Google Play
Handango
Microsoft Store
Nintendo eShop
Samsung Apps
SlideME
Opera Mobile Store
Playster
Ubuntu App Store
Windows Phone Store





Arcade



ALL.Net
NESiCAxLive
E-Amusement








Discontinued



Desura
GameAgent
GameTap
Games for Windows Marketplace
Impulse
Intel AppUp
Jumboplay
Kazaa
N-Gage
Nokia Store
OnLive
PlayNow Arena
Stardock Central
Triton
Windows Marketplace
Windows Marketplace for Mobile
Yahoo! Games
Zune Marketplace
Zylom












v
t
e


Video digital distribution platforms






Digital library
Streaming media
Video on demand





Free



56.com
7plus
9Now
ABC iview
Aparat
AcFun
afreecaTV
All 4
Arte Boutique
BBC iPlayer
BBC Store
Bilibili
BitTorrent
Blinkbox
Break.com
Brightcove
Buzznet
Canalplay
CinemaNow
Chicken Pork Adobo
Clowdy
Crackle
Dailymotion
Daisuki
DittoTV
DramaFever
Facebook Watch
Flickr
Flixster
Fotki
France TV Pluzz
Frequency
Funimation
Funshion
GOG.com
GyaO
Hoopla
Hotstar
Hunter TV
iQiyi
ITV Hub
i Want TV
Le
Lightbox
LiveLeak
mainStreaming
Mango TV
Medici.tv
Metacafe
Mixer
My5
MyTF1 VOD
MyVideo
NeuLion
The NewsMarket
Niconico
Noggin
OneWorldTV
Ora TV
OverDrive, Inc.
Pandora TV
PictureBox Films
Pluto TV
PLUS7
Popcornflix
PPTV
Putlocker
Queensland Online TV
RTÉ Player
Rutube
SBS on Demand
SchoolTube
Sky Go
Smashcast.tv
Sohu
Sony LIV
Sina Video
Spirit Show Network
Spuul
Starlight Networks
Steam
Streamworks International
STV Player
SVT Play
TalkTalk TV
Tank Top TV
TAPP TV
TeacherTube
Teaching Channel
Telly Inc
TENplay
thePlatform
Toon Goggles
Trilulilu
Tubi TV
Tudou
TV UOL
Tvigle
TVNZ OnDemand
TVPlayer
tvyo
Twitch.tv
UKTV Play
Ultraviolet
VBOX7
Veoh
Vevo
Vidoosh
Viewster
Viki
Vimeo
Viu
Voddler
V.QQ.com
VyRT
Vzaar
Wildscreen.tv
Wistia
Wuaki
Xfinity Streampix
Xunlei Kankan
Yahoo! View
Youku
YouTube
YuppTV
Zattoo




Sports



Fox Sports Go
WatchESPN





Pornographic



PornerBros
Pornhub
PornMD
PornoTube
RedTube
XHamster
Xtube
XVideos
YouPorn





Comedy



Funny or Die








Paid



Acorn TV
Amazon Video
AnimeLab
CBS All Access
CraveTV
Crunchyroll
CuriosityStream
DirecTV Now
FandangoNOW
Fandor
Filipino On Demand
FilmStruck
Foxtel Play
Foxtel On
Fullscreen
Global Wrestling Network
Google Play Movies & TV
HBO Go
HBO Now
Hillsong Channel Now
HOOQ
Hulu
Icflix
iflix
iTunes Store
MUBI
Netflix
New Japan Pro Wrestling World
Nintendo eShop
Now TV
PlayStation Store
PlayStation Video
PlayStation Vue
Playster
Rooster Teeth FIRST
Seeso
SHAHID
Showmax
Showtime
Shudder
Sky On Demand
Sling TV
Stan
STARZ
TVPlayer
UFC Fight Pass
VidAngel
Vudu
Warner Archive Instant
WWE Network
WWNLive
YouTube Red
Windows Store (Microsoft Movies & TV)





Discontinued



Azubu
Blip
Blockbuster On Demand (now part of Sling TV)
BlogTV
Fearnet
Hitbox.tv
imeem
iMesh
Intel AppUp
Joost
Justin.tv
Kazaa
LoveFilm
Megavideo
MUZU.TV
Nintendo Channel
Nintendo Video
Nokia Store
Openfilm
Presto
Quickflix
Redbox Instant by Verizon
Revver
Shomi
Sony Entertainment Network
Stage6
Super Deluxe
TouchVision
Triton
TroopTube
Twango
Vdio
Vessel
Viddler
Vidme
Vongo
WeShow
Windows Media Center
WWE Classics on Demand
Yahoo! Screen
Zune Marketplace












v
t
e


Software distribution



Licenses



Beerware
Floating licensing
Free
Free and open-source
Freely redistributable
Open source
Proprietary
Public domain





Compensation models



Adware
Commercial software

Retail software


Crippleware
Crowdfunding
Freemium
Freeware
Pay what you want

Careware
Donationware


Open core
Postcardware
Shareware

Nagware







Delivery methods



Digital distribution
File sharing
On-premises
Pre-installed
Product bundling
Retail software
Sneakernet
Software as a service





Deceptive and/or illicit



Unwanted software bundling
Malware

Spyware
Trojan horse
Worm
Ransomware


Scareware
Shovelware
Vaporware





Software release life cycle



Abandonware
End-of-life
Long-term support
Software maintenance
Software maintainer
Software publisher





Copy protection



Digital rights management
Software protection dongle
Hardware restrictions
License manager
Product activation
Product key
Software copyright
Software patent
Torrent poisoning











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_distribution&oldid=816841175"					Categories: Online content distributionE-commerceSoftware delivery methodsFilm distributionStreaming media systemsStreaming music servicesVideo game distributionVideo on demand servicesDigital rights managementHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles needing additional references from October 2006All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing additional references from July 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2014