






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article has been nominated to be checked for its neutrality. Discussion of this nomination can be found on the talk page. (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (June 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article is written like a personal reflection or opinion essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Discrimination is the process by which two stimuli differing in some aspect are responded to differently.[1] This term is used to highlight the difference of treatment between members of different groups when one group is intentionally singled out and treated worse, or not given the same opportunities. As attitudes toward minorities started to change, the term discrimination began to refer to that issue. Over the years, many forms of discrimination have come to be recognized including nationalist,[2] racial, gender, and sexual orientation.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Racial discrimination
1.2 Fighting back


2 Contemporary society

2.1 Gender discrimination
2.2 Discrimination against immigrants

2.2.1 Discrimination in the workplace


2.3 Discrimination based on sexual orientation


3 See also
4 References



History[edit]
Racial discrimination[edit]
Main articles: Racism in the United States and Racial inequality in the United States




Picture showing that most public places were segregated.


In 1864 the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution abolished slavery. However, in the 1870s Jim Crow laws were introduced in the Southeastern United States. These laws promoted the idea "separate but equal", meaning that all races were equal, although they should be in separate locations and use separate facilities. The mixing of races was illegal in most places such as public schools, public transportation and eating establishments.[3] These laws increased discrimination. For example, though the intent was to provide separate but equal facilities for all races, African-American schools black schools were given worse quality teachers, supplies, and buildings than their white counterparts.[4] Water fountains, bathrooms, and park benches were just a few of the areas segregated by whites due to Jim Crow laws. Discrimination was blatantly done; one example of this is in the case of Rosa Parks. In the South, it was customary for African-Americans to move to the back of the bus or give up their seats to white people. The Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka in 1954 ruled that there is no such thing as separate but equal, since separate is inherently unequal.
In the modern United States, gay black men are extremely likely to experience intersectional discrimination. In the United States, the children of gay African-American men have a poverty rate of 52 percent, the highest in the country. Gay African-American men in partnerships are also six times more likely to live in poverty than gay white male couples.[5]
Fighting back[edit]
Figures such as Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, and Rosa Parks[6] were involved in the fight against the race-based discrimination of the Civil Rights Movement. Rosa Parks's refusal to give up her bus seat sparked the Montgomery Bus Boycott—a large movement in Montgomery, Alabama that was an integral period in the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement. Martin Luther King Jr., a peaceful activist, led many such protests, proving to the white society discriminating against African-Americans that they were a valuable part of society as well. King organized many protests attended not only by blacks but whites as well.
While King[7] organized peaceful protests, Malcolm X went a different route. He and his main supporters, The Nation of Islam, wanted nothing to do with white people. Although Malcolm X's actions were radical, he is still considered one of the pioneers in fighting back against racial discrimination.
Ruby Bridges is an example of a child who dealt with discrimination from white peers and their parents. Most parents took their children out of her class because they didn't want their children near her, but eventually sent their children back, accepting the fact that she wasn't leaving. This showed that people will not accept inequality and they will actively fight back against discrimination no matter what age.[8]
Contemporary society[edit]
Gender discrimination[edit]
Further information: Gender inequality in the United States, Pregnancy discrimination in the United States, and Gender pay gap in the United States
Gender discrimination is another form of discrimination. Women are often seen as an expense to their employers because they take days off for children, need time off for maternity leave and are stereotyped as "more emotional". The theory that goes hand in hand with this is known as the glass escalator[9] or the glass ceiling, which holds that while women are being held down in male dominated professions, men often rise quickly to positions of authority in certain fields. Men are pushed forward into management, even surpassing women who have been at the job longer and have more experience in the field.
Men's rights deals with discrimination against men in the areas of family law, such as divorce and child custody, labor such as paternity leave, paternity fraud, health, education, conscription, and other areas of the law such as domestic violence, genital integrity, and allegations of rape.
Discrimination against immigrants[edit]







Immigrants to the United States are affected by a totally separate type of discrimination. Some people feel as though the large numbers of people being allowed into the country are cause for alarm, therefore discriminate against them.[10]
Arizona recently passed a law that forces people to carry documents with them at all times to prove their citizenship. This is only one controversy over immigrants in the United States, another is the claim that immigrants are stealing "true Americans'" jobs.Immigration restrictions are among the biggest government interventions in the economy. They prevent millions of people from taking jobs, renting homes, and pursuing a wide range of opportunities that they could otherwise have.[11] Violent hate crimes have increased[12] drastically. Recent social psychological research suggests that this form of prejudice against migrants may be partly explained by some fairly basic cognitive processes.[13][14]
According to Soylu,[15] some argue that immigrants constantly face being discriminated against because of the color of their skin, the sound of their voice, the way they look and their beliefs. Many immigrants are well educated, some argue that they are often blamed and persecuted for the ills in society such as overcrowding of schools, disease and unwanted changes in the host country's culture due to the beliefs of this "unwelcomed" group of people.[16]
According to Soylu, there was an open immigration policy up until 1924 in America until the National Origins Act came into effect.[16] According to the Immigration Act of 1924 which is a United States federal law, it limited the annual number of immigrants who could be admitted from any country to 2% of the number of people from that country who were already living in the United States in 1890, down from the 3% cap set by the Immigration Restriction Act of 1921, according to the Census of 1890 It superseded the 1921 Emergency Quota Act. The law was primarily aimed at further restricting immigration of Southern Europeans and Eastern Europeans. According to Buchanan, later in the 1930s with the advent of opinion polling, immigration policy analysis was carried out by collecting public thoughts and opinions on the issue. These factors encouraged a heated debate on immigration policy. These debates continued even into the 2000s, and were intensified by George W. Bush's immigration proposal.[17] Some argue that the 9/11 terrorist attacks left the country in a state of paranoia and fear that strengthened the views in favor of having closed borders.[16]
Discrimination in the workplace[edit]
Immigration to the United States can be difficult due to immigrants' lack of access to legal documents and the expensive nature of immigration. The United States has historically been a major target destination for people seeking work and continues to be so today.. As Graciela, a 47-year-old married woman who had lived in the US for 4 years, stated, “My husband,…he lost his job. Things were beginning to get tough…We came with the need to find work and better life possibilities.” [18][19] Worldwide, the workforce has become increasingly pluralistic and ethnically diverse as more and more people migrate across nations. Although race- or ethnicity-based discriminatory employment practices are prohibited in most developed countries, according to feminist scholar Mary Harcourt, actual discrimination is still widespread.[20] Sahagian Jacqueline, an author, argues that one example of this act of discrimination occurred at Macy's a department store. According to the U.S. Justice Department, Macy's used unfair documentation practices against legal immigrant employees who had proper work authorizations. During an eligibility re-verification process, Macy's broke immigration law that prohibits employers from discriminating against immigrant employees during re-verification by asking for more or different documents than other employees are required to submit based on a worker's immigration status or national origin. Some of the affected employees lost seniority, were suspended, or even let go due to the illegal re-verification.[21] While their opinions are controversial, researchers Moran, Tyler and Daranee argue that with immigrants' growing numbers and their expanding economic role in U.S. society, addressing challenges and creating opportunities for immigrants to succeed in the labor force are critical prerequisites to improve the economic security for all low-wage working families and ensure the future vitality of our economy.[22]
Discrimination based on sexual orientation[edit]
Another type of discrimination is that against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. For personal reasons such as religious beliefs, employers sometimes choose to not hire these people. LGBT rights have been protested against for various reasons; for example, one topic of controversy related to LGBT people is marriage, which was legalized in all states in June 2015 following the Supreme Court case Obergefell v. Hodges.
See also[edit]

Age discrimination in the United States
Black flight
Civil Rights
Civil Union
Housing discrimination in the United States
Housing segregation
Mortgage discrimination
Racial inequality in the United States
Racial steering
Religious discrimination in the United States
White flight

References[edit]



^ "Definition of DISCRIMINATION". Merriam-Webster.com. 
^ "FEDERAL PROTECTIONS AGAINST NATIONAL ORIGIN DISCRIMINATION". United States Department of Justice. 
^ "Jim Crow law - United States [1877-1954]". 
^ Farclough, Adam (2007). A Class of Their Own. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University. p. 414. 
^ Badgett, MV Lee; Durso, Laura; Schneebaum, Alyssa. "New Patterns of Poverty in the Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Community". ucla.edu. The Williams Institute. Retrieved October 12, 2015. 
^ "Rosa Parks Biography -- Academy of Achievement". Archived from the original on 2015-11-04. 
^ "Martin Luther King Jr. Biography". Archived from the original on April 6, 2011. Retrieved May 5, 2011. 
^ Ruby Bridges Hall. "The Education of Ruby Nell". rubybridges.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2004. 
^ Williams, C. L. "The Glass Escalator: Hidden Advantages for Men in the "Female" Professions" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-31. 
^ Kingsbury, Kathleen (February 27, 2008). "Immigration: No Correlation With Crime" – via www.time.com. 
^ somin, ilya (01/17). "immigration, freedom and the onstitution". harvard journal of law & public policy 40.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ "Hate Crimes Against Latinos Rising Nationwide". 
^ For more, see Rubin, M., Prejudice Against Migrants: Is It Because They're Too Hard to Think About? 
^ Rubin, M.; Paolini, S. & Crisp, R. J. (2010). "A processing fluency explanation of bias against migrants". Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 46 (1): 21–28. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.09.006. 
^ "Home". Cameron University. 
^ a b c Soylu, Alİ; Buchanan, Tom. A. "Discrimination against immigrants". Today's Zaman. Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2015. 
^ Jachimowicz, Maia. "Bush Proposes New Temporary Worker Program". Migration Policy Instituite. Retrieved 22 November 2015. 
^ Viruell-Fuentes, Edna (7 Oct 2007). ""Beyond Acculturation: Immigration, Discrimination, and Health Research among Mexicans in the United States."". 65: 95. 
^ Castro, Arnold B. de (November 1, 2006). "How Immigrant Workers Experience Workplace Problems: A Qualitative Study". 61. 
^ Harcourt, M (January 1, 2008). "Discrimination in hiring against immigrants and ethnic minorities: the effect of unionization". The International Journal of Human Resource Management. 19: 100. 
^ Jacqueline, Sahagian. "Are Macy's Hiring Policies Against Immigrants?". The Cheat Sheet. Retrieved October 23, 2015. 
^ Moran; Daranee, Petsod; Tyler. "Newcomers in the American Workplace: Improving Employment Outcomes for Low-Wage Immigrants and Refugees". 25 Gcir. Retrieved October 23, 2015. 









v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrimination_in_the_United_States&oldid=811663025"					Categories: Discrimination in the United StatesHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesArticles needing additional references from June 2011All articles needing additional referencesArticles needing POV-check from May 2011Articles that may contain original research from June 2011All articles that may contain original researchWikipedia articles needing style editing from March 2013All articles needing style editingArticles with multiple maintenance issues