
Dissolution of the Soviet Union



Tanks at Red Square during the 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt




Date
December 26, 1991; 26 years ago (1991-12-26)[1]


Location
Soviet Union


Participants



People of the Soviet Union
Federal government
Republican governments
Autonomous SSRs





Outcome



Dissolution of the Soviet Union into independent republics
Conclusion of the Cold War









Post-Soviet states (alphabetical order)





1. Armenia
2. Azerbaijan
3. Belarus
4. Estonia







5. Georgia
6. Kazakhstan
7. Kyrgyzstan
8. Latvia







9. Lithuania
10. Moldova
11. Russia
12. Tajikistan







13. Turkmenistan
14. Ukraine
15. Uzbekistan










Part of a series on the


History of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
(Soviet Union)






1917–1927
Revolutionary Beginnings






Revolution
Civil War
New Economic Policy
1922 Treaty
National delimitation






1927–1953
Stalinist rule






Socialism in One Country
Great Purge

Soviet famine of 1932–33


(Holodomor
Kazakhstan famine of 1932-1933)



World War II


(Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
Great Patriotic War
Operation Barbarossa
Occupation of the Baltic states
Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina
Battle of Berlin
Soviet invasion of Manchuria)




Soviet deportations
Soviet famine of 1946–47
Cold War
Korean War






1953–1964
Post-Stalin era






Berlin blockade
1954 transfer of Crimea
Khrushchev Thaw
On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences
We will bury you
9 March riots
Wage reforms
Cuban Revolution
Sino-Soviet split
Space program
Cuban Missile Crisis






1964–1982
Stagnated economy






Brezhnev Doctrine
Era of Stagnation
50th anniversary of the Armenian Genocide protests
Prague Spring

Vietnam War


(Laotian Civil War
Operation Menu
Cambodian Civil War
Fall of Saigon)




Six-Day War
Détente
Yom Kippur War
Dirty War

Wars in Africa


(Angolan War of Independence
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican War of Independence
Mozambican Civil War
South African Border War
Rhodesian Bush War)




Cambodian-Vietnamese War
Soviet–Afghan War
1980 Summer Olympics

Olympic boycotts


(1980 Olympic boycott
1984 Olympic boycott)




Polish strike
Death and funeral






1982–1991
Leadership changes and collapse






Invasion of Grenada
Glasnost
Perestroika
Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan

Singing Revolution


(Baltic Way
Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania
On the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia
Estonian Sovereignty Declaration)



Revolutions of 1989


(Pan-European picnic
Die Wende
Peaceful Revolution
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Velvet Revolution
End of communist rule in Hungary
Romanian Revolution
German reunification)



Dissolution


(Jeltoqsan
Nagorno-Karabakh War
9 April tragedy
Black January
Osh riots
War of Laws
Dushanbe riots
January Events
The Barricades
Referendum
Union of Sovereign States
August Coup
Ukrainian independence (referendum)
Belavezha Accords
Alma-Ata Protocol)







History of





Russia
Moscow
Kiev
Minsk
Former Soviet Republics





Soviet leadership





1. Lenin
2. Stalin
3. Malenkov
4. Khrushchev
5. Brezhnev
6. Andropov
7. Chernenko
8. Gorbachev








Culture
Economy
Education
Geography
Politics





 Soviet Union portal





v
t
e







Eastern Bloc







Soviet Socialist Republics


Armenia
Azerbaijan
Byelorussia
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kirghizia
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldavia
Russian SFSR
Tajikistan
Turkmenia
Ukraine
Uzbekistan








Allied states


Hungarian People's Republic
Polish People's Republic
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic

Socialist Republic of Romania

German Democratic Republic
People's Republic of Bulgaria

Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(to 1948)


People's Socialist Republic of Albania
(to 1961)

Republic of Cuba
People's Revolutionary Government of Grenada
People's Republic of Benin
People's Republic of the Congo
People's Republic of Angola
People's Republic of Mozambique
People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Somali Democratic Republic
(to 1977)

People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
Mongolian People's Republic

People's Republic of China
(to 1961)

Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Lao People's Democratic Republic
People's Republic of Kampuchea








Related organizations


Cominform
COMECON
Warsaw Pact

World Federation of
Trade Unions (WFTU)
World Federation of
Democratic Youth (WFDY)







Dissent and opposition

Forest Brothers


in Lithuania
in Latvia
in Estonia


Operation "Jungle"

Ukrainian Insurgent Army
Goryani movement (Bulgaria)
Romanian anti-communism
Polish Cursed Soldiers

1953 uprisings


in Plzeň
in East Germany



1956 protests


in Georgia
in Poznań




Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Novocherkassk massacre (Russia)

1968 events


Prague Spring
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Red Square demonstration




Charter 77 (Czechoslovakia)


Solidarity (Poland)


Jeltoqsan (Kazakhstan)


Braşov Rebellion (Romania)


January Events (Lithuania)


The Barricades (Latvia)


April 9 tragedy (Georgia)


Black January (Azerbaijan)








Cold War events


Marshall Plan


1948 Czechoslovak coup


Tito–Stalin split


Berlin Blockade


1961 Berlin Wall crisis


Cuban Missile Crisis


1980 Moscow Olympics








Decline


Singing Revolution


Polish Round Table Agreement


Revolutions of 1989


Fall of the Berlin Wall

January 1991


in Lithuania
in Latvia




Breakup of Yugoslavia


Yugoslav Wars


End of the Soviet Union


Fall of communism in Albania









v
t
e





The dissolution of the Soviet Union occurred on December 26, 1991. It was a result of the declaration number 142-Н of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union.[1] The declaration acknowledged the independence of the former Soviet republics and created the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), although five of the signatories ratified it much later or did not do so at all. On the previous day, 25 December 1991, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, the eighth and final leader of the Soviet Union, resigned, declared his office extinct, and handed over its powers – including control of the Soviet nuclear missile launching codes – to Russian President Boris Yeltsin. That evening at 7:32, the Soviet flag was lowered from the Kremlin for the last time and replaced with the pre-revolutionary Russian flag.[2]
Previously, from August to December, all the individual republics, including Russia itself, had either seceded from the union or at the very least denounced the Treaty on the Creation of the Soviet Union. The week before the union's formal dissolution, 11 republics signed the Alma-Ata Protocol formally establishing the CIS and declaring that the Soviet Union had ceased to exist.[3][4] Both the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the USSR (Russian: распад СССР) also signalled the end of the Cold War.
Several of the former Soviet republics have retained close links with the Russian Federation and formed multilateral organizations such as the Commonwealth of Independent States, Eurasian Economic Community, the Union State, the Eurasian Customs Union, and the Eurasian Economic Union to enhance economic and security cooperation. On the other hand, the Baltic states have joined NATO and the European Union.



Contents


1 1985

1.1 Moscow: Mikhail Gorbachev, new General Secretary


2 1986

2.1 Sakharov
2.2 Baltic republics

2.2.1 Latvia's Helsinki-86


2.3 Central Asia

2.3.1 Kazakhstan: Jeltoqsan riots




3 1987

3.1 Moscow: One-party democracy
3.2 Baltic republics: Molotov–Ribbentrop protests

3.2.1 Latvia leads
3.2.2 Estonia’s first protests


3.3 The Caucasus

3.3.1 Armenia: Environmental concerns and Nagorno-Karabakh




4 1988

4.1 Moscow loses control
4.2 Baltic Republics

4.2.1 Estonian Popular Front
4.2.2 Latvian Popular Front
4.2.3 Lithuania’s Sąjūdis


4.3 Rebellion in the Caucasus

4.3.1 Azerbaijan: Violence
4.3.2 Armenia: Uprising
4.3.3 Georgia: First demonstrations


4.4 The Western republics

4.4.1 Democratic Movement of Moldova
4.4.2 Demonstrations in Lviv, Ukraine
4.4.3 Kurapaty, Belarus




5 1989

5.1 Moscow: Limited democratization

5.1.1 Congress of People’s Deputies of the Soviet Union
5.1.2 Loss of satellite states


5.2 Baltic "Chain of Freedom"

5.2.1 Lithuania’s Communist Party splits


5.3 Caucasus

5.3.1 Azerbaijan’s blockade
5.3.2 Armenia’s Karabakh Committee released
5.3.3 Massacre in Tbilisi, Georgia


5.4 The Western republics

5.4.1 Popular Front of Moldova
5.4.2 Ukraine’s Rukh
5.4.3 Belarus: Kurapaty


5.5 Central Asian republics

5.5.1 Fergana, Uzbekistan
5.5.2 Zhanaozen, Kazakhstan




6 1990

6.1 Moscow loses six republics
6.2 Rivalry between USSR and RSFSR
6.3 Baltic republics

6.3.1 Lithuania
6.3.2 Estonia
6.3.3 Latvia


6.4 Caucasus

6.4.1 Azerbaijan’s Black January


6.5 The Western republics

6.5.1 Ukraine


6.6 Central Asian republics

6.6.1 Tajikistan: Dushanbe riots
6.6.2 Kirghizia: Osh massacre




7 1991

7.1 Moscow’s crisis
7.2 Russia’s President Boris Yeltsin
7.3 Baltic republics

7.3.1 Lithuania
7.3.2 Latvia
7.3.3 Estonia


7.4 August coup
7.5 The fall: August–December 1991


8 Consequences and impact

8.1 Sports
8.2 Telecommunications


9 Chronology of declarations of restored and newly independent states

9.1 Before the coup
9.2 During the coup
9.3 After the coup


10 Legacy

10.1 United Nations membership


11 Explanations of Soviet dissolution in historiography
12 See also
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links



1985[edit]
Moscow: Mikhail Gorbachev, new General Secretary[edit]
See also: Glasnost and Perestroika




Mikhail Gorbachev in 1987


Mikhail Gorbachev was elected General Secretary by the Politburo on March 11, 1985, three hours after predecessor Konstantin Chernenko's death at age 73. Gorbachev, aged 54, was the youngest member of the Politburo. His initial goal as general secretary was to revive the Soviet economy, and he realized that doing so would require reforming underlying political and social structures.[5] The reforms began with personnel changes of senior Brezhnev-era officials who would impede political and economic change.[6] On April 23, 1985, Gorbachev brought two protégés, Yegor Ligachev and Nikolai Ryzhkov, into the Politburo as full members. He kept the "power" ministries happy by promoting KGB Head Viktor Chebrikov from candidate to full member and appointing Minister of Defence Marshal Sergei Sokolov as a Politburo candidate.
This liberalisation, however, fostered[citation needed] nationalist movements and ethnic disputes within the Soviet Union. It also led indirectly to the revolutions of 1989, in which Soviet-imposed socialist regimes of the Warsaw Pact were toppled, all peacefully (with the notable exception of Romania),[7] which in turn increased pressure on Gorbachev to introduce greater democracy and autonomy for the Soviet Union's constituent republics. Under Gorbachev's leadership, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1989 introduced limited competitive elections to a new central legislature, the Congress of People's Deputies[8] (although the ban on other political parties was not lifted until 1990).[9]
In May 1985, Gorbachev delivered a speech in Leningrad advocating reforms and an anti-alcohol campaign to tackle widespread alcoholism. Prices of vodka, wine, and beer were raised in order to make these drinks more expensive and to discourage consumption and alcohol rationing was introduced. Unlike most forms of rationing, which is typically adopted as a strategy to conserve scarce goods, this was done to restrict sales with the overt goal of curtailing drunkenness.[10] Gorbachev's plan also included billboards promoting sobriety, increased penalties for public drunkenness, and censorship of drinking scenes from old movies. This mirrored Tsar Nicholas II's program during the First World War, which was intended to eradicate drunkenness in order to bolster the war effort. However, that earlier effort was also intended to preserve grain for only the most essential purposes, which did not appear to be a goal in Gorbachev's program. Gorbachev soon faced the same adverse economic reaction to his prohibition as did the last Tsar. The disincentivization of alcohol consumption was a serious blow to the state budget according to Alexander Yakovlev, who noted annual collections of alcohol taxes decreased by 100 billion rubles. Alcohol sales migrated to the black market and moonshining became more prevalent as some made "bathtub vodka" with homegrown potatoes. Poorer, less educated Russians resorted to drinking unhealthy substitutes such as nail-polish remover, rubbing alcohol, or men's cologne, resulting in an additional burden on Russia's healthcare sector due to the increased poisoning cases.[10] The underlying purpose of these reforms was to prop up the existing centrally planned economy, in contrast to later reforms, which tended toward market socialism.
On July 1, 1985, Gorbachev promoted Eduard Shevardnadze, First Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party, to full member of the Politburo, and the following day appointed him minister of foreign affairs, replacing longtime Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko. The latter, disparaged as "Mr Nyet" in the West, had served for 28 years as Minister of Foreign Affairs. Gromyko was relegated to the largely ceremonial position of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (officially Soviet Head of State), as he was considered an "old thinker." Also on July 1, Gorbachev sidelined his main rival by removing Grigory Romanov from the Politburo and he brought Boris Yeltsin and Lev Zaikov into the CPSU Central Committee Secretariat.
In the fall of 1985, Gorbachev continued to bring younger and more energetic men into government. On September 27, Nikolai Ryzhkov replaced 79-year-old Nikolai Tikhonov as Chairman of the Council of Ministers, effectively the Soviet prime minister, and on October 14, Nikolai Talyzin replaced Nikolai Baibakov as chairman of the State Planning Committee (GOSPLAN). At the next Central Committee meeting on October 15, Tikhonov retired from the Politburo and Talyzin became a candidate. Finally, on December 23, 1985, Gorbachev appointed Yeltsin First Secretary of the Moscow Communist Party replacing Viktor Grishin.
1986[edit]
Sakharov[edit]
Gorbachev continued to press for greater liberalization. On December 23, 1986, the most prominent Soviet dissident, Andrei Sakharov, returned to Moscow shortly after receiving a personal telephone call from Gorbachev telling him that after almost seven years his internal exile for defying the authorities was over.[11]
Baltic republics[edit]
The Baltic republics, forcibly reincorporated into the Soviet Union in 1944,[12] pressed for independence, beginning with Estonia in November 1988 when the Estonian legislature passed laws resisting the control of the central government.[13] While Gorbachev had loosened Soviet control over Eastern Europe, he had made it known that Baltic separatism would not be tolerated and be met with embargoes and force if need be, as there was a tacit agreement in the Politboro of the infeasibility of using force to keep Poland and Czechoslovakia communist, but said loss of power would not extend into the USSR itself.[14]
Latvia's Helsinki-86[edit]




Figure of Liberty on the Freedom Monument in Riga, focus of 1986 Latvian demonstrations.


The CTAG (Latvian: Cilvēktiesību aizstāvības grupa, Human Rights Defense Group) Helsinki-86 was founded in July 1986 in the Latvian port town of Liepāja by three workers: Linards Grantiņš, Raimonds Bitenieks, and Mārtiņš Bariss. Its name refers to the human-rights statements of the Helsinki Accords. Helsinki-86 was the first openly anti-Communist organization in the U.S.S.R., and the first openly organized opposition to the Soviet regime, setting an example for other ethnic minorities' pro-independence movements.[citation needed]
On December 26, 1986, in the early morning hours after a rock concert, 300 working-class Latvian youths gathered in Riga's Cathedral Square and marched down Lenin Avenue toward the Freedom Monument, shouting, "Soviet Russia out! Free Latvia!" Security forces confronted the marchers, and several police vehicles were overturned.[15]
Central Asia[edit]
Kazakhstan: Jeltoqsan riots[edit]
The "Jeltoqsan" (Kazakh for "December") of 1986 were riots in Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan, sparked by Gorbachev's dismissal of Dinmukhamed Konayev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan and an ethnic Kazakh, who was replaced with Gennady Kolbin, an outsider from the Russian SFSR.[16] Demonstrations started in the morning of December 17, 1986, with 200 to 300 students in front of the Central Committee building on Brezhnev Square protesting Konayev's dismissal and replacement by a Russian. Protesters swelled to 1,000 then to 5,000 as other students joined the crowd. The CPK Central Committee ordered troops from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, druzhiniki (volunteers), cadets, policemen, and the KGB to cordon the square and videotape the participants. The situation escalated around 5 p.m., as troops were ordered to disperse the protesters. Clashes between the security forces and the demonstrators continued throughout the night in Almaty.
On the next day, December 18, protests turned into civil unrest as clashes between troops, volunteers, militia units, and Kazakh students turned into a wide-scale confrontation. The clashes could only be controlled on the third day. The Alma-Ata events were followed by smaller protests and demonstrations in Shymkent, Pavlodar, Karaganda, and Taldykorgan. Reports from Kazakh SSR authorities estimated that the riots drew 3,000 people.[17] Other estimates are of at least 30,000 to 40,000 protestors with 5,000 arrested and jailed, and an unknown number of casualties.[18] Jeltoqsan leaders say over 60,000 Kazakhs participated in the protests.[18][19] According to the Kazakh SSR government, there were two deaths during the riots, including a volunteer police worker and a student. Both of them had died due to blows to the head. About 100 others were detained and several others were sentenced to terms in labor camps.[20] Sources cited by the Library of Congress claimed that at least 200 people died or were summarily executed soon thereafter; some accounts estimate casualties at more than 1,000. The writer Mukhtar Shakhanov claimed that a KGB officer testified that 168 protesters were killed, but that figure remains unconfirmed.
1987[edit]
Moscow: One-party democracy[edit]
At the January 28–30, 1987, Central Committee plenum, Gorbachev suggested a new policy of "Demokratizatsiya" throughout Soviet society. He proposed that future Communist Party elections should offer a choice between multiple candidates, elected by secret ballot. However, the CPSU delegates at the Plenum watered down Gorbachev's proposal, and democratic choice within the Communist Party was never significantly implemented.
Gorbachev also radically expanded the scope of Glasnost, stating that no subject was off-limits for open discussion in the media. Even so, the cautious Soviet intelligentsia took almost a year to begin pushing the boundaries to see if he meant what he said. For the first time, the Communist Party leader had appealed over the heads of Central Committee members for the people's support in exchange for expansion of liberties. The tactic proved successful: Within two years political reform could no longer be sidetracked by Party "conservatives." An unintended consequence was that having saved reform, Gorbachev's move ultimately killed the very system it was designed to save.[21]
On February 7, 1987, dozens of political prisoners were freed in the first group release since Khrushchev's "thaw" in the mid-1950s.[22] On May 6, 1987, Pamyat, a Russian nationalist group, held an unsanctioned demonstration in Moscow. The authorities did not break up the demonstration and even kept traffic out of the demonstrators' way while they marched to an impromptu meeting with Boris Yeltsin, head of the Moscow Communist Party and at the time one of Gorbachev's closest allies.[23] On July 25, 1987, 300 Crimean Tatars staged a noisy demonstration near the Kremlin Wall for several hours, calling for the right to return to their homeland, from which they were deported in 1944; police and soldiers merely looked on.[24]
On September 10, 1987, after a lecture from hardliner Yegor Ligachev at the Politburo for allowing these two unsanctioned demonstrations in Moscow, Boris Yeltsin wrote a letter of resignation to Gorbachev, who had been holidaying on the Black Sea.[25] Gorbachev was stunned – no one had ever voluntarily resigned from the Politburo. At the October 27, 1987, plenary meeting of the Central Committee, Yeltsin, frustrated that Gorbachev had not addressed any of the issues outlined in his resignation letter, criticized the slow pace of reform, servility to the general secretary, and opposition from Ligachev that had led to his (Yeltsin's) resignation.[26] No one had ever addressed the Party leader so brazenly in front of the Central Committee since Leon Trotsky in the 1920s.[26] In his reply, Gorbachev accused Yeltsin of "political immaturity" and "absolute irresponsibility." No one backed Yeltsin.
Nevertheless, news of Yeltsin's insubordination and "secret speech" spread, and soon samizdat versions began to circulate. This marked the beginning of Yeltsin's rebranding as a rebel and rise in popularity as an anti-establishment figure. The following four years of political struggle between Yeltsin and Gorbachev played a large role in the dissolution of the USSR.[27] On November 11, 1987, Yeltsin was fired from the post of First Secretary of the Moscow Communist Party.
Baltic republics: Molotov–Ribbentrop protests[edit]
On August 23, 1987, on the 48th anniversary of the secret protocols of the 1939 Molotov Pact between Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin that ultimately turned the then-independent Baltic states over to the Soviet Union, thousands of demonstrators marked the occasion in the three Baltic capitals to sing independence songs and attend speeches commemorating Stalin’s victims. The gatherings were sharply denounced in the official press and closely watched by the police, but were not interrupted.[28]
Latvia leads[edit]
On June 14, 1987, about 5,000 people gathered again at Freedom Monument in Riga, and laid flowers to commemorate the anniversary of Stalin's mass deportation of Latvians in 1941. This was the first large demonstration in the Baltic republics to commemorate the anniversary of an event contrary to official Soviet history. The authorities did not crack down on demonstrators, which encouraged more and larger demonstrations throughout the Baltic States. The next major anniversary after the August 23 Molotov Pact demonstration was on November 18, the date of Latvia’s independence in 1918. On November 18, 1987, hundreds of police and civilian militiamen cordoned off the central square to prevent any demonstration at Freedom Monument, but thousands lined the streets of Riga in silent protest regardless.[29]
Estonia’s first protests[edit]
In spring 1987, a protest movement arose against new phosphate mines in Estonia. Signatures were collected in Tartu, and students assembled in the university's main hall to express lack of confidence in the government. At a demonstration on May 1, 1987, young people showed up with banners and slogans despite an official ban. On August 15, 1987, former political prisoners formed the MRP-AEG group (Estonians for the Public Disclosure of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact), which was headed by Tiit Madisson. In September 1987, the Edasi newspaper published a proposal by Edgar Savisaar, Siim Kallas, Tiit Made, and Mikk Titma calling for Estonia's transition to autonomy. Initially geared toward economic independence, then toward a certain amount of political autonomy, the project, Isemajandav Eesti ("A Self-Managing Estonia") became known according to its Estonian acronym, IME, which means "miracle". On October 21, a demonstration dedicated to those who gave their lives in the 1918–1920 Estonian War of Independence took place in Võru, which culminated in a conflict with the militia. For the first time in years, the blue, black, and white national tricolor was publicly displayed.[30]
The Caucasus[edit]
Armenia: Environmental concerns and Nagorno-Karabakh[edit]




Environmental concerns over the Metsamor nuclear power plant drove initial demonstrations in Yerevan.[citation needed]


On October 17, 1987, about 3,000 Armenians demonstrated in Yerevan complaining about the condition of Lake Sevan, the Nairit chemicals plant, and the Metsamor Nuclear Power Plant, and air pollution in Yerevan. Police tried to prevent the protest but took no action to stop it once the march was underway. The demonstration was led by Armenian writers such as Silva Kaputikian, Zori Balayan, and Maro Margarian and leaders from the National Survival organization. The march originated at the Opera Plaza after speakers, mainly intellectuals, addressed the crowd.
The following day 1,000 Armenians participated in another demonstration calling for Armenian national rights in Karabagh. The demonstrators demanded the annexation of Nakhchivan and Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia, and carried placards to that effect. The police tried to physically prevent the march and after a few incidents, dispersed the demonstrators. Nagorno-Karabakh would break out in violence the following year.[31]
1988[edit]
Moscow loses control[edit]
In 1988 Gorbachev started to lose control of two regions of the Soviet Union, as the Baltic republics were now leaning towards independence, and the Caucasus descended into violence and civil war.
On July 1, 1988, the fourth and last day of a bruising 19th Party Conference, Gorbachev won the backing of the tired delegates for his last-minute proposal to create a new supreme legislative body called the Congress of People's Deputies. Frustrated by the old guard's resistance, Gorbachev embarked on a set of constitutional changes to try to separate party and state, and thereby isolate his conservative Party opponents. Detailed proposals for the new Congress of People's Deputies were published on October 2, 1988,[32] and to enable the creation of the new legislature. The Supreme Soviet, during its November 29 – December 1, 1988, session, implemented amendments to the 1977 Soviet Constitution, enacted a law on electoral reform, and set the date of the election for March 26, 1989.[33]
On November 29, 1988, the Soviet Union ceased to jam all foreign radio stations, allowing Soviet citizens for the first time to have unrestricted access to news sources beyond Communist Party control.[34]
Baltic Republics[edit]
In 1986 and 1987 Latvia had been in the vanguard of the Baltic states in pressing for reform. In 1988 Estonia took over the lead role with the foundation of the Soviet Union's first popular front and starting to influence state policy.
Estonian Popular Front[edit]
The Estonian Popular Front was founded in April 1988. On June 16, 1988, Gorbachev replaced Karl Vaino, the "old guard" leader of the Communist Party of Estonia, with the comparatively liberal Vaino Väljas, the Soviet ambassador to Nicaragua.[35] In late June 1988, Väljas bowed to pressure from the Estonian Popular Front and legalized the flying of the old blue-black-white flag of Estonia, and agreed to a new state language law that made Estonian the official language of the Republic.[15]
On October 2, the Popular Front formally launched its political platform at a two-day congress. Väljas attended, gambling that the front could help Estonia become a model of economic and political revival, while moderating separatist and other radical tendencies.[36] On November 16, 1988, the Supreme Soviet of the Estonian SSR adopted a declaration of national sovereignty under which Estonian laws would take precedence over those of the Soviet Union.[37] Estonia's parliament also laid claim to the republic's natural resources including land, inland waters, forests, mineral deposits, and to the means of industrial production, agriculture, construction, state banks, transportation, and municipal services within the territory of Estonia's borders.[38]
Latvian Popular Front[edit]
The Latvian Popular Front was founded in June 1988. On October 4, Gorbachev replaced Boris Pugo, the "old guard" leader of the Communist Party of Latvia, with the more liberal Jānis Vagris. In October 1988 Vagris bowed to pressure from the Latvian Popular Front and legalized flying the former carmine red-and-white flag of independent Latvia, and on October 6 he passed a law making Latvian the country's official language.[15]
Lithuania’s Sąjūdis[edit]
The Popular Front of Lithuania, called Sąjūdis ("Movement"), was founded in May 1988. On October 19, 1988, Gorbachev replaced Ringaudas Songaila, the "old guard" leader of the Communist Party of Lithuania, with the relatively liberal Algirdas Mykolas Brazauskas. In October 1988 Brazauskas bowed to pressure from Sąjūdis and legalized the flying of the historic yellow-green-red flag of independent Lithuania, and in November 1988 passed a law making Lithuanian the country's official language.[15]
Rebellion in the Caucasus[edit]
Azerbaijan: Violence[edit]
On February 20, 1988, after a week of growing demonstrations in Stepanakert, capital of the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast (the Armenian majority area within the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic), the Regional Soviet voted to secede and join with the Soviet Socialist Republic of Armenia.[39] This local vote in a small, remote part of the Soviet Union made headlines around the world; it was an unprecedented defiance of republican and national authorities. On February 22, 1988, in what became known as the "Askeran clash", two Azerbaijanis were killed by Karabakh police. These deaths, announced on state radio, led to the Sumgait Pogrom. Between February 26 and March 1, the city of Sumgait (Azerbaijan) saw violent anti-Armenian rioting during which 32 people were killed. The authorities totally lost control and occupied the city with paratroopers and tanks; nearly all of the 14,000 Armenian residents of Sumgait fled.[40]
Gorbachev refused to make any changes to the status of Nagorno Karabakh, which remained part of Azerbaijan. He instead sacked the Communist Party Leaders in both Republics – on May 21, 1988, Kamran Baghirov was replaced by Abdulrahman Vezirov as First Secretary of the Azerbaijan Communist Party. From July 23 to September 1988, a group of Azerbaijani intellectuals began working for a new organization called the Popular Front of Azerbaijan, loosely based on the Estonian Popular Front.[41] On September 17, when gun battles broke out between the Armenians and Azerbaijanis near Stepanakert, two soldiers were killed and more than two dozen injured.[42] This led to almost tit-for-tat ethnic polarization in Nagorno-Karabakh's two main towns: The Azerbaijani minority was expelled from Stepanakert, and the Armenian minority was expelled from Shusha.[43] On November 17, 1988, in response to the exodus of tens of thousands of Azerbaijanis from Armenia, a series of mass demonstrations began in Baku's Lenin Square, lasting 18 days and attracting half a million demonstrators. On December 5, 1988, the Soviet militia finally moved in, cleared the square by force, and imposed a curfew that lasted ten months.[44]
Armenia: Uprising[edit]
The rebellion of fellow Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh had an immediate effect in Armenia itself. Daily demonstrations, which began in the Armenian capital Yerevan on February 18, initially attracted few people, but each day the Nagorno-Karabakh issue became increasingly prominent and numbers swelled. On February 20, a 30,000-strong crowd demonstrated in the Theater Square, by February 22, there were 100,000, the next day 300,000, and a transport strike was declared, by February 25, there were close to 1 million demonstrators – more than a quarter of Armenia's population-.[45] This was the first of the large, peaceful public demonstrations that would become a feature of communism's overthrow in Prague, Berlin, and, ultimately, Moscow. Leading Armenian intellectuals and nationalists, including future first President of independent Armenia Levon Ter-Petrossian, formed the eleven-member Karabakh Committee to lead and organize the new movement.
Gorbachev again refused to make any changes to the status of Nagorno Karabakh, which remained part of Azerbaijan. Instead he sacked both Republics' Communist Party Leaders: On May 21, 1988, Karen Demirchian was replaced by Suren Harutyunyan as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Armenia. However, Harutyunyan quickly decided to run before the nationalist wind and on May 28, allowed Armenians to unfurl the red-blue-orange First Armenian Republic flag for the first time in almost 70 years.[46] On June 15, 1988, the Armenian Supreme Soviet adopted a resolution formally approving the idea of Nagorno Karabakh joining Armenia.[47] Armenia, formerly one of the most loyal Republics, had suddenly turned into the leading rebel republic. On July 5, 1988, when a contingent of troops was sent in to remove demonstrators by force from Yerevan's Zvartnots International Airport, shots were fired and one student protester was killed.[48] In September, further large demonstrations in Yerevan led to the deployment of armored vehicles.[49] In the autumn of 1988 almost all of the 200,000 Azerbaijani minority in Armenia was expelled by Armenian Nationalists, with over 100 killed in the process[50] – this, after the Sumgait pogrom earlier that year carried out by Azerbaijanis against ethnic Armenians and subsequent expulsion of all Armenians from Azerbaijan. On November 25, 1988, a military commandant took control of Yerevan as the Soviet government moved to prevent further ethnic violence.[51]
On December 7, 1988, the Spitak earthquake struck, killing an estimated 25,000 to 50,000 people. When Gorbachev rushed back from a visit to the United States, he was so angered to be confronted by protesters calling for Nagorno-Karabakh to be made part of the Armenian Republic – during a natural disaster – that on December 11, 1988, he ordered the entire Karabakh Committee to be arrested.[52]
Georgia: First demonstrations[edit]
In November 1988 in Tbilisi, capital of Soviet Georgia, many demonstrators camped out in front of the republic's legislature calling for Georgia's independence[53] and in support of Estonia's declaration of sovereignty.[54]
The Western republics[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Democratic Movement of Moldova[edit]
Beginning in February 1988, the Democratic Movement of Moldova (formerly Moldavia) organized public meetings, demonstrations, and song festivals, which gradually grew in size and intensity. In the streets, the center of public manifestations was the Stephen the Great Monument in Chişinău, and the adjacent park harboring Aleea Clasicilor (The "Alee of the Classics [of the Literature]"). On January 15, 1988, in a tribute to Mihai Eminescu at his bust on the Aleea Clasicilor, Anatol Şalaru submitted a proposal to continue the meetings. In the public discourse, the movement called for national awakening, freedom of speech, revival of Moldavian traditions, and for attainment of official status for the Romanian language and return to the Latin alphabet. The transition from "movement" (an informal association) to "front" (a formal association) was seen as a natural "upgrade" once a movement gained momentum with the public, and the Soviet authorities no longer dared to crack down on it.
Demonstrations in Lviv, Ukraine[edit]
On April 26, 1988, about 500 people participated in a march organized by the Ukrainian Cultural Club on Kiev's Khreschatyk Street to mark the second anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, carrying placards with slogans like "Openness and Democracy to the End." Between May and June 1988, Ukrainian Catholics in western Ukraine celebrated the Millennium of Christianity in Kievan Rus' in secret by holding services in the forests of Buniv, Kalush, Hoshiv, and Zarvanytsia. On June 5, 1988, as the official celebrations of the Millennium were held in Moscow, the Ukrainian Cultural Club hosted its own observances in Kiev at the monument to St. Volodymyr the Great, the grand prince of Kievan Rus'.
On June 16, 1988, 6,000 to 8,000 people gathered in Lviv to hear speakers declare no confidence in the local list of delegates to the 19th Communist Party conference, to begin on June 29. On June 21, a rally in Lviv attracted 50,000 people who had heard about a revised delegate list. Authorities attempted to disperse the rally in front of Druzhba Stadium. On July 7, 10,000 to 20,000 people witnessed the launch of the Democratic Front to Promote Perestroika. On July 17, a group of 10,000 gathered in the village Zarvanytsia for Millennium services celebrated by Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Bishop Pavlo Vasylyk. The militia tried to disperse attendees, but it turned out to be the largest gathering of Ukrainian Catholics since Stalin outlawed the Church in 1946. On August 4, which came to be known as "Bloody Thursday," local authorities violently suppressed a demonstration organized by the Democratic Front to Promote Perestroika. Forty-one people were detained, fined, or sentenced to 15 days of administrative arrest. On September 1, local authorities violently displaced 5,000 students at a public meeting lacking official permission at Ivan Franko State University.
On November 13, 1988, approximately 10,000 people attended an officially sanctioned meeting organized by the cultural heritage organization Spadschyna, the Kyiv University student club Hromada, and the environmental groups Zelenyi Svit ("Green World") and Noosfera, to focus on ecological issues. From November 14–18, 15 Ukrainian activists were among the 100 human-, national- and religious-rights advocates invited to discuss human rights with Soviet officials and a visiting delegation of the U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (also known as the Helsinki Commission). On December 10, hundreds gathered in Kiev to observe International Human Rights Day at a rally organized by the Democratic Union. The unauthorized gathering resulted in the detention of local activists.[55]
Kurapaty, Belarus[edit]
The Partyja BPF (Belarusian Popular Front) was established in 1988 as a political party and cultural movement for democracy and independence, à la the Baltic republics’ popular fronts. The discovery of mass graves in Kurapaty outside Minsk by historian Zianon Pazniak, the Belarusian Popular Front’s first leader, gave additional momentum to the pro-democracy and pro-independence movement in Belarus.[56] It claimed that the NKVD performed secret killings in Kurapaty.[57] Initially the Front had significant visibility because its numerous public actions almost always ended in clashes with the police and the KGB.
1989[edit]
Moscow: Limited democratization[edit]
Spring 1989 saw the people of the Soviet Union exercising a democratic choice, albeit limited, for the first time since 1917, when they elected the new Congress of People's Deputies. Just as important was the uncensored live TV coverage of the legislature's deliberations, where people witnessed the previously feared Communist leadership being questioned and held accountable. This example fueled a limited experiment with democracy in Poland, which quickly led to the toppling of the Communist government in Warsaw that summer – which in turn sparked uprisings that overthrew communism in the other five Warsaw Pact countries before the end of 1989, the year the Berlin Wall fell. These events showed that the people of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union did not support Gorbachev's drive to modernize Communism; rather, they preferred to abandon it altogether.[citation needed]
This was also the year that CNN became the first non-Soviet broadcaster allowed to beam its TV news programs to Moscow. Officially, CNN was available only to foreign guests in the Savoy Hotel, but Muscovites quickly learned how to pick up signals on their home televisions. That had a major impact on how Russians saw events in their country, and made censorship almost impossible.[58]
Congress of People’s Deputies of the Soviet Union[edit]




Andrei Sakharov, formerly exiled to Gorky, was elected to the Congress of People's Deputies in March 1989.


The month-long nomination period for candidates for the Congress of People's Deputies of the USSR lasted until January 24, 1989. For the next month, selection among the 7,531 district nominees took place at meetings organized by constituency-level electoral commissions. On March 7, a final list of 5,074 candidates was published; about 85% were Party members.
In the two weeks prior to the 1,500 district polls, elections to fill 750 reserved seats of public organizations, contested by 880 candidates, were held. Of these seats, 100 were allocated to the CPSU, 100 to the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions, 75 to the Communist Youth Union (Komsomol), 75 to the Committee of Soviet Women, 75 to the War and Labour Veterans' Organization, and 325 to other organizations such as the Academy of Sciences. The selection process was done in April.
In the March 26 general elections, voter participation was an impressive 89.8%, and 1,958 (including 1,225 district seats) of the 2,250 CPD seats were filled. In district races, run-off elections were held in 76 constituencies on April 2 and 9 and fresh elections were organized on April 20 and 14 to May 23,[59] in the 199 remaining constituencies where the required absolute majority was not attained.[33] While most CPSU-endorsed candidates were elected, more than 300 lost to independent candidates such as Yeltsin, physicist Andrei Sakharov and lawyer Anatoly Sobchak.
In the first session of the new Congress of People's Deputies, from May 25 to June 9, hardliners retained control but reformers used the legislature as a platform for debate and criticism – which was broadcast live and uncensored. This transfixed the population; nothing like this freewheeling debate had ever been witnessed in the U.S.S.R. On May 29, Yeltsin managed to secure a seat on the Supreme Soviet,[60] and in the summer he formed the first opposition, the Inter-Regional Deputies Group, composed of Russian nationalists and liberals. Composing the final legislative group in the Soviet Union, those elected in 1989 played a vital part in reforms and the eventual breakup of the Soviet Union during the next two years.
On May 30, 1989, Gorbachev proposed that nationwide local elections, scheduled for November 1989, be postponed until early 1990 because there were still no laws governing the conduct of such elections. This was seen by some as a concession to local Party officials, who feared they would be swept from power in a wave of anti-establishment sentiment.[61]
On October 25, 1989, the Supreme Soviet voted to eliminate special seats for the Communist Party and other official organizations in national and local elections, responding to sharp popular criticism that such reserved slots were undemocratic. After vigorous debate, the 542-member Supreme Soviet passed the measure 254-85 (with 36 abstentions). The decision required a constitutional amendment, ratified by the full congress, which met December 12–25. It also passed measures that would allow direct elections for presidents of each of the 15 constituent republics. Gorbachev strongly opposed such a move during debate but was defeated.
The vote expanded the power of republics in local elections, enabling them to decide for themselves how to organize voting. Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia had already proposed laws for direct presidential elections. Local elections in all the republics had already been scheduled to take place between December and March 1990.[62]
Loss of satellite states[edit]




The Eastern Bloc


The six Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe, while nominally independent, were widely recognized in the international community as the Soviet satellite states. All had been occupied by the Soviet Red Army in 1945, had Soviet-style socialist states imposed upon them, and had very restricted freedom of action in either domestic or international affairs. Any moves towards real independence were suppressed by military force – in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring in 1968. Gorbachev abandoned the oppressive and expensive Brezhnev Doctrine, which mandated intervention in the Warsaw Pact states, in favor of non-intervention in the internal affairs of allies – jokingly termed the Sinatra Doctrine in a reference to the Frank Sinatra song "My Way".
Baltic "Chain of Freedom"[edit]




"Baltic Way" 1989 demonstration in Šiauliai, Lithuania. The coffins are decorated with national flags of the three Baltic Republics and are placed symbolically beneath Soviet and Nazi flags.


The Baltic Way or Baltic Chain (also Chain of Freedom Estonian: Balti kett, Latvian: Baltijas ceļš, Lithuanian: Baltijos kelias, Russian: Балтийский путь) was a peaceful political demonstration on August 23, 1989.[63] An estimated 2 million people joined hands to form a human chain extending 600 kilometres (370 mi) across Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which had been forcibly reincorporated into the Soviet Union in 1944. The colossal demonstration marked the 50th anniversary of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact that divided Eastern Europe into spheres of influence and led to the occupation of the Baltic states in 1940.
In December 1989, the Congress of People's Deputies accepted—and Gorbachev signed—the report by the Yakovlev Commission condemning the secret protocols of the Molotov–Ribbentrop pact.[64]
Lithuania’s Communist Party splits[edit]
In the March 1989 elections to the Congress of Peoples Deputies, 36 of the 42 deputies from Lithuania were candidates from the independent national movement Sąjūdis. This was the greatest victory for any national organization within the USSR and was a devastating revelation to the Lithuanian Communist Party of its growing unpopularity.[65]
On December 7, 1989, the Communist Party of Lithuania under the leadership of Algirdas Brazauskas, split from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and abandoned its claim to have a constitutional "leading role" in politics. A smaller loyalist faction of the Communist Party, headed by hardliner Mykolas Burokevičius, was established and remained affiliated with the CPSU. However, Lithuania’s governing Communist Party was formally independent from Moscow's control – a first for Soviet Republics and a political earthquake that prompted Gorbachev to arrange a visit to Lithuania the following month in a futile attempt to bring the local party back under control.[66] The following year, the Communist Party lost power altogether in multiparty parliamentary elections which had caused Vytautus Landsbergis to become the first non-Communist president of Lithuania since its forced incorporation into the USSR.
Caucasus[edit]
Azerbaijan’s blockade[edit]
On July 16, 1989, the Popular Front of Azerbaijan held its first congress and elected Abulfaz Elchibey, who would become President, as its Chairman.[67] On August 19, 600,000 protesters jammed Baku’s Lenin Square (now Azadliq Square) to demand the release of political prisoners.[68] In the second half of 1989, weapons were handed out in Nagorno-Karabakh. When Karabakhis got hold of small arms to replace hunting rifles and crossbows, casualties began to mount; bridges were blown up, roads were blockaded, and hostages were taken.[69]
In a new and effective tactic, the Popular Front launched a rail blockade of Armenia,[70] which caused petrol and food shortages because 85 percent of Armenia's freight came from Azerbaijan.[71] Under pressure from the Popular Front the Communist authorities in Azerbaijan started making concessions. On September 25, they passed a sovereignty law that gave precedence to Azerbaijani law, and on October 4, the Popular Front was permitted to register as a legal organization as long as it lifted the blockade. Transport communications between Azerbaijan and Armenia never fully recovered.[71] Tensions continued to escalate and on December 29, Popular Front activists seized local party offices in Jalilabad, wounding dozens.
Armenia’s Karabakh Committee released[edit]
On May 31, 1989, the 11 members of the Karabakh Committee, who had been imprisoned without trial in Moscow’s Matrosskaya Tishina prison, were released, and returned home to a hero's welcome.[72] Soon after his release, Levon Ter-Petrossian, an academic, was elected chairman of the anti-communist opposition Pan-Armenian National Movement, and later stated that it was in 1989 that he first began considering full independence.[73]
Massacre in Tbilisi, Georgia[edit]




Photos of victims (mostly young women) of an April 1989 massacre in Tbilisi, Georgia.


On April 7, 1989, Soviet troops and armored personnel carriers were sent to Tbilisi after more than 100,000 people protested in front of Communist Party headquarters with banners calling for Georgia to secede from the Soviet Union and for Abkhazia to be fully integrated into Georgia.[74] On April 9, 1989, troops attacked the demonstrators; some 20 people were killed and more than 200 wounded.[75] This event radicalized Georgian politics, prompting many to conclude that independence was preferable to continued Soviet rule. On April 14, Gorbachev removed Jumber Patiashvili as First Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party and replaced him with former Georgian KGB chief Givi Gumbaridze.
On July 16, 1989, in Abkhazia's capital Sukhumi, a protest against the opening of a Georgian university branch in the town led to violence that quickly degenerated into a large-scale inter-ethnic confrontation in which 18 died and hundreds were injured before Soviet troops restored order.[76] This riot marked the start of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict.

The Western republics[edit]
Popular Front of Moldova[edit]
In the March 26, 1989, elections to the Congress of People's Deputies, 15 of the 46 Moldavian deputies sent to Moscow were supporters of the Nationalist/Democratic movement.[77] The Popular Front of Moldova founding congress took place two months later, on May 20, 1989. During its second congress (June 30 – July 1, 1989), Ion Hadârcă was elected its president.
A series of demonstrations that became known as the Grand National Assembly (Romanian: Marea Adunare Naţională) was the Front’s first major achievement. Such mass demonstrations, including one attended by 300,000 people on August 27,[78] convinced the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on August 31 to adopt the language law making Moldovan the official language, and replacing the Cyrillic alphabet with Latin characters.[79]
Ukraine’s Rukh[edit]
In Ukraine, Lviv and Kiev celebrated Ukrainian Independence Day on January 22, 1989. Thousands gathered in Lviv for an unauthorized moleben (religious service) in front of St. George's Cathedral. In Kiev, 60 activists met in a Kiev apartment to commemorate the proclamation of the Ukrainian People's Republic in 1918. On February 11–12, 1989, the Ukrainian Language Society held its founding congress. On February 15, 1989, the formation of the Initiative Committee for the Renewal of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church was announced. The program and statutes of the movement were proposed by the Writers Association of Ukraine and were published in the journal Literaturna Ukraina on February 16, 1989. The organization heralded Ukrainian dissidents such as Vyacheslav Chornovil.
In late February, large public rallies took place in Kiev to protest the election laws, on the eve of the March 26 elections to the USSR Congress of People's Deputies, and to call for the resignation of the first secretary of the Communist Party of Ukraine, Volodymyr Shcherbytsky, lampooned as "the mastodon of stagnation." The demonstrations coincided with a visit to Ukraine by Soviet President Gorbachev. On February 26, 1989, between 20,000 and 30,000 people participated in an unsanctioned ecumenical memorial service in Lviv, marking the anniversary of the death of 19th-century Ukrainian artist and nationalist Taras Shevchenko.
On March 4, 1989, the Memorial Society, committed to honoring the victims of Stalinism and cleansing society of Soviet practices, was founded in Kiev. A public rally was held the next day. On March 12, A pre-election meeting organized in Lviv by the Ukrainian Helsinki Union and the Marian Society Myloserdia (Compassion) was violently dispersed, and nearly 300 people were detained. On March 26, elections were held to the union Congress of People's Deputies; by-elections were held on April 9, May 14, and May 21. Among the 225 Ukrainian deputies, most were conservatives, though a handful of progressives made the cut.
From April 20–23, 1989, pre-election meetings were held in Lviv for four consecutive days, drawing crowds of up to 25,000. The action included a one-hour warning strike at eight local factories and institutions. It was the first labor strike in Lviv since 1944. On May 3, a pre-election rally attracted 30,000 in Lviv. On May 7, The Memorial Society organized a mass meeting at Bykivnia, site of a mass grave of Ukrainian and Polish victims of Stalinist terror. After a march from Kiev to the site, a memorial service was staged.
From mid-May to September 1989, Ukrainian Greek-Catholic hunger strikers staged protests on Moscow's Arbat to call attention to the plight of their Church. They were especially active during the July session of the World Council of Churches held in Moscow. The protest ended with the arrests of the group on September 18. On May 27, 1989, the founding conference of the Lviv regional Memorial Society was held. On June 18, 1989, an estimated 100,000 faithful participated in public religious services in Ivano-Frankivsk in western Ukraine, responding to Cardinal Myroslav Lubachivsky's call for an international day of prayer.
On August 19, 1989, the Russian Orthodox Parish of Saints Peter and Paul announced it would be switching to the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church. On September 2, 1989, tens of thousands across Ukraine protested a draft election law that reserved special seats for the Communist Party and for other official organizations: 50,000 in Lviv, 40,000 in Kiev, 10,000 in Zhytomyr, 5,000 each in Dniprodzerzhynsk and Chervonohrad, and 2,000 in Kharkiv. From September 8–10, 1989, writer Ivan Drach was elected to head Rukh, the People's Movement of Ukraine, at its founding congress in Kiev. On September 17, between 150,000 and 200,000 people marched in Lviv, demanding the legalization of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. On September 21, 1989, exhumation of a mass grave began in Demianiv Laz, a nature preserve south of Ivano-Frankivsk. On September 28, First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Ukraine Volodymyr Shcherbytsky, a holdover from the Brezhnev era, was replaced by Vladimir Ivashko.
On October 1, 1989, a peaceful demonstration of 10,000 to 15,000 people was violently dispersed by the militia in front of Lviv's Druzhba Stadium, where a concert celebrating the Soviet "reunification" of Ukrainian lands was being held. On October 10, Ivano-Frankivsk was the site of a pre-election protest attended by 30,000 people. On October 15, several thousand people gathered in Chervonohrad, Chernivtsi, Rivne, and Zhytomyr; 500 in Dnipropetrovsk; and 30,000 in Lviv to protest the election law. On October 20, faithful and clergy of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church participated in a synod in Lviv, the first since its forced liquidation in the 1930s.
On October 24, the union Supreme Soviet passed a law eliminating special seats for Communist Party and other official organizations' representatives. On October 26, twenty factories in Lviv held strikes and meetings to protest the police brutality of October 1 and the authorities' unwillingness to prosecute those responsible. From October 26–28, the Zelenyi Svit (Friends of the Earth – Ukraine) environmental association held its founding congress, and on October 27 the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet passed a law eliminating the special status of party and other official organizations.
On October 28, 1989, the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet decreed that effective January 1, 1990, Ukrainian would be the official language of Ukraine, while Russian would be used for communication between ethnic groups. On the same day The Congregation of the Church of the Transfiguration in Lviv left the Russian Orthodox Church and proclaimed itself the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. The following day, thousands attended a memorial service at Demianiv Laz, and a temporary marker was placed to indicate that a monument to the "victims of the repressions of 1939–1941" soon would be erected.
In mid-November The Shevchenko Ukrainian Language Society was officially registered. On November 19, 1989, a public gathering in Kiev attracted thousands of mourners, friends and family to the reburial in Ukraine of three inmates of the infamous Gulag Camp No. 36 in Perm in the Ural Mountains: human-rights activists Vasyl Stus, Oleksiy Tykhy, and Yuri Lytvyn. Their remains were reinterred in Baikove Cemetery. On November 26, 1989, a day of prayer and fasting was proclaimed by Cardinal Myroslav Lubachivsky, thousands of faithful in western Ukraine participated in religious services on the eve of a meeting between Pope John Paul II and Soviet President Gorbachev. On November 28, 1989, the Ukrainian SSR's Council for Religious Affairs issued a decree allowing Ukrainian Catholic congregations to register as legal organizations. The decree was proclaimed on December 1, coinciding with a meeting at the Vatican between the pope and the Soviet president.
On December 10, 1989, the first officially sanctioned observance of International Human Rights Day was held in Lviv. On December 17, an estimated 30,000 attended a public meeting organized in Kiev by Rukh in memory of Nobel laureate Andrei Sakharov, who died on December 14. On December 26, the Supreme Soviet of Ukrainian SSR adopted a law designating Christmas, Easter, and the Feast of the Holy Trinity official holidays.[55]
In May 1989, a Soviet dissident, Mustafa Dzhemilev, was elected to lead the newly founded Crimean Tatar National Movement. He also led the campaign for return of Crimean Tatars to their homeland in Crimea after 45 years of exile.
Belarus: Kurapaty[edit]




Meeting in Kurapaty, Byelorussia, 1989


On January 24, 1989, the Soviet authorities in Byelorussia agreed to the demand of the democratic opposition to build a monument to thousands of people shot by Stalin-era police in the Kuropaty Forest near Minsk in the 1930s.[80]
On September 30, 1989, thousands of Byelorussians, denouncing local leaders, marched through Minsk to demand additional cleanup of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster site in Ukraine. Up to 15,000 protesters wearing armbands bearing radioactivity symbols and carrying the banned red-and-white Byelorussian national flag filed through torrential rain in defiance of a ban by local authorities. Later, they gathered in the city center near the government's headquarters, where speakers demanded resignation of Yefrem Sokolov, the republic's Communist Party leader, and called for the evacuation of half a million people from the contaminated zones.[81]
Central Asian republics[edit]
Fergana, Uzbekistan[edit]
Thousands of Soviet troops were sent to the Fergana Valley, southeast of the Uzbek capital Tashkent, to re-establish order after clashes in which local Uzbeks hunted down members of the Meskhetian minority in several days of rioting between June 4–11, 1989; about 100 people were killed.[82] On June 23, 1989, Gorbachev removed Rafiq Nishonov as First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Uzbek SSR and replaced him with Karimov, who went on to lead Uzbekistan as a Soviet Republic and subsequently as an independent state.
Zhanaozen, Kazakhstan[edit]




Nursultan Nazarbayev became leader of the Kazakh SSR in 1989 and later led Kazakhstan to independence.


In Kazakhstan on June 19, 1989, young men carrying guns, firebombs, iron bars and stones rioted in Zhanaozen, causing a number of deaths. The youths tried to seize a police station and a water-supply station. They brought public transportation to a halt and shut down various shops and industries.[83] By June 25, the rioting had spread to five other towns near the Caspian Sea. A mob of about 150 people armed with sticks, stones and metal rods attacked the police station in Mangishlak, about 90 miles from Zhanaozen, before they were dispersed by government troops flown in by helicopters. Mobs of young people also rampaged through Yeraliev, Shepke, Fort-Shevchenko and Kulsary, where they poured flammable liquid on trains housing temporary workers and set them on fire.[84]
On June 22, 1989, Gorbachev removed Gennady Kolbin (the ethnic Russian whose appointment caused riots in December 1986) as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan for his poor handling of the June events, and replaced him with Nursultan Nazarbayev, an ethnic Kazakh who went on to lead Kazakhstan as a Soviet Republic and subsequently as an independent state for decades.
1990[edit]
Moscow loses six republics[edit]
On February 7, 1990, the Central Committee of the CPSU accepted Gorbachev’s recommendation that the party give up its monopoly on political power.[85] In 1990, all fifteen constituent republics of the USSR held their first competitive elections, with reformers and ethnic nationalists winning many seats. The CPSU lost the elections in six republics:

In Lithuania, to Sąjūdis, on February 24 (run-off elections on March 4, 7, 8, and 10).
In Moldova, to the Popular Front of Moldova, on February 25.
In Estonia, to the Estonian Popular Front, on March 18.
In Latvia, to the Latvian Popular Front, on March 18 (run-off elections on March 25, April 1, and April 29).
In Armenia, to the Pan-Armenian National Movement, on May 20 (run-off elections on June 3 and July 15).
In Georgia, to Round Table-Free Georgia, on October 28 (run-off election on November 11).

The constituent republics began to declare their national sovereignty and began a "war of laws" with the Moscow central government; they rejected union-wide legislation that conflicted with local laws, asserted control over their local economy and refused to pay taxes. President Landsbergis of Lithuania also exempted Lithuanian men from mandatory service in the Soviet Armed Forces. This conflict caused economic dislocation as supply lines were disrupted, and caused the Soviet economy to decline further.[86]
Rivalry between USSR and RSFSR[edit]
On March 4, 1990, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic held relatively free elections for the Congress of People's Deputies of Russia. Boris Yeltsin was elected, representing Sverdlovsk, garnering 72 percent of the vote.[87] On May 29, 1990, Yeltsin was elected chair of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR, despite the fact that Gorbachev asked Russian deputies not to vote for him.
Yeltsin was supported by democratic and conservative members of the Supreme Soviet, who sought power in the developing political situation. A new power struggle emerged between the RSFSR and the Soviet Union. On June 12, 1990, the Congress of People's Deputies of the RSFSR adopted a declaration of sovereignty. On July 12, 1990, Yeltsin resigned from the Communist Party in a dramatic speech at the 28th Congress.[88]




Lithuania’s Vytautas Landsbergis


Baltic republics[edit]
Lithuania[edit]
Gorbachev’s visit to the Lithuanian capital Vilnius on January 11–13, 1990, provoked a pro-independence rally attended by an estimated 250,000 people.
On March 11, the newly elected parliament of the Lithuanian SSR elected Vytautas Landsbergis, the leader of Sąjūdis, as its chairman and proclaimed the Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania, making Lithuania the first Soviet Republic to break away from the USSR. Moscow reacted with an economic blockade keeping the troops in Lithuania ostensibly "to secure the rights of ethnic Russians".[89]




Estonia’s Edgar Savisaar


Estonia[edit]
On March 25, 1990, the Estonian Communist Party voted to split from the CPSU after a six-month transition.[90]
On March 30, 1990, the Estonian Supreme Council declared the Soviet occupation of Estonia since World War II to be illegal and began reestablishing Estonia as an independent state.
On April 3, 1990, Edgar Savisaar of the Popular Front of Estonia was elected Chairman of the Council of Ministers (the equivalent of being Prime Minister).




Latvia’s Ivars Godmanis


Latvia[edit]
Latvia declared the restoration of independence on May 4, 1990, with the declaration stipulating a transitional period to complete independence. The Declaration stated that although Latvia had de facto lost its independence in World War II, the country had de jure remained a sovereign country because the annexation had been unconstitutional and against the will of the Latvian people. The declaration also stated that Latvia would base its relationship with the Soviet Union on the basis of the Latvian–Soviet Peace Treaty of 1920, in which the Soviet Union recognized Latvia's independence as inviolable "for all future time". May 4 is now a national holiday in Latvia.
On May 7, 1990, Ivars Godmanis of the Latvian Popular Front was elected Chairman of the Council of Ministers (the equivalent of being Latvia's Prime Minister).
Caucasus[edit]
Azerbaijan’s Black January[edit]
During the first week of January 1990, in the Azerbaijani exclave of Nakhchivan, the Popular Front led crowds in the storming and destruction of the frontier fences and watchtowers along the border with Iran, and thousands of Soviet Azerbaijanis crossed the border to meet their ethnic cousins in Iranian Azerbaijan.[91] It was the first time the Soviet Union had lost control of an external border.




Azerbaijani stamp with photos of Black January


Ethnic tensions had escalated between the Armenians and Azerbaijanis in spring and summer 1988.[92] On January 9, 1990, after the Armenian parliament voted to include Nagorno-Karabakh within its budget, renewed fighting broke out, hostages were taken, and four Soviet soldiers were killed.[93] On January 11, Popular Front radicals stormed party buildings and effectively overthrew the communist powers in the southern town of Lenkoran.[93] Gorbachev resolved to regain control of Azerbaijan; the events that ensued are known as "Black January." Late on January 19, 1990, after blowing up the central television station and cutting the phone and radio lines, 26,000 Soviet troops entered the Azerbaijani capital Baku, smashing barricades, attacking protesters, and firing into crowds. On that night and during subsequent confrontations (which lasted until February), more than 130 people died. Most of these were civilians. More than 700 civilians were wounded, hundreds were detained, but only a few were actually tried for alleged criminal offenses.
Civil liberties suffered. Soviet Defence Minister Dmitry Yazov stated that the use of force in Baku was intended to prevent the de facto takeover of the Azerbaijani government by the non-communist opposition, to prevent their victory in upcoming free elections (scheduled for March 1990), to destroy them as a political force, and to ensure that the Communist government remained in power. This marked the first time the Soviet Army took one of its own cities by force.[94]
The army had gained control of Baku, but by January 20 it had essentially lost Azerbaijan. Nearly the entire population of Baku turned out for the mass funerals of "martyrs" buried in the Alley of Martyrs.[94] Thousands of Communist Party members publicly burned their party cards. First Secretary Vezirov decamped to Moscow and Ayaz Mutalibov was appointed his successor in a free vote of party officials. The ethnic Russian Viktor Polyanichko remained second secretary and the power behind the throne.[95]
Following the hardliners' takeover, the September 30, 1990 elections (runoffs on October 14) were characterized by intimidation; several Popular Front candidates were jailed, two were murdered, and unabashed ballot stuffing took place, even in the presence of Western observers.[96] The election results reflected the threatening environment; out of the 350 members, 280 were Communists, with only 45 opposition candidates from the Popular Front and other non-communist groups, who together formed a Democratic Bloc ("Dembloc").[97] In May 1990 Mutalibov was elected Chairman of the Supreme Soviet unopposed.[98]
The Western republics[edit]
Ukraine[edit]




Viacheslav Chornovil, a prominent Ukrainian dissident and a lead figure of Rukh.


On January 21, 1990, Rukh organized a 300-mile (480 km) human chain between Kiev, Lviv, and Ivano-Frankivsk. Hundreds of thousands joined hands to commemorate the proclamation of Ukrainian independence in 1918 and the reunification of Ukrainian lands one year later (1919 Unification Act). On January 23, 1990, the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church held its first synod since its liquidation by the Soviets in 1946 (an act which the gathering declared invalid). On February 9, 1990, the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice officially registered Rukh. However, the registration came too late for Rukh to stand its own candidates for the parliamentary and local elections on March 4. At the 1990 elections of people's deputies to the Supreme Council (Verkhovna Rada), candidates from the Democratic Bloc won landslide victories in western Ukrainian oblasts. A majority of the seats had to hold run-off elections. On March 18, Democratic candidates scored further victories in the run-offs. The Democratic Bloc gained about 90 out of 450 seats in the new parliament.
On April 6, 1990, the Lviv City Council voted to return St. George Cathedral to the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. The Russian Orthodox Church refused to yield. On April 29–30, 1990, the Ukrainian Helsinki Union disbanded to form the Ukrainian Republican Party. On May 15 the new parliament convened. The bloc of conservative communists held 239 seats; the Democratic Bloc, which had evolved into the National Council, had 125 deputies. On June 4, 1990, two candidates remained in the protracted race for parliament chair. The leader of the Communist Party of Ukraine (CPU), Volodymyr Ivashko, was elected with 60 percent of the vote as more than 100 opposition deputies boycotted the election. On June 5–6, 1990, Metropolitan Mstyslav of the U.S.-based Ukrainian Orthodox Church was elected patriarch of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC) during that Church's first synod. The UAOC declared its full independence from the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, which in March had granted autonomy to the Ukrainian Orthodox church headed by the Metropolitan Filaret.




Leonid Kravchuk became Ukraine's leader in 1990.


On June 22, 1990, Volodymyr Ivashko withdrew his candidacy for leader of the Communist Party of Ukraine in view of his new position in parliament. Stanislav Hurenko was elected first secretary of the CPU. On July 11, Ivashko resigned from his post as chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament after he was elected deputy general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Parliament accepted the resignation a week later, on July 18. On July 16 Parliament overwhelmingly approved the Declaration on State Sovereignty of Ukraine – with a vote of 355 in favour and four against. The people's deputies voted 339 to 5 to proclaim July 16 a Ukrainian national holiday.
On July 23, 1990, Leonid Kravchuk was elected to replace Ivashko as parliament chairman. On July 30, Parliament adopted a resolution on military service ordering Ukrainian soldiers "in regions of national conflict such as Armenia and Azerbaijan" to return to Ukrainian territory. On August 1, Parliament voted overwhelmingly to shut down the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant. On August 3, it adopted a law on the economic sovereignty of the Ukrainian republic. On August 19, the first Ukrainian Catholic liturgy in 44 years was celebrated at St. George Cathedral. On September 5–7, the International Symposium on the Great Famine of 1932–1933 was held in Kiev. On September 8, The first "Youth for Christ" rally since 1933 took place held in Lviv, with 40,000 participants. In September 28–30, the Green Party of Ukraine held its founding congress. On September 30, nearly 100,000 people marched in Kiev to protest against the new union treaty proposed by Gorbachev.
On October 1, 1990, parliament reconvened amid mass protests calling for the resignations of Kravchuk and of Prime Minister Vitaliy Masol, a leftover from the previous régime. Students erected a tent city on October Revolution Square, where they continued the protest.
On October 17 Masol resigned, and on October 20, Patriarch Mstyslav I of Kiev and all Ukraine arrived at Saint Sophia’s Cathedral, ending a 46-year banishment from his homeland. On October 23, 1990, Parliament voted to delete Article 6 of the Ukrainian Constitution, which referred to the "leading role" of the Communist Party.
On October 25–28, 1990, Rukh held its second congress and declared that its principal goal was the "renewal of independent statehood for Ukraine". On October 28 UAOC faithful, supported by Ukrainian Catholics, demonstrated near St. Sophia’s Cathedral as newly elected Russian Orthodox Church Patriarch Aleksei and Metropolitan Filaret celebrated liturgy at the shrine. On November 1, the leaders of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church and of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, respectively, Metropolitan Volodymyr Sterniuk and Patriarch Mstyslav, met in Lviv during anniversary commemorations of the 1918 proclamation of the Western Ukrainian National Republic.
On November 18, 1990, the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church enthroned Mstyslav as Patriarch of Kiev and all Ukraine during ceremonies at Saint Sophia's Cathedral. Also on November 18, Canada announced that its consul-general to Kiev would be Ukrainian-Canadian Nestor Gayowsky. On November 19, the United States announced that its consul to Kiev would be Ukrainian-American John Stepanchuk. On November 19, the chairmen of the Ukrainian and Russian parliaments, respectively, Kravchuk and Yeltsin, signed a 10-year bilateral pact. In early December 1990 the Party of Democratic Rebirth of Ukraine was founded; on December 15, the Democratic Party of Ukraine was founded.[99]
Central Asian republics[edit]
Tajikistan: Dushanbe riots[edit]
Main article: 1990 Dushanbe riots




Tajik nationalist protesters squared off against the Soviet Army in Dushanbe.


On February 12–14, 1990, anti-government riots took place in Tajikistan's capital, Dushanbe, as tensions rose between nationalist Tajiks and ethnic Armenian refugees, after the Sumgait pogrom and anti-Armenian riots in Azerbaijan in 1988. During these riots, demonstrations sponsored by the nationalist Rastokhez movement turned violent. Radical economical and political reforms were demanded by the protesters which in turned torched government buildings; shops and other businesses were attacked and looted. 26 people were killed and 565 people were injured.
Kirghizia: Osh massacre[edit]
Main article: Osh riots (1990)
In June 1990, the city of Osh and its environs experienced bloody ethnic clashes between ethnic Kirghiz nationalist group Osh Aymaghi and Uzbek nationalist group Adolat over the land of a former collective farm. There were about 1,200 casualties, including over 300 dead and 462 seriously injured. The riots broke out over the division of land resources in and around the city.[100]
1991[edit]
Moscow’s crisis[edit]
On January 14, 1991, Nikolai Ryzhkov resigned from his post as Chairman of the Council of Ministers, or premier of the Soviet Union, and was succeeded by Valentin Pavlov in the newly established post of Prime Minister of the Soviet Union.
On March 17, 1991, in a Union-wide referendum 76.4 percent of voters endorsed retention of a reformed Soviet Union.[101] The Baltic republics, Armenia, Georgia, and Moldova boycotted the referendum as well as Checheno-Ingushetia (an autonomous republic within Russia that had a strong desire for independence, and by now referred to itself as Ichkeria).[102] In each of the other nine republics, a majority of the voters supported the retention of a reformed Soviet Union.
Russia’s President Boris Yeltsin[edit]




Boris Yeltsin, Russia's first democratically elected President


On June 12, 1991, Boris Yeltsin won 57 percent of the popular vote in the democratic elections, defeating Gorbachev's preferred candidate, Nikolai Ryzhkov, who won 16 percent of the vote. Following Yeltsin's election as president, Russia declared itself independent.[103] In his election campaign, Yeltsin criticized the "dictatorship of the center," but did not yet suggest that he would introduce a market economy.
Baltic republics[edit]
Lithuania[edit]
Main article: January Events (Lithuania)
On January 13, 1991, Soviet troops, along with the KGB Spetsnaz Alpha Group, stormed the Vilnius TV Tower in Lithuania to suppress the independence movement. Fourteen unarmed civilians were killed and hundreds more injured. On the night of July 31, 1991, Russian OMON from Riga, the Soviet military headquarters in the Baltics, assaulted the Lithuanian border post in Medininkai and killed seven Lithuanian servicemen. This event further weakened the Soviet Union's position internationally and domestically, and stiffened Lithuanian resistance.
Latvia[edit]
Main article: The Barricades




Barricade erected in Riga to prevent the Soviet Army from reaching the Latvian Parliament, July 1991.


The bloody attacks in Lithuania prompted Latvians to organize defensive barricades (the events are still today known as "The Barricades") blocking access to strategically important buildings and bridges in Riga. Soviet attacks in the ensuing days resulted in six deaths and several injuries; one person died later of their wounds.
Estonia[edit]
Main article: Tallinn TV Tower
When Estonia had officially restored its independence during the coup (see below) in the dark hours of August 20, 1991, at 11:03 pm Tallinn time, many Estonian volunteers surrounded the Tallinn TV Tower in an attempt to prepare to cut off the communication channels after the Soviet troops seized it and refused to be intimidated by the Soviet troops. When Edgar Savisaar confronted the Soviet troops for ten minutes, they finally retreated from the TV tower after a failed resistance against the Estonians.
August coup[edit]
Main article: 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt




Tanks in Red Square during the 1991 coup attempt.


Faced with growing separatism, Gorbachev sought to restructure the Soviet Union into a less centralized state. On August 20, 1991, the Russian SFSR was scheduled to sign a New Union Treaty that would have converted the Soviet Union into a federation of independent republics with a common president, foreign policy and military. It was strongly supported by the Central Asian republics, which needed the economic advantages of a common market to prosper. However, it would have meant some degree of continued Communist Party control over economic and social life.
More radical reformists were increasingly convinced that a rapid transition to a market economy was required, even if the eventual outcome meant the disintegration of the Soviet Union into several independent states. Independence also accorded with Yeltsin's desires as president of the Russian Federation, as well as those of regional and local authorities to get rid of Moscow’s pervasive control. In contrast to the reformers' lukewarm response to the treaty, the conservatives, "patriots," and Russian nationalists of the USSR – still strong within the CPSU and the military – were opposed to weakening the Soviet state and its centralized power structure.




Russian President Boris Yeltsin speaks atop a tank outside the White House in defiance of the August 1991 coup.


On August 19, 1991, Gorbachev's vice president, Gennady Yanayev, Prime Minister Valentin Pavlov, Defense Minister Dmitry Yazov, KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov and other senior officials acted to prevent the union treaty from being signed by forming the "General Committee on the State Emergency," which put Gorbachev – on holiday in Foros, Crimea – under house arrest and cut off his communications. The coup leaders issued an emergency decree suspending political activity and banning most newspapers.
Coup organizers expected popular support but found that public opinion in large cities and in the republics was mostly against them, manifested by public demonstrations, especially in Moscow. Russian SFSR President Yeltsin condemned the coup and garnered popular support.
Thousands of Muscovites came out to defend the White House (the Russian Federation's parliament and Yeltsin's office), the symbolic seat of Russian sovereignty at the time. The organizers tried but ultimately failed to arrest Yeltsin, who rallied opposition to the coup by making speeches from atop a tank. The special forces dispatched by the coup leaders took up positions near the White House, but members refused to storm the barricaded building. The coup leaders also neglected to jam foreign news broadcasts, so many Muscovites watched it unfold live on CNN. Even the isolated Gorbachev was able to stay abreast of developments by tuning into the BBC World Service on a small transistor radio.[104]
After three days, on August 21, 1991, the coup collapsed. The organizers were detained and Gorbachev was reinstated as president, albeit with his power much depleted.
The fall: August–December 1991[edit]




Signing of the agreement to establish the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), December 8, 1991.


On August 24, 1991, Gorbachev dissolved the Central Committee of the CPSU, resigned as the party's general secretary, and dissolved all party units in the government. Five days later, the Supreme Soviet indefinitely suspended all CPSU activity on Soviet territory, effectively ending Communist rule in the Soviet Union and dissolving the only remaining unifying force in the country. Gorbachev established a State Council of the Soviet Union on 5 September, designed to bring him and the highest officials of the remaining republics into a collective leadership, able to appoint a premier of the Soviet Union; it never functioned properly, though Ivan Silayev de facto took the post through the Committee on the Operational Management of the Soviet Economy and the Interstate Economic Committee and tried to form a government though with rapidly reducing powers.
The Soviet Union collapsed with dramatic speed in the last quarter of 1991. Between August and December, 10 republics declared their independence, largely out of fear of another coup. By the end of September, Gorbachev no longer had the authority to influence events outside of Moscow. He was challenged even there by Yeltsin, who had begun taking over what remained of the Soviet government, including the Kremlin.
On September 17, 1991, General Assembly resolution numbers 46/4, 46/5, and 46/6 admitted Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania to the United Nations, conforming to Security Council resolution numbers 709, 710, and 711 passed on September 12 without a vote.[105][106]
By 7 November 1991, most newspapers referred to the country as the 'former Soviet Union'.[107]
The final round of the Soviet Union's collapse began with a Ukrainian popular referendum on December 1, 1991, in which 90 percent of voters opted for independence. The secession of Ukraine, long second only to Russia in economic and political power, ended any realistic chance of Gorbachev keeping the Soviet Union together even on a limited scale. The leaders of the three principal Slavic republics, Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus (formerly Byelorussia), agreed to discuss possible alternatives to the union.
On December 8, the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus secretly met in Belavezhskaya Pushcha, in western Belarus, and signed the Belavezha Accords, which proclaimed the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and announced formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) as a looser association to take its place. They also invited other republics to join the CIS. Gorbachev called it an unconstitutional coup. However, by this time there was no longer any reasonable doubt that, as the preamble of the Accords put it, "the USSR, as a subject of international law and a geopolitical reality, is ceasing its existence."
On December 12, the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR formally ratified the Belavezha Accords and renounced the 1922 Union Treaty. It also recalled the Russian deputies from the Supreme Soviet of the USSR. The legality of this action was questionable, since Soviet law did not allow a republic to unilaterally recall its deputies.[108] However, no one in either Russia or the Kremlin objected. Any objections from the latter would have likely had no effect, since the Soviet government had effectively been rendered impotent long before December. On the surface, it appeared that the largest republic had formally seceded. However, this is not the case. Russia apparently took the line that it was not possible to secede from a country that no longer existed. Later that day, Gorbachev hinted for the first time that he was considering stepping down.[109]
On December 17, 1991, along with 28 European countries, the European Community, and four non-European countries, the three Baltic Republics and nine of the twelve remaining Soviet republics signed the European Energy Charter in the Hague as sovereign states.[110]




Five double-headed Russian eagles (below) replace the former state emblem of the Soviet Union and the "СССР" letters (above) in the façade of the Grand Kremlin Palace after the dissolution of the USSR.


Doubts remained over whether the Belavezha Accords had legally dissolved the Soviet Union, since they were signed by only three republics. However, on December 21, 1991, representatives of 11 of the 12 remaining republics – all except Georgia – signed the Alma-Ata Protocol, which confirmed the dissolution of the Union and formally established the CIS. They also "accepted" Gorbachev's resignation. While Gorbachev hadn't made any formal plans to leave the scene yet, he did tell CBS News that he would resign as soon as he saw that the CIS was indeed a reality.[111]
In a nationally televised speech early in the morning of December 25, 1991, Gorbachev resigned as president of the USSR – or, as he put it, "I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." He declared the office extinct, and all of its powers (such as control of the nuclear arsenal) were ceded to Yeltsin. A week earlier, Gorbachev had met with Yeltsin and accepted the fait accompli of the Soviet Union's dissolution. On the same day, the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR adopted a statute to change Russia's legal name from "Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" to "Russian Federation," showing that it was now a sovereign state.
On the night of December 25, at 7:32 p.m. Moscow time, after Gorbachev left the Kremlin, the Soviet flag was lowered for the last time, and the Russian tricolor was raised in its place at 11:40 pm, symbolically marking the end of the Soviet Union. In his parting words, he defended his record on domestic reform and détente, but conceded, "The old system collapsed before a new one had time to start working."[112] On that same day, the President of the United States George H.W. Bush held a brief televised speech officially recognizing the independence of the 11 remaining republics.
On December 26, the upper chamber of the Union's Supreme Soviet voted both itself and the Soviet Union out of existence. (The lower chamber, the Council of the Union, had been unable to work since December 12, when the recall of the Russian deputies left it without a quorum.) The following day Yeltsin moved into Gorbachev's former office, though the Russian authorities had taken over the suite two days earlier. By the end of 1991, the few remaining Soviet institutions that had not been taken over by Russia ceased operation, and individual republics assumed the central government's role.
The Alma-Ata Protocol also addressed other issues, including UN membership. Notably, Russia was authorized to assume the Soviet Union's UN membership, including its permanent seat on the Security Council. The Soviet Ambassador to the UN delivered a letter signed by Russian President Yeltsin to the UN Secretary-General dated December 24, 1991, informing him that by virtue of the Alma-Ata Protocol, Russia was the successor state to the USSR. After being circulated among the other UN member states, with no objection raised, the statement was declared accepted on the last day of the year, December 31, 1991.

Consequences and impact[edit]
Sports[edit]
The breakup of the Soviet Union saw a massive impact in the sporting world. Before its dissolution, the team had just qualified for Euro 1992, but their place was instead taken by the CIS national football team. After the tournament, the former Soviet Republics competed as separate independent nations, with FIFA allocating the Soviet team's record to Russia.[113]
Before the start of the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville and the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, The Olympic Committee of the USSR formally existed until March 12, 1992, when it disbanded but it was succeeded by the Russian Olympic Committee. However, 12 of the 15 former Soviet Republics competed together as the Unified Team and marched under the Olympic Flag in Barcelona, where they finished first in the medal rankings. The Unified Team also competed in Albertville earlier in the year (represented by six of the twelve ex-Republics), and finished second in the medal ranking at those Games. Afterwards, the IOCs of the former republics were established and made their debut in the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta.
Telecommunications[edit]
The Soviet Union's calling code of +7 continues to be used by Russia and Kazakhstan. Between 1993 and 1997, many newly independent republics implemented their own numbering plans such as Belarus (+375) and Ukraine (+380).
Chronology of declarations of restored and newly independent states[edit]
States with limited recognition are shown in italics.




Animated map showing independent states, and territorial changes to the Soviet Union, in chronological order.


Before the coup[edit]

 Lithuania – March 11, 1990
 Estonia (transitional) – March 30, 1990
 Latvia (transitional) – May 4, 1990
 Abkhazia – August 25, 1990
 Tatarstan - August 30, 1990
 Transnistria – September 2, 1990
 Georgia – April 9, 1991

During the coup[edit]




Zviazda, a state newspaper of the Belarusian SSR, issue from August 25, 1991. The headline reads, Belarus is independent!



 Gagauzia – August 19, 1991
 Estonia (effective) – August 20, 1991
 Latvia (effective) – August 21, 1991

After the coup[edit]




Country emblems of the independent states, before and after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.



 Ukraine – August 24, 1991
 Byelorussia/Belarus – August 25, 1991
 Moldova – August 27, 1991
 Kirghizia – August 31, 1991
 Uzbekistan – September 1, 1991
 Nagorno-Karabakh Republic – September 2, 1991
 Tajikistan – September 9, 1991
 Armenia – September 21, 1991
 Azerbaijan – October 18, 1991
 Turkmenistan – October 27, 1991
 Chechen Republic of Ichkeria – November 1, 1991
 South Ossetia – November 28, 1991
 Russian SFSR/Russian Federation – December 12, 1991 (the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR formally ratified the Belavezha Accords, renounced the 1922 Union Treaty, and recalled Russian deputies from the Supreme Soviet of the USSR).
 Kazakhstan – December 16, 1991

Legacy[edit]
Further information: Nostalgia for the Soviet Union
According to a 2014 poll, 57 percent of citizens of Russia regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union, while 30 percent said they did not. Elderly people tended to be more nostalgic than younger Russians.[114] 50% of respondents in Ukraine in a similar poll held in February 2005 stated they regret the disintegration of the Soviet Union.[115] Similar poll conducted in 2016 showed only 35% Ukrainians regretting the Soviet Union collapse, and 50% not regretting this.[116]
On 25 January 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin blamed Lenin and his advocating for the individual republics' right to political secession for the breakup of the Soviet Union.[117]
The breakdown of economic ties that followed the collapse of the Soviet Union led to a severe economic crisis and catastrophic fall in living standards in post-Soviet states and the former Eastern Bloc,[118] which was even worse than the Great Depression.[119][120] Poverty and economic inequality surged; between 1988/1989 and 1993/1995, the Gini ratio increased by an average of 9 points for all former socialist countries.[121] Even before Russia's financial crisis in 1998, Russia's GDP was half of what it had been in the early 1990s.[120]
United Nations membership[edit]
In a letter dated December 24, 1991, Boris Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Federation, informed the United Nations Secretary-General that the membership of the Soviet Union in the Security Council and all other UN organs was being continued by the Russian Federation with the support of the 11 member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
However, the Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had already joined the UN as original members on October 24, 1945, together with the Soviet Union. After declaring independence, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic changed its name to Ukraine on August 24, 1991, and on September 19, 1991, the Belorussian Soviet Socialist Republic informed the UN that it had changed its name to the Republic of Belarus.
The other twelve independent states established from the former Soviet Republics were all admitted to the UN:

September 17, 1991:  Estonia,  Latvia, and  Lithuania
March 2, 1992:  Armenia,  Azerbaijan,  Kazakhstan,  Kyrgyzstan,  Moldova,  Tajikistan,  Turkmenistan, and  Uzbekistan
July 31, 1992:  Georgia

Explanations of Soviet dissolution in historiography[edit]
Historiography on Soviet dissolution can be roughly classified in two groups: intentionalist accounts and structuralist accounts.
Intentionalist accounts contend that Soviet collapse was not inevitable, and resulted from the policies and decisions of specific individuals (usually, Gorbachev and Yeltsin). One characteristic example of intentionalist writing is historian Archie Brown's The Gorbachev Factor, which argues Gorbachev was the main force in Soviet politics at least in the period 1985–1988; even later, he largely spearheaded the political reforms and developments, as opposed to 'being led by events'.[122] This was especially true of the policies of perestroika and glasnost, market initiatives, and foreign policy stance, as political scientist George Breslauer has seconded, labelling Gorbachev a "man of the events".[123] In a slightly different vein, David Kotz and Fred Weir have contended that Soviet elites were responsible for spurring on both nationalism and capitalism, from which they could personally benefit (this is also demonstrated by their continued presence in the higher economic and political echelons of post-Soviet republics).[124]
Structuralist accounts, by contrast, take a more deterministic view, in which Soviet dissolution was an outcome of deeply-rooted structural issues, which planted a 'time-bomb'. For example, Stephen Walker has argued that while minority nationalities were denied power at the Union level, confronted by a culturally-destabilizing form of economic modernization, and subjected to a certain amount of Russification, they were at the same time strengthened by several policies pursued by Soviet regime (such as indigenization of leadership, support for local languages, etc.) – which over time created conscious nations. Furthermore, the basic legitimating myths of the Soviet Union federative system – that it was a voluntary and mutual union of allied peoples – eased the task of secession/ independence.[125] On January 25, 2016, Russian president Vladimir Putin supported this view, calling Lenin's support of the right of secession for the Soviet Republics a "delay-action bomb".[126]
See also[edit]


Soviet Union portal
1990s portal




Belavezha Accords
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
German reunification
History of the Soviet Union (1982–91)
History of Russia (1992–present)
Predictions of Soviet collapse
Union of Sovereign States


References[edit]


^ a b (in Russian) Declaration № 142-Н of the Soviet of the Republics of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, formally establishing the dissolution of the Soviet Union as a state and subject of international law.
^ "Gorbachev, Last Soviet Leader, Resigns; U.S. Recognizes Republics' Independence". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2015. 
^ "The End of the Soviet Union; Text of Declaration: 'Mutual Recognition' and 'an Equal Basis'". The New York Times. December 22, 1991. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "Gorbachev, Last Soviet Leader, Resigns; U.S. Recognizes Republics' Independence". The New York Times. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "Михаил Сергеевич Горбачёв (Mikhail Sergeyevičh Gorbačhëv)". Archontology. March 27, 2009. Retrieved April 3, 2009. 
^ Carrere D'Encausse, Helene (1993). The End of the Soviet Empire: The Triumph of the Nations (English – translated by Franklin Philip ed.). New York, NY: The New Republic (Basic Books) division of HarperCollins. p. 16. ISBN 0-465-09812-6. 
^ "Gorbachev's role in 1989 turmoil". BBC News. April 1, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "The Gorbachev Plan: Restructuring Soviet Power". The New York Times. June 30, 1988. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "The Third Russian Revolution; Transforming the Communist Party". The New York Times. February 8, 1990. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ a b Hough, Jerry F. (1997), pp. 124–125
^ "1986: Sakharov comes in from the cold". BBC News. December 23, 1972. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ Van Elsuwege, Peter (2008). From Soviet Republics to EU Member States: A Legal and Political Assessment of the Baltic States' Accession to the EU. Studies in EU External Relations. 1. BRILL. p. xxii. ISBN 978-90-04-16945-6. 
^ "Gorbachev Says Ethnic Unrest Could Destroy Restructuring Effort". The New York Times. November 28, 1988. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ Ebeling, Richard "How Lithuania Took Down the Soviet Union" https://www.fff.org/explore-freedom/article/how-lithuania-helped-take-down-the-soviet-union/
^ a b c d "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 20, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2011. 
^ "Nationalist riots in Kazakhstan: "Violent nationalist riots erupted in Alma-Ata, the capital of Kazakhstan, on 17 & 18 December 1986"". Informaworld. January 1, 1970. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ "Soviet Riots Worse Than First Reported", San Francisco Chronicle. San Francisco, Calif.: February 19, 1987. p. 22
^ a b "Kazakhstan: Jeltoqsan Protest Marked 20 Years Later", RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty
^ "Jeltoqsan Movement blames leader of Kazakh Communists" Archived September 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine., EurasiaNet
^ San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved March 27, 2010, from ProQuest Newsstand.
^ Leon Aron, Boris Yeltsin A Revolutionary Life. Harper Collins, 2000. page 187
^ "Soviet Releasing Some Prisoners Under New Law". The New York Times. February 8, 1987. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ Barringer, Felicity (May 24, 1987). "Russian Nationalists Test Gorbachev". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Barringer, Felicity (July 26, 1987). "Tartars Stage Noisy Protest in Moscow". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ O'Clery, Conor. Moscow December 25, 1991: The Last Day of the Soviet Union. Transworld Ireland (2011). ISBN 978-1-84827-112-8, p. 71.
^ a b Conor O'Clery, Moscow December 25, 1991: The Last Day of the Soviet Union. Transworld Ireland (2011). ISBN 978-1-84827-112-8, p. 74
^ Keller, Bill (November 1, 1987). "Critic of Gorbachev Offers to Resign His Moscow Party Post". The New York Times. 
^ Keller, Bill (August 24, 1987). "Lithuanians Rally For Stalin Victims". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ "Latvian Protest Reported Curbed". New York Times. November 19, 1987. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "Estonia's return to independence 1987–1991". Estonia.eu. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "Ministry of Foreign Affairs of The Republic of Armenia Official Site". Armeniaforeignministry.com. October 18, 1987. Archived from the original on September 14, 2007. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ "Government in the Soviet Union: Gorbachev's Proposal for Change". The New York Times. October 2, 1988. 
^ a b "Union of Soviet SOSocialist Republics: Parliamentary elections Congress of People's Deputies of the USSR, 1989". Ipu.org. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ http://www.radiojamming.puslapiai.it/article_en.htm
^ "Estonia Gets Hope". Ellensburg Daily Record. Helsinki, Finland: UPI. October 23, 1989. p. 9. Retrieved March 18, 2010. 
^ Keller, Bill (October 4, 1988). "Estonia Ferment: Soviet Role Model or Exception?". The New York Times. 
^ Website of Estonian Embassy in London (National Holidays)
^ Walker, Edward (2003). Dissolution. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 63. ISBN 0-7425-2453-1.
^ Pages 10–12 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 40
^ Page 82 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Keller, Bill (September 20, 1988). "Gunfire Erupts in Tense Soviet Area". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Page 69 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Page 83 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 23
^ Pages 60–61 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Keller, Bill (June 16, 1988). "Armenian Legislature Bakcs [sic] Calls For Annexing Disputed Territory". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Barringer, Felicity (July 11, 1988). "Anger Alters the Chemistry of Armenian Protest". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Keller, Bill (September 23, 1988). "Parts Of Armenia Are Blocked Off By Soviet Troops". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Pages 62–63 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Taubman, Philip (November 26, 1988). "Soviet Army Puts Armenian Capital Under Its Control". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Barringer, Felicity (December 12, 1988). "Amid the Rubble, Armenians Express Rage at Gorbachev". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Fein, Esther (April 25, 1989). "Kremlin Calls Georgia Violence a Local Operation". Retrieved June 24, 2014. 
^ Barringer, Felicity (November 29, 1988). "Tension Called High In Armenia Capital, With 1,400 Arrests". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ a b "Independence: a timeline (PART I) (08/19/01)". Ukrweekly.com. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ "Graves of 500 Stalin Victims Are Reported Outside Minsk". The New York Times. August 18, 1988. 
^ Keller, Bill (December 28, 1988). "Stalin's Victims: An Uneasy Enshrinement". The New York Times. 
^ Pages 188–189. Conor O'Clery. Moscow December 25, 1991: The Last Day of the Soviet Union. Transworld Ireland (2011)
^ Clines, Francis X. (May 15, 1989). "This Time, Many Candidates for Soviet Voters". The New York Times. 
^ Keller, Bill (May 30, 1989). "Moscow Maverick, in Shift, Is Seated in Supreme Soviet". The New York Times. 
^ Keller, Bill (May 31, 1989). "Gorbachev Urges a Postponement of Local Voting". The New York Times. 
^ Fein, Esther B. (October 25, 1989). "Soviet Legislature Votes to Abolish Official Seats". The New York Times. 
^ Wolchik, Sharon L.; Jane Leftwich Curry (2007). Central and East European Politics: From Communism to Democracy. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 238. ISBN 0-7425-4068-5. 
^ Senn (1995), p. 78
^ Cooper, Anne (September 2, 1989). "Communists in Baltics Shying From Kremlin". The New York Times. 
^ Fein, Esther B. (December 8, 1989). "Upheaval in the East; Lithuania Legalizes Rival Parties, Removing Communists' Monopoly". The New York Times. 
^ Page 86 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ "Huge Azerbaijani Rally Asks Moscow to Free Prisoners". The New York Times. August 20, 1989. 
^ Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 71
^ Keller, Bill (September 26, 1989). "A Gorbachev Deadline on Armenia Issue". The New York Times. 
^ a b Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 87
^ Fein, Esther B. (August 27, 1989). "11 Armenians Leave Prison, Find Celebrity". The New York Times. 
^ Page 72 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ "Soldiers Patrolling Soviet Georgia Amid Wave of Nationalist Protests". The New York Times. April 8, 1989. 
^ Fein, Esther B. (April 10, 1989). "At Least 16 Killed as Protesters Battle the Police in Soviet Georgia". The New York Times. 
^ "Soviet Troops Struggle To Curb Georgia Strife". The New York Times. July 18, 1989. 
^ "Update on the Moldavian Elections to the USSR Congress of People's Deputies". 24 May 1989. Archived from the original on February 26, 2012. Retrieved August 9, 2012. 
^ Esther B. Fein, "Baltic Nationalists Voice Defiance But Say They Won't Be Provoked", in The New York Times, August 28, 1989
^ King, p.140
^ "Belarus Plans to Build Memorial to Stalin's Victims". The New York Times. January 25, 1989. 
^ "Marchers in Minsk Demand Further Chernobyl Cleanup". The New York Times. October 1, 1989. 
^ "Uzbekistan Riots Reported Quelled". The New York Times. June 12, 1989. 
^ Fein, Esther B. (June 20, 1989). "Soviets Report an Armed Rampage in Kazakhstan". The New York Times. 
^ Fein, Esther B. (June 26, 1989). "Rioting Youths Reportedly Attack The Police in Soviet Kazakhstan". The New York Times. 
^ "Soviet Communist Party gives up monopoly on political power: This Day in History – 2/7/1990". History.com. Retrieved June 23, 2011. 
^ Acton, Edward, (1995) Russia, The Tsarist and Soviet Legacy, Longmann Group Ltd (1995) ISBN 0-582-08922-0
^ Leon Aron, Boris Yeltsin A Revolutionary Life. Harper Collins, 2000. page 739–740.
^ "1990: Yeltsin Resignation Splits Soviet Communists". BBC News. July 12, 1990. 
^ Nina Bandelj, From Communists to Foreign Capitalists: The Social Foundations of Foreign Direct Investment in Postsocialist Europe, Princeton University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-691-12912-9, p. 41
^ "Upheaval in the East; Party in Estonia Votes Split and Also a Delay". The New York Times. March 26, 1990. 
^ "Upheaval in the East: Azerbaijan; Angry Soviet Crowd Attacks What Is Left Of Iran Border Posts". The New York Times. January 7, 1990. 
^ Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 90
^ a b Page 89 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ a b Page 93 Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
^ Black Garden de Waal, Thomas. 2003. NYU. ISBN 0-8147-1945-7, p. 94
^ "Conflict, cleavage, and change in Central Asia and the Caucasus" Karen Dawisha and Bruce Parrott (eds.), Cambridge University Press. 1997 ISBN 0-521-59731-5, p. 124
^ "CIA World Factbook (1995)". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ "Conflict, cleavage, and change in Central Asia and the Caucasus", Karen Dawisha and Bruce Parrott (eds.), Cambridge University Press. 1997 ISBN 0-521-59731-5, p. 125
^ "Independence: a timeline (CONCLUSION) (08/26/01)". Ukrweekly.com. Retrieved March 30, 2013. 
^ "Osh". Redmond, WA: Microsoft® Student 2009 [DVD]. 2008. 
^ 1991: March Referendum Archived March 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. SovietHistory.org
^ Charles King, The Ghost of Freedom: History of the Caucasus
^ H., Hunt, Michael. The world transformed : 1945 to the present. p. 321. ISBN 9780199371020. OCLC 907585907. 
^ Gerbner, George (1993). "Instant History: The Case of the Moscow Coup". Political Communication. 10: 193–203. ISSN 1058-4609. Archived from the original on January 16, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2017. 
^ "Resolutions adopted by the United Nations Security Council in 1991". United Nations. Retrieved 17 June 2016. 
^ "46th Session (1991–1992) – General Assembly – Quick Links – Research Guides at United Nations Dag Hammarskjöld Library". United Nations. Retrieved 17 June 2016. 
^ Schmemann, Serge (7 November 1991). "Pre-1917 Ghosts Haunt a Bolshevik Holiday". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 December 2017. 
^ The On paper, the Russian SFSR had the constitutional right to "freely secede from the Soviet Union" (art. 69 of the RSFSR Constitution, art. 72 of the USSR Constitution), but according to USSR laws 1409-I (enacted on April 3, 1990) and 1457-I[permanent dead link] (enacted on April 26, 1990) this could be done only by referendum with two-thirds of all registered voters supporting it. No special referendum on the secession from the USSR was held in the Russian SFSR
^ Francis X. Clines, "Gorbachev is Ready to Resign as Post-Soviet Plan Advances", The New York Times, December 13, 1991.
^ "Concluding document of The Hague Conference on the European Energy Charter" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 24, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2011. 
^ Francis X. Clines, "11 Soviet States Form Commonwealth Without Clearly Defining Its Powers", The New York Times, December 22, 1991.
^ H., Hunt, Michael. The world transformed : 1945 to the present. pp. 323–324. ISBN 9780199371020. OCLC 907585907. 
^ http://en.rfs.ru/rfs/information/general/history/
^ Sputnik (January 15, 2014). "Over Half of Russians Regret Loss of Soviet Union". ria.ru. 
^ "Russians, Ukrainians Evoke Soviet Union" Archived June 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine., Angus Reid Global Monitor (01/02/05)
^ "Dynamics of nostalgia for USSR", "Rating" sociological group (05/10/16)
^ "Putin: Lenin's Ideas Destroyed USSR by Backing Republics Right to Secession". sputniknews.com. January 25, 2016. Retrieved January 26, 2016. 
^ "Child poverty soars in eastern Europe", BBC News, October 11, 2000
^ "What Can Transition Economies Learn from the First Ten Years? A New World Bank Report", Transition Newsletter, World Bank, K-A.kg
^ a b "Who Lost Russia?", The New York Times, October 8, 2000
^ Scheidel, Walter (2017). The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century. Princeton University Press. p. 222. ISBN 978-0691165028. 
^ Brown, Archie (1997). The Gorbachev Factor. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19288-052-9. 
^ Breslauer, George (2002). Gorbachev and Yeltsin as Leaders. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 274–275. ISBN 978-0521892445. 
^ Kotz, David and Fred Weir. "The Collapse of the Soviet Union was a Revolution from Above". The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union: 155–164. 
^ Edward, Walker (2003). Dissolution: Sovereignty and the Breakup of the Soviet Union. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-0-74252-453-8. 
^ "Putin: Lenin’s Ideas Destroyed USSR by Backing Republics Right to Secession", sputniknews, January 25, 2016


Further reading[edit]

"After the Fall: Building Nations out of the Soviet Union" (PDF). History of the International Monetary Fund 1990–1999 – Tearing Down Walls. International Monetary Fund. 
Aron, Leon. Boris Yeltsin : A Revolutionary Life. Harper Collins (2000). ISBN 0-00-653041-9
Aron, Leon. "The 'Mystery' of Soviet Collapse." Journal of Democracy 17.2 (2006): 21–35.
Beissinger, Mark. "Nationalism and the Collapse of Soviet Communism" Contemporary European History 18.3 (2009): 331–347.
Brown, Archie. The Gorbachev Factor. Oxford University Press (1997). ISBN 978-0-19288-052-9.
Cohen, Stephen. "Was the Soviet System Reformable?" Slavic Review 63.3 (2004): 459–488.
Crawshaw, Steve. Goodbye to the USSR: The Collapse of Soviet Power. Bloomsbury (1992). ISBN 0-7475-1561-1
Dallin, Alexander. "Causes of the Collapse of the USSR." Post-Soviet Affairs 8.4 (1992).
Dawisha, Karen & Parrott, Bruce (Editors). "Conflict, cleavage, and change in Central Asia and the Caucasus". Cambridge University Press (1997). ISBN 0-521-59731-5
de Waal, Thomas. Black Garden. NYU (2003). ISBN 0-8147-1945-7
Gorbachev, Mikhail. Memoirs. Doubleday (1995). ISBN 0-385-40668-1
Gvosdev, Nikolas K., ed. The Strange Death of Soviet Communism: A Post-Script. Transaction Publishers (2008). ISBN 978-1-41280-698-5
Kotz, David, and Fred Weir. “The Collapse of the Soviet Union was a Revolution from Above.” In The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union, edited by Laurie Stoff, 155–164. Thomson Gale (2006).
Mayer, Tom. "The Collapse of Soviet Communism: A Class Dynamics Interpretation." Social Forces 80.3 (2002): 759–811.
Miller, Chris (13 October 2016). The Struggle to Save the Soviet Economy: Mikhail Gorbachev and the Collapse of the USSR. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-4696-3018-2. 
O'Clery, Conor. Moscow December 25, 1991: The Last Day of the Soviet Union. Transworld Ireland (2011). ISBN 978-1-84827-112-8
Segrillo, Angelo. The Decline of the Soviet Union: A Hypothesis on Industrial Paradigms, Technological Revolutions and the Roots of Perestroika. LEA Working Paper Series, no. 2, December 2016.
Plokhy, Serhii. The Last Empire: The Final Days of the Soviet Union. Oneworld (2014). ISBN 978-1-78074-646-3
Strayer, Robert. Why Did the Soviet Union Collapse? Understanding Historical Change. M. E. Sharpe (1998). ISBN 978-0-76560-004-2
Suny, Ronald. Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution, and the Collapse of the Soviet Union. Stanford University Press (1993). ISBN 978-0-80472-247-6
Walker, Edward W. Dissolution: Sovereignty and the Breakup of the Soviet Union. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers (2003). ISBN 978-0-74252-453-8

External links[edit]

Photographs of the fall of the USSR by photojournalist Alain-Pierre Hovasse, a first-hand witness of these events.
Guide to the James Hershberg poster collection, Special Collections Research Center, The Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library, The George Washington University. This collection contains posters documenting the changing social and political culture in the former Soviet Union and Europe (particularly Eastern Europe) during the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the breakup of the Soviet Union. A significant portion of the posters in this collection were used in a 1999 exhibit at Gelman Library titled "Goodbye Comrade: An Exhibition of Images from the Revolution of '89 and the Collapse of Communism."
Lowering of the Soviet flag in December 25, 1991
U.S. Response to the End of the USSR from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
Miller, Chris (March 5, 2017). "The Struggle to Save the Soviet Economy". C-Span. 







v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts












v
t
e


Eastern Bloc







Soviet Union
Communism






Formation



Secret Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact protocol
Soviet invasion of Poland
Soviet occupations

Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina
Baltic states
Hungary
Romania


Yalta Conference











Annexed as, or
into, SSRs




Eastern Finland
Estonia
Latvia
Lithuania
Memel
East Prussia
West Belarus
Western Ukraine
Moldavia





Satellite states



Hungarian People's Republic
Polish People's Republic
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic
Socialist Republic of Romania
German Democratic Republic
People's Republic of Albania (to 1961)
People's Republic of Bulgaria
Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (to 1948)





Annexing SSRs



Russian SFSR
Ukrainian SSR
Byelorussian SSR





Organizations



Cominform
COMECON
Warsaw Pact
World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU)
World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY)






Revolts and
opposition




Welles Declaration
Goryani Movement
Forest Brothers
Ukrainian Insurgent Army
Operation Jungle
Baltic state continuity
Baltic Legations (1940–1991)
Cursed soldiers
Rebellion of Cazin 1950
1953 uprising in Plzeň
1953 East German uprising
1956 Georgian demonstrations
1956 Poznań protests
1956 Hungarian Revolution
Novocherkassk massacre
1965 Yerevan demonstrations
Prague Spring / Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
Brezhnev Doctrine
1968 Red Square demonstration
1968 student demonstrations in Belgrade
1968 protests in Kosovo
1970 Polish protests
Croatian Spring
1972 unrest in Lithuania SSR
June 1976 protests
Solidarity / Soviet reaction / Martial law
1981 protests in Kosovo
Reagan Doctrine
Jeltoqsan
Karabakh movement
April 9 tragedy
Romanian Revolution
Black January





Cold War events



Marshall Plan
Berlin Blockade
Tito–Stalin split
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
1961 Berlin Wall crisis





Conditions



Emigration and defection (list of defectors)
Sovietization of the Baltic states
Information dissemination
Politics
Economies
Telephone tapping





Decline



Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall
Romanian Revolution
Fall of communism in Albania
Singing Revolution
Collapse of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia
January 1991 events in Lithuania
January 1991 events in Latvia





Post-Cold War topics



Baltic Assembly
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Commonwealth of Independent States
Craiova Group
European Union
European migrant crisis
Eurasian Economic Union
NATO
Post-Soviet states
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
Visegrad Group












v
t
e


Independence of Ukraine (1991)



Events



Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1990 Ukrainian parliamentary election
Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine
USSR referendum
Sovereignty referendum
Chicken Kiev speech
Declaration of Independence
Independence referendum
International recognition





Political groups



People's Movement of Ukraine
Democratic Bloc
Group of 239





Key people



Viacheslav Chornovil
Leonid Kravchuk
Levko Lukyanenko
Oleksandr Moroz





Celebrations



Independence Day of Ukraine








History of Ukraine
Politics of Ukraine
List of sovereign states by date of formation












v
t
e


Revolutions of 1989



Internal
background



Era of Stagnation
Communism
Anti-communism
Criticism of communist party rule
Eastern Bloc
Eastern Bloc economies
Eastern Bloc politics
Eastern Bloc media and propaganda
Eastern Bloc emigration and defection
KGB
Nomenklatura
Shortage economy
Totalitarianism
Eastern European anti-Communist insurgencies





International
background



Active measures
Cold War
List of socialist states
Predictions of the dissolution of the Soviet Union
Reagan Doctrine
Soviet Empire
Terrorism and the Soviet Union
Vatican Opposition
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia
People Power Revolution





Reforms



Uskoreniye
Perestroika

Democratization in the Soviet Union
Khozraschyot
500 Days
Sinatra Doctrine


Glasnost
Socialism with Chinese characteristics
Đổi mới





Government
leaders



Ramiz Alia
Nicolae Ceaușescu
Mikhail Gorbachev
Károly Grósz
Erich Honecker
János Kádár
Miloš Jakeš
Egon Krenz
Wojciech Jaruzelski
Slobodan Milošević
Mathieu Kérékou
Mengistu Haile Mariam
Ne Win
Denis Sassou Nguesso
Heng Samrin
Deng Xiaoping
Todor Zhivkov
Siad Barre





Opposition
methods



Civil resistance
Demonstrations
Human chains
Magnitizdat
Polish underground press
Protests
Samizdat
Strike action





Opposition
leaders



Lech Wałęsa
Václav Havel
Alexander Dubček
Ion Iliescu
Liu Gang
Wu'erkaixi
Chai Ling
Wang Dan
Feng Congde
Tank Man
Joachim Gauck
Sali Berisha
Sanjaasürengiin Zorig
Vladimir Bukovsky
Boris Yeltsin
Viacheslav Chornovil
Vytautas Landsbergis
Zianon Pazniak
Zhelyu Zhelev
Aung San Suu Kyi
Meles Zenawi
Isaias Afwerki
Ronald Reagan
George H. W. Bush
Pope John Paul II





Opposition
movements



Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation
Charter 77
New Forum
Civic Forum
Democratic Party of Albania
Democratic Russia
Initiative for Peace and Human Rights
Sąjūdis
Peaceful Revolution
People's Movement of Ukraine
Solidarity
Popular Front of Latvia
Popular Front of Estonia
Public Against Violence
Belarusian Popular Front
National League for Democracy
National Salvation Front
Unification Church political activities
Union of Democratic Forces





Events
by location




Central and Eastern Europe



Albania
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
East Germany
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Soviet Union
Yugoslavia





Soviet Union



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Chechnya
Estonia
Georgia
Latvia
Lithuania
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Moldova
Russia
Tajikstan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan





Elsewhere



Afghanistan
Angola
Benin
Burma
Cambodia
China
Congo-Brazzaville
Ethiopia
Mongolia
Mozambique
Somalia
South Yemen








Individual
events



1988 Polish strikes
April 9 tragedy
Black January
Baltic Way
1987–89 Tibetan unrest
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria
Polish Round Table Agreement
Hungarian Round Table Talks
Pan-European Picnic
Monday Demonstrations
Alexanderplatz demonstration
Malta Summit
German reunification
January Events in Lithuania
January Events in Latvia
1991 protests in Belgrade
August Coup
Dissolution of the Soviet Union





Later events



Colour revolution
Decommunization
Lustration
Democratization
Economic liberalization
Post-Soviet conflicts
Neo-Sovietism
Neo-Stalinism
Post-communism
Yugoslav Wars












v
t
e


Soviet Union topics



History



Index of Soviet Union-related articles
Russian Revolution

February
October


Russian Civil War
Russian SFSR
USSR creation treaty
New Economic Policy
Stalinism
Great Purge
Great Patriotic War (World War II)
Cold War
Khrushchev Thaw
1965 reform
Stagnation
Perestroika
Glasnost
Revolutions of 1989
Dissolution
Nostalgia
Post-Soviet states








Geography




Subdivisions



Republics

autonomous


Oblasts

autonomous


Autonomous okrugs
Closed cities

list







Regions



Caspian Sea
Caucasus Mountains
European Russia
North Caucasus
Siberia
Ural Mountains
West Siberian Plain








Politics




General



Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations

Brezhnev Doctrine


Government

list


Human rights

LGBT


Law
Leaders

Collective leadership


Passport system
State ideology

Marxism–Leninism
Leninism
Stalinism







Bodies



Communist Party

organisation
Central Committee

Politburo
Secretariat


Congress
General Secretary


Congress of Soviets (1922–1936)
Supreme Soviet (1938–1991)
Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991)
Supreme Court





Offices



Premier
President
Deputy Premier
First Deputy Premier





Security services



Cheka
GPU
NKVD
MVD
MGB
KGB





Political repression



Red Terror
Collectivization
Great Purge
Population transfer
Gulag

list


Holodomor
Political abuse of psychiatry





Ideological repression



Religion
Suppressed research
Censorship
Censorship of images








Economy



Agriculture
Central Bank
Energy policy
Five-Year Plans
Net material product
Inventions
Ruble (currency)
Internet domain
Transport





Science



Communist Academy
Academy of Sciences
Academy of Medical Sciences
Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Sharashkas
Naukograds

list







Society







Crime
Demographics

Soviet people
working class
1989 census


Languages

Linguistics


LGBT





Culture



Ballet
Cinema
Fashion
Literature
Music

opera


Propaganda
Sports
Stalinist architecture





Opposition



Soviet dissidents and their groups

list










Anthem

republics


Emblem

republics


Flag

republics










 Templates



Departments
Russian Revolution 1917
Joseph Stalin
Stagnation Era
Fall of Communism








 Book
 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)






Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia
Eurasian Economic Union
Union State





Membership




Members



Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan
Uzbekistan





Associate members



Turkmenistan
Ukraine





Former members



Georgia (1993–2009)





History



Russian Empire
Soviet Union
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Union of Sovereign States
Belavezha Accords (Near abroad)
Alma-Ata Protocol











Sports



Unified Team at the Olympics
Unified Team at the Paralympics
CIS national bandy team
CIS national football team
CIS national ice hockey team
CIS national rugby team
CIS Cup (football)





Military



Collective Security Treaty Organization
Collective Rapid Reaction Force
Joint CIS Air Defense System





Economics



Economic Court
CISFTA
Eurasian Economic Community
Eurasian Patent Convention
Eurasian Patent Organization
EU Technical Aid





Organization



Interstate Aviation Committee
Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS








 Category












v
t
e


Russia articles



History




Timeline



Proto-Indo-Europeans
Scythians
East Slavs
Rus' Khaganate
Kievan Rus'
Novgorod Republic
Vladimir-Suzdal
Grand Duchy of Moscow
Tsardom of Russia
Russian Empire
Russian Republic
Russian SFSR
Soviet Union
Russian Federation





By topic



Economy
Military
Journalism ‎
Postal











Geography







Subdivisions
Borders
Earthquakes
Geology
European Russia
Caucasus Mountains
North Caucasus
Caspian Sea
Ural Mountains
West Siberian Plain
Siberia
Russian Far East
North Asia
Extreme points
Cities and towns
Islands
Lakes
Rivers
Volcanoes
Climate








Politics







Conscription
Constitution
Elections
Federal budget
Foreign relations
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of press

Media


Government
Human rights
Judiciary
Law

Citizenship


Civil Service
Law enforcement (Prisons)
Liberalism
Military
Opposition
Political parties
President of Russia








Economy







Agriculture
Aircraft industry
Car industry
Banking
Central Bank
Corruption
Defence industry
Economic regions
Energy
Fishing industry
Forestry
Gambling
Mining
Petroleum industry
Russian ruble
Russian oligarchs
Space industry
Shipbuilding
Trade unions
Taxation
Tourism
Transport
Telecommunications
Waste








Society







Demographics
Citizens
Abortion
Alcoholism
Crime
Education
Healthcare
Ethnic groups
Languages
LGBT
Immigration

Illegal


Prostitution
Racism
Religion
Suicide
Water supply and sanitation
Women





Culture



Architecture
Art
Literature
Ballet
Cinema
Graffiti
Inventions
Media
Music
Public holidays
Opera
Language
Cuisine
Martial arts
Folklore
Television
Internet
National anthem
Coat of arms
National flag
Sports












Outline



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Nagorno-Karabakh conflict



Background



Nagorno-Karabakh

History


Deportation of Azerbaijanis from Armenia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Karabakh movement

Miatsum


Armenians in Azerbaijan

Armenians in Baku


Azerbaijanis in Armenia
Anti-Armenian sentiment in Azerbaijan
Anti-Azerbaijani sentiment in Armenia
Armenia–Azerbaijan relations





Nagorno-Karabakh War



Askeran clash
Sumgait pogrom
Kirovabad pogrom
Baku pogrom
Battle of Kalbajar
Capture of Shusha
Black January
Zvartnots Airport clash
Siege of Stepanakert
Khojaly Massacre
Maraga massacre
Mardakert and Martuni Offensives
Law on Abolishment of Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast
1991 Azerbaijani Mil Mi-8 shootdown
1992 Azerbaijani Mil Mi-8 shootdown
Operation Goranboy
Operation Ring
1993 Summer Offensives
1994 Bagratashen bombing





Post-war clashes



2008 Mardakert skirmishes
February 2010 Nagorno-Karabakh skirmish
2010 Mardakert skirmishes
2012 Armenian–Azerbaijani border clashes
2014 Armenian–Azerbaijani clashes
2014 Armenian Mil Mi-24 shootdown
2016 Nagorno-Karabakh clashes





Main locations



Administrative divisions of the Republic of Artsakh

Stepanakert
Askeran Region
Hadrut Region
Kashatagh Region
Martakert Region
Martuni Region
Shahumyan Region
Shushi Region


Armenian-controlled territories

Agdam District
Fuzuli District
Jabrayil District
Kalbajar District
Lachin District
Qubadli District
Zangilan District







Political leaders



 Armenia

Levon Ter-Petrosyan
Robert Kocharyan
Serzh Sargsyan


 Republic of Artsakh

Artur Mkrtchyan
Robert Kocharyan
Leonard Petrosyan
Arkadi Ghukasyan
Bako Sahakyan


 Azerbaijan

Abulfaz Elchibey
Ayaz Mutallibov
Heydar Aliyev
Ilham Aliyev


Azerbaijani Community of Nagorno-Karabakh

Bayram Safarov
Nizami Bahmanov


 Russia

Boris Yeltsin


 Soviet Union

Mikhail Gorbachev


 Turkey

Turgut Özal







Military leaders



 Armenia

Vazgen Sargsyan
Gurgen Dalibaltayan
Norat Ter-Grigoryants
Jirair Sefilian


 Republic of Artsakh

Samvel Babayan
Kristapor Ivanyan
Arkady Ter-Tadevosyan
Monte Melkonian


 Azerbaijan

Isgandar Hamidov
Rahim Gaziyev
Surat Huseynov
Valeh Barshadly


 Russia

Pavel Grachev


 Soviet Union

Viktor Polyanichko


 Chechen Republic of Ichkeria

Shamil Basayev


 Afghanistan

Gulbuddin Hekmatyar







Peace process



Baker rules
Bishkek Protocol
Tehran Communiqué
Zheleznovodsk Communiqué
OSCE Minsk Group
Prague Process
Madrid Principles





International documents



Astrakhan Declaration
Nagorno-Karabakh Declaration
NATO Lisbon Summit Declaration
OIC Resolution 10/11, OIC Resolution 10/37
PACE Resolution 1416
UNGA Resolution 62/243
UNSC Resolutions 822, 853, 874, 884












v
t
e


Boris Yeltsin






1 February 1931 – 23 April 2007
1st President of Russia (1991–1999)





Life and politics



Birthplace
Sverdlovsk Regional Committee of the CPSU
Moscow City Committee of the CPSU
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR
28th Congress of the CPSU
Death and state funeral










Presidency



First inauguration
Second inauguration
Cabinet of Yeltsin–Gaidar
State Committee on the State of Emergency
1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Belavezha Accords
1993 Russian constitutional crisis
Constitutional referendum
Shannon diplomatic incident
Privatization
First Chechen War
Monetary reform (1993)
Monetary reform (1998)
1998 financial crisis
List of trips





Elections



Electoral history

1991 presidential election
1996 presidential election


Semibankirschina





Commemoration



Boris Yeltsin Presidential Center
Presidential Center legacy of Boris Yeltsin
Boris Yeltsin Presidential Library
Ural Federal University named after the first President of Russia Boris Yeltsin
Kyrgyz-Russian Slavic University named after Boris Yeltsin
Tennis Academy, named after the first President of Russia Boris Yeltsin
Boris Yeltsin Peak
Street of Boris Yeltsin (Yekaterinburg)
Monument (Yekaterinburg)
Monument (Cholpon-Ata)
Boris Yeltsin Volleyball Cup





Books



Confession on a Given Theme
Notes of President
Presidential Marathon
Boris Yeltsin: From Dawn to Dusk





Films



Yeltsin: Three Days in August
Three August's Days
Tsar Boris
President of All Russia
B.N.
Boris Yeltsin. Farewell to the Era
Boris Yeltsin. Life and Fate
Boris Yeltsin. First
Boris Yeltsin. Retreat is Impossible





Family



Nikolay Yeltsin (father)
Claudia Yeltsina (mother)
Naina Yeltsina (wife)
Tatyana Yumasheva (daughter)
Elena Okulova (daughter)








 Category:Boris Yeltsin
Vladimir Putin →











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dissolution_of_the_Soviet_Union&oldid=818478389"					Categories: Dissolution of the Soviet UnionHistory of the Soviet Union and Soviet Russia1985 in the Soviet Union1986 in the Soviet Union1987 in the Soviet Union1988 in the Soviet Union1989 in the Soviet Union1990 in the Soviet Union1991 in the Soviet Union1991 in politics1991 in Russia1991 in the United StatesDissolutions of countriesDecember 1991 eventsHidden categories: Articles with Russian-language external linksWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse mdy dates from July 2014Articles containing Russian-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles containing Latvian-language textArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016Articles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Articles containing Estonian-language textArticles containing Lithuanian-language textArticles containing Romanian-language text