This article is about the "Districts" (Kreise) of Germany. For "Government Districts" (Regierungsbezirke), see Regierungsbezirk.



Germany






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Germany




Constitution (Basic Law)


Human rights
Federal Constitutional Court








Executive


President

Frank-Walter Steinmeier


Chancellor

Angela Merkel


Vice-Chancellor

Sigmar Gabriel


Cabinet

Merkel III










Legislature



Federal Convention
(Bundesversammlung)

Federal Council (Bundesrat)
Federal Diet (Bundestag)

Joint Committee
(Gemeinsamer Ausschuss)









Judiciary


Federal courts

Constitutional
Administrative
Justice
Finance
Labor
Social










Administrative divisions


States (Länder)

Administrative regions
(Regierungsbezirke)

Districts (Kreise)
Collective municipalities (Ämter)
Municipalities (Gemeinden)








Elections


Electoral system
Political parties
Referendums






Foreign relations





Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





In most German states, the primary administrative subdivision is a Landkreis ("rural district"); the exceptions are the states of North Rhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, where the term is simply Kreis.[1] Most major cities in Germany are not part of any Kreis, and perform, themselves, functions like those of Kreisen; such a city is referred to as a Kreisfreie Stadt (literally "district-free city") or Stadtkreis ("urban district").
Kreise stand at an intermediate level of administration between each German state (s. Land, p. Länder) and the municipal governments (s. Gemeinde, p. Gemeinden) within it.[2] These correspond to level-3 administrative units in the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS 3), and are roughly equivalent to counties in the United States.
Previously, the similar title Reichskreis (Imperial Circle) was given to groups of states in the Holy Roman Empire. The related term Landeskommissariat was used for similar administrative divisions in some German territories until the 19th century.




Contents


1 Types of districts
2 Responsibilities
3 District council
4 District administration
5 See also
6 Notes



Types of districts[edit]




Administrative divisions of Germany


The majority of German districts are "rural districts"[3] (German: Landkreise), of which there are 294 as of 2017[update]. Cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants (and smaller towns in some states) do not usually belong to a district, but take on district responsibilities themselves, similar to the concept of independent cities. These are known as "urban districts" (German: Kreisfreie Städte or Stadtkreise)—cities which constitute a district in their own right—and there are 107 of them,[4] bringing the total number of districts to 401. As of 2016[update], approximately 26 million people live in these 107 urban districts.[5]
In North Rhine-Westphalia, there are some cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants which are not urban districts, for example Recklinghausen, Siegen, Paderborn, Bergisch Gladbach, Neuss and Moers. Nevertheless, these cities take over many district responsibilities themselves, although they are still part of a larger rural district. Midsize towns can perform particular administrative functions of the district as well, especially to provide common services to the local citizens. The classification as "midsize" town is usually based on a town's registered population, but varies from state to state.
A special type of rural districts are the three so-called Kommunalverbände besonderer Art (Municipal unions of special kind), a fusion of a district-free town with its adjacent rural district: Besides the Regionalverband Saarbrücken (Saarbrücken regional association), from 1974 until 2007 called "Stadtverband Saarbrücken" (Saarbrücken town association), there is the Hanover Region since 2001 and the Städteregion Aachen (Aachen region of towns) since 2009. Aachen, Hanover and Göttingen retain certain rights of an urban district (Kreisfreie Stadt); Saarbrücken has not explicitly determined a similar provision in its legislation.
Responsibilities[edit]




Map of German districts. Urban districts are shown in yellow, rural in white.


According to common federal and state laws, the districts are responsible for the following tasks:

The building and upkeep of "district roads" (German: Kreisstraßen)
Other building plans which cover more than one local authority's area
Caring for national parks
Social welfare
Youth welfare
The building and upkeep of hospitals
The building and upkeep of state schools of secondary education
Household waste collection and disposal
Car registration
Accommodation of foreign refugees
Electing the Landrat or Landrätin, the chief executive and representative of the district

Districts can perform additional functions, based on varying local laws in each region:

Financial support for culture
The building of pedestrian zones and bicycle lanes
Financial support for school exchanges
The building and upkeep of public libraries
Revitalisation of the economy
Encouraging tourism
The management of state-run adult education colleges (German: Volkshochschulen)

All these tasks are carried out by local (municipal) authorities operating together. Urban districts have these responsibilities and also those of the municipalities.
District council[edit]
The district council (German: Kreistag) is the highest institution of a rural district and is responsible for all fundamental guidelines of regional self-administration. This council is elected directly every five years, except in Bavaria where it is elected every six years. Usually the administrative seat of a rural district is located in one of its largest towns. However, district council and administrative seat of some rural districts are not situated within the district proper, but in an adjacent district-free city. Most of those rural districts are named after this central city as well (e.g. Bamberg and Karlsruhe). Moers is the biggest city in Germany (and at present time the only one with more than 100,000 inhabitants) that is neither an urban district, nor the district seat of an adjacent rural district.
District administration[edit]
The highest administrative position of a rural district is an officer known as Landrat or Landrätin, who is responsible for the district's day-to-day administration and acts as its representative for official purposes. In parts of northern Germany, Landrat is also the name of the entire district administration, which in southern Germany is known as Kreisverwaltung or Landratsamt.
In urban districts similar administrative functions are performed by a mayor, in most greater cities usually by the Lord Mayor.
Rural districts in some German states have an additional administrative commission called Kreisausschuss. This commission is generally led by the Landrat and includes a number of additional voluntary members. It takes over certain administrative functions for the district, following decisions of the district council. However, the exact role and regulations of this panel vary greatly between different states.
See also[edit]

List of districts of Germany
States of Germany
List of rural districts with populations and area in km² (in German)
List of urban districts with populations and area in km² (in German)

Notes[edit]



^ (In either case, the plural of the noun is formed by suffixing it with "en".) In Germany, the term Kreis is also used informally for any rural district, and (e.g. in statistical summaries) for a district of any type.
^ A Kreis is not to be confused with a Regierungsbezirk", a state administrative subdivision which exists in only a few of the German states.
^ "Country Compendium, A companion to the English Style Guide" (PDF). European Commission Directorate-General for Translation (EC DGT). February 2017. pp. 50–51. 
^ This number includes the "city-states" of Berlin and Hamburg, and two urban districts of the city-state Bremen.
^ "Kreisfreie Städte und Landkreise nach Fläche und Bevölkerung auf Grundlage des ZENSUS 2011 und Bevölkerungsdichte - Gebietsstand: 31.12.2015" (XLS) (in German). Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland. July 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. 









v
t
e


Germany articles



History







Timeline
Historiography
Military history








Germanic peoples
Migration Period
Frankish Empire
Holy Roman Empire
Ostsiedlung (East Colonisation)
Confederation of the Rhine
German Confederation
Frankfurt Constitution
North German Confederation
Unification of Germany
German Empire
World War I
Weimar Republic
Nazi Germany
World War II
Divided Germany
Allied occupation
Flight and expulsions
East Germany
West Germany
Reunification
Reunified Germany








Geography







Administrative divisions

States
Districts


Cities and towns
Earthquakes
Geology
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Bundestag
Bundesrat
Bundeswehr (military)
Cabinet
Chancellor
Constitution
Court system
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Law
Law enforcement
Political parties
President








Economy







Agriculture
Automobile industry
Banking

Central bank


Chemical Triangle
Economic history
Energy
Exports
German model
German states by GDP
Mining
Mittelstand companies
Science and technology
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport
Welfare








Society







Crime
Demographics
Drug policy
Education
Germans

Ethnic groups


Healthcare
Immigration
Pensions
Religion
Social issues





Culture



Anthem
Architecture
Art
Arts
Cinema
Coat of arms
Cuisine
Dance
Fashion
Festivals
Flag
Language
Literature
Internet
Media
Music
Names
Philosophy
Prussian virtues
Sport
Television
World Heritage












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Articles on third-level administrative divisions of countries






Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bhutan
Brunei
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Chad
Chile
China
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Democratic Republic of the Congo
East Timor
England
Ecuador
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany
Guinea
Greece
Haiti
India
Indonesia

distrik
kecamatan


Iraq
Italy
Ivory Coast
Japan
Kenya
Liberia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malawi
Mali
Morocco
Mozambique
Nepal
Northern Ireland
Niger
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Russia
Scotland
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Switzerland
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Thailand
Togo
Ukraine
United States
Vietnam
Wales
Zimbabwe






List of administrative divisions by country







Authority control



GND: 4073976-4











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Districts_of_Germany&oldid=815763389"					Categories: Districts of GermanySubdivisions of GermanyCountry subdivisions in EuropeSecond-level administrative country subdivisionsThird-level administrative country subdivisionsHidden categories: Articles containing German-language textCS1 German-language sources (de)Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016Articles with German-language external linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers