See also: Prosecutor

District attorney


Shield of an Assistant District Attorney (ADA)



Occupation


Profession



Activity sectors

Law practice, law enforcement, politics


Description


Competencies
Advocacy skills, analytical mind, sense of justice, political fit



Education required

Law degree, bar exam



Fields of
employment

Government legal service



Related jobs

Prosecutor, state's attorney, commonwealth's attorney, United States attorney


In the United States, a district attorney (DA) represents a state government in the prosecution of criminal offenses, and is the chief law enforcement officer and top prosecutor of that state's jurisdiction.
The district attorney leads a staff of prosecutors, assistant district attorneys (ADAs), who represent the state and investigate and prosecute criminals on behalf of the district attorney. Depending upon the system in place, DAs may be appointed by the chief executive of the jurisdiction or elected by the voters of the jurisdiction.
The prosecution is the legal party responsible for presenting the case against an individual who is suspected of breaking the law, initiating and directing further criminal investigations, guiding and recommending the sentencing of offenders, and are the only attorneys allowed to participate in grand jury proceedings.[1]



Contents


1 History and role
2 Nomenclature
3 Other jurisdictions
4 Assistant district attorney
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



History and role[edit]
The United States Judiciary Act of 1789, Section 35, provided for the appointment of a person in each judicial district to prosecute federal crimes and to represent the United States in all civil actions to which it was a party. Initially, there were 13 districts to cover the 11 States that had by that time ratified the constitution. Each State was a district, except for Massachusetts and Virginia which formed two. Districts were added when additional States were admitted. The statute did not confer a title upon these local agents of federal authority, but subsequent statutes and court decisions referred to them most frequently as "district attorneys". In 1948, the Judicial Code adopted the term "United States attorneys".[2]
This term for a prosecutor originates with the traditional use of the term "district" for multi-county prosecutorial jurisdictions in several U.S. states. For example, New York appointed prosecutors to multi-county districts prior to 1813. Even after those states broke up such districts and started appointing or electing prosecutors for individual counties, they continued to use the title "district attorney" for the most senior prosecutor in a county rather than switch to "county attorney".
At the local level in other jurisdictions, officers such as the commonwealth's attorney, state's attorney, county attorney, circuit solicitor, or county prosecutor carry out functions similar to those performed by a district attorney.[citation needed]
Nomenclature[edit]
The title of "district attorney" and "assistant district attorney", is the most commonly given official name to state prosecutors, and is used by several major jurisdictions within the United States, such as Oklahoma, California, Delaware, Georgia, Massachusetts, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin. In St. Louis, Missouri the title is circuit attorney.[3]
Other jurisdictions[edit]
In the United Kingdom, the equivalent position to the district attorney is the chief crown prosecutor[4], and the equivalent to an assistant district attorney is a crown prosecutor.[5] These prosecutors work under the Crown Prosecution Service in England and Wales, the Procurator Fiscal in Scotland, and the Director of Public Prosecutions in Northern Ireland. In many other countries, the title of the chief prosecuting officer is Director of Public Prosecutions.
In Canada, the equivalent position to the district attorney is the crown attorney, crown counsel or Crown Prosecutor depending on the province, and the equivalent to an assistant district attorney is the assistant crown attorney, assistant crown counsel or assistant crown prosecutor respectively. Except in Ontario, the chief prosecutor is an appointed position.[citation needed]
Assistant district attorney[edit]
The assistant district attorney (assistant DA, ADA), or state prosecutor, is a law enforcement official who represents the state government on behalf of the district attorney (DA) in investigating and prosecuting individuals alleged to have committed a crime. In carrying out their duties to enforce state and local laws, ADAs have the authority to investigate persons, issue subpoenas, file formal criminal charges, plea bargain with defendants, and grant immunity to witnesses and accused criminals.[1]
Administrative assistant district attorney (admin ADA), executive assistant district attorney (exec ADA), chief assistant district attorney (chief ADA), or first assistant district attorney (First ADA) are some of the titles given to the senior ADA leadership working under the DA.[citation needed] The chief ADA or first ADA, depending on the office, is generally considered the second-in-command, and usually reports directly to the DA. The exact roles and job assignments for each title vary with each individual office, but generally include management of the daily activities and supervision of specialized divisions within the office. Often, a senior ADA may oversee or prosecute some of the larger crimes within the jurisdiction. In some offices, the Exec ADA has the responsibility of hiring lawyers and support staff, as well as supervising press-releases and overseeing the work of the office.[citation needed]
See also[edit]

List of district attorneys by county
Allegheny County District Attorney
Baltimore County State's Attorney
Bronx County District Attorney
Commonwealth's attorney
Cook County State's Attorney
Dallas County District Attorney
Denver District Attorney's Office
District Attorney of Philadelphia
Essex County Prosecutor's Office
King County Prosecuting Attorney
Law and order (politics)
Los Angeles County District Attorney
Milwaukee County District Attorney
New York County District Attorney
Prosecuting Attorney of Honolulu
Queens County District Attorney
San Diego County District Attorney
San Francisco District Attorney's Office

References[edit]



^ a b "Standards on Prosecutorial Investigations". abanet.org. American Bar Association. 2017. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 
^ "History of the Federal Judiciary – Federal Judicial Center". www.fjc.gov. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 
^ "City Of St. Louis Circuit Attorney's Office – Kimberly M. Gardner – Circuit Attorney". www.circuitattorney.org. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 
^ "About The CPS : Chief Crown Prosecutors". www.cps.gov.uk. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 
^ "Crown Prosecutor Careers: The Crown Prosecution Service". www.cps.gov.uk. Retrieved November 13, 2017. 



External links[edit]



Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article District Attorney.



National District Attorneys Association website
Prosecuting Attorneys, District Attorneys, Attorneys General & US Attorneys on the Web—indexes prosecutor web sites throughout the USA and other countries






						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=District_attorney&oldid=810654703"					Categories: County officers in the United StatesDistrict attorneysLawyers by typeProsecutionUnited States lawHidden categories: Use mdy dates from November 2017Use American English from November 2017All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012