





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





District


Also known as:
Local authority district
Local government district





Category
Administrative district


Location
England


Found in
Counties


Created by
Local Government Act 1972
London Government Act 1963


Created
mostly 1 April 1974
and 1 April 1965
some earlier (see text)


Number
326 (as of 1 April 2009)


Possible types
Metropolitan (36)
Non-metropolitan (256)
 ∟Two-tier (201)
 ∟Unitary authority (55)
London borough (32)
sui generis (2)


Possible status
City
Royal borough
Borough


Populations
25,000–1.1 million


The districts of England (also known as local authority districts or local government districts to distinguish from unofficial city districts) are a level of subnational division of England used for the purposes of local government.[1] As the structure of local government in England is not uniform, there are currently four principal types of district-level subdivision. There are a total of 326 districts made up of 36 metropolitan boroughs, 32 London boroughs, 201 non-metropolitan districts, 55 unitary authorities, as well as the City of London and the Isles of Scilly which are also districts, but do not correspond to any of these categories. Some districts are styled as boroughs, cities, or royal boroughs; these are purely honorific titles, and do not alter the status of the district. All boroughs and cities, and a few districts, are led by a mayor who in most cases is a ceremonial figure elected by the district council, but – after local government reform – is occasionally a directly elected mayor who makes most of the policy decisions instead of the council.



Contents


1 History
2 Metropolitan boroughs
3 Non-metropolitan district (shire district)
4 Unitary authorities
5 London boroughs
6 Map
7 See also
8 References



History[edit]
Main article: Subdivisions of England
Prior to the establishment of districts in the 1890s, the basic unit of local government in England was the parish overseen by the parish church vestry committee. Vestries dealt with the administraction of both parochial and secular governmental matters. Parishes were the successors of the manorial system and historically had been grouped into hundreds. Hundreds once exercised some supervising administrative function. However, these powers ebbed away as more and more civic and judicial powers were centred on county towns.[2] From 1834 these parishes were grouped into Poor Law Unions, creating areas for administration of the Poor Law. These areas were later used for census registration and as the basis for sanitary provision. In 1894, based on these earlier subdivisions, the Local Government Act 1894 created urban districts and rural districts as sub-divisions of administrative counties, which had been created in 1889. Another reform in 1900 created 28 metropolitan boroughs as sub-divisions of the County of London. Meanwhile, from this date parish-level local government administration was transferred to civil parishes.
The setting-down of the current structure of districts in England began in 1965, when Greater London and its 32 London boroughs were created. They are the oldest type of district still in use. In 1974, metropolitan counties and non-metropolitan counties (also known as "shire counties") were created across the rest of England and were split into metropolitan districts and non-metropolitan districts. The status of the London boroughs and metropolitan districts changed in 1986, when they absorbed the functions and some of the powers of the metropolitan county councils and the Greater London Council which were abolished. In London power is now shared again, albeit on a different basis, with the Greater London Authority.
During the 1990s a further kind of district was created, the unitary authority, which combined the functions and status of county and district.
Metropolitan boroughs[edit]
Main article: Metropolitan borough
Metropolitan boroughs are a subdivision of a metropolitan county. These are similar to unitary authorities, as the metropolitan county councils were abolished in 1986. Most of the powers of the county councils were devolved to the districts but some services are run by joint boards and organisations. The districts typically have populations of 174,000 to 1.1 million.
Non-metropolitan district (shire district)[edit]
Main article: Non-metropolitan district
Non-metropolitan districts (also known as shire districts) are second-tier authorities, which share power with county councils. They are subdivisions of shire counties and the most common type of district. These districts typically have populations of 25,000 to 200,000.
In this two-tier system, county councils are responsible for some local services, such as education, social services, and roads, whilst district councils run other services, such as waste collection, local planning, and council housing.
The number of non-metropolitan districts has varied over time. Initially there were 296; after the creation of unitary authorities in the 1990s and late 2000s, their numbers were reduced to 201.
Unitary authorities[edit]
Main article: Unitary authorities of England
These are single-tier districts which are responsible for running all local services in their areas, combining both county and district functions. They were created in the mid-1990s out of non-metropolitan districts, and often cover large towns and cities as this is deemed to be more efficient than a two-tier structure. In addition, some of the smaller counties such as Rutland, Herefordshire and the Isle of Wight are unitary authorities. There are a total of 55 unitary authorities, including 9 introduced in 2009.
Unitary authorities are actually a slightly modified type of non-metropolitan district; most are established as individual counties containing a single district, with a district council but no county council. Berkshire is unusual, being a non-metropolitan county with no county council and six unitary authority districts. Cornwall, Durham, the Isle of Wight, Northumberland, Shropshire and Wiltshire were established as counties with a single district, but have non-metropolitan county councils with no district council. In practice, these function in the same way as other unitary authorities.
London boroughs[edit]
Main article: London boroughs
The London boroughs are sub-divisions of Greater London. They were established in 1965. Between 1965 and 1986 a two-tier structure of government existed in Greater London and the boroughs shared power with the Greater London Council (GLC). When the GLC was abolished in 1986 they gained similar status to the unitary authorities. In 2000 the Greater London Authority was established and a two-tier structure was restored, albeit with a change to the balance of powers and responsibilities.
Map[edit]



See also[edit]

List of English districts
List of English districts by population
List of articles about local government in the United Kingdom

References[edit]



^ Local Authority Districts (2015) to Counties (2015) Eng lookup, ONS, data.gov.uk. Retrieved 2 September 2016.
^ Mapping the Hundreds of England and Wales in GIS University of Cambridge Department of Geography, published 06-06-08, accessed 12 October 2011







Links to related articles











v
t
e


 Subdivisions of England



Region



Regions
NUTS 1 statistical regions of England





County



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
Ceremonial





District



Metropolitan
Non-metropolitan
London borough
City of London
Unitary authority
Isles of Scilly





Civil parish



Civil parish












v
t
e


Administrative geography of the United Kingdom



United Kingdom local government



History
Subdivisions: Shrievalties
Lieutenancy areas
Counties (list)





England local government



History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties

list


Combined authorities
Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan counties
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Civil parishes (list)





Northern Ireland local government



History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts





Scotland local government



History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Lieutenancy areas
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes





Wales local government



History
Subdivisions: Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties












v
t
e


England articles



History




Overviews



Timeline
Education
Local government
Maritime
Military
Social





Chronology



Prehistoric
Roman Britain
Lloegyr
Anglo-Saxon England

Heptarchy


Kingdom of England
Norman conquest
Angevin Empire
Wars of the Roses
Tudor period
Stuart period
English Renaissance
English Reformation
Elizabethan era
Jacobean era
Civil War
Union with Scotland
Georgian era
Regency
Victorian era
Edwardian period
The Blitz








Geography







Counties
Districts
Gardens
Islands
Parishes
Places
Regions
Towns








Politics







Economy

Middle Ages


Elizabethan government
Independence
Monarchy
Parliament








Culture











Afternoon Tea
Anglophilia
Castles
Country clothing
Cuisine
Demographics
Education
Folklore
Fête
Landscape garden
Identity
Innovations and discoveries
English language in England
Middle England
Museums
People

list


Religion

Church of England


Science education





Sport



Cricket

national team


Football

The Football Association
national team


Rugby league

Rugby Football League
national team


Rugby union

Rugby Football Union
national team


Wimbledon








Symbols



Coat of arms
Flags

national flag


Heraldry
Oak tree
Royal Standards
Royal Supporters
St. George

St George's Day


Tudor Rose












Outline



Book
Category
Portal
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Districts_of_England&oldid=750192009"					Categories: Districts of EnglandLocal government in the United KingdomTypes of subdivision in the United KingdomLAU 1 statistical regions of the European UnionHidden categories: Use British English from March 2016Use dmy dates from March 2016Articles needing additional references from July 2012All articles needing additional referencesPages using deprecated image syntax