





This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject. Please help improve the article with a good introductory style. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Map of Switzerland showing cantonal, districts and municipal boundaries (2016).


In contrast to centrally organised states, in the federally constituted Switzerland each canton is completely free to decide its own internal organisation. Therefore, there exists a variety of structures and terminology for the subnational entities between canton and municipality, loosely termed districts.
Most cantons are divided into Bezirke (German for districts, singular Bezirk). They are also termed Ämter (Lucerne, singular Amt), Amtsbezirke (Bern, Amtsbezirk), district (in French) or distretto (Ticino and part of Graubünden). The Bezirke generally provide only administration and court organization. However, for historical reasons districts in cantons Graubünden and Schwyz are their own legal entities with jurisdiction over tax and often have their own Landsgemeinde.
Seven of the 26 cantons – Uri, Obwalden, Nidwalden, Glarus, Zug, Basel-City and Geneva – have always existed without the district level of government. An eighth one, Appenzell Innerrhoden, uses no intermediate level either, but calls its lowest-level subdivisions Bezirke, although they are functionally equivalent to municipalities elsewhere.
A number of further cantons are considering (or have already decided) an abolition of the district level in the future: Appenzell Ausserrhoden, Schaffhausen, Lucerne, St. Gallen, Schwyz in 2006 voted on its abolition, but voted in favour of keeping the division, some with modifications. Bern in 2006 decided a reduction of its 26 districts to ten administrative regions, which took effect in 2010. St. Gallen, Solothurn and Lucerne removed the administrative role, but retained districts for elections. In 2008 Vaud decided on a reduction from 19 to 10 districts, followed by Thurgau which combined eight into five in 2012. In 2017 Graubünden replaced the 11 districts with 11 regions.
For further updated about this districts, see: Population size and population composition – Data, indicators: Cantons, communes [1] or Permanent resident population by age, canton, district and commune 2010–2013.[2]



Contents


1 Zürich
2 Bern
3 Lucerne
4 Schwyz
5 Fribourg
6 Solothurn
7 Basel-Landschaft
8 St. Gallen
9 Graubünden
10 Aargau
11 Thurgau
12 Ticino
13 Vaud
14 Valais
15 Neuchâtel
16 Jura
17 Schaffhausen
18 Appenzell Ausserrhoden
19 Appenzell Innerrhoden
20 See also
21 Notes and references



Zürich[edit]




Districts in the Canton of Zürich


The Canton of Zürich is divided into 12 districts (German: Bezirke)containing an estimated 641650 people:

Affoltern with capital Affoltern am Albis
Andelfingen with capital Andelfingen
Bülach with capital Bülach
Dielsdorf with capital Dielsdorf
Dietikon with capital Dietikon
Hinwil with capital Hinwil
Horgen with capital Horgen
Meilen with capital Meilen
Pfäffikon with capital Pfäffikon
Uster with capital Uster
Winterthur with capital Winterthur
Zürich comprises the city of Zürich

Bern[edit]




Districts of the canton of Bern


Main article: Subdivisions of the canton of Bern
The Canton of Bern is divided in five regions: Berner Jura, Seeland (with two subregions, Biel/Bienne and Seeland), Bern-Mittelland, Oberland (with subregions Thun, Obersimmental-Saanen, Frutigen-Niedersimmental, Interlaken-Oberhasli) and Emmental-Oberaargau (with two subregions, Emmental and Oberaargau) The current division has taken effect on 1 January 2010, based on a 2006 decision to abolish the former system of districts.
On 1 January 2010, the 26 administrative districts (Amtsbezirke) were combined into 10 new administrative districts (Verwaltungskreise):[3]

Bern-Mittelland with capital Ostermundigen, made up of all or part of the former districts of Bern, Fraubrunnen, Konolfingen, Laupen, Schwarzenburg and Seftigen
Biel/Bienne with capital Biel/Bienne, made up of all of the former district of Biel and about half of the former district of Nidau
Emmental with capital Langnau im Emmental, made up of all or part of the former districts of Burgdorf, Signau and Trachselwald
Frutigen-Niedersimmental with capital Frutigen, made up of all or part of the former districts of Frutigen and Niedersimmental
Interlaken-Oberhasli with capital Interlaken, made up of all or part of the former districts of Interlaken and Oberhasli
Jura bernois with capital Courtelary, made up of all or part of the former districts of Courtelary, Moutier and La Neuveville
Oberaargau with capital Wangen an der Aare, made up of all or part of the former districts of Aarwangen and Wangen
Obersimmental-Saanen with capital Saanen, made up of all of the former districts of Obersimmental and Saanen
Seeland with capital Aarberg, made up of all or part of the former districts of Aarberg, Büren, Erlach and Nidau
Thun with capital Thun, made up of all of the former administrative district of Thun

Lucerne[edit]




Districts of Canton Lucerne


The Canton of Lucerne used to be divided into 5 Ämter:

Entlebuch with capital Schüpfheim
Hochdorf with capital Hochdorf
Luzern with capital Luzern
Sursee with capital Sursee
Willisau with capital Willisau

These were abolished with the new cantonal constitution of 2007, although they will continue to be used as electoral districts.
Schwyz[edit]




Districts of the Cantons of Schwyz


The Canton of Schwyz is divided into 6 districts:

Einsiedeln including only the municipality of the same name
Gersau including only the municipality of the same name
Höfe with capital alternating between Wollerau and the village of Pfäffikon
Küssnacht including only the municipality of the same name
March with capital Lachen
Schwyz with capital Schwyz

Fribourg[edit]




Districts of canton Fribourg


The Canton of Fribourg is divided into 7 districts:

Broye with capital Estavayer-le-Lac
Glâne with capital Romont
Gruyère with capital Bulle
Sarine with capital Fribourg
See/Lac with capital Murten/Morat
Sense with capital Tafers
Veveyse with capital Châtel-Saint-Denis

Solothurn[edit]




Districts of Canton Solothurn


From 2005, Solothurn's ten districts are merged pairwise into five electoral districts, termed Amtei. From 2005, districts only have a statistical meaning.

Bucheggberg, Amtei Wasseramt-Bucheggberg
Dorneck, Amtei Dorneck-Thierstein (unofficially Schwarzbubenland)
Gäu, Amtei Thal-Gäu
Gösgen, Amtei Olten-Gösgen (unofficially Niederamt)
Lebern, Amtei Solothurn-Lebern
Olten, Amtei Olten-Gösgen
Solothurn, Amtei Solothurn-Lebern
Thal, Amtei Thal-Gäu
Thierstein, Amtei Dorneck-Thierstein
Wasseramt, Amtei Wasseramt-Bucheggberg

Basel-Landschaft[edit]




districts of Canton Basel-Landschaft


Basel-Landschaft is divided into 5 districts:

Arlesheim with capital Arlesheim
Laufen with capital Laufen
Liestal with capital Liestal
Sissach with capital Sissach
Waldenburg with capital Waldenburg

St. Gallen[edit]
Main article: Subdivisions of the canton of St. Gallen




Constituencies of St. Gallen


The canton abolished the district level in 2003, but it remains divided into eight constituencies (Wahlkreise) without administrative significance:

Rheintal with capital Altstätten
Rorschach with capital Rorschach
Sarganserland with capital Sargans
See-Gaster with capital Rapperswil-Jona
St. Gallen with capital St. Gallen
Toggenburg with capital Lichtensteig
Werdenberg with capital Buchs
Wil with capital Wil

Graubünden[edit]




Regions of Canton Graubünden


Beginning in 2017 Graubünden is divided into 11 regions:

Albula
Bernina
Engiadina Bassa/Val Müstair
Imboden
Landquart
Maloja
Moesa
Plessur
Prättigau/Davos
Surselva
Viamala

Aargau[edit]




Districts in Aargau


Aargau is divided into 11 districts:

Aarau with capital Aarau
Baden with capital Baden
Bremgarten with capital Bremgarten
Brugg with capital Brugg
Kulm with capital Unterkulm
Laufenburg with capital Laufenburg
Lenzburg with capital Lenzburg
Muri with capital Muri
Rheinfelden with capital Rheinfelden
Zofingen with capital Zofingen
Zurzach with capital Zurzach

Thurgau[edit]




Districts of Canton Thurgau


Thurgau is divided into five districts (eight prior to 2011) and each is named after its capital:

Arbon with capital Arbon
Frauenfeld with capital Frauenfeld
Kreuzlingen with capital Kreuzlingen
Münchwilen with capital Münchwilen
Weinfelden with capital Weinfelden

Ticino[edit]
Main article: Subdivisions of the canton of Ticino




Districts of Canton Ticino


Ticino is divided into 8 districts:

Bellinzona with capital Bellinzona
Blenio with capital Acquarossa
Leventina with capital Faido
Locarno with capital Locarno
Lugano with capital Lugano
Mendrisio with capital Mendrisio
Riviera with capital Riviera
Vallemaggia with capital Cevio

Vaud[edit]




Districts of Canton Vaud


Main article: Subdivisions of the canton of Vaud
Vaud is divided into 10 districts:

Aigle with capital Aigle
Broye-Vully with capital Payerne
Gros-de-Vaud with capital Echallens
Jura-North Vaudois with capital Yverdon-les-Bains
Lausanne with capital Lausanne
Lavaux-Oron with capital Cully
Morges with capital Morges
Nyon with capital Nyon
Riviera-Pays-d'Enhaut with capital Vevey
Ouest Lausannois with capital Renens

Valais[edit]




Districts in Valais


Main article: Subdivisions of the canton of Valais
Valais is divided into 13 districts:

Brig with capital Brig-Glis
Conthey with capital Conthey
Entremont with capital Sembrancher
Goms with capital Münster-Geschinen
Hérens with capital Evolène
Leuk with capital Leuk
Martigny with capital Martigny
Monthey with capital Monthey
Saint-Maurice with capital Saint-Maurice
Sierre with capital Sierre
Sion with capital Sion
Visp with capital Visp

The district of Raron is divided into:

Östlich Raron with capital Mörel-Filet
Westlich Raron with capital Raron

Neuchâtel[edit]




Districts of Canton Neuchâtel


The Canton of Neuchâtel is divided into 6 districts:

Boudry with capital Boudry
La Chaux-de-Fonds with capital La Chaux-de-Fonds
Le Locle with capital Le Locle
Neuchâtel with capital Neuchâtel
Val-de-Ruz with capital Cernier
Val-de-Travers with capital Val-de-Travers

Jura[edit]




Districts in Canton of Jura


The Canton of Jura is divided into 3 districts:

Delémont with capital Delémont
Porrentruy with capital Porrentruy
Franches-Montagnes with capital Saignelégier

Schaffhausen[edit]




Districts in Canton of Schaffhausen


The Canton of Schaffhausen is divided into 6 districts:

Stein with capital Stein am Rhein
Schaffhausen with capital Schaffhausen
Schleitheim with capital Schleitheim
Oberklettgau with capital Neunkirch
Unterklettgau with capital Hallau
Reiat with capital Thayngen

Appenzell Ausserrhoden[edit]




Districts of Appenzell Ausserrhoden


The Canton of Appenzell Ausserrhoden is divided into 3 districts:

Hinterland with capital Herisau
Mitteland with capital Trogen
Vorderland with capital Heiden

Appenzell Innerrhoden[edit]




Districts of Appenzell Innerrhoden


In Appenzell Innerrhoden districts are the lowest administrative division as the canton has no municipalities (except for the Feuerschaugemeinde, a special-purpose municipality for the town of Appenzell). The districts are functionally equivalent to municipalities elsewhere in Switzerland, and are generally shown as municipalities on maps etc.
The Canton is divided into 6 districts:

Appenzell
Gonten
Oberegg
Rüte
Schlatt-Haslen
Schwende

See also[edit]

Municipalities of Switzerland

Notes and references[edit]


^ Population size and population composition – Data, indicators: Cantons, communes (Report). Federal Statistical Office. 2014. nden. Retrieved 15 August 2015. 
^ Permanent resident population by age, canton, district and commune 2010–2013 (Report). Federal Statistical Office FSO. 2011. nden. Retrieved 15 August 2015. 
^ Amtliches Gemeindeverzeichnis der Schweiz, Mutationsmeldungen 2009 / Répertoire officiel des communes de Suisse, Mutations 2009 / Elenco ufficiale dei Comuni della Svizzera, Mutazione 2009 (PDF) (Report). Federal Statistical Office. 2009. nden. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 November 2010. Retrieved 6 March 2010. 








v
t
e


Subdivisions of Switzerland










Aargau
Appenzell Ausserrhoden
Appenzell Innerrhoden
Basel-Stadt






Basel-Landschaft
Bern
Fribourg
Geneva






Glarus
Graubünden
Jura
Lucerne






Neuchâtel
Nidwalden
Obwalden
Schaffhausen






Schwyz
Solothurn
St. Gallen
Thurgau






Ticino
Uri
Valais
Vaud






Zug
Zürich












Regions
Cantons
Districts
Municipalities

list
former














v
t
e


Articles on second-level administrative divisions of European countries






Albania
Armenia2
Austria
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France1
Georgia3
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Italy
Kazakhstan1
Kosovo4
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia1
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey1
Ukraine
United Kingdom







1 Has part of its territory outside Europe. 2 Entirely in Western Asia, but considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons. 3 Partially or entirely in Asia, depending on the definition of the border. 4 Partially recognised.





List of administrative divisions by country






Switzerland portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Districts_of_Switzerland&oldid=816710139"					Categories: Districts of SwitzerlandSubdivisions of SwitzerlandLists of subdivisions of SwitzerlandCountry subdivisions in EuropeSecond-level administrative country subdivisionsSwitzerland-related listsHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing context from February 2013All Wikipedia articles needing contextWikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2013All pages needing cleanupUse dmy dates from February 2014Use British English from February 2014