This article is about the television series. For other uses, see Doctor Who (disambiguation).


Doctor Who



Doctor Who title card since 2014



Genre
Science fiction
Drama


Created by



Sydney Newman
C. E. Webber
Donald Wilson





Written by
Various


Starring
Various Doctors
(as of 2017, Jodie Whittaker)
Various companions


Theme music composer



Ron Grainer





Opening theme
Doctor Who theme music


Composer(s)
Various composers
(since 2005, Murray Gold)


Country of origin
United Kingdom


No. of seasons
26 (1963–1989)
+ 1 TV film (1996)


No. of series
10 (2005–present)


No. of episodes
840 (97 missing)
276 stories (list of serials)


Production


Executive producer(s)
Various


Camera setup
Single/multiple-camera hybrid


Running time
Regular episodes:


25 minutes (1963–1984, 1986–1989)
45 minutes (1985, 2005–present)


Specials:
Various: 50–90 minutes


Release


Original network



BBC One (1963–present)
BBC One HD (2010–present)
BBC HD (2007–2010)





Picture format



405-line Black-and-white (1963–67)
625-line Black-and-white (1968–1969)
625-line PAL (1970–1989)
525-line NTSC (1996)
576i 16:9 DTV (2005–2008)
1080i HDTV (2009–present)





Audio format



Mono (1963–1987)
Stereo (1988–2008)
5.1 Surround Sound (2009–present)





Original release
23 November 1963 (1963-11-23) – present (present)


Chronology


Related shows



K-9 and Company
Torchwood
The Sarah Jane Adventures
K-9
Class





External links


Doctor Who at the BBC
www.bbc.co.uk/doctorwho/


Doctor Who is a British science-fiction television programme produced by the BBC since 1963. The programme depicts the adventures of a Time Lord called "the Doctor", an extraterrestrial being from the planet Gallifrey. The Doctor explores the universe in a time-travelling space ship called the TARDIS. Its exterior appears as a blue British police box, which was a common sight in Britain in 1963 when the series first aired. Accompanied by a number of companions, the Doctor combats a variety of foes, while working to save civilisations and help people in need.
The show is a significant part of British popular culture,[1][2] and elsewhere it has gained a cult following. It has influenced generations of British television professionals, many of whom grew up watching the series.[3] The programme originally ran from 1963 to 1989. There was an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot, in the form of a television film titled Doctor Who. The programme was relaunched in 2005, and since then has been produced in-house by BBC Wales in Cardiff. Doctor Who has also spawned numerous spin-offs, including comic books, films, novels, audio dramas, and the television series Torchwood (2006–2011), The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–2011), K-9 (2009–2010), and Class (2016), and has been the subject of many parodies and references in popular culture.
Twelve actors have headlined the series as the Doctor. The transition from one actor to another is written into the plot of the show with the concept of regeneration into a new incarnation – an idea introduced in 1966 to allow the show to continue after the departure of original lead William Hartnell who was becoming very ill at the time. The concept is that this is a Time Lord trait through which the character of the Doctor takes on a new body and personality to recover from a severe injury or anything that would otherwise kill a normal person. Each actor's portrayal differs, but all represent stages in the life of the same character and form a single narrative. The time-travelling feature of the plot means that different incarnations of the Doctor occasionally meet. The Doctor is currently portrayed by Jodie Whittaker, who took on the role after Peter Capaldi's exit in the 2017 Christmas special "Twice Upon a Time".



Contents


1 Premise
2 History

2.1 Public consciousness


3 Episodes

3.1 Missing episodes


4 Characters

4.1 The Doctor

4.1.1 Changes of appearance
4.1.2 Meetings of different incarnations
4.1.3 Revelations about the Doctor


4.2 Companions
4.3 Adversaries

4.3.1 Daleks
4.3.2 Cybermen
4.3.3 The Master




5 Music

5.1 Theme music
5.2 Incidental music


6 Viewership

6.1 United Kingdom
6.2 International

6.2.1 Oceania
6.2.2 Americas


6.3 DVD and video


7 Adaptations and other appearances

7.1 Doctor Who films
7.2 Spin-offs
7.3 Aftershows
7.4 Charity episodes
7.5 Spoofs and cultural references
7.6 Museums and exhibitions
7.7 Merchandise
7.8 Audios
7.9 Books
7.10 Video games


8 Chronology and canonicity
9 Awards
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References

12.1 Cited texts


13 Further reading
14 External links

14.1 Official websites
14.2 Past official BBC websites
14.3 Reference websites





Premise
Doctor Who follows the adventures of the primary character, a rogue Time Lord from the planet Gallifrey, who goes by the name "the Doctor". He fled Gallifrey in a stolen TARDIS – "Time and Relative Dimension in Space" – a time machine that travels by materialising into and dematerialising out of the time vortex. The TARDIS has a vast interior but appears smaller on the outside, and is equipped with a "chameleon circuit" intended to make the machine take on the appearance of local objects as a disguise; due to a malfunction, the Doctor's TARDIS remains fixed as a blue British police box.
The Doctor often finds events that pique his curiosity as he tries to prevent evil forces from harming innocent people or changing history, using only his ingenuity and minimal resources, such as his versatile sonic screwdriver. He rarely travels alone and often brings one or more companions to share these adventures. His companions are usually humans, as he has found a fascination with planet Earth, and he frequently collaborates with the international military task force UNIT when the Earth itself is threatened. As a Time Lord, the Doctor is centuries-old and has the ability to regenerate when his body is mortally damaged, taking on a new appearance and personality. The Doctor has gained numerous reoccurring enemies during his travels, including the Daleks, the Cybermen, and the Master, another renegade Time Lord.
History
Main article: History of Doctor Who
Doctor Who first appeared on BBC TV at 17:16:20 GMT on Saturday, 23 November 1963; this was eighty seconds later than the scheduled programme time, due to the assassination of John F. Kennedy the previous day.[4][5] It was to be a regular weekly programme, each episode 25 minutes of transmission length. Discussions and plans for the programme had been in progress for a year. The head of drama Sydney Newman was mainly responsible for developing the programme, with the first format document for the series being written by Newman along with the head of the script department (later head of serials) Donald Wilson and staff writer C. E. Webber. Writer Anthony Coburn, story editor David Whitaker and initial producer Verity Lambert also heavily contributed to the development of the series.[6][note 1] The programme was originally intended to appeal to a family audience,[7] as an educational programme using time travel as a means to explore scientific ideas and famous moments in history. On 31 July 1963 Whitaker commissioned Terry Nation to write a story under the title The Mutants. As originally written, the Daleks and Thals were the victims of an alien neutron bomb attack but Nation later dropped the aliens and made the Daleks the aggressors. When the script was presented to Newman and Wilson it was immediately rejected as the programme was not permitted to contain any "bug-eyed monsters". According to producer Verity Lambert; "We didn't have a lot of choice — we only had the Dalek serial to go ... We had a bit of a crisis of confidence because Donald [Wilson] was so adamant that we shouldn't make it. Had we had anything else ready we would have made that." Nation's script became the second Doctor Who serial – The Daleks (a.k.a. The Mutants). The serial introduced the eponymous aliens that would become the series' most popular monsters, and was responsible for the BBC's first merchandising boom.[8]
The BBC drama department's serials division produced the programme for 26 seasons, broadcast on BBC 1. Falling viewing numbers, a decline in the public perception of the show and a less-prominent transmission slot saw production suspended in 1989 by Jonathan Powell, controller of BBC 1.[9] Although it was effectively cancelled with the decision not to commission a planned 27th series of the show for transmission in 1990, the BBC repeatedly affirmed that the series would return.[10]
While in-house production had ceased, the BBC hoped to find an independent production company to relaunch the show. Philip Segal, a British expatriate who worked for Columbia Pictures' television arm in the United States, had approached the BBC about such a venture as early as July 1989, while the 26th series was still in production.[10] Segal's negotiations eventually led to a Doctor Who television film, broadcast on the Fox Network in 1996 as a co-production between Fox, Universal Pictures, the BBC and BBC Worldwide. Although the film was successful in the UK (with 9.1 million viewers), it was less so in the United States and did not lead to a series.[10]
Licensed media such as novels and audio plays provided new stories, but as a television programme Doctor Who remained dormant until 2003. In September of that year,[11] BBC Television announced the in-house production of a new series after several years of attempts by BBC Worldwide to find backing for a feature film version. The executive producers of the new incarnation of the series were writer Russell T Davies and BBC Cymru Wales head of drama Julie Gardner.
Doctor Who finally returned with the episode "Rose" on BBC One on 26 March 2005.[12] There have since been nine further series in 2006–2008 and 2010–2015, and Christmas Day specials every year since 2005. No full series was filmed in 2009,[13] although four additional specials starring David Tennant were made. In 2010, Steven Moffat replaced Davies as head writer and executive producer.[14] In January 2016, Moffat announced that he would step down after the 2017 finale, to be replaced by Chris Chibnall in 2018.[15] The tenth series debuted in April 2017, with a Christmas special preceding it in 2016.[16]
The 2005 version of Doctor Who is a direct plot continuation of the original 1963–1989 series[note 2] and the 1996 telefilm. This is similar to the 1988 continuation of Mission Impossible,[17] but differs from most other series relaunches which have either been reboots (for example, Battlestar Galactica[18] and Bionic Woman) or set in the same universe as the original but in a different time period and with different characters (for example, Star Trek: The Next Generation and spin-offs).
The programme has been sold to many other countries worldwide (see Viewership).
Public consciousness
It has been claimed that the transmission of the first episode was delayed by ten minutes due to extended news coverage of the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy the previous day; in fact it went out after a delay of eighty seconds.[19] The BBC believed that many viewers had missed this introduction to a new series due to the coverage of the assassination, as well as a series of power blackouts across the country, and they broadcast it again on 30 November 1963, just before episode two.[20][21]
The programme soon became a national institution in the United Kingdom, with a large following among the general viewing audience.[22][23] Many renowned actors asked for or were offered guest-starring roles in various stories.[24][25][26][27]
With popularity came controversy over the show's suitability for children. Morality campaigner Mary Whitehouse repeatedly complained to the BBC in the 1970s over what she saw as the show's frightening and gory content.[28] John Nathan-Turner produced the series during the 1980s and was heard to say that he looked forward to Whitehouse's comments, as the show's ratings would increase soon after she had made them.[29]
The phrase "Hiding behind (or 'watching from behind') the sofa" entered British pop culture, signifying in humour the stereotypical early-series behaviour of children who wanted to avoid seeing frightening parts of a television programme while remaining in the room to watch the remainder of it.[30] The phrase retains this association with Doctor Who, to the point that in 1991 the Museum of the Moving Image in London named their exhibition celebrating the programme "Behind the Sofa". The electronic theme music too was perceived as eerie, novel, and frightening, at the time. A 2012 article placed this childhood juxtaposition of fear and thrill "at the center of many people's relationship with the show",[31] and a 2011 online vote at Digital Spy deemed the series the "scariest TV show of all time".[32]
During Jon Pertwee's second series as the Doctor, in the serial Terror of the Autons (1971), images of murderous plastic dolls, daffodils killing unsuspecting victims, and blank-featured policemen marked the apex of the show's ability to frighten children.[33] Other notable moments in that decade include a disembodied brain falling to the floor in The Brain of Morbius[34] and the Doctor apparently being drowned by a villain in The Deadly Assassin (both 1976).[35]




The current TARDIS prop used since 2010.


A BBC audience research survey conducted in 1972 found that, by their own definition of violence ("any act[s] which may cause physical and/or psychological injury, hurt or death to persons, animals or property, whether intentional or accidental") Doctor Who was the most violent of the drama programmes the corporation produced at the time.[36] The same report found that 3% of the surveyed audience regarded the show as "very unsuitable" for family viewing.[37] Responding to the findings of the survey in The Times newspaper, journalist Philip Howard maintained that, "to compare the violence of Dr Who, sired by a horse-laugh out of a nightmare, with the more realistic violence of other television series, where actors who look like human beings bleed paint that looks like blood, is like comparing Monopoly with the property market in London: both are fantasies, but one is meant to be taken seriously."[36]
The image of the TARDIS has become firmly linked to the show in the public's consciousness; BBC scriptwriter Anthony Coburn, who lived in the resort of Herne Bay, Kent, was one of the people who conceived the idea of a police box as a time machine.[38] In 1996, the BBC applied for a trade mark to use the TARDIS' blue police box design in merchandising associated with Doctor Who.[39] In 1998, the Metropolitan Police Authority filed an objection to the trade mark claim; but in 2002, the Patent Office ruled in favour of the BBC.[40]
The programme's broad appeal attracts audiences of children and families as well as science fiction fans.[41]
The 21st century revival of the programme has become the centrepiece of BBC One's Saturday schedule, and has "defined the channel".[42] Since its return, Doctor Who has consistently received high ratings, both in number of viewers and as measured by the Appreciation Index.[43] In 2007, Caitlin Moran, television reviewer for The Times, wrote that Doctor Who is, "quintessential to being British".[2] Director Steven Spielberg has commented that, "the world would be a poorer place without Doctor Who".[44]
On 4 August 2013, a live programme titled Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor[45] was broadcast on BBC One, during which the actor who was going to play the Twelfth Doctor was revealed.[46] The live show was watched by an average of 6.27 million in the UK, and was also simulcast in the United States, Canada and Australia.[47][48]
Episodes
Further information: List of Doctor Who serials
Doctor Who originally ran for 26 seasons on BBC One, from 23 November 1963 until 6 December 1989. During the original run, each weekly episode formed part of a story (or "serial") — usually of four to six parts in earlier years and three to four in later years. Some notable exceptions were: The Daleks' Master Plan, which aired twelve episodes (plus an earlier one-episode teaser,[49] "Mission to the Unknown", featuring none of the regular cast[50]); almost an entire season of seven-episode serials (season 7); the ten-episode serial The War Games;[51] and The Trial of a Time Lord, which ran for fourteen episodes (albeit divided into three production codes and four narrative segments) during season 23.[52] Occasionally serials were loosely connected by a story-line, such as season 8 focusing on the Doctor battling a rogue Time Lord called the Master,[53][54] season 16's quest for the Key to Time,[55] season 18's journey through E-Space and the theme of entropy,[56] and season 20's Black Guardian trilogy.[57]
The programme was intended to be educational and for family viewing on the early Saturday evening schedule.[58] It initially alternated stories set in the past, which taught younger audience members about history, and with those in the future or outer space, focusing on science.[58] This was also reflected in the Doctor's original companions, one of whom was a science teacher and another a history teacher.[58]
However, science fiction stories came to dominate the programme, and the history-orientated episodes, which were not popular with the production team,[58] were dropped after The Highlanders (1967). While the show continued to use historical settings, they were generally used as a backdrop for science fiction tales, with one exception: Black Orchid, set in 1920s England.[59]
The early stories were serialised in nature, with the narrative of one story flowing into the next, and each episode having its own title, although produced as distinct stories with their own production codes.[60] Following The Gunfighters (1966), however, each serial was given its own title, and the individual parts were simply assigned episode numbers.[60]
Of the programme's many writers, Robert Holmes was the most prolific,[61] while Douglas Adams became the most well-known outside Doctor Who itself, due to the popularity of his Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy works.[62][63]
The serial format changed for the 2005 revival, with a series usually consisting of thirteen 45-minute, self-contained episodes (60 minutes with adverts, on overseas commercial channels), and an extended 60-minute episode broadcast on Christmas Day. This system was shortened to twelve episodes and one Christmas special following the revival's eighth series. Each series includes both standalone and multiple episodic stories, linked with a loose story arc that is resolved in the series finale. As in the early "classic" era, each episode, whether standalone or part of a larger story, has its own title. Occasionally, regular-series episodes will exceed the 45-minute run time; notably, the episodes "Journey's End" from 2008 and "The Eleventh Hour" from 2010 exceeded an hour in length.
840 Doctor Who instalments have been televised since 1963, ranging between 25-minute episodes (the most common format for the classic era), 45-minute episodes (for Resurrection of the Daleks in the 1984 series, a single season in 1985, and the most common format for the revival era since 2005), two feature-length productions (1983's The Five Doctors and the 1996 television film), twelve Christmas specials (most of 60 minutes' duration, one of 72 minutes), and four additional specials ranging from 60 to 75 minutes in 2009, 2010 and 2013. Four mini-episodes, running about eight minutes each, were also produced for the 1993, 2005 and 2007 Children in Need charity appeals, while another mini-episode was produced in 2008 for a Doctor Who-themed edition of The Proms. The 1993 2-part story, entitled Dimensions in Time, was made in collaboration with the cast of the BBC soap-opera EastEnders and was filmed partly on the EastEnders set. A two-part mini-episode was also produced for the 2011 edition of Comic Relief. Starting with the 2009 special "Planet of the Dead", the series was filmed in 1080i for HDTV,[64] and broadcast simultaneously on BBC One and BBC HD.
To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the show, a special 3D episode, "The Day of the Doctor", was broadcast in 2013.[65] In March 2013, it was announced that Tennant and Piper would be returning,[66] and that the episode would have a limited cinematic release worldwide.[67]
In April 2015, Steven Moffat confirmed that Doctor Who would run for at least another five years, extending the show until 2020.[68]
Missing episodes
Main article: Doctor Who missing episodes
Between about 1967 and 1978, large amounts of older material stored in the BBC's various video tape and film libraries were either destroyed,[note 3] wiped, or suffered from poor storage which led to severe deterioration from broadcast quality. This included many old episodes of Doctor Who, mostly stories featuring the first two Doctors: William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton. In all, 97 of 253 episodes produced during the first six years of the programme are not held in the BBC's archives (most notably seasons 3, 4, & 5, from which 79 episodes are missing). In 1972, almost all episodes then made were known to exist at the BBC,[69] while by 1978 the practice of wiping tapes and destroying "spare" film copies had been brought to a stop.[70]
No 1960s episodes exist on their original videotapes (all surviving prints being film transfers), though some were transferred to film for editing before transmission, and exist in their broadcast form.[71]
Some episodes have been returned to the BBC from the archives of other countries who bought prints for broadcast, or by private individuals who acquired them by various means. Early colour videotape recordings made off-air by fans have also been retrieved, as well as excerpts filmed from the television screen onto 8 mm cine film and clips that were shown on other programmes. Audio versions of all of the lost episodes exist from home viewers who made tape recordings of the show. Short clips from every story with the exception of Marco Polo, "Mission to the Unknown" and The Massacre of St Bartholomew's Eve also exist.
In addition to these, there are off-screen photographs made by photographer John Cura, who was hired by various production personnel to document many of their programmes during the 1950s and 1960s, including Doctor Who. These have been used in fan reconstructions of the serials. These amateur reconstructions have been tolerated by the BBC, provided they are not sold for profit and are distributed as low-quality VHS copies.[72]
One of the most sought-after lost episodes is part four of the last William Hartnell serial, The Tenth Planet (1966), which ends with the First Doctor transforming into the Second. The only portion of this in existence, barring a few poor-quality silent 8 mm clips, is the few seconds of the regeneration scene, as it was shown on the children's magazine show Blue Peter.[73] With the approval of the BBC, efforts are now under way to restore as many of the episodes as possible from the extant material.
"Official" reconstructions have also been released by the BBC on VHS, on MP3 CD-ROM, and as special features on DVD. The BBC, in conjunction with animation studio Cosgrove Hall, reconstructed the missing episodes 1 and 4 of The Invasion (1968), using remastered audio tracks and the comprehensive stage notes for the original filming, for the serial's DVD release in November 2006. The missing episodes of The Reign of Terror were animated by animation company Theta-Sigma, in collaboration with Big Finish, and became available for purchase in May 2013 through Amazon.com.[74] Subsequent animations made in 2013 include The Tenth Planet, The Ice Warriors and The Moonbase.
In April 2006, Blue Peter launched a challenge to find missing Doctor Who episodes with the promise of a full-scale Dalek model as a reward.[75]
In December 2011, it was announced that part 3 of Galaxy 4 and part 2 of The Underwater Menace had been returned to the BBC by a fan who had purchased them in the mid-1980s without realising that the BBC did not hold copies of them.[76]
On 10 October 2013, the BBC announced that films of eleven episodes, including nine missing episodes, had been found in a Nigerian television relay station in Jos.[77] Six of the eleven films discovered were the six-part serial The Enemy of the World, from which all but the third episode had been missing.[78] The remaining films were from another six-part serial, The Web of Fear, and included the previously missing episodes 2, 4, 5, and 6. Episode 3 of The Web of Fear is still missing.[79]
Characters
See also: List of Doctor Who cast members
The Doctor
Main article: The Doctor (Doctor Who)




The Doctor portrayed by series leads in chronological order. Left to right from top row; William Hartnell, Patrick Troughton, Jon Pertwee, Tom Baker, Peter Davison, Colin Baker, Sylvester McCoy, Paul McGann, Christopher Eccleston, David Tennant, Matt Smith, Peter Capaldi and Jodie Whittaker.


The character of the Doctor was initially shrouded in mystery. All that was known about him in the programme's early days was that he was an eccentric alien traveller of great intelligence who battled injustice while exploring time and space in an unreliable time machine, the "TARDIS" (an acronym for time and relative dimension in space), which notably appears much larger on the inside than on the outside (a quality referred to as "dimensional transcendentality").[note 4][80]
The initially irascible and slightly sinister Doctor quickly mellowed into a more compassionate figure. It was eventually revealed that he had been on the run from his own people, the Time Lords of the planet Gallifrey.
Changes of appearance
Producers introduced the concept of regeneration to permit the recasting of the main character. This was first prompted by the poor health of the original star, William Hartnell. The actual term "regeneration" was not initially conceived of until the Doctor's third on-screen regeneration however; Hartnell's Doctor had merely described undergoing a "renewal," and the Second Doctor underwent a "change of appearance".[81][82] The device has allowed for the recasting of the actor various times in the show's history, as well as the depiction of alternative Doctors either from the Doctor's relative past or future.[citation needed]
The serials The Deadly Assassin and Mawdryn Undead would later establish that a Time Lord can only regenerate 12 times, for a total of 13 incarnations. This line became stuck in the public consciousness despite not often being repeated, and was recognised by producers of the show as a plot obstacle for when the show finally had to regenerate the Doctor a thirteenth time.[83][84] The episode "The Time of the Doctor" depicted the Doctor acquiring a new cycle of regenerations, starting from the Twelfth Doctor, due to the Eleventh Doctor being the product of the Doctor's twelfth regeneration from his original set.[85][86]
Although the idea of casting a woman as the Doctor has been floated by the show's writers several times, including by Newman in 1986 and Davies in 2008, all official depictions to date have been played by men.[87][88] Jodie Whittaker took over the role as the Thirteenth Doctor at the end of the 2017 Christmas special, and is the first woman to be cast as the character in the television series. Whittaker has previously starred in television series such as Return to Cranford, Broadchurch alongside David Tennant (Tenth Doctor) and the dystopian British anthology Black Mirror.[89] The show introduced the Time Lords' ability to change sexes on regeneration in earlier episodes, first in dialogue, then with Michelle Gomez's version of The Master.


Series lead
Incarnation
Tenure[note 5]


William Hartnell
First Doctor
1963–66


Patrick Troughton
Second Doctor
1966–69


Jon Pertwee
Third Doctor
1970–74


Tom Baker
Fourth Doctor
1974–81


Peter Davison
Fifth Doctor
1982–84


Colin Baker
Sixth Doctor
1984–86


Sylvester McCoy
Seventh Doctor
1987–89[90][91][92]


Paul McGann
Eighth Doctor
1996


Christopher Eccleston
Ninth Doctor
2005


David Tennant
Tenth Doctor
2005–10


Matt Smith
Eleventh Doctor
2010–13


Peter Capaldi
Twelfth Doctor
2014–17


Jodie Whittaker
Thirteenth Doctor



In addition to those actors who have headlined the series, others have portrayed versions of the Doctor in guest roles. Notably, in 2013, John Hurt guest-starred as a hitherto unknown incarnation of the Doctor known as the War Doctor in the run-up to the show's 50th anniversary special "The Day of the Doctor".[93] He is shown in mini-episode "The Night of the Doctor" retroactively inserted into the show's fictional chronology between McGann and Eccleston's Doctors, although his introduction was written so as not to disturb the established numerical naming of the Doctors.[94] Another example is from the 1986 serial The Trial of a Time Lord, where Michael Jayston portrayed the Valeyard, who is described as an amalgamation of the darker sides of the Doctor's nature, somewhere between his twelfth and final incarnation.
On rare occasions, other actors have stood in for the lead. In The Five Doctors, Richard Hurndall played the First Doctor due to William Hartnell's death in 1975. In Time and the Rani, Sylvester McCoy briefly played the Sixth Doctor during the regeneration sequence, carrying on as the Seventh. For more information, see the list of actors who have played the Doctor. In other media, the Doctor has been played by various other actors, including Peter Cushing in two films.
The casting of a new Doctor has often inspired debate and speculation. Common topics of focus include the Doctor's sex (prior to the casting of Whittaker, all official incarnations were male), race (all Doctors to date have been white) and age (the youngest actor to be cast is Smith at 26, and the oldest are Capaldi and Hartnell, both 55).[95][96][97]
Meetings of different incarnations
There have been instances of actors returning at later dates to reprise the role of their specific Doctor. In 1973's The Three Doctors, William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton returned alongside Jon Pertwee. For 1983's The Five Doctors, Troughton and Pertwee returned to star with Peter Davison, and Tom Baker appeared in previously unseen footage from the uncompleted Shada episode. For this episode, Richard Hurndall replaced William Hartnell. Patrick Troughton again returned in 1985's The Two Doctors with Colin Baker. In 2007, Peter Davison returned in the Children in Need short "Time Crash" alongside David Tennant, and in 2013's 50th anniversary special episode, "The Day of the Doctor", David Tennant's Tenth Doctor appeared alongside Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor and John Hurt as the War Doctor, as well as brief footage from all of the previous actors.[98] In 2017, the First Doctor (this time portrayed by David Bradley) returned alongside Peter Capaldi in "The Doctor Falls" and "Twice Upon a Time". In "The Name of the Doctor", the Eleventh Doctor meets a previously unseen incarnation of himself, subsequently revealed to be the War Doctor.[93] Additionally, multiple incarnations of the Doctor have met in various audio dramas and novels based on the television show.
Revelations about the Doctor
See also: The Doctor: Inconsistencies
Throughout the programme's long history, there have been revelations about the Doctor that have raised additional questions. In The Brain of Morbius (1976), it was hinted that the First Doctor might not have been the first incarnation (although the other faces depicted might have been incarnations of the Time Lord Morbius). In subsequent stories the First Doctor was depicted as the earliest incarnation of the Doctor. In Mawdryn Undead (1983), the Fifth Doctor explicitly confirmed that he was then currently in his fifth incarnation. Later that same year, during 1983's 20th Anniversary special The Five Doctors, the First Doctor enquires as to the Fifth Doctor's regeneration; when the Fifth Doctor confirms "Fourth", the First Doctor excitedly replies "Goodness me. So there are five of me now." In 2010, the Eleventh Doctor similarly calls himself "the Eleventh" in "The Lodger". In the 2013 episode "The Time of the Doctor," the Eleventh Doctor clarified he was the product of the twelfth regeneration, due to a previous incarnation which he chose not to count and one other aborted regeneration. The name Eleventh is still used for this incarnation; the same episode depicts the prophesied "Fall of the Eleventh" which had been trailed throughout the series.
During the Seventh Doctor's era, it was hinted that the Doctor was more than just an ordinary Time Lord. In the 1996 television film, the Eighth Doctor describes himself as being "half human".[99] The BBC's FAQ for the programme notes that "purists tend to disregard this",[100] instead focusing on his Gallifreyan heritage.
The programme's first serial, An Unearthly Child, shows that the Doctor has a granddaughter, Susan Foreman. In the 1967 serial, Tomb of the Cybermen, when Victoria Waterfield doubts the Doctor can remember his family because of, "being so ancient", the Doctor says that he can when he really wants to—"The rest of the time they sleep in my mind". The 2005 series reveals that the Ninth Doctor thought he was the last surviving Time Lord, and that his home planet had been destroyed; in "The Empty Child" (2005), Dr. Constantine states that, "Before the war even began, I was a father and a grandfather. Now I am neither." The Doctor remarks in response, "Yeah, I know the feeling." In "Smith and Jones" (2007), when asked if he had a brother, he replied, "No, not any more." In both "Fear Her" (2006) and "The Doctor's Daughter" (2008), he states that he had, in the past, been a father.
In "The Wedding of River Song" (2011), it is implied that the Doctor's true name is a secret that must never be revealed; this is explored further in "The Name of the Doctor" (2013), when River Song speaking his name allows the Great Intelligence to enter his tomb, and in "The Time of the Doctor" (2013) where speaking his true name becomes the signal by which the Time Lords would know they can safely return to the universe.
Companions
Main article: Companion (Doctor Who)
The companion figure – generally a human – has been a constant feature in Doctor Who since the programme's inception in 1963. One of the roles of the companion is to remind the Doctor of his "moral duty".[101] The Doctor's first companions seen on screen were his granddaughter Susan Foreman (Carole Ann Ford) and her teachers Barbara Wright (Jacqueline Hill) and Ian Chesterton (William Russell). These characters were intended to act as audience surrogates, through which the audience would discover information about the Doctor who was to act as a mysterious father figure.[101] The only story from the original series in which the Doctor travels alone is The Deadly Assassin. Notable companions from the earlier series included Romana (Mary Tamm and Lalla Ward), a Time Lady; Sarah Jane Smith (Elisabeth Sladen); and Jo Grant (Katy Manning). Dramatically, these characters provide a figure with whom the audience can identify, and serve to further the story by requesting exposition from the Doctor and manufacturing peril for the Doctor to resolve. The Doctor regularly gains new companions and loses old ones; sometimes they return home or find new causes — or loves — on worlds they have visited. Some have died during the course of the series. Companions are usually human, or humanoid aliens.
Since the 2005 revival, the Doctor generally travels with a primary female companion, who occupies a larger narrative role. Steven Moffat described the companion as the main character of the show, as the story begins anew with each companion and she undergoes more change than the Doctor.[102][103] The primary companions of the Ninth and Tenth Doctors were Rose Tyler (Billie Piper), Martha Jones (Freema Agyeman), and Donna Noble (Catherine Tate) with Mickey Smith (Noel Clarke) and Jack Harkness (John Barrowman) recurring as secondary companion figures.[104] The Eleventh Doctor became the first to travel with a married couple, Amy Pond (Karen Gillan) and Rory Williams (Arthur Darvill), whilst out-of-sync meetings with River Song (Alex Kingston) and Clara Oswald (Jenna Coleman) provided ongoing story arcs. The tenth series introduced Pearl Mackie as Bill Potts, the Doctor's newest traveling companion.[105] Bill Potts is the Doctor's first openly gay companion. Pearl Mackie said that the increased representation for LGBTQ people is important on a mainstream show.[106]
Some companions have gone on to re-appear, either in the main series or in spin-offs. Sarah Jane Smith became the central character in The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–11) following a return to Doctor Who in 2006. Guest stars in the series included former companions Jo Grant, K9, and Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart (Nicholas Courtney). The character of Jack Harkness also served to launch a spin-off, Torchwood, (2006–2011) in which Martha Jones also appeared.
Adversaries
See also: List of Doctor Who universe creatures and aliens and List of Doctor Who villains
When Sydney Newman commissioned the series, he specifically did not want to perpetuate the cliché of the "bug-eyed monster" of science fiction.[107] However, monsters were popular with audiences and so became a staple of Doctor Who almost from the beginning.
With the show's 2005 revival, executive producer Russell T Davies stated his intention to reintroduce classic icons of Doctor Who.[108] The Autons with the Nestene Consciousness and Daleks returned in series 1, Cybermen in series 2, the Macra and the Master in series 3, the Sontarans and Davros in series 4, and the Time Lords including Rassilon in the 2009–10 Specials. Davies' successor, Steven Moffat, has continued the trend by reviving the Silurians in series 5, Cybermats in series 6, the Great Intelligence and the Ice Warriors in Series 7, and Zygons in the 50th Anniversary Special.[109] Since its 2005 return, the series has also introduced new recurring aliens: Slitheen (Raxacoricofallapatorian), Ood, Judoon, Weeping Angels and the Silence.
Besides infrequent appearances by the Ice Warriors, Ogrons, the Rani, and Black Guardian, three adversaries have become particularly iconic: the Daleks, the Cybermen, and the Master.
Daleks
Main article: Dalek




A Dalek at the Doctor Who Experience, Cardiff


The Dalek race, which first appeared in the show's second serial in 1963,[110] are Doctor Who's oldest villains. The Daleks are Kaleds from the planet Skaro, mutated by the scientist Davros and housed in mechanical armour shells for mobility. The actual creatures resemble octopi with large, pronounced brains. Their armour shells have a single eye-stalk, a sink-plunger-like device that serves the purpose of a hand, and a directed-energy weapon. Their main weakness is their eyestalk; attacks upon them using various weapons can blind a Dalek, making it go mad. Their chief role in the series plot, as they frequently remark in their instantly recognisable metallic voices, is to "exterminate" all non-Dalek beings. They even attack the Time Lords in the Time War, as shown during the 50th Anniversary of the show. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the Doctor Who franchise, their most recent appearances being in the 2015 episodes "The Witch's Familiar" and "Hell Bent". Davros has also been a recurring figure since his debut in Genesis of the Daleks, although played by several different actors.
The Daleks were created by writer Terry Nation (who intended them to be an allegory of the Nazis)[111] and BBC designer Raymond Cusick.[112] The Daleks' début in the programme's second serial, The Daleks (1963–64), made both the Daleks and Doctor Who very popular. A Dalek appeared on a postage stamp celebrating British popular culture in 1999, photographed by Lord Snowdon. In the new series, Daleks come in a range of colours; the colour denoting its role within the species.[citation needed]
In the 2012 episode "Asylum of the Daleks", many of the Dalek variants seen throughout the programme's history made an appearance.[113]
Cybermen
Main article: Cyberman




A 2006 Cyberman


Cybermen were originally a wholly organic species of humanoids originating on Earth's twin planet Mondas that began to implant more and more artificial parts into their bodies. This led to the race becoming coldly logical and calculating cyborgs, with emotions usually only shown when naked aggression was called for. With the demise of Mondas, they acquired Telos as their new home planet. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the Doctor Who franchise.
The 2006 series introduced a totally new variation of Cybermen. These Cybus Cybermen were created in a parallel universe by the mad inventor John Lumic; he was attempting to preserve the humans by transplanting their brains into powerful metal bodies, sending them orders using a mobile phone network and inhibiting their emotions with an electronic chip.
The Master
Main article: Master (Doctor Who)
The Master is the Doctor's archenemy, a renegade Time Lord who desires to rule the universe. Conceived as "Professor Moriarty to the Doctor's Sherlock Holmes",[114] the character first appeared in 1971. As with the Doctor, the role has been portrayed by several actors, since the Master is a Time Lord as well and able to regenerate; the first of these actors was Roger Delgado, who continued in the role until his death in 1973. The Master was briefly played by Peter Pratt and Geoffrey Beevers until Anthony Ainley took over and continued to play the character until Doctor Who's hiatus in 1989. The Master returned in the 1996 television movie of Doctor Who, and was played by American actor Eric Roberts.
Following the series revival in 2005, Derek Jacobi provided the character's re-introduction in the 2007 episode "Utopia". During that story, the role was then assumed by John Simm who returned to the role multiple times through the Tenth Doctor's tenure.[115] As of the 2014 episode "Dark Water," it was revealed that the Master had become a female incarnation or "Time Lady," going by the name of "Missy" (short for Mistress, the feminine equivalent of "Master"). This incarnation is played by Michelle Gomez.
John Simm returned in his role as the Master in the tenth series.[116]
Music
See also: List of Doctor Who composers
Theme music
Main article: Doctor Who theme music









Doctor Who theme excerpt






An excerpt from the original (1963) classic theme music to Doctor Who






Problems playing this file? See media help.


The Doctor Who theme music was one of the first electronic music signature tunes for television, and after five decades remains one of the most easily recognised. It has been often called both memorable and frightening, priming the viewer for what was to follow. During the 1970s, the Radio Times, the BBC's own listings magazine, announced that a child's mother said the theme music terrified her son. The Radio Times was apologetic, but the theme music remained.[citation needed]
The original theme was composed by Ron Grainer and realised by Delia Derbyshire of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, with assistance from Dick Mills and was released as a single on Decca F 11837 in 1964. The various parts were built up using musique concrète techniques, by creating tape loops of an individually struck piano string and individual test oscillators and filters. The Derbyshire arrangement served, with minor edits, as the theme tune up to the end of season 17 (1979–80). It is regarded as a significant and innovative piece of electronic music, recorded well before the availability of commercial synthesisers or multitrack mixers. Each note was individually created by cutting, splicing, speeding up and slowing down segments of analogue tape containing recordings of a single plucked string, white noise, and the simple harmonic waveforms of test-tone oscillators, intended for calibrating equipment and rooms, not creating music. New techniques were invented to allow mixing of the music, as this was before the era of multitrack tape machines. On hearing the finished result, Grainer asked, "Did I write that?"[citation needed] Although Grainer was willing to give Derbyshire the co-composer credit, it was against BBC policy at the time.[117][118]
A different arrangement was recorded by Peter Howell for season 18 (1980), which was in turn replaced by Dominic Glynn's arrangement for the season-long serial The Trial of a Time Lord in season 23 (1986). Keff McCulloch provided the new arrangement for the Seventh Doctor's era which lasted from season 24 (1987) until the series' suspension in 1989. American composer John Debney created a new arrangement of Ron Grainer's original theme for Doctor Who in 1996. For the return of the series in 2005, Murray Gold provided a new arrangement which featured samples from the 1963 original with further elements added; in the 2005 Christmas episode "The Christmas Invasion", Gold introduced a modified closing credits arrangement that was used up until the conclusion of the 2007 series.[citation needed]
A new arrangement of the theme, once again by Gold, was introduced in the 2007 Christmas special episode, "Voyage of the Damned"; Gold returned as composer for the 2010 series.[119] He was responsible for a new version of the theme which was reported to have had a hostile reception from some viewers.[120] In 2011, the theme tune charted at number 228 of radio station Classic FM's Hall of Fame, a survey of classical music tastes. A revised version of Gold's 2010 arrangement had its debut over the opening titles of the 2012 Christmas special "The Snowmen", and a further revision of the arrangement was made for the 50th Anniversary special "The Day of the Doctor" in November 2013.[citation needed]
Versions of the "Doctor Who Theme" have also been released as pop music over the years. In the early 1970s, Jon Pertwee, who had played the Third Doctor, recorded a version of the Doctor Who theme with spoken lyrics, titled, "Who Is the Doctor".[note 6] In 1978 a disco version of the theme was released in the UK, Denmark and Australia by the group Mankind, which reached number 24 in the UK charts. In 1988 the band The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu (later known as The KLF) released the single "Doctorin' the Tardis" under the name The Timelords, which reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 2 in Australia; this version incorporated several other songs, including "Rock and Roll Part 2" by Gary Glitter (who recorded vocals for some of the CD-single remix versions of "Doctorin' the Tardis").[121] Others who have covered or reinterpreted the theme include Orbital,[121] Pink Floyd,[121] the Australian string ensemble Fourplay, New Zealand punk band Blam Blam Blam, The Pogues, Thin Lizzy, Dub Syndicate, and the comedians Bill Bailey and Mitch Benn. Both the theme and obsessive fans were satirised on The Chaser's War on Everything. The theme tune has also appeared on many compilation CDs, and has made its way into mobile-phone ringtones. Fans have also produced and distributed their own remixes of the theme. In January 2011 the Mankind version was released as a digital download on the album Gallifrey And Beyond.
Incidental music
Main article: List of music featured on Doctor Who
See also: List of Doctor Who music releases
Most of the innovative incidental music for Doctor Who has been specially commissioned from freelance composers, although in the early years some episodes also used stock music, as well as occasional excerpts from original recordings or cover versions of songs by popular music acts such as The Beatles and The Beach Boys. Since its 2005 return, the series has featured occasional use of excerpts of pop music from the 1970s to the 2000s.
The incidental music for the first Doctor Who adventure, An Unearthly Child, was written by Norman Kay. Many of the stories of the William Hartnell period were scored by electronic music pioneer Tristram Cary, whose Doctor Who credits include The Daleks, Marco Polo, The Daleks' Master Plan, The Gunfighters and The Mutants. Other composers in this early period included Richard Rodney Bennett, Carey Blyton and Geoffrey Burgon.
The most frequent musical contributor during the first 15 years was Dudley Simpson, who is also well known for his theme and incidental music for Blake's 7, and for his haunting theme music and score for the original 1970s version of The Tomorrow People. Simpson's first Doctor Who score was Planet of Giants (1964) and he went on to write music for many adventures of the 1960s and 1970s, including most of the stories of the Jon Pertwee/Tom Baker periods, ending with The Horns of Nimon (1979). He also made a cameo appearance in The Talons of Weng-Chiang (as a Music hall conductor).
In 1980 starting with the serial The Leisure Hive the task of creating incidental music was assigned to the Radiophonic Workshop. Paddy Kingsland and Peter Howell contributed many scores in this period and other contributors included Roger Limb, Malcolm Clarke and Jonathan Gibbs.
The Radiophonic Workshop was dropped after 1986's The Trial of a Time Lord series, and Keff McCulloch took over as the series' main composer until the end of its run, with Dominic Glynn and Mark Ayres also contributing scores.
All the incidental music for the 2005 revived series has been composed by Murray Gold and Ben Foster and has been performed by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales from the 2005 Christmas episode "The Christmas Invasion" onwards. A concert featuring the orchestra performing music from the first two series took place on 19 November 2006 to raise money for Children in Need. David Tennant hosted the event, introducing the different sections of the concert. Murray Gold and Russell T Davies answered questions during the interval and Daleks and Cybermen appeared whilst music from their stories was played. The concert aired on BBCi on Christmas Day 2006. A Doctor Who Prom was celebrated on 27 July 2008 in the Royal Albert Hall as part of the annual BBC Proms. The BBC Philharmonic and the London Philharmonic Choir performed Murray Gold's compositions for the series, conducted by Ben Foster, as well as a selection of classics based on the theme of space and time. The event was presented by Freema Agyeman and guest-presented by various other stars of the show with numerous monsters participating in the proceedings. It also featured the specially filmed mini-episode "Music of the Spheres", written by Russell T Davies and starring David Tennant.[122]
Six soundtrack releases have been released since 2005. The first featured tracks from the first two series,[123] the second and third featured music from the third and fourth series respectively. The fourth was released on 4 October 2010 as a two disc special edition and contained music from the 2008–2010 specials (The Next Doctor to End of Time Part 2).[124][125] The soundtrack for Series 5 was released on 8 November 2010.[126] In February 2011, a soundtrack was released for the 2010 Christmas special: "A Christmas Carol",[127] and in December 2011 the soundtrack for Series 6 was released, both by Silva Screen Records.[128]
In 2013, a 50th-anniversary boxed set of audio CDs was released featuring music and sound effects from Doctor Who’s 50-year history. The celebration continued in 2016 with the release of Doctor Who: The 50th Anniversary Collection Four LP Box Set by New York City-based Spacelab9. The company pressed 1,000 copies of the set on "Metallic Silver" vinyl, dubbed the "Cyberman Edition".[129]
Viewership
Main article: Doctor Who fandom
United Kingdom




The image of the TARDIS is iconic in British popular culture.


Premiering the day after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the first episode of Doctor Who was repeated with the second episode the following week. Doctor Who has always appeared initially on the BBC's mainstream BBC One channel, where it is regarded as a family show, drawing audiences of many millions of viewers; episodes were also repeated on BBC Three, before its transition to an online-only channel . The programme's popularity has waxed and waned over the decades, with three notable periods of high ratings.[130] The first of these was the "Dalekmania" period (circa 1964–1965), when the popularity of the Daleks regularly brought Doctor Who ratings of between 9 and 14 million, even for stories which did not feature them.[130][131] The second was the mid to late 1970s, when Tom Baker occasionally drew audiences of over 12 million.[130]
An audience survey during the 1970s revealed that at the time 60% of the viewership were adults.[citation needed]
During the ITV network strike of 1979, viewership peaked at 16 million.[citation needed] Figures remained respectable into the 1980s, but fell noticeably after the programme's 23rd series was postponed in 1985 and the show was off the air for 18 months. At the time of Season 19's broadcast in 1982 the show was being watched by a global audience of 98 million, 88 million in 38 foreign countries, and an average of ten million in the United Kingdom.[citation needed]
Its late 1980s performance of three to five million viewers was seen as poor at the time and was, according to the BBC Board of Control, a leading cause of the programme's 1989 suspension. Some fans considered this disingenuous, since the programme was scheduled against the soap opera Coronation Street, the most popular show at the time.[citation needed] After the series' revival in 2005 (the third notable period of high ratings), it has consistently had high viewership levels for the evening on which the episode is broadcast.[130]
The BBC One broadcast of "Rose", the first episode of the 2005 revival, drew an average audience of 10.81 million, third highest for BBC One that week and seventh across all channels.[130][132][133] The current revival also garners the highest audience Appreciation Index of any drama on television.[134]
International




Map of countries that have or currently broadcast Doctor Who in either its current or classic incarnation (map correct as of October 2014)


Doctor Who has been broadcast internationally outside of the United Kingdom since 1964, a year after the show first aired. As of 1 January 2013, the modern series has been or is currently broadcast weekly in more than 50 countries.[citation needed]
Doctor Who is one of the five top grossing titles for BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm.[135] BBC Worldwide CEO John Smith has said that Doctor Who is one of a small number of "Superbrands" which Worldwide will promote heavily.[136]
Only four episodes have ever had their premiere showings on channels other than BBC One. The 1983 20th anniversary special The Five Doctors had its début on 23 November (the actual date of the anniversary) on a number of PBS stations two days prior to its BBC One broadcast. The 1988 story Silver Nemesis was broadcast with all three episodes airing back to back on TVNZ in New Zealand in November, after the first episode had been shown in the UK but before the final two instalments had aired there. Finally, the 1996 television film premiered on 12 May 1996 on CITV in Edmonton, Canada, 15 days before the BBC One showing, and two days before it aired on Fox in the United States.[citation needed]
Oceania
New Zealand was the first country outside the United Kingdom to screen Doctor Who, beginning in September 1964, and continued to screen the series for many years, including the new series from 2005.[citation needed]
In Australia, the show has had a strong fan base since its inception, having been exclusively first run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) since January 1965. The ABC has periodically repeated episodes; of note were the weekly screenings of all available classic episodes starting in 2003, for the show's 40th anniversary, and the weekdaily screenings of all available revived episodes in 2013 for the show's 50th anniversary. The ABC broadcasts the modern series first run on ABC1 and ABC ME, with repeats on ABC2. The ABC also provided partial funding for the 20th anniversary special The Five Doctors in 1983.[citation needed]
Americas
Main article: Doctor Who in Canada and the United States
The series also has a fan base in the United States, where it was shown in syndication from the 1970s to the 1990s, particularly on PBS stations.[citation needed]
TVOntario picked up the show in 1976 beginning with The Three Doctors and aired each series (several years late) through to series 24 in 1991. From 1979 to 1981, TVO airings were bookended by science-fiction writer Judith Merril who would introduce the episode and then, after the episode concluded, try to place it in an educational context in keeping with TVO's status as an educational channel. Its airing of The Talons of Weng-Chiang was cancelled as a result of accusations that the story was racist; the story was later broadcast in the 1990s on cable station YTV. CBC began showing the series again in 2005. The series moved to the Canadian cable channel Space in 2009.[citation needed]
For the Canadian broadcast, Christopher Eccleston recorded special video introductions for each episode (including a trivia question as part of a viewer contest) and excerpts from the Doctor Who Confidential documentary were played over the closing credits; for the broadcast of "The Christmas Invasion" on 26 December 2005, Billie Piper recorded a special video introduction. CBC began airing series two on 9 October 2006 at 20:00 E/P (20:30 in Newfoundland and Labrador), shortly after that day's CFL double header on Thanksgiving in most of the country.[citation needed]
Series three began broadcasting on CBC on 18 June 2007 followed by the second Christmas special, "The Runaway Bride" at midnight,[137] and the Sci Fi Channel began on 6 July 2007 starting with the second Christmas special at 8:00 pm E/P followed by the first episode.[138]
Series four aired in the United States on the Sci Fi Channel (now known as Syfy), beginning in April 2008.[139] It aired on CBC beginning 19 September 2008, although the CBC did not air the Voyage of the Damned special.[140] The Canadian cable network Space broadcast "The Next Doctor" (in March 2009) and all subsequent series and specials.[141]
DVD and video
Main article: List of Doctor Who DVD releases
A wide selection of serials are available from BBC Video on DVD, on sale in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and the United States. Every fully extant serial has been released on VHS, and BBC Worldwide continues to regularly release serials on DVD. The 2005 series is also available in its entirety on UMD for the PlayStation Portable. Eight original series serials have been released on Laserdisc[142] and many have also been released on Betamax tape and Video 2000. One episode of Doctor Who (The Infinite Quest) was released on VCD. Only the series from 2009 onwards are available on Blu-ray, except for the 1970 story Spearhead from Space, released in July 2013 and the 1996 TV film Doctor Who released in September 2016.[143] Many early releases have been re-released as special editions, with more bonus features.[citation needed]
Adaptations and other appearances
Doctor Who films
Main article: Dr. Who (Dalek films)
There are two Doctor Who feature films: Dr. Who and the Daleks, released in 1965 and Daleks – Invasion Earth: 2150 A.D. in 1966. Both are retellings of existing television stories (specifically, the first two Dalek serials, The Daleks and The Dalek Invasion of Earth respectively) with a larger budget and alterations to the series concept.
In these films, Peter Cushing plays a human scientist[144] named "Dr. Who", who travels with his granddaughter and niece and other companions in a time machine he has invented. The Cushing version of the character reappears in both comic strips and a short story, the latter attempting to reconcile the film continuity with that of the series.
In addition, several planned films were proposed, including a sequel, The Chase, loosely based on the original series story, for the Cushing Doctor, plus many attempted television movie and big screen productions to revive the original Doctor Who, after the original series was cancelled.
Paul McGann starred in the only television film as the eighth incarnation of the Doctor. After the film, he continued the role in audio books and was confirmed as the eighth incarnation through flashback footage and a mini episode in the 2005 revival, effectively linking the two series and the television movie.
In 2011, David Yates announced that he had started work with the BBC on a Doctor Who film, a project that would take three or more years to complete. Yates indicated that the film would take a different approach to Doctor Who,[145] although the current Doctor Who showrunner Steven Moffat stated later that any such film would not be a reboot of the series and a film should be made by the BBC team and star the current TV Doctor.[146][147]
Spin-offs
Main article: Doctor Who spin-offs
Doctor Who has appeared on stage numerous times. In the early 1970s, Trevor Martin played the role in Doctor Who and the Daleks in the Seven Keys to Doomsday. In the late 1980s, Jon Pertwee and Colin Baker both played the Doctor at different times during the run of a play titled Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure. For two performances, while Pertwee was ill, David Banks (better known for playing Cybermen) played the Doctor. Other original plays have been staged as amateur productions, with other actors playing the Doctor, while Terry Nation wrote The Curse of the Daleks, a stage play mounted in the late 1960s, but without the Doctor.
A pilot episode ("A Girl's Best Friend") for a potential spinoff series, K-9 and Company, was aired in 1981 with Elisabeth Sladen reprising her role as companion Sarah Jane Smith and John Leeson as the voice of K9, but was not picked up as a regular series.
Concept art for an animated Doctor Who series was produced by animation company Nelvana in the 1980s, but the series was not produced.[148]
Following the success of the 2005 series produced by Russell T Davies, the BBC commissioned Davies to produce a 13-part spin-off series titled Torchwood (an anagram of "Doctor Who"), set in modern-day Cardiff and investigating alien activities and crime. The series debuted on BBC Three on 22 October 2006.[149] John Barrowman reprised his role of Jack Harkness from the 2005 series of Doctor Who.[150] Two other actresses who appeared in Doctor Who also star in the series; Eve Myles as Gwen Cooper, who also played the similarly named servant girl Gwyneth in the 2005 Doctor Who episode "The Unquiet Dead",[151] and Naoko Mori who reprised her role as Toshiko Sato first seen in "Aliens of London". A second series of Torchwood aired in 2008; for three episodes, the cast was joined by Freema Agyeman reprising her Doctor Who role of Martha Jones. A third series was broadcast from 6 to 10 July 2009, and consisted of a single five-part story called Children of Earth which was set largely in London. A fourth series, Torchwood: Miracle Day jointly produced by BBC Wales, BBC Worldwide and the American entertainment company Starz debuted in 2011. The series was predominantly set in the United States, though Wales remained part of the show's setting.
The Sarah Jane Adventures, starring Elisabeth Sladen who reprised her role as investigative journalist Sarah Jane Smith, was developed by CBBC; a special aired on New Year's Day 2007 and a full series began on 24 September 2007.[152] A second series followed in 2008, notable for (as noted above) featuring the return of Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart. A third in 2009 featured a crossover appearance from the main show by David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. In 2010, a further such appearance featured Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor alongside former companion actress Katy Manning reprising her role as Jo Grant. A final, three-story fifth series was transmitted in autumn 2011 – uncompleted due to the death of Elisabeth Sladen in early 2011.
An animated serial, The Infinite Quest, aired alongside the 2007 series of Doctor Who as part of the children's television series Totally Doctor Who. The serial featured the voices of series regulars David Tennant and Freema Agyeman but is not considered part of the 2007 series.[153] A second animated serial, Dreamland, aired in six parts on the BBC Red Button service, and the official Doctor Who website in 2009.[154]
Class, featuring students of Coal Hill School, was first aired on-line on BBC Three from 22 October 2016, as a series of eight 45 minute episodes, written by Patrick Ness.[155][156] Peter Capaldi as the Twelfth Doctor appears in the show's first episode.[157] The series was picked up by BBC America on 8 January 2016 and by BBC One a day later.[158] On 7 September 2017, BBC Three controller Damian Kavanagh confirmed that the series had officially been cancelled.[159]
Numerous other spin-off series have been created not by the BBC but by the respective owners of the characters and concepts. Such spin-offs include the novel and audio drama series Faction Paradox, Iris Wildthyme and Bernice Summerfield; as well as the made-for-video series P.R.O.B.E.; the Australian-produced television series K-9, which aired a 26-episode first season on Disney XD;[160] and the audio spin-off Counter-Measures.[161]
Aftershows
When the revived series of Doctor Who was brought back, an aftershow series was created by the BBC, titled Doctor Who Confidential. There have been three aftershow series created, with the latest one titled Doctor Who: The Fan Show, which began airing from the tenth series. Each series follows behind-the-scenes footage on the making of Doctor Who through clips and interviews with the cast, production crew and other people, including those who have participated in the television series in some manner. Each episode deals with a different topic, and in most cases refers to the Doctor Who episode that preceded it.


Series
Episodes
First aired
Last aired
Narrator / Presenter


Doctor Who Confidential
87
26 March 2005
1 October 2011
David Tennant (2005)
Simon Pegg (2005)
Mark Gatiss (2005–06)
Anthony Head (2006–10)
Noel Clarke (2009)
Alex Price (2010)
Russell Tovey (2010–11)


Doctor Who Extra
90
23 August 2014
5 December 2015
Matt Botten
Rufus Hound
Matt Lucas
Charity Wakefield


Doctor Who: The Fan Show
12
15 April 2017
present
Christel Dee (Main host)
Luke Spillane (co-host)


Charity episodes
In 1983, coinciding with the series' 20th anniversary, The Five Doctors was shown as part of the annual BBC Children in Need Appeal, however it was not a charity based production, simply scheduled within the line-up of Friday 25 November 1983. This was the programme's very first co-production with Australian broadcaster ABC.[162] Featuring three of the first five Doctors, a new actor to replace the deceased William Hartnell, and unused footage to represent Tom Baker.[163] This was a full-length, 90-minute film, the longest single episode of Doctor Who produced to date (the television movie ran slightly longer on broadcast where it included commercial breaks).[164][165]
In 1993, for the franchise's 30th anniversary, another charity special, titled Dimensions in Time was produced for Children in Need, featuring all of the surviving actors who played the Doctor and a number of previous companions. It also featured a crossover with the soap opera EastEnders, the action taking place in the latter's Albert Square location and around Greenwich. The special was one of several special 3D programmes the BBC produced at the time, using a 3D system that made use of the Pulfrich effect requiring glasses with one darkened lens; the picture would look normal to those viewers who watched without the glasses.
In 1999, another special, Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death, was made for Comic Relief and later released on VHS. An affectionate parody of the television series, it was split into four segments, mimicking the traditional serial format, complete with cliffhangers, and running down the same corridor several times when being chased (the version released on video was split into only two episodes). In the story, the Doctor (Rowan Atkinson) encounters both the Master (Jonathan Pryce) and the Daleks. During the special the Doctor is forced to regenerate several times, with his subsequent incarnations played by, in order, Richard E. Grant, Jim Broadbent, Hugh Grant and Joanna Lumley. The script was written by Steven Moffat, later to be head writer and executive producer to the revived series.[14]
Since the return of Doctor Who in 2005, the franchise has produced two original "mini-episodes" to support Children in Need. The first, aired in November 2005, was an untitled seven-minute scene which introduced David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. It was followed in November 2007 by "Time Crash", a 7-minute scene which featured the Tenth Doctor meeting the Fifth Doctor (played once again by Peter Davison).
A set of two mini-episodes, titled "Space" and "Time" respectively, were produced to support Comic Relief. They were aired during the Comic Relief 2011 event.[166]
During 2011 Children in Need, an exclusively-filmed segment showed the Doctor addressing the viewer, attempting to persuade them to purchase items of his clothing, which were going up for auction for Children in Need. The 2012 edition of CiN featured the mini-episode The Great Detective.
Spoofs and cultural references
Main article: Doctor Who spoofs
Doctor Who has been satirised and spoofed on many occasions by comedians including Spike Milligan (a Dalek invades his bathroom — Milligan, naked, hurls a soap sponge at it) and Lenny Henry. Jon Culshaw frequently impersonates the Fourth Doctor in the BBC Dead Ringers series.[167] Doctor Who fandom has also been lampooned on programs such as Saturday Night Live, The Chaser's War on Everything, Mystery Science Theater 3000, Family Guy, American Dad!, Futurama, South Park, Community as Inspector Spacetime, The Simpsons and The Big Bang Theory. As part of the 50th anniversary programmes, former Fifth Doctor Peter Davison directed, wrote and co-starred in the parody The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot, which also starred two other former Doctors, Colin Baker and Sylvester McCoy, and cameo appearances from cast and crew involved in the programme, including showrunner Steven Moffat and Doctors Paul McGann, David Tennant and Matt Smith.[168]
The Doctor in his fourth incarnation has been represented on several episodes of The Simpsons[169] and Matt Groening's other animated series Futurama.[170][171]
There have also been many references to Doctor Who in popular culture and other science fiction, including Star Trek: The Next Generation ("The Neutral Zone")[172] and Leverage. In the Channel 4 series Queer as Folk (created by later Doctor Who executive producer Russell T. Davies), the character of Vince was portrayed as an avid Doctor Who fan, with references appearing many times throughout in the form of clips from the programme. In a similar manner, the character of Oliver on Coupling (created and written by current show runner Steven Moffat) is portrayed as a Doctor Who collector and enthusiast. References to Doctor Who have also appeared in the young adult fantasy novels Brisingr[173] and High Wizardry,[174] the video game Rock Band,[175] the soap opera EastEnders,[176] the Adult Swim comedy show Robot Chicken, the Family Guy episodes "Blue Harvest" and "420", and the game RuneScape. It has also be referenced in Destroy All Humans! 2, by civilians in the game's variation of England,[177] and in Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney.[178]
Doctor Who has been a reference in several political cartoons, from a 1964 cartoon in the Daily Mail depicting Charles de Gaulle as a Dalek[179] to a 2008 edition of This Modern World by Tom Tomorrow in which the Tenth Doctor informs an incredulous character from 2003 that the Democratic Party will nominate an African-American as its presidential candidate.[180]
The word "TARDIS" is an entry in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary[181] and the iOS dictionary.
Museums and exhibitions
Main article: Doctor Who exhibitions
There have been various exhibitions of Doctor Who in the United Kingdom, including the now closed exhibitions at:

Land's End (Cornwall)
Blackpool
Llangollen
Kelvingrove Museum, Glasgow
Coventry Transport Museum, Coventry
Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne
Melbourne, Australia (only international DW concert to be performed)
Kensington Olympia Two, London
Longleat, which ran for 30 years.[182]
Cardiff (the city where the series is filmed).[183]

The exhibition closed down on the 9th of September 2017
Merchandise
Main article: Doctor Who merchandise
Since its beginnings, Doctor Who has generated hundreds of products related to the show, from toys and games to collectible picture cards and postage stamps. These include board games, card games, gamebooks, computer games, roleplaying games, action figures and a pinball game. Many games have been released that feature the Daleks, including Dalek computer games.
Audios
See also: List of Doctor Who audio releases, List of Doctor Who audiobooks, and List of Doctor Who audio plays by Big Finish
The earliest Doctor Who-related audio release was a 21-minute narrated abridgement of the First Doctor television story The Chase released in 1966. Ten years later, the first original Doctor Who audio was released on LP record; Doctor Who and the Pescatons featuring the Fourth Doctor. The first commercially available audiobook was an abridged reading of the Fourth Doctor story State of Decay in 1981. In 1988, during a hiatus in the television show, Slipback, the first radio drama, was transmitted.
Since 1999, Big Finish Productions has released several different series of Doctor Who audios on CD. The earliest of these featured the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Doctors, with Paul McGann's Eight Doctor joining the line in 2001. Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor began appearing for Big Finish in 2012. Along with the main range, adventures of the First, Second and Third Doctors have been produced in both limited cast and full cast formats, as well as audiobooks. The 2013 series Destiny of the Doctor, produced as part of the series' 50th Anniversary celebrations, marked the first time Big Finish created stories (in this case audiobooks) featuring the Doctors from the revived show. Along with this, in May 2016 the Tenth Doctor, David Tennant, appeared alongside Cathrine Tate in a collection of three audio adventures.
In addition to these main lines, both the BBC and Big Finish have produced original audio dramas and audiobooks based on spin-off material, such as Torchwood and The Sarah Jane Adventures series.
Books
See also: List of Doctor Who novelists
Doctor Who books have been published from the mid-sixties through to the present day. From 1965 to 1991 the books published were primarily novelised adaptations of broadcast episodes; beginning in 1991 an extensive line of original fiction was launched, the Virgin New Adventures and Virgin Missing Adventures. Since the relaunch of the programme in 2005, a new range of novels have been published by BBC Books. Numerous non-fiction books about the series, including guidebooks and critical studies, have also been published, and a dedicated Doctor Who Magazine with newsstand circulation has been published regularly since 1979. This is published by Panini, as is the Doctor Who Adventures magazine for younger fans.
See also:

List of Doctor Who novelisations
Eighth Doctor Adventures
Past Doctor Adventures
New Series Adventures

Video games
See also: Category:Video games based on Doctor Who
Numerous Doctor Who video games have been created from the mid-80s through to the present day. One of the recent ones is a match-3 game released in November 2013 for iOS, Android, Amazon App Store and Facebook called Doctor Who: Legacy. It has been constantly updated since its release and features all of the Doctors as playable characters as well as over 100 companions.[184]
Another video game instalment is LEGO Dimensions – in which Doctor Who is one of the many "Level Packs" in the game. At the moment, the pack contains the Twelfth Doctor (who can reincarnate into the others), K9, the TARDIS and a Victorian London adventure level area. The game and pack released in November 2015.
Chronology and canonicity
Since the creation of the Doctor Who character by BBC Television in the early 1960s, a myriad of stories have been published about Doctor Who, in different media: apart from the actual television episodes that continue to be produced by the BBC, there have also been novels, comics, short stories, audio books, radio plays, interactive video games, game books, webcasts, DVD extras, and even stage performances. In this respect it is noteworthy that the BBC takes no position on the canonicity of any of such stories, and producers of the show have expressed distaste for the idea.[185]
Awards
Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Doctor Who
The show has received recognition as one of Britain's finest television programmes, winning the 2006 British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series and five consecutive (2005–2010) awards at the National Television Awards during Russell T Davies' tenure as executive producer.[186][187] In 2011, Matt Smith became the first Doctor to be nominated for a BAFTA Television Award for Best Actor and in 2016, Michelle Gomez became the first female to receive a BAFTA nomination for the series, getting a Best Supporting Actress nomination for her work as Missy.




Matt Smith, Jenna Louise Coleman and Steven Moffat accepting an award for Doctor Who


In 2013, the Peabody Awards honoured Doctor Who with an Institutional Peabody "for evolving with technology and the times like nothing else in the known television universe."[188] The programme is listed in Guinness World Records as the longest-running science fiction television show in the world,[189] the "most successful" science fiction series of all time—based on its over-all broadcast ratings, DVD and book sales, and iTunes traffic—[190] and for the largest ever simulcast of a TV drama with its 50th anniversary special.[191] During its original run, it was recognised for its imaginative stories, creative low-budget special effects, and pioneering use of electronic music (originally produced by the BBC Radiophonic Workshop).
In 1975, Season 11 of the series won a Writers' Guild of Great Britain award for Best Writing in a Children's Serial. In 1996, BBC television held the "Auntie Awards" as the culmination of their "TV60" series, celebrating 60 years of BBC television broadcasting, where Doctor Who was voted as the "Best Popular Drama" the corporation had ever produced, ahead of such ratings heavyweights as EastEnders and Casualty.[192] In 2000, Doctor Who was ranked third in a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century, produced by the British Film Institute and voted on by industry professionals.[193] In 2005, the series came first in a survey by SFX magazine of "The Greatest UK Science Fiction and Fantasy Television Series Ever". Also, in the 100 Greatest Kids' TV shows (a Channel 4 countdown in 2001), the 1963–1989 run was placed at number eight.
The revived series has received recognition from critics and the public, across various awards ceremonies. It won five BAFTA TV Awards, including Best Drama Series, the highest-profile and most prestigious British television award for which the series has ever been nominated.[194] It was very popular at the BAFTA Cymru Awards, with 25 wins overall including Best Drama Series (twice), Best Screenplay/Screenwriter (thrice) and Best Actor.[195] It was also nominated for 7 Saturn Awards, winning the only Best International Series in the ceremony's history. In 2009, Doctor Who was voted the 3rd greatest show of the 2000s by Channel 4, behind Top Gear and The Apprentice.[196] The episode "Vincent and the Doctor" was shortlisted for a Mind Award at the 2010 Mind Mental Health Media Awards for its "touching" portrayal of Vincent van Gogh.[197]
It has won the Short Form of the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, the oldest science fiction/fantasy award for films and series, six times since 2006. The winning episodes were "The Empty Child"/"The Doctor Dances" (2006), "The Girl in the Fireplace" (2007), "Blink" (2008), "The Waters of Mars" (2010), "The Pandorica Opens"/"The Big Bang" (2011), and "The Doctor's Wife" (2012).[198][199][200][201] The 2016 Christmas special "The Return of Doctor Mysterio" is also a finalists for the 2017 Hugo Awards.[202] Doctor Who star Matt Smith won Best Actor in the 2012 National Television awards alongside Karen Gillan who won Best Actress. Doctor Who has been nominated for over 200 awards and has won over a hundred of them.
As a British series, the majority of its nominations and awards have been for national competitions such as the BAFTAs, but it has occasionally received nominations in mainstream American awards, most notably a nomination for "Favorite Sci-Fi Show" in the 2008 People's Choice Awards and the series has been nominated multiple times in the Spike Scream Awards, with Smith winning Best Science Fiction Actor in 2011. The Canadian Constellation Awards have also recognised the series.
See also


Doctor Who portal
BBC portal
Science fiction portal
Television in the United Kingdom portal







Book: Doctor Who





Time travel in fiction
Doctor Who in Australia
List of Doctor Who serials
List of Doctor Who Christmas specials
List of Doctor Who universe creatures and aliens
List of Doctor Who vehicles
Doctor Who in popular culture

Notes


^ Newman is often given sole creator credit for the series. Some reference works such as The Complete Encyclopedia of Television Programs 1947–1979 by Vincent Terrace erroneously credit Terry Nation with creating Doctor Who, because of the way his name is credited in the two Peter Cushing films.[citation needed]
Newman and Lambert's role in originating the series was recognised in the 2007 episode "Human Nature", in which the Doctor, in disguise as a human named John Smith, gives his parents' names as Sydney and Verity.[citation needed]
^ This is often emphasised in the accompanying making-of documentaries in the series Doctor Who Confidential, as well as in occasional flashbacks to images of earlier versions of the Doctor.
^ The tapes, based on a 405-line broadcast standard, were rendered obsolete when UK television changed to a 625-line signal in preparation for the soon-to-begin colour transmissions.
^ When it became an entry in the Oxford English Dictionary, the word "TARDIS" often came to be used to describe anything that appeared larger on the inside than its exterior implied.
^ Earlier incarnations of the Doctor have occasionally appeared with the then current incarnation in later plots. The First and Second Doctors appeared in the 1973 Third Doctor story, The Three Doctors; the First, Second, Third and Fourth appeared in the 1983 Fifth Doctor story, The Five Doctors; the Second appeared with the Sixth in the 1985 story, The Two Doctors; the Fifth appeared with the Tenth in the 2007 mini-episode, "Time Crash"; the Eighth Doctor returned in the 2013 mini-episode "The Night of the Doctor"; the Tenth appeared with the Eleventh in the 2013 episode "The Day of the Doctor"; and the First appeared with the Twelfth in the 2017 episodes "The Doctor Falls" and "Twice Upon a Time".
^ Often mistitled "I am the Doctor" on YouTube uploads. Originally released as a 7" vinyl single, plain sleeve, December 1972 on label Purple PUR III


References


^ "The end of Olde Englande: A lament for Blighty". The Economist. 14 September 2006. Retrieved 18 September 2006. 
"ICONS. A Portrait of England". Archived from the original on 3 November 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2007. 
^ a b Moran, Caitlin (30 June 2007). "Doctor Who is simply masterful". The Times. London. Retrieved 1 July 2007. [Doctor Who] is as thrilling and as loved as Jolene, or bread and cheese, or honeysuckle, or Friday. It's quintessential to being British. 
^ Do You Remember the First Time?. Doctor Who Confidential. Director and presenter: David Tennant 
^ Howe, Stammers, Walker (1994), p. 54
^ "An Unearthly Child". BBC. 16 August 2012. 
^ Howe, Stammers, Walker (1994), pp. 157–230 ("Production Diary")
^ Howe, Stammers, Walker (1992), p. 3.
^ Steve Tribe, James Goss Dr Who: The Dalek Handbook BBC Books Random House 2011 ISBN 978-1-84990-232-8 Pg9
^ Deans, Jason (21 June 2005). "Doctor Who makes the Grade". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 4 February 2007. But Mr Grade was not at the helm when Doctor Who was finally retired for good in 1989 — that decision fell to the then BBC1 controller, Jonathan Powell. 
^ a b c Doctor Who Magazine Eighth Doctor Special, Panini Comics 2003
^ Gibson, Owen (26 September 2003). "Doctor Who returns to BBC1 screens". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 20 January 2012. 
^ "Doctor Who is Saturday night hit". BBC. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ Davies, Russell T; Cook, Benjamin (2010). Doctor Who: The Writer's Tale: The Final Chapter. London: BBC Books. p. 216. ISBN 978-1-84607-861-3. 
^ a b "Doctor Who guru Davies steps down". BBC News. 20 May 2008. Retrieved 20 May 2008. 
^ Ben Dowell. "Steven Moffat quits Doctor Who to be replaced by Chris Chibnall in 2018". RadioTimes. 
^ "Official: Moffat Leaving Doctor Who After Series 10, Chris Chibnall New Showrunner". 
^ "Rewind: 'Mission: Impossible' (1988) revisited". cultbox.co.uk. Retrieved 6 March 2016. 
^ "Outpost Gallifrey: TV Series FAQ". gallifreyone.com. Archived from the original on 1 June 2009. 
^ Howe, David J.; Mark Stammers; Stephen James Walker (2003). The Television Companion: The Unofficial and Unauthorised Guide to DOCTOR WHO (2nd ed.). Surrey: Telos Publishing Ltd. ISBN 1-903889-51-0. 
^ "Serial A: 100,000 BC (aka An Unearthly Child, The Tribe of Gum)". shannonsullivan.com. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ "DOCTOR WHO'S FIRST EPISODE: AN UNEARTHLY CHILD". televisionheaven.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ Clark, Anthony. "Doctor Who (1963–89, 2005–)". Screenonline. Retrieved 21 March 2007. The science fiction adventure series Doctor Who (BBC, 1963–89) has created a phenomenon unlike any other British TV programme. 
^ Tulloch, John. "Doctor Who". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007. The official fans have never amounted to more than a fraction of the audience. Doctor Who achieved the status of an institution as well as a cult. 
^ "Voyage of the Damned – Cast and Crew". BBC. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ "Planet of the Dead – Credits". BBC. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ "Dinosaurs on a Spaceship – Credits". BBC. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ "The Name of the Doctor – Credits". BBC. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ "Biography of Mary Whitehouse". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved 6 July 2007. 
^ "Doctor Who Producer Dies". BBC News. 3 May 2002. Retrieved 6 July 2007. 
^ Leith, Sam (4 July 2008). "Worshipping Doctor Who from behind the sofa". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 5 July 2008. The cliché about Doctor Who — that it had us "hiding behind the sofa" — is more telling in its tone than its questionable factuality. It connotes nostalgia, and a pleasurable mixture of fright and fascination — but above all it connotes domesticity. It united fear and soft furnishings in the British mind. 
^ If you weren't scared of Doctor Who as a child, you missed out on a crucial experience – IO9, by Charlie Jane Anders, 25 December 2012
^ 'Doctor Who' named scariest TV show of all time: Your Top 10 revealed, Digital Spy, Catriona Wightman & Morgan Jeffery, 31 October 2011.
^ "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Terror of the Autons". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – The Brain of Morbius". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – The Deadly Assassin". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ a b Howard, Philip (29 January 1972). "Violence is not really Dr Who's cup of tea". The Times. p. 2. 
^ "The Times Diary — Points of view". The Times. 27 January 1972. p. 16. 
^ "Doctor Who fan in tardis replica plan for Herne Bay". BBC. Retrieved 31 July 2013. 
^ "Case details for Trade Mark UK00002104259". UK Patent Office. Retrieved 27 October 2013. 
^ "Trade mark decision". UK Patent Office website. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
Knight, Mike. "In the matter of application No. 2104259 by The British Broadcasting Corporation to register a series of three marks in Classes 9, 16, 25 and 41 AND IN THE MATTER OF Opposition thereto under No. 48452 by The Metropolitan Police Authority" (PDF). UK Patent Office. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
"BBC wins police Tardis case". BBC News. 23 October 2002. Retrieved 17 January 2007. 
^ Leith, Sam (4 July 2008). "Worshipping Doctor Who from behind the sofa". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2008. 
^ Robinson, James (18 March 2007). "Television's Lord of prime time awaits his next regeneration". The Observer. London. Retrieved 19 March 2007. 
^ Pettie, Andrew (4 January 2009). "Casting Matt Smith shows that Doctor Who is a savvy multi-million pound brand". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 4 January 2009. 
^ Dowell, Ben (23 August 2008). "Edinburgh TV Festival 2008: don't rule out Doctor Who feature film, says Steven Moffat". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 23 August 2008. 
^ "Doctor Who: Fans await announcement". BBC. 4 August 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2013. 
^ "New Doctor Who star to be unveiled". BBC. 2 August 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2013. 
^ Glanfield, Tim (5 August 2013). "Doctor Who: Almost 7m watch Peter Capaldi revealed as 12th Doctor". Radio Times. Retrieved 5 August 2013. 
^ "From spin doctor to Doctor Who ... star's childhood dream comes true". The Herald. Glasgow. 5 August 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2013. 
^ The Daleks' Master Plan. Writers Terry Nation and Dennis Spooner, Director Douglas Camfield, Producer John Wiles. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 13 November 1965 – 29 January 1966.
^ Writer Terry Nation, Director Derek Martinus, Producer Verity Lambert (9 October 1965). "Mission to the Unknown". Doctor Who. London. BBC. BBC One. 
^ The War Games. Writers Malcolm Hulke and Terrance Dicks, Director David Maloney, Producer Derrick Sherwin. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 19 April 1969 – 21 June 1969.
^ The Trial of a Time Lord. Writers Robert Holmes, Philip Martin and Pip and Jane Baker, Directors Nicholas Mallett, Ron Jones and Chris Clough, Producer John Nathan-Turner. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 6 September 1986 – 6 December 1986.
^ "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Season 8". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "The Master – BBC". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Season 16". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Logopolis". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "BBC – Season 20 – Episode guide". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ a b c d "10 things you didn't know about Doctor Who". Watch. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2012. 
^ Black Orchid. Writer Terence Dudley, Director Ron Jones, Producer John Nathan-Turner. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 1 March 1982 – 2 March 1982.
^ a b "Doctor Who Episode List". BBC. Retrieved 26 October 2013. 
^ Debnath, Neela (21 September 2013). "Review of Doctor Who 'The Talons of Weng-Chiang' (Series 14)". The Independent. Retrieved 26 October 2013. 
^ "BBC Online – Cult – Hitchhiker's – Douglas Adams – Biography". BBC. Retrieved 26 October 2013. 
^ "Shada, Douglas Adams's 'lost' Doctor Who story, to be novelised". The Guardian. 24 March 2011. Retrieved 26 October 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who to be filmed in HD". Doctor Who Online. 4 February 2009. Archived from the original on 29 January 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2009. 
^ "BBC announces Doctor Who 3D Special". BBC News. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who: David Tennant returns for anniversary show". BBC News. 30 March 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013. 
^ McMillan, Graeme (12 February 2013). "'Doctor Who' goes 3D for its half-century edition". Digital Trends. Retrieved 2 April 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who 'to remain on-screen until at least 2020'". BBC. 7 April 2015. Retrieved 8 April 2015. 
^ Molesworth, Richard. "BBC Archive Holdings". Doctor Who Restoration Team. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2007. A full set was held at least until early 1972, as 16 mm black and white film negatives (apart — of course — from 'Masterplan' 7). . 
^ Molesworth, Richard. "BBC Archive Holdings". Doctor Who Restoration Team. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2007. the videotapes began to be wiped, or re-used, until the formation of the BBC's Film and Videotape Library in 1978 put a stop to this particular practice. 
^ "'Doctor Who': Restoring and Reconstructing Missing Episodes". BBC. Retrieved 20 January 2012. 
^ Lewinski, John Scott (29 September 2008). "Fans Reconstruct Doctor Who's Trashed Past". Wired. Retrieved 20 January 2012. 
^ Martin, Lara (20 February 2009). "Zimbabwe 'hoarding lost 'Who' episodes'". Digital Spy. Retrieved 20 January 2012. 
^ Foster, Chuck (21 June 2011). "The Reign of Terror — animation update". Doctor Who News Page. 
^ "Blue Peter — Missing Doctor Who tapes". BBC. April 2006. Archived from the original on 24 April 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2006. 
^ Mulkern, Patrick (11 December 2011). "Doctor Who: two long-lost episodes uncovered". Radio Times. Retrieved 11 December 2011. 
^ Christopher Allen (10 October 2013). "Two "Missing" Doctor Who Adventures Found". BBC Worldwide. Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
^ Doctor Who Online (11 October 2013). "Nine Missing Doctor Who Episodes Recovered!". Doctor Who Online. Retrieved 11 October 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who: Yeti classic among episodes found in Nigeria". BBC. Retrieved 25 October 2013. 
^ "Full record for Tardis-like adj". Science Fiction Citations. Retrieved 7 September 2007. 
^ "The Doctor Who Transcripts - The Power of the Daleks". www.chakoteya.net. Retrieved 2017-01-27. 
^ "The Doctor Who Transcripts - The War Games". www.chakoteya.net. Retrieved 2017-01-27. 
^ Berriman, Ian (26 October 2010). "Interview: Russell T Davies Talks About THAT Sarah Jane Adventures Line". gamesradar.com. Retrieved 19 April 2012. 
^ Darren Scott (26 November 2013). "Steven Moffat on 'Doctor numbers' and the regeneration limit". 
^ "INTERVIEW Russell T. Davies talks about THAT Sarah Jane Adventures line". sfx.co.uk. Retrieved 5 August 2013. 
^ Emily Barr (13 October 2010). "Doctor Who is now immortal, reveals the BBC". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 October 2010. 
^ Horn, Marc (10 October 2010). "How Doctor Who nearly became the Time Lady". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 17 July 2017. 
^ Nichols, Sam (18 December 2008). "Could Catherine Zeta-Jones be the next Doctor Who". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 July 2017. 
^ "Doctor Who: Jodie Whittaker is to replace Peter Capaldi in the Time Lord regeneration game". The Telegraph. 16 July 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017. 
^ "Official episode guide". UK: BBC. 1 March 2008. Retrieved 31 March 2008. 
^ "Episode Guide — Seventh Doctor Index". Doctor Who — Classic Series. UK: BBC. Retrieved 30 July 2011. 
^ "TV Movie cast & crew". UK: BBC. Retrieved 15 April 2008. 
^ a b Hogan, Michael (18 May 2013). "Doctor Who: The Name of the Doctor, BBC One, review". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 22 May 2013. 
^ Rigby, Sam (24 November 2013). "'Doctor Who': Steven Moffat on regeneration limit". Digital Spy. Retrieved 25 November 2013. 
^ Ted B. Kissell. "The depressing, disappointing maleness of Doctor Who 's new Time Lord", The Atlantic, 5 August 2013
^ "Neil Gaiman hopes a non-white person will take Doctor Who role someday", Sunday World, 8 August 2013.
^ Jackson, Matthew (9 December 2013). "Peter Capaldi explains why no one can be too old to play The Doctor". Blastr. Syfy. Retrieved 16 July 2015. 
^ "The Day of the Doctor". Doctor Who. Cardiff. 23 November 2013. 60 minutes in. BBC. BBC One. 
^ "Doctor Who: the TV movie". BBC. Retrieved 13 June 2008. 
^ "Doctor Who — FAQ — Plot and Continuity". BBC. 28 March 2008. Retrieved 30 April 2010. 
^ a b "Doctor Who (before the Tardis)". BBC News. 19 November 2008. Retrieved 22 May 2012. 
^ Jones, Paul (19 April 2012). "Steven Moffat: the companion is the main character in Doctor Who, not the Doctor". Radio Times. BBC Magazines. Retrieved 28 November 2013. 
^ Berkshire, Geoff (27 March 2013). "'Doctor Who' returns: Steven Moffat talks new companion Clara and Jenna-Louise Coleman". Zap2it. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2013. 
^ Orthia, Lindy A. (2010). ""Sociopathetic Abscess" or "Yawning Chasm"? The Absent Postcolonial Transition in Doctor Who". Journal of Commonwealth Literature. 45 (2): 207–225. doi:10.1177/0021989410366891. 
^ "Doctor Who: Pearl Mackie named as new companion". BBC. 23 April 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2016. 
^ "Bill Potts". The Telegraph. 
^ "Doctor Who (before the Tardis)". BBC Magazine. 19 November 2008. Retrieved 3 January 2009. 
^ "Doctor Who series two secrets revealed". BBC. 19 June 2005. Retrieved 29 August 2013. 
^ Monster Files: Cybermats. iTunes Store. 2011. 
^ "The Dead Planet". Retrieved 30 June 2011. 
^ "NATION, TERRY". Retrieved 19 May 2008. 
^ "Doctor Who Dalek designer Ray Cusick dies after illness". BBC. 24 February 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2013. 
^ "Every generation of The Daleks returning to 'Doctor Who'". BANG Showbiz. England. 2 April 2012. Retrieved 3 April 2012. 
^ Doctor Who Magazine Special Edition No. 2, 5 September 2002, [subtitled The Complete Third Doctor], p. 14.
^ "John Simm Returns for the Finale!". 
^ "John Simm to return as the Master in Doctor Who". BBC. 6 April 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2017. 
^ Pidd, Helen. "Doctor Who theme's co-creator honoured with posthumous PhD". The Guardian. Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved 31 December 2017. 
^ Allen, Ben. "Doctor Who theme co-composer honoured with posthumous PhD". Radio Times. Immediate Media Company Ltd. Retrieved 31 December 2017. 
^ "Murray Gold Returns". Doctor Who News Page. 3 January 2010. 
^ "Doctor Who: 'nasty' new theme tune angers fans". The Daily Telegraph. 18 April 2010. Retrieved 20 May 2010. 
^ a b c Peel, Ian (7 July 2008). "Doctor Who: a musical force?". The Guardian. London: blog. Retrieved 7 July 2008. 
^ "BBC Prom 27 July 2008". BBC. 27 July 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. 
^ "Who soundtrack soon". BBC. 17 July 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2006. Retrieved 4 August 2006. 
"Silva Screen announces Doctor Who CD release date". silvascreen.co.uk. 1 November 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2006. Retrieved 4 December 2006. 
^ "DOCTOR WHO – SERIES 4 Murray Gold". Silva Screen Music. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ "DOCTOR WHO: SERIES 4-THE SPECIALS Murray Gold". Silva Screen Music. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who Series 5 Original TV Soundtrack (Music CD)". BBC. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who: A Christmas Carol (Soundtrack)". BBC. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who: Series 6 (Soundtrack)". BBC. Retrieved 6 September 2013. 
^ Coopee, Todd. "Doctor Who: The 50th Anniversary Collection 4 LP Box Set". ToyTales.ca. 
^ a b c d e Hilton, Matt (16 July 2008). "Doctor Who — Top Chart Placing – 1963–2008". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. ;Hilton, Matt (11 January 2008). "Doctor Who Top Ratings: 1963–2007". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 15 March 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. 
^ Marlborough, Douglas (28 December 1964). "Dead, but they won't lie down". Daily Mail. London. Archived from the original (Reprint, hosted on Doctor Who Cuttings Archive) on 19 June 2006. Retrieved 16 July 2008. 
^ "Weekly Viewing Summary: Terrestrial Top 30 – Week ending 6 July 2008". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. 16 July 2008. Archived from the original on 13 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. 
^ Hilton, Matt (16 July 2008). "Journey's End: Officially Number One". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. 
^ Wright, Mark (1 November 2007). "These sci-fi people vote". The Stage. Archived from the original on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2009. 
^ Sweney, Mark (8 July 2008). "Profits grow at BBC Worldwide". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 8 July 2008. 
^ O'Connor, Gavin (13 July 2008). "Daleks speak to all nations". Wales on Sunday. Archived from the original on 15 July 2008. Retrieved 13 July 2008. 
^ "Canada: Runaway Bride and Series Three on CBC". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 31 May 2007. Retrieved 9 June 2007. 
^ "Sci Fi on Air Schedule". Scifi.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007. 
^ "'Doctor Who' series 4, 'Sarah Jane' Travel to Sci Fi". Zap2it. Archived from the original on 7 February 2008. Retrieved 4 February 2008. 
^ "Series Four Starts 19 September on CBC". dwin.org. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 22 May 2008. 
^ "Doctor Who: The Next Doctor". Spacecast.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2009. Retrieved 5 March 2009. 
^ "BBC classic series laserdiscs @ The TARDIS Library (Doctor Who books, DVDs, videos & audios)". Timelash.com. Retrieved 30 July 2011. 
^ "The Doctor Who TV Movie Lands on blurray!". doctorwho.tv. Retrieved 17 September 2016. 
^ "Matt Smith is the eleventh, and youngest, actor to play Doctor Who". News. London: The Daily Telegraph (online). 5 January 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2011. 
^ Dawtrey, Adam (14 November 2011). "Yates to direct bigscreen 'Doctor Who'". Variety. Retrieved 14 November 2011. 
^ Sperling, Daniel (2 December 2011). "'Doctor Who' Movie Will Not Be A Reboot Says Moffat". Digital Spy. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ "Doctor Who movie will star Matt Smith if it gets made, says Steven Moffat". Metro. Retrieved 2 December 2011. 
^ Bailey, Shaun (Producer); Kalangis, Johnny (Director) (2004). The Planet of the Doctor, Part 6: Doctor Who & Culture II (Documentary). Toronto: CBC Television. Archived from the original (QuickTime or Windows Media) on 2 July 2009. Retrieved 9 April 2009. 
"Planet of the Doctor". CBC Television. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2009. 
^ Walker, Stephen James (2007). Inside the Hub. Tolworth, Surrey: Telos Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-84583-013-7. 
^ "Doctor Who spin-off made in Wales". BBC News. 17 October 2005. Retrieved 24 April 2006. 
^ "Team Torchwood". BBC. 24 February 2006. Archived from the original on 20 July 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2006. 
^ "Russell T Davies creates new series for CBBC, starring Doctor Who's Sarah Jane Smith" (Press release). BBC. 14 September 2006. Retrieved 14 September 2006. 
^ "Who's a Toon?". BBC Doctor Who website. 26 January 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 26 January 2007. 
^ "Wire star set for Dr Who cartoon". BBC News. 9 October 2009. Retrieved 6 January 2010. 
^ The Doctor Who Team. "BBC Latest News – Doctor Who – Doctor Who Spin Off: Class". Doctor Who. 
^ Dowell, Ben (29 February 2016). "Doctor Who spin off Class begins filming in April 2016 and may feature Peter Capaldi". RadioTimes. Retrieved 29 February 2016. 
^ Metro.co.uk, Olivia Waring for (2016-09-24). "Peter Capaldi WILL appear in Buffy-style Doctor Who spin-off Class". Metro. Retrieved 2017-01-16. 
^ Friedlander, Whitney (8 January 2016). "BBC America Sets 'Doctor Who' Spinoff 'Class' for 2016". Variety. 
^ Jeffrey, Morgan (7 September 2017). "BBC Three boss confirms Doctor Who spin-off Class is done: "It just didn't really land for us"". DigitalSpy. Retrieved 7 September 2017. 
^ "Doctor Who dog K9 gets spin-off". BBC News. 25 April 2006. Retrieved 26 July 2006. 
^ "New Doctor Who Spin off ... Counter-Measures". Big Finish. 20 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 October 2011. Retrieved 26 October 2013. 
^ The Five Doctors (Cover). BBC. 1985. BBC 2020 2. 
^ "The Five Doctors Serial 6K". drwhoguide.com. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ Shaun Lyon; et al. (31 March 2007). "The Five Doctors". Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ Sullivan, Shannon (7 August 2007). "The Five Doctors". A Brief History of Time Travel. Retrieved 24 October 2013. 
^ "Doctor Who For Comic Relief – Exclusive". SFX. 2 March 2011. Retrieved 6 March 2011. 
^ Mark Perry, Kevin Connelly and Phil Cornwell (2005). Dead Ringers meets Doctor Who – Comedy Greats – BBC. BBC. Event occurs at 0:00–1:30. 
^ "The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot", BBC. Retrieved 23 November 2013
^ Sideshow Bob's Last Gleaming. 20th Century Fox Television. 26 November 1995. Event occurs at 11:29. 
^ Möbius Dick. 20th Century Fox Television. 4 August 2011. Event occurs at 20:20. 
^ All the Presidents' Heads. 20th Century Fox Television. 28 July 2011. Event occurs at 5:50. 
^ "Random Doctor Who References in American TV Shows". An American View of British Science Fiction. 23 April 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2013. 
^ Paolini, Christopher (20 September 2008). "Shadows of the Past". Brisingr (Hardcover) (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 204, 761. ISBN 0-375-82672-6. 'Bending over, Eragon read, Adrift upon the sea of time, the lonely god wanders from shore to distant shore, upholding the laws of the stars above.' and in acknowledgments 'Also, for those who understood the reference to a 'lonely god' when Eragon and Arya sitting around the campfire, my only excuse is that the Doctor can travel everywhere, even alternate realities. Hey, I'm a fan too!' 
^ "Man in the Bar, the". The Errantry Concordance. Diane Duane. 25 March 2005. Retrieved 5 July 2007. 
^ "Doctor who Love in Rock Band". flickr. zerolives. 20 November 2007. Retrieved 24 December 2007. 
^ Nathan, Sarah (4 December 2007). "From Square to eternity". The Sun. London. Retrieved 7 May 2009. 
^ "Destroy All Humans! 2". vgfacts.com. 
^ "Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney". vgfacts.com. 
^ Illingsworth, Leslie Gilbert (25 November 1964). "The Degaullek (France's leader, General De Gaulle, is caricatured as a Dalek)" (Reprint at the British Cartoon Archive). Daily Mail. London. Retrieved 15 March 2014. 
^ "This Modern World". The Week that Was. Tom Tomorrow. 10 June 2008. Retrieved 15 March 2014. 
^ "The essence of the Oxford English Dictionary". 5 September 2002. Retrieved 15 May 2009. 
^ "Dr Who Exhibition, Longleat". THE DOCTOR WHO EXHIBITIONS ARCHIVE. Retrieved 15 January 2016. 
^ "Doctor Who". Doctor Who. 
^ 'Doctor Who: Legacy' Keeps Getting Updated as 10th Anniversary of 'Dr. Who' Show Approaches. Retrieved 26 February 2015.
^ Davies, Russell T. (March 2014). "Doctor Who Magazine" (356). 
^ "Doctor Who scoops two TV awards". News. BBC. 21 January 2010. Retrieved 1 April 2010. 
^ Sperling, Daniel (26 January 2011). "National Television Awards 2011 – Winners". Digital Spy. Retrieved 16 August 2012. 
^ 72nd Annual Peabody Awards, May 2013.
^ "Dr Who 'longest-running sci-fi'". BBC News. 28 September 2006. Retrieved 30 September 2006. 
^ Miller, Liz Shannon (26 July 2009). "'Doctor Who' Honored by Guinness — Entertainment News, TV News, Media". Variety. Retrieved 23 November 2009. 
^ "GUINNESS WORLD RECORD FOR THE DAY OF THE DOCTOR". Doctor Who website. 24 November 2013. Retrieved 24 November 2013. 
^ Culf, Andrew (4 November 1996). "Viewers spurn TV's golden age in poll of small screen classics as the BBC fetes its 60th birthday". The Guardian. p. 4. 
^ "Fawlty Towers tops TV hits". BBC News. 5 September 2000. Retrieved 18 March 2007. 
^ "Doctor leads Bafta Cymru winners". BBC News. 22 April 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2006. 
^ "Bafta glory for Channel 4's Boy A". BBC News. 12 May 2008. Retrieved 13 May 2008. 
^ Cable, Simon (26 December 2009). "Top Gear takes decade's top show accolade". Daily Mail. Retrieved 6 February 2013. 
^ "Winners announced". Mind. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Retrieved 4 May 2011. Dr Who – "Vincent and the Doctor" (BBC One/BBC Wales). Richard Curtis writes this touching episode of Dr Who about the mental health experiences of the great artist Vincent van Gogh. 
^ "Hugo and Campbell Awards Winners". Locus Online. 26 August 2006. Retrieved 27 August 2006. 
^ "2007 Hugo Awards". World Science Fiction Society. 1 September 2007. Retrieved 1 September 2007. 
^ "2008 Hugo Awards Announced". World Science Fiction Society. 9 August 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2007. 
^ "2011 Hugo and Campbell Awards Nominees". Locus Magazine. 24 April 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2011. 
^ "BBC Latest News - Doctor Who". www.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-04-14. 


Cited texts


Howe, David J.; Mark Stammers; Stephen James Walker (1992). Doctor Who: The Sixties (paperback ed.). London: Virgin Books. ISBN 0-86369-707-0. 
Howe, David J.; Mark Stammers; Stephen James Walker (1994). The Handbook: The First Doctor — The William Hartnell Years 1963–1966. London: Virgin Books. ISBN 0-426-20430-1. 
Howe, David J & Walker, Stephen James (1998). Doctor Who: The Television Companion (1st ed.). London: BBC Books. ISBN 978-0-563-40588-7. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Howe, David J; Walker, Stephen James (2003). The Television Companion: The Unofficial and Unauthorised Guide to DOCTOR WHO (2nd ed.). Surrey, UK: Telos Publishing Ltd. ISBN 1-903889-51-0. 
Richards, Justin (2003). Doctor Who — The Legend (1st ed.). London: BBC Books. ISBN 0-563-48602-3. 


Further reading

Matt Hills. Triumph of a Time Lord: Regenerating "Doctor Who" in the Twenty-First Century (I.B. Tauris, 2010) 261 pages. Discusses the revival of the BBC's Doctor Who in 2005 after it had been off the air as a regular series for more than 15 years; topics include the role of "fandom" in the sci-fi programme's return, and notions of "cult" and "mainstream" in television.
Tabloid Bintang Indonesia, Doctor Who Pengganti Chalkzone
Majalah GADIS, Kenalan Bareng Doctor Who, Ketemu Bareng 1st–11th Doctor

External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Doctor Who





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Doctor Who.





Wikinews has related news: Category:Doctor Who



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Doctor Who" dated 2011-01-02, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles

Official websites

Doctor Who at BBC Programmes
Doctor Who 50th Anniversary: Official BBC Worldwide Site
Doctor Who (BBC South East Wales) at BBC Online
BBC: The Changing Face of Doctor Who – many press cuttings and articles from 1963 onwards
BBC America Doctor Who website
SPACE Channel Doctor Who website

Past official BBC websites

Doctor Who Series 4
Doctor Who Series 1, 2 & 3
Doctor Who Classic Season 1 – 1996 Movie

Reference websites

Doctor Who on Tardis Data Core,  an external wiki
Doctor Who: A Brief History Of Time (Travel) – a production history of Doctor Who
The Doctor Who Reference Guide – synopses of every television episode, novel, audio drama, comic strip and spin-off video based on the series
Doctor Who Online
Gallifrey Base
BroaDWcast – Doctor Who transmissions around the World
Doctor Who TV
Doctor Who (1963) at Internet Movie Database
Doctor Who (1996) at Internet Movie Database
Doctor Who (2005) at Internet Movie Database
Doctor Who at AllMovie
Doctor Who (1963) at TV.com
Doctor Who (2005) at TV.com







v
t
e


Doctor Who



Pages




Characters



The Doctor
Companions
Time Lords
Daleks
Cybermen
Sontarans
Weeping Angels
The Master
Davros
Silurians





Concepts



TARDIS
Regeneration
Sonic screwdriver
Time Vortex
Time War
Blinovitch Limitation Effect
Whoniverse
Torchwood Institute
UNIT





Miscellaneous



History
Missing episodes
Music

theme music


Doctor Who in Canada and the U.S.
Doctor Who in Australia
Fandom
Merchandise








Lists




Production



Serials

unmade


Special episodes
Christmas specials
Radio stories
Awards and nominations
Home video
Doctors
Cast
Guest appearances
Producers
Script editors
Writers
Music

composers
soundtrack releases







Narrative devices



Supporting characters
UNIT personnel
Creatures and aliens
Villains
Henchmen
Robots
Planets
Items
Vehicles





Miscellaneous



Doctor Who exhibitions








Spin-offs and
related shows




Spin-offs



K-9 and Company
Tardisodes
Torchwood
The Sarah Jane Adventures
K-9
Class





Documentaries



Whose Doctor Who
Thirty Years in the TARDIS
Dalekmania
Doctor Who Confidential
Totally Doctor Who
Torchwood Declassified
Doctor Who: The Commentaries
The Science of Doctor Who
Doctor Who Extra
Doctor Who: The Fan Show





Concerts and
stage shows



The Curse of the Daleks
Doctor Who and the Daleks in the Seven Keys to Doomsday
Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure
Doctor Who: A Celebration
Doctor Who Prom

2008
2010
2013


Doctor Who Live








Adaptations
and tie-ins




Films



Dr. Who and the Daleks
Daleks – Invasion Earth: 2150 A.D.





Books



Novelisations
New Adventures
Missing Adventures
Virgin Decalog
Eighth Doctor Adventures
Past Doctor Adventures
BBC Short Trips
New Series Adventures
Telos novellas
Big Finish Short Trips





Audio



Big Finish audio plays
Audiobooks
Audio releases
Big Finish Spin-off audio plays

Cyberman
Dalek Empire
Gallifrey
I, Davros
Jago & Litefoot
Sarah Jane Smith
UNIT
Torchwood


The Lost Stories
Destiny of the Doctor
Kaldor City





Video



Wartime
P.R.O.B.E.
Shakedown: Return of the Sontarans
Mindgame
Downtime
Auton
Dæmos Rising
Zygon: When Being You Just Isn't Enough
Dead and Buried





TV Specials



Dimensions in Time
The Curse of Fatal Death
Scream of the Shalka
An Adventure in Space and Time
The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot





Video games



Doctor Who: The First Adventure
The Warlord
The Mines of Terror
Dalek Attack
Destiny of the Doctors
Top Trumps
The Adventure Games
Return to Earth
Evacuation Earth
The Mazes of Time
Worlds in Time
The Eternity Clock
Doctor Who: Legacy





Miscellaneous



Comic stories
Doctor Who spin-offs
Spin-off companions
Faction Paradox
Iris Wildthyme
Death's Head
Dalek comic strips, illustrated annuals and graphic novels
Pinball
Card game
Popular culture
Spoofs
Star Trek: The Next Generation/Doctor Who: Assimilation2








Related
publications




Magazines



Doctor Who Magazine
Doctor Who Adventures
Doctor Who – Battles in Time
The Black Archive





Publishers



Big Finish Productions
Reeltime Pictures
BBV
Mad Norwegian Press
Magic Bullet Productions
Obverse Books











 Portal
 Category
 Book












v
t
e


Doctor Who episodes






Classic series (1963–1989)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26


Film (1996)
Doctor Who


Revived series (2005–present)
1
2
3
4
2008–2010 specials
5
6
7
2013 specials
8
9
10
11


Episodes
840 (97 missing)
Stories
276





Season 1



An Unearthly Child
The Daleks
The Edge of Destruction
Marco Polo
The Keys of Marinus
The Aztecs
The Sensorites
The Reign of Terror





Season 2



Planet of Giants
The Dalek Invasion of Earth
The Rescue
The Romans
The Web Planet
The Crusade
The Space Museum
The Chase
The Time Meddler





Season 3



Galaxy 4
"Mission to the Unknown"
The Myth Makers
The Daleks' Master Plan
The Massacre of St Bartholomew's Eve
The Ark
The Celestial Toymaker
The Gunfighters
The Savages
The War Machines





Season 4



The Smugglers
The Tenth Planet
The Power of the Daleks
The Highlanders
The Underwater Menace
The Moonbase
The Macra Terror
The Faceless Ones
The Evil of the Daleks





Season 5



The Tomb of the Cybermen
The Abominable Snowmen
The Ice Warriors
The Enemy of the World
The Web of Fear
Fury from the Deep
The Wheel in Space





Season 6



The Dominators
The Mind Robber
The Invasion
The Krotons
The Seeds of Death
The Space Pirates
The War Games





Season 7



Spearhead from Space
Doctor Who and the Silurians
The Ambassadors of Death
Inferno





Season 8



Terror of the Autons
The Mind of Evil
The Claws of Axos
Colony in Space
The Dæmons





Season 9



Day of the Daleks
The Curse of Peladon
The Sea Devils
The Mutants
The Time Monster





Season 10



The Three Doctors
Carnival of Monsters
Frontier in Space
Planet of the Daleks
The Green Death





Season 11



The Time Warrior
Invasion of the Dinosaurs
Death to the Daleks
The Monster of Peladon
Planet of the Spiders





Season 12



Robot
The Ark in Space
The Sontaran Experiment
Genesis of the Daleks
Revenge of the Cybermen





Season 13



Terror of the Zygons
Planet of Evil
Pyramids of Mars
The Android Invasion
The Brain of Morbius
The Seeds of Doom





Season 14



The Masque of Mandragora
The Hand of Fear
The Deadly Assassin
The Face of Evil
The Robots of Death
The Talons of Weng-Chiang





Season 15



Horror of Fang Rock
The Invisible Enemy
Image of the Fendahl
The Sun Makers
Underworld
The Invasion of Time





Season 16



The Ribos Operation
The Pirate Planet
The Stones of Blood
The Androids of Tara
The Power of Kroll
The Armageddon Factor





Season 17



Destiny of the Daleks
City of Death
The Creature from the Pit
Nightmare of Eden
The Horns of Nimon
Shada (unaired)





Season 18



The Leisure Hive
Meglos
Full Circle
State of Decay
Warriors' Gate
The Keeper of Traken
Logopolis





Season 19



Castrovalva
Four to Doomsday
Kinda
The Visitation
Black Orchid
Earthshock
Time-Flight





Season 20




Season



Arc of Infinity
Snakedance
Mawdryn Undead
Terminus
Enlightenment
The King's Demons





Special



The Five Doctors








Season 21



Warriors of the Deep
The Awakening
Frontios
Resurrection of the Daleks
Planet of Fire
The Caves of Androzani
The Twin Dilemma





Season 22




Season



Attack of the Cybermen
Vengeance on Varos
The Mark of the Rani
The Two Doctors
Timelash
Revelation of the Daleks





Supp.



"A Fix with Sontarans"








Season 23



The Mysterious Planet
Mindwarp
Terror of the Vervoids
The Ultimate Foe





Season 24



Time and the Rani
Paradise Towers
Delta and the Bannermen
Dragonfire





Season 25



Remembrance of the Daleks
The Happiness Patrol
Silver Nemesis
The Greatest Show in the Galaxy





Season 26



Battlefield
Ghost Light
The Curse of Fenric
Survival





Series 1



"Rose"
"The End of the World"
"The Unquiet Dead"
"Aliens of London" / "World War Three"
"Dalek"
"The Long Game"
"Father's Day"
"The Empty Child" / "The Doctor Dances"
"Boom Town"
"Bad Wolf" / "The Parting of the Ways"





Series 2




Christmas



"The Christmas Invasion"





Series



"New Earth"
"Tooth and Claw"
"School Reunion"
"The Girl in the Fireplace"
"Rise of the Cybermen" / "The Age of Steel"
"The Idiot's Lantern"
"The Impossible Planet" / "The Satan Pit"
"Love & Monsters"
"Fear Her"
"Army of Ghosts" / "Doomsday"





Supp.



"Doctor Who: Children in Need"
"Attack of the Graske"
Tardisodes








Series 3




Christmas

"The Runaway Bride"



Series



"Smith and Jones"
"The Shakespeare Code"
"Gridlock"
"Daleks in Manhattan" / "Evolution of the Daleks"
"The Lazarus Experiment"
"42"
"Human Nature" / "The Family of Blood"
"Blink"
"Utopia" / "The Sound of Drums" / "Last of the Time Lords"





Supp.



The Infinite Quest








Series 4




Christmas



"Voyage of the Damned"





Series



"Partners in Crime"
"The Fires of Pompeii"
"Planet of the Ood"
"The Sontaran Stratagem" / "The Poison Sky"
"The Doctor's Daughter"
"The Unicorn and the Wasp"
"Silence in the Library" / "Forest of the Dead"
"Midnight"
"Turn Left"
"The Stolen Earth" / "Journey's End"





Supp.



"Time Crash"








2008–2010
specials




Specials



"The Next Doctor"
"Planet of the Dead"
"The Waters of Mars"
The End of Time





Supp.



Dreamland
"Music of the Spheres"








Series 5




Series



"The Eleventh Hour"
"The Beast Below"
"Victory of the Daleks"
"The Time of Angels" / "Flesh and Stone"
"The Vampires of Venice"
"Amy's Choice"
"The Hungry Earth" / "Cold Blood"
"Vincent and the Doctor"
"The Lodger"
"The Pandorica Opens" / "The Big Bang"





Supp.



Meanwhile in the TARDIS








Series 6




Christmas



"A Christmas Carol"





Series



"The Impossible Astronaut" / "Day of the Moon"
"The Curse of the Black Spot"
"The Doctor's Wife"
"The Rebel Flesh" / "The Almost People"
"A Good Man Goes to War"
"Let's Kill Hitler"
"Night Terrors"
"The Girl Who Waited"
"The God Complex"
"Closing Time"
"The Wedding of River Song"





Supp.



"Space" / "Time"
"Death Is the Only Answer"
Night and the Doctor








Series 7




Christmas



"The Doctor, the Widow and the Wardrobe"
"The Snowmen"





Series



"Asylum of the Daleks"
"Dinosaurs on a Spaceship"
"A Town Called Mercy"
"The Power of Three"
"The Angels Take Manhattan"
"The Bells of Saint John"
"The Rings of Akhaten"
"Cold War"
"Hide"
"Journey to the Centre of the TARDIS"
"The Crimson Horror"
"Nightmare in Silver"
"The Name of the Doctor"





Supp.



"Good as Gold"
Pond Life
"P.S."








2013
specials




Specials



"The Day of the Doctor"
"The Time of the Doctor"





Supp.



"The Night of the Doctor"
"The Last Day"








Series 8



"Deep Breath"
"Into the Dalek"
"Robot of Sherwood"
"Listen"
"Time Heist"
"The Caretaker"
"Kill the Moon"
"Mummy on the Orient Express"
"Flatline"
"In the Forest of the Night"
"Dark Water" / "Death in Heaven"





Series 9




Christmas



"Last Christmas"
"The Husbands of River Song"





Series



"The Magician's Apprentice" / "The Witch's Familiar"
"Under the Lake" / "Before the Flood"
"The Girl Who Died"
"The Woman Who Lived"
"The Zygon Invasion" / "The Zygon Inversion"
"Sleep No More"
"Face the Raven"
"Heaven Sent"
"Hell Bent"








Series 10




Christmas



"The Return of Doctor Mysterio"
"Twice Upon a Time"





Series



"The Pilot"
"Smile"
"Thin Ice"
"Knock Knock"
"Oxygen"
"Extremis"
"The Pyramid at the End of the World"
"The Lie of the Land"
"Empress of Mars"
"The Eaters of Light"
"World Enough and Time" / "The Doctor Falls"















v
t
e


Media in Cardiff



Television and
film production



Aspect Television
Bay TV Swansea
BBC Wales
ITV Wales
S4C
Made in Cardiff
Broadcasting House, Cardiff
BBC Roath Lock
BAFTA Cymru
Cube Interactive
Hartswood Films
Calon
Cardiff Film Festival








Television
series




Drama



Doctor Who
Torchwood
The Sarah Jane Adventures
Class
Caerdydd
Being Human
Crash
Merlin
Sherlock
Upstairs Downstairs
Casualty
Pobol y Cwm
Atlantis
Wizards vs Aliens
Alys





Comedy



Gavin & Stacey
Satellite City
High Hopes





Factual



BBC Wales Today
Hospital 24/7
Newyddion
ITV News: Wales at Six
#CardiffNews
CF99





Reality



The Valleys





Quiz shows



Only Connect





Children's



SuperTed
Fireman Sam
The Story of Tracy Beaker
Wil Cwac Cwac








Film



Tiger Bay
Human Traffic
The Contractor
Flick
Skellig
Patagonia
The Big I Am
Panic Button
Killer Elite





Press



Western Mail
South Wales Echo
Echo Extra
Y Dinesydd
gair rhydd
Buzz
Metro





Radio



BBC Radio Wales
BBC Radio Cymru
Capital FM South Wales
Nation Radio
Gold
Heart South Wales
Xpress Radio
Radio Cardiff





Online



WalesOnline
CardiffOnline
Pizzaman






 category










v
t
e


Russell T Davies



TV series
created



Dark Season (1991)
Century Falls (1993)
Revelations (1994–96)
The Grand (1997–98)
Queer as Folk (1999–2000)
Bob & Rose (2001)
The Second Coming (2003)
Mine All Mine (2004)
Casanova (2005)
Doctor Who (2005–10)
Torchwood (2006–11)
The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–11)
Wizards vs Aliens (2012–13)
Cucumber (2015)
Banana (2015)
Tofu (2015)
A Very English Scandal (2018)





Novel



Damaged Goods












v
t
e


Steven Moffat



Series written
and produced



Press Gang (1989–93)
Joking Apart (1993–95)
Chalk (1997)
Coupling (2000–04)
Jekyll (2007)
Doctor Who (2010–17)
Sherlock (2010–present)





Films written



The Adventures of Tintin (2011)










Awards for Doctor Who











v
t
e


BAFTA TV Award for Best Drama Series






Inspector Morse (1992)
Inspector Morse (1993)
Between the Lines (1994)
Cracker (1995)
Cracker (1996)
EastEnders (1997)
Jonathan Creek (1998)
The Cops (1999)
The Cops (2000)
Clocking Off (2001)
Cold Feet (2002)
Spooks (2003)
Buried (2004)
Shameless (2005)
Doctor Who (2006)
The Street (2007)
The Street (2008)
Wallander (2009)
Misfits (2010)
Sherlock (2011)
The Fades (2012)
Last Tango in Halifax (2013)
Broadchurch (2014)
Happy Valley (2015)
Wolf Hall (2016)
Happy Valley (2017)












v
t
e


Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Short Form






"Conversations with Dead People" (Buffy the Vampire Slayer) (2003)
Gollum's Acceptance Speech at the 2003 MTV Movie Awards (2004)
"33" (Battlestar Galactica) (2005)
"The Empty Child" / "The Doctor Dances" (Doctor Who) (2006)
"The Girl in the Fireplace" (Doctor Who) (2007)
"Blink" (Doctor Who) (2008)
Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog (2009)
"The Waters of Mars" (Doctor Who) (2010)
"The Pandorica Opens" / "The Big Bang" (Doctor Who) (2011)
"The Doctor's Wife" (Doctor Who) (2012)
"Blackwater" (Game of Thrones) (2013)
"The Rains of Castamere" (Game of Thrones) (2014)
"By Means Which Have Never Yet Been Tried" (Orphan Black) (2015)
"AKA Smile" (Jessica Jones) (2016)
"Leviathan Wakes" (The Expanse) (2017)












v
t
e


Nebula Award for Best Script/Ray Bradbury Award



Nebula Award for Best Script



Soylent Green – Stanley R. Greenberg (1973)
Sleeper – Woody Allen (1974)
Young Frankenstein – Mel Brooks and Gene Wilder (1975)
Star Wars – George Lucas (1977)
The Sixth Sense – M. Night Shyamalan (1999)
Galaxy Quest – David Howard and Robert Gordon (2000)
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon James Schamus, Kuo Jung Tsai, and Hui-Ling Wang (2001)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Stephen Sinclair, and Peter Jackson (2003)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2004)
Serenity – Joss Whedon (2005)
Howl's Moving Castle – Hayao Miyazaki, Cindy Davis Hewitt, and Donald H. Hewitt (2006)
Pan's Labyrinth – Guillermo del Toro (2007)
WALL-E – Andrew Stanton, Jim Reardon, and Pete Docter (2008)





Ray Bradbury Award for
Outstanding Dramatic Presentation



Terminator 2: Judgment Day – James Cameron (1992)
Babylon 5 – J. Michael Straczynski (1999)
2000X – Tales of the Next Millennia – Yuri Rasovsky and Harlan Ellison (2001)
Joss Whedon (2008)
District 9 – Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell (2009)
Inception – Christopher Nolan (2010)
Doctor Who: "The Doctor's Wife" – Richard Clark and Neil Gaiman (2011)
Beasts of the Southern Wild – Benh Zeitlin, Lucy Alibar (2012)
Gravity – Alfonso Cuarón and Jonás Cuarón (2013)
Guardians of the Galaxy – James Gunn and Nicole Perlman (2014)
Mad Max: Fury Road – George Miller, Brendan McCarthy, and Nico Lathouris (2015)
Arrival – Eric Heisserer (2016)












v
t
e


Saturn Award for Best Television Presentation






Alien Nation: Millennium (1994)
Alien Nation: Dark Horizon (1995)
Doctor Who (1996)
The Shining (1997)
Storm of the Century (1999)
Fail Safe (2000)
Jack and the Beanstalk: The Real Story (2001)
Steven Spielberg Presents Taken (2002)
Battlestar Galactica (2003)
Farscape: The Peacekeeper Wars (2004)
Masters of Horror / The Triangle (2005)
The Librarian: Return to King Solomon's Mines (2006)
Family Guy ("Blue Harvest") (2007)
The Librarian: Curse of the Judas Chalice (2008)
Torchwood: Children of Earth (2009)
The Walking Dead (2010)
The Walking Dead (2011)
Breaking Bad (2012)
Breaking Bad (2013)
Game of Thrones (2014)
Doctor Who: "The Husbands of River Song'" (2015)
11.22.63 (2016)
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doctor_Who&oldid=818496997"					Categories: 1960s British drama television series1960s British science fiction television series1963 British television programme debuts1970s British drama television series1970s British science fiction television series1980s British drama television series1980s British science fiction television series1989 British television programme endings2000s British drama television series2000s British science fiction television series2005 British television programme debuts2010s British drama television series2010s British science fiction television seriesBAFTA winners (television series)BBC Cymru Wales television programmesBBC high definition programmesBBC Television programmesBlack-and-white British television programmesBritish science fiction television programmesDoctor WhoEnglish-language television programsFirst-run syndicated television programs in the United StatesIntergalactic travel in fictionMedia franchises introduced in 1963Media franchisesNonlinear narrative television seriesParallel universes in fictionPBS network showsPeabody Award-winning television programsSpace adventure television seriesTelevision programs adapted into comicsTelevision programs adapted into filmsTelevision programs adapted into novelsTelevision programs adapted into video gamesTelevision series produced at Pinewood StudiosTelevision series revived after cancellationTelevision series set in the futureTime travel television seriesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2013Wikipedia semi-protected pagesUse British English from November 2013Use dmy dates from October 2016Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2017Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listSpoken articlesBBC programme ID same as Wikidata