This article is about the sport. For the film, see DodgeBall: A True Underdog Story. For location service, see Dodgeball (service).
"Dodge Ball" redirects here. For the video game, see Super Dodge Ball.






This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (December 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







A dodgeball player dodging a ball.


Dodgeball is a game in which players on two teams try to throw balls at each other while avoiding being hit themselves. In North America, the game is typically played among children ages 6–12 in elementary school. In some countries universities also play the game.
There are many variations of the game, but generally the main objective of each team is to eliminate all members of the opposing team by hitting them with thrown balls, catching a ball thrown by a member of the opposing team, or forcing them to move outside the court boundaries when a ball is thrown at them.
Internationally, there are currently two world bodies: World Dodgeball Federation (WDBF), which uses foam, and the World Dodgeball Association (WDA), which uses cloth.[citation needed]



Contents


1 Equipment
2 Court
3 Rules of game
4 In popular culture
5 World records
6 Variations
7 Usage in American vernacular
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links



Equipment[edit]




A dodgeball on a court, prior to the beginning of the match.




Play media


Dodgeball game, 2014


The number of dodgeballs used in the game often varies, but three to ten is common. Exceptions are usually made if a court is particularly small or if many people participate. More balls generally adds to the amount of action in a game, but can result in stalemate with many blocks. Six is the minimum number of balls to conduct a game with enforced rules. An odd number is generally favorable as one team will necessarily have a majority of balls in possession and should take the offensive role.[citation needed]
Dodgeball is played with many different types of dodgeballs. The three most used are foam, rubber and cloth depending on the organizations that endorse the sport. Rubber is mostly played in the United States while Foam and Cloth are played in at least 16 countries worldwide.[citation needed]
Court[edit]




An example of a dodgeball court used in the National Dodgeball League


A typical dodgeball game is usually played on a basketball court, volleyball court, fenced area or even an Australian Rules Football oval or soccer pitch. There is no fixed dodgeball court design. The game is picked on the best available surface that is usually one of the above-mentioned. Unless it is a variation of dodgeball, the court must have a center line.
Rules of game[edit]




Dodgeball players preparing for the opening rush






The opening rush of a dodgeball game.


At the beginning of a dodgeball game, the balls are lined up on the central dividing line (in some versions of the game, the balls are thrown in the air for the players to catch or divided evenly to both teams before a match). The players then simultaneously rush towards the center line and try to grab one of the dodgeballs and throw or roll it backwards to their teammates; players cannot pick up a ball and throw it instantly. In some versions there is a "check line" that the dodgeballs have to be behind before they can be considered "live." This is known as the opening rush. Once the game has commenced, players throw balls at members of the opposing team in an attempt to eliminate the players.
When a player has been hit by a dodgeball "on the full" (i.e. without hitting the roof, the floor, any of the walls, or an outside object and rebounding off) and no one catches it before it becomes dead, that player has been eliminated and must move to his team's designated bench area (players are still out if the ball rebounds off another dodgeball and/or player and hits them on the full). The same rule applies if any number of people try to catch the ball but drop it. Depending on the rules and variation, "headshots" (balls thrown in dodgeball that hit an opposing player in the head) may either result in the thrower being out, or the person being hit being out, or both.
If a player catches a ball thrown by the opposing team on the full, then the player who threw the ball is eliminated. As long as the ball has been caught in any way and is held for at least two seconds, the thrower is out (i.e. even if the ball is caught between the legs, the thrower is still out). If a dodgeball hits an opposing player but gets caught by one of the hit player's teammates, the thrower is out, a player gets reinstated, and the player who was hit stays in. In dodgeball games that are played on a basketball court, if a player throws the ball and it goes into the opposing basket and/or it hits the basketball backboard on the full, the whole team gets resurrected. The ball is still counted to have scored a basket or hit the backboard on the full if it rebounded off another dodgeball or it was deflected into the backboard by an opposing player. If the ball hits the backboard supports and/or the ring but fails to hit the backboard or go into the hoop, there is no effect. Players cannot be caught out if the ball hits the backboard, backboard supports, and/or the ring.
Players can pick up dead balls and throw them back at the other team. Players are allowed to leave the confines of the court to gather balls that have rolled out of bounds, but cannot throw the ball until they are back inside the court. A ball thrown from outside the court cannot eliminate an opponent who is hit. It only succeeds in getting the thrower automatically eliminated. A player who moves completely out of bounds when a ball is thrown at them and does not catch that ball is also eliminated. If a player moves into the opponent's zone or picks up a ball from inside the opponent's zone without it fully rolling inside their zone, that player is out. Players can also get eliminated if their throw hits an opponent on the head, displays bad sportsmanship, or cheats. Kicking the balls is prohibited.
Depending on the rules of a particular game, a ball in the possession of a player can be used to block incoming balls thrown by the opposing team. Depending on the rules of the game being played, if a player gets a dodgeball knocked out of their hands from an opposition throw, or drops the dodgeball when it is used to deflect oncoming balls, the player is eliminated.
Once all players on either teams are eliminated, the game is over.
This will be in effect when there is a few players on each team: Alternate rule is ‘No Lines’ or open court. This rule is used at a point in the game when there are few players left and it is too easy to dodge the ball with all the extra room. When ‘No Lines’ is declared, all boundary lines no longer count and the players can go anywhere to get a better shot at their opponent.
In popular culture[edit]
In Spain there is a variation of the game which is called Datchball, this game was created by Roberto Navarro a Physical Education teacher in order to include the game in the school. Nowadays it is one of the most important games[citation needed] played by the students in the north of Spain and we can find associations, championships and leagues of the game.

In the Indian subcontinent a variation of the game is played called "Sekan-tadi" (सेकन-तड़ी). This is slang used for "slamming the hip". Other names are Gend Tadi and Maram Pitti.
In China, a variation of the game is played called "Da Yi Mao" (打一毛). Instead of a ball, the game is played with a small round sand bag, which is also known as the kick-ball (毽). There are multiple techniques of throwing the sand bag, making it hitting the target more efficiently and harder to catch. This sport is very popular among primary school students as an after-class activity.
The 2004 movie Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story is generally credited with reviving interest in the sport, especially among young adults, despite referencing the sport as being about "violence, exclusion and degradation".[1]
The videogame Stikbold: A Dodgeball Adventure (named after the Danish word for dodgeball, stikbold) features the sport of dodgeball, although the rules vary slightly from the actual game.[2]

In addition, the dangerous nature and associated risks of dodgeball have resulted in controversies, lawsuits, and calls to eliminate the game from school physical education programs.[3]
World records[edit]

University of California, Irvine, reclaimed the largest game of dodgeball title on Sept. 25, 2012 with 6,084 participants.[4] The previous largest game of dodgeball was played by 4,979 participants at the University of Alberta on February 3, 2012.[5]
The longest game of dodgeball was played on April 27–29, 2012 at the Castleton State College in Castleton, Vermont. The game lasted for 41 hr 3 min 17 sec.[6]

Variations[edit]
Main article: List of dodgeball variations
Usage in American vernacular[edit]
In some American idioms, the act of avoiding something or someone mildly unpleasant can be referred to as 'playing dodgeball.' Additionally, in a variant of the same concept, the term "dodgeball" is sometimes used to describe a situation in which an individual is caught between two untenable positions, in a reference to the version of the game in which players from the same team can surround opposing players from two opposite sides.
See also[edit]

List of dodgeball variations
Ga-ga
Prisonball
Killerball (sport)
U.S. intercollegiate dodgeball champions

Notes[edit]



^ Paley, Amit (July 12, 2004). "All Grown Up, Dodgeball Hurtles Toward a Higher Popularity". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 3, 2012. 
^ http://www.windowscentral.com/stikbold-dodgeball-adventure-review
^ "School dodgeball goes to court in New York". The Associated Press. USAToday.com. November 20, 2004. Retrieved February 3, 2012. 
^ CBS
^ "U of A smashes dodgeball record". Edmonton Journal. February 3, 2012. Retrieved February 3, 2012. 
^ "Longest marathon playing dodgeball". Guinness World Records. Retrieved June 19, 2013. 



References[edit]

National Dodgeball League Official Dodgeball Rules & Regulations of Play
World Dodgeball Federation rule book
D'Angelo, Chris (2008). If you got the Guts, We got the Balls: A book about Dodgeball. Dangerous Chris Print. ISBN 978-0-578-01564-4
Keyes, A. (2005). The Complete Book About Dodgeball. AuthorHouse. ISBN 1-4208-7548-5
Kassock, Isaac (2012). The Philosophy of Dodgeball: A Treatise. Createspace. ISBN 1-4700-4494-3
YMCA School Playground Partners: Dodgeball Games YMCA of San Diego County

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dodgeball.





Look up dodgeball in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



World Dodgeball Association World Dodgeball Association
National Dodgeball League Professional dodgeball league, directions for member clubs/leagues in the United States.
World Dodgeball Society California, Chicago, New York
Elite Dodgeball Invitational Tournaments and leagues within the United States. Invite only.
National Amateur Dodgeball Association
National College Dodgeball Association
San Diego Dodgeball Leagues
Dodgeball Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canadian league.
Vancouver Dodgeball League A Vancouver, BC, Canada league.
UK Dodgeball Association National governing body for dodgeball in the UK.
Dodgeball NZ, New Zealand's Official Dodgeball Organisation
South African Dodgeball Association SA's First Dodgeball Association.







v
t
e


Gym, outdoor and playground games



Tag



Ante Over
British Bulldog
Capture the flag
Cooties
Duck, duck, goose
Four corners
Kho kho
Marco Polo
Pie
Steal the Flingsock








Catch
Chinese jump rope
Dodgeball
Four square
Hide-and-seek
Hopscotch
Kick the can
Leapfrog
Marbles
Playground songs

list


Red Rover
Skipping rope

Double Dutch
Rhymes


Skully
Statues
The floor is lava
Tinikling












v
t
e


Team sports






Sport
Governing bodies
Sportspeople
National sport





Basket sports



Basketball

beach
deaf
3x3
water
wheelchair


Cestoball
Korfball
Netball

Fast5
indoor
wheelchair


Rezball
Ringball
Slamball





Football codes







Association football

amputee
beach
freestyle
Futsal
indoor
Jorkyball
paralympic
powerchair
roller
street
walking


Australian rules football

AFLX
Lightning football
Metro footy
Nine-a-side
Rec footy


Gaelic football

Ladies'


Circle rules football





Gridiron codes



American football

eight-man
flag
nine-man
six-man
sprint
touch
wheelchair


Canadian football
Indoor American football

Arena football







Hybrid codes



Austus
Eton wall game
International rules football
Samoa rules
Speedball
Swedish football
Universal football
Volata





Medieval football codes



Ba game
Caid
Calcio fiorentino
Camping
Cnapan
Cornish hurling
Cuju
Harpastum
Kemari
Ki-o-rahi
Jegichagi
La soule
Lelo burti
Marn grook
Pasuckuakohowog
Royal Shrovetide
Uppies and downies
Yubi lakpi





Rugby codes



Beach
Rugby league

masters
mod
nines
sevens
tag
wheelchair


Rugby union

American flag
mini
sevens
snow
tag
touch
tens


Touch
Wheelchair








Bat-and-ball games



Baseball
Brännboll
British baseball
Corkball
Cricket

One Day
Test
Twenty20


Danish longball
Indoor cricket
Kickball
Lapta
Matball
Oină
Over-the-line
Pesäpallo
Rounders
Softball

Fastpitch


Stickball
Stoolball
Town ball
Vigoro
Vitilla
Wiffle ball
Wireball





Stick and ball sports







Bando
Cammag
Hurling

Camogie
Super11s
Shinty–Hurling


Indigenous North American stickball
Iomain
Knattleikr
Knotty
Lacrosse

box/indoor
field
intercrosse
women's


Ritinis
Shinty

Shinty–Hurling







Hockey sports



Ball hockey
Bandy

rink


Broomball

Moscow


Field hockey

indoor


Floor hockey
Floorball
Ice hockey

pond
power
ice sledge
underwater


Ringette
Rinkball
Roller hockey

in-line
quad


Rossall hockey
Shinny
Street hockey
Underwater hockey
Unicycle hockey





Polo sports



Auto polo
Cowboy polo
Cycle polo
Elephant polo
Horseball
Motoball
Pato
Polo

Arena polo
chovgan
snow polo


Polocrosse
Segway polo
Yak polo








Net sports



Ball badminton
Beach tennis
Biribol
Bossaball
Fistball
Footbag net
Football tennis
Footvolley
Jianzi
Jokgu
Newcomb ball
Peteca
Sepak takraw
Throwball
Volleyball

beach
paralympic







Other sports



Airsoft
Angleball
Balle à la main
Ballon au poing
Basque pelota

frontenis
jai alai
xare


Bo-taoshi
Boules

Bocce
Bocce volo
Boccia
Bowls
Jeu provençal
Pétanque
Raffa


Buzkashi
Combat (juggling)
Curling

wheelchair


Cycle ball
Digor
Dodgeball
Flickerball
Gateball
Goalball
Guts
Handball

beach
Czech
field


Hornussen
Ice stock sport
Jereed
Kabaddi

indoor
beach


Kho kho
Kin-Ball
Lagori
Longue paume
Mesoamerican ballgame
Paintball
Pelota mixteca
Prisonball
Pushball
Quidditch
Rollball
Roller derby
Slahal
Snow snake
Synchronized skating
Synchronized swimming
Tamburello
Tchoukball

beach


Tejo
Tug of war
Ulama
Ultimate
Underwater football
Underwater rugby
Valencian pilota

Llargues


Water polo

canoe
inner tube
beach


Waboba
Whirlyball
Woodball
Yukigassen









Authority control



NDL: 00577431











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dodgeball&oldid=817463793"					Categories: Team sportsBall gamesGames of physical skillDodgeballPhysical educationHidden categories: Articles that may contain original research from December 2011All articles that may contain original researchAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017Articles containing video clips