For other uses, see Drought (disambiguation).




Contraction/Desiccation cracks in dry earth (Sonoran desert, Mexico).


A drought is a period of below-average precipitation in a given region, resulting in prolonged shortages in the water supply, whether atmospheric, surface water or ground water. A drought can last for months or years, or may be declared after as few as 15 days.[1] It can have a substantial impact on the ecosystem and agriculture of the affected region[2] and harm to the local economy.[3] Annual dry seasons in the tropics significantly increase the chances of a drought developing and subsequent bush fires. Periods of heat can significantly worsen drought conditions by hastening evaporation of water vapour.
Many plant species, such as those in the family Cactaceae (or cacti), have drought tolerance adaptations like reduced leaf area and waxy cuticles to enhance their ability to tolerate drought. Some others survive dry periods as buried seeds. Semi-permanent drought produces arid biomes such as deserts and grasslands.[4] Prolonged droughts have caused mass migrations and humanitarian crises. Most arid ecosystems have inherently low productivity. The most prolonged drought ever in the world in recorded history occurred in the Atacama Desert in Chile (400 Years).[5]



Contents


1 Causes of drought

1.1 Precipitation deficiency
1.2 Dry season
1.3 El Niño
1.4 Erosion and human activities
1.5 Climate change


2 Types
3 Consequences of drought
4 Globally

4.1 Examples


5 Protection, mitigation and relief
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Causes of drought[edit]
Precipitation deficiency[edit]
See also: Precipitation
Mechanisms of producing precipitation include convective, stratiform,[6] and orographic rainfall.[7] Convective processes involve strong vertical motions that can cause the overturning of the atmosphere in that location within an hour and cause heavy precipitation,[8] while stratiform processes involve weaker upward motions and less intense precipitation over a longer duration.[9] Precipitation can be divided into three categories, based on whether it falls as liquid water, liquid water that freezes on contact with the surface, or ice. Droughts occur mainly in areas where normal levels of rainfall are, in themselves, low. If these factors do not support precipitation volumes sufficient to reach the surface over a sufficient time, the result is a drought. Drought can be triggered by a high level of reflected sunlight and above average prevalence of high pressure systems, winds carrying continental, rather than oceanic air masses, and ridges of high pressure areas aloft can prevent or restrict the developing of thunderstorm activity or rainfall over one certain region. Once a region is within drought, feedback mechanisms such as local arid air,[10] hot conditions which can promote warm core ridging,[11] and minimal evapotranspiration can worsen drought conditions.
Dry season[edit]
See also: Dry season
Within the tropics, distinct, wet and dry seasons emerge due to the movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone or Monsoon trough.[12] The dry season greatly increases drought occurrence,[13] and is characterized by its low humidity, with watering holes and rivers drying up. Because of the lack of these watering holes, many grazing animals are forced to migrate due to the lack of water and feed to more fertile spots. Examples of such animals are zebras, elephants,[14] and wildebeest. Because of the lack of water in the plants, bushfires are common.[15] Since water vapor becomes more energetic with increasing temperature, more water vapor is required to increase relative humidity values to 100% at higher temperatures (or to get the temperature to fall to the dew point).[16] Periods of warmth quicken the pace of fruit and vegetable production,[17] increase evaporation and transpiration from plants,[18] and worsen drought conditions.[19]
El Niño[edit]




Regional impacts of warm ENSO episodes (El Niño)


See also: El Niño
Drier and hotter weather occurs in parts of the Amazon River Basin, Colombia, and Central America during El Niño events. Winters during the El Niño are warmer and drier than average conditions in the Northwest, northern Midwest, and northern Mideast United States, so those regions experience reduced snowfalls. Conditions are also drier than normal from December to February in south-central Africa, mainly in Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, and Botswana. Direct effects of El Niño resulting in drier conditions occur in parts of Southeast Asia and Northern Australia, increasing bush fires, worsening haze, and decreasing air quality dramatically. Drier-than-normal conditions are also in general observed in Queensland, inland Victoria, inland New South Wales, and eastern Tasmania from June to August. As warm water spreads from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific, it causes extensive drought in the western Pacific. Singapore experienced the driest February in 2014 since records began in 1869, with only 6.3 mm of rain falling in the month and temperatures hitting as high as 35 °C on 26 February. The years 1968 and 2005 had the next driest Februaries, when 8.4 mm of rain fell.[20]
Erosion and human activities[edit]
See also: Aeolian processes
Human activity can directly trigger exacerbating factors such as over farming, excessive irrigation,[21] deforestation, and erosion adversely impact the ability of the land to capture and hold water.[22] In arid climates, the main source of erosion is wind.[23] Erosion can be the result of material movement by the wind. The wind can cause small particles to be lifted and therefore moved to another region (deflation). Suspended particles within the wind may impact on solid objects causing erosion by abrasion (ecological succession). Wind erosion generally occurs in areas with little or no vegetation, often in areas where there is insufficient rainfall to support vegetation.[24]




Fields outside Benambra, Victoria, Australia suffering from drought conditions.


Loess is a homogeneous, typically nonstratified, porous, friable, slightly coherent, often calcareous, fine-grained, silty, pale yellow or buff, windblown (Aeolian) sediment.[25] It generally occurs as a widespread blanket deposit that covers areas of hundreds of square kilometers and tens of meters thick. Loess often stands in either steep or vertical faces.[26] Loess tends to develop into highly rich soils. Under appropriate climatic conditions, areas with loess are among the most agriculturally productive in the world.[27] Loess deposits are geologically unstable by nature, and will erode very readily. Therefore, windbreaks (such as big trees and bushes) are often planted by farmers to reduce the wind erosion of loess.[23] Wind erosion is much more severe in arid areas and during times of drought. For example, in the Great Plains, it is estimated that soil loss due to wind erosion can be as much as 6100 times greater in drought years than in wet years.[28]
Climate change[edit]
See also: Climate change
Activities resulting in global climate change are expected to trigger droughts with a substantial impact on agriculture[29][30] throughout the world, and especially in developing nations.[31][32][33] Overall, global warming will result in increased world rainfall.[34] Along with drought in some areas, flooding and erosion will increase in others. Paradoxically, some proposed solutions to global warming that focus on more active techniques, solar radiation management through the use of a space sunshade for one, may also carry with them increased chances of drought.[35]
Types[edit]
As a drought persists, the conditions surrounding it gradually worsen and its impact on the local population gradually increases. People tend to define droughts in three main ways: [36]

Meteorological drought is brought about when there is a prolonged time with less than average precipitation. Meteorological drought usually precedes the other kinds of drought.[37]
Agricultural droughts affect crop production or the ecology of the range. This condition can also arise independently from any change in precipitation levels when soil conditions and erosion triggered by poorly planned agricultural endeavors cause a shortfall in water available to the crops. However, in a traditional drought, it is caused by an extended period of below average precipitation.[38]
Hydrological drought is brought about when the water reserves available in sources such as aquifers, lakes and reservoirs fall below the statistical average. Hydrological drought tends to show up more slowly because it involves stored water that is used but not replenished. Like an agricultural drought, this can be triggered by more than just a loss of rainfall. For instance, Kazakhstan was recently[when?] awarded a large amount of money by the World Bank to restore water that had been diverted to other nations from the Aral Sea under Soviet rule.[39] Similar circumstances also place their largest lake, Balkhash, at risk of completely drying out.[40]

Consequences of drought[edit]




A Mongolian gazelle dead due to drought.


The effects of droughts and water shortages can be divided into three groups: environmental, economic and social consequences. In the case of environmental effects: lower surface and subterranean water levels, lower flow levels (with a decrease below the minimum leading to direct danger for amphibian life), increased pollution of surface water, the drying out of wetlands, more and larger fires, higher deflation intensity, losing biodiversity, worse health of trees and the appearance of pests and den droid diseases. Economic losses include lower agricultural, forests, game and fishing output, higher food production costs, lower energy production levels in hydro plants, losses caused by depleted water tourism and transport revenue, problems with water supply for the energy sector and technological processes in metallurgy, mining, the chemical, paper, wood, foodstuff industries etc., disruption of water supplies for municipal economies. Meanwhile, social costs include the negative effect on the health of people directly exposed to this phenomenon (excessive heat waves), possible limitation of water supplies and its increased pollution levels, high food costs, stress caused by failed harvests, etc. This is why droughts and fresh water shortages may be considered as a factor which increases the gap between developed and developing countries.[41]
The effect varies according to vulnerability. For example, subsistence farmers are more likely to migrate during drought because they do not have alternative food sources. Areas with populations that depend on water sources as a major food source are more vulnerable to famine.
Drought can also reduce water quality,[42][43] because lower water flows reduce dilution of pollutants and increase contamination of remaining water sources. Common consequences of drought include:

Diminished crop growth or yield productions and carrying capacity for livestock
Dust bowls, themselves a sign of erosion, which further erode the landscape
Dust storms, when drought hits an area suffering from desertification and erosion
Famine due to lack of water for irrigation
Habitat damage, affecting both terrestrial and aquatic wildlife[44]
Hunger, drought provides too little water to support food crops.
Malnutrition, dehydration and related diseases
Mass migration, resulting in internal displacement and international refugees
Reduced electricity production due to reduced water flow through hydroelectric dams[45]
Shortages of water for industrial users[46][47]
Snake migration, which results in snakebites[48]
Social unrest
War over natural resources, including water and food
Wildfires, such as Australian bushfires, are more common during times of drought and even death of people.[49]
Exposure and oxidation of acid sulfate soils due to falling surface and groundwater levels.[50][51][52]
Cyanotoxin accumulation within food chains and water supply, some of which are among the most potent toxins known to science, can cause cancer with low exposure over long term.[53] High levels of microcystin has been found in San Francisco Bay Area salt water shellfish and fresh water supplies throughout the state of California in 2016.

Globally[edit]
Drought is a normal, recurring feature of the climate in most parts of the world. It is among the earliest documented climatic events, present in the Epic of Gilgamesh and tied to the biblical story of Joseph's arrival in and the later Exodus from Ancient Egypt.[54] Hunter-gatherer migrations in 9,500 BC Chile have been linked to the phenomenon,[55] as has the exodus of early humans out of Africa and into the rest of the world around 135,000 years ago.[56]




A South Dakota farm during the Dust Bowl, 1936


Examples[edit]
Main article: List of droughts
Well-known historical droughts include:

1900 India killing between 250,000 and 3.25 million.
1921–22 Soviet Union in which over 5 million perished from starvation due to drought
1928–30 Northwest China resulting in over 3 million deaths by famine.
1936 and 1941 Sichuan Province China resulting in 5 million and 2.5 million deaths respectively.
The 1997–2009 Millennium Drought in Australia led to a water supply crisis across much of the country. As a result, many desalination plants were built for the first time (see list).
In 2006, Sichuan Province China experienced its worst drought in modern times with nearly 8 million people and over 7 million cattle facing water shortages.
12-year drought that was devastating southwest Western Australia, southeast South Australia, Victoria and northern Tasmania was "very severe and without historical precedent".





Affected areas in the western Sahel belt during the 2012 drought.


The Darfur conflict in Sudan, also affecting Chad, was fueled by decades of drought; combination of drought, desertification and overpopulation are among the causes of the Darfur conflict, because the Arab Baggara nomads searching for water have to take their livestock further south, to land mainly occupied by non-Arab farming people.[57]
Approximately 2.4 billion people live in the drainage basin of the Himalayan rivers.[58] India, China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal and Myanmar could experience floods followed by droughts in coming decades. Drought in India affecting the Ganges is of particular concern, as it provides drinking water and agricultural irrigation for more than 500 million people.[59][60][61] The west coast of North America, which gets much of its water from glaciers in mountain ranges such as the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevada, also would be affected.[62][63]




Drought affected area in Karnataka, India in 2012.


In 2005, parts of the Amazon basin experienced the worst drought in 100 years.[64][65] A 23 July 2006 article reported Woods Hole Research Center results showing that the forest in its present form could survive only three years of drought.[66][67] Scientists at the Brazilian National Institute of Amazonian Research argue in the article that this drought response, coupled with the effects of deforestation on regional climate, are pushing the rainforest towards a "tipping point" where it would irreversibly start to die. It concludes that the rainforest is on the brink of being turned into savanna or desert, with catastrophic consequences for the world's climate. According to the WWF, the combination of climate change and deforestation increases the drying effect of dead trees that fuels forest fires.[68]




Lake Chad in a 2001 satellite image. The lake has shrunk by 95% since the 1960s.[69][70]


By far the largest part of Australia is desert or semi-arid lands commonly known as the outback. A 2005 study by Australian and American researchers investigated the desertification of the interior, and suggested that one explanation was related to human settlers who arrived about 50,000 years ago. Regular burning by these settlers could have prevented monsoons from reaching interior Australia.[71] In June 2008 it became known that an expert panel had warned of long term, maybe irreversible, severe ecological damage for the whole Murray-Darling basin if it did not receive sufficient water by October 2008.[72] Australia could experience more severe droughts and they could become more frequent in the future, a government-commissioned report said on July 6, 2008.[73] Australian environmentalist Tim Flannery, predicted that unless it made drastic changes, Perth in Western Australia could become the world’s first ghost metropolis, an abandoned city with no more water to sustain its population.[74] The long Australian Millennial drought broke in 2010.
Recurring droughts leading to desertification in East Africa have created grave ecological catastrophes, prompting food shortages in 1984–85, 2006 and 2011.[75] During the 2011 drought, an estimated 50,000 to 150,000 people were reported to have died,[76] though these figures and the extent of the crisis are disputed.[77] In February 2012, the UN announced that the crisis was over due to a scaling up of relief efforts and a bumper harvest.[78] Aid agencies subsequently shifted their emphasis to recovery efforts, including digging irrigation canals and distributing plant seeds.[78]
In 2012, a severe drought struck the western Sahel. The Methodist Relief & Development Fund (MRDF) reported that more than 10 million people in the region were at risk of famine due to a month-long heat wave that was hovering over Niger, Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. A fund of about £20,000 was distributed to the drought-hit countries.[79]
Protection, mitigation and relief[edit]




Succulent plants are well-adapted to survive long periods of drought.






Water distribution on Marshall Islands during El Niño.


Agriculturally, people can effectively mitigate much of the impact of drought through irrigation and crop rotation. Failure to develop adequate drought mitigation strategies carries a grave human cost in the modern era, exacerbated by ever-increasing population densities. President Roosevelt on April 27, 1935, signed documents creating the Soil Conservation Service (SCS)—now the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). Models of the law were sent to each state where they were enacted. These were the first enduring practical programs to curtail future susceptibility to drought, creating agencies that first began to stress soil conservation measures to protect farm lands today. It was not until the 1950s that there was an importance placed on water conservation was put into the existing laws (NRCS 2014).[80]




Aerosols over the Amazon each September for four burning seasons (2005 through 2008) during the Amazon basin drought. The aerosol scale (yellow to dark reddish-brown) indicates the relative amount of particles that absorb sunlight.


Strategies for drought protection, mitigation or relief include:

Dams - many dams and their associated reservoirs supply additional water in times of drought.[81]
Cloud seeding - a form of intentional weather modification to induce rainfall.[82] This remains a hotly debated topic, as the United States National Research Council released a report in 2004 stating that to date, there is still no convincing scientific proof of the efficacy of intentional weather modification.[83]
Desalination - of sea water for irrigation or consumption.[84]
Drought monitoring - Continuous observation of rainfall levels and comparisons with current usage levels can help prevent man-made drought. For instance, analysis of water usage in Yemen has revealed that their water table (underground water level) is put at grave risk by over-use to fertilize their Khat crop.[85] Careful monitoring of moisture levels can also help predict increased risk for wildfires, using such metrics as the Keetch-Byram Drought Index[49] or Palmer Drought Index.
Land use - Carefully planned crop rotation can help to minimize erosion and allow farmers to plant less water-dependent crops in drier years.
Outdoor water-use restriction - Regulating the use of sprinklers, hoses or buckets on outdoor plants, filling pools, and other water-intensive home maintenance tasks. Xeriscaping yards can significantly reduce unnecessary water use by residents of towns and cities.
Rainwater harvesting - Collection and storage of rainwater from roofs or other suitable catchments.
Recycled water - Former wastewater (sewage) that has been treated and purified for reuse.
Transvasement - Building canals or redirecting rivers as massive attempts at irrigation in drought-prone areas.

See also[edit]


Aridity index
Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed
Drought refuge
FEMA
Food security
Leaf Sensor
Permanent wilting point
Thirst
Topsoil
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
Water conflict
Water crisis
World Water Day
World Water Forum

Regional:

Amazon Rainforest drought
Australia, Exceptional Circumstances relief payments
China (2010)
Spain
Maya civilization collapse
Russia and USSR
Sahel drought
United Kingdom
United States
US dust bowl drought (1930s)


References[edit]


^ It's a scorcher - and Ireland is officially 'in drought' Irish Independent, 2013-07-18.
^ Living With Drought Archived 2007-02-18 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Australian Drought and Climate Change, retrieved on June 7th 2007.
^ Keddy, P.A. 2007. (https://www.amazon.com/Plants-Vegetation-Origins-Processes-Consequences/dp/0521864801 Plants and Vegetation: Origins, Processes, Consequences). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 666 p.
^ "Driest Place: Atacama Desert, Chile". Extreme Science. Retrieved September 25, 2016. .
^ Emmanouil N. Anagnostou (2004). "A convective/stratiform precipitation classification algorithm for volume scanning weather radar observations". Meteorological Applications. Cambridge University Press. 11 (4): 291–300. Bibcode:2004MeApp..11..291A. doi:10.1017/S1350482704001409. 
^ A.J. Dore; M. Mousavi-Baygi; R.I. Smith; J. Hall; D. Fowler; T.W. Choularton (June 2006). "A model of annual orographic precipitation and acid deposition and its application to Snowdonia". Atmospheric Environment. 40 (18): 3316–3326. Bibcode:2006AtmEn..40.3316D. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2006.01.043. 
^ Robert Penrose Pearce (2002). Meteorology at the Millennium. Academic Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-12-548035-2. Retrieved 2009-01-02. 
^ Robert A. Houze, Jr. (1994-06-28). Cloud Dynamics. Academic Press. p. 348. ISBN 0080502105. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ Roland Paepe; Rhodes Whitmore Fairbridge; Saskia Jelgersma (1990). Greenhouse Effect, Sea Level and Drought. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 22. ISBN 0792310179. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ Joseph S. D'Aleo; Pamela G. Grube (2002). The Oryx Resource Guide to El Niño and La Niña. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 48–49. ISBN 1573563781. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ Bin Wang (2006-01-13). The Asian Monsoon. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 206. ISBN 3540406107. Retrieved 2008-05-03. 
^ Vijendra K. Boken; Arthur P. Cracknell; Ronald L. Heathcote (2005-03-24). Monitoring and Predicting Agricultural Drought : A Global Study: A Global Study. Oxford University Press. p. 349. ISBN 0198036787. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ TONY RENNELL (June 29, 2007). "It's dry season and elephants are desperately seeking water - but poachers lie in wait". London: Daily Mail. 
^ "Wet & Dry Seasons". 
^ Alistair B. Fraser (1994-11-27). "Bad Meteorology: The reason clouds form when air cools is because cold air cannot hold as much water vapor as warm air". Retrieved 2015-02-17. 
^ Cooperative Extension Service (January 2014). Home Vegetable Gardening in Kentucky (PDF). University of Kentucky. p. 19. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ North Carolina State University (2013-08-09). "Evapotranspiration". Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2002-05-16). "Warm Temperatures and Severe Drought Continued in April Throughout Parts of the United States; Global Temperature For April Second Warmest on Record". Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ "channelnewsasia.com - February 2010 is driest month for S'pore since records began in 1869". 3 March 2010. Retrieved 5 November 2017. 
^ "A biblical tragedy as Sea of Galilee faces drought". BelfastTelegraph.co.uk. 
^ "Kenya: Deforestation exacerbates droughts, floods". forests.org. 
^ a b Vern Hofman; Dave Franzen (1997). "Emergency Tillage to Control Wind Erosion". North Dakota State University Extension Service. Retrieved 2009-03-21. 
^ United States Geological Survey (2004). "Dunes – Getting Started". Retrieved 2009-03-21. 
^ F. von Richthofen (1882). "On the mode of origin of the loess". Geological Magazine (Decade II). 9 (7): 293–305. doi:10.1017/S001675680017164X. 
^ K.E.K. Neuendorf; J.P. Mehl, Jr.; J.A. Jackson (2005). Glossary of Geology. Springer-Verlag, New York. p. 779. ISBN 3-540-27951-2. 
^ Arthur Getis; Judith Getis and Jerome D. Fellmann (2000). Introduction to Geography, Seventh Edition. McGraw-Hill. p. 99. ISBN 0-697-38506-X. 
^ Wiggs, Giles F.S. (2011). "Geomorphological hazards in drylands". In Thomas, David S.G. Arid Zone Geomorphology: Process, Form and Change in Drylands. John Wiley & Sons. p. 588. ISBN 978-0-470-71076-0.  The distribution of all the water on the earth’s surface is not even. Some places have lots of fresh water (rivers, lakes, lagoons, ponds etc.) and are continuously replenished by rainfall, runoffs and water from underground. Others places too are known to have very little water. Therefore, if a region that has lots of rainfall, goes for a couple of weeks without rains, and people, animals and plants begin to experience a bit of dryness, it can be called drought. At the same time, that condition may be very normal for places with no water, and can go for months without any rains with little problems.
^ NOAA Drought and climate change: implications for the West Archived 2008-06-25 at the Wayback Machine. December 2002
^ "Smith A.B. and R. Katz, 2013: U.S. Billion-dollar weather and climate disasters: Data sources, trends, accuracy and biases. Natural Hazards, 67, 387–410, doi:10.1007/s11069-013-0566-5" (PDF). Retrieved 5 November 2017. 
^ "Finfacts: Irish business, finance news on economics". finfacts.com. 
^ Fuel costs, drought influence price increase Archived September 13, 2012, at Archive.is
^ "Nigerian Scholar Links Drought, Climate Change to Conflict in Africa - US Department of State". state.gov. Archived from the original on 28 October 2005. 
^ "Is Water the New Oil?". Common Dreams. 
^ Sunshade' for global warming could cause drought 2 August 2007 New Scientist, Catherine Brahic
^ "Qianfeng Wang". ResearchGate. 
^ "What is a Drought?" (PDF). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. August 2006. Retrieved 2007-04-10. 
^ The alleviating trend of drought in the Huang-Huai-Hai Plain of China based on the daily SPEI. International Journal of Climatology.2015. doi: 10.1002/joc.4244 Wang, Qianfeng, Shi, Peijun, Lei, Tianjie, Geng, Guangpo, Liu, Jinghui, Mo, Xinyu, Li, Xiaohan, Zhou, Hongkui. and Wu, Jianjun
^ "BBC NEWS - Asia-Pacific - Dam project aims to save Aral Sea". bbc.co.uk. 
^ "BBC NEWS - Asia-Pacific - Kazakh lake 'could dry up'". bbc.co.uk. 
^ Prokurat, Sergiusz (2015). "Drought and water shortages in Asia as a threat and economic problem" (PDF). Journal of Modern Science. 26 (3). Retrieved 4 August 2016. 
^ Mosley LM (2014). Drought impacts on the water quality of freshwater systems; review and integration. Earth Science Reviews. DOI: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2014.11.010.
^ 10. Mosley LM, Zammit B, Leyden E, Heneker TM, Hipsey MR, Skinner D, and Aldridge KT (2012). The Impact of Extreme Low Flows on the Water Quality of the Lower Murray River and Lakes (South Australia). Water Resources Management 26: 3923–3946.
^ C.Michael Hogan. 2010. Abiotic factor. Ed. Emily Monosson. Encyclopedia of Earth. National Council for Science and the Environment, Washington DC Archived June 8, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Drought affecting US hydroelectric production | Daily Estimate Archived October 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Parched village sues to shut tap at Coke / Drought-hit Indians say plant draining groundwater". SFGate. 
^ "Sweden closes nuclear plants over safety fears". Greenpeace International. 
^ "BBC NEWS - Asia-Pacific - Australians face snake invasion". bbc.co.uk. 
^ a b "TFS Article". tamu.edu. Archived from the original on 11 July 2003. 
^ Mosley LM, Zammit B, Jolley A, and Barnett L (2014). Acidification of lake water due to drought. Journal of Hydrology. 511: 484–493.
^ Mosley LM, Palmer D, Leyden E, Fitzpatrick R, and Shand P (2014). Acidification of floodplains due to river level decline during drought. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 161: 10–23.
^ Mosley LM, Palmer D, Leyden E, Fitzpatrick R, and Shand P (2014). Changes in acidity and metal geochemistry in soils, groundwater, drain and river water in the Lower Murray River after a severe drought. Science of the Total Environment 485–486: 281–291.
^ "Toxins from freshwater algae found in San Francisco Bay shellfish". Retrieved 5 November 2017. 
^ "BBC - Weather Centre - Features - History and Religion - Weather in the Bible - Drought and Famine". Retrieved 5 November 2017. 
^ "Ancient Chile Migration Mystery Tied to Drought". nationalgeographic.com. 
^ Drought pushed ancient African immigration [permanent dead link]
^ Thomson Reuters Foundation. "Thomson Reuters Foundation". alertnet.org. 
^ "People & the Planet > climate change > newsfile > big melt threatens millions, says un". peopleandplanet.net. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. 
^ "Ganges, Indus may not survive: climatologists". rediff.com. 
^ "People's Daily Online - Glaciers melting at alarming speed". peopledaily.com.cn. 
^ "BBC NEWS - Science/Nature - Himalaya glaciers melt unnoticed". bbc.co.uk. 
^ "Glaciers Are Melting Faster Than Expected, UN Reports". ScienceDaily. 
^ Water shortage worst in decades, official says, Los Angeles Times
^ staff. "Amazon Drought Worst in 100 Years". www.ens-newswire.com. Retrieved 5 November 2017. 
^ Drought Threatens Amazon Basin - Extreme conditions felt for second year running Archived May 27, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Amazon rainforest 'could become a desert' , The Independent, July 23, 2006. Retrieved September 28, 2006.
^ Dying Forest: One year to save the Amazon, The Independent, July 23, 2006. Retrieved September 28, 2006.
^ Climate change a threat to Amazon rainforest, warns WWF, World Wide Fund for Nature, March 9, 2996. Retrieved September 28, 2006.
^ "Plan B Updates - 47: Disappearing Lakes, Shrinking Seas - EPI". earth-policy.org. 
^ "Shrinking African Lake Offers Lesson on Finite Resources". nationalgeographic.com. 
^ Sensitivity of the Australian Monsoon to insolation and vegetation: Implications for human impact on continental moisture balance, Geological Society of America
^ Australian rivers 'face disaster', BBC News
^ Australia faces worse, more frequent droughts: study, Reuters
^ Metropolis strives to meet its thirst, BBC News
^ Sara Pantuliano and Sara Pavanello (2004) Taking drought into account Addressing chronic vulnerability among pastoralists in the Horn of Africa Archived March 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Overseas Development Institute
^ "Fatal Failure: Did Aid Agencies Let Up To 100,000 Somalis Die in 2011?". Time. January 18, 2012.
^ Warah, Rasna (2 October 2011). "Manufacturing a famine: How Somalia crisis became a fund-raising opportunity". The East African. Retrieved 16 March 2013. 
^ a b Gettleman, Jeffrey (3 February 2012). "U.N. Says Somalia Famine Has Ended, but Crisis Isn't Over". Retrieved 5 November 2017 – via www.nytimes.com. 
^ "Methodists make appeal for famine threatened West Africa - Ekklesia". ekklesia.co.uk. 
^ "State Conservation District Laws Development and Variations - NRCS". usda.gov. 
^ Matt Weiser; Jeremy B. White (2014-06-01). "Should California build dams, reservoirs to help with future droughts?". Fresno Bee. Archived from the original on 2015-03-20. Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ "Cloud seeding helps alleviate drought". chinadaily.com.cn. 
^ NRC. "Critical Issues in Weather Modification Research". 
^ City of Santa Barbara (2014-12-22). "Desalinization". Retrieved 2015-02-18. 
^ BBC's From Our Own Correspondent on khat water usage


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drought.





Look up drought in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Drought



GIDMaPS Global Integrated Drought Monitoring and Prediction System, University of California, Irvine
Water scarcity from FAO Water (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations)
Drought: Hearing before the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, United States Senate, One Hundred Thirteenth Congress, First Session, on Exploring the Effects of Drought on Energy And Water Management, April 25, 2013
U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate Disasters
Global Real-Time Drought Media Monitoring
Prokurat S., "Drought and water shortages in Asia as a threat and economic problem", in: "Journal of Modern Science", 3/26/2015, pp. 235–250.







v
t
e


Global warming and climate change








Temperatures






Brightness temperature
Effective temperature
Geologic record
Hiatus
Historical climatology
Instrumental record
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Proxy data
Record of the past 1,000 years
Satellite measurements













Causes







Anthropogenic



Attribution of recent climate change
Aviation
Biofuel
Black carbon
Carbon dioxide
Deforestation
Earth's energy budget
Earth's radiation balance
Ecocide
Fossil fuel
Global dimming
Global warming potential
Greenhouse effect
(Infrared window)
Greenhouse gases
(Halocarbons)
Land use, land-use change and forestry
Radiative forcing
Tropospheric ozone
Urban heat island





Natural



Albedo
Bond events
Climate oscillations
Climate sensitivity
Cloud forcing
Cosmic rays
Feedbacks
Glaciation
Global cooling
Milankovitch cycles
Ocean variability

AMO
ENSO
IOD
PDO


Orbital forcing
Solar variation
Volcanism





Models



Global climate model
















History






History of climate change science
Atmospheric thermodynamics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling













Opinion and climate change






Environmental ethics
Media coverage of climate change
Public opinion on climate change
(Popular culture)
Scientific opinion on climate change
Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment
Climate change denial
Global warming conspiracy theory
By country & region
(Africa
Arctic
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
China
Europe
European Union
Finland
Grenada
Japan
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Scotland
South Korea
Sweden
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
United States)













Politics










Clean Power Plan
Climate change denial
(Manufactured controversy)
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
March for Science
People's Climate March
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
Global climate regime
















Potential effects and issues







General



Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic dipole anomaly
Arctic haze
Arctic methane release
Climate change and agriculture
Climate change and ecosystems
Climate change and gender
Climate change and poverty
Current sea level rise
Drought
Economics of global warming
Effect on plant biodiversity
Effects on health
Effects on humans
Effects on marine mammals
Environmental migrant
Extinction risk from global warming
Fisheries and climate change
Forest dieback
Industry and society
Iris hypothesis
Megadrought
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Physical impacts
Polar stratospheric cloud
Regime shift
Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Runaway climate change
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation





By country



Australia
South Asia

India
Nepal


United States
















Mitigation







Kyoto Protocol



Clean Development Mechanism
Joint Implementation
Bali Road Map
2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference





Governmental



European Climate Change Programme
G8 Climate Change Roundtable
United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
Paris Agreement

United States withdrawal


Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
List of climate change initiatives





Emissions reduction



Carbon credit
Carbon-neutral fuel
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out





Carbon-free energy



Carbon capture and storage
Efficient energy use
Low-carbon economy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy





Personal



Individual action on climate change
Simple living





Other



Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon sink
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Individual and political action on climate change
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Urban reforestation
Climate Action Plan
Climate action
















Proposed adaptations







Strategies



Damming glacial lakes
Desalination
Drought tolerance
Irrigation investment
Rainwater storage
Sustainable development
Weather modification





Programmes



Avoiding dangerous climate change
Land allocation decision support system














Glossary of climate change
Index of climate change articles
Category:Climate change
Category:Global warming
Portal:Global warming












v
t
e


Natural disasters



Geological



Earthquakes
Mass wasting

Landslides
Mudflows
Lahars
Ice calving


Volcano eruption
Avalanches
Sinkholes
Quicksands





Water



Flood

Coastal flood
Flash flood
Storm surge


Limnic eruption
Tsunami
Cloudburst
Meteotsunami





Weather



Ice

Cold wave
Winter storm
Thundersnow
Ice storm
Blizzard
Ground blizzard
Snowsquall
Hail
Freezing rain
Whiteout (weather)
Black ice
Cryoseism
Freezing drizzle
Ice dam
Ice jacking
Jumble ice




Heat

Droughts
Heat waves
Heat burst
Backdraft
Megadrought
Torridness


Wind

Storms
Storm surge
Dust storm
Thunderstorm
Severe thunderstorm
Supercell
Firestorm
Gale
Sirocco
Simoon
Haboob
Cyclone
Mesocyclone
Tropical cyclones
Extratropical cyclone
Subtropical cyclone
European windstorm
Derechos
Atlantic hurricane
Typhoon
Downdraft
Tornado
Multiple-vortex tornado
Landspout
Waterspout
Fire whirl
Gustnado
Dust devil
Whirlwind
Lightning strike
Air-mass thunderstorm
Hypercane
Microburst
Monsoon







Fire



Wildfires
Firestorm
Fire whirl





Health



Outbreak

Epidemic
Pandemic


Famine





Space



Gamma-ray burst
Fast radio burst
Cosmic rays (Ultra-high-energy cosmic ray)
Impact event
Meteor shower
Particle shower
Solar proton event
Solar flare
Coronal mass ejection
Geomagnetic storm
Astrophysical jet
Kilonova
Nova
Supernova impostor
Pair-instability supernova
Supernova
Hypernova
Quark-nova
Stellar collision
Galactic collision
Galactic merger












v
t
e


Disasters



Overview



Lists

by death toll
by cost







Disasters




Natural (by death toll)



Tornadoes
Drought
Mudslide
Flood
Tropical cyclone
Earthquake
Volcanic eruptions
Fires
Wildfires
Impact event





Accidents




Transport



Rail
Maritime
Shipwreck
Aircraft
Airship





Industrial



Structural failures and collapses
Bridge
Dam
Nuclear

by death toll


Civilian radiation
Civilian nuclear
Military nuclear
Oil spills
Levee breach
Mast and tower
Infrastructure
Space





Health



Famines
Epidemics








Man-made



Wars and anthropogenic disasters
Battles and other violent events
Military
Wars
Terrorist incidents
Riots
Massacres
Nightclub fires








Countermeasures



Humanitarian aid
Emergency population warning
Emergency Alert System
Earthquake preparedness
Earthquake warning system
Evacuations
Emergency management
Hurricane preparedness
Crisis management
Disaster risk reduction





Media



Feature films





Organizations



Global Risk Forum GRF Davos
International Association of Emergency Managers
International Disaster and Risk Conference
Disaster Accountability Project
International Disaster Emergency Service








 Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



GND: 4013248-1
NDL: 00564866











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drought&oldid=817462241"					Categories: DroughtsBasic meteorological concepts and phenomenaCivil defenseClimatologyHydrologyWater and the environmentWeather hazardsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksWebarchive template archiveis linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from May 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips