For other uses, see Drug (disambiguation).




Caffeine, contained in coffee and other beverages, is the most widely used psychoactive drug in the world. 90% of North American adults consume the substance on a daily basis.[1]






Uncoated aspirin tablets, consisting of about 90% acetylsalicylic acid, along with a minor amount of inert fillers and binders. Aspirin is a pharmaceutical drug often used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation.


A drug is any substance (other than food that provides nutritional support) that, when inhaled, injected, smoked, consumed, absorbed via a patch on the skin, or dissolved under the tongue causes a temporary physiological (and often psychological) change in the body.[2][3]
In pharmacology, a pharmaceutical drug, also called a medication or medicine, is a chemical substance used to treat, cure, prevent, or diagnose a disease or to promote well-being.[2] Traditionally drugs were obtained through extraction from medicinal plants, but more recently also by organic synthesis.[4] Pharmaceutical drugs may be used for a limited duration, or on a regular basis for chronic disorders.[5]
Pharmaceutical drugs are often classified into drug classes—groups of related drugs that have similar chemical structures, the same mechanism of action (binding to the same biological target), a related mode of action, and that are used to treat the same disease.[6][verification needed][7] The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC), the most widely used drug classification system, assigns drugs a unique ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it to specific drug classes within the ATC system. Another major classification system is the Biopharmaceutics Classification System. This classifies drugs according to their solubility and permeability or absorption properties.[8]
Psychoactive drugs are chemical substances that affect the function of the central nervous system, altering perception, mood or consciousness.[9] They include alcohol, a depressant (and a stimulant in small quantities), and the stimulants nicotine and caffeine. These three are the most widely consumed psychoactive drugs worldwide[10] and are also considered recreational drugs since they are used for pleasure rather than medicinal purposes.[11] Other recreational drugs include hallucinogens, opiates and amphetamines and some of these are also used in spiritual or religious settings. Some drugs can cause addiction [12] and all drugs can have side effects.[13] Excessive use of stimulants can promote stimulant psychosis. Many recreational drugs are illicit and international treaties such as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs exist for the purpose of their prohibition.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Medication
3 Spiritual and religious use
4 Smart drugs and designer drugs
5 Recreational drug use
6 Administration of drugs
7 Control of drugs
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



Etymology
In English, the noun "drug" is thought to originate from Old French "drogue", possibly deriving later into "droge-vate" from Middle Dutch meaning "dry barrels", referring to medicinal plants preserved in them.[14] The transitive verb "to drug" (meaning intentionally administer a substance to someone, often without their knowledge) arose later and invokes the psychoactive rather than medicinal properties of a substance.[15]
Medication




Nexium is a proton-pump inhibitor. It is used to reduce the production of stomach acid.


Main articles: Pharmaceutical drug and Drug class
A medication or medicine is a drug taken to cure or ameliorate any symptoms of an illness or medical condition. The use may also be as preventive medicine that has future benefits but does not treat any existing or pre-existing diseases or symptoms. Dispensing of medication is often regulated by governments into three categories—over-the-counter medications, which are available in pharmacies and supermarkets without special restrictions; behind-the-counter medicines, which are dispensed by a pharmacist without needing a doctor's prescription, and prescription only medicines, which must be prescribed by a licensed medical professional, usually a physician.[16]
In the United Kingdom, behind-the-counter medicines are called pharmacy medicines which can only be sold in registered pharmacies, by or under the supervision of a pharmacist. These medications are designated by the letter P on the label.[17] The range of medicines available without a prescription varies from country to country. Medications are typically produced by pharmaceutical companies and are often patented to give the developer exclusive rights to produce them. Those that are not patented (or with expired patents) are called generic drugs since they can be produced by other companies without restrictions or licenses from the patent holder.[18]
Pharmaceutical drugs are usually categorised into drug classes. A group of drugs will share a similar chemical structure, or have the same mechanism of action, the same related mode of action or target the same illness or related illnesses.[6][7] The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC), the most widely used drug classification system, assigns drugs a unique ATC code, which is an alphanumeric code that assigns it to specific drug classes within the ATC system. Another major classification system is the Biopharmaceutics Classification System. This groups drugs according to their solubility and permeability or absorption properties.[8]
Spiritual and religious use
Main article: Entheogen




An Amazonian shaman






San Pedro, a psychoactive cactus


Some religions, particularly ethnic religions are based completely on the use of certain drugs, known as entheogens, which are mostly hallucinogens,—psychedelics, dissociatives, or deliriants. Some drugs used as entheogens include kava which can act as a stimulant, a sedative, a euphoriant and an anesthetic. The roots of the kava plant are used to produce a drink which is consumed throughout the cultures of the Pacific Ocean.
Some shamans from different cultures use entheogens, defined as "generating the divine within"[19] to achieve religious ecstasy. Amazonian shamans use ayahuasca (yagé) a hallucinogenic brew for this purpose. Mazatec shamans have a long and continuous tradition of religious use of Salvia divinorum a psychoactive plant. Its use is to facilitate visionary states of consciousness during spiritual healing sessions.[20]
Silene undulata is regarded by the Xhosa people as a sacred plant and used as an entheogen. Its root is traditionally used to induce vivid (and according to the Xhosa, prophetic) lucid dreams during the initiation process of shamans, classifying it a naturally occurring oneirogen similar to the more well-known dream herb Calea ternifolia.[21]
Peyote a small spineless cactus has been a major source of psychedelic mescaline and has probably been used by Native Americans for at least five thousand years.[22][23] Most mescaline is now obtained from a few species of columnar cacti in particular from San Pedro and not from the vulnerable peyote.[24]
The entheogenic use of cannabis has also been widely practised [25] for centuries.[26] Rastafari use marijuana (ganja) as a sacrament in their religious ceremonies.
Psychedelic mushrooms (psilocybin mushrooms), commonly called magic mushrooms or shrooms have also long been used as entheogens.
Smart drugs and designer drugs
Main articles: Nootropic and Designer drug
Nootropics, also commonly referred to as "smart drugs", are drugs that are claimed to improve human cognitive abilities. Nootropics are used to improve memory, concentration, thought, mood, learning, and many other things. Some nootropics are now beginning to be used to treat certain diseases such as attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. They are also commonly used to regain brain function lost during aging.
Other drugs known as designer drugs are produced. An early example of what today would be labelled a 'designer drug' was LSD, which was synthesised from ergot [27]. Other examples include analogs of performance-enhancing drugs such as designer steroids taken to improve physical capabilities and these are sometimes used (legally or not) for this purpose, often by professional athletes.[28] Other designer drugs mimic the effects of psychoactive drugs. Since the late 1990s there has been the identification of many of these synthesised drugs. In Japan and the United Kingdom this has spurred the addition of many designer drugs into a newer class of controlled substances known as a temporary class drug.
Synthetic cannabinoids have been produced for a longer period of time and are used in the designer drug synthetic cannabis.
Recreational drug use




Cannabis is a commonly used recreational drug.[29]


Main article: Recreational drug use
Further information: Prohibition of drugs
Recreational drug use is the use of a drug (legal, controlled, or illegal) with the primary intention of altering the state of consciousness through alteration of the central nervous system in order to create positive emotions and feelings. The hallucinogen LSD is a psychoactive drug commonly used as a recreational drug.[30]
Some national laws prohibit the use of different recreational drugs; and medicinal drugs that have the potential for recreational use are often heavily regulated. However, there are many recreational drugs that are legal in many jurisdictions and widely culturally accepted. Cannabis is the most commonly consumed controlled recreational drug in the world (as of 2012).[31] Its use in many countries is illegal but is legally used in several countries usually with the proviso that it can only be used for personal use. It can be used in the leaf form of marijuana (grass), or in the resin form of hashish. Marijuana is a more mild form of cannabis than hashish.
There may be an age restriction on the consumption and purchase of legal recreational drugs. Some recreational drugs that are legal and accepted in many places include alcohol, tobacco, betel nut, and caffeine products, and in some areas of the world the legal use of drugs such as khat is common.[32]
There are a number of legal intoxicants commonly called legal highs that are used recreationally. The most widely used of these is alcohol.
Administration of drugs
All drugs, can be administered via a number of routes, and many can be administered by more than one.


Bolus is the administration of a medication, drug or other compound that is given to raise its concentration in blood to an effective level. The administration can be given intravenously, by intramuscular, intrathecal or subcutaneous injection.
Inhaled, (breathed into the lungs), as an aerosol or dry powder. (This includes smoking a substance)
Injection as a solution, suspension or emulsion either: intramuscular, intravenous, intraperitoneal, intraosseous.
Insufflation, or snorted into the nose.
Orally, as a liquid or solid, that is absorbed through the intestines.
Rectally as a suppository, that is absorbed by the rectum or colon.
Sublingually, diffusing into the blood through tissues under the tongue.
Topically, usually as a cream or ointment. A drug administered in this manner may be given to act locally or systemically.[33]
Vaginally as a pessary, primarily to treat vaginal infections.


Control of drugs
There are numerous governmental offices in many countries that deal with the control and oversee of drug manufacture and use, and the implementation of various drug laws. The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs is an international treaty brought about in 1961 to prohibit the use of narcotics save for those used in medical research and treatment. In 1971, a second treaty the Convention on Psychotropic Substances had to be introduced to deal with newer recreational psychoactive and psychedelic drugs.
The legal status of Salvia divinorum varies in many countries and even in states within the United States. Where it is legislated against the degree of prohibition also varies.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States is a federal agency responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the regulation and supervision of food safety, tobacco products, dietary supplements, prescription and over-the-counter medications, vaccines, biopharmaceuticals, blood transfusions, medical devices, electromagnetic radiation emitting devices, cosmetics, animal foods[34] and veterinary drugs.
See also


Pharmacy and Pharmacology portal




Controlled Substances Act
Drug development
Inverse benefit law
Lifestyle drug
List of drugs
List of pharmaceutical companies
List of psychoactive plants
List of Schedule I drugs (US)
Pharmacognosy
Placebo
Prodrug
Specialty drugs (United States)
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime


References



^ Richard Lovett (24 September 2005). "Coffee: The demon drink?". Retrieved 2014-05-01. 
^ a b "Drug". Dictionary.com Unabridged. v 1.1. Random House. 20 September 2007 – via Dictionary.com. 
^ "Drug Definition". Stedman's Medical Dictionary. Retrieved 2014-05-01 – via Drugs.com. 
^ Atanasov AG, Waltenberger B, Pferschy-Wenzig EM, Linder T, Wawrosch C, Uhrin P, Temml V, Wang L, Schwaiger S, Heiss EH, Rollinger JM, Schuster D, Breuss JM, Bochkov V, Mihovilovic MD, Kopp B, Bauer R, Dirsch VM, Stuppner H (December 2015). "Discovery and resupply of pharmacologically active plant-derived natural products: A review". Biotechnol Adv. 33 (8): 1582–614. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.08.001. PMC 4748402 . PMID 26281720. 
^ "Drug". The American Heritage Science Dictionary. Houghton Mifflin Company. Retrieved 20 September 2007 – via dictionary.com. 
^ a b Mahoney A, Evans J (6 November 2008). "Comparing drug classification systems". AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings: 1039. PMID 18999016. 
^ a b World Health Organization (2003). Introduction to drug utilization research (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. p. 33. ISBN 924156234X. 
^ a b Bergström, CA; Andersson, SB; Fagerberg, JH; Ragnarsson, G; Lindahl, A (16 June 2014). "Is the full potential of the biopharmaceutics classification system reached?". European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 57: 224–31. doi:10.1016/j.ejps.2013.09.010. PMID 24075971. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-03-28. Retrieved 2015-03-16. 
^ Crocq MA (June 2003). "Alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, and mental disorders". Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 5 (2): 175–185. PMC 3181622 . PMID 22033899. 
^ "Recreational Drug". The Free Dictionary. Retrieved 16 March 2015. 
^ Fox, Thomas Peter; Oliver, Govind; Ellis, Sophie Marie (2013). "The Destructive Capacity of Drug Abuse: An Overview Exploring the Harmful Potential of Drug Abuse Both to the Individual and to Society". ISRN Addiction. 2013: 1–6. doi:10.1155/2013/450348. Retrieved 15 April 2015. 
^ "MHRA Side Effects of Medicines." MHRA Side Effects of Medicines,
^ Harper, Douglas. "drug". Online Etymology Dictionary. 
^ Tupper KW (2012). "Psychoactive substances and the English language: "Drugs," discourses, and public policy". Contemporary Drug Problems. 39 (3): 461–492. doi:10.1177/009145091203900306. 
^ "About Registration: Medicines and Prescribing". Health and Care Professions Council. Retrieved 22 January 2016. 
^ "Glossary of MHRA terms – P". U.K. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Retrieved 2008-11-05. 
^ ""Generic Drugs", Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration" (PDF). Fda.gov. Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
^ Entheogen, [dictionary.com], retrieved 2012-03-13 
^ Valdés, Díaz & Paul 1983, p. 287.
^ Sobiecki, Jean-Francois (July 2012). "Psychoactive Spiritual Medicines and Healing Dynamics in the Initiation Process of Southern Bantu Diviners". Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. 44 (3): 216–223. doi:10.1080/02791072.2012.703101. PMID 23061321. 
^ El-Seedi HR, De Smet PA, Beck O, Possnert G, Bruhn JG (October 2005). "Prehistoric peyote use: alkaloid analysis and radiocarbon dating of archaeological specimens of Lophophora from Texas". J Ethnopharmacol. 101 (1–3): 238–42. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2005.04.022. PMID 15990261. 
^ "A Brief History of the San Pedro Cactus". Mescaline.com. Retrieved 11 October 2017. 
^ Terry M (2013). "Lophophora williamsii". IUCN Red list of threatened species. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2013-1.RLTS.T151962A581420.en. 
^ "Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology – Jurema-Preta (Mimosa tenuiflora [Willd.] Poir.): a review of its traditional use, phytochemistry and pharmacology". scielo.br. Retrieved 2009-01-14. 
^ Bloomquist, Edward (1971). Marijuana: The Second Trip. California: Glencoe. 
^ "Discovery And Synthesis Of LSD: What You Probably Did Not Know About It - Chemistry Hall". 2017-06-13. Archived from the original on 2017-06-13. Retrieved 2017-06-13. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Teale P, Scarth J, Hudson S (2012). "Impact of the emergence of designer drugs upon sports doping testing". Bioanalysis. 4 (1): 71–88. doi:10.4155/bio.11.291. PMID 22191595. 
^ Lingeman. Drugs from A-Z: A Dictionary. Penguin. ISBN 0-7139-0136-5. 
^ "DrugFacts: Hallucinogens - LSD, Peyote, Psilocybin, and PCP". National Institute on Drug Abuse. December 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2015. 
^ "World Drug Report 2012" (pdf). UNODC. 2012. p. 69. Retrieved 9 December 2016. 
^ Al-Mugahed, Leen (2008). "Khat Chewing in Yemen: Turning over a New Leaf: Khat Chewing Is on the Rise in Yemen, Raising Concerns about the Health and Social Consequences". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 86 (10): 741–2. doi:10.2471/BLT.08.011008. PMC 2649518 . PMID 18949206. Retrieved 22 January 2016. 
^ "The administration of medicines". Nursing Times. EMAP Publishing Limited. 19 November 2007. Retrieved 11 January 2016. 
^ "Animal Food & Feeds". Fda.gov. Retrieved 14 March 2015. 



Further reading

Richard J. Miller (2014). Drugged: the science and culture behind psychotropic drugs. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-995797-2. 

External links

DrugBank, a database of 4800 drugs and 2500 protein drug targets




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drugs.








v
t
e


Pharmacology: major drug groups



Gastrointestinal tract/
metabolism (A)



stomach acid

Antacids
H2 antagonists
Proton pump inhibitors


Antiemetics
Laxatives
Antidiarrhoeals/Antipropulsives
Anti-obesity drugs
Anti-diabetics
Vitamins
Dietary minerals





Blood and blood
forming organs (B)



Antithrombotics

Antiplatelets
Anticoagulants
Thrombolytics/fibrinolytics


Antihemorrhagics

Platelets
Coagulants
Antifibrinolytics







Cardiovascular
system (C)



cardiac therapy/antianginals

Cardiac glycosides
Antiarrhythmics
Cardiac stimulants


Antihypertensives
Diuretics
Vasodilators
Beta blockers
Calcium channel blockers
renin-angiotensin system

ACE inhibitors
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
Renin inhibitors


Antihyperlipidemics

Statins
Fibrates
Bile acid sequestrants







Skin (D)



Emollients
Cicatrizants
Antipruritics
Antipsoriatics
Medicated dressings





Genitourinary
system (G)



Hormonal contraception
Fertility agents
SERMs
Sex hormones





Endocrine
system (H)



Hypothalamic-pituitary hormones
Corticosteroids

Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids


Sex hormones
Thyroid hormones/Antithyroid agents





Infections and
infestations (J, P, QI)



Antimicrobials: Antibacterials (Antimycobacterials)
Antifungals
Antivirals
Antiparasitics

Antiprotozoals
Anthelmintics
Ectoparasiticides


IVIG
Vaccines





Malignant disease
(L01-L02)



Anticancer agents

Antimetabolites
Alkylating
Spindle poisons
Antineoplastic
Topoisomerase inhibitors







Immune disease
(L03-L04)



Immunomodulators

Immunostimulants
Immunosuppressants







Muscles, bones,
and joints (M)



Anabolic steroids
Anti-inflammatories

NSAIDs


Antirheumatics
Corticosteroids
Muscle relaxants
Bisphosphonates





Brain and
nervous system (N)



Analgesics
Anesthetics

General
Local


Anorectics
Anti-ADHD Agents
Antiaddictives
Anticonvulsants
Antidementia Agents
Antidepressants
Antimigraine Agents
Antiparkinson's Agents
Antipsychotics
Anxiolytics
Depressants
Entactogens
Entheogens
Euphoriants
Hallucinogens

Psychedelics
Dissociatives
Deliriants


Hypnotics/Sedatives
Mood Stabilizers
Neuroprotectives
Nootropics
Neurotoxins
Orexigenics
Serenics
Stimulants
Wakefulness-Promoting Agents





Respiratory
system (R)



Decongestants
Bronchodilators
Cough medicines
H1 antagonists





Sensory organs (S)



Ophthalmologicals
Otologicals





Other ATC (V)



Antidotes
Contrast media
Radiopharmaceuticals
Dressings
Senotherapeutics












v
t
e


Recreational drug use



Major
recreational
drugs




Depressants



Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Carbamates
Ethanol (alcohol)

Alcoholic drinks
Beer
Wine


Gabapentinoids
GHB
Inhalants

Medical

Nitrous oxide


Hazardous solvents

contact adhesives
Gasoline
nail polish remover
Paint thinner


Other

Freon




Kava
Nonbenzodiazepines
Quinazolinones





Opioids



Buprenorphine

Suboxone
Subutex


Codeine
Desomorphine

Krokodil


Dextropropoxyphene

Darvocet
Darvon


Fentanyl
Diamorphine

Heroin


Hydrocodone
Hydromorphone

Dilaudid


Methadone
Mitragyna speciosa

Kratom


Morphine

Opium


Oxycodone

/paracetamol


Tramadol





Stimulants



Amphetamine
Arecoline

Areca


Betel
Caffeine

Coffee
Energy drinks
Tea


Cathinone

Khat


Cocaine

Coca
Crack


Ephedrine

Ephedra


MDPV
Mephedrone
Methamphetamine
Methylone
Methylphenidate
Modafinil
Nicotine

Tobacco


Theobromine

Cocoa
Chocolate







Entactogens



2C series
6-APB

Benzofury


AMT
MDA
MDMA

Ecstasy







Hallucinogens




Psychedelics



Bufotenin

Psychoactive toads
Vilca
Yopo


DMT

Ayahuasca


LSA
LSD-25
Mescaline

Peruvian torch
Peyote
San Pedro


Psilocybin / Psilocin

Psilocybin mushrooms







Dissociatives



DXM
Glaucine
Inhalants

Nitrous oxide
alkyl nitrites
poppers
amyl nitrite


Ketamine
MXE
Muscimol

Amanita muscaria


PCP
Salvinorin A

Salvia divinorum







Deliriants



Atropine and Scopolamine

Atropa belladonna
Datura
Hyoscyamus niger
Mandragora officinarum


Dimenhydrinate
Diphenhydramine





Cannabinoids



JWH-018
THC

Cannabis
Hashish
Hash oil
Marijuana







Oneirogens



Calea zacatechichi
Silene capensis








Club drugs



Cocaine
Quaaludes
MDMA (Ecstasy)
Nitrous oxide
Poppers








Drug culture




Cannabis culture



420
Cannabis cultivation
Cannabis smoking
Head shop
Legal history of cannabis in the United States
Legality of cannabis
Marijuana Policy Project
Medical cannabis
NORML
Cannabis and religion
Stoner film





Coffee culture



Coffee break
Coffeehouse
Latte art
Tea house





Drinking culture



Bartending
Beer culture
Beer festival
Binge drinking
Diethyl ether
Drinking games
Drinking song
Happy hour
Hip flask
Nightclub
Pub
Pub crawl
Sommelier
Sports bar
Tailgate party
Wine bar
Wine tasting





Psychedelia



Psychonautics
Art
Drug
Era
Experience
Literature
Music
Microdosing
Therapy





Smoking culture



Cigarette card
Fashion cigarettes
Cloud-chasing
Loosie
Smokeasy
Smoking fetishism
Tobacco smoking





Other



Club drug
Counterculture of the 1960s
Dance party
Drug paraphernalia
Drug tourism
Entheogen
Hippie
Nootropic
Party and play
Poly drug use
Rave
Religion and drugs
Self-medication
Sex and drugs
Whoonga








Drug
production
and trade




Drug
production



Coca production in Colombia
Drug precursors
Opium production in Afghanistan
Rolling meth lab





Drug trade



Illegal drug trade

Colombia


Darknet market
Drug distribution

Beer shop
Cannabis shop
Liquor store
Liquor license










Issues with
drug use



Abuse
Date rape drug
Impaired driving
Drug harmfulness

Effects of cannabis


Addiction
Dependence

Prevention
Opioid replacement therapy
Rehabilitation
Responsible use


Drug-related crime
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
Long-term effects of cannabis
Neurotoxicity
Overdose
Passive smoking

of tobacco or other substances







Legality of
drug use




International



1961 Narcotic Drugs
1971 Psychotropic Substances
1988 Drug Trafficking
Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs





State level



Drug policy

Decriminalization
Prohibition
Supply reduction


Policy reform

Demand reduction
Drug Policy Alliance
Harm reduction
Law Enforcement Action Partnership
Liberalization

Latin America


Students for Sensible Drug Policy
Transform Drug Policy Foundation







Drug policy
by country



Australia
Canada
Germany
India
Netherlands
Portugal
Slovakia
Soviet Union
Sweden
Switzerland
United States

Just Say No
Office of National Drug Control Policy
School district drug policies
California
Colorado
Maryland
Virginia







Other



Arguments for and against drug prohibition
Capital punishment for drug trafficking
Cognitive liberty
Designer drug
Drug court
Drug possession
Drug test
Narc
Politics of drug abuse
War on Drugs

Mexican Drug War
Plan Colombia
Philippine Drug War


Zero tolerance








Lists of
countries by...



Alcohol legality

Alcohol consumption


Anabolic steroid legality
Cannabis legality

Annual use
Lifetime use


Cigarette consumption
Cocaine legality

Cocaine use


Methamphetamine legality
Opiates use
Psilocybin mushrooms legality
Salvia legality












v
t
e


Receptor/signaling modulators



Amino acids and
similar/related



Amino acids and related: GABA receptor modulators
GABAA receptor positive modulators
GABA metabolism and transport modulators
GHB receptor modulators
Glutamate metabolism and transport modulators
Glycine receptor modulators
Ionotropic glutamate receptor modulators
Metabotropic glutamate receptor modulators


Monoamines: Adrenergic receptor modulators
Dopamine receptor modulators
Histamine receptor modulators
Melatonin receptor modulators
Monoamine metabolism modulators
Monoamine neurotoxins
Monoamine releasing agents
Monoamine reuptake inhibitors
Serotonin receptor modulators
TAAR modulators


Acetylcholine: Acetylcholine metabolism and transport modulators
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor modulators
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor modulators


Others: Imidazoline receptor modulators
Purine receptor modulators
Sigma receptor modulators
Thyroid hormone receptor modulators





Lipids



Eicosanoids: Cannabinoid receptor modulators
Leukotriene signaling modulators
Prostanoid signaling modulators


Phospholipids: Lysophospholipid signaling modulators
PAF receptor modulators


Steroids: Androgen receptor modulators
Estrogen receptor modulators
Glucocorticoid receptor modulators
Mineralocorticoid receptor modulators
Progesterone receptor modulators
Steroid metabolism modulators


Other nuclear receptors: Nuclear receptor modulators
PPAR modulators
Retinoid receptor modulators
Vitamin D receptor modulators
Xenobiotic-sensing receptor modulators





Peptides/proteins



General: Signaling peptide/protein receptor modulators


Peptides: Angiotensin receptor modulators
GH/IGF-1 axis signaling modulators
Melanocortin receptor modulators
Neurokinin receptor modulators
Opioid receptor modulators
Oxytocin and vasopressin receptor modulators


Cytokines: Cytokine receptor modulators
Chemokine receptor modulators
Interleukin receptor modulators
TNF receptor superfamily modulators


Growth factors: Growth factor receptor modulators
TGFβ receptor superfamily modulators





Others and
non-receptor



Enzymes: Cytochrome P450 modulators
Histone deacetylase inhibitors
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors


Ion channels: Ion channel modulators
TRP channel modulators


Transporters: Symporter inhibitors


Others: Nitric oxide signaling modulators








See also
Pharmacomodulation
Cell signaling
Neurotransmitters











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drug&oldid=816713585"					Categories: DrugsHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2016