For other uses, see Dune (disambiguation).




Erg Chebbi, Morocco


In physical geography, a dune is a hill of loose sand built by aeolian processes (wind) or the flow of water.[1] Dunes occur in different shapes and sizes, formed by interaction with the flow of air or water. Most kinds of dunes are longer on the windward side where the sand is pushed up the dune and have a shorter "slip face" in the lee of the wind. The valley or trough between dunes is called a slack. A "dune field" is an area covered by extensive sand dunes. Dunes occur, for example, in some deserts and along some coasts.
Some coastal areas have one or more sets of dunes running parallel to the shoreline directly inland from the beach. In most cases, the dunes are important in protecting the land against potential ravages by storm waves from the sea. Although the most widely distributed dunes are those associated with coastal regions, the largest complexes of dunes are found inland in dry regions and associated with ancient lake or sea beds.
Dunes can form under the action of water flow (fluvial processes), and on sand or gravel beds of rivers, estuaries and the sea-bed.
The modern word "dune" came into English from French c. 1790,[2] which in turn came from Middle Dutch dūne.[1]



Contents


1 Aeolian dunes

1.1 Aeolian dune shapes

1.1.1 Crescentic or transverse

1.1.1.1 Lunettes


1.1.2 Linear
1.1.3 Star
1.1.4 Dome
1.1.5 Parabolic
1.1.6 Longitudinal (Seif) dunes
1.1.7 Reversing dunes


1.2 Coastal dunes

1.2.1 Ecological succession on coastal dunes


1.3 Coastal dune floral adaptations
1.4 Nabkha dunes


2 Sub-aqueous dunes
3 Lithified dunes
4 Desertification
5 Conservation
6 Examples

6.1 Africa
6.2 Asia
6.3 Europe
6.4 North America
6.5 South America
6.6 Oceania
6.7 World's highest dunes
6.8 Sand dune systems
6.9 Extraterrestrial dunes


7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



Aeolian dunes[edit]
Aeolian dune shapes[edit]
Crescentic or transverse[edit]




Isolated barchan dunes on the surface of Mars. Dominant wind direction would be from left to right.


Crescent-shaped mounds are generally wider than they are long. The slipfaces are on the concave sides of the dunes. These dunes form under winds that blow consistently from one direction, and they also are known as barchans, or transverse dunes. Some types of crescentic dunes move more quickly over desert surfaces than any other type of dune. A group of dunes moved more than 100 metres per year between 1954 and 1959 in China's Ningxia Province, and similar speeds have been recorded in the Western Desert of Egypt. The largest crescentic dunes on Earth, with mean crest-to-crest widths of more than three kilometres, are in China's Taklamakan Desert.[3]
Lunettes[edit]
Fixed crescentic dunes that form on the leeward margins of playas and river valleys in arid and semiarid regions in response to the direction(s) of prevailing winds, are known as lunettes, source-bordering dunes, bourrelets and clay dunes. They may be composed of clay, silt, sand, or gypsum, eroded from the basin floor or shore, transported up the concave side of the dune, and deposited on the convex side. Examples in Australia are up to 6.5 km long, 1 km wide, and up to 50 metres high. They also occur in southern and West Africa, and in parts of the western United States, especially Texas.[4]
Linear[edit]




Large linear dunes in the Great Sand Sea in southwest Egypt, seen from the International Space Station. The distance between each dune is 1.5-2.5 km.


Straight or slightly sinuous sand ridges typically much longer than they are wide are known as linear dunes. They may be more than 160 kilometres (100 miles) long. Some linear dunes merge to form Y-shaped compound dunes. Many form in bidirectional wind regimes. The long axes of these dunes extend in the resultant direction of sand movement.[5]
Linear loess hills known as pahas are superficially similar. These hills appear to have been formed during the last ice age under permafrost conditions dominated by sparse tundra vegetation.
Star[edit]




An isolated star dune.


Radially symmetrical, star dunes are pyramidal sand mounds with slipfaces on three or more arms that radiate from the high center of the mound. They tend to accumulate in areas with multidirectional wind regimes. Star dunes grow upward rather than laterally. They dominate the Grand Erg Oriental of the Sahara. In other deserts, they occur around the margins of the sand seas, particularly near topographic barriers. In the southeast Badain Jaran Desert of China, the star dunes are up to 500 metres tall and may be the tallest dunes on Earth.
Dome[edit]
Oval or circular mounds that generally lack a slipface. Dome dunes are rare and occur at the far upwind margins of sand seas.
Parabolic[edit]




Schematic of coastal parabolic dunes.


U-shaped mounds of sand with convex noses trailed by elongated arms are parabolic dunes. These dunes are formed from blowout dunes where the erosion of vegetated sand leads to a U-shaped depression. The elongated arms are held in place by vegetation; the largest arm known on Earth reaches 12 km. Sometimes these dunes are called U-shaped, blowout, or hairpin dunes, and they are well known in coastal deserts. Unlike crescent shaped dunes, their crests point upwind. The bulk of the sand in the dune migrates forward.
In plan view, these are U-shaped or V-shaped mounds of well-sorted, very fine to medium sand with elongated arms that extend upwind behind the central part of the dune. There are slipfaces that often occur on the outer side of the nose and on the outer slopes of the arms.
These dunes often occur in semiarid areas where the precipitation is retained in the lower parts of the dune and underlying soils. The stability of the dunes was once attributed to the vegetative cover but recent research has pointed to water as the main source of parabolic dune stability. The vegetation that covers them—grasses, shrubs, and trees—help anchor the trailing arms. In inland deserts, parabolic dunes commonly originate and extend downwind from blowouts in sand sheets only partly anchored by vegetation. They can also originate from beach sands and extend inland into vegetated areas in coastal zones and on shores of large lakes.
Most parabolic dunes do not reach heights higher than a few tens of metres except at their nose, where vegetation stops or slows the advance of accumulating sand.
Simple parabolic dunes have only one set of arms that trail upwind, behind the leading nose. Compound parabolic dunes are coalesced features with several sets of trailing arms. Complex parabolic dunes include subsidiary superposed or coalesced forms, usually of barchanoid or linear shapes.
Parabolic dunes, like crescent dunes, occur in areas where very strong winds are mostly unidirectional. Although these dunes are found in areas now characterized by variable wind speeds, the effective winds associated with the growth and migration of both the parabolic and crescent dunes probably are the most consistent in wind direction.
The grain size for these well-sorted, very fine to medium sands is about 0.06 to 0.5 mm. Parabolic dunes have loose sand and steep slopes only on their outer flanks. The inner slopes are mostly well packed and anchored by vegetation, as are the corridors between individual dunes. Because all dune arms are oriented in the same direction, and, the inter-dune corridors are generally swept clear of loose sand, the corridors can usually be traversed in between the trailing arms of the dune. However to cross straight over the dune by going over the trailing arms, can be very difficult. Also, traversing the nose is very difficult as well because the nose is usually made up of loose sand without much if any vegetation.
A type of extensive parabolic dune that lacks discernible slipfaces and has mostly coarse grained sand is known as a zibar.[6] The term zibar comes from the Arabic word to describe "rolling transverse ridges ... with a hard surface".[7] The dunes are small, have low relief, and can be found in many places across the planet from Wyoming (United States) to Saudi Arabia to Australia. Spacing between zibars ranges from 50 to 400 metres and they don't become more than 10 metres high.[8] The dunes form at about ninety degrees to the prevailing wind which blows away the small, fine-grained sand leaving behind the coarser grained sand to form the crest.[9]
Longitudinal (Seif) dunes[edit]




Rub' al Khali (Arabian Empty Quarter) sand dunes imaged by Terra (EOS AM-1). Most of these dunes are seif dunes. Their origin from barchans is suggested by the stubby remnant "hooks" seen on many of the dunes. Wind would be from left to right.


Longitudinal dunes (also called Seif dunes, after the Arabic word for "sword"), elongate parallel to the prevailing wind, possibly caused by a larger dune having its smaller sides blown away. Seif dunes are sharp-crested and are common in the Sahara. They range up to 300 m (980 ft) in height and 300 km (190 mi) in length. In the southern third of the Arabian Peninsula, a vast erg called the Rub' al Khali or the Empty Quarter, contains seif dunes that stretch for almost 200 km and reach heights of over 300 m.
Seif dunes are thought to develop from barchans if a change of the usual wind direction occurs. The new wind direction will lead to the development of a new wing and the over development of one of the original wings. If the prevailing wind then becomes dominant for a lengthy period of time the dune will revert to its barchan form, with one exaggerated wing. Should the strong wind then return the exaggerated wing will further extend so that eventually it will be supplied with sand when the prevailing wind returns. The wing will continue to grow under both wind conditions, thus producing a seif dune. On a seif dune the slipface develops on the side facing away from the strong wind, while the slipface of a barchan faces the direction of movement. In the sheltered troughs between highly developed seif dunes barchans may be formed because the wind is unidirectional.
A transverse dune is perpendicular to the prevailing wind, probably caused by a steady build-up of sand on an already existing minuscule mound.
Reversing dunes[edit]
Occurring wherever winds periodically reverse direction, reversing dunes are varieties of any of the above shapes. These dunes typically have major and minor slipfaces oriented in opposite directions.
All these dune shapes may occur in three forms: simple, compound, and complex. Simple dunes are basic forms with a minimum number of slipfaces that define the geometric type. Compound dunes are large dunes on which smaller dunes of similar type and slipface orientation are superimposed, and complex dunes are combinations of two or more dune types. A crescentic dune with a star dune superimposed on its crest is the most common complex dune. Simple dunes represent a wind regime that has not changed in intensity or direction since the formation of the dune, while compound and complex dunes suggest that the intensity and direction of the wind has changed.
The sand mass of dunes can move either windward or leeward, depending on if the wind is making contact with the dune from below or above its apogee. If wind hits from above, the sand particles move leeward. If sand hits from below, sand particles move windward. The leeward flux of sand is greater than the windward flux. Further, when the wind carrying sand particles when it hits the dune, the dune’s sand particles will saltate more than if the wind had hit the dune without carrying sand particles.[10]
Coastal dunes[edit]




Coastal dunes covered in grasses around the mouth of the Liver Å river in Denmark.


Dunes form where the beach is wide enough to allow for the accumulation of wind-blown sand, and where prevailing onshore winds tend to blow sand inland. Obstacles—for example, vegetation, pebbles and so on—tend to slow down the wind and lead to the deposition of sand grains.[11] These small "incipient dunes or "shadow dunes" tend to grow in the vertical direction if the obstacle slowing the wind can also grow vertically (i.e., vegetation). Coastal dunes expand laterally as a result of lateral growth of coastal plants via seed or rhizome.[12][13] Models of coastal dunes suggest that their final equilibrium height is related to the distance between the water line and where vegetation can grow.[14] Additionally the height of coastal dunes is impacted by storm events, which can erode dunes. Recent work has suggested that coastal dunes tend to evolve toward a high or low morphology depending on the growth rate of dunes relative to storm frequency. In certain conditions, both low and high dunes are possible — dunes are a system that shows bistable dynamics.[15][16]
Dunes provide privacy and shelter from the wind.
Ecological succession on coastal dunes[edit]
As a dune forms, plant succession occurs. The conditions on an embryo dune are harsh, with salt spray from the sea carried on strong winds. The dune is well drained and often dry, and composed of calcium carbonate from seashells. Rotting seaweed, brought in by storm waves adds nutrients to allow pioneer species to colonize the dune. These pioneer species are marram grass, sea wort grass and other sea grasses in the United Kingdom. These plants are well adapted to the harsh conditions of the foredune typically having deep roots which reach the water table, root nodules that produce nitrogen compounds, and protected stoma, reducing transpiration. Also, the deep roots bind the sand together, and the dune grows into a foredune as more sand is blown over the grasses. The grasses add nitrogen to the soil, meaning other, less hardy plants can then colonize the dunes. Typically these are heather, heaths and gorses. These too are adapted to the low soil water content and have small, prickly leaves which reduce transpiration. Heather adds humus to the soil and is usually replaced by coniferous trees, which can tolerate low soil pH, caused by the accumulation and decomposition of organic matter with nitrate leaching.[17] Coniferous forests and heathland are common climax communities for sand dune systems.
Young dunes are called yellow dunes and dunes which have high humus content are called grey dunes. Leaching occurs on the dunes, washing humus into the slacks, and the slacks may be much more developed than the exposed tops of the dunes. It is usually in the slacks that more rare species are developed and there is a tendency for the dune slacks soil to be waterlogged and where only marsh plants can survive. These plants would include: creeping willow, cotton grass, yellow iris, reeds, and rushes. As for the species, there is a tendency for natterjack toads to breed here.
Coastal dune floral adaptations[edit]
Dune ecosystems are extremely difficult places for plants to survive. This is due to a number of pressures related to their proximity to the ocean and confinement to growth on sandy substrates. These include:

Little available soil moisture
Little available soil organic matter/nutrients
Harsh winds
Salt spray
Erosion/shifting and sometimes ephemeral substrate
Tidal influences

There are many adaptations plants have evolved to cope with these pressures:

Deep taproot to reach water table (Pink Sand Verbena)
Shallow but extensive root systems
Prostrate growth form to avoid wind/salt spray (Abronia spp., Beach Primrose)
Krummholz growth form (Monterrey Cypress-not a dune plant but deals with similar pressures)
Thickened cuticle/Succulence to reduce moisture loss and reduce salt uptake (Ambrosia/Abronia spp., Calystegia soldanella)
Pale leaves to reduce insolation (Artemisia/Ambrosia spp.)
Thorny/Spiky seeds to ensure establishment in vicinity of parent, reduces chances of being blown away or swept our to sea (Ambrosia chamissonis)

Nabkha dunes[edit]
A nabkha, or coppice dune, is a small dune anchored by vegetation. They usually indicate desertification or soil erosion, and serve as nesting and burrow sites for animals.
Sub-aqueous dunes[edit]
Sub-aqueous (underwater) dunes form on a bed of sand or gravel under the actions of water flow. They are ubiquitous in natural channels such as rivers and estuaries, and also form in engineered canals and pipelines. Dunes move downstream as the upstream slope is eroded and the sediment deposited on the downstream or lee slope in typical bedform construction.[18]
These dunes most often form as a continuous 'train' of dunes, showing remarkable similarity in wavelength and height.
Dunes on the bed of a channel significantly increase flow resistance, their presence and growth playing a major part in river flooding.
Lithified dunes[edit]




Cross-bedding in lithified aeolian sand dunes preserved as sandstone in Zion National Park, Utah


A lithified (consolidated) sand dune is a type of sandstone that is formed when a marine or aeolian sand dune becomes compacted and hardened. Once in this form, water passing through the rock can carry and deposit minerals, which can alter the color of the rock. Cross-bedded layers of stacks of lithified dunes can produce the cross-hatching patterns, such as those seen in the Zion National Park in the western United States.
A slang term, used in the southwest US, for consolidated and hardened sand dunes is "slickrock", a name that was introduced by pioneers of the Old West because their steel-rimmed wagon wheels could not gain traction on the rock.
Desertification[edit]
Main article: Desertification
Sand dunes can have a negative impact on humans when they encroach on human habitats. Sand dunes move via a few different means, all of them helped along by wind. One way that dunes can move is by saltation, where sand particles skip along the ground like a bouncing ball. When these skipping particles land, they may knock into other particles and cause them to move as well, in a process known as creep. With slightly stronger winds, particles collide in mid-air, causing sheet flows. In a major dust storm, dunes may move tens of metres through such sheet flows. Also as in the case of snow, sand avalanches, falling down the slipface of the dunes—that face away from the winds—also move the dunes forward.
Sand threatens buildings and crops in Africa, the Middle East, and China. Drenching sand dunes with oil stops their migration, but this approach is quite destructive to the dunes' animal habitats and uses a valuable resource. Sand fences might also slow their movement to a crawl, but geologists are still analyzing results for the optimum fence designs.[citation needed] Preventing sand dunes from overwhelming towns, villages, and agricultural areas has become a priority for the United Nations Environment Programme. Planting dunes with vegetation also helps to stabilise them.
Conservation[edit]




Sand blowing off a crest in the Kelso Dunes of the Mojave Desert, California, USA.


Dune habitats provide niches for highly specialized plants and animals, including numerous rare species and some endangered species. Due to widespread human population expansion, dunes face destruction through land development and recreational usages, as well as alteration to prevent the encroachment of sand onto inhabited areas. Some countries, notably the United States, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Netherlands, and Sri Lanka have developed significant programs of dune protection through the use of sand dune stabilization. In the U.K., a Biodiversity Action Plan has been developed to assess dunes loss and to prevent future dunes destruction.
Examples[edit]
Africa[edit]

Alexandria Coastal Dunefields, in the Eastern Cape, South Africa[19]
Witsand Nature Reserve in the Kalahari Desert, South Africa
The white dunes of De Hoop Nature Reserve, South Africa
The dunes of the Suguta Valley, a desert part of the Great Rift Valley in northwestern Kenya
The dunes of the Danakil Depression, northeastern Ethiopia toward the border with Eritrea
The dunes of Sossusvlei in the greater Namib-Naukluft National Park, Namibia
The coastal dunes of Iona National Park in the southwesternmost part of Angola
Khawa dunes in the Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park, the southwesternmost part of Botswana
La Dune Rose in the city of Gao in northern Mali near the Niger River
Erg Aoukar in southeastern Mauritania extending into Mali
Erg Chech in southwestern Algeria and northern Mali
Erg Chebbi and Erg Chigaga in southern Morocco
Grand Erg Oriental in northeastern Algeria and southern Tunisia
Grand Erg Occidental in western Algeria
The Idehan Ubari and the Idehan Murzuq in southwestern Libya
The Rebiana Sand Sea in southeastern Libya
The Great Sand Sea in southeastern Libya and southwestern Egypt
The Selima Sand Sheet in northwestern Sudan
The dunes of the Bayuda Desert in northern Sudan
The dunes of the Lompoul Desert in northwestern Senegal
The coastal dunes of Bazaruto Island, Mozambique
Erg du Djourab in northern Chad
The dunes of the Mourdi Depression in northeastern Chad
The dunes of Tin Toumma Desert, in southeastern Niger
Grand Erg de Bilma in the Ténéré, in northern Niger
The dunes of Oursi in the Sahel Region, northern Burkina Faso
Tanzania's Shifting Sands near Olduvai Gorge





Wind ripples on crescent-shaped sand dunes (Barchans) in Southwest Afghanistan (Sistan).


Asia[edit]

The dunes in the Thar Desert in India and Pakistan
Tottori Sand Dunes, Tottori Prefecture, Japan
Rig-e Jenn in the Central Desert of Iran.
Rig-e Lut in the Southeast of Iran.
The Ilocos Norte Sand Dunes in the Philippines, particularly Paoay Sand Dunes.
Mer'eb Dune (also written as Merheb) in United Arab Emirates, used as an arena for motor sports and skiing.
Gumuk Pasir Parangkusumo near Parangtritis beach in Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
Mui Ne, Vietnam.
Wahiba Sands, Oman[20]
Teri, red dune complex in southern India





Fronting the Mediterranean Sea in Oliva, a municipality in the comarca of Safor in the Valencian Community, Spain.


Europe[edit]

The Dunes of Dyuni, near Pomorie, Bulgaria, vast area of sand dunes in the Burgas Province
The Dune of Pilat, not far from Bordeaux, France, is the largest known sand dune in Europe
The Dunes of Piscinas, in the south west of Sardinia island.
Sands of Forvie within the Ythan Estuary complex, Aberdeenshire, Scotland.
Oxwich Dunes, near Swansea, is on the Gower Peninsula in Wales.
Winterton Dunes – Norfolk, England
Słowiński National Park, Poland
Akrotiri Sand Dune, Lemesos, Cyprus
Råbjerg mile, Northern Jutland, Denmark
Thy National Park, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Dunes of Corrubedo, Spain
Northern Littoral Natural Park, Portugal
São Jacinto Dunes Natural Reserve, Portugal
Rëra e Hedhur in Shëngjin, Albania
Hoge Veluwe National Park, Veluwe, Netherlands
Dunes of Texel National Park, Texel, Netherlands
Zuid-Kennemerland National Park, North Holland, Netherlands
Ammothines Lemnou, Lemnos, Greece

North America[edit]




Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes






Cadiz Dunes Wilderness, California.



Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, the northernmost sand dunes in the world, Kobuk Valley National Park, Alaska[21]
The Athabasca Sand Dunes, located in the Athabasca Sand Dunes Provincial Park, Saskatchewan.
The Cadiz Dunes in the Mojave Trails National Monument in California.
The Kelso Dunes in the Mojave Desert of California.
Dunes in Death Valley National Park, California.
Great Sand Dunes National Park, Colorado.
White Sands National Monument, New Mexico.
Little Sahara Recreation Area, Utah.
Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore, Michigan, on the east shore of Lake Michigan.
Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, Indiana, on the south shore of Lake Michigan.[22][23]
Warren Dunes State Park, Michigan, on the east shore of Lake Michigan.
Grand Sable Dunes, in the Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore, Michigan.
Samalayuca Dunes, in the state of Chihuahua, Mexico
Algodones Dunes near Brawley, California.
Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes, on the central coast of California.
Monahans Sandhills State Park near Odessa, Texas.
Beaver Dunes State Park near Beaver, Oklahoma.
The Killpecker sand dunes of the Red Desert in southwestern Wyoming.
Jockey's Ridge State Park – on the Outer Banks, North Carolina.
The Great Dune found in Cape Henlopen State Park in Lewes, Delaware.
Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area near Florence, Oregon, on the Pacific Coast.
Bruneau Dunes State Park – Owyhee Desert, Idaho
Hoffmaster State Park – Muskegon, Michigan
Silver Lake State Park — a sand dunes that allows off-road vehicle use located in Mears, Michigan.

South America[edit]




White sand dunes in the Lençóis Maranhenses National Park, Maranhão, Brazil



Lençóis Maranhenses National Park in the state of Maranhão, Brazil
Jericoacoara National Park, in the state of Ceará, Brazil
Genipabu in Natal, Brazil
Medanos de Coro National Park near the town of Coro, in Falcón State, Venezuela
Duna Federico Kirbus in Catamarca Province, Argentina
Villa Gesell in Buenos Aires Province, Argentina
Cerro Blanco in Nazca Province, Peru
Cerro Medanoso in Atacama Region, Chile
Colún Beach, Valdivian Coastal Reserve in Chile

Oceania[edit]

Simpson Desert sand dunes in the Northern Territory, Queensland and South Australia, Australia
Fraser Island in Queensland, Australia
Cronulla sand dunes in New South Wales, Australia
Stockton Beach in New South Wales, Australia
Te Paki sand dunes near Cape Reinga, New Zealand

World's highest dunes[edit]

Note: This table is partially based on estimates and incomplete information.

Dune
Height from Base feet/metres
Height from Sea Level feet/metres
Location
Notes


Duna Federico Kirbus
~4,035/1,230
~9,334/2,845
Bolsón de Fiambalá, Fiambalá, Catamarca Province, Argentina
Highest in the world[24]


Cerro Blanco
~3,860/1,176
~6,791/2,080
Nasca Valley, Department of Ica, Peru 14°52′05″S 74°50′17″W﻿ / ﻿14.868°S 74.838°W﻿ / -14.868; -74.838﻿ (Cerro Blanco Dune)
Highest in Peru, second highest in the world


Badain Jaran Dunes
~1,640/500
~6,640/2,020
Badain Jaran Desert, Alashan Plain, Inner Mongolia, Gobi Desert, China
World's tallest stationary dunes and highest in Asia[25]


Rig-e Yalan Dune
~1,542/470
~3,117/950
Lut Desert, Kerman, Iran
Near World the hottest place (Gandom Beryan)


Average Highest Area Dunes
1,410/430?
~6,500/~1,980?
Isaouane-n-Tifernine Sand Sea, Algerian Sahara
Highest in Africa


Big Daddy/Dune 7
(Big Mama?)[26]
1,256/383
~1,870/570
Sossusvlei Dunes, Namib Desert, Namibia / Near Walvis Bay Namib Desert, Namibia
according to the Namibian Ministry of Environment & Tourism the highest dune in the world


Mount Tempest
~920/280
~920/280
Moreton Island, Brisbane, Australia
Highest in Australia


Star Dune
>750/230
~8,950/2,730
Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve, Colorado, USA
Highest in North America


Dune of Pyla
~345/105
~699/130
Bay of Arcachon, Aquitaine, France
Highest in Europe


Ming-Sha Dunes
 ?
5,660/1,725
Dunhuang Oasis, Taklamakan Desert, Gansu, China



Medanoso Dune
~1805/550
~5446/1,660
Atacama Desert, Chile
Highest in Chile


Sand dune systems[edit]

(coastal dunes featuring succession)


Athabasca Sand Dunes Provincial Park, Alberta and Saskatchewan
Ashdod Sand Dune, Israel
Bamburgh Dunes, Northumberland, England
Bradley Beach, New Jersey
Circeo National Park, a Mediterranean dune area on the southwest coast of the Lazio region of Italy
Cronulla sand dunes, NSW, Australia
Crymlyn Burrows, Wales
Dawlish Warren, Devon, England
Fraser Island, Queensland Australia, largest sand island in the world
Kenfig Burrows, Wales
Margam burrows, Wales
Murlough Sand Dunes, Newcastle, Co Down, Northern Ireland
Morfa Harlech sand dunes, Gwynedd, Wales
Newborough Warren, North Wales
Oregon Dunes National Recreation Area, near North Bend, Oregon
Penhale Sands, Cornwall, England
Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore, Michigan
Sandy Island Beach State Park, Richland, New York
Studland, Dorset, England
Thy National Park, North Denmark Region, Denmark
Winterton, Norfolk, England
Ynyslas Sand Dunes, Wales

Extraterrestrial dunes[edit]




Sand dune on Mars


See also: List of extraterrestrial dune fields
Dunes can likely be found in any environment where there is a substantial atmosphere, winds, and dust to be blown. Dunes are common on Mars and in the equatorial regions of Titan.
Titan's dunes include large expanses with modal lengths of about 20–30 km. The regions are not topographically confined, resembling sand seas. These dunes are interpreted to be longitudinal dunes whose crests are oriented parallel to the dominant wind direction, which generally indicates west-to-east wind flow. The sand is likely composed of hydrocarbon particles, possibly with some water ice mixed in.[27]
See also[edit]

Antidune
Barchan
Devil's stovepipe
Erg (landform)
Ice dune
List of landforms
Masseira
Médanos
Sand dune stabilization
Sandhill
Singing sand
Strand plain

Notes[edit]



^ a b first edited by Fowler, H.W.; Fowler, F.G. (1984). Sykes, J.B., ed. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English (7th ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-861132-3. 
^ dune - Definitions from Dictionary.com
^ "Types of Dunes". Retrieved 8 March 2012. 
^ Twidale, C.R. & Campbell, E.M. (2005, revised edition): Australian landforms: understanding a low, flat, arid and old landscape. Rosenberg Publishing. Pp. 241-3. ISBN 1 877058 32 7
^ "Types of Dunes". Retrieved 23 May 2014. 
^ Goudie, Ron Cooke; Andrew Warren; Andrew (1996). Desert geomorphology (2. impr. ed.). London: UCL Press. pp. 395–396. ISBN 1-85728-017-2. 
^ Goudie, Ron Cooke; Andrew Warren; Andrew (1996). Desert geomorphology (2. impr. ed.). London: UCL Press. p. 395. ISBN 1-85728-017-2. 
^ "USGS Landform Glossary" (PDF). United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 3 October 2013. [permanent dead link]
^ Nielsen, Ole. "Zibar Dunes". My Opera. Retrieved 3 October 2013. 
^ Jiang, Hong; Dun, Hongchao; Tong, Ding; Huang, Ning (2017-04-15). "Sand transportation and reverse patterns over leeward face of sand dune". Geomorphology. 283: 41–47. doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.12.030. 
^ Hesp, P. (1989). "A review of biological and geomorphological processes involved in the initiation and development of incipient foredunes". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Section B. Biological Sciences. 96: 181–201. doi:10.1017/S0269727000010927. 
^ Godfrey, P. J. (1977-09-01). "Climate, plant response and development of dunes on barrier beaches along the U.S. east coast". International Journal of Biometeorology. 21 (3): 203–216. doi:10.1007/BF01552874. ISSN 0020-7128. 
^ Goldstein, Evan B.; Moore, Laura J.; Vinent, Orencio Durán (2017-08-08). "Lateral vegetation growth rates exert control on coastal foredune <q>hummockiness</q> and coalescing time". Earth Surface Dynamics. 5 (3): 417–427. doi:10.5194/esurf-5-417-2017. ISSN 2196-6311. 
^ Durán, O.; Moore L. J. (2013). "Vegetation controls on the maximum size of coastal dunes". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (43): 17217–17222. doi:10.1073/pnas.1307580110. PMC 3808624 . PMID 24101481. 
^ Durán, O.; Moore L. J. (2015). "Barrier island bistability induced by biophysical interactions". Nature Climate Change. 5 (2): 158–162. doi:10.1038/nclimate2474. 
^ Goldstein, E.B..; Moore L. J. (2016). "Vegetation controls on the maximum size of coastal dunes". Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface. 121: 964–977. doi:10.1002/2015JF003783. 
^ Miles, J. (1985). "The pedogenic effects of different species and vegetation types and the implications of succession". European Journal of Soil Science. 36 (4): 571. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2389.1985.tb00359.x. 
^ Prothero, D. R. and Schwab, F., 1996, Sedimentary Geology, pg. 45–49, ISBN 0-7167-2726-9
^ "Alexandria Coastal Dunefields". UNESCO World Heritage. Retrieved 11 January 2010. 
^ Wahiba Sands
^ Mann, D. H.; Heiser P. A.; Finney B. P. (2002). "Holocene history of the Great Kobuk Sand Dunes, Northwestern Alaska" (PDF). Quaternary Science Reviews. Elsevier. 21 (4): 709–731. doi:10.1016/S0277-3791(01)00120-2. 
^ Smith, S. & Mark, S. (2006). Alice Gray, Dorothy Buell, and Naomi Svihla: "Preservationists of Ogden Dunes". The South Shore Journal, 1. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 13 September 2012. Retrieved 2012-06-11. 
^ Smith, S. & Mark, S. (2009). "The Historical Roots of the Nature Conservancy in the Northwest Indiana/Chicagoland Region: From Science to Preservation". The South Shore Journal, 3. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 2015-11-22. 
^ Sandboard Magazine
^ "Mystery of world's tallest sand dunes solved" - 24 November 2004 - New Scientist
^ Big Mama highest dune Archived 2 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Peeking Through the Haze: Titan's Surface, part II - The Planetary Society Blog | The Planetary Society Archived 28 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine.



References[edit]

Bagnold, Ralph (2012) [1941]. The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes. Courier Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-14119-0. 

Further reading[edit]

Ralph Lorenz; James Zimbelman (2014). Dune Worlds: How Wind-blown Sand Shapes Planetary Landscapes. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-89724-8. 
Anthony J. Parsons, A. D. Abrahams, ed. (2009). Geomorphology of Desert Environments. Springer. ISBN 978-1-4020-5718-2. 
Pye, Kenneth; Tsoar, Haim (2009). Aeolian Sand and Sand Dunes. Springer. ISBN 978-3-540-85909-3. 
"Nouakchott, Mauritania". NASA Earth Observatory. Archived from the original on 30 September 2006. Retrieved 28 April 2006. 
V. Badescu, R. B. Cathcart and A. A. Bolonkin, "Sand Dune Fixation: a solar-powered Sahara seawater pipeline macroproject", in: Land Degradation & Development; 19, (2008): doi:10.1002/ldr.864.
"Types of Dunes". USGS. Retrieved 2010-10-06. 
"Summary: Dunes, Parabolic". Desert Processes Working Group; Knowledge Sciences, Inc. Archived from the original on 21 October 2010. Retrieved 6 October 2010. 
"Fighting wind erosion. One aspect of the combat against desertification". Les dossiers thématiques du CSFD. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 4 January 2011. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to:
Dune (category)




Coastal Sand Dunes
Dune pattern identification, U.S. Army
The Bibliography of Aeolian Research
Gold Coast Dune Management Policy[permanent dead link]
USGS page on dune types
Great Sand Dunes National Park







v
t
e


River morphology



Large-scale features



Drainage basin
Drainage system (geomorphology)
Estuary
Strahler number (stream order)
River valley
River delta
River sinuosity





Alluvial rivers



Anabranch
Avulsion (river)
Bar (river morphology)
Braided river
Channel pattern
Cut bank
Floodplain
Meander
Meander cutoff
Mouth bar
Oxbow lake
Point bar
Riffle
Rapids
Riparian zone
River bifurcation
River channel migration
River mouth
Slip-off slope
Stream pool
Thalweg





Bedrock river



Canyon
Knickpoint
Plunge pool





Bedforms



Ait
Antidune
Dune
Current ripple





Regional processes



Aggradation
Base level
Degradation (geology)
Erosion and tectonics
River rejuvenation





Mechanics



Deposition (geology)
Water erosion
Exner equation
Hack's law
Helicoidal flow
Playfair's law
Sediment transport








Category
Portal












v
t
e


Coastal geography



Landforms



Anchialine pool
Archipelago
Atoll
Avulsion
Ayre
Barrier island
Bay
Baymouth bar
Bight
Bodden
Brackish marsh
Cape
Channel
Cliff
Coast
Coastal plain
Coastal waterfall
Continental margin
Continental shelf
Coral reef
Cove
Dune

cliff-top


Estuary
Firth
Fjard
Fjord
Freshwater marsh
Fundus
Gat
Geo
Gulf
Gut
Headland
Inlet
Intertidal wetland
Island
Islet
Isthmus
Lagoon
Machair
Marine terrace
Mega delta
Mouth bar
Mudflat
Natural arch
Peninsula
Reef
Regressive delta
Ria
River delta
Salt marsh
Shoal
Shore
Skerry
Sound
Spit
Stack
Strait
Strand plain
Submarine canyon
Tidal island
Tidal marsh
Tide pool
Tied island
Tombolo
Windwatt










Beaches



Beach cusps
Beach evolution
Coastal morphodynamics
Beach ridge
Beachrock
Pocket beach
Raised beach
Recession
Shell beach
Shingle beach
Storm beach
Wash margin





Processes



Blowhole
Cliffed coast
Coastal biogeomorphology
Coastal erosion
Concordant coastline
Current
Cuspate foreland
Discordant coastline
Emergent coastline
Feeder bluff
Fetch
Flat coast
Graded shoreline
Headlands and bays
Ingression coast
Large-scale coastal behaviour
Longshore drift
Marine regression
Marine transgression
Raised shoreline
Rip current
Rocky shore
Sea cave
Sea foam
Shoal
Steep coast
Submergent coastline
Surf break
Surf zone
Surge channel
Swash
Undertow
Volcanic arc
Wave-cut platform
Wave shoaling
Wind wave
Wrack zone





Management



Accretion
Coastal management
Integrated coastal zone management
Submersion





Related



Bulkhead line
Grain size

boulder
clay
cobble
granule
pebble
sand
shingle
silt


Intertidal zone
Littoral zone
Physical oceanography
Region of freshwater influence








 Category
 Commons












v
t
e


Patterns in nature



Patterns



Crack
Dune
Foam
Meander
Phyllotaxis
Soap bubble
Symmetry

in crystals
Quasicrystals
in flowers
in biology


Tessellation
Vortex street
Wave
Widmanstätten pattern








Causes



Pattern formation
Biology

Natural selection
Camouflage
Mimicry
Sexual selection


Mathematics

Chaos theory
Fractal
Logarithmic spiral


Physics

Crystal
Fluid dynamics
Plateau's laws
Self-organization







People



Plato
Pythagoras
Empedocles
Leonardo Fibonacci

Liber Abaci


Adolf Zeising
Ernst Haeckel
Joseph Plateau
Wilson Bentley
D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson

On Growth and Form


Alan Turing

The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis


Aristid Lindenmayer
Benoît Mandelbrot

How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional Dimension







Related



Pattern recognition
Emergence
Mathematics and art









Authority control



GND: 4013208-0
NDL: 00570079











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dune&oldid=817602316"					Categories: DunesAeolian landformsCoastal and oceanic landformsCoastal geographySedimentologyHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2010Use dmy dates from December 2010Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers