For other uses of "Dutch", see Dutch (disambiguation).


Dutch


Nederlands


Pronunciation
[ˈneːdərlɑnts] ( listen)


Native to
Mainly the Netherlands, Belgium, and Suriname; also in Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten, as well as France (French Flanders).


Region
Mainly Western Europe, today also in Africa, South America and the Caribbean.


Ethnicity
Dutch people
Flemish people



Native speakers

22 million (2016)[1]
Total (L1 plus L2 speakers): 28 million (2012)[2][3]



Language family


Indo-European

Germanic

West Germanic

Low Franconian (Frankish)

Dutch












Early forms


Old Dutch

Middle Dutch






Writing system

Latin (Dutch alphabet)
Dutch Braille



Signed forms

Signed Dutch (NmG)


Official status



Official language in


 Aruba
 Belgium
 Curaçao
 Netherlands
 Sint Maarten
 Suriname

 Benelux
 European Union
 South American Union
 Caricom


Regulated by
Nederlandse Taalunie
(Dutch Language Union)


Language codes


ISO 639-1
nl


ISO 639-2
dut (B)
nld (T)


ISO 639-3
nld Dutch/Flemish


Glottolog
mode1257[4]


Linguasphere
52-ACB-a



Dutch-speaking world (included are areas of daughter-language Afrikaans)




Distribution of the Dutch language and its dialects in Western Europe



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


The Dutch language ( Nederlands (help·info)) is a West Germanic language that is spoken by around 24 million people as a first language—including the population of the Netherlands and about sixty percent that of Belgium—and by another 5 million as a second language.[2][3][5][6] It is the third most widely spoken Germanic language, after English and German.
Outside the Low Countries, it is the native language of the majority of the population of Suriname, and also holds official status in Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, which are constituent countries of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Historical minorities on the verge of extinction remain in parts of France[7] and Germany, and in Indonesia,[n 1] while up to half a million native speakers may reside in the United States, Canada and Australia combined.[n 2] The Cape Dutch dialects of Southern Africa have evolved into Afrikaans, a mutually intelligible daughter language[n 3] which is spoken to some degree by at least 16 million people, mainly in South Africa and Namibia.[n 4]
Dutch is one of the closest relatives of both German and English[n 5] and is colloquially said to be "roughly in between" them.[n 6] Dutch, like English, has not undergone the High German consonant shift, does not use Germanic umlaut as a grammatical marker, has largely abandoned the use of the subjunctive, and has levelled much of its morphology, including most of its case system.[n 7] Features shared with German include the survival of two to three grammatical genders—albeit with few grammatical consequences[n 8]—as well as the use of modal particles,[8] final-obstruent devoicing, and a similar word order.[n 9] Dutch vocabulary is mostly Germanic and incorporates slightly more Romance loans than German but far fewer than English.[n 10]



Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Origins
2.2 Frankish (3rd century – )
2.3 Old Dutch (5th – 12th century)
2.4 Middle Dutch (12th – 15th century)
2.5 Modern Dutch (15th century – )


3 Classification
4 Dutch varieties

4.1 Dialect groups
4.2 Regional languages
4.3 Daughter and sister languages


5 Geographic distribution

5.1 Europe
5.2 Asia and Australasia

5.2.1 Asia
5.2.2 Australasia


5.3 Americas
5.4 Africa


6 Phonology

6.1 Consonants
6.2 Vowels
6.3 Diphthongs
6.4 Phonotactics
6.5 Polder Dutch


7 Grammar

7.1 Verbs and tenses
7.2 Genders and cases
7.3 Word order
7.4 Diminutives
7.5 Pronouns and determiners
7.6 Compounds


8 Vocabulary
9 Spelling and writing system
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Bibliography
14 External links



Name[edit]
Main article: Terminology of the Low Countries
In both Belgium and the Netherlands, the native official name for Dutch is Nederlands, and its dialects have their own names, e.g. Hollands ("Hollandic"), West-Vlaams ("West Flemish"), Brabants ("Brabantian").[9][10] Sometimes Vlaams ("Flemish") is used as well to describe Standard Dutch in Flanders.[11] Over time, the Dutch language has been known under a variety of names. In Middle Dutch Dietsc, Duutsc or Duitsc was used.[12] It derived from the Old Germanic word theudisk, which literarily means "popular" or "belonging to the populace". In Western Europe the term was used for the language of the local Germanic populace as opposed to Latin, the non-native language of writing and the Catholic Church.[13] In the first text in which it is found, dating from 784, theodisce refers to Anglo-Saxon, the West Germanic dialects of Britain.[14][15] Although in Britain the name Englisc replaced theodisce on an early age, speakers of West Germanic in other parts of Europe kept on using it as a reference to their local speech.
Owing to commercial and colonial rivalry in the 16th and 17th centuries between England and the Low Countries, the English cognate of theodisk developed into the exonym Dutch, which came to refer exclusively to the people of the Netherlands. Although the wider definition of Dutch that included "German" continued for a while longer in the US and survived there in the name Pennsylvania Dutch, a local German dialect. In the Low Countries on the contrary, Dietsch or Duytsch as endonym for Dutch went out of common use and had been gradually replaced by the Dutch endonym Nederlands. This designation started at the Burgundian court in the 15th century, although the use of neder, laag, bas and inferior ("nether" or "low") to refer to the area known as the Low Counties, goes back further in time. Earlier the Romans have been referring to the region as Germania Inferior ("Lower" Germania).[16][17][18] It is a reference to the Low Countries' downriver location at the Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta near the North Sea.
Vlaemsch, Hollandsch or Brabantsch were locally used endonyms to refer to the Dutch language as a whole.[19] Apart from these, the name Nederlands received since 1551 strong competition from the name Nederduits (literally "Low Dutch", i.e. "Dutch"). It is a calque of the before mentioned Roman province Germania Inferior. Early grammarians linked the name of the Dutch language to the Romans, in an attempt to give it more prestige. In addition, the Dutch exonym Hoogduits (literarily "High Dutch", i.e. the Germanic language spoken on higher grounds) for the German language came into use.[20]
However, the 19th century saw the rise of dialectology and the categorisation of dialects. German dialectologists termed the German varieties spoken in the mountainous south of Germany as Hochdeutsch ("High German"). Subsequently, German varieties spoken in the north were designated as Niederdeutsch ("Low German"). These were in the Dutch language area calqued as the exonyms Nederduits and Hoogduits and referred now to the German varieties of standard German. As a result, the Hoog ("High") was dropped in the Dutch exonym Hoogduits in the sense of the German standard language, meaning that Duits narrowed down as Dutch exonym for German. Moreover, Nederduits lost its meaning as endonym for Dutch, and Nederlands prevailed as sole Dutch endonym.
History[edit]
Main article: History of the Dutch language




The approximate extent of Germanic languages in the early 10th century.:
  Old West Norse
  Old East Norse
  Old Gutnish
  Old English (West Germanic)
  Continental West Germanic languages (Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Old High German).
  Crimean Gothic (East Germanic)



Old Dutch branched off more or less around the same time as Old English (Anglo-Saxon), Old High German, Old Frisian and Old Saxon did. The early form of Dutch was a set of Franconian dialects spoken by the Salian Franks in the fifth century, and thus, it has developed through Middle Dutch to Modern Dutch over the course of 15 centuries.[21] During that period, it forced Old Frisian back from the western coast to the north of the Low Countries, and influenced or even replaced Old Saxon spoken in the east (contiguous with the Low German area). On the other hand, Dutch has been replaced in adjacent lands in nowadays France and Germany. The division in Old, Middle and Modern Dutch is mostly conventional, since the transition between them was very gradual. One of the few moments linguists can detect somewhat of a revolution is when the Dutch standard language emerged and quickly established itself. The development of the Dutch language is illustrated by the following sentence in Old, Middle and Modern Dutch:

Irlôsin sol an frithe sêla mîna fan thên thia ginâcont mi, wanda under managon he was mit mi (Old Dutch)
Erlossen sal [hi] in vrede siele mine van dien die genaken mi, want onder menegen hi was met mi (Middle Dutch)
Verlossen zal hij in vrede ziel mijn van degenen die genaken mij, want onder menigen hij was met mij (Modern Dutch, same word order)
Hij zal mijn ziel in vrede verlossen van degenen die mij genaken, want onder menigen was hij met mij (Modern Dutch, default word order)[22]
He will deliver my soul in peace from those who come on to me, because, amongst many, he was with me (English)[23]

Origins[edit]




Map of the pre-Roman Iron Age in Northern Europe culture(s) associated with the Proto-Germanic language, ca 500–50 BCE. The area south of Scandinavia is the Jastorf culture.


Among the Indo-European languages, Dutch is grouped within the Germanic languages, meaning it shares a common ancestor with languages such as English, German, and the Scandinavian languages. All Germanic languages are subject to the Grimm's law and Verner's law sound shifts, which originated in the Proto-Germanic language and define the basic features differentiating them from other Indo-European languages. This is assumed to have taken place in approximately the mid-first millennium BCE in the pre-Roman Northern European Iron Age.[24]
The Germanic languages are traditionally divided into three groups: East (now extinct), West, and North Germanic.[25] They remained mutually intelligible throughout the Migration Period. Dutch is part of the West Germanic group, which also includes English, Scots, Frisian, Low German (Old Saxon) and High German. It is characterized by a number of phonological and morphological innovations not found in North or East Germanic.[26] The West Germanic varieties of the time are generally split into three dialect groups: Ingvaeonic (North Sea Germanic), Istvaeonic (Weser-Rhine Germanic) and Irminonic (Elbe Germanic). It appears that the Frankish tribes fit primarily into the Istvaeonic dialect group with certain Ingvaeonic influences towards the northwest, which are still seen in modern Dutch.
Frankish (3rd century – )[edit]
Main article: Frankish language
The Frankish language itself is poorly attested. A notable exception is the Bergakker inscription, found near the Dutch city of Tiel, which may represent a primary record of 5th-century Frankish. Although some place names recorded in Roman texts such as vadam (modern Dutch: wad, English: "mudflat"), could arguably be considered as the oldest single "Dutch" words, the Bergakker inscription yields the oldest evidence of Dutch morphology. However, there is no consensus on the interpretation of the rest of the text.[27]
The Franks emerged in the southern Netherlands (Salian Franks) and central Germany (Ripuarian Franks), and later descended into Gaul. The name of their kingdom survives in that of France, which ultimately traces its origins to the western portion of the kingdom. Although they ruled the Gallo-Romans for nearly 300 years, their language, Frankish, became extinct in most of France and was replaced by later forms of the language throughout Germany in around the 7th century. It was replaced in France by Old French (a Romance language with a considerable Old Frankish influence.
However, the Old Franconian language did not die out at large, as it continued to be spoken in the Low Countries and Germany, and subsequently evolved into what we now call Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch in the Low Countries and into the old forms of Moselle Franconian, Rhine Franconian, East Franconian and South Franconian dialects in what is today Germany, Luxembourg, Alsace and Lorraine.
In fact, Old Frankish could be reconstructed from Old Dutch and Frankish loanwords in Old French.[28]
Old Dutch (5th – 12th century)[edit]
Main article: Old Dutch




Area in which Old Dutch was spoken


Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch is regarded as the prime ancestor of a separate Dutch language. The "Low" in Old Low Franconian refers to the Low Countries, where Frankish was only minimally influenced by the High German consonant shift and the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law. The High German consonant shift, moving over Western Europe from south to west, caused a differentiation with the Central and High Franconian in Germany. The latter would as a consequence evolve (along with Alemannic, Bavarian and Lombardic) into Old High German. At more or less the same time the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law, moving over Western Europe from west to east, led to the development of Old English (or Anglo-Saxon), Old Frisian and Old Saxon. Hardly influenced by either development, Old Dutch remained close to the original language of the Franks, the people that would rule Europe for centuries. The language did however experience developments of its own, such as very early final-obstruent devoicing. In fact, the find at Bergakker indicates that the language may already have experienced this shift during the Old Frankish period.




The Utrecht baptismal vow


Attestations of Old Dutch sentences are extremely rare. The language is mostly recorded on fragmentary relics, and words have been reconstructed from Middle Dutch and loan words from Old Dutch in other languages.[29] The oldest recorded is found in the Salic law. In this Frankish document written around 510 the oldest Dutch sentence has been identified: Maltho thi afrio lito ("I say to you, I free you, serf") used to free a serf. Another old fragment of Dutch is Visc flot aftar themo uuatare ("A fish was swimming in the water"). The oldest conserved larger Dutch text is the Utrecht baptismal vow (776–800) starting with Forsachistu diobolae ... ec forsacho diabolae ("Do you forsake the devil? ... I forsake the devil"). If only for its poetic content, the most famous Old Dutch sentence is probably Hebban olla vogala nestas hagunnan, hinase hic enda tu, wat unbidan we nu ("All birds have started making nests, except me and you, what are we waiting for"), is dated to around the year 1100, written by a Flemish monk in a convent in Rochester, England. Since the sentence speaks to the imagination, it is often erroneously stated as the oldest Dutch sentence.
Middle Dutch (12th – 15th century)[edit]
Main article: Middle Dutch
Old Dutch naturally evolved into Middle Dutch. The year 1150 is often cited as the time of the discontinuity, but it actually marks a time of profuse Dutch writing and during this period a rich Medieval Dutch literature developed. There was at that time no overarching standard language; Middle Dutch is rather a collective name for a number of closely related mutually intelligible dialects whose ancestor was Old Dutch. Where Old Dutch fragments are very hard to read for untrained Modern Dutch speakers, the various literary works of Middle Dutch are somewhat more accessible.[30] The most notable difference between Old and Middle Dutch is in a feature of speech known as vowel reduction. Round vowels in word-final syllables are rather frequent in Old Dutch; in Middle Dutch, such vowels are leveled to a schwa.
The Middle Dutch dialect areas were affected by political boundaries. The sphere of political influence of a certain ruler often also created a sphere of linguistic influence, with the language within the area becoming more homogenous. Following the contemporary political divisions they are in order of importance:

West Flemish with the County of Flanders at its centre. It had been influential during the earlier Middle Ages (the "Flemish expansion") but lost prestige to the neighbouring Brabantian in the 13th century.
Brabantian, spoken primarily in the Duchy of Brabant and adjacent parts. It was an influential dialect during most of the Middle Ages, during the so-called "Brabantian expansion" in which the influence of Brabant was extended outwards into other areas.
Hollandic, which had the County of Holland as its heartland, where originally Old Frisian was spoken. The people mixed with Frankish settlers from Flanders and Brabant and a new Frankish dialect with a Frisian substrate developed. It was less influential during most of the Middle Ages but became more so in the 16th century during the "Hollandic expansion"; the Eighty Years' War took place in the Southern Netherlands during this period.
Limburgish, spoken by the people in the modern-day provinces of Dutch and Belgian Limburg, and adjacent lands in Germany. It was over time tied to different political areas and is therefore the most divergent of the dialects. It was even partly influenced by the High German consonant shift and is the most distant to the later developed standard language to which it contributed little. It was however the earliest Middle Dutch dialect that developed a literary tradition.
Since it has Old Saxon and not Low Franconian (Old Dutch) as its ancestor, Dutch Low Saxon is not strictly a Dutch dialect. However, it was influenced by Middle Dutch since the 14th century and it did play a part in the formation of the standard Dutch language in later periods. It was spoken in the Oversticht territories of the episcopal principality of Utrecht and adjacent parts of Guelders.

Modern Dutch (15th century – )[edit]




Title page of the Statenvertaling (1637) reads: Biblia [...] Uyt de Oorspronckelijcke talen in onse Neder-landtsche tale getrouwelijck over-geset. (English: From the Original languages into our Dutch language faithfully translated.[31]


A process of standardisation started in the Middle Ages, especially under the influence of the Burgundian Ducal Court in Dijon (Brussels after 1477). The dialects of Flanders and Brabant were the most influential around this time. The process of standardisation became much stronger at the start of the 16th century, mainly based on the urban dialect of Antwerp. The 1585 fall of Antwerp to the Spanish army led to a flight to the northern Netherlands, where the Dutch Republic declared its independence from Spain. This influenced the urban dialects of the province of County of Holland. In 1637, a further important step was made towards a unified language,[32] when the Statenvertaling, the first major Bible translation into Dutch, was created that people from all over the new republic could understand. It used elements from various, even Dutch Low Saxon, dialects but was predominantly based on the urban dialects of Holland of post 16th century.[33]
In the Southern Netherlands (now Belgium and Luxembourg), developments were different. Under subsequent Spanish, Austrian and French rule, the standardisation of Dutch language came to a standstill. The state, law, and increasingly education used French, yet more than half the Belgian population were speaking a variety of Dutch. In the course of the nineteenth century the Flemish Movement stood up for the rights of Dutch speakers, mostly which were referred to as "Flemish". However, the dialect variation was a serious disadvantage in the face of the standardised francophonie.[34] Since standardisation is a lengthy process, Dutch-speaking Belgium associated itself with the standard language that had already developed in the Netherlands over the centuries. Therefore, the situation in Belgium is essentially no different from that in the Netherlands, although there are recognisable differences in pronunciation, comparable to the pronunciation differences between standard British and standard American English.[35] In 1980 the Netherlands and Belgium concluded the Language Union Treaty. This treaty lays down the principle that the two countries must gear their language policy to each other, among other things, for a common system of spelling.
Classification[edit]




The simplified relation between the West Germanic languages



Indo-European languages

Germanic

West Germanic

Low Franconian

Dutch

Afrikaans, Dutch-based creoles











Dutch belongs to its own West Germanic sub-group, the Low Franconian languages, paired with its sister language Limburgish or East Low Franconian. Its closest relative is the mutually-intelligible daughter language, Afrikaans. Other West Germanic languages related to Dutch are German, English and the Frisian languages and the un-standardised languages Low German and Yiddish.
Dutch stands out in combining some Ingvaeonic characteristics (occurring consistently in English and Frisian and reduced in intensity from west to east over the continental West Germanic plane) with dominant Istvaeonic characteristics, of which some of them are also incorporated in German. Unlike German, Dutch (apart from Limburgish) has not been influenced at all by the south to north movement of the High German consonant shift and had some changes of its own.[36] The cumulation of these changes resulted over time in separate, but related standard languages with various degrees of similarities and differences between them. For a comparison between the West Germanic languages, see the sections Morphology, Grammar and Vocabulary.
Dutch varieties[edit]
Main article: Dutch dialects
Dutch dialects are primarily the dialects that are both related with the Dutch language and are spoken in the same language area as the Dutch standard language. Although heavily under the influence of the standard language, some of them remain remarkably diverse and are found in the Netherlands and northern Belgium. The area where they are spoken often correspond with former mediaeval counties and duchies. The Netherlands (but not Belgium) makes a distinction between a dialect and a streektaal ("regional language"). These words are actually more political than linguistic, because a regional language unite a large group of very differing varieties. Such is the case with the Gronings dialect, which is considered a variety of the Dutch Low Saxon regional language, but is in fact very distinct from other Low Saxon varieties due to a Frisian substrate. Also, some Dutch dialects are more remote from the Dutch standard language than some varieties of a regional language are. Such is the case with West Flemish, which is considered a Dutch dialect but is far more remote from the standard language than most Dutch Low Saxon varieties are. Within the Netherlands, a further distinction is made between a regional language and a separate language, which is the case with the (standardised) West Frisian language. It is spoken next to Dutch in the province of Friesland.
Dutch dialects and regional languages are not spoken as often as they used to be. Although this is much less the case in Belgium (Flanders) than in the Netherlands. Recent research by Geert Driessen shows that the use of dialects and regional languages among both Dutch adults and youth is in heavy decline. In 1995, 27 percent of the Dutch adult population spoke a dialect or regional language on a regular basis, while in 2011 this was no more than 11 percent. In 1995, 12 percent of the primary school aged children spoke a dialect or regional language, while in 2011 this had declined to 4 percent. Of the officially recognized regional languages Limburgish is spoken most (in 2011 among adults 54%, among children 31%) and Dutch Low Saxon least (adults 15%, children 1%). The decline of the West Frisian language in Friesland occupies a middle position (adults 44%, children 22%). Dialects are most often spoken in rural areas, however, a lot of cities have a distinct city dialect. For example, the city of Ghent has very distinct "g", "e" and "r" sounds, differing a lot from the surrounding villages. The Brussels dialect combines Brabantian with words adopted from Walloon and French.
Some of the dialects had until recently extensions across the borders of other standard language areas. In most cases the heavy influence of the standard language has broken the dialect continuum. Examples are the Gronings dialect spoken in Groningen as well as the closely related varieties in adjacent East Frisia (Germany). South Guelderish (Zuid-Gelders) is a dialect spoken in Gelderland (Netherlands) and in closely related varieties in adjacent parts of North Rhine-Westphalia (Germany). Limburgish (Limburgs) is spoken in Limburg (Belgium) as well as in Limburg (Netherlands) and extends across the German border. West Flemish (Westvlaams) is spoken in West Flanders, the western part of Zeelandic Flanders and also in French Flanders, where it virtually became extinct to make way for French.




Dutch dialects


  [West Flemish





1. West Flemish and Zeeuws Flemish
2. Zeelandic







  Hollandic





3. South Hollandic
4. Westhoeks
5. Waterlands and Volendams
6. Zaans
7. Kennemerlands
8. West Frisian
9. Bildts, Midslands, Stadsfries and Amelands







  Dutch Low Saxon





10. Kollumerlands
11. Gronings and North Drents
12. Stellingwerfs
13. Middle Drents
14. South Drents
15. Twents
16. Twents-Graafschaps
17. Sallands, Achterhooks and Urks
18. Veluws







  Eastern Hollandic





19. Utrechts-Alblasserwaards







  Brabantian





20. South Guelderish
21. North Brabantian and North Limburgs
22. Brabantian
23. East Flemish







  Limburgish





24. Limburgish







  Miscellaneous





FL. Province Flevoland. No dialect a majority, because of its short existence. (Post World War II)
The blank area (near zone 9) speaks West Frisian, a separate language.








Dialect groups[edit]
The West Flemish group of dialects, spoken in West Flanders and Zeeland, is so distinct that it might be considered as a separate language variant, although the strong significance of language in Belgian politics would prevent the government from classifying them as such. An oddity of the dialect is that, the voiced velar fricative (written as "g" in Dutch) shifts to a voiced glottal fricative (written as "h" in Dutch), while the letter "h" becomes mute (just like in French). As a result, when West Flemings try to talk Standard Dutch, they're often unable to pronounce the g-sound, and pronounce it similar to the h-sound. This leaves f.e. no difference between "held" (hero) and "geld" (money). Or in some cases, they are aware of the problem, and hyper-correct the "h" into a voiced velar fricative or g-sound, again leaving no difference. The West Flemish variety historically spoken in adjacent parts in France is sometimes called French Flemish and is listed as a French minority language, however only a very small and aging minority of the French-Flemish population still speaks and understands West Flemish.
Hollandic is spoken in Holland and Utrecht, though the original forms of this dialect (which were heavily influenced by a West Frisian substratum and, from the 16th century on, by Brabantian dialects) are now relatively rare. The urban dialects of the Randstad, which are Hollandic dialects, do not diverge from standard Dutch very much, but there is a clear difference between the city dialects of Rotterdam, The Hague, Amsterdam and Utrecht. In some rural Hollandic areas more authentic Hollandic dialects are still being used, especially north of Amsterdam. Another group of dialects based on Hollandic is that spoken in the cities and larger towns of Friesland, where it partially displaced West Frisian in the 16th century and is known as Stadsfries ("Urban Frisian").
Brabantian is named after the historical Duchy of Brabant, which corresponded mainly to the provinces of North Brabant and southern Gelderland, the Belgian provinces of Antwerp and Flemish Brabant, as well as Brussels (where its native speakers have become a minority) and the province of Walloon Brabant. Brabantian expands into small parts in the west of Limburg while its strong influence on the East Flemish of East Flanders and eastern Zeelandic Flanders[37] weakens towards the west. In a small area in the northwest of North Brabant (Willemstad), Hollandic is spoken. Conventionally, the South Guelderish dialects are distinguished from Brabantian, but there are no objective criteria apart from geography to do so. Over 5 million people live in an area with some form of Brabantian being the predominant colloquial language out of the area's 22 million Dutch-speakers.[38][39]
Limburgish, spoken in both Belgian Limburg and Netherlands Limburg and in adjacent parts in Germany, is considered as a dialect in Belgium, while having obtained the status of official regional language in the Netherlands.
Regional languages[edit]
The Dutch Low Saxon dialect area, comprising the provinces of Groningen, Drenthe and Overijssel, and parts of the province of Gelderland as well. The IJssel roughly forms the linguistic watershed here. This group, which is not Low Franconian but instead Low Saxon and close to neighbouring Low German, has been elevated by the Netherlands (and by Germany) to the legal status of streektaal (regional language) according to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. It is regarded as Dutch for a number of reasons. From the 14th to 15th century onward, its urban centers (Deventer, Zwolle, Kampen, Zutphen and Doesburg) have been increasingly influenced by the western written Dutch and became a linguistically mixed area. From the 17th century onward, it was gradually integrated into the Dutch language area.[40] Dutch Low Saxon used to be at one end of the Low German dialect continuum. However, the national border has given way to dialect boundaries coinciding with a political border, because the traditional dialects are strongly influenced by the national standard varieties.[41] Cross-the-border dialects now separated by a plain gap also include South Guelderish and Limburgish on the Dutch side of the border and Meuse-Rhenish on the German side of the border.[42]
Limburgish has the status of official regional language (or streektaal) in the Netherlands and Germany, but not in Belgium. It receives protection by chapter 2 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Limburgish has been influenced by the Rhinelandic varieties like the Colognian dialect, and has had a somewhat different development since the late Middle Ages.
Daughter and sister languages[edit]
Afrikaans, although mutually intelligible with Dutch, is not a dialect but a separate standardised language. It is spoken in South Africa and Namibia. As a daughter language of Dutch, Afrikaans evolved mainly from 17th century Dutch dialects, but was influenced by various other languages in South Africa.
West Frisian (Westerlauwers Fries), along with Saterland Frisian and North Frisian, evolved from the same branch of the West Germanic languages as Old English (i.e. Anglo-Frisian) and are therefore genetically more closely related to English and Scots than to Dutch. Although the different influences on the respective languages, particularly that of Norman French on English and Dutch on West Frisian, have rendered English quite distinct from West Frisian, and West Frisian less distinct from Dutch than from English. Although under heavy influence of the Dutch standard language, it is not mutually intelligible with Dutch and considered a sister language of Dutch, like English and German.[43]
Geographic distribution[edit]
See also: Dutch diaspora


Country
Speakers
Year


Netherlands
7007160740000000000♠16,074,000[44][45]
2017


Belgium
7006629135800000000♠6,291,358[46][47]
2017


Suriname
7005400000000000000♠400,000[48]
2017


Caribbean Netherlands
7004209000000000000♠20,900[citation needed]
N/A


Curaçao
7004114000000000000♠11,400[citation needed]
2011


Aruba
7003529000000000000♠5,290[citation needed]
N/A


Sint Maarten
7003200000000000000♠2,000[citation needed]
2011


Total worldwide
7007228049480000000♠22,804,948
N/A


Dutch is an official language of the Netherlands proper, Belgium, Suriname, the Dutch Caribbean municipal (St. Eustatius Saba & Bonaire), Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten. Dutch is also an official language of several international organisations, such as the European Union, Union of South American Nations [49] and the Caribbean Community. At an academic level, Dutch is taught in about 175 universities in 40 countries. About 15,000 students worldwide study Dutch at university.[50]
Europe[edit]
In Europe, Dutch is the majority language in the Netherlands (96%) and Belgium (59%) as well as a minority language in Germany and northern France's French Flanders, where it is in the ultimate stage of language death. Though Belgium as a whole is multilingual, the two regions into which the country is divided (Flanders, francophone Wallonia, bilingual Brussels and small "facility" zones) are largely monolingual. The Netherlands and Belgium produce the vast majority of music, films, books and other media written or spoken in Dutch.[51] Dutch is a monocentric language, with all speakers using the same standard form (authorized by the Dutch Language Union) based on a Dutch orthography employing the Latin alphabet when writing. In stark contrast to its written uniformity, Dutch lacks a prestige dialect and has a large dialectal continuum consisting of 28 main dialects, which can themselves be further divided into at least 600 distinguishable varieties.[52][53]
Outside the Netherlands and Belgium, the dialect around the German town of Kleve (South Guelderish) both historically and genetically belongs to the Dutch language. In North-Western France, the area around Calais was historically Dutch-speaking (West Flemish), of which an estimated 20,000 are daily speakers. The cities of Dunkirk, Gravelines and Bourbourg only became predominantly French-speaking by the end of the 19th century. In the countryside, until World War I, many elementary schools continued to teach in Dutch, and the Catholic Church continued to preach and teach the catechism in Dutch in many parishes.[54]
During the second half of the 19th century, Dutch was banned from all levels of education by both Prussia and France and lost most of its functions as a cultural language. In both Germany and France, the Dutch standard language is largely absent, and speakers of these Dutch dialects will use German or French in everyday speech. Dutch is not afforded legal status in France or Germany, either by the central or regional public authorities, and knowledge of the language is declining among younger generations.[55]
As a foreign language, Dutch is mainly taught in primary and secondary schools in areas adjacent to the Netherlands and Flanders. In French-speaking Belgium, over 300,000 pupils are enrolled in Dutch courses, followed by over 23,000 in the German states of Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia, and about 7,000 in the French region of Nord-Pas-de-Calais (of which 4,550 are in primary school).[56] At an academic level, the largest number of faculties of neerlandistiek can be found in Germany (30 universities), followed by France (20 universities) and the United Kingdom (5 universities).[56][57]
Asia and Australasia[edit]
Asia[edit]
Despite the Dutch presence in Indonesia for almost 350 years, as the Asian bulk of the Dutch East Indies, the Dutch language has no official status there[58] and the small minority that can speak the language fluently are either educated members of the oldest generation, or employed in the legal profession,[59] as certain law codes are still only available in Dutch.[60] Dutch is taught in various educational centres in Indonesia, the most important of which is the Erasmus Language Centre (ETC) in Jakarta. Each year, some 1,500 to 2,000 students take Dutch courses there.[61] In total, several thousand Indonesians study Dutch as a foreign language.[62] Owing to centuries of Dutch rule in Indonesia, many old documents are written in Dutch. Many universities therefore include Dutch as a source language, mainly for law and history students.[63] In Indonesia this involves about 35,000 students.[50]
Unlike other European nations, the Dutch chose not to follow a policy of language expansion amongst the indigenous peoples of their colonies.[64] In the last quarter of the 19th century, however, a local elite gained proficiency in Dutch so as to meet the needs of expanding bureaucracy and business.[65] Nevertheless, the Dutch government remained reluctant to teach Dutch on a large scale for fear of destabilising the colony. Dutch, the language of power, was supposed to remain in the hands of the leading elite.[65]
After independence, Dutch was dropped as an official language and replaced by Malay. Yet the Indonesian language inherited many words from Dutch: words for everyday life as well as scientific and technological terms.[66] One scholar argues that 20% of Indonesian words can be traced back to Dutch words,[67] many of which are transliterated to reflect phonetic pronunciation e.g. kantoor "office" in Indonesian is kantor, while bus "bus" becomes bis. In addition, many Indonesian words are calques of Dutch; for example, rumah sakit "hospital" is calqued on the Dutch ziekenhuis (literally "sickhouse"), kebun binatang "zoo" on dierentuin (literally "animal garden"), undang-undang dasar "constitution" from grondwet (literally "ground law"). These account for some of the differences in vocabulary between Indonesian and Malay.
Australasia[edit]
After the declaration of independence of Indonesia, Western New Guinea, the "wild east" of the Dutch East Indies, remained a Dutch colony until 1962, known as Netherlands New Guinea.[68] Despite prolonged Dutch presence, the Dutch language is not spoken by many Papuans, the colony having been ceded to Indonesia in 1963.
Dutch-speaking immigrant communities can also be found in Australia and New Zealand. The 2011 Australian census showed 37,248 people speaking Dutch at home.[69] At the 2006 New Zealand census, 26,982 people, or 0.70 percent of the total population, reported to speak Dutch to sufficient fluency that they could hold an everyday conversation.[70]
Americas[edit]




The location of Suriname in South America






The location of the Dutch Caribbean in the southern Caribbean


In contrast to the colonies in the East Indies, from the second half of the 19th century onwards, the Netherlands envisaged expansion of Dutch in its colonies in the West Indies. Until 1863, when slavery was abolished in the West Indies, slaves were forbidden to speak Dutch, with the effect that local creoles such as Papiamento and Sranan Tongo which were based not on Dutch but rather other European languages, became common in the Dutch West Indies. However, as most of the people in the Colony of Surinam (now Suriname) worked on Dutch plantations, this reinforced the use of Dutch as a means for direct communication.[65][71]
In Suriname today, Dutch is the sole official language,[72] and over 60 percent of the population speaks it as a mother tongue.[5] Dutch is the obligatory medium of instruction in schools in Suriname, even for non-native speakers.[73] A further twenty-four percent of the population speaks Dutch as a second language.[74] Suriname gained its independence from the Netherlands in 1975 and has been an associate member of the Dutch Language Union since 2004.[75] The lingua franca of Suriname, however, is Sranan Tongo,[76] spoken natively by about a fifth of the population.[51][77]
In Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, all parts of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Dutch is the official language but spoken as a first language by only 7% to 8% of the population,[78] although most native-born people on the islands can speak the language since the education system is in Dutch at some or all levels.
In the United States, a now extinct dialect of Dutch, Jersey Dutch, spoken by descendants of 17th-century Dutch settlers in Bergen and Passaic counties, was still spoken as late as 1921.[79] Other Dutch-based creole languages once spoken in the Americas include Mohawk Dutch (in Albany, New York), Berbice (in Guyana), Skepi (in Essequibo, Guyana) and Negerhollands (in the United States Virgin Islands). Pennsylvania Dutch is not a member of the set of Dutch dialects and is less misleadingly called Pennsylvania German.[80]
Martin Van Buren, the eighth President of the United States, spoke Dutch as his first language and is the only U.S. President to have spoken a language other than English as his first language. Dutch prevailed for many generations as the dominant language in parts of New York along the Hudson River. Another famous American born in this region who spoke Dutch as a first language was Sojourner Truth.
According to the 2000 United States census, 150,396 people spoke Dutch at home,[81] while according to the 2006 Canadian census, this number reaches 160,000 Dutch speakers.[82] At an academic level, 20 universities offer Dutch studies in the United States.[56][57] In Canada, Dutch is the fourth most spoken language by farmers, after English, French and German,[83] and the fifth most spoken non-official language overall (by 0.6% of Canadians).[84]
Africa[edit]
Main article: Afrikaans




The distribution of Afrikaans across South Africa: proportion of the population speaking Afrikaans at home



  0–20%
  20–40%
  40–60%



  60–80%
  80–100%






The largest legacy of the Dutch language lies in South Africa, which attracted large numbers of Dutch, Flemish and other northwest European farmer (in Dutch, boer) settlers, all of whom were quickly assimilated.[85] The long isolation from the rest of the Dutch-speaking world made the Dutch as spoken in Southern Africa evolve into what is now Afrikaans.[86] In 1876, the first Afrikaans newspaper called Die Afrikaanse Patriot was published in the Cape Colony.[87]
European Dutch remained the literary language[86] until the start of the 1920s, when under pressure of Afrikaner nationalism the local "African" Dutch was preferred over the written, European-based standard.[85] In 1925, section 137 of the 1909 constitution of the Union of South Africa was amended by Act 8 of 1925, stating "the word Dutch in article 137 ... is hereby declared to include Afrikaans".[88][89] The constitution of 1983 only listed English and Afrikaans as official languages. It is estimated that between 90% to 95% of Afrikaans vocabulary is ultimately of Dutch origin.[90][91]
Both languages are still largely mutually intelligible, although this relation can in some fields (such as lexicon, spelling and grammar) be asymmetric, as it is easier for Dutch speakers to understand written Afrikaans than it is for Afrikaans speakers to understand written Dutch.[92] Afrikaans is grammatically far less complex than Dutch, and vocabulary items are generally altered in a clearly patterned manner, e.g. vogel becomes voël ("bird") and regen becomes reën ("rain").[93] In South Africa, the number of students following Dutch at university is difficult to estimate, since the academic study of Afrikaans inevitably includes the study of Dutch.[50] Elsewhere in the world, the number of people learning Dutch is relatively small.
See also: Differences between Afrikaans and Dutch
It is the third language of South Africa in terms of native speakers (~13.5%),[94] of whom 53 percent are Coloureds and 42.4 percent Whites.[95] In 1996, 40 percent of South Africans reported to know Afrikaans at least at a very basic level of communication.[96] It is the lingua franca in Namibia,[85][97][98] where it is spoken natively in 11 percent of households.[99] In total, Afrikaans is the first language in South Africa alone of about 7.1 million people[94] and is estimated to be a second language for at least 10 million people worldwide,[100] compared to over 23 million[5] and 5 million respectively, for Dutch.[2]
Dutch colonial presence elsewhere in Africa, notably Dutch Gold Coast, was too ephemeral not to be wiped out by prevailing colonizing European successors. Belgian colonial presence in Congo and Rwanda-Urundi (Burundi and Rwanda, held under League of Nations mandate and later UN trust) left little (Flemish) Dutch legacy, as French was the main colonial language.[101]
Phonology[edit]
Main article: Dutch phonology



This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


For further details on different realisations of phonemes, dialectal differences and example words, see the full article at Dutch phonology.
Consonants[edit]
Unlike other Germanic languages, Dutch doesn't have phonological aspiration of consonants.[102] Like English, Dutch did not participate in the second consonant shift. Like most Germanic languages, the Dutch consonant system did not undergo the High German consonant shift and has a syllable structure that allows fairly complex consonant clusters. Dutch also retains full use of the velar fricatives that were present in Proto-Germanic, but lost or modified in many other Germanic languages. Dutch has final-obstruent devoicing: at the end of a word, voicing distinction is neutralised and all obstruents are pronounced voiceless. For example, Dutch goede (̇‘good’) is /ˈɣudə/ but the related form goed is /ɣut/. Dutch shares this final-obstruent devoicing with German (the Dutch noun goud is pronounced [ɣɑut], the adjective gouden is pronounced [ɣɑudə(n)], like the German noun Gold, pronounced [ɡɔlt], adjective golden, pronounced [ɡɔldn] vs English gold and golden, both pronounced with [d].)
Voicing of pre-vocalic initial voiceless alveolar fricatives occurs, although less in Dutch than in German (Dutch zeven, German sieben with [z] versus English seven and Low German seven with [s]), and also the shift /θ/ → /d/. Dutch shares only with Low German the development of /xs/ → /ss/ (Dutch vossen, ossen and Low German Vösse, Ossen versus German Füchse, Ochsen and English foxes, oxen), and also the development of /ft/ → /xt/ though it is far more common in Dutch (Dutch zacht and Low German sacht versus German sanft and English soft, but Dutch kracht versus German Kraft and English craft).


 
Bilabial
Labio-
dental
Alveolar
Post-
alveolar
Velar/
Uvular
Glottal


Nasal
m

n

ŋ



Plosive
p b

t d

k ɡ
(ʔ)


Fricative

f v
s z
ʃ ʒ
x ɣ
ɦ


Trill


r



Approximant
ʋ
l

j



Notes:

[ʔ] is not a separate phoneme in Dutch, but is inserted before vowel-initial syllables within words after /a/ and /ə/ and often also at the beginning of a word.
The realization of /r/ phoneme varies considerably from dialect to dialect and even between speakers in the same dialect area. Common realisations are an alveolar trill [r], alveolar tap [ɾ], uvular trill [ʀ], voiced uvular fricative [ʁ], and alveolar approximant [ɹ].
The realization of /ʋ/ also varies somewhat by area and speaker. The main realisation is a labiodental approximant [ʋ], but some speakers, particularly in the south, use a bilabial approximant [β̞] or a labiovelar approximant [w].
The lateral /l/ is slightly velarized postvocalically in most dialects, particularly in the north.[103]
/x/ and /ɣ/ may be true velars [x] and [ɣ], uvular [χ] and [ʁ] or palatal [ç] and [ʝ]. The more palatal realisations are common in southern areas, while uvulars are common in the north.
Some northern dialects have a tendency to devoice all fricatives regardless of environment. This is particularly common with /ɣ/ but can affect others as well.
/ʃ/ and /ʒ/ are not native phonemes of Dutch, and usually occur in borrowed words, like show and bagage (‘baggage’).
/ɡ/ is not a native phoneme of Dutch and only occurs in borrowed words, like garçon.

Vowels[edit]
Like English, Dutch did not develop i-mutation as a morphological marker and shares with most Germanic languages the lengthening of short vowels in stressed open syllables, which has led to contrastive vowel length that is used as a morphological marker. Dutch has an extensive vowel inventory. Vowels can be grouped as back rounded, front unrounded and front rounded. They are also traditionally distinguished by length or tenseness.
Vowel length is not always considered a distinctive feature in Dutch phonology, because it normally co-occurs with changes in vowel quality. One feature or the other may be considered redundant, and some phonemic analyses prefer to treat it as an opposition of tenseness. However, even if not considered part of the phonemic opposition, the long/tense vowels are still realised as phonetically longer than their short counterparts. The changes in vowel quality are also not always the same in all dialects, and in some there may be little difference at all, with length remaining the primary distinguishing feature. And while it is true that older words always pair vowel length with a change in vowel quality, new loanwords have reintroduced phonemic oppositions of length. Compare zonne(n) [ˈzɔnə] ("suns") versus zone [ˈzɔːnə] ("zone") versus zonen [ˈzoːnə(n)] ("sons"), or kroes [krus] ("mug") versus cruise [kruːs] ("cruise").




Short/lax vowels


Front
unr.
Front
rnd.
Central
Back


Close
ɪ
ʏ




Mid
ɛ

ə
ɔ


Open

ɑ



 


Long/tense vowels


Front
unr.
Front
rnd.
Back


Close
i ~ iː
y ~ yː
u ~ uː


Close-mid
eː
øː
oː


Open-mid
(ɛː)
(œː)
(ɔː)


Open
aː






Notes:

The distinction between /i y u/ and /iː yː uː/ is only slight, and may be considered allophonic for most purposes. However, some recent loanwords have introduced distinctively long /iː yː uː/, making the length distinction marginally phonemic.
The long close-mid vowels /eː øː oː/ are realised as slightly closing diphthongs [eɪ øʏ oʊ] in many northern dialects.
The long open-mid vowels /ɛː œː ɔː/ only occur in a handful of loanwords, mostly from French. In certain Belgian Dutch varieties they may also occur as realisations of /ɛi œy au/.[103]
The long close and close-mid vowels are often pronounced more closed or as centering diphthongs before an /r/ in the syllable coda. This may occur before coda /l/ as well.

Diphthongs[edit]
See also: IJ (digraph)
Unique to the development of Dutch is the collapse of older ol/ul/al + dental into ol + dental, followed by vocalisation of pre-consonantal /l/ and after a short vowel, creating the diphthong /ɑu/ e.g., Dutch goud, zout and bout corresponds with Low German Gold, Solt, Bolt; German Gold, Salz, Balt and English gold, salt, bold. This is the most common diphthong along with /ɛi œy/. All three are commonly the only ones considered unique phonemes in Dutch. The tendency for native English speakers is to pronounce Dutch names with /ɛi/ (written as ij or ei) as /aɪ/, (like the English vowel y) which does not normally lead to confusion among native listeners, since in a number of dialects (e.g. in Amsterdam[104]) the same pronunciation is heard.
In contrast, /ɑi/ and /ɔi/ are rare in Dutch, and occur only in some words. The "long/tense" diphthongs, while they are indeed realised as proper diphthongs, are generally analysed phonemically as a long/tense vowel followed by a glide /j/ or /ʋ/. All diphthongs end in a close vowel (/i y u/). They are grouped here by their first element.




Short/lax diphthongs


Front
unr.
Front
rnd.
Back


Close





Mid
ɛi
œy
(ɔi)


Open


ɑu (ɑi)



 


Long/tense diphthongs


Front
unr.
Front
rnd.
Back


Close
iu
yu
ui


Mid
eːu

oːi


Open
aːi






Phonotactics[edit]
The syllable structure of Dutch is (C)(C)(C)V(C)(C)(C)(C). Many words, as in English, begin with three consonants; for example, straat /straːt/ (street). There are words that end in four consonants, e.g., herfst /ɦɛrfst/ 'autumn', ergst /ɛrxst/ 'worst', interessantst 'most interesting', sterkst /stɛrkst/ 'strongest', the last three of which are superlative adjectives.
The highest number of consonants in a single cluster is found in the word slechtstschrijvend /ˈslɛxtstˌsxrɛi̯vənt/ 'writing worst' with 7 consonant phonemes. Similar is angstschreeuw  /ˈɑŋstsxreːu̯/ (help·info) "scream in fear", with six in a row.
Polder Dutch[edit]
A notable change in pronunciation has been occurring in younger generations in the provinces of Utrecht, North and South Holland, which has been dubbed "Polder Dutch" by Jan Stroop.[105] These speakers pronounce ⟨ij/ei⟩, ⟨ou/au⟩, and ⟨ui⟩, which used to be pronounced as /ɛi/, /ɔu/, and /œy/, increasingly lowered, as [ai], [au], and [ay] respectively. Instead, /eː/, /oː/, and /øː/ are pronounced as diphthongs now, as [ei], [ou], and [øy][106] respectively, which makes this change an instance of a chain shift.
This change is interesting from a sociolinguistic point of view because it has apparently happened relatively recently, in the 1970s, and was pioneered by older well-educated women from the upper middle classes.[107] The lowering of the diphthongs has long been current in many Dutch dialects, and is comparable to the English Great Vowel Shift, and the diphthongisation of long high vowels in Modern High German, which centuries earlier reached the state now found in Polder Dutch. Stroop theorizes that the lowering of open-mid to open diphthongs is a phonetically "natural" and inevitable development and that Dutch, after having diphthongised the long high vowels like German and English, "should" have lowered the diphthongs like German and English as well.
Instead, he argues, this development has been artificially frozen in an "intermediate" state by the standardisation of Dutch pronunciation in the 16th century, where lowered diphthongs found in rural dialects were perceived as ugly by the educated classes and accordingly declared substandard. Now, however, in his opinion, the newly affluent and independent women can afford to let that natural development take place in their speech. Stroop compares the role of Polder Dutch with the urban variety of British English pronunciation called Estuary English.
Among Belgian and Surinamese Dutch speakers and speakers from other regions in the Netherlands, this vowel shift is not taking place.
Grammar[edit]
Main article: Dutch grammar
See also: DT-Manie
Dutch is grammatically similar to German, such as in syntax and verb morphology (for a comparison of verb morphology in English, Dutch and German, see Germanic weak verb and Germanic strong verb). Grammatical cases have largely fallen out of use and are now mostly limited to pronouns and a large number of set phrases. Inflected forms of the articles are also often found in surnames and toponyms.
Standard Dutch uses three genders to differentiate between natural gender and three when discerning grammatical gender. But for most non-Belgian speakers, the masculine and feminine genders have merged to form the common gender (de), while the neuter (het) remains distinct as before. This gender system is similar to those of most Continental Scandinavian languages. As in English, but to a lesser degree, the inflectional grammar of the language (e.g., adjective and noun endings) has simplified over time.
Verbs and tenses[edit]
When grouped according to their conjugational class, Dutch has four main verb types: weak verbs, strong verbs, irregular verbs and mixed verbs.
Weak verbs are the most numerous verbs, constituting about 60% of all verbs. In weak verbs, the past tense and past participle are formed with a dental suffix:

Weak verbs with past in -de
Weak verbs with past in -te

Strong verbs are the second most numerous verb group. Here the past tense is formed by changing the vowel of the stem. This pattern is not uniform and Dutch distinguishes between 7 classes of strong verbs, of which 5 have an internal variant allowing for 12 different patterns of strong verb conjugation.


Verb class
Verb
Present
Past
Perfect


1
kijken
(to watch)
kijk
keek
gekeken


2a
bieden
(to offer)
bied
bood
geboden


2b
stuiven
(to gush)
stuif
stoof
gestoven


3a
klimmen
(to climb)
klim
klom
geklommen


3b
zenden
(to send)
zend
zond
gezonden


4
breken
(to break)
breek
brak
gebroken


5a
geven
(to give)
geef
gaf
gegeven


5b
zitten
(to sit)
zit
zat
gezeten


6a
dragen
(to carry)
draag
droeg
gedragen


6b
heffen
(to lift)
hef
hief
geheven


7a
roepen
(to call)
roep
riep
geroepen


7b
vangen
(to catch)
vang
ving
gevangen


Mixed verbs are verbs which have a weak past tense (-de or -te), but strong past participle (-en) or a strong past tense (vowel change), but weak past participle.
In Dutch the irregular verbs are the least numerous, but most used verb forms.
The reflexive pronoun zich (Germ sich) is used for the third person singular in reflexive verbs. It was originally borrowed from Limburgish, which is why in all other Dutch dialects (like in English) the usual reflexive is hem/haar or z'n eigen.
Genders and cases[edit]
As in English, the case system of Dutch and the subjunctive have largely fallen out of use, and the system has generalised the dative over the accusative case for certain pronouns (NL: me, je; EN: me, you; LI: mi, di vs. DE: mich/mir, dich/dir). While standard Dutch has three grammatical genders, this has few grammatical consequences and the masculine and feminine gender are often merged into a common gender in the Netherlands but not in Belgium (EN: none; NL/LI: common and neuter; in Belgium masculine, feminine and neuter is in use).
Modern Dutch has mostly lost its case system.[108] However, certain idioms and expressions continue to include now archaic case declensions. The article has just two forms, de and het, more complex than English, which has only "the". The use of the older inflected form den in the dative or accusative as well as use of 'der' in the dative are restricted to numerous set phrases, surnames and toponyms.



Masculine singular
Feminine singular
Neuter singular
Plural (any gender)


Nominative
de
de
het
de


Genitive
van de / des
van de / der
van het / des
van de / der


Dative
(aan / voor) de
(aan / voor) de
(aan / voor) het
(aan / voor) de


Accusative
de
de
het
de


In modern Dutch, the genitive articles 'des' and 'der' are commonly used in idioms. Other usage is typically considered archaic, poetic or stylistic. In most circumstances, the preposition 'van' is instead used, followed by the normal definitive article 'de' or 'het'. For the idiomatic use of the articles in the genitive, see for example:

Masculine singular: "des duivels" (lit: of the devil) (common proverbial meaning: Seething with rage)
Feminine singular: het woordenboek der Friese taal (the dictionary of the Frisian language)
Neuter singular: de vrouw des huizes (the lady of the house)
Plural: de voortgang der werken (the progress of (public) works)

In contemporary usage, the genitive case still occurs a little more often with plurals than with singulars, as the plural article is 'der' for all genders and no special noun inflection must be taken account of. 'Der' is commonly used in order to avoid reduplication of 'van', e.g. het merendeel der gedichten van de auteur instead of het merendeel van de gedichten van de auteur ("the bulk of the author's poems").
There is also a genitive form for the pronoun die/dat ("that [one], those [ones]"), namely diens for masculine and neuter singulars (occurrences of dier for feminine singular and all plurals are extremely rare). Although usually avoided in common speech, this form can be used instead of possessive pronouns to avoid confusion. Compare:

Hij vertelde over zijn zoon en zijn vrouw. – He told about his son and his (own) wife.
Hij vertelde over zijn zoon en diens vrouw. – He told about his son and the latter's wife.

Analogically, the relative and interrogative pronoun wie ("who") has the genitive forms wiens and wier (corresponding to English "whose", but less frequent in use).
Dutch also has a range of fixed expressions that make use of the genitive articles, which can be abbreviated using apostrophes. Common examples include "'s ochtends" (with 's as abbreviation of des; in the morning) and "desnoods" (lit: of the need, translated: if necessary).
The Dutch written grammar has simplified over the past 100 years: cases are now mainly used for the pronouns, such as ik (I), mij, me (me), mijn (my), wie (who), wiens (whose: masculine or neuter singular), wier (whose: feminine singular; masculine, feminine or neuter plural). Nouns and adjectives are not case inflected (except for the genitive of proper nouns (names): -s, -'s or -'). In the spoken language cases and case inflections had already gradually disappeared from a much earlier date on (probably the 15th century) as in many continental West Germanic dialects.
Inflection of adjectives is more complicated. The adjective receives no ending with indefinite neuter nouns in singular (as with een /ən/ 'a/an'), and -e in all other cases. (This was also the case in Middle English, as in "a goode man".) Note that fiets belongs to the masculine/feminine category, and that water and huis are neuter.



Masculine singular or feminine singular
Neuter singular
Plural (any gender)


Definite
(with definite article
or pronoun)
de mooie fiets (the beautiful bicycle)
het mooie huis (the beautiful house)
de mooie fietsen (the beautiful bicycles)
de mooie huizen (the beautiful houses)


Indefinite
(with indefinite article or
no article and no pronoun)
een mooie fiets (a beautiful bicycle)
koude soep (cold soup)
een mooi huis (a beautiful house)
koud water (cold water)
mooie fietsen (beautiful bicycles)
mooie huizen (beautiful houses)


An adjective has no e if it is in the predicative: De soep is koud.
More complex inflection is still found in certain lexicalized expressions like de heer des huizes (literally, the man of the house), etc. These are usually remnants of cases (in this instance, the genitive case which is still used in German, cf. Der Herr des Hauses) and other inflections no longer in general use today. In such lexicalized expressions remnants of strong and weak nouns can be found too, e.g. in het jaar des Heren (Anno Domini), where "-en" is actually the genitive ending of the weak noun. Also in this case, German retains this feature.
Word order[edit]
Dutch shares much of its word order with German. Dutch exhibits subject–object–verb word order, but in main clauses the conjugated verb is moved into the second position in what is known as verb second or V2 word order. This makes Dutch word order almost identical to that of German, but often different from English, which has subject–verb–object word order and has since lost the V2 word order that existed in Old English.[109]
An example sentence used in some Dutch language courses and textbooks is "Ik kan mijn pen niet vinden omdat het veel te donker is", which translates into English word for word as "I can my pen not find because it far too dark is", but in standard English word order would be written "I cannot find my pen because it is far too dark". If the sentence is split into a main and subclause and the verbs highlighted, the logic behind the word order can be seen.
Main clause: "Ik kan mijn pen niet vinden "
Verbs are placed in the final position, but the conjugated verb, in this case "kan" (can), is made the second element of the clause.
Subclause: "omdat het veel te donker is "
The verb or verbs always go in the final position.
In an interrogative main clause the usual word order is: conjugated verb followed by subject; other verbs in final position:

"Kun jij je pen niet vinden?" (literally "Can you your pen not find?") "Can't you find your pen?"

In the Dutch equivalent of a wh-question the word order is: interrogative pronoun (or expression) + conjugated verb + subject; other verbs in final position:

"Waarom kun jij je pen niet vinden?" ("Why can you your pen not find?") "Why can't you find your pen?"

In a tag question the word order is the same as in a declarative clause:

"Jij kunt je pen niet vinden?" ("You can your pen not find?") "You can't find your pen?"

A subordinate clause does not change its word order:

"Kun jij je pen niet vinden omdat het veel te donker is?" ("Can you your pen not find because it far too dark is?") "Can you not find your pen because it's far too dark?"

Diminutives[edit]
See also: List of diminutives by language § Dutch
In Dutch, the diminutive is used extensively. It is the nuances of meaning expressed by the diminutive which make it peculiarly unique Dutch but also difficult to master for non-native speakers. It is a very productive[110]:61 and formed by adding one of the suffixes to the noun in question, depending on the latter's phonological ending:

-je for ending in -b, -c, -d, -t, -f, -g, -ch, -k, -p, -v, -x, -z or -s: neef → neefje (male cousin, nephew)
-pje for ending in -m: boom (tree) → boompje
-kje for ending in -ing: koning (king) → koninkje (the 'ng'-sound transforms into 'nk'), but vondeling → vondelingetje (foundling)
-tje for ending in -h, -j, -l, -n, -r, -w, or a vowel other than -y: zoen → zoentje (kiss). A single open vowel is doubled when adding "-tje" would change the pronunciation: auto → autootje (car).
-′tje for ending in -y and for abbreviations: baby → baby'tje, cd → cd'tje, A4 → A4'tje
-etje for ending in -b, -l, -n, -ng or -r preceded by a "short" (lax) vowel: bal → balletje (ball). Final consonant is doubled (except for -ng) to preserve the vowel's shortness.

The diminutive suffixes -ke (from which -tje has derived by palatalization), -eke, -ske, -ie, -kie, and -pie are used in southern dialects. Some of these form part of expressions that became standard language, like een makkie, from gemak = ease). The form -ke is also present in many women's names: Janneke, Marieke, Marijke, Mieke, Meike etc.
In Dutch, the diminutive is not merely restricted to nouns and exist in numerals (met z'n tweetjes, "the two of us"), pronouns (onderonsje, "tête-à-tête"), verbal particles (moetje, "shotgun marriage"), and even prepositions (toetje, "dessert").[110]:64–65 Most notable however, are the diminutive forms of adjectives and adverbs. The former take an diminutive ending and thus functions as a noun, the latter remain adverbs and have always the diminutive with the -s appended, e.g. adjective: groen ("green") → noun: groentje ("rookie"); adverb: even ("just") → adverb: eventjes ("just a minute").
Some nouns have two different diminutives, each with a different meaning: bloem (flower) → bloempje (lit. "small flower"), but bloemetje (lit. also "small flower", meaning bouquet). A few nouns exist solely in a diminutive form, e.g. zeepaardje (seahorse), while many, e.g. meisje (girl), originally a diminutive of meid (maid), have acquired a meaning independent of their non-diminutive forms. A diminutive can sometimes be added to an uncountable noun to refer to a single portion: ijs (ice, ice cream) → ijsje (ice cream treat, cone of ice cream), bier (beer) → biertje. Some diminutive forms only exist in plural, e.g. kleertjes (clothing).
When used to refer to time, the Dutch diminutive form can indicate whether the person in question found it pleasant or not: een uurtje kletsen (chatting for a "little" hour.) The diminutive can, however, also be used pejoratively: Hij was weer eens het "mannetje". (He acted as if he was the "little" man.)
Pronouns and determiners[edit]
There are two series of personal pronouns, subject and objects pronouns. The forms on the right-hand sides within each column are the unemphatic forms; those not normally written are given in brackets. Only ons and u do not have an unemphatic form. The distinction between emphatic and unemphatic pronouns is very important in Dutch. It does exist in English as well but not in written form.[110]:67


person
subject
object


1st person singular
ik - ('k)
mij - me


2nd person singular, informal
jij - je
jou - je


2nd person singular, formal
u
u


3rd person singular, masculine
hij - (-ie)
hem - ('m)


3rd person singular, feminine
zij - ze
haar - ('r, d'r)


3rd person singular, neuter
het - ('t)
het - ('t)





1st person plural
wij - we
ons


2nd person plural, informal
jullie - je
jullie - je


2nd person plural, formal
u
u


3rd person plural, for a person
zij - ze
hun, hen - ze


3rd person plural, for an object
zij - ze
die - ze


Like in English, Dutch has generalised the dative over the accusative case for all pronouns, e.g. Du me, je, Eng me, you, vs. Germ mich/mir dich/dir. There is one exception: the standard language prescribes that in the third person plural, hen is to be used for the direct object, and hun for the indirect object. This distinction was artificially introduced in the 17th century by grammarians, and is largely ignored in spoken language and not well understood by Dutch speakers. Consequently, the third person plural forms hun and hen are interchangeable in normal usage, with hun being more common. The shared unstressed form ze is also often used as both direct and indirect objects and is a useful avoidance strategy when people are unsure which form to use.[111]
Dutch shares also with English the presence of h- pronouns, e.g. Du hij, hem, haar, hun and Eng he, him, her vs. Germ er, ihn, ihr, ihnen.
Compounds[edit]




Dutch language street sign in the Netherlands


Like most Germanic languages, Dutch forms noun compounds, where the first noun modifies the category given by the second (hondenhok = doghouse). Unlike English, where newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written in open form with separating spaces, Dutch (like the other Germanic languages) either uses the closed form without spaces (boomhut = tree house) or inserts a hyphen (VVD-coryfee = outstanding member of the VVD, a political party). Like German, Dutch allows arbitrarily long compounds, but the longer they get, the less frequent they tend to be.
The longest serious entry in the Van Dale dictionary is  wapenstilstandsonderhandeling (help·info) (ceasefire negotiation). Leafing through the articles of association (Statuten) one may come across a 30-letter  vertegenwoordigingsbevoegdheid (help·info) (authorisation of representation). An even longer word cropping up in official documents is ziektekostenverzekeringsmaatschappij (health insurance company) though the shorter ziektekostenverzekeraar (health insurer) is more common.
Notwithstanding official spelling rules, some Dutch-speaking people, like some Scandinavians and German speakers, nowadays tend to write the parts of a compound separately, a practice sometimes dubbed de Engelse ziekte (the English disease).[112]
Vocabulary[edit]
Dutch vocabulary is predominantly Germanic in origin, with loanwords accounting for 20%.[113] The main foreign influence on Dutch vocabulary since the 12th century and culminating in the French period has been French and (northern) Oïl languages, accounting for an estimated 6.8% of all words, or more than a third of all loanwords. Latin, which was spoken in the southern Low Countries for centuries, and subsequently played a major role as the language of science and religion, follows with 6.1%. High German and Low German were influential until the mid-19th century and account for 2.7%, but these are mostly unrecognizable since many have been "Dutchified", e.g. German Fremdling → Dutch vreemdeling. From English Dutch has borrowed words since the middle of the 19th century, as a consequence of the increasing power and influence of Britain and the United States. The share of English loanwords is about 1.5%, but this number is still on the increase.[114] Conversely, Dutch contributed many loanwords to English, accounting for 1.3% of its lexicon.[115]
The main Dutch dictionary is the Van Dale groot woordenboek der Nederlandse taal, which contains some 268,826 headwords.[116] In the field of linguistics, the 45,000-page Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal is also widely used. This scholarly endeavor took 147 years to complete and contains all recorded Dutch words from the Early Middle Ages onward.
Spelling and writing system[edit]
Main articles: Dutch orthography and Dutch Braille




Dutch uses the digraph IJ as a single letter. Shown is a bus road marking.


The official spelling is set by the Wet schrijfwijze Nederlandsche taal (Law on the writing of the Dutch language; Belgium 1946, Netherlands 1947; based on a 1944 spelling revision; both amended in the 1990s after a 1995 spelling revision). The Woordenlijst Nederlandse taal, more commonly known as "het groene boekje" (i.e. "the green booklet", because of its color), is usually accepted as an informal explanation of the law.
Dutch is written using the Latin script. Dutch uses one additional character beyond the standard alphabet, the digraph IJ. It has a relatively high proportion of doubled letters, both vowels and consonants, due to the formation of compound words and also to the spelling devices for distinguishing the many vowel sounds in the Dutch language. An example of five consecutive doubled letters is the word voorraaddoos (food storage container). The diaeresis (Dutch: trema) is used to mark vowels that are pronounced separately when involving a pre- or suffix, whereas a hyphen is used when this problem occurs in compound words. For example; "beïnvloed" (influenced), but zee-eend (sea duck). Generally, other diacritical marks only occur in loanwords, though the acute accent can also be used for emphasis or to differentiate between two forms. Its most common use is to differentiate between the indefinite article 'een' (a, an) and the numeral 'één' (one).
See also[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Dutch phrasebook.





Dutch edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Bargoens
Dutch Braille
Dutch grammar
Dutch Language Union
Dutch linguistic influence on military terms
Dutch literature
Dutch name
Dutch orthography
Dutch-based creole languages
Flemish
French Flemish
Grand Dictation of the Dutch Language
Indo-European languages
Istvaeones
List of English words of Dutch origin
Low Dietsch
Low Franconian
Meuse-Rhenish
Middle Dutch
Old Frankish

Notes[edit]


^ In France, a historical dialect called French Flemish is spoken. There are about 80,000 Dutch speakers in France; see Simpson 2009, p. 307. In French Flanders, only a remnant of 20,000 Flemish-speakers remain; see Berdichevsky 2004, p. 90. French Flemish is spoken in the north-west of France by an estimated population of 20,000 daily speakers and 40,000 occasional speakers; see European Commission 2010.
A dialect continuum exists between Dutch and German through the South Guelderish and Limburgish dialects.
In 1941, 400,000 Indonesians spoke Dutch, and Dutch exerted a major influence on Indonesian; see Sneddon 2003, p. 161. In 1941, about 0.5% of the inland population had a reasonable knowledge of Dutch; see Maier 2005, p. 12. At the beginning of World War II, about one million Asians had an active command of Dutch, while an additional half million had a passive knowledge; see Jones 2008, p. xxxi. Many older Indonesians speak Dutch as a second language; see Thomson 2003, p. 80. Some of the ethnic Chinese in Indonesia speak Dutch amongst each other; see Tan 2008, pp. 62–64, Erdentuğ & Colombijn 2002, p. 104. Dutch is spoken by "smaller groups of speakers" in Indonesia; see Bussmann 2002, p. 83. Some younger Indonesians learn Dutch as a foreign language because their parents and grandparents may speak it and because in some circles, Dutch is regarded as the language of the elite; see Vos 2001, p. 91. At present, only educated people of the oldest generation, in addition to specialists who require knowledge of the language, can speak Dutch fluently; see Ammon 2006, p. 2017. Around 25% of present-day Indonesian vocabulary can be traced back to Dutch words, see Maier 2005, p. 17.
^ 410,000 in USA, 159,000 in Canada, 47,000 in Australia; see Simpson 2009, p. 307. Between 200,000 and 400,000 in USA alone; see McGoldrick, Giordano & Garcia-Preto 2005, p. 536.
^ Afrikaans is a daughter language of Dutch; see Booij 1999, p. 2, Jansen, Schreuder & Neijt 2007, p. 5, Mennen, Levelt & Gerrits 2006, p. 1, Booij 2003, p. 4, Hiskens, Auer & Kerswill 2005, p. 19, Heeringa & de Wet 2007, pp. 1, 3, 5.
Afrikaans was historically called Cape Dutch; see Deumert & Vandenbussche 2003, p. 16, Conradie 2005, p. 208, Sebba 1997, p. 160, Langer & Davies 2005, p. 144, Deumert 2002, p. 3, Berdichevsky 2004, p. 130.
Afrikaans is rooted in 17th century dialects of Dutch; see Holm 1989, p. 338, Geerts & Clyne 1992, p. 71, Mesthrie 1995, p. 214, Niesler, Louw & Roux 2005, p. 459.
Afrikaans is variously described as a creole, a partially creolised language, or a deviant variety of Dutch; see Sebba 2007, p. 116.
^ It has the widest geographical and racial distribution of all official languages of South Africa; see Webb 2003, pp. 7, 8, Berdichevsky 2004, p. 131. It has by far the largest geographical distribution; see Alant 2004, p. 45.
It is widely spoken and understood as a second or third language; see Deumert & Vandenbussche 2003, p. 16, Kamwangamalu 2004, p. 207, Myers-Scotton 2006, p. 389, Simpson 2008, p. 324, Palmer 2001, p. 141, Webb 2002, p. 74, Herriman & Burnaby 1996, p. 18, Page & Sonnenburg 2003, p. 7, Brook Napier 2007, pp. 69, 71.
An estimated 40 percent of South Africans have at least a basic level of communication in Afrikaans; see Webb 2003, p. 7 McLean & McCormick 1996, p. 333. Afrikaans is a lingua franca of Namibia; see Deumert 2004, p. 1, Adegbija 1994, p. 26, Batibo 2005, p. 79, Donaldson 1993, p. xiii, Deumert & Vandenbussche 2003, p. 16, Baker & Prys Jones 1997, p. 364, Domínguez & López 1995, p. 399, Page & Sonnenburg 2003, p. 8, CIA 2010.
While the number of total speakers of Afrikaans is unknown, estimates range between 15 and 23 million. Afrikaans has 16.3 million speakers; see de Swaan 2001, p. 216. Afrikaans has a total of 16 million speakers; see Machan 2009, p. 174. About 9 million people speak Afrikaans as a second or third language; see Alant 2004, p. 45, Proost 2006, p. 402. Afrikaans has over 5 million native speakers and 15 million second language speakers; see Réguer 2004, p. 20. Afrikaans has about 6 million native and 16 million second language speakers; see Domínguez & López 1995, p. 340. In South Africa, over 23 million people speak Afrikaans, of which a third are first-language speakers; see Page & Sonnenburg 2003, p. 7. L2 "Black Afrikaans" is spoken, with different degrees of fluency, by an estimated 15 million; see Stell & 2008–11, p. 1.
Dutch and Afrikaans share mutual intelligibility; see Gooskens 2007, p. 453, Holm 1989, p. 338, Baker & Prys Jones 1997, p. 302, Egil Breivik & Håkon Jahr 1987, p. 232. For written mutual intelligibility; see Sebba 2007, p. 116, Sebba 1997, p. 161.
It is easier for Dutch speakers to understand Afrikaans than the other way around; see Gooskens 2007, p. 454.
^ Dutch and English are the closest relatives of German; see Abraham 2006, p. 124. Dutch is the closest relative of German; see Czepluch & Abraham 2004, p. 13. Dutch and English are closely related; see Ingram 1989, p. 494, Todd 2004, p. 37, Kager 1989, p. 105, Hogg 2002, p. 134, De Bot, Lowie & Verspoor 2005, pp. 130, 166, Weissenborn & Höhle 2001, p. 209, Crisma & Longobarde 2009, p. 250. Dutch and English are very closely related languages; see Fitzpatrick 2007, p. 188. Dutch is, after Frisian, the closest relative of English; see Mallory & Adams 2006, p. 23, Classe 2000, p. 390, Hogg 2002, p. 3, Denning, Kessler & Leben 2007, p. 22. English is most closely related to Dutch; see Lightfoot 1999, p. 22, and more so than to German; see Sonnenschein 2008, p. 100, Kennedy Wyld 2009, p. 190.
^ Dutch is traditionally described as morphologically between English and German, but syntactically closer to German; see Clyne 2003, p. 133. Dutch has been positioned to be between English and German; see Putnam 2011, p. 108, Bussmann 2002, p. 83, Müller 1995, p. 121, Onysko & Michel 2010, p. 210. Typologically, Dutch takes a midway position between English and German, with a similar word order to that of German, grammatical gender, and a largely Germanic vocabulary. It is morphologically close to English, and the case system and subjunctive have largely fallen out of use; see Swan & Smith 2001, p. 6.
^ Dutch shares with English its simplified morphology and the abandonment of the grammatical case system; see Booij 1999, p. 1, Simpson 2009, p. 309. In contrast to German, case markings have become vestigial in English and Dutch; see Hogg 2002, p. 134, Abraham 2006, p. 118, Bussmann 2002, p. 83, Swan & Smith 2001, p. 6. The umlaut in Dutch and English matured to a much lesser extent than in German; see Simpson 2009, p. 307, Lass 1994, p. 70, Deprez 1997, p. 251.
^ Dutch has effectively two genders; see Booij 1999, p. 1, Simpson 2009, p. 309, De Vogelaer 2009, p. 71. Grammatical gender has little grammatical consequences in Dutch; see Bussmann 2002, p. 84
^ Simpson 2009, p. 307, Booij 1999, p. 1 Dutch and German do not have a strict SVO order as in English; see Hogg 2002, pp. 87, 134. In contrast to English, which has SVO as the underlying word order, for Dutch and German this is SV1OV2 or (in subordinate clauses) SOV; see Ingram 1989, p. 495, Jordens & Lalleman 1988, pp. 149, 150, 177. Dutch has almost the same word order as German; see Swan & Smith 2001, p. 6.
^ Dutch vocabulary has more Germanic words than English and more Romance words than German; see Simpson 2009, p. 309, Swan & Smith 2001, p. 17. Dutch vocabulary is mostly Germanic; see Swan & Smith 2001, p. 6. Dutch has the most similar vocabulary to English; see Mallory & Adams 2006, p. 1.


References[edit]


^ Dutch at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016)
^ a b c European Commission (2006). "Special Eurobarometer 243: Europeans and their Languages (Survey)" (PDF). Europa. Retrieved February 3, 2007.  "1% of the EU population claims to speak Dutch well enough in order to have a conversation." (page 153)
^ a b "Dutch — University of Leicester". .le.ac.uk. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Modern Dutch". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ a b c "Het Nederlandse taalgebied" (in Dutch). Nederlandse Taalunie. 2005. Retrieved November 4, 2008. 
^ "Netherlandic language - Encyclopædia Britannica". Britannica.com. Retrieved June 11, 2014. 
^ Willemyns, Roland (2002). "Language Contact at the Romance-Germanic Language Border". In Jeanine Treffers-Daller, Roland Willemyns. Journal of multilingual and multicultural development. Multilingual Matters. p. 4. ISBN 1853596272. 
^ "A Guide to Dutch - 10 facts about the Dutch language". BBC. 
^ Britannica on Netherlandic Language
^ see also Haeringen, Coenraad van. Netherlancis Language Research Men and Works in the Study of Dutch. Brill. 
^ Georges De Schutter, "Dutch", The Germanic Languages, eds. Ekkehard König and Johan van der Auwera (London: Routledge, 1994), 439.
^ Old Dutch Dictionary
^ Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 2nd revised edn., s.v. "Dutch" (Random House Reference, 2005).
^ Roland Willemyns (2013). Dutch: Biography of a Language. Oxford University Press. p. 5. 
^ Strabo, Walafridus (1996-01-01). Walahfrid Strabo's Libellus De Exordiis Et Incrementis Quarundam in Observationibus Ecclesiasticis Rerum: A Translation and Liturgical Commentary. BRILL. p. 223. ISBN 9004096698. 
^ (in Dutch) See J. Verdam, Middelnederlandsch handwoordenboek (The Hague 1932 (reprinted 1994)): "Nederlant, znw. o. I) Laag of aan zee gelegen land. 2) land aan den Nederrijn; Nedersaksen, -duitschland."
^ "Hermes in uitbreiding". Users.pandora.be. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ (in Dutch) neder- corresponds with the English nether-, which means "low" or "down". See Online etymological dictionary. Entry: Nether.
^ DBNL. "Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde 1909 · dbnl". DBNL (in Dutch). Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ DBNL. "Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde 1909 · dbnl". DBNL (in Dutch). Retrieved 2017-04-25. 
^ Willemyns, Roland (2013). Dutch : biography of a language. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. xiii. ISBN 0199858713. 
^ http://www.statenvertaling.net/bijbel/psal/55.html Psalm 55:19
^ http://bible.cc/psalms/55-18.htm Psalm 55:18
^ "Languages of the World: Germanic languages". The New Encyclopædia Britannica. Chicago, IL, United States: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 1993. ISBN 0-85229-571-5.  This long-standing, well-known article on the languages can be found in almost any edition of Britannica.
^ Hawkins, John A. (1987). "Germanic languages". In Bernard Comrie. The World's Major Languages. Oxford University Press. pp. 68–76. ISBN 0-19-520521-9. 
^ Robinson, Orrin W. (1992). Old English and Its Closest Relatives. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-2221-8. 
^ Willemyns, Roland (2013). Dutch: Biography of a Language. Oxford University Press. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-0-19-932366-1. 
^ editor, Lister M. Matheson (2012). Icons of the Middle Ages : rulers, writers, rebels, and saints. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood. p. 145. ISBN 0313340803. 
^ Webster's New World Dictionary: Old Dutch
^ Besamusca, Emmeline; Verheul, Jaap. Discovering the Dutch: on culture and society of the Netherlands. Amsterdam University Press. p. 239. ISBN 9789048526093. 
^ Full English transcript: BIBLE, that is: The entire H. Scripture, containing all the Canonical Books of the Old and the New TESTAMENTS. Now first, by order of the High LORDS STATES GENERAL of the United Netherlands, and according to the Decision of the National Synod, held at Dordrecht, in the Years 1618 and 1619. From the Original languages into our Dutch language faithfully translated. With new added Clarifications of the dark passages, notes of the paralleled Texts, and new Indexes of both TESTAMENTS.
^ "Dutch & Other Languages". Ccjk.com. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Taal in Nederland .:. Brabants". Taal.phileon.nl. Retrieved June 11, 2014. 
^ McRae, Kenneth D. (1984). Conflict and compromise in multilingual societies. Waterloo, ON: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. pp. 54–55. ISBN 0889201951. 
^ Bramlett, Edited by Frank (2012). Linguistics and the Study of Comics (1. publ. ed.). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 163. ISBN 113700410X. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Friedrich Maurer uses the term Istvaeonic instead of Franconian; see Friedrich Maurer (1942), Nordgermanen und Alemannen: Studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen Sprachgeschichte, Stammes- und Volkskunde, Bern: Verlag Francke.
^ Belgium (2005). Keith Brown, ed. Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-08-044299-4. 
^ Belgium FOD economy Statbel official demographic statistics
^ Netherlands gouvernement CBS official demographic statistics
^ Willemyns, Roland (2013). Dutch: Biography of a Language. OUP USA. ISBN 0199858713. , p.10.
^ Markku Filppula, Juhani Klemola, Marjatta Palander, Esa Penttilä (2005): Dialects Across Borders: Selected papers from the 11th International Conference on Methods in Dialectology (Methods XI), John Benjamins Publishing, ISBN 9027294046, 9789027294043, p. 21
^ Folkert de Vriend, Charlotte Giesbers, Roeland van Hout & Louis ten Bosch (2009): The Dutch–German dialect border: relating linguistic, geographic and perceptual distances, in: the International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing, Special Issue on Language Variation
^ PhD, William F. Katz, (2013). Phonetics for dummies. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons Inc. p. 238. ISBN 1118505085. 
^ "Netherlands Statistics population counter". www.cbs.nl. Retrieved 6 May 2017. 
^ "Europeans and their Languages" (PDF). ec.europa.eu. European Union. Retrieved 6 May 2017. 
^ "Current population of Belgium". countrymeters.info. Retrieved 6 May 2017. 
^ "Europeans and their Languages" (PDF). ec.europa.eu. European Union. Retrieved 6 May 2017. 
^ "Website Dutch Language Union". taalunieversum.org (in Dutch). 
^ [1] Archived December 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c "Hoeveel studenten studeren er jaarlijks Nederlands aan universiteiten buiten het taalgebied?" (in Dutch). Nederlandse Taalunie. 2012. 
^ a b "Hoe trots zijn wij op het Nederlands?". Taalunieversum.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ M. van der Wal, Geschiedenis van het Nederlands, 1992. ISBN 90-274-1839-X
^ B. van den Berg, Morfologische Atlas van de Nederlandse Dialecten, 2008. ISBN 9053567747
^ "Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development" (PDF). Multilingual-matters.net. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Flemish in France". Uoc.edu. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ a b c "Nederlands studeren wereldwijd". Taalunieversum.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ a b "Neerlandistiek wereldwijd". Neerlandistiek.taalunieversum.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Baker (1998), p.202.
^ Ammon (2005), p.2017.
^ Booij (1999), p.2
^ "Dutch worldwide". Taalunieversum. December 20, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Taalunie | Beleidsorganisatie voor het Nederlands". Taalunieversum.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Taalunie | Beleidsorganisatie voor het Nederlands". Taalunieversum.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Joel Corneal Kuipers (1998). Language, identity, and marginality in Indonesia: the changing nature of ritual speech on the Island of Sumba. Cambridge University Press. p. 9. Retrieved June 29, 2010. 
^ a b c "Westerse koloniale taalpolitiek in Azië: het Nederlands, Portugees, Spaans, Engels en Frans in vergelijkend perspectief" (PDF). Web.archive.org. October 1, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2009. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Sneddon (2003), p.162.
^ Hendrik M. Maier (February 8, 2005). "A Hidden Language – Dutch in Indonesia". Institute of European Studies. Berkeley: University of California. 
^ "Indonesia: Fight over the Papuans". TIME. December 29, 1961. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Census Home". Censusdata.abs.gov.au. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "2006 Census Data - QuickStats About Culture and Identity - Tables". Statistics New Zealand. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2011. 
^ [2] Archived August 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Suriname". Cia.gov. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "Documentaire". Taalunieversum. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Source: Zevende algemene volks- en woningtelling 2004, Algemeen Bureau voor de Statistiek
^ "About us". Taalunieversum.org. January 26, 2010. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Ethnologue on Sranan". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ Recognition of Surinamese-Dutch (Surinaams-Nederlands) as an equal natiolect was expressed in 1976 by the publication of the Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands – een geannoteerde lijst van Surinaams-Nederlandse woorden en uitdrukkingen (Dictionary of Surinam Dutch – an annotated list of Surinam-Dutch words and expressions), see Johannes van Donselaar Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands – een geannoteerde lijst van Surinaams-Nederlandse woorden en uitdrukkingen, Utrecht : Instituut A. W. de Groot voor Algemene Taalwetenschap van de Rijksuniversiteit te Utrecht (1976), Amsterdam, E.T.Rap (1977) ISBN 90-6005-125-4, published in 1989 as the Woordenboek van het Surinaams-Nederlands (Dictionary of Surinam Dutch), by Van Donselaar, and later by the publication of the Woordenboek Surinaams Nederlands (Dictionary Surinam Dutch) in 2009 (editor Renata de Bies, in cooperation with lexicologists Willy Martin en Willy Smedts), which was previously published as the Woordenboek van de Surinaamse Bijdrage aan het Nederlands (Dictionary of the Surinam Contribution to Dutch").
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – Aruba". Cia.gov. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "Jersey Dutch". Bartleby.com. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "German Myth 7 - Pennsylvania Dutch or German?". German.about.com. April 10, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "Dutch". Mla.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Statistics Canada 2006 (Dutch and Flemish grouped together)". 2.statcan.ca. July 4, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "Agriculture-population linkage data for the 2006 Census. The Daily". Statcan.gc.ca. December 2, 2008. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ Statistics Canada, 2006 Census Profile of Federal Electoral Districts (2003 Representation Order): Language, Mobility and Migration and Immigration and Citizenship. Ottawa, 2007, pp. 6–10.
^ a b c Language Standardization and Language Change: The Dynamics of Cape Dutch. Ana Deumert. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 2004. Retrieved November 10, 2008. 
^ a b Standaard Afrikaans (PDF). Abel Coetzee. Afrikaner Pers. 1948. Retrieved September 17, 2014. 
^ Abel Jacobus Coetzee (1940). Die verhaalskat van Ons Klyntji (1896-1905) (in Afrikaans). Johannesburg: Voortrekkerpers. OCLC 63430958. 
^ "South Africa: Legislation: 1910-2015". Archontology.org. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ [3] Archived August 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Language and Social History: Studies in South African Sociolinguistics (page 214). Rajend Mesthrie. New Africa Books. 1995. Retrieved November 3, 2008. 
^ The Dutch Language: A Survey (page 132). Pierre Brachin, Paul Vincent. Brill Archive. 1985. Retrieved November 3, 2008. 
^ "Oxford Journal on Mutual Comprehensibility of Written Afrikaans and Dutch". Llc.oxfordjournals.org. August 27, 2006. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ Name (Required): (August 14, 2012). "The Afrikaans Language". Kwintessential.co.uk. Archived from the original on September 7, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ a b Key results of the 2011 census[permanent dead link], Statistics South Africa
^ Primary tables: 1996 and 2001 compared Archived November 30, 2006, at the Wayback Machine., Statistics South Africa
^ "LANGUAGE POLICY DEVELOPMENT IN SOUTH AFRICA" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 9, 2003. Retrieved September 21, 2016. 
^ "The World Factbook (CIA) — Namibia". Cia.gov. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ Language Attitudes in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Sociolinguistic Overview (page 26). Efurosibina E. Adegbija. Multilingual Matters. 1994. Retrieved November 10, 2008. 
^ [4] Archived December 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Ethnologue on Afrikaans". Ethnologue.com. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ (in French)«Pasopo» disent les «ketjes» de Lubumbashi - Le Soir, 28th September 1999
^ Frans Hinskens, Johan Taeldeman, Language and space: Dutch, Walter de Gruyter 2014. 3110261332, 9783110261332, p.66
^ a b Verhoeven (2005:245)
^ Onderzoek naar de Amsterdamse Volkstaal
^ Stroop, Jan (October 1999). "Young Women's Farewell to Standard Dutch". Poldernederlands. Retrieved January 2, 2010. 
^ Decoster & Smessart, Wivine & Hans (2012). Basisbegrippen Fonetiek en Fonologie. Leuven: Acco. p. 91. ISBN 978-90-334-8576-3. 
^ "History of the Dutch Language: Language change in the 19th and 20th century". Neon.niederlandistik.fu-berlin.de. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ "Grammatical Cases in Dutch". Zeer Goed Dutch. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ "Verb Movement in Old and Middle English: Dialect Variation and Language Contact". Ling.upenn.edu. January 20, 1995. Retrieved August 19, 2012. 
^ a b c Donaldson, Bruce (2008). Dutch: A Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge. ISBN 9781134082360. 
^ "Hun of hen?". Onze Taal Taaladviesdienst. Retrieved May 23, 2007. 
^ "SOS - Signalering Onjuist Spatiegebruik". Spatiegebruik.nl. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 
^ Loanwords in the World's Languages: A Comparative Handbook. Walter de Gruyter. 2009. p. 349. 
^ Loanwords in the World's Languages: A Comparative Handbook. Walter de Gruyter. 2009. p. 352. 
^ Loanwords in the World's Languages: A Comparative Handbook. Walter de Gruyter. 2009. p. 370. 
^ "Home | Van Dale" (in Dutch). Vandale.nl. Retrieved August 12, 2015. 


Bibliography[edit]


Abraham, Werner (2006), Kulikov, L.I.; Malchukov, A.L.; De Swart, Peter, eds., "Case, valency and transitivity: Bare and prepositional differential case marking", Studies in Language, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 77, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Adegbija, Efurosibina E. (1994), Language Attitudes in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Sociolinguistic Overview, Multilingual Matters, retrieved November 10, 2008 
Alant, Jaco (2004), Parlons Afrikaans (in French), Éditions L'Harmattan, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Ammon, Ulrich (2006), Sociolinguistics: an international handbook of the science of language and society (3), Walter de Gruyter, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Baker, Colin; Prys Jones, Sylvia (1997), Encyclopedia of bilingualism and bilingual education, Multilingual Matters Ltd., retrieved May 19, 2010 
Berdichevsky, Norman (2004), Nations, language, and citizenship, Norman Berdichevsky, retrieved May 31, 2010 
Batibo, Herman (2005), Language decline and death in Africa: causes, consequences, and challenges, Multilingual Matters Ltd, retrieved May 24, 2010 
Booij, Geert (1999), "The Phonology of Dutch.", Oxford Linguistics, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-823869-X, retrieved May 24, 2010 
Booij, Geert (2003), "Constructional idioms and periphrasis: the progressive construction in Dutch." (PDF), Paradigms and Periphrasis, University of Kentucky, archived from the original (PDF) on May 3, 2011, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Brachin, Pierre; Vincent, Paul (1985), The Dutch Language: A Survey, Brill Archive, retrieved November 3, 2008 
Bromber, Katrin; Smieja, Birgit (2004), "Globalisation and African languages: risks and benefits", Trends in Linguistics, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 28, 2010 
Brook Napier, Diane (2007), Schuster, Katherine; Witkosky, David, eds., "Language of the land: policy, politics, identity: Languages, language learning, and nationalism in South Africa", Studies in the history of education, Information Age Publishing, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Bussmann, Hadumod (2002), Gender across languages, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Classe, Olive (2000), "Encyclopedia of Literary Translation into English", Second Edition, Fitzroy Dearborn, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Clyne, Michael G. (2003), Dynamics of language contact: English and immigrant languages, Cambridge University Press, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Crisma, Paola; Longobarde, Giuseppe (2009), "Historical syntax and linguistic theory", Oxford linguistics, Oxford University Press US, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Czepluch, Hartmut; Abraham, Werner (2004), Focus on Germanic typology, Akademie Verlag, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Conradie, C. Jac (2005), "The final stages of deflection – The case of Afrikaans "het"", Historical Linguistics 2005, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved May 29, 2010 
De Bot, Kees; Lowie, Wander; Verspoor, Marjolyn (2005), Second language acquisition, Routledge, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Denning, Keith; Kessler, Brett; Leben, William R. (2007), English vocabulary elements, Oxford University Press US, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Deprez, Kas (1997), Clyne, Michael G., ed., "Diets, Nederlands, Nederduits, Hollands, Vlaams, Belgisch Nederlands", Undoing and redoing corpus planning, Walter de Gruyter, pp. 249–312, retrieved May 10, 2011 
Deumert, Ana (2002), "Standardization and social networks – The emergence and diffusion of standard Afrikaans", Standardization – Studies from the Germanic languages, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved May 29, 2010 
Deumert, Ana; Vandenbussche, Wim (2003), "Germanic standardizations: past to present", Trends in Linguistics, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved May 28, 2010 
Deumert, Ana (2004), Language Standardization and Language Change: The Dynamics of Cape Dutch, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved November 10, 2008 
de Swaan, Abram (2001), Words of the world: the global language system, A. de Swaan, retrieved June 3, 2010 
De Vogelaer, Gunther (2009), Tsiplakou, Stavroula; Karyolemou, Marilena; Pavlou, Pavlos Y., eds., "Language variation—European perspectives II: Changing pronominal gender in Dutch: transmission or diffusion?", International Conference on Language Variation in Europe, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved May 9, 2011 
Domínguez, Francesc; López, Núria (1995), Sociolinguistic and language planning organizations, John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved May 28, 2010 
Donaldson, Bruce C. (1993), A grammar of Afrikaans, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 28, 2010 
Egil Breivik, Leiv; Håkon Jahr, Ernst (1987), Language change: contributions to the study of its causes, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Erdentuğ, Aygen; Colombijn, Freek (2002), Urban ethnic encounters: the spatial consequences, Routledge, retrieved June 29, 2010 
European Commission (2010), "Flemish in France", Research Centre of Multilingualism, Euromosaic, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Fitzpatrick, Eileen (2007), "Corpus linguistics beyond the word: corpus research from phrase to discourse, Volume 2004", Language and Computers: Studies in Practical Linguistics, Rodopi, 60, retrieved November 9, 2010 
Geerts, G.; Clyne, Michael G. (1992), Pluricentric languages: differing norms in different nations, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Gooskens, Charlotte (2007), "The Contribution of Linguistic Factors to the Intelligibility of Closely Related Languages" (PDF), Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, Volume 28, Issue November 6, 2007, University of Groningen, pp. 445–467, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Heeringa, Wilbert; de Wet, Febe (2007), The origin of Afrikaans pronunciation: a comparison to west Germanic languages and Dutch dialects (PDF), University of Groningen, pp. 445–467, archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2011, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Herriman, Michael L.; Burnaby, Barbara (1996), Language policies in English-dominant countries: six case studies, Multilingual Matters Ltd., retrieved May 19, 2010 
Hiskens, Frans; Auer, Peter; Kerswill, Paul (2005), The study of dialect convergence and divergence: conceptual and methodological considerations (PDF), Lancaster University, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Hogg, Richard M. (2002), An introduction to Old English, Oxford University Press US, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Holm, John A. (1989), Pidgins and Creoles: References survey, Cambridge University Press, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Ingram, David (1989), First language acquisition: method, description, and explanation, Cambridge University Press, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Jansen, Carel; Schreuder, Robert; Neijt, Anneke (2007), "The influence of spelling conventions on perceived plurality in compounds. A comparison of Afrikaans and Dutch." (PDF), Written Language & Literacy 10:2, Radboud University Nijmegen, archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2011, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Jones, Russell (2008), "Loan-words in Indonesian and Malay", Indonesian Etymological Project, KITLV Office Jakarta, Yayasan Obor Indonesia, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Jordens, Peter; Lalleman, Josine A. (1988), "Language development", Algemene Vereniging voor Taalwetenschap, Walter de Gruyter, 5, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Kager, René (1989), "A metrical theory of stress and destressing in English and Dutch", Linguistic models, Walter de Gruyter, 14, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Kamwangamalu, Nkonko M. (2004), Baldauf, Richard B.; Kaplan, Robert B., eds., Language planning and policy in Africa: The language planning situation in South Africa, Multilingual Matters Ltd., retrieved May 31, 2010 
Kennedy Wyld, Henry Cecil (2009), The Growth of English: An Elementary Account of the Present Form of Our Language, and Its Development, BiblioBazaar, LLC, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Langer, Nils; Davies, Winifred V. (2005), Linguistic purism in the Germanic languages, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 28, 2010 
Lass, Roger (1994), Old English: a historical linguistic companion, Cambridge University Press, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Lightfoot, David (1999), "The development of language: acquisition, change, and evolution", Blackwell/Maryland lectures in language and cognition, Wiley-Blackwell, 1, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Machan, Tim William (2009), Language anxiety: conflict and change in the history of English, Oxford University Press, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Maier, H.M.J. (2005), A Hidden Language – Dutch in Indonesia, Institute of European Studies, UC Berkeley, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Mallory, J.P.; Adams, Douglas Q. (2006), The Oxford introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European world, Oxford University Press, retrieved May 31, 2010 
Maurer, Friedrich (1942), Nordgermanen und Alemannen: Studien zur germanischen und frühdeutschen Sprachgeschichte, Stammes- und Volkskunde, Strasbourg: Hünenburg.
McGoldrick, Monica; Giordano, Joseph; Garcia-Preto, Nydia (2005), Ethnicity and family therapy, Guilford Press, retrieved April 7, 2011 
McLean, Daryl; McCormick, Kay (1996), Fishman, Joshua A.; Conrad, Andrew W.; Rubal-Lopez, Alma, eds., Post-imperial English: status change in former British and American colonies, 1940–1990: English in South Africa 1940–1996, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved May 31, 2010 
Mennen, Ineke; Levelt, Clara; Gerrits, Ellen (2006), "Acquisition of Dutch phonology: an overview." (PDF), Speech Science Research Centre Working Paper WP10, Queen Margaret University College, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Mesthrie, Rajend (1995), Language and Social History: Studies in South African Sociolinguistics, New Africa Books, retrieved August 23, 2008 
Mesthrie, Rajend (2002), Language in South Africa, Cambridge University Press, retrieved May 18, 2010 
Müller, Gereon (1995), A-bar syntax: a study in movement types, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Myers-Scotton, Carol (2006), Multiple voices: an introduction to bilingualism, Blackwell Publishing, retrieved May 31, 2010 
Niesler, Thomas; Louw, Philippa; Roux, Justus (2005), "Phonetic analysis of Afrikaans, English, Xhosa and Zulu using South African speech databases" (PDF), Southern African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, 23 (4): 459–474, archived from the original (PDF) on December 21, 2012 
Onysko, Alexander; Michel, Sascha (2010), Cognitive Perspectives on Word Formation, Walter de Gruyter, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Palmer, Vernon Valentine (2001), Mixed jurisdictions worldwide: the third legal family, Vernon V. Palmer, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Page, Melvin Eugene; Sonnenburg, Penny M. (2003), Colonialism: an international, social, cultural, and political encyclopedia, Melvin E. Page, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Proost, Kristel (2006), Proost, Kristel; Winkler, Edeltraud, eds., "Von Intentionalität zur Bedeutung konventionalisierter Zeichen: Spuren der Kreolisierung im Lexikon des Afrikaans", Studien zur Deutschen Sprache (in German), Gunter Narr Verlag, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Putnam, Michael T. (2011), [tp://books.google.com/books?id=UkZTLU0ftjQC Studies on German-language Islands], John Benjamins Publishing Company, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Réguer, Laurent Philippe (2004), Si loin, si proche...: Une langue européenne à découvrir : le néerlandais (in French), Sorbonne Nouvelle, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Sebba, Mark (1997), Contact languages: pidgins and creoles, Palgrave Macmillan, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Sebba, Mark (2007), Spelling and society: the culture and politics of orthography around the world, Cambridge University Press, retrieved May 19, 2010 
Shetter, William Z.; Ham, Esther (2007), Dutch: an essential grammar, Taylor & Francis, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Simpson, Andrew (2008), Language and national identity in Africa, Oxford University Press, retrieved May 31, 2010 
Simpson, J.M.Y. (2009), Brown, Keith; Ogilvie, Sarah, eds., Concise encyclopedia of languages of the world: Dutch, Elsevier, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Sneddon, James N. (2003), The Indonesian language: its history and role in modern society, UNSW Press, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Sonnenschein, E.A. (2008), A New English Grammar Based on the Recommendations of the Joint Committee on Grammatical Terminology, Read Books, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Stell, Gerard (2008), Mapping linguistic communication across colour divides: Black Afrikaans in Central South Africa, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, retrieved June 2, 2010 
Swan, Michael; Smith, Bernard (2001), Learner English: a teacher's guide to interference and other problems, Volume 1, Cambridge University Press, retrieved April 7, 2011 
Tan, Mely G. (2008), "Etnis Tionghoa di Indonesia: kumpulan tulisan", Ethnic Chinese in Indonesia; collected articles., Yayasan Obor Indonesia, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Thomson, William R. (2003), Page, Kogan, ed., Asia & Pacific Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report: Indonesia, Kogan Page Publishers, pp. 76–85, retrieved June 3, 2010 
Todd, Loreto (2004), Pidgins and Creoles, Routledge, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Vos, Mei Li (2001), International cooperation between politics and practice: how Dutch Indonesian cooperation changed remarkably little after a diplomatic rupture, Het Spinhuis, retrieved June 29, 2010 
Webb, Victor N. (2002), "Language in South Africa: the role of language in national transformation, reconstruction and development", Impact Studies in Language and Society, John Benjamins Publishing Company 
Webb, Victor N. (2003), "Language policy development in South Africa" (PDF), Centre for Research in the Politics of Language, University of Pretoria, archived from the original (PDF) on December 9, 2003 
Weissenborn, Jürgen; Höhle, Barbara (2001), "Approaches to bootstrapping", Phonological, lexical, syntactic and neurophysiological aspects of early language acquisition, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 1, retrieved November 6, 2010 
Willemyns, Roland (2013), Dutch: Biography of a Language, Oxford University Press, ISBN 9780199858712 
Namibian Population Census (2001), Languages Spoken in Namibia, Government of Namibia, archived from the original on May 16, 2010, retrieved May 28, 2010 
CIA (2010), The World Factbook (CIA) — Namibia, Central Intelligence Agency, retrieved May 28, 2010 


External links[edit]



Dutch edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Dutch language at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
The Nederlandse Taalunie, Dutch language union
Learn Dutch - Zeer Goed Interactive lessons for learning Dutch vocabulary and grammar



Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects


Media
from Commons
Travel guides
from Wikivoyage
Definitions
from Wiktionary
Source texts
from Wikisource
Learning resources
from Wikiversity
Data
from Wikidata










v
t
e


 Languages of the Netherlands



Official national language



Dutch





Official regional languages



West Frisian
English
Papiamento





Non-official regional languages/dialects



Limburgish
Low Saxon
Romani
Yiddish





Sign languages



Dutch Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages of Belgium



Official languages



Dutch
French
German





Germanic




Dutch



Brabantian
Flemish

East
West







Low Franconian



Limburgish
Low Dietsch








Romance



Champenois
Lorrain
Picard
Walloon





Francosign



Flemish Sign Language
French Belgian Sign Language





Germanosign



German Sign Language












v
t
e


 Languages and dialects of Benelux






Dutch

Brabantian
East Flemish
Hollandic

South Hollandic
Utrechts-Alblasserwaards


South Guelderish
West Flemish
Zeelandic
Stadsfries


Dutch Low Saxon

Achterhoeks
Drèents
East Frisian
Gronings
Sallands
Stellingwarfs
Tweants
Urkers
Veluws


English
French

Champenois
Lorrain
Picard
Walloon


German

Ripuarian


Limburgish

Low Dietsch


Luxembourgish
Papiamento
West Frisian








  Languages of Belgium
  Languages of the Netherlands
  Languages of Luxembourg












v
t
e


Modern West Germanic languages



Anglo-Frisian languages



English
North Frisian
Saterland Frisian
Scots
West Frisian





High German languages



German
Luxembourgish
Yiddish





Low Franconian languages



Afrikaans
Dutch
Limburgish
Low German
Plautdietsch












v
t
e


Modern Germanic languages and dialects




North
Germanic






West
Scandinavian




Bergensk
Elfdalian
Faroese

Gøtudanskt


Icelandic
Jamtlandic
Norwegian

Bokmål
Nynorsk


Sognamål
Trøndersk
Valdris
Vestlandsk
Vikværsk






East
Scandinavian




Bornholmsk
Dalecarlian
Danish
Insular Danish
Jutlandic

South


Perkerdansk
Gutnish
Kalix
Kebabnorsk
Kiruna
Luleå
Norrland
Småländska
South Swedish

Scanian


Stockholm

Rinkeby


Uppländska
Västgötska
Westrobothnian
Swedish

Åland
Estonia
Finland
Ostrobothnia











West
Germanic






Anglo-
Frisian




East Frisian

Saterland Frisian
Wangerooge Frisian
Wursten Frisian


English

English dialects


North Frisian
Scots
West Frisian






Netherlandic






Standardized variants




Dutch
Afrikaans






West Netherlandic




Hollandic
West Flemish
Zeelandic
East Flemish
Brabantian






East Netherlandic




Limburgish
Meuse-Rhenish









Low German/
Low Saxon






Dutch-influenced:




Dutch Low Saxon






German-influenced:




Northern Low Saxon
Westphalian
Eastphalian
Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch
Brandenburgisch
East Pomeranian
Central Pomeranian
Low Prussian









High
German






Standard
German




German
Swiss
Austrian






Central
German




Central Franconian

Luxembourgish
Moselle Franconian

Hunsrückisch
Transylvanian Saxon


Ripuarian

Kölsch




Rhine Franconian

Hessian
Lorraine Franconian
Palatine


Thuringian
Upper Saxon
High Prussian
Lausitzisch-neumärkisch
Silesian






Upper
German




High Franconian

East Franconian
South Franconian


Bavarian

Northern Bavarian
Central Bavarian
Southern Bavarian


Cimbrian
Mòcheno
Swabian
Alemannic

Low Alemannic

Coloniero


Central Alemannic
High Alemannic
Highest Alemannic

Walser




Swiss German





 



Prague German
Yiddish















Authority control



GND: 4122614-8
SUDOC: 027276805
NDL: 00568910











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dutch_language&oldid=818334103"					Categories: Dutch languageLanguages of BelgiumLanguages of the NetherlandsLanguages of Saint MartinLanguages of the ABC IslandsLow Franconian languagesStress-timed languagesSubject–object–verb languagesVerb-second languagesHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 19CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl)Articles with Dutch-language external linksCS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 Afrikaans-language sources (af)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with French-language external linksUse mdy dates from September 2016Articles with hAudio microformatsLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles containing Old Frankish-language textArticles containing Dutch-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Pages using columns with the default column widthArticles containing German-language textArticles containing Low German-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles including recorded pronunciationsCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 German-language sources (de)Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles with images not understandable by color blind users