This article is about the modern region. For the Anglo-Saxon kingdom, see Kingdom of East Anglia.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Flag of East Anglia






East Anglia: with the administrative counties of Norfolk and Suffolk (in red) to the north and south respectively and Cambridgeshire (in pink) to the west


East Anglia is a geographical area in the East of England. The area included has varied[1] but the legally defined NUTS 2 statistical unit, comprises the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, including the City of Peterborough unitary authority.[2] The name derives from the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the East Angles, a tribe that originated in Angeln, northern Germany.



Contents


1 Area
2 History
3 Geography

3.1 Climate


4 Transport
5 Universities
6 Enterprise zones
7 Symbols and culture
8 Tourism
9 See also
10 Notes
11 References
12 External links



Area[edit]
Definitions of what constitutes East Anglia vary. The Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of East Anglia, established in the 6th century, originally consisted of the modern counties of Norfolk and Suffolk and expanded west into at least part of Cambridgeshire. The modern NUTS 2 statistical unit of East Anglia comprises Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire (including the City of Peterborough unitary authority).[2] Those three counties have formed the Roman Catholic Diocese of East Anglia since 1976, and were the subject of a possible government devolution package in 2016.[3][4]
Essex has sometimes been included in definitions of East Anglia, including by the London Society of East Anglians.[note 1] However, the Kingdom of Essex to the south, was a separate element of the Heptarchy of Anglo-Saxon England and did not identify as Angles but Saxons. The county of Essex by itself forms a NUTS 2 statistical unit in the East of England region.




Great Britain around the year 800 showing the East Angles




Redcliffe-Maud proposed provinces; East Anglia is marked 7


Other definitions of the area have been used or proposed over the years. For example, the Redcliffe-Maud Report in 1969, which followed the Royal Commission on the Reform of Local Government, recommended the creation of eight provinces in England. The proposed East Anglia province would have included northern Essex, southern Lincolnshire and a small part of Northamptonshire as well as Cambridgeshire, Norfolk and Suffolk.
History[edit]
Further information: Kingdom of East Anglia
The kingdom of East Anglia initially consisted of Norfolk and Suffolk, but upon the marriage of the East Anglian princess Etheldreda, the Isle of Ely also became part of the kingdom.
The kingdom was formed about the year 520 by the merging of the North and the South Folk (Angles who had settled in the former lands of the Iceni during the previous century) and was one of the seven Anglo-Saxon heptarchy kingdoms (as defined in the 12th century writings of Henry of Huntingdon).[5][page needed] For a brief period following a victory over the rival kingdom of Northumbria around the year 616, East Anglia was the most powerful of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England, and its King Raedwald was Bretwalda (overlord of the Anglo-Saxons kingdoms). However, this did not last and over the next forty years East Anglia was defeated by the Mercians twice and continued to weaken in relation to the other kingdoms. Finally, in 794, Offa of Mercia had king Æthelberht killed and took control of the kingdom himself.[6] Although independence was temporarily restored by rebellion in 825, on 20 November 869 the Danes killed King Edmund and captured the kingdom (see Ivar the Boneless). By 917, after a succession of Danish defeats, East Anglia was incorporated into the Kingdom of England by Edward the Elder, afterwards becoming an earldom.
Despite some engineering work in the form of sea barriers constructed by the Roman Empire, much of East Anglia remained marshland and bogs until the 17th century. From this point onward a series of systematic drainage projects, mainly using drains and river diversions along the lines of Dutch practice, converted the alluvial land into wide swathes of productive arable land.[citation needed] In the 1630s thousands of Puritan families from East Anglia settled in the American region of New England, taking much East Anglian culture with them that can still be traced today.[7][page needed] East Anglia, which based much of its earnings on wool, textiles, and arable farming, was a rich area of England until the effects of the Industrial Revolution saw manufacturing and development shift to the Midlands and the North.
During the Second World War, the Royal Air Force and the United States Army Air Forces constructed many airbases in East Anglia for the heavy bomber fleets of the Combined Bomber Offensive against Nazi-occupied Europe. East Anglia was ideally suited to airfield construction as it comprises large areas of open, level terrain and is close to mainland Europe. The reduced flight time to mainland Europe therefore reduced the fuel load required and enabled a larger bomb load to be carried.[citation needed] Building the airfields was a massive civil engineering project and by the end of the war there was one approximately every 8 miles.[citation needed] Many of these airfields can still be seen today, particularly from aerial photographs, and a few remain in use today; the most prominent being Norwich International Airport. Pillboxes, which were erected in 1940 to help defend the nation against invasion, can also be found throughout the area at strategic points.[8]
Geography[edit]




Norwich, with an urban population of 210,000, is the principal city in East Anglia


East Anglia is bordered to the north and east by the North Sea, to the south by the estuary of the River Thames and shares an undefined land border to the west with the rest of England. Much of northern East Anglia is flat, low-lying and marshy (such as the Fens of Cambridgeshire and Norfolk), although the extensive drainage projects of the past centuries actually make this one of the driest areas in the UK.[citation needed] Inland much of the rest of Suffolk and Norfolk is gently undulating, with glacial moraine ridges providing some areas of steeper areas relief. The supposed flatness of the Norfolk landscape is noted in many famous pieces of literature, such as Noël Coward's Private Lives – "Very flat, Norfolk" and often leads to some confusion when people actually see the relief.
On the north-west corner East Anglia is bordered by a bay known as The Wash, where owing to deposits of sediment and land reclamation, the coastline has altered markedly within historical times; several towns once on the coast of the Wash (notably King's Lynn) are now some distance inland. Conversely, over to the east on the coast exposed to the North Sea the coastline is subject to rapid erosion and has shifted inland significantly since historic times.
Major rivers include Suffolk's Stour, running through country beloved of the painter John Constable, and the River Nene. The River Cam is a tributary of the Great Ouse and gives its name to Cambridge, whilst Norwich sits on the River Yare and River Wensum. The River Orwell flows through Ipswich and has its mouth, along with the River Stour at Felixstowe. The Norfolk and Suffolk Broads form a network of waterways between Norwich and the coast and are popular for recreational boating. The Ouse flows into the Wash at King's Lynn.
Major urban areas in East Anglia include the cities of Norwich, Cambridge and Peterborough, and the town of Ipswich. Smaller towns and cities include Bury St Edmunds, Ely, Lowestoft, Great Yarmouth and King's Lynn. Much of the area is still rural in nature with many villages surrounded by agricultural land. The landscape of Cambridgeshire and Norfolk has been heavily influenced by Dutch technology, from the use of red clay roof tiles to the draining of The Fens.[citation needed]
Climate[edit]
Main article: Climate of East Anglia
The climate of East Anglia is generally dry and mild. Temperatures range from an average of 1–10 °C in the winter to 12–22 °C in the summer, although it is not uncommon for daily temperatures to fall and rise significantly outside these averages. Although water plays a significant role in the Fenland and Broadland landscapes, the area is among the driest in the United Kingdom and during the summer months, tinder-dry conditions are frequently experienced, occasionally resulting in field and heath fires.[citation needed] Many areas receive less than 700mm of rainfall a year and this is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year. Sunshine totals tend to be higher towards the coastal areas.[citation needed]
Transport[edit]




Port of Felixstowe – Landguard Terminal in the foreground with Trinity Terminal in the background


Main articles: Transport in East Anglia and Roads in the United Kingdom
Transport in East Anglia consists of an extensive road and rail network. Main A roads, such as the A12 and A47 link the area to the rest of the UK, and the A14 links the Midlands to the Port of Felixstowe. This is the busiest container port in the UK, dealing with over 40% of UK container traffic and a is a major gateway port into the country.[citation needed] There is very little motorway within East Anglia.
Rail links include the Great Eastern Main Line from Norwich to London Liverpool Street and the West Anglia Main Line connecting Cambridge to London. Sections of the East Coast Main Line run through the area and Peterborough is an important interchange on this line. The area is linked to the Midlands and north-west England by rail and has a number of local rail services, such as the Bittern Line from Norwich to Sheringham.[9]
East Anglia is ideal for cycling and National Cycle Route 1 passes through it. Cambridge has the largest proportion of its residents in the UK cycling to work with 25% commuting by bicycle.[10] The city is also home to the Cambridgeshire guided busway, which at 13.3 miles (21.4 km) was the longest stretch of guided bus-way in the world when it opened in 2011.[11]
The only major commercial airport is Norwich International Airport, although London Stansted Airport, the fourth busiest passenger airport in the UK, lies just south of Cambridge in north-west Essex.[citation needed]
Universities[edit]
The University of Cambridge, established at the start of the 13th century and in the town of the same name, is East Anglia's best-known institution of higher learning, and is among the oldest and most famous universities in the world. Other institutions include the University of East Anglia (in Norwich), Norwich University of the Arts, Anglia Ruskin University (based in Cambridge), University of Suffolk (based in Ipswich) and University Centre Peterborough.
Enterprise zones[edit]
Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone, an enterprise zone initiated by New Anglia Local Enterprise Partnership,[12] was announced in 2011 and launched in April 2012.[13] It includes six sites with a total area of 121 hectares (300 acres), which have attracted a number of energy-related businesses.[12] The sites are Beacon Park and South Denes in Great Yarmouth, Mobbs Way, Riverside Road and South Lowestoft Industrial Estate in Lowestoft and Ellough Business Park in Ellough near Beccles.[13] There is also an enterprise zone in Cambridgeshire, Alconbury Enterprise Campus in Huntingdon.[14]
Symbols and culture[edit]




Three crowns emblem at Saxmundham's parish church






Memorial to East Anglians who died during the First World War in Liverpool Street Station. The memorial, erected by the London Society of East Anglians, displays the flag


A shield of three golden crowns, placed two above one, on a blue background has been used as a symbol of East Anglia for centuries. The coat of arms was ascribed by medieval heralds to the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of East Anglia and the Wuffingas dynasty which ruled it. The arms are effectively identical to the coat of arms of Sweden.
The three crowns appear, carved in stone, on the baptismal font (c.1400) in the parish church of Saxmundham,[15] and on the 15th century porch of Woolpit church, both in Suffolk. They also appear in local heraldry and form part of the arms of the diocese of Ely and the arms of the borough of Bury St Edmunds, where the crowns are shown pierced with arrows to represent the martyrdom of Edmund the Martyr, the last king of East Anglia. Other users of the arms include the former Isle of Ely County Council, the Borough of Colchester and the University of East Anglia.
The East Anglian flag as it is known today was proposed by George Henry Langham and adopted in 1902 by the London Society of East Anglians (established in 1896). It superimposes the three crowns in a blue shield on a St George's cross.
East Anglia features heavily in English literature, notably in Noël Coward's Private Lives and the history of its waterways and drainage forms the backdrop to Graham Swift's novel Waterland. The area also figures in works by L.P. Hartley, Arthur Ransome and Dorothy L. Sayers, among many others.
Tourism[edit]
East Anglia has a wide range of holiday resorts that range from the traditional coastal towns of Felixstowe and Lowestoft in Suffolk and Great Yarmouth and Hunstanton in Norfolk, to small fishing villages like Aldeburgh and Southwold in Suffolk. Other tourist attractions include historic towns like Bury St Edmunds, Cambridge and Ely as well as areas such as Constable Country, the Broads and the North Norfolk coast.
See also[edit]

Earls of East Anglia
Historical and alternative regions of England
Kings of East Anglia
Middle Angles
Parish Pump (CGA series)
Royal Anglian Regiment

Notes[edit]



^ The First World War memorial at Liverpool Street Station, erected by the London Society of East Anglians, is "to the men of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Cambridgeshire".



References[edit]


^ "Jade Goody and the many faces of East Anglia". BBC News. 15 May 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2016. 
^ a b "East of England". Office for National Statistics. The National Archives. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2017. 
^ "Cambridgeshire and Peterborough devolution deal". GOV.UK. 16 March 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2017. 
^ Joel Lamy (24 May 2016). "East Anglia devolution deal could be just days away with talks over geography and elected mayor ongoing". Fenland Citizen. Retrieved 25 May 2016. 
^ Huntingdon, Henry; Greenway, Diana (1996). Historia Anglorum: The History of the English People (Reprinted ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 9780198222248. Retrieved 7 March 2017. 
^ Brown, Michelle P.; Farr, Carol A. (2005). Mercia: an Anglo-Saxon Kingdom in Europe. New York: Continuum. p. 228. ISBN 9780826477651. 
^ Fischer, David Hackett (1991). Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America (Reissue ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195069056. 
^ "UK Pillbox, Pillboxes, Bunkers, Anti-tank traps and other Anti-Invasion Defences built in World War 2". Pillboxesuk.co.uk. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 
^ "Top 50 World Container Ports". World Shipping Council. Retrieved 20 February 2017. 
^ Mark Miller (19 June 2008). "Cambridge Announced As National Cycling Town". Cambridge County Council. Wayback Machine. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 27 May 2016. 
^ "Cambridgeshire guided busway opens to passengers". BBC News. 7 August 2011. Retrieved 15 May 2016. 
^ a b Pullinger, Stephen (25 September 2014). "Energy jobs boom fuelled by Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone". EDP24. Eastern Daily Press. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ a b Dickson, Annabelle (12 January 2012). "Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft enterprise zone interest from around the world". EDP24. Eastern Daily Press. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ "The Alconbury Weald Project". Cambridge News. 24 June 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2015. 
^ "The Parish Church". Saxmundham. Retrieved 19 April 2016. 


External links[edit]

Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone
Alconbury Enterprise Campus

Coordinates: 52°30′N 1°00′E﻿ / ﻿52.5°N 1°E﻿ / 52.5; 1





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=East_Anglia&oldid=818534497"					Categories: East AngliaNUTS 2 statistical regions of the United KingdomRegions of EnglandHidden categories: Use dmy dates from January 2018Articles needing additional references from April 2016All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016Coordinates on Wikidata