Not to be confused with Eastern Catholic Churches, Oriental Orthodoxy, or Eastern Christianity.
"Eastern Orthodoxy", "Orthodox Church", "Orthodox Catholic Church", and "Orthodox Christian Church" redirect here. For other uses, see Orthodox (disambiguation).
"Orthodox Church" redirects here. For other uses, see Orthodox Church (disambiguation).


Part of a series on the


Eastern Orthodox Church



Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator, Hagia Sophia



Overview





Structure
Theology (History of theology)
Liturgy
Church history
Holy Mysteries
View of salvation
View of Mary
View of icons







Background



Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension
of Jesus




Christianity
Christian Church
Apostolic succession
Four Marks of the Church
Orthodoxy









Organization



Autocephaly
Patriarchate
Ecumenical Patriarch
Episcopal polity
Clergy
Bishops
Priests
Deacons
Monasticism
Degrees of monasticism









Autocephalous jurisdictions



Constantinople
Alexandria
Antioch
Jerusalem
Russia
Serbia
Romania
Bulgaria
Georgia
Cyprus
Greece
Poland
Albania
Czech lands and Slovakia
North America









Ecumenical Councils


Seven Ecumenical Councils:



First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Sixth
Seventh



Other important councils:



Quinisext Council
Constantinople IV
Constantinople V
Jassy
Jerusalem









History



Church Fathers
Pentarchy
Byzantine Empire
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
Great Schism
Russia
Ottoman Empire
North America









Theology


History of Orthodox Theology

(20th century (Neo-Palamism))





Apophaticism
Chrismation
Contemplative prayer
Essence vs. Energies
Hesychasm
Holy Trinity
Hypostatic union
Icons
Metousiosis
Mystical theology
Nicene Creed
Nepsis
Oikonomia
Ousia
Palamism
Philokalia
Phronema
Sin
Theosis
Theotokos



Differences from the Catholic Church
Opposition to the Filioque
Opposition to papal supremacy








Liturgy and worship


Divine Liturgy
Divine Services



Akathist
Apolytikion
Artos
Ectenia
Euchologion
Holy Water
Iconostasis
Jesus Prayer
Kontakion
Liturgical entrances
Liturgical fans
Lity
Memorial service
Memory Eternal
Omophorion
Orthodox bowing
Orthodox marriage
Praxis
Paraklesis
Paschal greeting
Paschal Homily
Paschal troparion
Prayer rope
Prosphora
Russian bell ringing
Semantron
Sign of the cross
Sticheron
Troparion
Vestments
Use of incense









Liturgical calendar


Paschal cycle
12 Great Feasts
Other feasts:



Feast of Orthodoxy
Intercession of the Theotokos



The four fasting periods:



Nativity Fast
Great Lent
Apostles' Fast
Dormition Fast









Major figures



Athanasius of Alexandria
Ephrem the Syrian
Basil of Caesarea
Cyril of Jerusalem
Gregory of Nazianzus
Gregory of Nyssa
John Chrysostom
Cyril of Alexandria
John Climacus
Maximus the Confessor
John of Damascus
Theodore the Studite
Kassiani
Cyril and Methodius
Photios I of Constantinople
Gregory Palamas









Other topics



Architecture
Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs
Orthodox cross
Saint titles
Statistics by country










v
t
e







Part of a series on


Christianity










Jesus
Christ






Jesus in Christianity
Son of God
Virgin birth
Ministry
Crucifixion
Resurrection












Bible
Foundations






Old Testament
New Testament
Gospel
Canon
Books
Church
Creed
New Covenant









Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit






Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
History of theology
Mission
Patriology
Pneumatology
Salvation












History
Tradition






Mary
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early Christianity
Constantine
Councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Luther
Reformation
Radical Reformation









Related topics



Art
Holidays (list)
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism












Denominations
Groups






Western




Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant




Eastern




Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox
Assyrian




Nontrinitarian




Jehovah's Witness
Latter Day Saint
Oneness Pentecostal









 Christianity portal





v
t
e









The oldest known icon of Christ Pantocrator, encaustic on panel, Saint Catherine's Monastery, Sinai Peninsula


The Eastern Orthodox Church,[1] also known as the Orthodox Church,[2] or officially as the Orthodox Catholic Church,[3] is the second-largest Christian Church, with over 250 million members.[4][5] As one of the oldest religious institutions in the world, it has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern Europe, and the Near East, including Slav and Greek peoples.[6] A communion of autocephalous churches (″jurisdictions″, or national churches), each typically governed by its own Holy Synod, its bishops are equal by virtue of ordination, with doctrines summarised in the Nicene Creed.[2] The Church has no central doctrinal or governance authority analogous to the Roman Catholic Church's pope; however, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by all as primus inter pares of the bishops, and the Church of Constantinople, since the Great Schism of 1054, enjoys precedence and certain prerogatives.[7][8]
The Eastern Orthodox Church teaches that it is the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles.[9] It maintains that it practices the original Christian faith, passed down by sacred tradition. Of its several patriarchates four reminiscent the pentarchy, while its autocephalous and autonomous churches reflect or variety of hierarchical organisation. Of its innumerable sacred mysteries, it recognises seven "major sacraments" of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as Mother of God, honoured in devotions.
Eastern Orthodoxy developed in the Greek-speaking Eastern part of the Roman Empire, continuing later in the Byzantine Empire.[10] During the first centuries AD, most major intellectual, cultural, and social developments in the Great Christian Church took place within the sphere of influence of the Byzantine commonwealth,[11][12][13] where the Greek language was widely spoken and used for theological writings. In reference to this legacy, it was sometimes called "Greek Orthodox",[14][15][11] though this was never in official use and gradually abandoned by the non–Greek-speaking Eastern Orthodoxy from the 10th century A.D.[16][16][17][17][18] The contemporary Eastern Orthodox Church shared communion with the contemporary Roman Catholic Church until the East–West Schism in AD 1054, triggered by disputes over doctrine, especially the authority of the Pope. Prior to the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, also Oriental Orthodox churches shared in this communion, separating primarily over differences in Christology.
The majority of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in Eastern Europe, Greece, and the Caucasus, with smaller communities in the former Byzantine regions of the eastern Mediterranean, Africa, and to a decreasing degree also in the Middle East due to persecution. There are also many in other parts of the world, formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.



Contents


1 Name and characteristics

1.1 Orthodoxy
1.2 Catholicity


2 Organization and leadership

2.1 Church councils
2.2 Adherents


3 Theology

3.1 Trinity
3.2 Sin, salvation, and the incarnation
3.3 Resurrection of Christ
3.4 Christian life
3.5 Mother of God and saints
3.6 Eschatology
3.7 Bible
3.8 Holy tradition and the patristic consensus
3.9 Territorial expansion and doctrinal integrity


4 Worship

4.1 Church calendar
4.2 Church services

4.2.1 Music and chanting
4.2.2 Incense


4.3 Fasting

4.3.1 Fasting periods


4.4 Almsgiving


5 Traditions

5.1 Monasticism
5.2 Icons and symbols

5.2.1 Icons
5.2.2 Iconostasis
5.2.3 Cross


5.3 Art and architecture

5.3.1 Church buildings
5.3.2 Frescos and mosaics


5.4 Local customs


6 Holy mysteries (sacraments)

6.1 Baptism
6.2 Chrismation
6.3 Holy Communion (Eucharist)
6.4 Repentance (Confession)
6.5 Marriage

6.5.1 Marriage service


6.6 Holy Orders
6.7 Unction


7 History

7.1 Early Church
7.2 Ecumenical councils
7.3 Roman/Byzantine Empire
7.4 Early schisms
7.5 Conversion of East and South Slavs
7.6 Great Schism (1054)
7.7 Age of captivity
7.8 Russian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire
7.9 Russian Orthodox Church in Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union (1917–91)
7.10 Other Orthodox churches during the Cold War


8 Relations with other Christians
9 Relations with Islam
10 Present

10.1 Main communion
10.2 Traditionalist groups
10.3 Churches not in communion with others


11 See also
12 Notes and references

12.1 Notes
12.2 References
12.3 Bibliography

12.3.1 Books
12.3.2 Tertiary reference works




13 Further reading
14 External links



Name and characteristics[edit]
In keeping with the Church's teaching on universality and with the Nicene Creed, Orthodox authorities such as Saint Raphael of Brooklyn have insisted that the full name of the church has always included the term "Catholic", as in "Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Church".[19][20][21] The official name of the Eastern Orthodox Church is the Orthodox Catholic Church.[22][23][24][25] It is the name by which the church refers to itself in its liturgical or canonical texts,[26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33] in official publications,[34][35] and in official contexts or administrative documents.[36][37] Orthodox teachers refer to the Church as Catholic.[38][39] This name and longer variants containing "Catholic" are also recognized and referenced in other books and publications by secular or non-Orthodox writers.[40][41][42][43][44][45]
The common name of the Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, is a shortened practicality that helps to avoid confusions in casual use. From ancient times through the first millennium, Greek was the most prevalent shared language in the demographic regions where the Byzantine Empire flourished, and Greek, being the language in which the New Testament was written, was the primary liturgical language of the church. For this reason, the eastern churches were sometimes identified as "Greek" (in contrast to the "Roman" or "Latin" church, which used a Latin translation of the Bible), even before the great schism. After 1054, "Greek Orthodox" or "Greek Catholic" marked a church as being in communion with Constantinople, much as "Roman Catholic" did for communion with Rome. This identification with Greek, however, became increasingly confusing with time. Missionaries brought Orthodoxy to many regions without ethnic Greeks, where the Greek language was not spoken. In addition, struggles between Rome and Constantinople to control parts of southeastern Europe resulted in the conversion of some churches to Rome, which then also used "Greek Catholic" to indicate their continued use of the Byzantine rites. Today, many of those same Roman churches remain, while a very large number of Orthodox are not of Greek national origin, and do not use Greek as the language of worship.[46] "Eastern", then, indicates the geographical element in the Church's origin and development, while "Orthodox" indicates the faith, as well as communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.[47] (There are additional Christian churches in the east that are in communion with neither Rome nor Constantinople, who tend to be distinguished by the category named "Oriental Orthodox".) While the Church continues officially to call itself "Catholic", for reasons of universality, the common title of "Eastern Orthodox Church" avoids casual confusion with the Roman Catholic Church.
Orthodoxy[edit]




Emperor Constantine presents a representation of the city of Constantinople as tribute to an enthroned Mary and baby Jesus in this church mosaic. Hagia Sophia, c. 1000).


The first known use of the phrase "the catholic church" (he katholike ekklesia) occurred in a letter written about 110 AD from one Greek church to another (Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans). Quote of St Ignatius to the Smyrnaeans (circa 110 AD): "Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church."[48] Thus, almost from the very beginning, Christians referred to the Church as the "One, Holy, Catholic (from the Greek καθολική, or "according to the whole, universal") and Apostolic Church".[49] The Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same Church.
A number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Assyrian Church and the Oriental Orthodox Churches. In the Orthodox view, the Assyrians and Orientals left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East–West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break. The Church of England separated from the Roman Catholic Church, not directly from the Orthodox Church, for the first time in the 1530s (and, after a brief reunion in 1555, again finally in 1558). Thus, though it was united to Orthodoxy when established through the work of Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the early 7th century, its separation from Orthodoxy came about indirectly through the See of Rome.
To all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word "Orthodox" itself, a union of Greek orthos ("straight", "correct", "true", "right") and doxa ("common belief", from the ancient verb δοκέω-δοκῶ which is translated "to believe", "to think", "to consider", "to imagine", "to assume").[50]
The dual meanings of doxa, with "glory" or "glorification" (of God by the Church and of the Church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair "correct belief" and "true worship". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the Church together with Christ.[51][52] The Bulgarian and all the Slavic churches use the title Pravoslavie (Cyrillic: Православие), meaning "correctness of glorification", to denote what is in English Orthodoxy, while the Georgians use the title Martlmadidebeli. Several other churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa also came to use Orthodox in their titles, but are still distinct from the Orthodox Church as described in this article.
The term "Eastern Church" (the geographic east in the East–West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Roman Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). "Eastern" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title "Eastern Orthodox", "Orthodox Catholic", or simply "Orthodox".[47]
What unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through the Holy Tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in Scripture and in worship,[53] and the latter most essentially through the mystery of Baptism and in the Divine Liturgy.[54] The faith lives and breathes by God's energies in communion with the Church. Inter-communion is the litmus test by which all can see that two churches share the same faith; lack of inter-communion (excommunication, literally "out of communion") is the sign of different faiths, even though some central theological points may be shared. The sharing of beliefs can be highly significant, but it is not the full measure of the faith.
The lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Orthodox Church has spread into the west and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance.[55] And as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of modern persecutions of Christians in communist nations has left behind both some governance and some faith issues that have yet to be completely resolved.[56]
All members of the Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy Tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves.[57] It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of the Holy Tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the Church, as given in the Scriptural promises.[58]
The shared beliefs of Orthodoxy, and its theology, exist within the Holy Tradition and cannot be separated from it, for their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone.[59] Doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed. To be a theologian, one must know how to pray, and one who prays in spirit and in truth becomes a theologian by doing so.[60] Doctrine must also be lived in order to be prayed, for without action, the prayer is idle and empty, a mere vanity, and therefore the theology of demons.[61] According to these teachings of the ancient church, no superficial belief can ever be orthodox. Similarly, reconciliation and unity are not superficial, but are prayed and lived out.
Catholicity[edit]




An icon of Saint John the Baptist, 14th century, Republic of Macedonia


The Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic. Doctrine of Catholicity of the Church, as derived from the Nicene Creed, is essential to Eastern Orthodox Ecclesiology. The term Catholicity of the Church (Greek Καθολικότης τῆς Ἐκκλησίας) is used in its original sense, as a designation for the Universality of the Church, centered around Christ. Therefore, Eastern Orthodox notion of Catholicity is not centered around any singular see, unlike Roman Catholicism, that has one earthly center.
Due to the influence of the Roman Catholic Church in the west, where the English language itself developed, the words "catholic" and "catholicity" are sometimes used to refer to that church specifically. However, the more prominent dictionary sense given for general use is still the one shared by other languages, implying breadth and universality, reflecting comprehensive scope.[62] In a Christian context, the Church, as identified with the original Church founded by Christ and His apostles, is said to be catholic (or universal) in regard to its union with Christ in faith. Just as Christ is indivisible, so are union with Him and faith in Him, whereby the Church is "universal", unseparated, and comprehensive, including all who share that faith. Orthodox Bishop Kallistos Ware has called that "simple Christianity".[63] That is the sense of early and patristic usage wherein the Church usually refers to itself as the "Catholic Church",[64][65] whose faith is the "Orthodox faith". It is also the sense within the phrase "One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church", found in the Nicene Creed, and referred to in Orthodox worship, e.g. in the litany of the catechumens in the divine liturgy.
With the mutual excommunications of the East–West Schism in 1054, the churches in Rome and Constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true Church, leaving a smaller but still-catholic Church in place. Each retained the "Catholic" part of its title, the "Catholic Church" (or "Roman Catholic Church") on the one hand, and the "Orthodox Catholic Church" on the other, each of which was defined in terms of inter-communion with either Rome or Constantinople. While the Orthodox Church recognizes what it shares in common with other churches, including the Roman Catholic Church, it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith, with the Church throughout all time, and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully.
Organization and leadership[edit]
Main article: Orthodox Church organization




The exterior of the Patriarchal Basilica of St. George, of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, located in the Fener (Fanari) district of Istanbul.


The religious authority for Eastern Orthodoxy is not a Patriarch or the Pope as in Catholicism, nor the Bible as in Protestantism, but the scriptures as interpreted by the seven ecumenical councils of the Church. The Orthodox Church is a fellowship of "autocephalous" (Greek for self-headed) Churches, with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople being the only autocephalous head who holds the title primus inter pares, meaning "first among equals" in Latin. The Patriarch of Constantinople has the honor of primacy, but his title is only first among equals and has no real authority over Churches other than the Constantinopolitan.[1][66][67] The Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the Church and the Church to be his body. It is believed that authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and clergy through the laying on of hands—a practice started by the apostles, and that this unbroken historical and physical link is an essential element of the true Church (Acts 8:17, 1 Tim 4:14, Heb 6:2). However, the Church asserts that Apostolic Succession also requires Apostolic Faith, and bishops without Apostolic Faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to Apostolic Succession.[68]
The Eastern Orthodox communion is organized into several regional Churches, which are either autocephalous ("self-headed") or lower ranking autonomous (the Greek term for "self-lawed") Church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016,[69] as well as a number of autonomous Churches.[66] Each Church has a ruling bishop and a Holy Synod to administer its jurisdiction and to lead the Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.
Each bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs.[67] His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organized into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice a year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.
Church councils[edit]
There have been a number of times when alternative theological ideas arose to challenge the Orthodox faith. At such times the Church deemed it necessary to convene a general or "Great" council of all available bishops throughout the world. The Church considers the first seven Ecumenical Councils (held between the 4th and the 8th centuries) to be the most important; however, there have been more, specifically the Synods of Constantinople, 879–880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași), 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672, all of which helped to define the Orthodox position.




Oldest extant manuscript of the Nicene Creed, dated to the 5th Century


The ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these Great Synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Church. The Pope of Rome, at that time, held the position of "first among equals". And while he was not present at any of the councils he continued to hold this title until the East–West Schism of 1054 AD.
According to Orthodox teaching the position of "First Among Equals" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organizational head of a council of equals (like a president). His words and opinions carry no more insight or wisdom than any other bishop. It is believed that the Holy Spirit guides the Church through the decisions of the entire council, not one individual. Additionally it is understood that even the council’s decisions must be accepted by the entire Church in order for them to be valid.
One of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honor to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the "New Rome". According to the third Canon of the second ecumenical council: "Because it is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor after the bishop of Rome." This means that both enjoy the same privileges because they are both bishops of the imperial capitals, but the bishop of Rome will precede the bishop of Constantinople since Old Rome precedes New Rome.
The 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: "For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honored with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is."
Because of the schism the Orthodox no longer recognize the primacy of the pope. The Patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of "first among equals".
Adherents[edit]
Further information: Eastern Orthodoxy by country




Distribution of Eastern Orthodox Christians in the world by country:
  More than 75%
  50–75%
  20–50%
  5–20%
  1–5%
  Below 1%, but has local autocephaly



Politics, wars, persecutions, oppressions, and related potential threats[70] can make precise counts of Orthodox membership difficult to obtain at best in some regions. Historically, forced migrations have also altered demographics in relatively short periods of time. The most reliable estimates currently available number Orthodox adherents at around 200 million worldwide,[1] making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after Catholicism.[inconsistent][discuss][71] The numerous Protestant groups in the world, if taken all together, outnumber the Orthodox,[72] but they differ theologically and do not form a single communion.[71] According to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, the Orthodox population in 2010 decreased to 4% of the global population from 7.1% of the global population in 1910. According to the same source, in terms of the total Christian population, the relative percentages were 12.2% and 20.4% respectively.[73] According to the Pew Research Center, the Orthodox share of the world's total Christian population was 12% in 2011.[inconsistent][discuss][74](p21)
Most members today are concentrated in Eastern Europe and Asian Russia, in addition to significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant, although Eastern Orthodoxy has spread into a global religion towards Western Europe and the New World, with churches in most countries and major cities. The adherents constitute the largest single religious faith in the world's largest country – Russia,[75][a] where roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live. They are the majority religion in Ukraine,[77][78] Romania,[77] Belarus,[79] Greece,[b][77] Serbia,[77] Bulgaria,[77] Moldova,[77] Georgia,[77] Macedonia,[77] Cyprus,[77] Montenegro,[77] they also dominate in the disputed territories Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant minorities of Eastern Orthodox are present in Bosnia and Herzegovina,[77] Latvia,[80] Estonia,[81] Kazakhstan,[82] Kyrgyzstan,[83] Lebanon,[84] Albania,[85] Syria,[77] and many other countries.
The percentage of Christians in Turkey fell from 19 percent in 1914 to 2.5 percent in 1927,[86] predominately due to persecution, including the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide and subsequent population exchange between Greece and Turkey,[87] population exchanges between Bulgaria and Turkey, and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas).[88] Today there are more than 160,000 people of different Christian denominations.[77]
Through mostly labor migration from Eastern Europe and some conversion, Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religious grouping in certain Western countries, for example in the Republic of Ireland,[89][90][91] but Orthodoxy is not "a central marker of minority identity" for the migrants.[89] While in the United States, the number of Orthodox parishes is growing.[92][c][d]
Theology[edit]
Main article: Eastern Orthodox Christian theology
Trinity[edit]
Orthodox Christians believe in the Holy Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (hypostases), without overlap or modality among them, who share one divine essence (ousia Greek οὐσία)—uncreated, immaterial and eternal.[96] These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Holy Trinity is summarized in the Symbol of Faith.[97]
In discussing God's relationship to His creation, Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and His uncreated energies, which is how He reaches us. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches us are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from, God's inner being.[98]
In understanding the Holy Trinity as "one God in three persons", "three persons" is not to be emphasized more than "one God", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: "Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified." Their "communion of essence" is "indivisible". Trinitarian terminology—essence, hypostasis, etc.—are used "philosophically", "to answer the ideas of the heretics", and "to place the terms where they separate error and truth."[99] The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness remains beyond our comprehension and expression, a Holy Mystery that can only be experienced.
Sin, salvation, and the incarnation[edit]




John of Damascus


According to the Eastern Orthodox faith, at some point in the beginnings of human existence, man was faced with a choice: to learn the difference between good and evil through observation, or through participation. The biblical story of Adam and Eve relates this choice by mankind to participate in evil, accomplished through disobedience to God's command. Both the intent and the action were separate from God's will; it is that separation that defines and marks any operation as sin. The separation from God caused the loss of (fall from) his grace, a severing of mankind from his creator and the source of his life. The end result was the diminishment of human nature and its subjection to death and corruption, an event commonly referred to as the "fall of man".
When Orthodox Christians refer to Fallen Nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; we are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil. But our fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said that we are "inclined to sin"; that is, we find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors.[100] But just as any species begets its own kind, so fallen humans beget fallen humans, and from the beginning of our existence we lie open to sinning by our own choice.
Since the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades, and of death itself.[101] Through God's participation in humanity, Christ's human nature, perfected and unified with his divine nature, ascended into heaven, there to reign in communion with the Holy Trinity.
By these acts of salvation, Christ provided fallen mankind with the path to escape its fallen nature. The Orthodox Church teaches that through baptism into Christ's death, and our death unto sin in repentance, with God's help we can also rise with Christ into heaven, healed of the breach of our fallen nature and restored to God's grace. To Orthodox Christians, this process is what is meant by "salvation", which consists of the Christian life. The ultimate goal is theosis – an even closer union with God and closer likeness to God than existed in the Garden of Eden. This very process is called Deification or "God became man that man might become 'god'". However, it must be emphasized that Orthodox Christians do not believe that man literally becomes God in His essence, or a god in his own nature. More accurately, Christ's salvific work enables man in his human nature to become "partakers of the Divine nature" (2 Peter 1:4); that is to say, man is united to God in Christ.
Through Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time – saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the Church as saints.[102]
The Orthodox reject the idea that Christ died to give God "satisfaction", as taught by Anselm, or as a punitive substitute as taught by the Reformers. Sin (separation from God, the source of all life) is its own punishment, capable of imprisoning the soul in an existence without life, without anything good, and without hope: hell, by any measure. Life on earth is God's gift, to give us opportunity to make our choice real: separation, or union.
Resurrection of Christ[edit]




A 17th-century Russian Orthodox icon of the Resurrection.


The Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Christ Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament. Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was in his humanity (that is, in history) crucified, and died, descending into Hades (Sheol), the place of the dead, as all humans do. But He, alone among humans, has two natures, one human, one divine, which are indivisible and inseparable from each other through the mystery of the incarnation. Hades could not restrain the infinite God. Christ in His divine nature captured the keys of Hades and broke the bonds which had imprisoned the human souls who had been held there through their separation from God.
Neither could death contain the Son of God, the Fountain of Life, who arose from death even in his human nature. Not only this, but he opened the gates of Hades to all the righteous dead of past ages, rescuing them from their fallen human nature and restoring them to a nature of grace with God, bringing them back to life, this time in God's heavenly kingdom. And this path he opened to all who choose to follow him in time yet to come, thus saving the human race. Thus the Orthodox proclaim each year at the time of Pascha (Easter), that Christ "trampled down death by death, and on those in the tombs bestowed life."
The celebration of the Resurrection of Christ at Pascha is the central event in the liturgical year of the Orthodox Church. According to Orthodox tradition, each human being may partake of this immortality, which would have been impossible without the Resurrection; it is the main promise held out by God in the New Testament. Every holy day of the Orthodox liturgical year relates to the Resurrection directly or indirectly. Every Sunday is especially dedicated to celebrating the Resurrection and the triune God, representing a mini-Pascha. In the liturgical commemorations of the Passion of Christ during Holy Week there are frequent allusions to the ultimate victory at its completion.
Christian life[edit]
Church teaching is that Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and hesychasm,[103] cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the Church as a member of the body of Christ.[104] It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next.[105][106] The Church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfillment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.[107]
The Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. The church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts.[108] In Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the Church is sometimes called the communion of the saints.[109]
Mother of God and saints[edit]




Our Lady of Tinos is the major Marian shrine in Greece






The Theotokos of Vladimir, one of the most venerated of Orthodox Christian icons of the Virgin Mary.


The Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural—a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the Church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognized by a large portion of the Church a service of official recognition (canonization) is celebrated.
This does not 'make' the person a saint, it merely recognizes the fact and announces it to the rest of the Church. A day is prescribed for the saint’s celebration, hymns composed and icons are created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshiped, for worship is due to God alone. In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.[110]
Pre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. In Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfillment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolizing the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed[111]). Accordingly, the Orthodox consider Mary to be the Ark of the New Covenant and give her the respect and reverence as such. The Theotokos was chosen by God and she freely co-operated in that choice to be the Mother of Jesus Christ, the God-man.
The Orthodox believe that the Christ Child from the moment of conception was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the 'Theotokos' or 'Bogoroditsa' as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to "brothers" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word 'brother' was used in multiple ways, as was the term 'father'. Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honored above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.[112]
The Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the Holy Mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the Church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since Biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.[113]
Eschatology[edit]
Main article: Christian eschatology




Last Judgment: 12th-century Byzantine mosaic from Torcello Cathedral.


Orthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Roman Catholicism. The soul’s experience of either of these states is only a "foretaste"—being experienced only by the soul—until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.[114][115]
The Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment.[116] For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.[115]




Monastery of Saint John the Theologian in Patmos, where the Book of Revelation was written


While the Orthodox consider the text of the Apocalypse (Book of Revelation) to be a part of Scripture, it is also regarded to be a mystery. Speculation on the contents of Revelation are minimal and it is never read as part of the regular order of services.[citation needed] Those theologians who have delved into its pages tend to be amillennialist in their eschatology, believing that the "thousand years" spoken of in biblical prophecy refers to the present time: from the Crucifixion of Christ until the Second Coming.
While it is not usually taught in church it is often used as a reminder of God’s promise to those who love Him, and of the benefits of avoiding sinful passions. Iconographic depictions of the Final Judgment are often portrayed on the back (western) wall of the church building to remind the departing faithful to be vigilant in their struggle against sin. Likewise it is often painted on the walls of the Trapeza (refectory) in a monastery where monks may be inspired to sobriety and detachment from worldly things while they eat.
The Orthodox believe that Hell, though often described in metaphor as punishment inflicted by God, is in reality the soul's rejection of God's infinite love which is offered freely and abundantly to everyone.
The Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:

All souls will be reunited with their resurrected bodies.
All souls will fully experience their spiritual state.
Having been perfected, the saints will forever progress towards a deeper and fuller love of God, which equates with eternal happiness.[115]

Bible[edit]
The official bible of the Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament.[117] Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council.[118] They refer to the Bible as Holy Scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy Scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of Holy Tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief.[119] The Bible provides the only texts held to be suitable for reading in Orthodox worship services. Through the many scriptural quotations embedded in the worship service texts themselves, it is often said that the Orthodox pray the Bible as well as read it.




David glorified by the women of Israel from the Paris Psalter, example of the Macedonian art (Byzantine) (sometimes called the Macedonian Renaissance)


The New Testament consists of writings of the apostles and a very few other authors writing within apostolic times.[120] The Old Testament consists of the writings of the Church as it existed in the time of the first covenant (before Christ), that is, within Judaism. The eastern regions of ancient Christianity adopted primarily the Greek-language Jewish translation of those writings known as the Septuagint, while the western regions (under the administration of Rome) depended at first on various Latin translations.
St. Jerome completed the well-known Vulgate Latin translation only in the early 5th century, around the time the accepted lists of scripture were resolved in the west. The east took up to a century longer to resolve the lists in use there, and ended by accepting a few additional writings from the Septuagint that did not appear in the lists of the west. The differences were small and were not considered to compromise the unity of the faith shared between east and west.
They did not play a role in the eventual schism in the 11th century that separated the See of Rome and the West from the See of Constantinople and the other apostolic Orthodox Churches, and remained as defined essentially without controversy in the East or West for at least one thousand years. It was only in the 16th century that Reformation Protestants challenged the lists, proclaiming a canon that rejected those Old Testament books that did not appear in the 3rd-century Hebrew Bible. In response, the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches reaffirmed their accepted scriptural lists in more formal canons of their own.
Once established as Holy Scripture, there has never been any question that the Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study,[121] even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the "Anagignoskomena" (ἀναγιγνωσκόμενα, "things that are read") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon,[122] but deemed by the Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon.[123] The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Roman Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms),[124] and hence does not participate in the various liturgical and prayer uses of the Psalter.
In a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the Holy Scriptures the "Word of God". That is a title the Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. "God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light."[125] This is the Word which spoke the universe into being, and resonates in creation without diminution throughout all history, a Word of divine power.
As much as the Orthodox Church reveres and depends on the scriptures, they cannot compare to the Word of God's manifest action. But the orthodox do believe that the Holy Scriptures testify to God's manifest actions in history, and that through its divine inspiration God's Word is manifested both in the scriptures themselves and in the cooperative human participation that composed them. It is in that sense that the orthodox refer to the scriptures as "God's Word".
The Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of sola scriptura. The Church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is.[126] Christ promised: "When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth".[127] The Holy Spirit, then, is the infallible guide for the Church to the interpretation of Scripture. The Church depends upon those saints who, by lives lived in imitation of Christ, achieving theosis, can serve as reliable witnesses to the Holy Spirit's guidance. Individual interpretation occurs within the Church and is informed by the Church. It is rational and reasoned, but is not arrived at only by means of deductive reasoning.
At the same time, the authority of its interpretation resides in Christ as the head of the church, in cooperation with the Holy Spirit, and is expressed through those whom He has brought into union with Himself. The authority is not ecclesiastical, and interpretation is not restricted to clergy, but is open to whomever the Holy Spirit chooses to reveal it. A true interpretation is for the benefit of the whole Church, not just the individual, and it is consistent with "that faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all" because God's revelation is consistent everywhere, always, and to all. Reading and understanding the Bible, interpreting within the Church, is encouraged and of great benefit, essential to the spiritual life of every Christian.
Scriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text stills consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognizable forms. The Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible.[128] In biblical interpretation, it does not use speculations, suggestive theories, or incomplete indications, not going beyond what is fully known.
Holy tradition and the patristic consensus[edit]
"That faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all", the faith taught by Jesus to the apostles, given life by the Holy Spirit at Pentecost, and passed down to future generations without additions and without subtractions, is known as Holy Tradition.[129][130] Holy Tradition does not change in the Orthodox Church because it encompasses those things that do not change: the nature of the one God in Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the history of God's interactions with his peoples, the Law as given to the Israelites, all Christ's teaching as given to the disciples and Jews and recorded in scripture, including the parables, the prophecies, the miracles, and His own example to humanity in His extreme humility. It encompasses also the worship of the church, which grew out of the worship of the synagogue and temple and was extended by Christ at the last supper, and the relationship between God and His people which that worship expresses, which is also evidenced between Christ and his disciples. It includes the authority that Christ bestowed on his disciples when he made them apostles,[131] for the preserving and teaching of the faith, and for governing the organization and conduct of the church (in its administration by bishops).
Holy Tradition is firm, even unyielding, but not rigid or legalistic; instead, it lives and breathes within the Church.[132] For example, the New Testament was entirely written by the early church (mostly the apostles). The whole Bible was accepted as scripture by means of Holy Tradition practiced within the early church. The writing and acceptance took five centuries, by which time the Holy Scriptures themselves had become in their entirety a part of Holy Tradition.[133] But Holy Tradition did not change, because "that faith which has been believed everywhere, always, and by all" remained consistent, without additions, and without subtractions. The historical development of the Divine Liturgy and other worship services and devotional practices of the church provide a similar example of extension and growth "without change".[134]
The continuity and stability of Orthodox worship throughout the centuries is one means by which Holy Tradition expresses the unity of the whole church throughout time. Not only can the Orthodox of today visit a church in a place that speaks a language unknown to the visitors yet have the service remain familiar and understandable to them, but the same would hold true were any able to visit past eras. The church strives to preserve Holy Tradition "unchanging" that it may express the one unchanging faith for all time to come as well.
Besides these, Holy Tradition includes the doctrinal definitions and statements of faith of the seven ecumenical councils, including the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, and some later local councils, patristic writings, canon law, and icons.[128] Not all portions of Holy Tradition are held to be equally strong. Some, the Holy Scriptures foremost, certain aspects of worship, especially in the Divine Liturgy, the doctrines of the ecumenical councils, the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, possess a verified authority that endures forever, irrevocably.[128] But with local councils and patristic writings, the Church applies a selective judgement. Some councils and writers have occasionally fallen into error, and some contradict each other.[128]
In other cases, opinions differ, no consensus is forthcoming, and all are free to choose. With agreement among the Fathers, though, the authority of interpretation grows, and full patristic consensus is very strong. With canon law (which tends to be highly rigorous and very strict, especially with clergy) an unalterable validity also does not apply, since canons deal with living on earth, where conditions are always changing and each case is subject to almost infinite variation from the next.[128] Even when and where they were once used with full strictness, their application was not absolute, and was carried out for individuals under the pastoral care of their bishop, who had the authority to decide when individual discipline had been satisfied. This too is a part of the Holy Tradition.
By tradition, the Orthodox Church, when faced with issues that are larger than a single bishop can resolve, holds a local council. The bishops and such others as may attend convene (as St. Paul called the Corinthians to do) to seek the mind of the church.[135] A council's declarations or edicts then reflect its consensus (if one can be found). An ecumencial council is only called for issues of such import or difficulty or pervasiveness that smaller councils are insufficient to address them. Ecumenical councils' declarations and canons carry binding weight by virtue of their representation across the whole church, by which the mind of the church can be readily seen. However, not all issues are so difficult as to require an ecumenical council to resolve. Some doctrines or decisions, not defined in a formal statement or proclaimed officially, nevertheless are held by the Church unshakably and unanimously without internal disturbance, and these, also reflecting the mind of the church, are just as firmly irrevocable as a formal declaration of an ecumenical council. Lack of formality does not imply lack of authority within Holy Tradition.[128] An example of such unanimity can be found in the acceptance in the 5th century of the lists of books that comprise Holy Scripture, a true canon without official stamp.
Territorial expansion and doctrinal integrity[edit]
During the course of the early church, there were numerous followers who attached themselves to the Christ and His mission here on Earth, as well as followers who retained the distinct duty of being commissioned with preserving the quality of life and lessons revealed through the experience of Jesus living, dying, resurrecting and ascending among them. As a matter of practical distinction and logistics, people of varying gifts were accorded stations within the community structure – ranging from the host of agape meals (shared with brotherly and fatherly love), to prophecy and the reading of Scripture, to preaching and interpretations and giving aid to the sick and the poor. Sometime after Pentecost the Church grew to a point where it was no longer possible for the Apostles to minister alone. Overseers (bishops)[136] and assistants (deacons and deaconesses)[137] were appointed to further the mission of the Church.
The ecclesia recognized the gathering of these early church communities as being greatest in areas of the known world that were famous for their significance on the world stage – either as hotbeds of intellectual discourse, high volumes of trade, or proximity to the original sacred sites. These locations were targeted by the early apostles, who recognized the need for humanitarian efforts in these large urban centers and sought to bring as many people as possible into the ecclesia – such a life was seen as a form of deliverance from the decadent lifestyles promoted throughout the eastern and western Roman empire.
As the Church increased in size through the centuries, the logistic dynamics of operating such large entities shifted: patriarchs, metropolitans, archimandrites, abbots and abbesses, all rose up to cover certain points of administration.[138]
As a result of heightened exposure and popularity of the philosophical schools (haereseis) of Greco-Roman society and education, Synods and Councils were forced to engage such schools that sought to co-opt the language and pretext of the Christian faith in order to gain power and popularity for their own political and cultural expansion. As a result, ecumenical councils were held to attempt to rebuild solidarity by using the strength of distant orthodox witnesses to dampen the intense local effects of particular philosophical schools within a given area.
While originally intended to serve as an internal check and balance for the defense of the doctrine developed and spread by the apostles to the various sees against faulty local doctrine, at times the church found its own bishops and emperors falling prey to local conventions. At these crucial moments in the history of the church, it found itself able to rebuild on the basis of the faith as it was kept and maintained by monastic communities, who subsisted without reliance on the community of the state or popular culture and were generally unaffected by the materialism and rhetoric that often dominated and threatened the integrity and stability of the urban churches.
In this sense, the aim of the councils was not to expand or fuel a popular need for a clearer or relevant picture of the original apostolic teaching. Rather, the theologians spoke to address the issues of external schools of thought who wished to distort the simplicity and neutrality of the apostolic teaching for personal or political gain. The consistency of the Orthodox faith is entirely dependent on the Holy Tradition of the accepted corpus of belief – the decisions ratified by the fathers of the seven ecumenical councils, and this is only done at the beginning of a consecutive council so that the effects of the decisions of the prior council can be audited and verified as being both conceptually sound and pragmatically feasible and beneficial for the church as a whole.
Worship[edit]
Main articles: Byzantine Rite, Eastern Orthodox worship, and Western Rite Orthodoxy




Fresco of Basil the Great in the cathedral of Ohrid. The saint is shown consecrating the Gifts during the Divine Liturgy which bears his name.


Church calendar[edit]
The minority of autocephalous Orthodox Churches, but the majority of the members of the Orthodox Church follow the Julian calendar [139] The majority of Orthodox autocephalous Churches follow the Revised Julian calendar.[140] The autonomous Church of Finland of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, as well as parts of the Church of the Czech Lands and Slovakia use the Gregorian calendar. [141]
Many church traditions, including the schedules of services, feasts, and fasts, are structured by the church’s calendar, which provides a strictly observed intermingled set of cycles of varying lengths. The fixed annual cycle begins 1 September, and establishes the times for all annual observances that are fixed by date, such as Christmas. The annual Paschal cycle is established relative to the varying date of Pascha each year and affects the times for such observances as Pascha itself, Great Lent, Holy Week, and the feasts of Ascension and Pentecost.
Lesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.[142]

Each day of the Weekly Cycle is dedicated to certain special memorials. Sunday is dedicated to Christ's Resurrection; Monday honors the Holy Bodiless Powers (Angels, Archangels, etc.); Tuesday is dedicated to the prophets and especially the greatest of the Prophets, St. John the Forerunner and Baptist of the Lord; Wednesday is consecrated to the Cross and recalls Judas' betrayal; Thursday honors the Holy Apostles and Hierarchs, especially St. Nicholas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia; Friday is also consecrated to the Cross and recalls the day of the Crucifixion; Saturday is dedicated to All Saints, especially the Mother of God, and to the memory of all those who have departed this life in the hope of resurrection and eternal life.

Church services[edit]
Main articles: Canonical Hours § Orthodox and Greek-Catholic usage, and Divine Services
The services of the church are conducted each day according to the church calendar. Parts of each service remain fixed, while others change depending on the observances prescribed for the specific day in the various cycles, ever providing a flow of constancy within variation. Services are conducted in the church and involve both the clergy and faithful. Services cannot properly be conducted by a single person, but must have at least one other person present (i.e. a Priest cannot celebrate alone, but must have at least a Chanter present and participating).
Usually, all of the services are conducted on a daily basis only in monasteries and cathedrals, while parish churches might only do the services on the weekend and major feast days. On certain Great Feasts (and, according to some traditions, every Sunday) a special All-Night Vigil (Agrypnia) will be celebrated from late at night on the eve of the feast until early the next morning. Because of its festal nature it is usually followed by a breakfast feast shared together by the congregation.

The journey is to the Kingdom. This is where we are going—not symbolically, but really.
— Fr. Alexander Schmemann, For the Life of the World


We knew not whether we were in heaven or on earth.
— Ambassadors of Kievan Rus (10th Century), Apocryphal quote from conversion of Kievan Rus.





Icon of Ss. Basil the Great (left) and John Chrysostom, ascribed authors of the two most frequently used Eastern Orthodox Divine Liturgies, c. 1150 (mosaic in the Palatine Chapel, Palermo).


Services, especially the Divine Liturgy, may only be celebrated once a day on a single altar (some churches have multiple altars in order to accommodate large congregations). Each priest may only celebrate the Divine Liturgy once a day.
From its Jewish roots, the liturgical day begins at sundown. The traditional daily cycle of services is as follows:

Vespers – (Greek Hesperinos) Sundown, the beginning of the liturgical day.
Compline (Greek Apodeipnon, lit. "After-supper") – After the evening meal, and before sleeping.
Midnight Office – Usually served only in monasteries.
Matins (Greek Orthros) – First service of the morning. Prescribed to start before sunrise.
Hours – First, Third, Sixth, and Ninth – Sung either at their appropriate times, or in aggregate at other customary times of convenience. If the latter, The First Hour is sung immediately following Orthros, the Third and Sixth before the Divine Liturgy, and the Ninth before Vespers.
Divine Liturgy – The Eucharist service. (Called Holy Mass in the Western Rite)

The Divine Liturgy is the celebration of the Eucharist. Although it is usually celebrated between the Sixth and Ninth Hours, it is not considered to be part of the daily cycle of services, as it occurs outside the normal time of the world. The Divine Liturgy is not celebrated on weekdays during Great Lent, and in some places during the lesser fasting seasons either; however, reserve communion is prepared on Sundays and is distributed during the week at the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts.
Other items brought to the altar during the Divine Liturgy include a gold or silver chalice with red wine, a small metallic urn of warm water, a metallic communion spoon, a little metallic spear, a sponge, a metal disk with cut pieces of bread upon it, and a star, which is a star-shaped piece of metal over which the priest places a cloth covering when transporting the holy gifts to and from the altar. Also found on the altar table is the antimins. The antimins is a silk cloth, signed by the appropriate diocesan bishop, upon which the sanctification of the holy gifts takes place during each Divine Liturgy. The antimins contain the relics of a saint. When a church is consecrated by a bishop, there is a formal service or prayers and sanctification in the name of the Saint that the church is named after. The bishop will also often present a small relic of a saint to place in or on the altar as part of the consecration of a new church.
The book containing liturgically read portions of the four gospels is permanently "enthroned" on the altar table. The Orthodox bishops, priests, deacons and readers sing/chant specific verses from this Gospel Book on each different day of the year.
This daily cycle services is conceived of as both the sanctification of time (chronos, the specific times during which they are celebrated), and entry into eternity (kairos). They consist to a large degree of litanies asking for God's mercy on the living and the dead, readings from the Psalter with introductory prayers, troparia, and other prayers and hymns surrounding them. The Psalms are so arranged that when all the services are celebrated the entire Psalter is read through in their course once a week, and twice a week during Great Lent when the services are celebrated in an extended form.
Music and chanting[edit]
See also: Early Christianity




Chanters singing on the kliros at the Church of St. George, Patriarchate of Constantinople.


Orthodox services are sung nearly in their entirety. Services consist in part of a dialogue between the clergy and the people (often represented by the choir or the Psaltis Cantor). In each case the prayers are sung or chanted following a prescribed musical form. Almost nothing is read in a normal speaking voice, with the exception of the homily if one is given.
Because the human voice is seen as the most perfect instrument of praise, musical instruments (organs, guitars, etc.) are not generally used to accompany the choir.
The church has developed eight modes or tones (see Octoechos) within which a chant may be set, depending on the time of year, feast day, or other considerations of the Typikon. There are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures.[143] It is common, especially in the United States, for a choir to learn many different styles and to mix them, singing one response in Greek, then English, then Russian, etc.
In the Russian tradition there have been some famous composers of "unaccompanied" church music, such as Tchaikovsky (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 41, 1878, and All-Night Vigil, op. 52, 1882) and Rachmaninoff (Liturgy of St John Chrysostom, op. 31, 1910, and All-Night Vigil, op. 37, 1915); and many church tones can likewise be heard influencing their music.
Incense[edit]




Russian Orthodox Deacon and Priest






An Orthodox priest in Jerusalem


As part of the legacy handed down from its Judaic roots, incense is used during all services in the Orthodox Church as an offering of worship to God as it was done in the Jewish First and Second Temples in Jerusalem (Exodus chapter 30). Incense is also prophesied in the book of Malachi 1:11 as a "pure offering" in the glorification of God by the Gentiles in "every place" where the name of God is regarded as "great". Traditionally, the base of the incense used is the resin of Boswellia sacra, also known as frankincense, but the resin of fir trees has been used as well. It is usually mixed with various floral essential oils giving it a sweet smell.
Incense represents the sweetness of the prayers of the saints rising up to God (Psalm 141:2, Revelation 5:8, 8:4). The incense is burned in an ornate golden censer that hangs at the end of three chains representing the Trinity. Two chains represent the human and Godly nature of the Son, one chain for the Father and one chain for the Holy Spirit. The lower cup represents the earth and the upper cup the heaven. In the Greek, Slavic, and Syrian traditions there are 12 bells hung along these chains representing the 12 apostles. There are also 72 links representing 72 evangelists.
The charcoal represents the sinners. Fire signifies the Holy Spirit and frankincense the good deeds. The incense also represents the grace of the Holy Trinity. The censer is used (swung back and forth) by the priest/deacon to venerate all four sides of the altar, the holy gifts, the clergy, the icons, the congregation, and the church structure itself. Incense is also used in the home where the individual will go around the house and "cross" all of the icons saying in Greek: Ἅγιος ὁ Θεός, Ἅγιος ἰσχυρός, Ἅγιος ἀθάνατος, ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς. or in English: Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Fasting[edit]
See also: Fasting: Orthodoxy & Eastern Catholicism




Blessing of the waters and throwing cross; Theophany


The number of fast days varies from year to year, but in general the Orthodox Christian can expect to spend a little over half the year fasting at some level of strictness. There are spiritual, symbolic, and even practical reasons for fasting. In the Fall from Paradise mankind became possessed by a carnal nature; that is to say, became inclined towards the passions. Through fasting, Orthodox Christians attempt to return to the relationship of love and obedience to God enjoyed by Adam and Eve in Paradise in their own lives, by refraining from carnal practices, by bridling the tongue (James 3:5–6), confession of sins, prayer and almsgiving.
Fasting is seen as purification and the regaining of innocence. It is a practice of learning to temper the body's primary desire for food. By learning to temper this basic desire of the body, the practitioner can more readily temper other worldly desires, and thus, become better enabled to draw closer to God in the hope of becoming more Christ-like. Through obedience to the Church and its ascetic practices the Orthodox Christian seeks to rid himself or herself of the passions (The desires of our fallen carnal nature). All Orthodox Christians are provided with a prescribed set of guidelines. They do not view fasting as a hardship, but rather as a privilege and joy. The teaching of the Church provides both the time and the amount of fasting that is expected as a minimum for every member who chooses to participate. For greater ascesis, some may choose to go without food entirely for a short period of time. A complete three-day fast at the beginning and end of a fasting period is not unusual, and some fast for even longer periods, though this is usually practiced only in monasteries.
In general, fasting means abstaining from meat and meat products, dairy (eggs and cheese) and dairy products, fish, olive oil, and wine. Wine and oil—and, less frequently, fish—are allowed on certain feast days when they happen to fall on a day of fasting; but animal products and dairy are forbidden on fast days, with the exception of "Cheese Fare" week which precedes Great Lent, during which dairy products are allowed. Wine and oil are usually also allowed on Saturdays and Sundays during periods of fast. In some Orthodox traditions, caviar is permitted on Lazarus Saturday, the Saturday before Palm Sunday, although the day is otherwise a fast day. Married couples also abstain from sexual activity on fast days so that they may devote themselves fulsomely to prayer (1 Corinthians 7:5).
While it may seem that fasting in the manner set forth by the Church is a strict rule, there are circumstances where a person's spiritual guide may allow an Economy because of some physical necessity (e.g. those who are pregnant or infirm, the very young and the elderly, or those who have no control over their diet, such as prisoners or soldiers).
Fasting periods[edit]




The congregation lighting their candles from the new flame in Adelaide, at St. George Greek Orthodox Church, just as the priest has retrieved it from the altar. The picture is flash-illuminated; all electric lighting is off, and only the oil lamps in front of the Iconostasis remain lit.


The time and type of fast is generally uniform for all Orthodox Christians; the times of fasting are part of the ecclesiastical calendar, and the method of fasting is set by the Holy Canons and Sacred Tradition. There are four major fasting periods during the year:

The Nativity Fast (Advent or "Winter Lent") which is the 40 days preceding the Nativity of Christ (Christmas), beginning on 15 November and running through 24 December. This fast becomes more severe beginning 12 December, and Christmas Eve is observed as a strict fast day.
Great Lent which consists of the 6 weeks (40 Days) preceding Palm Sunday, and Great Week (Holy Week) which precedes Pascha (Easter).
The Apostles' Fast which varies in length from 8 days to 6 weeks. It begins on the Monday following All Saints Sunday (the first Sunday after Pentecost) and extends to the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul on 29 June. Since the date of Pentecost depends on that of Pascha, and Pascha is determined on the lunar calendar, this fast can disappear completely under New Calendar observance (This is one of the objections raised by opponents to the New Calendar).
The Dormition Fast, a two-week-long Fast preceding the Dormition of the Theotokos (repose of The Virgin Mary), lasting from 1 August through 15 August.





Patriarch Kirill serves Holy Liturgy at Easter



In addition to these fasting seasons, Orthodox Christians fast on every Wednesday (in commemoration of Christ's betrayal by Judas Iscariot), and Friday (in commemoration of Christ's Crucifixion) throughout the year. Monastics often fast on Mondays (in imitation of the Angels, who are commemorated on that day in the weekly cycle, since monastics are striving to lead an angelic life on earth, and angels neither eat nor drink).
Orthodox Christians who are preparing to receive the Eucharist do not eat or drink at all from vespers (sunset) until after taking Holy Communion. A similar total fast is expected to be kept on the Eve of Nativity, the Eve of Theophany (Epiphany), Great Friday and Holy Saturday for those who can do so. There are other individual days observed as fasts (though not as days of total fasting) no matter what day of the week they fall on, such as the Beheading of St. John the Baptist on 29 August and the Exaltation of the Holy Cross on 14 September.
Strict fasting is canonically forbidden on Saturdays and Sundays due to the festal character of the Sabbath and the Resurrection, respectively. On those days wine and oil are permitted even if abstention from them would be otherwise called for. Holy Saturday is the only Saturday of the year where a strict fast is kept every year, though it is also kept on the Eve of Theophany in years when that day falls on Saturday.
There are also four periods in the liturgical year during which no fasting is permitted, even on Wednesday and Friday. These fast-free periods are:

The week following Pascha (Easter), also known as Bright Week.
The week following Pentecost.
The period from the Nativity of Christ up to (but not including) the Eve of Theophany (Epiphany). The day of Theophany itself is always fast-free, even if it falls on a Wednesday or Friday.
The week following the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee (one of the preparatory Sundays before Great Lent). This is fast-free to remind the faithful not to boast like the Pharisee that he fasts for two days out of the week Luke 18:12.

When certain feast days fall on fast days, the fasting laws are lessened to a certain extent, to allow some consolation in the trapeza (refectory) for the longer services, and to provide an element of sober celebration to accompany the spiritual joy of the feast.
It is considered a greater sin to advertise one's fasting than not to participate in the fast. Fasting is a purely personal communication between the Orthodox Christian and God. If one has health concerns, or responsibilities that cannot be fulfilled because of fasting, then it is perfectly permissible not to fast. An individual's observance of the fasting laws is not to be judged by the community (Romans 14:1–4), but is a private matter between him and his Spiritual Father or Confessor.
Almsgiving[edit]
"Almsgiving", more comprehensively described as "acts of mercy", refers to any giving of oneself in charity to someone who has a need, such as material resources, work, assistance, counsel, support, or kindness. Along with prayer and fasting, it is considered a pillar of the personal spiritual practices of the Orthodox Christian tradition. Almsgiving is particularly important during periods of fasting, when the Orthodox believer is expected to share with those in need the monetary savings from his or her decreased consumption. As with fasting, mentioning to others one's own virtuous deeds tends to reflect a sinful pride, and may also be considered extremely rude.
Traditions[edit]
Monasticism[edit]
Main article: Degrees of Orthodox monasticism








Esphigmenou monastery, Mount Athos









Monasteries of Meteora, Greece









Trei Ierarhi Monastery, Romania









Krušedol Monastery, Serbia









Supraśl Orthodox Monastery









Saint Catherine's Monastery (6th century), Sinai Peninsula, Egypt


The Eastern Orthodox Church places heavy emphasis and awards a high level of prestige to traditions of monasticism and asceticism with roots in Early Christianity in the Near East and Byzantine Anatolia. The most important centres of Christian Orthodox monasticism are Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula (Egypt) and Mount Athos in Northern Greece.
All Orthodox Christians are expected to participate in at least some ascetic works, in response to the commandment of Christ to "come, take up the cross, and follow me." (Mark 10:21 and elsewhere) They are therefore all called to imitate, in one way or another, Christ himself who denied himself to the extent of literally taking up the cross on the way to his voluntary self-sacrifice. However, laypeople are not expected to live in extreme asceticism since this is close to impossible while undertaking the normal responsibilities of worldly life.
Those who wish to do this therefore separate themselves from the world and live as monastics: monks and nuns. As ascetics par excellence, using the allegorical weapons of prayer and fasting in spiritual warfare against their passions, monastics hold a very special and important place in the Church. This kind of life is often seen as incompatible with any kind of worldly activity including that which is normally regarded as virtuous. Social work, school teaching, and other such work is therefore usually left to laypeople. Ascetics of the Orthodox Church are recognized by their long hair, and in case of male monks, long beards.




Schema worn by monks


There are three main types of monastics. Those who live in monasteries under a common rule are coenobitic. Each monastery may formulate its own rule, and although there are no religious orders in Orthodoxy some respected monastic centers such as Mount Athos are highly influential. Eremitic monks, or hermits, are those who live solitary lives. It is the yearning of many who enter the monastic life to eventually become solitary hermits. This most austere life is only granted to the most advanced monastics and only when their superiors feel they are ready for it.
Hermits are usually associated with a larger monastery but live in seclusion some distance from the main compound. Their local monastery will see to their physical needs, supplying them with simple foods while disturbing them as little as possible. In between are those in semi-eremitic communities, or sketes, where one or two monks share each of a group of nearby dwellings under their own rules and only gather together in the central chapel, or katholikon, for liturgical observances.
The spiritual insight gained from their ascetic struggles make monastics preferred for missionary activity. Bishops are almost always chosen from among monks, and those who are not generally receive the monastic tonsure before their consecrations.
Many (but not all) Orthodox seminaries are attached to monasteries, combining academic preparation for ordination with participation in the community's life of prayer. Monks who have been ordained to the priesthood are called hieromonk (priest-monk); monks who have been ordained to the diaconate are called hierodeacon (deacon-monk). Not all monks live in monasteries, some hieromonks serve as priests in parish churches thus practicing "monasticism in the world".
Cultural practices differ slightly, but in general Father is the correct form of address for monks who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as Brother. Similarly, Mother is the correct form of address for nuns who have been tonsured, while Novices are addressed as Sister. Nuns live identical ascetic lives to their male counterparts and are therefore also called monachoi (monastics) or the feminine plural form in Greek, monachai, and their common living space is called a monastery.
Icons and symbols[edit]
See also: Christian symbolism




The "Chi-Rho" symbol, Catacombs of San Callisto, Rome






"IX" (Jesus Christ) monogram from a 4th-century sarcophagus from Constantinople






Easter eggs in front of altar, symbol of Resurrection.


Everything in the Orthodox Church has a purpose and a meaning revealing God's revelation to man. At the front, or eastern end of the church, is a raised dais with an icon-covered screen or wall (iconostasis or templon) separating the nave from the sanctuary. In the center of this wall is the entrance to the altar known as the "Royal Doors" through which only the clergy may pass.
There is a right and left side door on the front of the iconostasis, one depicting the archangel, Michael and the other Gabriel. The priest and altar boys enter and exit through these doors during appropriate parts of the Divine Liturgy. Immediately to the right of the main gate you will always find an icon of Jesus Christ, on the left, an icon of the Theotokos (Mother of God). Other icons depicted on the iconostasis are Saint John the Forerunner and the Saint after which the church is named.
In front of the iconostasis is the bishop's chair, a place of honor where a visiting bishop or metropolitan will often sit when visiting the church. An Orthodox priest, when standing at the altar during the Divine Liturgy, faces toward the altar (typically facing east) and properly leads his congregation while together they perform the mystical sacrifice and pray to God.
The sanctuary contains the Holy Altar, representing the place where Orthodox Christians believe that Christ was born of the virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate, laid in the tomb, descended into hell, rose from the dead on the third day, ascended into heaven, and will return again at his second coming. A free-standing cross, bearing the body of Christ, may stand behind the altar. On the altar are a cloth covering, a large book containing the gospel readings performed during services, an ark containing presanctified divine gifts (bread and wine) distributed by the deacon or priest to those who cannot come to the church to receive them, and several white beeswax candles.
Icons[edit]
Main article: Icons








Our Lady of the Sign (Novgorod) icon (12th century), Cathedral of St. Sophia, Novgorod









Byzantine icon (13th) of Michael the Archangel, Saint Catherine's Monastery









St John the Theologian by Andreas Ritzos, example of Cretan School









St Theodore's miracle, a 17th-century Stroganov school icon





The term 'icon' comes from the Greek word eikon, which simply means image. The Orthodox believe that the first icons of Christ and the Virgin Mary were painted by Luke the Evangelist. Icons are filled with symbolism designed to convey information about the person or event depicted. For this reason, icons tend to be formulaic, following a prescribed methodology for how a particular person should be depicted, including hair style, body position, clothing, and background details.
Icon painting, in general, is not an opportunity for artistic expression, though each iconographer brings a vision to the piece. It is far more common for an icon to be copied from an older model, though with the recognition of a new saint in the church, a new icon must be created and approved. The personal and creative traditions of Catholic religious art were largely lacking in Orthodox iconography before the 17th century, when Russian iconography began to be strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from both Protestant and Roman Catholic Europe. Greek iconography also began to take on a strong western influence for a period and the difference between some Orthodox icons and western religious art began to vanish. More recently there has been a trend of returning to the more traditional and symbolic representations.




Our Lady of St. Theodore (12th century), the protector of Kostroma and patron icon of the Romanov family, following the Byzantine "Tender Mercy" type.






Modern icon depicting Constantine XI Palaiologos, last emperor of the eastern Roman (Byzantine) empire


The style of the icons seems to have been borrowed heavily from the paganism of the Greek culture. Henry Chadwick writes, "In this instinct there was a measure of truth. The representations of Christ as the Almighty Lord on his judgment throne owed something to pictures of Zeus. Portraits of the Mother of God were not wholly independent of a pagan past of venerated mother-goddesses. In the popular mind the saints had come to fill a role that had been played by heroes and deities."[144]
Free-standing statues (three-dimensional depictions) are almost non-existent within the Orthodox Church. This is partly due to the rejection of the previous pagan Greek age (Greek gods) of idol worship and partly because icons are meant to show the spiritual nature of man, not the sensual earthly body. Bas reliefs, however, became common during the Byzantine period and led to a tradition of covering a painted icon in a silver or gold 'riza' in order to preserve the icon. Such bas relief coverings usually leave the faces and hands of the saints exposed for veneration.
Icons are not considered by the Orthodox to be idols or objects of worship. The parameters of their usage were clearly spelled out by the 7th ecumenical council. Justification for their usage utilises the following logic: before God took human form in Christ, no material depiction was possible and therefore blasphemous even to contemplate. Once God became incarnate, depiction was possible.
As Christ is believed to be God, it is justified to hold in one's mind the image of God-incarnate. Likewise, when one venerates an icon, it is not the wood or paint that are venerated but rather the individual shown, just as it is not the paper one loves when one might kiss the photograph of a loved one. As Saint Basil famously proclaimed, honour or veneration of the icon always passes to its archetype. Following this reasoning, the veneration of the glorified human saint made in God's image, is always a veneration of the divine image, and hence God as foundational archetype.
Icons can be found adorning the walls of churches and often cover the inside structure completely.[145] Most Orthodox homes have an area set aside for family prayer, usually an eastern facing wall, where are hung many icons. Icons have been part of Orthodox Christianity since the beginning of the church.[146]
Icons are often illuminated by a candle or oil lamp. (Beeswax for candles and olive oil for lamps are preferred because they are natural and burn cleanly.) Besides the practical purpose of making icons visible in an otherwise dark church, both candles and oil lamps symbolise the Light of the World, who is Christ.
Tales of miraculous icons are not uncommon, though it has always been considered that the message of such an event was for the immediate faithful involved and therefore does not usually attract crowds. Some miraculous icons whose reputations span long periods of time nevertheless become objects of pilgrimage along with the places where they are kept. As several Orthodox theologians and saints have explored in the past, the icon's miraculous nature is found not in the material, but in the glory of the saint who is depicted. The icon is a window, in the words of Paul Florensky, that actually participates in the glory of what it represents.
Iconostasis[edit]
Main article: Iconostasis




Iconostasis in the Cathedral of the Annunciation in the Moscow Kremlin.


An iconostasis, also called the templon, is a wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary in a church. Iconostasis also refers to a portable icon stand that can be placed anywhere within a church. The modern iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine templon in the 11th century. The evolution of the iconostasis probably owes a great deal to 14th-century Hesychast mysticism and the wood-carving genius of the Russian Orthodox Church.
The first ceiling-high, five-leveled Russian iconostasis was designed by Andrey Rublyov in the cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir in 1408. The separation between sanctuary and nave accomplished by the iconostasis is not mandatory, though it is common practice. Depending on circumstance, the role of the iconostasis can be played by masonry, carved panels, screens, curtains, railings, a cord or rope, plain icons on stands, steps, or nothing at all.
Cross[edit]




A three-bar cross.


Depictions of the cross within the Orthodox Church are numerous and often highly ornamented, but its use does not extend to all Orthodox traditions.[citation needed] Some carry special significance.[citation needed] The Tri-Bar Cross, popular in Russia, Ukraine, and Belorussia, but common throughout the Orthodox world, seen to the left, has three bars. Its origins are in the early Byzantine Church of the 4th century AD.[citation needed]
The small top crossbar represents the sign that Pontius Pilate nailed above Christ's head. It often is inscribed with an acronym, "INRI", Latin, meaning "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews" or "INBI", Greek, "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews"; however, it is often replaced or amplified by the phrase "The King of Glory" in order to answer Pilate's statement with Christ's affirmation, "My Kingdom is not of this world".[citation needed]
There is also a bottom slanting bar which has several explanations. Claims of evidence indicate that there was a small wooden platform for the crucified to stand on in order to support his weight; in Jesus' case his feet were nailed side by side to this platform with one nail each in order to prolong the torture of the cross.
Implied evidence for this comes mainly from two sources, namely, the Bible (in order to cause the victim to die faster, his legs were broken so they could not support his weight and he would suffocate)[citation needed] and iconography (all early depictions of the crucifixion show this arrangement, not the later with feet on top with single nail).[citation needed] It has also been pointed out by some experts that the nailed hands of a body crucified in the manner often shown in modern secular art would not support the weight of the body and would tear through. A platform for the feet would relieve this problem.[citation needed]
That the bottom bar is slanted has two explanations, to represent the very real agony which Christ experienced on the cross (a refutation of Docetism)[citation needed] and to signify that the thief on Christ's right chose the right path while the thief on the left did not.[citation needed]
Other crosses associated with the Orthodox Church are the more traditional single-bar crosses, budded designs, the Greek cross, the Latin cross, the Jerusalem cross (cross pattée), Celtic crosses, and others.[147] A common symbolism of the slanted foot stool is The foot-rest points up, toward Heaven, on Christ’s right hand-side, and downward, to Hades, on Christ’s left. "Between two thieves Thy Cross did prove to be a balance of righteousness: wherefore one of them was dragged down to Hades by the weight of his blasphemy [the balance points downward], whereas the other was lightened of his transgressions unto the comprehension of theology [the balance points upward]. O Christ God, glory to Thee."[148] Another Orthodox cross which is worn in gold is an outer budded cross with an inner Three Bar Cross. The inscription Jesus Christ in Greek: IC (Iesous) on the left side bar and XC (Xhristos) on the right side bar, with a sun on the top of the cross. There is also typically an inscription on the back in Church Slavonic: "спаси и сохрани", "Spasi i Sokhrani", "Save and Protect". This cross is known as the Saint Olga Cross.[149]
Art and architecture[edit]








Svetitskhoveli Cathedral is one of the oldest Orthodox churches in Georgia[150] (4th)









St George basilica, Madaba, Jordan (6th)









Hagios Demetrios, Thessaloniki (7th century)









Church of St John the Baptist, Kerch (8th)









Church of Christ Pantocrator, Nesebar (13th)









Salvatorkirche (Munich)









Church of Saint Sava, Belgrade, one of the world's largest Orthodox churches









Saint Isaac's Cathedral in the style of classicism, the largest Orthodox basilica and fourth largest in the world









Church of the Savior on Blood in Russian Revival style, Saint Petersburg









Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church, Vienna in Neobyzantine style









Saint Nicholas Princely Church, Iaşi









Saint George Greek Orthodox Cathedral, Beirut





Church buildings[edit]
Main article: Orthodox church (building)




An illustration of the traditional interior of an Orthodox church.


The church building has many symbolic meanings; perhaps the oldest and most prominent is the concept that the Church is the Ark (as in Noah's) in which the world is saved from the flood of temptations; therefore, most Orthodox Churches are rectangular in design. Another popular configuration, especially for churches with large choirs is cruciform or cross-shaped or what is called the "Greek-cross."
Architectural patterns vary in shape and complexity, with chapels sometimes added around the main church, or triple altars; but in general, the symbolic layout of the church remains the same. Each church is created with specified qualifications based on what the apostles said in the Bible.[citation needed] These qualifications include how big the temple should be.[citation needed]




Interior of Agios Minas Cathedral, Heraklion


The Church building is divided into three main parts: the narthex (vestibule), the nave and the sanctuary (also called the altar or holy place). The narthex is where catechumens and non-Orthodox visitors were traditionally asked to stand during services. It is separated from the nave by "The Royal Gate". On each side of this gate are candle stands (menalia) representing the pillars of fire that went before the Hebrew people escaping from Egypt.
The nave is where most of the congregation stand during services. Traditionally, men stand on the right and women on the left. This is for a number of reasons: (1) Considering the family unit of past centuries the husband was dominant; thus, standing the same distance from the altar, equality is emphasised. (2) The idea of separating the sexes was inherited from the Jewish tradition of doing so within synagogues (3) Separation of sexes also followed the practice of choirs in which different levels of voice are placed in groups to facilitate harmony.
In general, men and women dress respectfully, typically wearing their "Sunday best" to enter the church. Often, women cover their heads as prescribed by Paul (1 Cor. 11:13). Children are considered full members of the Church and stand attentively and quietly during services. There is often a choir area at the side or in a loft in back. In addition to the Choir, a Chanter is always present at the front of the church to chant responses and hymns that are part of the Divine Liturgy offered by the Priest. There is usually a dome in the ceiling with an icon of Christ depicted as Ruler of the Universe (Pantocrator).
The Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.[151]
Frescos and mosaics[edit]
See also: Early Byzantine mosaics in the Middle East







St Mark mosaic, Nea Moni (11th century)









Frescoes at Hosios Loukas (11th)









Last Judgment fresco (14th), Gracanica Monastery









Fresco by Onufri (16th) at the Holy Apostles church, Kastoria









Frescoes at Rila Monastery by Zahari and Dimitar Zograf




Apart from the icons, the Orthodox churches and monasteries are often decorated with frescos and mosaics.
Local customs[edit]




Shards of pottery vases on the street, after being thrown from the windows of nearby houses. A Holy Saturday tradition in Corfu.


The Orthodox Church also has many associated traditions (sometimes referred to simply as customs), compatible with its life and function, but not necessarily tied so closely to the faith itself. These are not generally regarded as a part of Holy Tradition, though no strict dividing line is drawn. As long as compatibility is maintained, general practice often tends to the permissive rather than the restrictive, with the local priest or bishop resolving questions.
Many of these customs are local or cultural, and some are not even especially religious, but form a part of the church's relationship with the people in the time and place where it exists. Where outside customs affect church practices such as worship, a closer watch is kept for guarding the integrity of worship, but suitable local differences are welcomed and celebrated joyfully. The local church customs, especially liturgical ones, are referred to as differences in typica (Style).
Locality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Montenegrin Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as Rum ("Roman") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.[10]
Differences in praxis ("practice") tend to be slight, involving things such as the order in which a particular set of hymns are sung or what time a particular service is celebrated. But observances of the saints' days of local saints are more often celebrated in special services within a locality, as are certain national holidays, like Greek Independence Day. In North America, observances of Thanksgiving Day are increasing.
Members of the Church are fully united in faith and the Sacred Mysteries with all Orthodox congregations, regardless of nationality or location. In general, Orthodox Christians could travel the globe and feel familiar with the services even if they did not know the language being used.
In the Levant, Christian Orthodox services and identity often combine both the Byzantine Greek and indigenous (Arabic and Aramaic) traditions. Other Orthodox communities can identify with two Eastern Orthodox churches simultaneously, for example Caucasus Greeks and Pontic Greeks in Russia often identify with both the Greek Orthodox Church and Russian Orthodox Church, as a result of centuries of assimilation and intermarriage with ethnic Russians and other Christian Orthodox communities in mainly southern Russia.
Holy mysteries (sacraments)[edit]
According to Orthodox theology, the purpose of the Christian life is to attain theosis, the mystical union of mankind with God. This union is understood as both collective and individual. St. Athanasius of Alexandria wrote concerning the Incarnation that, "He (Jesus) was made man that we might be made god (θεοποιηθῶμεν)."[152] See 2 Peter 1:4, John 10:34–36, Psalm 82:6. The entire life of the church is oriented towards making this possible and facilitating it.
In the Orthodox Church the terms "mystery" or "the mysteries" refer to the process of theosis. While it is understood that God theoretically can do anything instantly and invisibly, it is also understood that he generally chooses to use material substance as a medium in order to reach people. The limitations are those of mankind, not God. Matter is not considered to be evil by the Orthodox. Water, oil, bread, wine, etc., all are means by which God reaches out to allow people to draw closer to him. How this process works is a "mystery" and cannot be defined in human terms. These mysteries are surrounded by prayer and symbolism so that their true meaning will not be forgotten.
Those things which in the West are often termed sacraments or sacramentals are known among the Orthodox as the "sacred mysteries". While the Roman Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (Baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms will often speak of the seven Great Mysteries. Among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), Baptism, Chrismation, Confession, Unction, Matrimony, and Ordination. But the term also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.[153]
Baptism[edit]




An Orthodox baptism


Baptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through Baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Holy Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the "old man" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection.[154] Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.
Children of Orthodox families are normally baptized shortly after birth. Converts to Orthodoxy are usually formally baptized into the Orthodox Church, though exceptions are sometimes made. Those who have left Orthodoxy and adopted a new religion, if they return to their Orthodox roots, are usually received back into the church through the mystery of Chrismation.
Properly, the mystery of Baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptize.[155] In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptized by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.
The service of Baptism used in Orthodox churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism, describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.
Chrismation[edit]
Chrismation (sometimes called confirmation[156]) is the mystery by which a baptized person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism.[157] It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Orthodox Church.[158] As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.[159]
A baptized and chrismated Orthodox Christian is a full member of the Church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.[159]
The creation of chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. (Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others.) Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.[160]
Holy Communion (Eucharist)[edit]




Eucharistic elements prepared for the Divine Liturgy






An icon of Holy Communion: "Receive the Body of Christ; taste the Fountain of Immortality."


The Eucharist is at the center of Orthodox Christianity. In practice, it is the partaking of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the midst of the Divine Liturgy with the rest of the church. The bread and wine are believed to become the genuine Body and Blood of the Christ Jesus through the operation of the Holy Spirit. The Orthodox Church has never[citation needed] described exactly how this occurs, or gone into the detail that the Roman Catholic Church has in the West.
Communion is given only to baptized and chrismated Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a "cochlear", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice.[161] From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.[159]
Because of the Orthodox understanding of mankind's fallen nature in general those who wish to commune prepare themselves in a way that reflects mankind in paradise. First, they prepare by having their confession heard and the prayer of repentance read over them by a priest. They will increase their prayer rule, adding the prescribed prayers in preparation for communing. Finally, they will fast completely from food and drink from the evening of the previous day (usually sunset on Saturday if communing on Sunday).
Repentance (Confession)[edit]
Main article: Confession (religion)
Orthodox Christians who have committed sins but repent of them, and who wish to reconcile themselves to God and renew the purity of their original baptisms, confess their sins to God before a spiritual guide who offers advice and direction to assist the individual in overcoming their sin. Parish priests commonly function as spiritual guides, but such guides can be any person, male or female, who has been given a blessing to hear confessions. Spiritual guides are chosen very carefully as this is a mandate that once chosen must be obeyed. Having confessed, the penitent then has his or her parish priest read the prayer of repentance over them.
Sin is not viewed by the Orthodox as a stain on the soul that needs to be wiped out, or a legal transgression that must be set right by a punitive sentence, but rather as a mistake made by the individual with the opportunity for spiritual growth and development. An act of Penance (epitemia), if the spiritual guide requires it, is never formulaic, but rather is directed toward the individual and their particular problem, as a means of establishing a deeper understanding of the mistake made, and how to effect its cure. Because full participatory membership is granted to infants, it is not unusual for even small children to confess; though the scope of their culpability is far less than an older child, still their opportunity for spiritual growth remains the same.
Marriage[edit]
Further information: Marriage in the Eastern Orthodox Church
From the Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Roman Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and His Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union.[162][163] It is referred to extensively in both the Old and New Testaments. Christ declared the essential indissolubility of marriage in the Gospel. Both virginity and marriage have the same reference to the future Kingdom.[164]
Jesus said that "when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be "fleshy", but "spiritual".[164] Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and Church, is eternal.[165]




The wedding of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia.


The Church does recognize that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the Church towards sinful man.[166]
In the U.S., according to 2001 statistics, 14% of Orthodox marriages ended in an ecclesiastical divorce. This figure, since it took no account of how many of the couples who entered such marriages took out a civil divorce, is not comparable with the figure of 43% given at that time for the proportion of all marriages that ended in a civil divorce. But it has been argued as indicating a probable total of only 15% of marriages celebrated in an Orthodox church led to any form of divorce.[167]
Ecclesiastically divorced Orthodox (not civilly divorced only) are usually allowed to remarry in the Orthodox Church, though there is usually imposed on them a fairly severe penance by their bishop and the services for a second marriage in this case are more penitential than joyful. Widows are permitted to remarry without repercussion and their second marriage is considered just as valid as the first. One exception to this rule is the clergy and their wives. Should a married priest die, it is normal that his wife will retire to a monastery once their children are out of the house. Widowed priests are not allowed to remarry (no priest may be married after his ordination) and also frequently end up in monasteries.
Marriage service[edit]
The service of Marriage in the Orthodox Church has two distinct parts: the Betrothal and the Crowning. The Betrothal includes:

The exchange of the rings. Based on biblical references, it has always been the tradition of the Church to place the wedding ring on the right hands of the couple. This is seen very clearly in one of the prayers in the Betrothal Service. A portion of the prayer refers to the biblical references: "For You, O Lord, have declared that a pledge is to be given and held inviolate in all things. By a ring Joseph was given might in Egypt; by a ring Daniel was exalted in Babylon; by a ring our heavenly Father showed compassion upon His prodigal son, for He said, ‘Put a ring upon his right hand, kill the fatted calf, and let us eat and rejoice.’ Your own right hand, O Lord, armed Moses in the Red Sea. By word of Your truth were the Heavens established and the earth set upon her sure foundations; and the right hands of Your servants shall be blessed by Your mighty word, and by Your uplifted arm." As we see, it was scripturally the practice to wear rings on the right hand, the hand of authority and power completing the pledge of commitment. The power and authority comes from the right hand of God.
The procession, the declaration of intent, and
The lighting of candles.

The Crowning includes the readings from the epistle and gospel, the Blessing of the Common Cup, and the Dance of Isaiah (the bride and groom are led around the table 3 times), and then the Removal of the Crowns. There is no exchange of vows. There is a set expectation of the obligations incumbent on a married couple, and whatever promises they may have privately to each other are their responsibility to keep. The ceremony ends with the reading of Benedictions to and the Greeting of the Couple.
At the Sacrament of Marriage the crowns are placed on the bride and groom’s heads as the following prayer is recited three times, "The servant of God, (groom’s name), is crowned to the handmaid of God, (bride’s name), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" three times. It is then repeated three times as the bride is crowned to the groom. We witness the groom and bride being crowned (visibly proclaimed) as the king and queen, respectively, of a new family, entrusted by God with the authority to rule their family in faith and love and harmony with Christ.
They both share in this responsibility and privilege as a newly married couple. This is not simply being declared by the priest or even the Church, but by God Himself, as the following hymn is chanted three times: "O Lord, our God, crown them with glory and honor." The crowns are then switched back and forth between the groom and bride’s head, signifying that they completely share their lives together.
The crowns also serve as a reminder of the crowns that await them in heaven, if they live their lives in faithfulness to God and to each other. Fr. John Meyendorff in his book, Marriage: An Orthodox Perspective, writes: "According to St. John Chrysostom, the crowns symbolized victory over the ‘passions’." In the service of a second marriage the crowns are not to be used, but if it is a second marriage for only one of the two who are marrying and a first marriage for the other, the usual rite is followed.[168]
Many couples keep the wedding crowns in a case and display them near their icon corner or in the couple’s bedroom. They serve as a reminder that God has united them to each other and to himself and that he has bestowed his grace upon them to live in unity, faith and love.
The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.[169][170]
Holy Orders[edit]




Clergy at All Saints' Antiochian Orthodox Church, Raleigh, United States (L to R): priest, two deacons, bishop.


Since its founding, the Church spread to different places and its leaders in each region came to be known as episkopoi (overseers, plural of episkopos, overseer—Gr. ἐπίσκοπος), which became "bishop" in English. The other ordained roles are presbyter (Gr. πρεσβύτερος, elder), which became "prester" and then "priest" in English, and diakonos (Gr. διάκονος, servant), which became "deacon" in English (see also subdeacon). There are numerous administrative positions among the clergy that carry additional titles.
In the Greek tradition, bishops who occupy an ancient see are called metropolitans, while the lead bishop in Greece is the archbishop. (In the Russian tradition, however, the usage of the terms "metropolitan" and "archbishop" is reversed.) Priests can be archpriests, archimandrites or protopresbyters. Deacons can also be archdeacons or protodeacons. The position of deacon is often occupied for life. The deacon also acts as an assistant to a bishop.
With the exception of bishops, who remain celibate, the Orthodox Church has always allowed priests and deacons to be married, provided the marriage takes place before ordination. In general it is considered preferable for parish priests to be married as they often act as counsel to married couples and thus can draw on their own experience. Unmarried priests usually are monks and live in monasteries, though there are occasions when, because of a lack of married priests, a monk-priest is temporarily assigned to a parish.
Widowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to take holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church.[171] However, it has fallen out of practice (the last deaconess was ordained in the 19th century).
Unction[edit]
Anointing with oil, often called "unction", is one of the mysteries administered by the Orthodox Church and it is not reserved only for the dying or terminally ill, but for all in need of spiritual or bodily healing. In Greece, during the Ottoman occupation, it became the custom to administer this mystery annually on Great Wednesday to all believers; in recent decades, this custom has spread to many other locations. It is often distributed on major feast days, or any time the clergy feel it necessary for the spiritual welfare of its congregation.
According to Orthodox teaching unction is based on the Epistle of James:

Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up. And if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.—James 5:14–15

History[edit]
Main article: History of the Orthodox Church
Early Church[edit]




An early Christian "Ichthys" (fish) inscription from ancient Ephesus


Following Jesus Christ's Great Commission to the apostles, Christianity spread rapidly throughout the Roman Empire. Paul and the Apostles traveled extensively throughout the Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing Churches in major communities, with the first Churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome.[172] Christianity in the Roman Empire met with considerable resistance, as its adherents would refuse to comply with the Roman state (even at the threat of death) in offering sacrifice to the pagan gods. Despite persecutions, the Church spread. The persecution dissipated upon the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in 324 AD.[172]
By the 4th century Christianity had spread to numerous regions. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the Church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod in order to define the Church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location, but by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the Church. Most modern Christian Churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council,[172][173] as of major importance.
Ecumenical councils[edit]
Main article: First seven Ecumenical Councils
See also: State church of the Roman Empire




Icon depicting the Emperor Constantine and the bishops of the First Council of Nicaea (325) holding the Niceno–Constantinopolitan Creed of 381.


Several doctrinal disputes from the 4th century onwards led to the calling of Ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an Ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an Ecumenical council.
There are seven councils authoritatively recognized as Ecumenical:

The First Ecumenical Council was convoked by the Roman Emperor Constantine at Nicaea in 325 and presided over by the Patriarch Alexander of Alexandria, with over 300 bishops condemning the view of Arius that the Son is a created being inferior to the Father.[174]
The Second Ecumenical Council was held at Constantinople in 381, presided over by the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, with 150 bishops, defining the nature of the Holy Spirit against those asserting His inequality with the other persons of the Trinity.[175]
The Third Ecumenical Council is that of Ephesus in 431, presided over by the Patriarch of Alexandria, with 250 bishops, which affirmed that Mary is truly "Birthgiver" or "Mother" of God (Theotokos), contrary to the teachings of Nestorius.[176]
The Fourth Ecumenical Council is that of Chalcedon in 451, Patriarch of Constantinople presiding, 500 bishops, affirmed that Jesus is truly God and truly man, without mixture of the two natures, contrary to Monophysite teaching.[177]
The Fifth Ecumenical Council is the second of Constantinople in 553, interpreting the decrees of Chalcedon and further explaining the relationship of the two natures of Jesus; it also condemned the alleged teachings of Origen on the pre-existence of the soul, etc.[178]
The Sixth Ecumenical Council is the third of Constantinople in 681; it declared that Christ has two wills of his two natures, human and divine, contrary to the teachings of the Monothelites.[179]
The Seventh Ecumenical Council was called under the Empress Regent Irene of Athens in 787, known as the second of Nicaea. It supports the veneration of icons while forbidding their worship. It is often referred to as "The Triumph of Orthodoxy".[180]

There are also two other councils which are considered Ecumenical by some Orthodox. All Orthodox agree that the decisions of these further councils are valid; the disagreement is only whether they carry sufficient importance to be considered truly Ecumenical:

8. The Fourth Council of Constantinople was called in 879. It restored St. Photius to his See in Constantinople and condemned any alteration of the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed of 381.


9. The Fifth Council of Constantinople was actually a series of councils held between 1341 and 1351. It affirmed the hesychastic theology of St. Gregory Palamas and condemned the philosopher Barlaam of Calabria.

In addition to these councils there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Jassy (Iași) in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena including Modernism, other Christian confessions, Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.[181]
Roman/Byzantine Empire[edit]




Hagia Sophia, the largest church in the world and patriarchal basilica of Constantinople for nearly a thousand years, later converted into a mosque, now a museum


Main articles: State church of the Roman Empire and Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople
Eastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Russia, Greece, Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine, as well as Asia.
In the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I.[182]
Early schisms[edit]
The Church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematizing the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective "Greek" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire. However, those who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt, and today they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and in the whole Middle East. There was also a similar, albeit smaller scale, split in Syria (Patriarchate of Antioch), which resulted in the separation of the Syriac Orthodox Church from the Byzantine Patriarchate of Antioch.
Those who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are sometimes called "Oriental Orthodox" to distinguish them from the "Eastern Orthodox", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as "non-Chalcedonians", or "anti-Chalcedonians". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term "miaphysite", to denote the "united" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one) consistent with St. Cyril's theology: "The term union...signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united" and "the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description" (St. Cyril of Alexandria - On the Unity of Christ). Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church, although over the last several decades there has been considerable reconciliation and the prospect of reunification has been discussed.
As well, there are the "Nestorian" churches, which are Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of Constantinople. "Nestorian" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lay in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teacher(s) Theodore of Mopsuestia and/or Diodore of Tarsus. The "Nestorian Church" is commonly referred to as "the Assyrian Church" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.
Conversion of East and South Slavs[edit]
Further information: Christianization of Bulgaria, Christianization of the Rus' Khaganate, and Christianization of Kievan Rus'
In the 9th and 10th centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Kievan Rus'. This work was made possible by the work of the Byzantine-era saints Cyril and Methodius. When king Rastislav of Moravia asked Byzantium for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language, Byzantine emperor Michael III chose these two brothers. Cyril and Methodius translated the Bible and many of the prayer books. As the translations prepared by them were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Old Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese. Their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886.[183]




The baptism of Princess Olga in Constantinople, a miniature from the Radzivill Chronicle


Some of the disciples, namely Saint Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum, were of great importance to the Orthodox Faith in Bulgaria. In a short time, the disciples of Cyril and Methodius managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 893, proclaimed the first organized Church on the Balkan Peninsula. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of East Slavic peoples, most notably the Rus', predecessors of Belarusians, Russians, and Ukrainians.[184]
The work of the Thessaloniki brothers Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact to Serbs as well.[185] However, they accepted Christianity collectively by families and by tribes (in the process between the 7th and the 9th century). In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honor the Saint on whose day they received the sacrament of Holy Baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava is actually the celebration of the spiritual birthday of the Serbian people which the Church blessed and proclaimed it a Church institution.[186]
The missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire or Latin as the Roman priests did.[187] Today the Russian Orthodox Church is the largest of the Orthodox Churches followed by the Romanian Orthodox Church.[188]
Great Schism (1054)[edit]
Main article: East-West Schism
In the 11th century what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine Churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Roman Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding Papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralization of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to Papacy approvals. It used to be that the Emperor would at least have say when a new Pope would be elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.[189]




Latin Crusaders sacking the city of Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Orthodox controlled Byzantine Empire, in 1204.


The final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which was importantly also strongly condemned by the Pope at the time (Innocent III, see reference at end of paragraph); the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. Many things that were stolen during this time —holy relics, riches, and many other items—were not returned and are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.[190][191]
Reunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. Some local Eastern Churches have, however, renewed union with Rome in time since (see Eastern Catholic Churches). Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Churches.[192]
Age of captivity[edit]
Main articles: Christianity in the Ottoman Empire and History of the Eastern Orthodox Church under the Ottoman Empire
In 1453, the Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire. By this time Egypt had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries, but Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia which had recently acquired an autocephalous status; and thus Moscow called itself the Third Rome, as the cultural heir of Constantinople.
Under Ottoman rule, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous millet. The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the Rûm (Ottoman administrative unit meaning "Roman"), which encompassed all the Orthodox subjects of the Empire.
Russian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire[edit]
Up until 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State.[193] In 1721 the first Russian Emperor, Peter I abolished completely the patriarchate and so the Church effectively became a department of the government, ruled by a Most Holy Synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. From 1721 until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church was essentially transformed into a governmental agency, a tool used to various degrees by the tsars in the imperial campaigns of Russification. The Church was allowed by the State to levy taxes on the peasants. Therefore, the Church, along with the imperial regime, to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and the other Russian revolutionaries.[194]
Russian Orthodox Church in Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union (1917–91)[edit]
See also: Persecution of Christians in the Soviet Union




1931 demolition of the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow



The rebuilt Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, currently the tallest Orthodox church







Russian Orthodox Church in Shanghai was converted into a washing machine factory.


The revolution brought a brief period of freedom from governmental control for the Church: an independent patriarchate was reestablished briefly in 1917, until Vladimir Lenin quashed the Church a few years later, imprisoning or killing many of the clergy and of the faithful.[citation needed] Part of the clergy escaped the Bolshevik persecutions by fleeing abroad, where they founded an independent church in exile, reunified with the Russian one in 2007.
The Orthodox Church clergy in Russia were seen as sympathetic with the cause of the White Army in the Civil War (see White movement) after the October Revolution, and occasionally collaborated with it; Patriarch Tikhon's declared position was vehemently anti-Bolshevik in 1918. This may have further strengthened the Bolshevik animus against the church.
Before and after the October Revolution of 7 November 1917 (25 October Old Calendar) there was a movement within Russia to unite all of the people of the world under Communist rule (see Communist International). This included the Eastern Bloc countries as well as the Balkan States. Since some of these Slavic states tied their ethnic heritage to their ethnic churches, both the peoples and their church were targeted by the Soviets.[195][196]
The Soviets' official interpretation of freedom of conscience was one of "guaranteeing the right to profess any religion, or profess none, to practice religious cults, or conduct atheist propaganda",[197] though in effect atheism was sponsored by state and was taught in all educational establishments.[198] Public criticism of atheism was unofficially forbidden and sometimes led to imprisonment.[199]
The Soviet government confiscated church property, ridiculed religion, harassed believers, and propagated atheism in schools.[citation needed] Actions toward particular religions, however, were determined by State interests, and most organized religions were never outlawed.[citation needed]
Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals.[200][201]
The result of state sponsored atheism was to transform the Church into a persecuted and martyred Church. In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.[202]
After Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. But in 1959 Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.[202]
In the Soviet Union, in addition to the methodical closing and destruction of churches, the charitable and social work formerly done by ecclesiastical authorities was taken over by the state. As with all private property, Church owned property was confiscated into public use. The few places of worship left to the Church were legally viewed as state property which the government permitted the church to use. After the advent of state funded universal education, the Church was not permitted to carry on educational, instructional activity of any kind. Outside of sermons during the celebration of the divine liturgy it could not instruct or evangelise to the faithful or its youth. Catechism classes, religious schools, study groups, Sunday schools and religious publications were all illegal or banned. This persecution continued, even after the death of Stalin until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. This caused many religious tracts to be circulated as illegal literature or samizdat.[200]
Among the most damaging aspects of Soviet rule, along with these physical abuses, the Soviet Union frequently manipulated the recruitment and appointment of priests, sometimes planting agents of the KGB within the church to monitor religious persons who were viewed – simply for not being atheists[citation needed] – as suspicious and potential threats to Soviet communism.[citation needed] As a result, the return of religious beliefs in Russia has been impeded even after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[citation needed]
However, there is definitely marked return to Christian Orthodoxy in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion & Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 percent to 72 percent, according to a new Pew Research Center analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) – a collaboration involving social scientists in about 50 countries.[203]
Other Orthodox churches during the Cold War[edit]
Albania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist.[204] In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organization enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematization (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialized institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).[205][206]
Relations with other Christians[edit]




The consecration of the Rt Rev. Reginald Heber Weller as an Anglican bishop at the Cathedral of St. Paul the Apostle in the Episcopal Diocese of Fond du Lac, with the Rt. Rev. Anthony Kozlowski of the Polish National Catholic Church and Saint Tikhon, then Bishop of the Aleutians and Alaska (along with his chaplains Fr. John Kochurov and Fr. Sebastian Dabovich) of the Russian Orthodox Church present






Pope Francis and Patriarch Bartholomew I in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem, 2014


See also: Fourth Crusade and Polish–Muscovite War (1605–18)
Eastern Orthodoxy represents the majority of Eastern Christianity. The Orthodox trace their bishops back to the apostles through apostolic succession, and continue the ancient Christian practices of veneration of saints, especially Mary the Mother of God as the Theotokos, prayers for the dead, and monasticism. Orthodoxy does not openly promote statuary, although it is not expressly condemned, instead limiting itself primarily to two-dimensional iconography. Western theological concepts of original sin, substitutionary atonement, predestination, purgatory and particular judgment are generally rejected by traditional Orthodox theologians.
The Orthodox believe themselves to be the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; that is, the true Church established by Jesus Christ and placed into the care of the apostles. As almost all other Christian groups are in indirect schism with the Orthodox Church, mostly as a result of the Great Schism with the Roman Catholic Church at the turn of the second Christian millennium (before the schisms of the Protestant Reformation), these other groups are viewed as being Christian, but who, to varying degrees, lack full theological orthodoxy and orthopraxy. As such, all groups outside of the Orthodox Church are not seen as being members of the Church proper, but rather separated brethren who have failed to retain the fullness of the Christian faith and theology. These deviations from orthodoxy have traditionally been called heresy, but due to the term's perceived pejorative connotations, some prefer the more technical designation of the term heterodoxy.
In 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical "addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations".[207] This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC);[208] as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox Churches are members of the WCC and "Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees".[209] Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism "is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox Churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians."[210]
Hilarion Alfeyev, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on "such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage" and desire "vigorous grassroots engagement" between the two Christian communions on such issues.[211]
In that regard, the differences between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralized Roman Catholic Church and the decentralized confederation of Orthodox Churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary (Theotokos, or "God-bearer").[212] Even during a visit by Pope Francis to Georgia in October 2016, the leader of the Roman Catholics was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians when he was holding mass in front of the practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.[213]
The Oriental Orthodox Churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century;[214] also, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time, he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.[215]
Relations with Islam[edit]




The Constantinople Massacre of April 1821: a religious persecution of the Greek population of Constantinople under the Ottomans. Patriarch Gregory V of Constantinople was executed.


Historically, the Orthodox Church and the non-Chalcedonians were among the first peoples to have contact with Islam, which conquered Roman/Byzantine Syria-Palestine and Egypt in the 7th century, and fought many battles against Islamic conquests. The Qur'an itself records its concurrent observations regarding the Roman world in Surah al-Rum. The main contact with Islam however, came after the conquest of the Seljuk Turks of Roman/Byzantine Anatolia in the 13th century. Until the turn of the 20th century, the Orthodox Church was under the authority of various Islamic Sultanates and Caliphates until the anti-Colonialist surge that began in the early 20th century.
In Russia, Metropolitan Alfeyev stated belief in the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.[216]
Present[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another.
Presently, there are two communions that reject each other and, in addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion, all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox. The main traditional historical communion is divided into two groups - those who use the Revised Julian calendar for calculating fixed feasts and the Julian calendar for calculating movable feasts, and those who use the Julian calendar for all purposes. This second group may include congregations whose church allows them to choose, with the proviso that the choice remains in effect at least until the end of the church year. Also in communion are the Estonian and Finnish Orthodox churches who have a dispensation to use the Gregorian calendar for all purposes. Another group are referred to as True Orthodoxy (also Old Calendarists), they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contravention of the ecumenical councils. Similarly, another group called Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow. As Eastern Orthodox Christianity is both collegial and local in structure, there is no single organization called the "True Orthodox Church" nor is there official recognition among the "True Orthodox" as to who is properly included among them. While some unions have taken place even up to the present, the majority of True Orthodox are only secondarily concerned with reunion as opposed to preservation of Eastern Orthodox teaching. The calendar question reflects the dispute between those who wish to use a calendar which is reformed yet not Gregorian (effectively gaining the perceived benefits of the Gregorian calendar without disregarding the three anathemas issued against it in the sixteenth century), something which opponents consider unnecessary and damaging to continuity, and those who wish to maintain the traditional ecclesiastical calendar (which happens to be based on the Julian calendar), arguing that such a modern change goes against 1900 years of Church tradition and was in fact perpetrated without an ecumenical council, which would surely have rejected the idea.




The Pan-Orthodox Council, Kolymvari, Crete, Greece, June 2016


The dispute has led to much acrimony, and sometimes even to violence. Following canonical precepts, some adherents of the old calendar have chosen to abstain from clerical intercommunion with those synods which have embraced the new calendar until the conflict is resolved. The monastic communities on Mount Athos have provided the strongest opposition to the new calendar, and to modernism in general, while still maintaining communion with their mother church.
Some latent discontent between different national churches exists also in part due to different approach towards ecumenism. While the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, the Orthodox bishops in North America gathered into the Standing Conference of the Canonical Orthodox Bishops in the Americas (SCOBA), Romanian bishops, and others are fairly open to dialog with the Roman Catholic Church, both conservative and moderate Old Calendarists, many of the monks of Mount Athos, several bishops of Russian, Serbian, and some of Greek and Bulgarian churches regard ecumenism as compromising essential doctrinal stands in order to accommodate other Christians, and object to the emphasis on dialogue leading to inter-communion; believing instead that Orthodox must speak the truth with love, in the hope of leading to the eventual conversion to Orthodoxy of heterodox Christians.[clarification needed]
Eastern Orthodox Christians are among the wealthiest Christian denominations in the United States.[217] They also tend to be better educated than most other religious groups in America, having a high number of graduate (68%) and post-graduate (28%) degrees per capita.[218]
The Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has recently united with the Moscow Patriarchate (MP); these two branches of the Russian Orthodox Church had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime (see Act of Canonical Communion).
Main communion[edit]
The Orthodox Church is a communion of 14 autocephalous (that is, administratively completely independent) regional churches,[219] plus the Orthodox Church in America, which is recognized as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish, the Czech-Slovak churches. Each has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its Council of Bishops or Synod presided by a senior bishop – its Primate (or First Hierarch). The Primate may carry the honorary title of Patriarch, Metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or Archbishop (in the Greek tradition).
Each regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or, dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a Tomos or other document of autonomy.




Patriarchate of Peć in Kosovo, the seat of the Serbian Orthodox Church from the 14th century when its status was upgraded into a patriarchate






Cathedral of Evangelismos, Alexandria






Romanian People's Salvation Cathedral (under construction) will be the seat of the Romanian Patriarch


Below is a list of the 14 (15) autocephalous Orthodox churches, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled first among equals. Based on these definitions, the list is in their order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with constituent autonomous churches and exarchates. The Liturgical title of the Primate is listed in italics. The communion:

Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople (Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome and First Among Equals Patriarch)

Autonomous Orthodox Church of Finland (Archbishop of Karelia and All Finland)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Crete (Archbishop of Crete)
Self-governing Monastic Community of Mount Athos
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Korea (Metropolitan of Seoul and all Korea)
Exarchate of Patmos (Patriarchal Exarch of Patmos)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain (Archbishop of Thyateira and Great Britain)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta (Orthodox Archbishop of Italy and Malta and Exarch of Southern Europe)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America (Archbishop of America)
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia (Archbishop of Australia)
Exarchate of the Philippines (Exarch of Philippines)
Patriarchal Exarchate for Orthodox Parishes of Russian Tradition in Western Europe (Archbishop of Komana)


Patriarchate of Alexandria (His Most Divine Beatitude the Pope and Patriarch of the Great City of Alexandria, Libya, Pentapolis, Ethiopia, all the land of Egypt, and all Africa, Father of Fathers, Shepherd of Shepherds, Prelate of Prelates, Thirteenth of the Apostles, and Judge of the Œcumene)
Patriarchate of Antioch (Patriarch of Antioch and all the East)

Self-governing Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America (Archbishop of New York and Metropolitan of All North America)


Patriarchate of Jerusalem (Patriarch of the Holy City of Jerusalem and all Holy Land, Syria, Arabia, beyond the Jordan River, Cana of Galilee, and Sacred Zion)

Autonomous Church of Mount Sinai (Archbishop of Choreb, Sinai, and Raitha)


Patriarchate of Russia (Patriarch of Moscow and all Russia)

Autonomous Orthodox Church in Japan (Archbishop of Tokyo and Metropolitan of All Japan)
Autonomous Orthodox Church of China (defunct)
Exarchate of Belarus (Metropolitan of Minsk and Slutsk, Patriarchal Exarch of All Belarus)
Self-governing Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (Metropolitan of Eastern America and New York, First Hierarch of the Russian church abroad)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Ukraine (Metropolitan of Kiev and all Ukraine)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Moldova (Metropolitan of Chişinău and all Moldova)
Self-governing Orthodox Church of Latvia (Metropolitan of Riga and all Latvia)
Self-governing Estonian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate (Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia) [Autonomy not recognized by the Ecumenical Patriarchate]


Serbian Patriarchate (Archbishop of Peć, Metropolitan of Belgrade and Karlovci, and Serbian Patriarch)

Autonomous Orthodox Ohrid Archbishopric (Archbishop of Ohrid and Metropolitan of Skopje)


Patriarchate of Bulgaria (Metropolitan of Sofia and Patriarch of All Bulgaria)
Patriarchate of Romania (Archbishop of Bucharest, Metropolitan of Muntenia and Dobrudja, and Patriarch of All Romania)
Patriarchate of Georgia (Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia, the Archbishop of Mtskheta-Tbilisi and Metropolitan bishop of Abkhazia and Pitsunda.)
Church of Greece (Archbishop of Athens and all Greece)
Church of Cyprus (Archbishop of New Justiniana and all Cyprus)
Orthodox Church of Albania (Archbishop of Tirana, Durres and all Albania)
Orthodox Church in America (Archbishop of Washington, Metropolitan of All America and Canada)[e]
Orthodox Church of the Czech lands and Slovakia (Archbishop of Prague, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia or the Archbishop of Presov, the Metropolitan of Czech lands and Slovakia)
Orthodox Church of Poland (Metropolitan of Warsaw and all Poland)

There are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status of the following Orthodox churches:

Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church (Metropolitan of Tallinn and all Estonia) — Autonomy is recognized only by the Ecumenical Patriarchate, opposed only by the Russian Orthodox Church
Self-governing Metropolis of Bessarabia of the Romanian Orthodox Church — Autonomy is objected by the Russian Orthodox Church

Traditionalist groups[edit]




Traditional Paschal procession by Russian Orthodox Old-Rite Church


True Orthodoxy separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s.[220] The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and those Churches in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same. They adhere to the use of the old Julian Calendar since Antiquity, claiming that the calendar reform in 1920s is in contravention of the Ecumenical Councils. True Orthodox writers have argued that in missionary areas such as the United States, Orthodox (SCOBA) membership numbers may be overstated, with the comparative number of True Orthodox as up to 15% of the Orthodox population, in Russia, it has been claimed by some clergy that up to a million Russians may be True Orthodox of different jurisdictions, though the total number is often cited at 1.7-2 million together.
There is no official communion of traditionalists. They often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality. The following is a list:

Churches descending from the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia
Greek Old Calendarists
Old Calendar Bulgarian Orthodox Church
Old Calendar Romanian Orthodox Church
Russian Orthodox Autonomous Church
Serbian True Orthodox Church

Old Believers are groups that do not accept liturgical reforms carried out in the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon in the 17th century. Although all Old Believers groups emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reform, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite the emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups that profess different interpretations of the church tradition and often are not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).
Old Believers:

Russian Orthodox Old-Rite Church (Belokrinitskaya Hierarchy)
Lipovan Orthodox Old-Rite Church (Belokrinitskaya Hierarchy)
Russian Old-Orthodox Church (Novozybkovskaya Hierarchy)
Pomorian Old-Orthodox Church (Pomortsy)

Churches not in communion with others[edit]
Churches with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the 14 (15) autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schisms.

Abkhazian Orthodox Church
Bulgarian Alternative Synod, in full communion with the Montenegrin Orthodox Church and the Ukrainian Orthodox Kiev Patriarchate
Belarusian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Communion of the Western Orthodox Churches (Celtic Orthodox Church, French Orthodox Church, Orthodox Church of the Gauls)
Croatian Orthodox Church, existed 1942-45
Evangelical Orthodox Church, only Eastern Orthodox denomiation that mixes with Charismatic and Evangelical elements.
Holy Orthodox Church in North America, in communion with Greek Old Calendarists
Lusitanian Orthodox Church
Macedonian Orthodox Church – The Church proclaimed independence, but this is objected by the Serbian Orthodox Church as a schism. Though officially unrecognised by the other churches in the communion, the Macedonian Orthodox Church de facto communicates with many of the churches.[221][222][223][224]
Montenegrin Orthodox Church, in full communion with the Bulgarian Alternative Synod and the Ukrainian Orthodox Kiev Patriarchate
Orthodox-Catholic Church of America
Orthodox Church in Italy, since 2013 a vicariate of the Nordic Catholic Church known as the Old Catholic Church in Italy
Orthodox Church of Greece (Holy Synod in Resistance) (as of 2014 in communion with Greek Old Calendarists)
Russian True Orthodox Church
Turkish Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Kiev Patriarchate), in full communion with the Bulgarian Alternative Synod and the Montenegrin Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church Canonical

See also[edit]


 Eastern Christianity portal
 Christianity portal
 Religion portal
Byzantine art
Byzantine literature
Byzantine dress
Byzantine music
Chalcedonian Christianity
Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic ecclesiastical differences
Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic theological differences
Eastern Orthodox Christian theology
Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar
Emanation (Eastern Orthodoxy)
Greek Orthodox Christianity in Lebanon
History of Eastern Orthodox Christian theology
List of Orthodox Churches
Orthodox Church organization
State church of the Roman Empire
Timeline of Orthodoxy in Greece (33-717)
Western Rite Orthodoxy


Notes and references[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ According to Roman Lunkin in an interview about the 2012 survey published by Среда (Sreda), about 40% of the Russian Federation population is Orthodox. However, only 5% belong to a parish or regularly attend Divine Liturgy. Lunkin said that this was long known by experts but a myth persists that 80–90% of the population is Orthodox.[76] According to The World Factbook 2006 estimate, 15–20% are practicing Russian Orthodox but there is a large populations of non-practicing believers.[77]
^ Data is estimated, there are no census figures available, Greece is said to be 98% Orthodox by CIA, but additional studies found only 60-80% believe in God, if true, then no more than 80% may be Orthodox.
^ According to Alexei Krindatch, "the total number of Orthodox parishes" increased by 16% from 2000 to 2010 in the United States, from this, he wrote that Orthodox Churches are growing.[93](p2) Krindatch did not provide figures about any change in the membership over that same period in his 2010 highlight.
^ According to Oliver Herbel, in Turning to Tradition, the 2008 US Religious Landscape Survey "suggests that if there is growth, it is statistically insignificant."[94](p9) The 2014 US Religious Landscape Survey also shows, within the survey's ±9.2% margin of sampling error corresponding to the sample size of the Orthodox Christian category being 186 people, a statistically insignificant decline within the category "Orthodox Christians" as the percentage of population from 2007 to 2014.[95](pp4, 21, 36, 93) But only 53% of people who were Orthodox Christian as children still self identify as Orthodox Christian in 2014.[95](p39) The Orthodox Christian category "is most heavily made up of immigrants and the children of immigrants."[95](p53)
^ Autocephaly was granted in 1970 from its mother church, the Russian Orthodox Church. No church has yet objected the inclusion of the Orthodox Church in America. It is in full communion with all canonical Orthodox Churches and therefore fully recognized by all de facto. Upon gaining autocephaly it became the 15th church within the communion. The Ecumenical Patriarchate accepts the Orthodox Church in America, but disputes the Russian Orthodox Church's action of granting autocephaly. There are no Orthodox canons stating who can or cannot grant autocephaly.



References[edit]


^ a b c Meyendorff, John (2014-07-14). "Eastern Orthodoxy". britannica.com. Britannica. Retrieved 26 July 2015. 
^ a b Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America (2016). "The Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 18 December 2016. The Orthodox Church today, numbering over 250 million worldwide, is a communion of self governing Churches, each administratively independent of the other, but united by a common faith and spirituality. 
^ Please see sources in Name and characteristics section.
^ Adherents (28 October 2005). "Christianity". Major Branches of Religions Ranked by Number of Adherents. Retrieved 18 December 2016. 
^ Mary Fairchild. "Orthodox Affiliation". About. Retrieved 26 October 2014. 
^ Ware 1993, p. 8.
^ Lewis Patsavos. The Primacy of the See of Constantinople in Theory and Practice
^ Territorial Jurisdiction According to Orthodox Canon Law. The Phenomenon of Ethnophyletism in Recent Years
^ Holy Bible: Matthew 28:16-20; Mark 16:14-18; Luke 24:44-49.
^ a b Binns 2002, p. 3.
^ a b Millar, Fergus (2006). A Greek Roman Empire : power and belief under Theodosius II (408–450). University of California Press. p. 279 pages. ISBN 0-520-24703-5. 
^ Tanner, Norman P. The Councils of the Church, ISBN 0-8245-1904-3
^ The Byzantine legacy in the Orthodox Church by John Meyendorff – 1982
^ Byzantium in Encyclopedia of historians and historical writing Vol. 1, Kelly Boyd (ed.), Fitzroy Dearborn publishers, 1999 ISBN 978-1-884964-33-6
^ Edwin Pears, The destruction of the Greek Empire and the story of the capture of Constantinople by the Turks, Haskell House, 1968
^ a b Joan Mervyn Hussey, The Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire, 1990
^ a b A. P. Vlasto, Entry of Slavs Christendom – 1970
^ Andreĭ Lazarov Pantev, Bŭlgarska istorii︠a︡ v evropeĭski kontekst – 2000
^ Cleenewerck 2009, p. 101 "The Church of the East has never from the first been known by any other name than Catholic, nor has she set aside this title in any official document.".
^ "About Orthodox". Saint Mary Antiochian Orthodox Church, Pawtucket, RI, USA. Retrieved 4 May 2014. The official designation of the Orthodox Church is the "Eastern Orthodox Catholic and Apostolic Church." 
^ "TO BE AN ORTHODOX CHRISTIAN ..." Orthodox Christian Church in Thailand (Moscow Patriarchate). Retrieved 4 May 2014. The various Orthodox Churches are all sister Churches, all part of the One, Holy, Orthodox Catholic Church. 
^ Encyclopædia Brittanica Online, "Eastern Orthodoxy" "Eastern Orthodoxy, official name, used in British English as well, is Orthodox Catholic Church, one of the three major doctrinal and jurisdictional groups of Christianity.".
^ Ellwood Encyclopedia of World Religions 2007, p. 128 "The Eastern Orthodox Churches are properly known as the "Orthodox Catholic Church"".
^ Tsichlis, Fr. Steven. "Frequently Asked Questions About the Orthodox Church". St. Paul's Greek Orthodox Church, Irvine, California, USA. Archived from the original on 10 December 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2014. The full title of our Church is "The Orthodox Catholic Church." 
^ Richard R. Losch (1 May 2002). The Many Faces of Faith: A Guide to World Religions and Christian Traditions. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 76. ISBN 978-0-8028-0521-8. The official name of the body is the Orthodox Catholic Church. 
^ Encyclopædia Brittanica Online, "Eastern Orthodoxy" "The official designations of the church in its liturgical or canonical texts are either "the Orthodox Catholic Church" or the "Greek Catholic Church" only.".
^ Merriam-Webster Encyclopedia of World Religions 1999, p. 309 "The official designation of the church in Eastern Orthodox liturgical or canonical texts is "the Orthodox Catholic Church."".
^ The monks of Decani Monastery, Kosovo. "The Orthodox Church, An Introduction". Orthodox Christian Information Center. Retrieved 3 May 2014. The official designation of the church in its liturgical and canonical texts is "the Orthodox Catholic Church" 
^ "What We Believe". The Orthodox Church. The Diocese of Eastern Pennsylvania, Orthodox Church in America. Retrieved 3 May 2014. 
^ "About Orthodoxy". The Orthodox Church. Berlin, MD, USA: Christ the Saviour Orthodox Church. Retrieved 3 May 2014. 
^ "THE HOLY ORTHODOX CHRISTIAN CHURCH: ITS FAITH AND LIFE". ArchangelsBooks.com. Retrieved 4 May 2014. 
^ "Orthodox Christianity – Introduction". Serbian Orthodox Diocese of Ras and Prizren. Retrieved 4 May 2014. 
^ "About Orthodoxy". Holy Ascension Orthodox Church, Frackville, PA. Retrieved 4 May 2014. 
^ Orthodox Eastern Church 1909.
^ Greek Orthodox Church 1875.
^ "Orthodox Dogma and Doctrine: The symbol of Faith". Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the USA – Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 4 May 2014. The Church is Catholic, for her flock has one heart and one soul (Acts 4:32) and her catholicity is dominant. 
^ "About Orthodoxy". Saint Mary of Egypt Orthodox Church. Retrieved 4 May 2014. 
^ Ware 1993, p. 307.
^ Fitzgerald 1998, p. 8.
^ De Vie 1945.
^ Nielsen, Johnson & Ellis 2001, p. 248 "In the Eastern Orthodox Catholic Church, authority ...".
^ Fortescue 1908, p. 255 "... it is all gathered together and still lives in the Holy Apostolic Orthodox Catholic Church of the Seven Councils.".
^ Schadé Encyclopedia of World Religions 2006.
^ Losch 2002, p. 76.
^ Merriam-Webster Encyclopedia of World Religions 1999, pp. 309-10.
^ Encyclopædia Brittanica Online, "Eastern Orthodoxy" "Because of the use of the name "Greek Catholics" by the Eastern churches of the Catholic Church and the historical links of the Orthodox Catholic church with the Eastern Roman Empire and Byzantium (Constantinople), however, the exonyms in American English usage referred to it as the "Eastern" or "Greek Orthodox" Church. These terms are sometimes misleading, especially when applied to Russian or Slavic churches and to the Orthodox communities in western Europe and America.".
^ a b Fitzgerald, Thomas (9 January 1996). "The Orthodox Church: An Introduction". Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. 
^ Thurston, Herbert (1908). "Catholic". In Knight, Kevin. The Catholic Encyclopedia. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved 17 August 2012. 
^ Hardon 1981, p. 217.
^ δοκέω in Liddell and Scott
^ Ware 1991, pp. 16, 271.
^ Hierotheos 1998, pp. 69-72.
^ Ware 1991, pp. 212-213.
^ Ware 1991, p. 282.
^ Ware 1991, pp. 180-199.
^ Ware 1991, pp. 152-179.
^ Ware 1991, pp. 203-204.
^ Holy Bible: John 14:17; John 14:26
^ Ware 1991, p. 215.
^ Evagrius the Solitary (1857–1866) [4th century], "On Prayer, 60", in Migne, J. P., Patrologia Graeca, 79, Paris: Imprimerie Catholique, p. 1180B, retrieved 15 May 2014 
^ St. Maximus (1857–1866) [7th century], "Letter 20", in Migne, J. P., Patrologia Graeca, 91, Paris: Imprimerie Catholique, p. 601C, retrieved 15 May 2014 
^ American Heritage Dict & 5th ed, p. 294 "catholicity".
^ Ware 1991, p. 16.
^ Encyclopedia of Christianity 2003, p. 867.
^ Leith 1982, p. 486.
^ a b "Eastern Orthodox Church". BBC. Retrieved 26 July 2015. 
^ a b "Eastern Ortthodoxy". www.religionfacts.com. Retrieved 26 July 2015. 
^ Morris, Fr. John (October 2007). "An Orthodox Response to the Recent Roman Catholic Declaration on the Nature of the Church". The Word. Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America (Oct 2007). Retrieved 22 May 2014. 
^ Website of the Pan-Orthodox Council
^ Dagher, Sam (14 Apr 2015), Mideast's Christians Trapped by Extremists, Wall Street Journal, pp. A1, A12, retrieved 5 Jul 2015 
^ a b "Major branches of religions ranked by number of adherents". adherents.com. Retrieved 2014-05-22. 
^ Diamond, Plattner & Costopoulos 2005, p. 119.
^ Yearbook of International Religious Demography 2015. BRILL. 29 June 2015. p. 156. ISBN 978-90-04-29739-5. 
^ Pew Research Center (2011-12-19). Global Christianity: a report on the size and distribution of the world's Christian population (PDF). Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-08-05. Retrieved 2015-01-01. 
^ "Orthodox belonging to Church – 41%". sreda.org. Moscow.  Based on a survey of 56,900 people interviewed in 2012, responding 41% yes to the statement: "I am Orthodox, and belong to the Russian Orthodox Church."
^ Филина, Ольга (2012-08-27). "Верю — не верю". kommersant.ru (in Russian). Moscow: Коммерсантъ. Archived from the original on 2012-08-27. Retrieved 2015-09-27. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n  This article incorporates public domain material from the CIA World Factbook document "Field listing :: Religions".
^ Sparkle Design Studio. "Опитування: Віруючим якої церкви, конфесії Ви себе вважаєте? // Центр Разумкова". Archived from the original on 2014-04-08. 
^ Religion and denominations in the Republic of Belarus by the Commissioner on Religions and Nationalities of the Republic of Belarus from November 2011
^ "Tieslietu ministrija iesniegtie religisko organizaciju parskati par darbibu 2011. gada" (in Latvian). Archived from the original on November 26, 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012. 
^ "Statistical database: Population Census 2000 – Religious affiliation" . Statistics Estonia. 22 October 2002. Retrieved 2011-02-18
^ Table 28, 2013 Census Data – QuickStats About Culture and Identity – Tables.
^ "Kyrgyzstan". State.gov. Retrieved 17 April 2010. 
^ Lebanon – International Religious Freedom Report 2010 U.S. Department of State. Retrieved on 14 February 2010.
^ Religion in Albania#Religious demography
^ Içduygu, Ahmet; Toktas, Şule; Ali Soner, B. (1 February 2008). "The politics of population in a nation-building process: emigration of non-Muslims from Turkey". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 31 (2): 358–389. doi:10.1080/01419870701491937. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Chapter The refugees question in Greece (1821–1930) in "Θέματα Νεοελληνικής Ιστορίας", ΟΕΔΒ ("Topics from Modern Greek History"). 8th edition" (PDF). Nikolaos Andriotis. 2008. 
^ "'Editors' Introduction: Why a Special Issue?: Disappearing Christians of the Middle East" (PDF). Editors' Introduction. 2001. Retrieved 11 June 2013. 
^ a b Maria Hämmerli; Jean-François Mayer (28 August 2014). Orthodox Identities in Western Europe: Migration, Settlement and Innovation. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 229. ISBN 978-1-4094-6754-0. according to the 2011 census, Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religious grouping in Ireland, showing... 
^ Arthur Aughey; John Oakland (17 December 2013). Irish Civilization: An Introduction. Routledge. p. 99. ISBN 978-1-317-67850-2. However, the fastest-growing church is the Orthodox Church … 
^ "Number of Orthodox Christians in Ireland doubled over five years". pravoslavie.ru. Moscow: Sretensky Monastery. 2012-11-01. Retrieved 2014-05-23.   This tertiary source September 2015 reuses information from other sources without citing them in detail.
^ Jones, Whitney (2010-10-06). "Report finds strong growth in U.S. Orthodox Churches". huffingtonpost.com. New York. Religion News Service. Archived from the original on 2010-10-10. Retrieved 2014-05-23. 
^ Krindatch, Alexei D. (2010). "[Highlights from the] 2010 US Orthodox Christian census" (PDF). hartfordinstitute.org. Hartford, CT: Hartford Institute for Religion Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-23. Retrieved 2015-09-26.  Conducted as part of the Religious Congregations and Membership Study 2010.
^ Herbel, Oliver (2014). Turning to tradition: converts and the making of an American Orthodox church. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199324958. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ a b c Pew Research Center (2015-05-12). America's changing religious landscape (PDF). Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-09-05. Retrieved 2015-09-26.  Based on 2014 Religious Landscape Survey.
^ Ware 1993, pp. 208-211.
^ Ware 1993, p. 202.
^ Ware 1993, pp. 67–69.
^ Hierotheos 1998, pp. 128–130.
^ Matusiak, Fr. John. "Original Sin". Orthodox Church in America. Retrieved 23 May 2014. 
^ Chrysostom 400, Paschal Homily.
^ St. Athanasius 318, Ch. 2-3.
^ Hierotheos 1998, pp. 234-237,(241=Glossary).
^ George 2006, p. 34.
^ Oxford Dict Christian Church & 3rd ed.
^ Fitzgerald, Fr. Thomas (2014). "Spirituality". Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America. Retrieved 15 May 2014. 
^ George 2006, p. 21.
^ Hierotheos 1998, pp. 25-30.
^ Hierotheos 1998, p. 23.
^ Ware 1993, pp. 255-256.
^ Meyendorff, Gregory of Nyssa; transl., introduction and notes by Abraham J. Malherbe and Everett Ferguson ; preface by John (1978). The life of Moses (PDF). New York: Paulist Press. p. 59. ISBN 978-0809121120. Retrieved 4 October 2013. 
^ Ware 1993, pp. 257-258.
^ Ware 1993, p. 234.
^ The Longer Catechism of The Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church, an Orthodox catechism from 1830, by Metropolitan Philaret. Start with item 366 or 372. Archived July 22, 2007, at WebCite
^ a b c Rose, Father Seraphim, The Soul After Death, St. Herman Press, Platina, CA, c. 1980
^ The Longer Catechism, Item 377. Archived July 22, 2007, at WebCite
^ Gherghitta p. 6, 2003; Collins/Flint/VanEpps p. 586 2002; Geisler/Nix, 2012;
^ Ware 1991, p. 209.
^ Ware 1991, p. 209, (quoting St. John Chrysostom): "It is impossible for a man to be saved if he does not read the Scriptures.".
^  Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Canon of the New Testament". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 
^ Pomazansky, Michael, Orthodox Dogmatic Theology, pp. 33–34
^ including the deuterocanonical books
^ S. T. Kimbrough (2005). Orthodox And Wesleyan Scriptual Understanding And Practice. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-88141-301-4. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ Orthodox Study Bible, St. Athanasius Academy of Theology, 2008, p778, commentary
^ Holy Bible: Genesis 1:3
^ Ware, Bishop Kallistos (Timothy), How to Read the Bible, retrieved 11 June 2013
^ Holy Bible: John 16:13
^ a b c d e f Ware 1991, pp. 210–215
^ Ware 1993, pp. 195-196.
^ Letter of 1718, in George Williams, The Orthodox Church of the East in the 18th Century, p. 17
^ Holy Bible: Matthew 16:19
^ Vladimir Lossky, "Tradition is the life of the Holy Spirit in the Church."
^ Ware 1991, p. 205.
^ Ware 1991, p. 213.
^ Holy Bible: 1 Cor 1:10
^ Holy Bible: Acts 14:23
^ Holy Bible: Acts 6:1-6
^ Concordia Theological Seminary – Content Not Found Archived April 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Julian calendar". Wikipedia. 2017-09-27. 
^ "Revised Julian calendar". Wikipedia. 2017-08-09. 
^ "Gregorian calendar". Wikipedia. 2017-09-19. 
^ "The Five Cycles". Orthodox Worship. The Diocese of Eastern Pennsylvania, Orthodox Church in America. Retrieved 24 June 2015. 
^ Ware 1993, p. 238.
^ Henry Chadwick, The Early Church, 283.
^ Ware 1993, p. 271.
^ "Icons – Orthodox Christianity – Religion Facts". Archived from the original on March 22, 2015. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ A good explanation of the 3-bar cross was written by Orthodox symbologist Dr Alexander Roman and can be found at http://www.ukrainian-orthodoxy.org/questions/2010/threeBarCross.php
^ "An Explanation of the Traditional Russian Orthodox Three-bar Cross". www.synaxis.info. Retrieved 2015-10-17. 
^ "St. Olga Cross (10kt Gold) (Large) (High Quality Gauge)". 
^ The Early Church, Henry Chadwick, p. 34
^ Thomas E. FitzGerald. The Orthodox Church: Student Edition. Retrieved 5 January 2013. 
^ Athanasius of Alexandria, On the Incarnation of the Word, § 54. Archived July 22, 2007, at WebCite
^ Ware 1993, pp. 274-277.
^ Ware 1993, pp. 277-278.
^ Ware 1993, p. 278.
^ Fr. Thomas Hopko (1981). "The Orthodox Faith". St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. Retrieved 11 November 2013. 
^ Ware 1993, pp. 278-9.
^ Harakas 1987, pp. 56–7.
^ a b c Ware 1993, p. 279
^ Harakas 1987, p. 57.
^ Ware 1993, p. 287.
^ Letter to Families by Pope John Paul II Archived April 5, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ John Meyendorff (1975). Marriage: An Orthodox Perspective. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-913836-05-7. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ a b John Meyendorff (1975). Marriage: An Orthodox Perspective. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-913836-05-7. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ John Meyendorff (1975). Marriage: An Orthodox Perspective. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-913836-05-7. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ Mgr. Athenagoras Peckstadt, Bishop of Sinope (18 May 2005). "Marriage, Divorce and Remarriage in the Orthodox Church: Economia and Pastoral Guidance". The Orthodox research Institute. Retrieved 19 November 2008. 
^ "A Perspective on Divorce Among Greek Orthodox Couples". Retrieved 12 February 2008.  quote|One cannot arrive at a divorce rate [for Orthodox faithful] from the Archdiocesan published statistics because they … do not track the number of civil divorces.
^ "Wedding Ceremony". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "Statement of Orthodox Christian Bishops" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 August 2010. 
^ "OCA Reaffirms SCOBA Statement in Wake of Massachusetts Same-Sex Marriage Ruling". Retrieved 4 August 2010. 
^ Karras, Valerie A. (June 2004). "Female Deacons in the Byzantine Church". Church History. 73 (2): 272–316. doi:10.1017/S000964070010928X. ISSN 0009-6407. 
^ a b c Ware 1993
^ Tomáš Špidlík (1986). The spirituality of the Christian East: a systematic handbook. ISBN 978-0-87907-879-9. 
^ "The First Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Second Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Third Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Fourth Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Fifth Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Sixth Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "The Seventh Ecumenical Council — Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "TURKEY Fanar: Churches reach agreement on pan-Orthodox Holy Synod in 2016". 
^ "Hagia Sophia". Archnet. Retrieved 12 March 2016. 
^ A. Avenarius. Christianity in 9th-century Rus. // Beitruge zur byzantinischen Geschichte im 9.-11. Jahrhundert. Prague: V. Vavrinek, 1978. Pp. 301–315.
^ Aco Lukaroski. "St. Clement of Ohrid Cathedral – About Saint Clement of Ohrid". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–05, s.v. "Cyril and Methodius, Saints"; Encyclopædia Britannica, Warren E. Preece – 1972, p.846, s.v., "Cyril and Methodius, Saints" and "Orthodoxy, Missions ancient and modern"; Encyclopedia of World Cultures, David H. Levinson, 1991, p.239, s.v., "Social Science"; Eric M. Meyers, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Archaeology in the Near East, p.151, 1997; Lunt, Slavic Review, June 1964, p. 216; Roman Jakobson, "Crucial problems of Cyrillo-Methodian Studies"; Leonid Ivan Strakhovsky, A Handbook of Slavic Studies, p.98; V. Bogdanovich, History of the ancient Serbian literature, Belgrade, 1980, p.119
^ Stephan Thernstrom (1980). Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups. Belknap Press. p. 925. ISBN 978-0-674-37512-3. 
^ Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–05, s.v. "Cyril and Methodius, Saints"
^ "HA-RUSSIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "East-West Schism 01". Orthodox Church in the Philippines. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2016. 
^ Pope Innocent III, Letters, 126 (given 12 July 1205, and addressed to the papal legate, who had absolved the crusaders from their pilgrimage vows). Text taken from the Internet Medieval Sourcebook by Paul Halsall. Modified. Original translation by J. Brundage.
^ 1979 The Horses of San Marco Thames and Hudson an English translation of a 1977 Venetian city government publication p191
^ Articles on moral / morality Orthodox Christian perspective. "Dr. David Carlson -- Continuing the Dialogue of Love: Orthodox-Catholic Relations in 2004". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "Russian Destinies" Archived 2008-09-28 at the Wayback Machine. by Fr. Andrew Phillips, "Orthodox England", 4/17 July 2005
^ Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Two Hundred Years Together
^ Alfonsas Eidintas (2001). President of Lithuania: prisoner of the Gulag : a biography of Aleksandras Stulginskis. p. 23. ISBN 978-9986-757-41-2. 
^ George Calciu (1 April 1997). Christ Is Calling You: A Course in Catacomb Pastorship. ISBN 978-1-887904-52-0. 
^ Article 52 of the 1977 Constitution of the USSR
^ Ware 1993, p. 147.
^ Sermons to young people by Father George Calciu-Dumitreasa. Given at the Chapel of the Romanian Orthodox Church Seminary, The Word online. Bucharest "Calciu Christ Calling". 
^ a b Alexander (servant of God.) (1998). Father Arseny, 1893–1973: Prisoner, Priest and Spiritual Father. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. ISBN 978-0-88141-180-5. 
^ Sullivan, Patricia. Anti-Communist Priest Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa, The Washington Post, 26 November 2006. Page C09. Accessed 9 May 2008.
^ a b Ostling, Richard. "Cross meets Kremlin", TIME Magazine, 24 June 2001. Retrieved 7 April 2008. Archived July 22, 2007, at WebCite
^ "Russians Return to Religion, But Not to Church". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 10 February 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ "Van Christo. Albania and the Albanians". Archived from the original on 8 December 2007. Retrieved 2009-10-26. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Dumitru Bacu, The Anti-Humans. Student Re-Education in Romanian Prisons Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine., Soldiers of the Cross, Englewood, Colorado, 1971. Originally written in Romanian as Pitești, Centru de Reeducare Studențească, Madrid, 1963
^ Adrian Cioroianu, Pe umerii lui Marx. O introducere în istoria comunismului românesc ("On the Shoulders of Marx. An Incursion into the History of Romanian Communism"), Editura Curtea Veche, Bucharest, 2005
^ Ware, Kallistos (29 April 1993). The Orthodox Church. Penguin Adult. p. 322. ISBN 9780140146561. From the beginning of the twentieth century the Ecumenical Patriarchate has shown a special concern for Christian reconciliation. At his accession in 1902, Patriarch Joachim III sent an encyclical letter to all the autocephalous Orthodox Churches, asking in particular for their opinion on relations with other Christian bodies. In January 1920 the Ecumenical Patriarchate followed this up with a bold and prophetic letter addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations. Many of the ideas in this letter anticipate subsequent developments in the WCC. Constantinople, along with several of the other Orthodox Churches, was represented at the Faith and Order Conferences at Lausanne in 1927 and at Edinburgh in 1937. The Ecumenical Patriarchate also participated in the first Assembly of the WCC at Amsterdam in 1948, and has been a consistent supporter of the work of the WCC ever since. 
^ Fuchs, Lorelei F. (2008). Koinonia and the Quest for an Ecumenical Ecclesiology. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 162. ISBN 9780802840233. Addressed "to all the Churches of Christ, wheresoever they be", the letter of the Ecumenical Patriarchate opens the words anticipating the spirit of the ecclesial bodies which would later form the World Council of Churches. 
^ Benz, Ernst (31 July 2008). The Eastern Orthodox Church. Transaction Publishers. p. 197. ISBN 9780202365756. A large number of Orthodox Churches are members of the World Council of Churches; Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees and attend its conferences. 
^ Ware, Kallistos (28 April 1993). The Orthodox Church. Penguin Adult. p. 322. ISBN 9780140146561. 
^ "From Russia, with Love". Christianity Today. Retrieved 31 December 2007. Many evangelicals share conservative positions with us on such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage. Do you want vigorous grassroots engagement between Orthodox and evangelicals? Yes, on problems, for example, like the destruction of the family. Many marriages are split. Many families have either one child or no child. 
^ Orthodox Christian Information Center. An Orthodox View of the Virgin Mary[permanent dead link]. Retrieved November 10th, 2016.
^ Orthodox Church snubs Pope Francis in Georgia. Al Jazeera News. Retrieved November 10th, 2016.
^ Syrian Orthodox Resources – Middle Eastern Oriental Orthodox Common Declaration
^ "Saint George Coptic Church". Suscopts.org. Retrieved 2014-04-03. 
^ "From Russia, with Love". Christianity Today. Retrieved 31 December 2007. If we speak about Islam (and of course if we mean moderate Islam), then I believe there is the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity. This is what we have had in Russia for centuries, because Russian Islam has a very long tradition. But we never had religious wars. Nowadays we have a good system of collaboration between Christian denominations and Islam. 
^ Leonhardt, David (13 May 2011). "Faith, Education and Income". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 May 2011. 
^ US Religious Landscape Survey: Diverse and Dynamic (PDF), The Pew Forum, February 2008, p. 85, retrieved 17 September 2012 .
^ "Ecumenical Patriarchate". Retrieved 5 March 2015. 
^ Beoković, Jelena (1 May 2010). "Ko su ziloti, pravoslavni fundamentalisti" [Who are Zealots, Orthodox Fundamentalists]. Politika. Retrieved 5 August 2014. 
^ "МПЦ испраќа докази за својата 45 годишна живост". Денешен весник. 
^ "Новиот бугарски патријарх треба да го продолжи коректниот однос кон МПЦ". Вечер. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ "Првпат заедничко празнување на македонската и на бугарската академија". Дневник. Archived from the original on 2016-04-02. Retrieved 2016-02-20. 
^ "† Мошти на св. Николај Мирликиски Чудотворец во Бигорски - Бигорски Манастир". 


Bibliography[edit]
Books[edit]

St. Athanasius; Lewis, C.S. (1982), On the Incarnation [De Incarnatione Verbi Dei] (PDF), Crestwood, New York: St. Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary, ISBN 9780913836408, retrieved 3 June 2014 
Binns, John (4 July 2002), An Introduction to the Christian Orthodox Churches, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-66738-8, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Chrysostom, St. John (c. 400), Paschal Homily, Wikisource, retrieved 2016-02-20 
Cleenewerck, Laurent (2009), His Broken Body: Understanding and Healing the Schism Between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches, Washington, D.C., USA: Euclid University Press, ISBN 978-0-6151-8361-9, retrieved 2 June 2014  [self-published source]
De Vie, D. Charles (1945), The Eastern Orthodox-Catholic Church and the Anglican Church: Their Union, Tufts University, OCLC 190830032, archived from the original on 3 September 2015, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Diamond, Larry Jay; Plattner, Marc F.; Costopoulos, Philip J., eds. (2005), World Religions and Democracy, Johns Hopkins University and the National Endowment for Democracy, ISBN 0-8018-8080-7, OCLC 58807255, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Fitzgerald, Thomas E. (30 September 1998), The Orthodox Church, Westport, CT, USA: Praeger Publishers, ISBN 978-0-275-96438-2, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Fortescue, Adrian (1908), The Orthodox Eastern Church (2nd ed.), London: Catholic Truth Society / University of Virginia (published 11 December 2008), retrieved 2 June 2014 
George, Archimandrite (2006), Theosis: The True Purpose of Human Life (PDF) (4th ed.), Mount Athos, Greece: Holy Monastery of St. Gregorios, ISBN 960-7553-26-8, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Greek Orthodox Church (1875), The marriage service of the Holy Orthodox Catholic Church, trans. from Greek by Rev. Athanasius Richardson, London: A. R. Mowbray & Co., retrieved 2 June 2014 
Edwards, Mark (2009). Catholicity and Heresy in the Early Church. Ashgate. 
Harakas, Stanley S. (1 May 1987), The Orthodox Church: 455 Questions and Answers, Light & Life Publishing Company, Minneapolis, MN, USA, ISBN 978-0-937032-56-5 
Hardon, John (1981), Catholic Catechism, New York, NY, USA: Doubleday, ISBN 0-385-08045-X, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Hayward, C.J.S. (2016), The Best of Jonathan's Corner, Wheaton, IL, USA: C.J.S. Hayward Publications, ISBN 1478219912 
Hierotheos, Metropolitan of Nafpaktos (1998), The Mind of the Orthodox Church, Levadia, Greece: Birth of the Theotokos Monastery, ISBN 960-7070-39-9 
Leith, John H. (1982), Creeds of the Churches (3rd ed.), Westminster: John Knox Press, ISBN 978-0-8042-0526-9, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Losch, Richard R. (3 May 2002), The Many Faces of Faith: A Guide to World Religions and Christian Traditions, Wm. B. Eerdmans, ISBN 978-0-8028-0521-8, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Meyendorff, John (1966). Orthodoxy and Catholicity. New York: Sheed & Ward. 
Meyendorff, John (1978). Living Tradition. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. 
Meyendorff, John (1983). Catholicity and the Church. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. 
Meyendorff, John (1989). Imperial unity and Christian divisions: The Church 450-680 A.D. The Church in history. 2. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. ISBN 978-0-88-141056-3. 
Meyendorff, John (1996). Rome, Constantinople, Moscow: Historical and Theological Studies. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. 
Nielsen, Stevan L.; Johnson, W. Brad; Ellis, Albert (1 May 2001), Counseling and Psychotherapy With Religious Persons: A Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy Approach, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-1-4106-0070-7, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Orthodox Eastern Church (1909), The Shorter Catechism of the Eastern Orthodox Catholic Church, Rincon Publishing Co., retrieved 2 June 2014 
Ware, Bishop Kallistos (Timothy) (1991) [first published 1964], The Orthodox Church (revised original ed.), New York, NY, USA: Penguin Books, ISBN 0-14-013529-4 
Ware, Bishop Kallistos (Timothy) (29 April 1993), The Orthodox Church (new ed.), New York, NY, USA: Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-14-014656-1 

Tertiary reference works[edit]

American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.), Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014, ISBN 978-0-547-04101-8, retrieved 28 May 2014 
Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.), Columbia Univ. Press, June 2000, ISBN 9780787650155, retrieved 2 June 2014 
Encyclopædia Brittanica Online, 2014, retrieved 29 May 2014 
Encyclopedia of Christianity, 3, Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2003, ISBN 0-8028-2415-3, retrieved 28 May 2014 
Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East & North Africa (2nd ed.), Macmillan Reference USA, August 2004, ISBN 9780028657691, archived from the original on 2 June 2014, retrieved 28 May 2014 
Encyclopedia of World Religions, Concord Pub., 25 October 2006, ISBN 978-1-60136-000-7, retrieved 28 May 2014 
Encyclopedia of World Religions (revised ed.), Infobase Publishing, 2007, ISBN 978-0-8160-6141-9, retrieved 30 May 2014 
Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions, Merriam-Webster, September 1999, ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0, retrieved 30 May 2014 
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, archived from the original on May 31, 2014, retrieved 30 May 2014 
Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd rev. ed.), Oxford University Press, 2005, ISBN 9780192802903 

Further reading[edit]

Aderny, Walter F. The Greek and Eastern Churches (1908) online
Erickson, John H. (1991). The Challenge of Our Past: Studies in Orthodox Canon Law and Church History. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. 
Erickson, John H. (1992). "The Local Churches and Catholicity: An Orthodox Perspective". The Jurist. 52: 490–508. 
Hussey, Joan Mervyn. The orthodox church in the Byzantine empire (Oxford University Press, 2010) online
Krindatch, Alexei D. ed., Atlas of American Orthodox Christian Churches (Holy Cross Orthodox Press, 2011) online.
Mascall, Eric Lionel (1958). "The Example of Orthodoxy", in his The Recovery of Unity: a Theological Approach (London: Longmans, Green, and Co.), p. 52-64. N.B.: Caption title; concerns especially the place and example of Eastern Orthodoxy in the Ecumenical Movement.
McGuckin, John Anthony, ed. (2011). The Encyclopedia of Eastern Orthodox Christianity. 2 vols. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, W. Sussex, UK. ISBN 978-1-4051-8539-4. 
Parry, Ken. ed., The Blackwell Companion to Eastern Christianity (2010); Comprehensive global coverage.
Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn (1869). Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church: with an Introduction on the Study of Ecclesiastical History. Fourth ed. London: J. Murray.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Orthodox Church.





Wikisource has several original texts related to: Eastern Orthodox Church





Look up Eastern Orthodox Church in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



An Online Orthodox Catechism published by the Russian Orthodox Church
OrthodoxWiki
Orthodox Dictionary at Kursk Root Hermitage of the Birth of the Most Holy Theotokos
Orthodox books – Lives of Holy People at skete.com
An Orthodox View of Salvation
IV Pre-Conciliar Pan-Orthodox Conference
Orthodox Icons and Paintings
Prologue from Ohrid – (Saints of the Orthodox Church Calendar)
A repository with scientific papers on various aspects of the Byzantine Orthodox Church in English and in German
IOCC: Gaza’s Orthodox Community Struggles to Endure


Relations Between the Roman Catholic Church and Orthodoxy


Pope Benedict XIV, Allatae Sunt (On the observance of Oriental Rites), Encyclical, 1755
Orientale Lumen – Apostolic Letter of Pope John Paul II on the Eastern Churches, 1995
Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, 2006







v
t
e


Eastern Orthodox Church




Current Eastern Orthodox Patriarchs, Metropolitans and Archbishops of autocephalous and autonomous churches



Autocephalous
patriarchates




Pentarchy



Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople
Patriarch Theodore II of Alexandria
Patriarch John X of Antioch
Patriarch Theophilos III of Jerusalem





National



Patriarch Kirill of the Russian Orthodox Church
Patriarch Ilia II of the Georgian Orthodox Church
Patriarch Irinej of the Serbian Orthodox Church
Patriarch Daniel of the Romanian Orthodox Church
Patriarch Neophyte of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church











Other autocephalous
churches



Archbishop Chrysostomos II of the Church of Cyprus
Archbishop Ieronymos II of the Church of Greece
Archbishop Anastasios of the Albanian Orthodox Church
Metropolitan Sawa of the Polish Orthodox Church
Metropolitan Rastislav of the Czech and Slovak Orthodox Church
Metropolitan Tikhon of the Orthodox Church in America





Autonomous
churches



Church of Sinai
Finnish Orthodox Church
Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church[a]
Latvian Orthodox Church
Korean Orthodox Church
Japanese Orthodox Church[a]
Chinese Orthodox Church[a]
Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate)[a]
Orthodox Ohrid Archbishopric
Russian Orthodox Exarchate in Western Europe[a]
Metropolis of Bessarabia[a]
Moldovan Orthodox Church[a]





Semi-autonomous
churches



Church of Crete
Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia[b]





Liturgy



Byzantine Rite
Western Rite






 Eastern Christianity portal



^ a b c d e f g Autocephaly or autonomy is not universally recognized.
^ Semi-autonomous part of the Russian Orthodox Church whose autonomy is not universally recognized.












Links to related articles











v
t
e


Eastern Orthodoxy in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)













v
t
e


Eastern Orthodoxy in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau












v
t
e


Eastern Orthodoxy in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard












v
t
e


Bishops of Byzantium and Patriarchs of Constantinople



Bishops of Heraclea/Byzantium
(to 330 AD)



Andrew
Stachys
Onesimus
Polycarpus I
Plutarch
Sedecion
Diogenes
Eleutherius
Felix
Polycarpus II
Athenodorus
Euzois
Laurence
Alypius
Pertinax
Olympianus
Marcus I
Philadelphus
Cyriacus I
Castinus
Eugenius I
Titus
Dometius
Rufinus
Probus
Metrophanes
Alexander








Archbishops of Constantinople
(330–451 AD)



Alexander
Paul I
Eusebius
Macedonius I
Eudoxius
Evagrius
Demophilus
Maximus I
Gregory I
Nectarius
John I Chrysostom
Arsacius
Atticus
Sisinnius I
Nestorius
Maximianus
Proclus
Flavian
Anatolius





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Byzantine period (451–1453 AD)



Anatolius
Gennadius I
Acacius
Fravitta
Euphemius
Macedonius II
Timothy I
John II
Epiphanius
Anthimus I
Menas
Eutychius
John III
John IV
Cyriacus II
Thomas I
Sergius I
Pyrrhus
Paul II
Peter
Thomas II
John V
Constantine I
Theodore I
George I
Paul III
Callinicus I
Cyrus
John VI
Germanus I
Anastasius
Constantine II
Nicetas I
Paul IV
Tarasius
Nicephorus I
Theodotus I
Antony I
John VII
Methodius I
Ignatios
Photios I
Stephen I
Antony II
Nicholas I
Εuthymius I
Stephen II
Tryphon
Theophylact
Polyeuctus
Βasil I
Αntony III
Nicholas II
Sisinnius II
Sergius II
Eustathius
Alexius
Michael I
Constantine III
John VIII
Cosmas I
Eustratius
Nicholas III
John IX
Leo
Michael II
Cosmas II
Nicholas IV
Theodotus II
Neophytus I
Constantine IV
Luke
Michael III
Chariton
Theodosius I
Basil II
Nicetas II
Leontius
Dositheus
George II
John X
Michael IV†
Theodore II†
Maximus II†
Μanuel I†
Germanus II†
Methodius II†
Manuel II†
Arsenius†
Nicephorus II†
Germanus III
Joseph I
John XI
Gregory II
Athanasius I
John XII
Nephon I
John XIII
Gerasimus I
Isaias
John XIV
Isidore I
Callistus I
Philotheus
Macarius
Nilus
Antony IV
Callistus II
Matthew I
Euthymius II
Joseph II
Metrophanes II
Gregory III
Athanasius II





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Ottoman period (1453–1923 AD)



Gennadius II
Isidore II
Joasaph I
Sophronius I
Mark II
Symeon I
Dionysius I
Raphael I
Maximus III
Nephon II
Maximus IV
Joachim I
Pachomius I
Theoleptus I
Jeremias I
Joannicius I
Dionysius II
Joasaph II
Metrophanes III
Jeremias II
Pachomius II
Theoleptus II
Matthew II
Gabriel I
Theophanes I
Meletius I
Neophytus II
Raphael II
Cyril I
Timothy II
Gregory IV
Anthimus II
Cyril II
Athanasius III
Neophytus III
Parthenius I
Parthenius II
Joannicius II
Cyril III
Paisius I
Parthenius III
Gabriel II
Parthenius IV
Dionysius III
Clement
Methodius III
Dionysius IV
Gerasimus II
Athanasius IV
James
Callinicus II
Neophytus IV
Gabriel III
Neophytus V
Cyprianus
Athanasius V
Cyril IV
Cosmas III
Jeremias III
(Callinicus III)
Paisius II
Seraphim I
Neophytus VI
Cyril V
Callinicus IV (III)
Seraphim II
Joannicius III
Samuel
Meletius II
Theodosius II
Sophronius II
Gabriel IV
Procopius
Neophytus VII
Gerasimus III
Gregory V
Callinicus V (IV)
Jeremias IV
Cyril VI
Eugenius II
Anthimus III
Chrysanthus
Agathangelus
Constantius I
Constantius II
Gregory VI
Anthimus IV
Anthimus V
Germanus IV
Meletius III
Anthimus VI
Cyril VII
Joachim II
Sophronius III
Joachim III
Joachim IV
Dionysius V
Neophytus VIII
Anthimus VII
Constantine V
Germanus V
Meletius IV





Patriarchs of Constantinople
Modern period (since 1923 AD)



Gregory VII
Constantine VI
Basil III
Photius II
Benjamin
Maximus V
Athenagoras
Demetrius
Bartholomew








† in exile at Nicaea
 Eastern Christianity portal












v
t
e


Pentarchy







   


Pope of Rome
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Alexandria
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Antioch
(1st century*)




Patriarch of Constantinople
(4th century)




Patriarch of Jerusalem
(5th century*)











(* =Apostolic sees)
 Christianity portal
 Eastern Christianity portal
 Oriental Orthodoxy portal












v
t
e


Eastern Christianity




Cultural sphere of Christian traditions that developed since Early Christianity in the Middle East, Eastern Europe, Eastern Africa, Asia Minor, Southern India, and parts of the Far East.



Communions



Eastern Orthodox Church
Oriental Orthodoxy
Eastern Catholic Churches
Assyrian Church of the East
Ancient Church of the East








History



Eastern Orthodox Church
Byzantine Empire
Ecumenical council
Church of the East
Council of Chalcedon
Iconoclastic controversy
St Thomas Christians
Christianization of Bulgaria
Christianization of Kievan Rus'
East–West Schism





Scriptures



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



Hesychasm
Icon
Apophaticism
Filioque clause
Miaphysitism
Dyophysitism
Nestorianism
Theosis
Theoria
Phronema
Philokalia
Praxis
Theotokos
Hypostasis
Ousia
Essence–energies distinction
Metousiosis¨





Worship



Sign of the cross
Divine Liturgy
Iconography
Asceticism
Omophorion





Ethnic
groups
with
significant
adherence




Majorities




Indo-European



Armenians
Aromanians
Belarusians
Bulgarians
Greeks

including Greek Cypriots


Macedonians
Megleno-Romanians
Moldovans
Montenegrins
Ossetians
Romanians
Russians
Serbs
Ukrainians





Afro-Asiatic



Agaw
Amhara
Assyrians
Copts
Chaldean Catholics
Maronites
Tigrayans





Turkic



Chuvash
Dolgans
Gagauz
Khakas
Kryashens
Yakuts





Kartvelian



Georgians

including Svans and Mingrelians







Finno-Ugric



Izhorians
Karelians
Khanty
Komi
Mansi
Mari
Mordvins
Setos
Udmurts
Vepsians
Votes





Samoyedic



Enets
Nenets
Nganasans
Selkups





Chukotko-Kamchatkan



Alyutors
Itelmens
Kereks
Koryaks





Dené–Yeniseian



Kets
Tlingits





Eskimo–Aleut



Aleuts
Yupiks





Northwest Caucasian



Abkhazians





Nakh



Batsbi








Minorities



Adyghe

Kabardians


Kists
Albanians
Altai
Arabs
Buryats
Chukchi
Finns
Inuit
Malayali
Oromos
Romani
Rusyns
Saami









 Eastern Christianity portal










v
t
e


Christianity



Jesus



Christ
Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Son of God








Foundations



Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant





Bible



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
Ecclesiology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation






History and
tradition




Mary
Joseph
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early
Constantine
Ecumenical councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther






Denomi-
nations
and
traditions
(list)





Western



Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant





Eastern



Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Assyrian Church of the East ("Nestorian")
Eastern Catholic Churches





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Oneness Pentecostalism








Related topics



Art
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism








 Category
 Christianity portal












v
t
e


Religion








Major religious groups and religious denominations







Abrahamic




Judaism



Orthodox

Haredi
Hasidic
Modern


Conservative
Reform
Karaite
Reconstructionist
Renewal
Humanistic
Haymanot





Christianity



Catholicism

Eastern Catholic Churches


Eastern Christianity

Church of the East

Assyrian Church of the East


Eastern Orthodoxy
Oriental Orthodoxy

Ethiopian Orthodoxy




Independent Catholicism

Old Catholicism


Protestantism

Adventism
Anabaptism
Anglicanism
Baptists
Calvinism

Presbyterianism
Congregationalism
Continental Reformed


Lutheranism
Methodism
Pentecostalism
Evangelicalism


Nontrinitarianism

Jehovah's Witnesses
Mormonism
Jesuism


Nondenominational





Islam



Sunni

Hanafi
Maliki
Hanbali
Shafi'i


Shia

Twelver
Isma'ilism
Zaidiyyah


Ahmadi
Ibadi
Non-denominational
Quranism
Zahirism
Salafism

Wahhabism
Ahl al-Hadith


Mahdavia
European Islam
Nation of Islam





Others



Bábism

Azáli Bábism
Bahá'í Faith


Druze
Mandaeism
Rastafari
Samaritanism








Dharmic




Hinduism



Vaishnavism
Shaktism
Shaivism
Ayyavazhi
Smartism
Balinese





Buddhism



Mahayana

Chan

Zen
Thiền
Seon


Pure Land
Nichiren
Madhyamaka
Tiantai


Theravada
Vajrayana

Tibetan
Shingon
Newar
Bon


Navayana





Others



Dravidian
Jainism

Digambara
Śvētāmbara


Sikhism
Gurung shamanism
Bon Lamaism
Kirant Mundhum








Persian



Manichaeism
Yazdânism

Yazidism
Ishikism
Ali-Illahism
Yarsanism


Zoroastrianism





European



Armenian
Baltic

Dievturība
Druwi
Romuva


Caucasian
Celtic

Druidry


Germanic
Hellenism
Italo-Roman
Romanian
Slavic





Uralic



Finnish
Hungarian
Uralic

Mari
Mordvin
Udmurt







Central and
Northern Asian



Burkhanism
Chuvash
Manchu
Mongolian
Siberian
Tengrism





East Asian



Benzhuism
Bimoism
Bon
Cheondoism
Confucianism
Dongbaism
Faism
Hmongism
Jeungsanism
Luoism
Meishanism
Mileism
Muism
Neo-Confucianism
Ryukyuan religion
Shenism
Shigongism
Shinto
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Wuism
Yiguandao





Southeast Asian



Burmese
Satsana Phi
Malaysian
Indonesian

Marapu
Kaharingan
Kebatinan


Philippine
Vietnamese

Caodaism
Đạo Mẫu
Hoahaoism







African




Traditional



Akan
Akamba
Baluba
Bantu
Berber
Bushongo
Cushitic
Dinka
Efik
Fon and Ewe
Guanche
Igbo
Isoko
Lotuko
Lozi
Lugbara
Maasai
Mbuti
San
Serer
Tumbuka
Waaq
Yoruba
Zulu





Diasporic



Candomblé
Kumina
Obeah
Quimbanda
Palo
Santería
Umbanda
Vodou
Voodoo
Winti








Other groups



Bathouism
Bongthingism
Donyi-Polo
Kiratism
Sanamahism
Sarnaism
Aboriginal Australian
Native American
Mesoamerican
Hawaiian
Polynesian





Recent



Discordianism
Eckankar
Jediism
New Age
New Thought
Pastafarianism
Raëlism
Satanism
Scientology
Thelema
Unitarian Universalism
Wicca
















Historical religions







Prehistoric



Paleolithic





Near East



Arabian
Egyptian
Mesopotamian
Semitic

Canaanite
Yahwism







Indo-European




Asia



Proto-Indo-Iranian
Armenian
Ossetian
Vedic
Zoroastrianism

Mithraism
Zurvanism


Gnosticism

Manichaeism







Europe



Celtic
Germanic

Anglo-Saxon
Continental
Norse


Greek

Gnosticism
Neoplatonism


Manichaeism
Balkan
Roman
Slavic



















Topics







Aspects



Apostasy / Disaffiliation
Behaviour
Beliefs
Clergy
Conversion
Deities
Entheogens
Ethnic religion
Denomination
Faith
Fire
Folk religion
God
Meditation
Monasticism

monk
nun


Mysticism
Mythology
Nature
Ordination
Orthodoxy
Orthopraxy
Prayer
Religious experience
Ritual

liturgy
sacrifice


Spirituality
Supernatural
Symbols
Truth
Water
Worship





Theism



Animism
Deism
Dualism
Henotheism
Monotheism
Nontheism
Panentheism
Pantheism
Polytheism
Transtheism





Religious studies



Anthropology
Cognitive science
Comparative
Development
Evolutionary origin
Evolutionary psychology
History
Philosophy
Neurotheology
Psychology
Sociology
Theology
Theories
Women






Religion and
society




Agriculture
Business
Clergy

monasticism
ordination


Conversion

evangelism
missionary
proselytism


Education
Fanaticism
Freedom

pluralism
syncretism
toleration
universalism


Fundamentalism
Growth
Happiness
Homosexuality
Minorities
National church
National religiosity levels
Religiocentrism
Political science
Populations
Schism
Science
State
Theocracy
Vegetarianism
Video games
Violence

persecution
terrorism
war


Wealth






Secularism and
irreligion




Antireligion
Deism
Agnosticism
Atheism
Criticism
LaVeyan Satanism
Deconstruction
Humanistic Judaism
Irreligion by country
Objectivism
Secular humanism
Secular theology
Secularization
Separation of church and state
Unaffiliated






Overviews
and lists




Index
Outline
Timeline
Abrahamic prophets
Deification
Deities
Founders
Mass gatherings
New religious movements
Organizations
Religions and spiritual traditions
Scholars














Category
Portal
















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eastern_Orthodox_Church&oldid=818105649"					Categories: Eastern OrthodoxyChristian organizations established in the 1st centuryHidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language textCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World FactbookCS1 Latvian-language sources (lv)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template webcite linksArticles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource referenceWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse American English from June 2012All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textInconsistent articlesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012Articles needing additional references from December 2017All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2014Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata