This article is about the Island in the Pacific Ocean. For the album by Kris Kristofferson, see Easter Island (album).
"Rapa Nui" redirects here. For other uses under the name, see Rapa Nui (disambiguation).


Easter Island
Rapa Nui
Isla de Pascua


Special Territory, Province and Commune









Flag

Seal



Coat of arms






Easter Island map showing Terevaka, Poike, Rano Kau, Motu Nui, Orongo, and Mataveri; major ahus are marked with moai









Easter Island





Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean


Coordinates: 27°7′S 109°22′W﻿ / ﻿27.117°S 109.367°W﻿ / -27.117; -109.367Coordinates: 27°7′S 109°22′W﻿ / ﻿27.117°S 109.367°W﻿ / -27.117; -109.367


Country
 Chile


Region
 Valparaíso


Province
 Isla de Pascua


Commune
 Isla de Pascua


Seat
Hanga Roa


Government


 • Type
Municipality


 • Body
Municipal council


 • Provincial Governor
Melania Carolina Hotu Hey[2]


 • Alcalde
Pedro Edmunds Paoa (PRO)


Area[3]


 • Total
163.6 km2 (63.2 sq mi)


Highest elevation
507 m (1,663 ft)


Lowest elevation
0 m (0 ft)


Population (2016 projection)


 • Total
6,600[1]


Time zone
CLT (UTC−6)


 • Summer (DST)
CLST (UTC−5)


Country Code
+56


Currency
Peso (CLP)


Language
Spanish, Rapa Nui


Website
Municipality of Isla de Pascua


NGA UFI=-905269



Rapa Nui National Park

UNESCO World Heritage Site



Moai at Rano Raraku, Easter Island






Criteria
Cultural: i, iii, v


Reference
715


Inscription
1995 (19th Session)


Area
6,666 ha


Easter Island (Rapa Nui: Rapa Nui, Spanish: Isla de Pascua) is a Chilean island in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, at the southeasternmost point of the Polynesian Triangle in Oceania. Easter Island is famous for its 887 extant monumental statues, called moai, created by the early Rapa Nui people. In 1995, UNESCO named Easter Island a World Heritage Site, with much of the island protected within Rapa Nui National Park.
Polynesian people most likely settled on Easter Island sometime between 700 and 1100 AD and created a thriving and industrious culture as evidenced by the island's numerous enormous stone moai and other artifacts. However, human activity, the introduction of the Polynesian rat and overpopulation led to gradual deforestation and extinction of natural resources which severely weakened the Rapa Nui civilization.[4] By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population had dropped to 2,000–3,000 from an estimated high of approximately 15,000 just a century earlier. European diseases and Peruvian slave raiding in the 1860s further reduced the Rapa Nui population, to a low of only 111 inhabitants in 1877.[5]
Easter Island is one of the most remote inhabited islands in the world.[6] The nearest inhabited land (around 50 residents in 2013) is Pitcairn Island, 2,075 kilometres (1,289 mi) away;[7] the nearest town with a population over 500 is Rikitea, on the island of Mangareva, 2,606 km (1,619 mi) away; the nearest continental point lies in central Chile, 3,512 kilometres (2,182 mi) away.
Easter Island is a special territory of Chile that was annexed in 1888. Administratively, it belongs to the Valparaíso Region, and, more specifically, it is the only commune of the Province Isla de Pascua.[8] According to the 2012 Chilean census, the island has about 5,800 residents, of whom some 60 percent are descendants of the aboriginal Rapa Nui.
Easter Island is considered part of Insular Chile.



Contents


1 Name
2 History

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Discussion
2.3 European contact
2.4 19th century
2.5 20th century
2.6 21st century
2.7 Indigenous rights movement


3 Geography

3.1 Geology
3.2 Climate


4 Ecology
5 Culture

5.1 Mythology
5.2 Stone work

5.2.1 Statues
5.2.2 Stone platforms
5.2.3 Stone walls
5.2.4 Stone houses
5.2.5 Petroglyphs
5.2.6 Caves


5.3 Rongorongo
5.4 Wood carving
5.5 21st-century culture

5.5.1 Sports




6 Demographics

6.1 2012 census
6.2 Demographic history


7 Administration and legal status
8 Notable people
9 Transportation
10 See also
11 References
12 Bibliography
13 Further reading
14 External links



Name[edit]
The name "Easter Island" was given by the island's first recorded European visitor, the Dutch explorer Jacob Roggeveen, who encountered it on Easter Sunday (5 April) in 1722, while searching for Davis or David's island. Roggeveen named it Paasch-Eyland (18th-century Dutch for "Easter Island").[9][10] The island's official Spanish name, Isla de Pascua, also means "Easter Island".
The current Polynesian name of the island, Rapa Nui ("Big Rapa"), was coined after the slave raids of the early 1860s, and refers to the island's topographic resemblance to the island of Rapa in the Bass Islands of the Austral Islands group.[11] However, Norwegian ethnographer Thor Heyerdahl argued that Rapa was the original name of Easter Island and that Rapa Iti was named by refugees from there.[12]
The phrase Te pito o te henua has been said to be the original name of the island since French ethnologist Alphonse Pinart gave it the romantic translation "the Navel of the World" in his Voyage à l'Île de Pâques, published in 1877.[13] William Churchill (1912) inquired about the phrase and was told that there were three te pito o te henua, these being the three capes (land's ends) of the island. The phrase appears to have been used in the same sense as the designation of "Land's End" at the tip of Cornwall. He was unable to elicit a Polynesian name for the island itself, and concluded that there may not have been one.[14]
According to Barthel (1974), oral tradition has it that the island was first named Te pito o te kainga a Hau Maka, "The little piece of land of Hau Maka".[15] However, there are two words pronounced pito in Rapa Nui, one meaning 'end' and one 'navel', and the phrase can thus also mean "the Navel of the World". Another name, Mata ki te rangi, means "Eyes looking to the sky".[16]
Islanders are referred to in Spanish as pascuense; however it is common to refer to members of the indigenous community as Rapa Nui.
History[edit]
Main article: History of Easter Island
Introduction[edit]
Oral tradition states the island was first settled by a two canoe expedition, originating from Marae Renga (or Marae Toe Hau), and led by the chief Hotu Matu'a and his captain Tu'u ko Iho. The island was first scouted after Haumaka dreamed of such a far off country, Hotu deemed it a worthwhile place to flee from a neighboring chief, one to whom he had already lost three battles. At their time of arrival, the island had one lone settler, Nga Tavake 'a Te Rona. After a brief stay at Anakena, the colonists settled in different parts of the island. Hotu's heir, Tu'u ma Heke, was born on the island. Tu'u ko Iho is viewed as the leader who brought the statues and caused them to walk.[17]
The earliest radiocarbon dates for the island, AD 690±130, occur on the southwestern portion of the island at Ahu Tahai near Hanga Roa. Archaeological and paleobotanical evidence also point to this area as the early center of habitation. Anthropometrical, skeletal, and linguistic evidence show the Easter Islanders to be close relatives of the Mangarevans. Thus, the Easter Islanders are considered to be South-East Polynesians, originating from the general area of Mangareva-Pitcairn-Henderson. Contact, at least culturally, carried onwards for at least 400 years. Similar sacred zones with statuary (marae and ahu) in East Polynesia lends support to this interaction from the 12th to the 15th centuries. The south coast was colonized starting in the 1300s. Then, Easter Island appears to have become isolated by about 1500, and mo'ai carving and transport ceased. The last forest was cut down by about 1640, and by about 1700, the flora was almost completely gone. The soil was eroded or leached, and water resources dried up. Only the three crater swamps, and isolated springs such as Vai Tapa Eru, provided fresh water. A peak population of about 12,000 seen in the 14th and 15th centuries had shrunk to perhaps 6,000.[17]:17-18,20-21,31,41-45
By the 15th century, two confederations, hanau, of social groupings, mata, existed, based on lineage. The western and northern portion of the island belonged to the Tu'u, which included the royal Miru, with the royal center at Anakena, though Tahai and Te Peu served as earlier capitals. The eastern portion of the island belonged to the 'Otu 'Itu. Shortly after the Dutch visit, from 1724 until 1750, the 'Otu 'Itu fought the Tu'u for control of the island. This fighting would continue until the 1860s. Famine followed the burning of huts and the destruction of fields. Social control vanished as the ordered way of life gave way to lawlessness and predatory bands as the warrior class took over. Homelessness prevailed with many living underground. After the Spanish visit, from 1770 onwards, a period of statue toppling, huri mo'ai, commenced. This was an attempt by competing groups to destroy the socio-spiritual power, or mana, represented by statues, making sure to break them in the fall to ensure they were dead and without power. None were left standing by the arrival of the French missionaries in the 1860s.[17]:21-24,27,54-56,64-65
Between 1862 and 1888, about 94% of the population perished or emigrated. The island was victimized by Blackbirding from 1862 to 1863, resulting in the abduction or killing of about 1500, with 1408 working as indentured servants in Peru. Only about a dozen were to return to Easter Island, but they brought smallpox, which decimated the remaining population of 1500. Those who perished included the island's tumu ivi 'atua, bearers of the island's culture, history, and genealogy besides the rongorongo experts.[17]:86-91
Discussion[edit]
Estimated dates of initial settlement of Easter Island have ranged from 300 to 1200 AD, approximately coinciding with the arrival of the first settlers in Hawaii. Rectifications in radiocarbon dating have changed almost all of the previously posited early settlement dates in Polynesia. Rapa Nui is now considered to have been settled in the narrower range of 700 to 1100 AD. Ongoing archaeological studies suggest a still-later date: "Radiocarbon dates for the earliest stratigraphic layers at Anakena, Easter Island, and analysis of previous radiocarbon dates imply that the island was colonized late, about 1200 AD. Significant ecological impacts and major cultural investments in monumental architecture and statuary thus began soon after initial settlement."[18][19]
According to oral tradition, the first settlement was at Anakena. Researchers have noted that the Caleta Anakena landing point provides the island's best shelter from prevailing swells as well as a sandy beach for canoe landings and launchings so it appeals as a likely early place of settlement. However, this conclusion contradicts radiocarbon dating, according to which other sites preceded Anakena by many years, especially the Tahai, whose radiocarbon dates precede Anakena's by several centuries.
The island was most likely populated by Polynesians who navigated in canoes or catamarans from the Gambier Islands (Mangareva, 2,600 km (1,600 mi) away) or the Marquesas Islands, 3,200 km (2,000 mi) away. According to some theories, such as the Polynesian Diaspora Theory, there is a possibility that early Polynesian settlers arrived from South America due to their remarkable sea-navigation abilities. Theorists have supported this through the agricultural evidence of the sweet potato. The sweet potato was a favoured crop found among Polynesian society for generations. However, the origins of the sweet potato trace back to South America, proving evidence of interaction at some point in time between these two geographic areas.[20] When James Cook visited the island, one of his crew members, a Polynesian from Bora Bora, Hitihiti, was able to communicate with the Rapa Nui.[21]:296–297 The language most similar to Rapa Nui is Mangarevan, with an estimated 80 percent similarity in vocabulary. In 1999, a voyage with reconstructed Polynesian boats was able to reach Easter Island from Mangareva in 19 days.[22]




A View of the Monuments of Easter Island, Rapanui, c. 1775–1776 by William Hodges.[23] The earliest known painting of Easter Island.[citation needed]


According to oral traditions recorded by missionaries in the 1860s, the island originally had a strong class system, with an ariki, or high chief, wielding great power over nine other clans and their respective chiefs. The high chief was the eldest descendent through first-born lines of the island's legendary founder, Hotu Matu'a. The most visible element in the culture was the production of massive statues called moai that some believe represented deified ancestors. According to National Geographic, "Most scholars suspect that the moai were created to honor ancestors, chiefs, or other important personages, However, no written and little oral history exists on the island, so it’s impossible to be certain."[24]
It was believed that the living had a symbiotic relationship with the dead in which the dead provided everything that the living needed (health, fertility of land and animals, fortune etc.) and the living, through offerings, provided the dead with a better place in the spirit world. Most settlements were located on the coast and most moai were erected along the coastline, watching over their descendants in the settlements before them, with their backs toward the spirit world in the sea.
Jared Diamond suggested that cannibalism took place on Easter Island after the construction of the moai contributed to environmental degradation when extreme deforestation destabilized an already precarious ecosystem.[25] Archeological record shows that at the time of the initial settlement the island was home to many species of trees, including at least three species which grew up to 15 metres (49 ft) or more: Paschalococos – possibly the largest palm trees in the world at the time, Alphitonia zizyphoides, and Elaeocarpus rarotongensis, as well as at least six species of native land birds. A major factor that contributed to the extinction of multiple plant species was the introduction of the Polynesian rat. Studies by paleobotanists have shown rats can dramatically affect the reproduction of vegetation in an ecosystem. In the case of Rapa Nui, recovered plant shell seeds showed markings of being gnawed on by rats.[4] Barbara A. West wrote, "Sometime before the arrival of Europeans on Easter Island, the Rapanui experienced a tremendous upheaval in their social system brought about by a change in their island's ecology... By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population had dropped to 2,000–3,000 from a high of approximately 15,000 just a century earlier."[26]
By that time, 21 species of trees and all species of land birds became extinct through some combination of overharvesting/overhunting, rat predation, and climate change. The island was largely deforested, and it did not have any trees more than 3 metres (10 feet) tall. Loss of large trees meant that residents were no longer able to build seaworthy vessels, significantly diminishing their fishing abilities. One theory regarding the deforestation that caused such ecological and social damage was that the trees were used as rollers to move the statues to their place of erection from the quarry at Rano Raraku.[27] Deforestation also affected agricultural production on Rapa Nui. At first, the native tropical forests provided ideal shade cover for soil. But with many of the native forest being destroyed, the topsoil became eroded causing a sharp decline in agricultural production.[4] This was further exacerbated by the loss of land birds and the collapse in seabird populations as a potential source of food. By the 18th century, residents of the island were largely sustained by farming, with domestic chickens as the primary source of protein.[28]
As the island became overpopulated and resources diminished, warriors known as matatoa gained more power and the Ancestor Cult ended, making way for the Bird Man Cult. Beverly Haun wrote, "The concept of mana (power) invested in hereditary leaders was recast into the person of the birdman, apparently beginning circa 1540, and coinciding with the final vestiges of the moai period."[29] This cult maintained that, although the ancestors still provided for their descendants, the medium through which the living could contact the dead was no longer statues, but human beings chosen through a competition. The god responsible for creating humans, Makemake, played an important role in this process. Katherine Routledge, who systematically collected the island's traditions in her 1919 expedition,[30] showed that the competitions for Bird Man (Rapanui: tangata manu) started around 1760, after the arrival of the first Europeans, and ended in 1878, with the construction of the first church by Roman Catholic missionaries who formally arrived in 1864. Petroglyphs representing Bird Men on Easter Island are exactly the same as some in Hawaii, indicating that this concept was probably brought by the original settlers; only the competition itself was unique to Easter Island.




Motu Nui islet, part of the Birdman Cult ceremony


According to Diamond and Heyerdahl's version of the island's history, the huri mo'ai—"statue-toppling"—continued into the 1830s as a part of fierce internal wars. By 1838 the only standing moai were on the slopes of Rano Raraku, in Hoa Hakananai'a in Orongo, and Ariki Paro in Ahu Te Pito Kura. A study headed by Douglas Owsley published in 1994 asserted that there is little archaeological evidence of pre-European societal collapse. Bone pathology and osteometric data from islanders of that period clearly suggest few fatalities can be attributed directly to violence.[31]
European contact[edit]
The first-recorded European contact with the island was on 5 April (Easter Sunday), 1722, by Dutch navigator Jacob Roggeveen.[21] His visit resulted in the death of about a dozen islanders, including the tumu ivi 'atua, and the wounding of many others.[17]:46-53
The next foreign visitors (on 15 November 1770) were two Spanish ships, San Lorenzo and Santa Rosalia, under the command of Captain Don Felipe Gonzalez de Ahedo.[21]:238,504 The Spanish were amazed by the "standing idols", all of which were erect that you witnessed.[17]:60-64
Four years later, in 1774, British explorer James Cook visited Easter Island; he reported that some statues had been toppled. Through the interpretation of Hitihiti, Cook learned the statues commemorated their former high chiefs, including their names and ranks.[21]:296–297
The British ship HMS Blossom arrived in 1825.[17]:79
19th century[edit]
A series of devastating events killed or removed most of the population in the 1860s. In December 1862, Peruvian slave raiders struck. Violent abductions continued for several months, eventually capturing around 1,500 men and women, half of the island's population.[32] Among those captured were the island's paramount chief, his heir, and those who knew how to read and write the rongorongo script, the only Polynesian script to have been found to date. (Although serious debate exists about whether this is proto-writing or true writing.)
When the slave raiders were forced to repatriate the people they had kidnapped, carriers of smallpox disembarked together with a few survivors on each of the islands.[33] This created devastating epidemics from Easter Island to the Marquesas islands. Easter Island's population was reduced to the point where some of the dead were not even buried.[17]:91
Tuberculosis, introduced by whalers in the mid-19th century, had already killed several islanders when the first Christian missionary, Eugène Eyraud, died from this disease in 1867. About a quarter of the island's population succumbed along with him. In the following years, the managers of the sheep ranch and the missionaries started buying the newly available lands of the deceased, and this led to great confrontations between natives and settlers.




"Queen Mother" Koreto with her daughters "Queen" Caroline and Harriette in 1877


Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier bought up all of the island apart from the missionaries' area around Hanga Roa and moved a few hundred Rapanui to Tahiti to work for his backers. In 1871 the missionaries, having fallen out with Dutrou-Bornier, evacuated all but 171 Rapanui to the Gambier islands.[34] Those who remained were mostly older men. Six years later, only 111 people lived on Easter Island, and only 36 of them had any offspring.[35] From that point on the island's population slowly recovered. But with over 97% of the population dead or gone in less than a decade, much of the island's cultural knowledge had been lost.
Alexander Salmon, Jr., a son of an English Jewish merchant and a Pōmare Dynasty princess, eventually worked to repatriate workers from his inherited copra plantation. He eventually bought up all lands on the island with the exception of the mission, and was its sole employer. He worked to develop tourism on the island, and was the principal informant for the British and German archaeological expeditions for the island. He sent several pieces of genuine Rongorongo to his niece's husband, the German consul in Valparaíso, Chile. Salmon sold the Brander Easter Island holdings to the Chilean government on January 2 1888 and signed as a witness to the cession of the island. He returned to Tahiti in December of that year. He effectively ruled the island from 1878 until his cession to Chile in 1888.
Easter Island was annexed by Chile on 9 September 1888 by Policarpo Toro by means of the "Treaty of Annexation of the Island" (Tratado de Anexión de la isla). Toro, then representing the government of Chile, signed with Atamu Tekena, designated "King" by the Roman Catholic missionaries after the paramount chief and his heir had died. The validity of this treaty is still contested by some Rapanui. Officially, Chile purchased the nearly all encompassing Mason-Brander sheep ranch, comprised from lands purchased from the descendants of Rapanui who died during the epidemics, and then claimed sovereignty over the island.
20th century[edit]
Until the 1960s the surviving Rapanui were confined to Hanga Roa. The rest of the island was rented to the Williamson-Balfour Company as a sheep farm until 1953.[36] The island was then managed by the Chilean Navy until 1966, at which point the island was reopened in its entirety. In 1966 the Rapanui were given Chilean citizenship.[37]




General Pinochet posing with a native Rapa Nui woman


Following the 1973 Chilean coup d'état that brought Augusto Pinochet to power, Easter Island was placed under martial law. Tourism slowed down and private property was restored. During his time in power, Pinochet visited Easter Island on three occasions. The military built a number of new military facilities and a new city hall.[38]
After an agreement in 1985 between Chile and United States, the runway at Mataveri International Airport was enlarged and was inaugurated in 1987. The runway was expanded 423 metres (1,388 ft) reaching 3,353 metres (11,001 ft). Pinochet is reported to have refused to attend the inauguration in protest of pressures from the United States to attend human rights cases.[39]
21st century[edit]
Fishers of Rapa Nui have shown their concern of illegal fishing on the island. “Since the year 2000 we started to lose tuna, which is the basis of the fishing on the island, so then we began to take the fish from the shore to feed our families, but in less than two years we depleted all of it,” Pakarati said.[40] On 30 July 2007, a constitutional reform gave Easter Island and the Juan Fernández Islands (also known as Robinson Crusoe Island) the status of "special territories" of Chile. Pending the enactment of a special charter, the island continued to be governed as a province of the V Region of Valparaíso.[41]
A total solar eclipse visible from Easter Island occurred for the first time in over 1,300 years on 11 July 2010, at 18:15:15.[42]
Species of fish were collected in Easter Island for one month in different habitats including shallow lava pools, depths of 43 meters, and deep waters. Within these habitats, two holotypes and paratypes, Antennarius randalli and Antennarius moai, were discovered. These are considered frog-fish because of their characteristics: "12 dorsal rays, last two or three branched; bony part of first dorsal spine slightly shorter than second dorsal spine; body without bold zebra-like markings; caudal peduncle short, but distinct; last pelvic ray divided; pectoral rays 11 or 12".[43]
Indigenous rights movement[edit]
Starting in August 2010, members of the indigenous Hitorangi clan occupied the Hangaroa Eco Village and Spa.[44][45] The occupiers allege that the hotel was bought from the Pinochet government, in violation of a Chilean agreement with the indigenous Rapa Nui, in the 1990s.[46] The occupiers say their ancestors had been cheated into giving up the land.[47] According to a BBC report, on 3 December 2010, at least 25 people were injured when Chilean police using pellet guns attempted to evict from these buildings a group of Rapa Nui who had claimed that the land the buildings stood on had been illegally taken from their ancestors.[48]
In January 2011, the UN's Special Rapporteur on Indigenous People, James Anaya, expressed concern about the treatment of the indigenous Rapa Nui by the Chilean government, urging Chile to "make every effort to conduct a dialogue in good faith with representatives of the Rapa Nui people to solve, as soon as possible the real underlying problems that explain the current situation".[44]
The incident ended in February 2011, when up to 50 armed police broke into the hotel to remove the final five occupiers. They were arrested by the government and no injuries were reported.[44]
Geography[edit]




Easter Island, Salas y Gómez Islands, South America and the islands in between


Easter Island is one of the world's most isolated inhabited islands. Its closest inhabited neighbour is Pitcairn Island, 2,075 km (1,289 mi) to the west, with fewer than 100 inhabitants. The nearest continental point lies in central Chile near Concepción, at 3,512 kilometres (2,182 mi). Easter Island's latitude is similar to that of Caldera, Chile, and it lies 3,510 km (2,180 mi) west of continental Chile at its nearest point (between Lota and Lebu in the Biobío Region). Isla Salas y Gómez, 415 km (258 mi) to the east, is closer but is uninhabited. Archipelago Tristan da Cunha in the southern Atlantic competes for the title of the most remote island, lying 2,430 kilometres (1,510 mi) from Saint Helena island and 2,816 kilometres (1,750 mi) from the South African coast.
The island is about 24.6 km (15.3 mi) long by 12.3 km (7.6 mi) at its widest point; its overall shape is triangular. It has an area of 163.6 square kilometres (63.2 sq mi), and a maximum altitude of 507 metres (1,663 ft). There are three Rano (freshwater crater lakes), at Rano Kau, Rano Raraku and Rano Aroi, near the summit of Terevaka, but no permanent streams or rivers.
Geology[edit]




Typical landscape on Easter Island; rounded extinct volcanoes covered in low vegetation.


Easter Island is a volcanic high island, consisting mainly of three extinct coalesced volcanoes: Terevaka (altitude 507 metres) forms the bulk of the island, while two other volcanoes, Poike and Rano Kau, form the eastern and southern headlands and give the island its roughly triangular shape. Lesser cones and other volcanic features include the crater Rano Raraku, the cinder cone Puna Pau and many volcanic caves including lava tubes.[49] Poike used to be a separate island until volcanic material from Terevaka united it to the larger whole. The island is dominated by hawaiite and basalt flows which are rich in iron and show affinity with igneous rocks found in the Galápagos Islands.[50]
Easter Island and surrounding islets, such as Motu Nui and Motu Iti, form the summit of a large volcanic mountain rising over 2,000 metres (6,600 ft) from the sea bed. The mountain is part of the Sala y Gómez Ridge, a (mostly submarine) mountain range with dozens of seamounts, formed by the Easter hotspot. The range begins with Pukao and next Moai, two seamounts to the west of Easter Island, and extends 2,700 km (1,700 mi) east to the Nazca Ridge. The ridge was formed by the Nazca Plate moving over the Easter hotspot.[51]
Located about 350 km east of the East Pacific Rise, Easter Island lies within the Nazca Plate, bordering the Easter Microplate. The Nazca-Pacific relative plate movement due to the seafloor spreading, amounts to about 150 mm per year. This movement over the Easter hotspot has resulted in the Easter Seamount Chain, which merges into the Nazca Ridge further to the east. Easter Island and Sala y Gómez are surface representations of that chain. The chain has progressively younger ages to the west. The current hotspot location is speculated to be west of Easter Island, amidst the Ahu, Umu and Tupa submarine volcanic fields and the Pukao and Moai seamounts.[52]
Easter Island lies atop the Rano Kau Ridge, and consists of three shield volcanoes with parallel geologic histories. Poike and Rano Kau exist on the east and south slopes of Terevaka, respectively. Rano Kau developed between 0.78 and 0.46 Ma from tholeiitic to alkalic basalts. This volcano possesses a clearly defined summit caldera. Benmoreitic lavas extruded about the rim from 0.35 to 0.34 Ma. Finally, between 0.24 and 0.11 Ma, a 6.5 km fissure developed along a NE-SW trend, forming monogenetic vents and rhyolitic intrusions. These include the cryptodome islets of Motu Nui and Motu Iti, the islet of Motu Kao Kao, the sheet intrusion of Te Kari Kari, the perlitic obsidian Te Manavai dome and the Maunga Orito dome.[52]
Poike formed from tholeiitic to alkali basalts from 0.78 to 0.41 Ma. Its summit collapsed into a caldera which was subsequently filled by the Puakatiki lava cone pahoehoe flows at 0.36 Ma. Finally, the trachytic lava domes of Maunga Vai a Heva, Maunga Tea Tea, and Maunga Parehe formed along a NE-SW trending fissure.[52]
Terevaka formed around 0.77 Ma of tholeiitic to alkali basalts, followed by the collapse of its summit into a caldera. Then at about 0.3Ma, cinder cones formed along a NNE-SSW trend on the western rim, while porphyritic benmoreitic lava filled the caldera, and pahoehoe flowed towards the northern coast, forming lava tubes, and to the southeast. Lava domes and a vent complex formed in the Maunga Puka area, while breccias formed along the vents on the western portion of Rano Aroi crater. This volcano's southern and southeastern flanks are composed of younger flows consisting of basalt, alkali basalt, hawaiite, mugearite, and benmoreite from eruptive fissures starting at 0.24 Ma. The youngest lava flow, Roiho, is dated at 0.11 Ma. The Hanga O Teo embayment is interpreted to be a 200 m high landslide scarp.[52]
Rano Raraku and Maunga Toa Toa are isolated tuff cones of about 0.21 Ma. The crater of Rano Raraku contains a freshwater lake. The stratified tuff is composed of sideromelane, slightly altered to palagonite, and somewhat lithified. The tuff contains lithic fragments of older lava flows. The northwest sector of Rano Raraku contains reddish ash.[52] According to Bandy, "...all of the great images of Easter Island are carved from" the light and porous tuff from Rano Raraku. A carving was abandoned when a large, dense and hard lithic fragment was encountered. However, these lithics became the basis for stone hammers and chisels. The Puna Pau crater contains an extremely porous pumice, from which was carved the Pukao "hats". The Maunga Orito obsidian was used to make the "mataa" spearheads.[53]
In the first half of the 20th century, steam reportedly came out of the Rano Kau crater wall. This was photographed by the island's manager, Mr. Edmunds.[54]
Climate[edit]
See also: Climate of Chile
Under the Köppen climate classification, the climate of Easter Island is classified as a tropical rainforest climate (Af) that borders on a humid subtropical climate. The lowest temperatures are recorded in July and August (minimum 15 °C or 59 °F) and the highest in February (maximum temperature 28 °C or 82 °F[55]), the summer season in the southern hemisphere. Winters are relatively mild. The rainiest month is May, though the island experiences year-round rainfall.[56] Easter Island's isolated location exposes it to winds which help to keep the temperature fairly cool. Precipitation averages 1,118 millimetres or 44 inches per year. Occasionally, heavy rainfall and rainstorms strike the island. These occur mostly in the winter months (June–August). Since it is close to the South Pacific High and outside the range of the intertropical convergence zone, cyclones and hurricanes do not occur around Easter island.[57] There is significant temperature moderation due to its isolated position in the middle of the ocean.



Climate data for Easter Island (1961–1990, extremes 1912–1990)


Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year


Record high °C (°F)
32.0
(89.6)
31.0
(87.8)
32.0
(89.6)
31.0
(87.8)
30.0
(86)
29.0
(84.2)
31.0
(87.8)
28.3
(82.9)
30.0
(86)
29.0
(84.2)
33.0
(91.4)
34.0
(93.2)
34.0
(93.2)


Average high °C (°F)
27.0
(80.6)
27.3
(81.1)
26.9
(80.4)
25.4
(77.7)
23.4
(74.1)
22.0
(71.6)
21.3
(70.3)
21.2
(70.2)
21.7
(71.1)
22.5
(72.5)
23.9
(75)
25.4
(77.7)
24.0
(75.2)


Daily mean °C (°F)
23.3
(73.9)
23.6
(74.5)
23.1
(73.6)
21.8
(71.2)
20.2
(68.4)
18.8
(65.8)
18.2
(64.8)
18.0
(64.4)
18.3
(64.9)
19.1
(66.4)
20.4
(68.7)
21.8
(71.2)
20.6
(69.1)


Average low °C (°F)
19.8
(67.6)
20.2
(68.4)
19.9
(67.8)
18.9
(66)
17.7
(63.9)
16.5
(61.7)
15.7
(60.3)
15.4
(59.7)
15.5
(59.9)
16.0
(60.8)
17.3
(63.1)
18.4
(65.1)
17.6
(63.7)


Record low °C (°F)
12.0
(53.6)
14.0
(57.2)
11.0
(51.8)
12.7
(54.9)
10.0
(50)
7.0
(44.6)
9.4
(48.9)
7.0
(44.6)
8.0
(46.4)
8.0
(46.4)
8.0
(46.4)
12.0
(53.6)
7.0
(44.6)


Average precipitation mm (inches)
72.8
(2.866)
84.8
(3.339)
95.6
(3.764)
120.7
(4.752)
152.9
(6.02)
106.3
(4.185)
105.1
(4.138)
93.8
(3.693)
86.8
(3.417)
68.0
(2.677)
74.0
(2.913)
86.4
(3.402)
1,147.2
(45.165)


Average relative humidity (%)
77
79
79
81
81
81
80
80
79
77
77
78
79


Mean monthly sunshine hours
291.4
245.8
238.7
195.0
176.7
155.0
151.9
173.6
183.0
220.1
219.0
263.5
2,513.7


Mean daily sunshine hours
9.4
8.7
7.7
6.5
5.7
5.0
4.9
5.6
6.1
7.1
7.3
8.5
6.88


Source #1: Universidad de Chile (normals and sunshine hours)[58][59]


Source #2: Deutscher Wetterdienst (extremes and humidity)[60]


Ecology[edit]
Easter Island, together with its closest neighbour, the tiny island of Isla Sala y Gómez 415 kilometres (258 mi) farther east, is recognized by ecologists as a distinct ecoregion, the Rapa Nui subtropical broadleaf forests. The original subtropical moist broadleaf forests are now gone, but paleobotanical studies of fossil pollen, tree moulds left by lava flows, and root casts found in local soils indicate that the island was formerly forested, with a range of trees, shrubs, ferns, and grasses. A large extinct palm, Paschalococos disperta, related to the Chilean wine palm (Jubaea chilensis), was one of the dominant trees as attested by fossil evidence. Like its Chilean counterpart it probably took close to 100 years to reach adult height. The Polynesian rat, which the original settlers brought with them, played a very important role in the disappearance of the Rapanui palm. Although some may believe that rats played a major role in the degradation of the forest, less than 10% of palm nuts show teeth marks from rats. The remains of palm stumps in different places indicate that humans caused the trees to fall because in large areas, the stumps were cut efficiently.[61]
The clearance of the palms to make the settlements led to their extinction almost 350 years ago.[62] The toromiro tree (Sophora toromiro) was prehistorically present on Easter Island, but is now extinct in the wild. However the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the Göteborg Botanical Garden are jointly leading a scientific program to reintroduce the toromiro to Easter Island. With the palm and the toromiro virtually gone, there was considerably less rainfall as a result of less condensation. After the island was used to feed thousands of sheep for almost a century, by the mid-1900s the island was mostly covered in grassland with nga'atu or bulrush (Schoenoplectus californicus tatora) in the crater lakes of Rano Raraku and Rano Kau. The presence of these reeds, which are called totora in the Andes, was used to support the argument of a South American origin of the statue builders, but pollen analysis of lake sediments shows these reeds have grown on the island for over 30,000 years.[citation needed] Before the arrival of humans, Easter Island had vast seabird colonies containing probably over 30 resident species, perhaps the world's richest.[63] Such colonies are no longer found on the main island. Fossil evidence indicates five species of landbirds (two rails, two parrots and a heron), all of which have become extinct.[64] Five introduced species of landbird are known to have breeding populations (see List of birds of Easter Island).
Lacks of studies resulting in poor understandings of oceanic fauna of Easter Island and waters in vicinity, however possibilities of undiscovered breeding grounds for humpback, southern blue and pygmy blue whales including Easter Island and Isla Salas y Gómez have been considered.[65] Potential breeding area for fin whales have been detected off northeast of the island as well.[66]

Vegetation on the island






View of Easter Island from space, 2001. The Poike peninsula is on the right.









Digital recreation of its ancient landscape, with tropical forest and palm trees









View toward the interior of the island









View of Rano Kau and Pacific Ocean




The immunosuppressant drug sirolimus was first discovered in the bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus in a soil sample from Easter Island. The drug is also known as rapamycin, after Rapa Nui.[67] It is now being studied for extending longevity in mice.[68]

Trees are sparse, rarely forming natural groves, and it has been argued whether native Easter Islanders deforested the island in the process of erecting their statues,[69] and in providing sustenance for an overpopulated island.[citation needed] Experimental archaeology demonstrated that some statues certainly could have been placed on "Y" shaped wooden frames called miro manga erua and then pulled to their final destinations on ceremonial sites.[69] Other theories involve the use of "ladders" (parallel wooden rails) over which the statues could have been dragged.[70] Rapanui traditions metaphorically refer to spiritual power (mana) as the means by which the moai were "walked" from the quarry. Recent experimental recreations have proven that it is fully possible that the moai were literally walked from their quarries to their final positions by use of ropes, casting doubt on the role that their existence plays in the environmental collapse of the island.[71]
Given the island's southern latitude, the climatic effects of the Little Ice Age (about 1650 to 1850) may have exacerbated deforestation, although this remains speculative.[69] Many researchers[72] point to the climatic downtrend caused by the Little Ice Age as a contributing factor to resource stress and to the palm tree's disappearance. Experts, however, do not agree on when exactly the island's palms became extinct.
Jared Diamond dismisses past climate change as a dominant cause of the island's deforestation in his book Collapse which assesses the collapse of the ancient Easter Islanders.[73] Influenced by Heyerdahl's romantic interpretation of Easter's history (as he acknowledges in chapter 2 of Collapse), Diamond insists that the disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th centuries. He notes that they stopped making statues at that time and started destroying the ahu. But the link is weakened because the Bird Man cult continued to thrive and survived the great impact caused by the arrival of explorers, whalers, sandalwood traders, and slave raiders.
Midden contents show that the main source of protein was tuna and dolphin. With the loss of the trees, there was a sudden drop in the quantities of fish bones found in middens as the islanders lost the means to construct fishing vessels, coinciding with a large increase in bird bones. This was followed by a decrease in the number of bird bones as birds lost their nesting sites or became extinct. A new style of art from this period shows people with exposed ribs and distended bellies, indicative of malnutrition, and it is around this time that many islanders moved to living in fortified caves and the first signs of warfare and cannibalism appear.
Soil erosion because of lack of trees is apparent in some places. Sediment samples document that up to half of the native plants had become extinct and that the vegetation of the island drastically altered. Polynesians were primarily farmers, not fishermen, and their diet consisted mainly of cultivated staples such as taro root, sweet potato, yams, cassava, and bananas. With no trees to protect them, sea spray led to crop failures exacerbated by a sudden reduction in fresh water flows. There is evidence that the islanders took to planting crops in caves beneath collapsed ceilings and covered the soil with rocks to reduce evaporation. Cannibalism occurred on many Polynesian islands, sometimes in times of plenty as well as famine. Its presence on Easter Island (based on human remains associated with cooking sites, especially in caves) is supported by oral histories.[citation needed]
Benny Peiser[5] noted evidence of self-sufficiency when Europeans first arrived. The island still had smaller trees, mainly toromiro, which became extinct in the wild in the 20th century probably because of slow growth and changes in the island's ecosystem. Cornelis Bouman, Jakob Roggeveen's captain, stated in his logbook, "... of yams, bananas and small coconut palms we saw little and no other trees or crops." According to Carl Friedrich Behrens, Roggeveen's officer, "The natives presented palm branches as peace offerings." According to ethnographer Alfred Mètraux, the most common type of house was called "hare paenga" (and is known today as "boat house") because the roof resembled an overturned boat. The foundations of the houses were made of buried basalt slabs with holes for wooden beams to connect with each other throughout the width of the house. These were then covered with a layer of totora reed, followed by a layer of woven sugarcane leaves, and lastly a layer of woven grass. There were reports by European visitors who said they had seen "boles of large palm trees".[citation needed]
Peiser claims that these reports indicate that large trees existed at that time, which is perhaps contradicted by the Bouman quote above. Plantations were often located farther inland, next to foothills, inside open-ceiling lava tubes, and in other places protected from the strong salt winds and salt spray affecting areas closer to the coast. It is possible many of the Europeans did not venture inland. The statue quarry, only one kilometre (0.62 miles) from the coast with an impressive cliff 100 m (330 ft) high, was not explored by Europeans until well into the 19th century.





Panorama of Anakena beach, Easter Island. The moai pictured here was the first to be raised back into place on its ahu in 1955 by Thor Heyerdahl[74] using the labor of islanders and wooden levers.


Easter Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, perhaps aggravated by agriculture and massive deforestation. This process seems to have been gradual and may have been aggravated by sheep farming throughout most of the 20th century. Jakob Roggeveen reported that Easter Island was exceptionally fertile. "Fowls are the only animals they keep. They cultivate bananas, sugar cane, and above all sweet potatoes." In 1786 Jean-François de La Pérouse visited Easter Island and his gardener declared that "three days' work a year" would be enough to support the population.
Rollin, a major in the Pérouse expedition, wrote, "Instead of meeting with men exhausted by famine... I found, on the contrary, a considerable population, with more beauty and grace than I afterwards met in any other island; and a soil, which, with very little labor, furnished excellent provisions, and in an abundance more than sufficient for the consumption of the inhabitants."[75]
According to Diamond, the oral traditions (the veracity of which has been questioned by Routledge, Lavachery, Mètraux, Peiser and others) of the current islanders seem obsessed with cannibalism, which he offers as evidence supporting a rapid collapse. For example, he states, to severely insult an enemy one would say, "The flesh of your mother sticks between my teeth." This, Diamond asserts, means the food supply of the people ultimately ran out.[76] Cannibalism, however, was widespread across Polynesian cultures.[77] Human bones have not been found in earth ovens other than those behind the religious platforms, indicating that cannibalism in Easter Island was a ritualistic practice. Contemporary ethnographic research has proven there is scarcely any tangible evidence for widespread cannibalism anywhere and at any time on the Island.[78] The first scientific exploration of Easter Island (1914) recorded that the indigenous population strongly rejected allegations that they or their ancestors had been cannibals.[30]
Culture[edit]




Bird paintings in the cave called "Cave of the Men Eaters"


Mythology[edit]
Main article: Rapa Nui mythology
The most important myths are:

Tangata manu, the Birdman cult which was practised until the 1860s.
Makemake, an important god.
Aku-aku, the guardians of the sacred family caves.
Moai-kava-kava a ghost man of the Hanau epe (long-ears.)
Hekai ite umu pare haonga takapu Hanau epe kai noruego, the sacred chant to appease the aku-aku before entering a family cave.

Stone work[edit]
The Rapa Nui people had a Stone Age culture and made extensive use of local stone:

Basalt, a hard, dense stone used for toki and at least one of the moai.
Obsidian, a volcanic glass with sharp edges used for sharp-edged implements such as Mataa and for the black pupils of the eyes of the moai.
Red scoria from Puna Pau, a very light red stone used for the pukao and a few moai.
Tuff from Rano Raraku, a much more easily worked rock than basalt that was used for most of the moai.

Statues[edit]
Main article: Moai
The large stone statues, or moai, for which Easter Island is famous, were carved in the period 1100–1680 AD (rectified radio-carbon dates).[16] A total of 887 monolithic stone statues have been inventoried on the island and in museum collections.[79] Although often identified as "Easter Island heads", the statues have torsos, most of them ending at the top of the thighs, although a small number are complete figures that kneel on bent knees with their hands over their stomachs.[80][81] Some upright moai have become buried up to their necks by shifting soils.
Almost all (95%)[citation needed] moai were carved from compressed, easily worked solidified volcanic ash or tuff found at a single site on the side of the extinct volcano Rano Raraku. The native islanders who carved them used only stone hand chisels, mainly basalt toki, which lie in place all over the quarry. The stone chisels were sharpened by chipping off a new edge when dulled. While sculpting was going on, the volcanic stone was splashed with water to soften it. While many teams worked on different statues at the same time, a single moai took a team of five or six men approximately a year to complete. Each statue represented the deceased head of a lineage.
Only a quarter of the statues were installed. Nearly half remained in the quarry at Rano Raraku, and the rest sat elsewhere, presumably on their way to intended locations. The largest moai raised on a platform is known as "Paro". It weighs 82 tonnes (90.4 short tons), and is 9.89 m (32.4 ft) long.[82][83] Several other statues of similar weight were transported to ahu on the north and south coasts.
Possible means by which the statues were moved include employment of a miro manga erua, a Y-shaped sledge with cross pieces, pulled with ropes made from the tough bark of the hau tree[84] and tied around the statue's neck. Anywhere from 180 to 250 men were required for pulling, depending on the size of the moai. Some 50 of the statues were re-erected in modern times. One of the first was on Ahu Ature Huke in Anakena beach in 1956.[85] It was raised using traditional methods during a Heyerdahl expedition.
Another method that might have been used would be to attach ropes to the statue and rock it, tugging it forward as it rocked. This would fit the legend of the Mo'ai 'walking' to their final locations.[86][87][88] This might have been managed by as few as 15 people, supported by the following evidence:

The heads of the moai in the quarry are sloped forward whereas the ones moved to final locations are not. This would serve to provide a better centre of gravity for transport.
The statues found along the transport roads have wider bases than statues installed on ahu; this would facilitate more stable transport. Studies have shown fractures along the bases of the statues in transport; these could have arisen from rocking the statue back and forth and placing great pressures on the edges. The statues found mounted on ahu do not have wide bases and stone chips found at the sites suggest they were further modified on placement.
The abandoned and fallen statues near the old roads are found (more often than would be expected from chance) face down on ascending grades and on their backs when headed uphill. Some were documented standing upright along the old roads, e.g., by a party from Captain Cook's voyage that rested in the shade of a standing statue. This would be consistent with upright transport.

There is debate around the moai regarding the effects of the monument creation process on the environment. Some believe that the process of creating the moai caused widespread deforestation and ultimately a civil war over scarce resources.[89]
In 2011, a large moai statue was excavated from the ground.[90] During the same excavation program, some larger moai were found to have complex dorsal petroglyphs, revealed by deep excavation of the torso.[91]

Moais






Tukuturi, an unusual bearded kneeling moai









All fifteen standing moai at Ahu Tongariki, excavated and restored in the 1990s









Ahu Akivi, one of the few inland ahu, with the only moai facing the ocean





Stone platforms[edit]




Two ahu at Hanga Roa. In foreground Ahu Ko Te Riku (with a pukao on its head). In the mid-ground is a side view of an ahu with five moai showing retaining wall, platform, ramp and pavement. The Mataveri end of Hanga Roa is visible in the background with Rano Kau rising above it.


Ahu are stone platforms. Varying greatly in layout, many were reworked during or after the huri mo'ai or statue-toppling era; many became ossuaries; one was dynamited open; and Ahu Tongariki was swept inland by a tsunami. Of the 313 known ahu, 125 carried moai—usually just one, probably because of the shortness of the moai period and transportation difficulties. Ahu Tongariki, one kilometre (0.62 miles) from Rano Raraku, had the most and tallest moai, 15 in total.[92] Other notable ahu with moai are Ahu Akivi, restored in 1960 by William Mulloy, Nau Nau at Anakena and Tahai. Some moai may have been made from wood and were lost.
The classic elements of ahu design are:

A retaining rear wall several feet high, usually facing the sea
A front wall made of rectangular basalt slabs called paenga
A fascia made of red scoria that went over the front wall (platforms built after 1300)
A sloping ramp in the inland part of the platform, extending outward like wings
A pavement of even-sized, round water-worn stones called poro
An alignment of stones before the ramp
A paved plaza before the ahu. This was called marae
Inside the ahu was a fill of rubble.

On top of many ahu would have been:

Moai on squareish "pedestals" looking inland, the ramp with the poro before them.
Pukao or Hau Hiti Rau on the moai heads (platforms built after 1300).
When a ceremony took place, "eyes" were placed on the statues. The whites of the eyes were made of coral, the iris was made of obsidian or red scoria.

Ahu evolved from the traditional Polynesian marae. In this context ahu referred to a small structure sometimes covered with a thatched roof where sacred objects, including statues, were stored. The ahu were usually adjacent to the marae or main central court where ceremonies took place, though on Easter Island ahu and moai evolved to much greater size. There the marae is the unpaved plaza before the ahu. The biggest ahu is 220 metres (720 ft) and holds 15 statues, some of which are 9 metres (30 ft) high. The filling of an ahu was sourced locally (apart from broken, old moai, fragments of which have been used in the fill).[74] Individual stones are mostly far smaller than the moai, so less work was needed to transport the raw material, but artificially levelling the terrain for the plaza and filling the ahu was laborious.
Ahu are found mostly on the coast, where they are distributed fairly evenly except on the western slopes of Mount Terevaka and the Rano Kau and Poike[93] headlands. These are the three areas with the least low-lying coastal land, and apart from Poike the furthest areas from Rano Raraku. One ahu with several moai was recorded on the cliffs at Rano Kau in the 1880s but had fallen to the beach before the Routledge expedition.[30]




A Hare Moa, a Chicken House, image cut from a laser scan collected by nonprofit CyArk.


Stone walls[edit]
One of the highest-quality examples of Easter Island stone masonry is the rear wall of the ahu at Vinapu. Made without mortar by shaping hard basalt rocks of up to 7 tonnes to match each other exactly, it has a superficial similarity to some Inca stone walls in South America.[94]
Stone houses[edit]
Two types of houses are known from the past: hare paenga, a house with an elliptical foundation, made with basalt slabs and covered with a thatched roof that resembled an overturned boat, and hare oka, a round stone structure. Related stone structures called Tupa look very similar to the hare oka, except that the Tupa were inhabited by astronomer-priests and located near the coast, where the movements of the stars could be easily observed. Settlements also contain hare moa ("chicken house"), oblong stone structures that housed chickens. The houses at the ceremonial village of Orongo are unique in that they are shaped like hare paenga but are made entirely of flat basalt slabs found inside Rano Kao crater. The entrances to all the houses are very low, and entry requires crawling.
In early times the people of Rapa Nui reportedly sent the dead out to sea in small funerary canoes, as did their Polynesian counterparts on other islands. They later started burying people in secret caves to save the bones from desecration by enemies. During the turmoil of the late 18th century, the islanders seem to have started to bury their dead in the space between the belly of a fallen moai and the front wall of the structure. During the time of the epidemics they made mass graves that were semi-pyramidal stone structures.
Petroglyphs[edit]
Petroglyphs are pictures carved into rock, and Easter Island has one of the richest collections in all Polynesia. Around 1,000 sites with more than 4,000 petroglyphs are catalogued. Designs and images were carved out of rock for a variety of reasons: to create totems, to mark territory, or to memorialize a person or event. There are distinct variations around the island in the frequency of themes among petroglyphs, with a concentration of Birdmen at Orongo. Other subjects include sea turtles, Komari (vulvas) and Makemake, the chief god of the Tangata manu or Birdman cult.[95]

Petroglyphs






Makemake with two birdmen, carved from red scoria









Fish petroglyph found near Ahu Tongariki




Caves[edit]
The island and neighbouring Motu Nui are riddled with caves, many of which show signs of past human use for planting and as fortifications, including narrowed entrances and crawl spaces with ambush points. Many caves feature in the myths and legends of the Rapa Nui.




Sample of rongorongo


Rongorongo[edit]
Main article: Rongorongo
Easter Island once had an apparent script called rongorongo. Glyphs include pictographic and geometric shapes; the texts were incised in wood in reverse boustrophedon direction. It was first reported by a French missionary, Eugène Eyraud, in 1864. At that time, several islanders said they could understand the writing, but according to tradition, only ruling families and priests were ever literate, and none survived the slave raids and subsequent epidemics. Despite numerous attempts, the surviving texts have not been deciphered, and without decipherment it is not certain that they are actually writing. Part of the problem is the small amount that has survived: only two dozen texts, none of which remain on the island. There are also only a couple of similarities with the petroglyphs on the island.[96]
Wood carving[edit]






Skeletal statuette
Atypical tubby statuette


Wood was scarce on Easter Island during the 18th and 19th centuries, but a number of highly detailed and distinctive carvings have found their way to the world's museums. Particular forms include:[97]




Ancestor figure, circa 1830, from LACMA collections



Reimiro, a gorget or breast ornament of crescent shape with a head at one or both tips.[98] The same design appears on the flag of Rapa Nui. Two Rei Miru at the British Museum are inscribed with Rongorongo.
Moko Miro, a man with a lizard head. The Moko Miro was used as a club because of the legs, which formed a handle shape. If it wasn't held by hand, dancers wore it around their necks during feasts. The Moko Miro would also be placed at the doorway to protect the household from harm. It would be hanging from the roof or set in the ground. The original form had eyes made from white shells, and the pupils were made of obsidian.[99]
Moai kavakava are male carvings and the Moai Paepae are female carvings.[100] These grotesque and highly detailed human figures carved from Toromiro pine, represent ancestors. Sometimes these statues were used for fertility rites. Usually, they are used for harvest celebrations; "the first picking of fruits was heaped around them as offerings". When the statues were not used, they would be wrapped in bark cloth and kept at home. There were a few times that are reported when the islanders would pick up the figures like dolls and dance with them.[100] The earlier figures are rare and generally depict a male figure with an emaciated body and a goatee. The figures' ribs and vertebrae are exposed and many examples show carved glyphs on various parts of the body but more specifically, on the top of the head. The female figures, rarer than the males, depict the body as flat and often with the female's hand lying across the body. The figures, although some were quite large, were worn as ornamental pieces around a tribesman's neck. The more figures worn, the more important the man. The figures have a shiny patina developed from constant handling and contact with human skin.[citation needed]
Ao, a large dancing paddle

21st-century culture[edit]
The Rapanui sponsor an annual festival, the Tapati, held since 1975 around the beginning of February to celebrate Rapanui culture. The islanders also maintain a national football team and three discos in the town of Hanga Roa. Other cultural activities include a musical tradition that combines South American and Polynesian influences and woodcarving.
Sports[edit]
The Chilean leg of the Red Bull Cliff Diving World Series takes place on the Island of Rapa Nui.
Demographics[edit]
Further information: Europeans in Oceania
2012 census[edit]
Population at the 2012 census was 5,761 (increased from 3,791 in 2002).[101] In 2002, 60% were persons of indigenous Rapa Nui origin, 39% were mainland Chileans (or their Easter Island-born descendants) of European or mestizo (mixed European and indigenous Chilean Amerindian) origin, and the remaining 1% were indigenous mainland Chilean Amerindians (or their Easter Island-born descendants).[102] Population density on Easter Island in 2012 is only 35 inhabitants per square kilometre (91/sq mi).

Real life in Rapa Nui






Polynesian dancing with feather costumes is on the tourist itinerary.









Hanga Roa town hall









Fishing boats









Front view of the Catholic Church, Hanga Roa









Catholic Church, Hanga Roa









Interior view of the Catholic Church in Hanga Roa




Demographic history[edit]
The 1982 population was 1,936. The increase in population in the last census was partly caused by the arrival of people of European or mixed European and Native American descent from the Chilean mainland. However, most married a Rapanui spouse. Around 70% of the population were natives. Estimates of the pre-European population range from 7–17,000. Easter Island's all-time low of 111 inhabitants was reported in 1877. Out of these 111 Rapanui, only 36 had descendants, but all of today's Rapanui claim descent from those 36.
Administration and legal status[edit]
Easter Island shares with Juan Fernández Islands the constitutional status of "special territory" of Chile, granted in 2007. As of 2011[update] a special charter for the island was under discussion in the Chilean Congress.
Administratively, the island is a province of the Valparaíso Region and contains a single commune (comuna). Both the province and the commune are called Isla de Pascua and encompass the whole island and its surrounding islets and rocks, plus Isla Salas y Gómez, some 380 km (236 mi) to the east. The provincial governor is appointed by the President of the Republic.[103] The municipal administration is located in Hanga Roa, led by a mayor and a six-member municipal council, all directly elected for a four-year mandate.
Notable people[edit]

Kings of Easter Island
Hotu Matuʻa – island founder
Nga'ara – one of the last ‘ariki
Atamu Tekena – missionary installed king
Riro Kāinga – last person to hold title of king
Angata – native catechist and prophetess who led a 1914 rebellion
Juan Tepano – indigenous leader and cultural informant
Thor Heyerdahl – ethnographer
Eugène Eyraud – missionary
Hippolyte Roussel – missionary
Sebastian Englert—missionary and ethnologist
Katherine Routledge – archaeologist and anthropologist
William Mulloy – archaeologist
Pedro Pablo Edmunds Paoa – Mayor and former Governor
Melania Carolina Hotu Hey – Governor (2006–2010 and incumbent since 2015)
Juan Edmunds Rapahango – former Mayor

Transportation[edit]
Easter Island is served by Mataveri International Airport, with jet service (currently Boeing 767s and Boeing 787s) from LAN Airlines and, seasonally, subsidiaries such as LAN Peru.
See also[edit]


List of largest monoliths
Lists of islands
North Sentinel Island
Omphalos
Podesta
Rapa Nui language
Rapa Nui mythology




Chile portal
Oceania portal
Islands portal


References[edit]



^ "COMUNAS: POBLACIÓN ESTIMADA AL 30 DE JUNIO POR SEXO Y EDAD SIMPLE 2002–2020. BASE DE DATOS". National Statistics Institute (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016. 
^ "Currently Governor". Gobernación Provincial Isla de Pascua (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. 
^ a b "Censo de Población y Vivienda 2002". National Statistics Institute. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010. 
^ a b c Hunt, T. (2006). "Rethinking the Fall of Easter Island". American Scientist. 94 (5): 412. doi:10.1511/2006.61.1002. 
^ a b Peiser, B. (2005). "From Genocide to Ecocide: The Rape of Rapa Nui" (PDF). Energy & Environment. 16 (3&4): 513. doi:10.1260/0958305054672385. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-10. 
^ "Welcome to Rapa Nui – Isla de Pascua – Easter Island", Portal RapaNui, the island's official website, archived from the original on 14 January 2012 
^ Thomas Brinkhoff (1 February 2013). "Pitcairn Islands". citypopulation.de. Thomas Brinkhoff. Archived from the original on 15 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. 
^ List of Chilean Provinces, Congreso Nacional, archived from the original on 10 September 2012, retrieved 20 February 2013 
^ An English translation of the originally Dutch journal by Jacob Roggeveen, with additional significant information from the log by Cornelis Bouwman, was published in: Andrew Sharp (ed.), The Journal of Jacob Roggeveen (Oxford 1970).
^ Dos Passos, John, (2011). Easter Island : island of enigmas. Doubleday. ISBN 9780307787057. OCLC 773372948. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Thompson, William (1891), Invention of the name 'Rapa Nui', archived from the original on 24 December 2007 
^ Heyerdahl 1961 Heyerdahl's view was that the two islands were about the same size, and that "big" and "small" were not physical but historical attributes, "big" indicating the original. In reality, however, Easter Island is more than four times bigger than Rapa Iti. Heyerdahl also stated that there is an island called "Rapa" in Lake Titicaca in South America, but so far there is no map available showing an island of that name in the lake.
^ Pinart, Alphonse (1877). "Voyage à l'Ile de Pâques (Océan Pacifique)". Le Tour du Monde; Nouveau Journal des Voyags. Hachette. 36: 225. Archived from the original on 16 July 2017. 
^ Churchill, William (1912). The Rapanui Speech and the Peopling of Southeast Polynesia. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. 
^ Barthel, Thomas S. (1974), The Eighth Land: The Polynesian Settlement of Easter Island (1978 ed.), University of Hawaii 
^ a b Beck, J. Warren (2003), "Mata Ki Te Rangi: Eyes towards the Heavens", Easter Island: Scientific Exploration Into the World's Environmental Problems in Microcosm, p. 100, ISBN 9780306474941, archived from the original on 12 April 2016, retrieved 27 March 2013 
^ a b c d e f g h Fischer, Steven (2005). Island at the End of the World. London: Reaktion Books Ltd. p. 14,38. ISBN 9781861892829. 
^ Hunt, T. L.; Lipo, CP (2006). "Late Colonization of Easter Island". Science. 311 (5767): 1603–6. Bibcode:2006Sci...311.1603H. doi:10.1126/science.1121879. PMID 16527931. 
^ Hunt, Terry; Lipo, Carl (2011). The Statues that Walked: Unraveling the Mystery of Easter Island. Free Press. ISBN 1-4391-5031-1. 
^ Rank, Michael (2013) Lost Civilizations. Seattle: CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. pp. 46–47.
^ a b c d Salmond, Anne (2010). Aphrodite's Island. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 238. ISBN 9780520261143. 
^ "The Voyage to Rapa Nui 1999–2000". Polynesian Voyaging Society. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. 
^ More information at the picture's page at the National Maritime Museum's collections' web site Archived 31 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Easter Island Archived 3 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.. National Geographic.
^ Rothstein, Bo (2005). Social traps and the problem of trust. Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ISBN 0-521-84829-6
^ West, Barbara A. (2008) Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania. Infobase Publishing. p. 684. ISBN 0-8160-7109-8
^ Stephen A. Royale, Islands: Nature and Culture (Reaktion Books Ltd., 2014), 65.
^ Diamond 2005, pp. 103–107
^ Haun, Beverley (2008). Inventing 'Easter Island' Archived 12 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. University of Toronto Press. p. 8. ISBN 0-8020-9888-6
^ a b c Routledge 1919
^ Owsley, Douglas W. et al. "Biological effects of European contact on Easter Island" C.S. Larson and G.R. Milner, eds. In the Wake of Contact: Biological Responses to Conquest 1994
^ Diamond 2005, p. 171
^ "Sentinels in Stone – The Collapse of Easter Island's Culture". Bradshaw Foundation. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2015. 
^ Routledge 1919, p. 208
^ "Collapse of island's demographics in the 1860s and 1870s". Rongorongo.org. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "Annexation by Chile". Archived from the original on 4 November 2008. 
^ Diamond 2005, p. 112
^ Lewis, Raymond J. (1994) Review of Rapanui; Tradition and Survival on Easter Island Archived 20 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Délano, Manuel (17 August 1987) Pinochet no asiste a la inauguración de la pista de la isla de Pascua Archived 30 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. El Pais.
^ Pablo Hernandez Mares (November 2016), Illegal Fishing Threatens Easter Island’s Natural Resources, Mongabay, retrieved 16 November 2016 
^ Chilean Law 20,193, National Congress of Chile
^ "Eclipse fever focuses on remote Easter Island". MSNBC. Archived from the original on 12 July 2010. 
^ Allen, Gerald R. (1970). "Two New Species of Frogfishes (Antennaridae) from Easter Island". Pacific Science. 24 (4): 521. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. 
^ a b c "Police evict Rapa Nui clan from Easter Island hotel". BBC. 6 February 2011. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2011. 
^ "Rapanui: Protests Continue Against The Hotel Hanga Roa". IPIR. 17 April 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2013. 
^ "Indian Law.org". Congressman Faleomavaega to Visit Rapa Nui. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2011. 
^ Hinto, Santi. "Giving Care to the Motherland: conflicting narratives of Rapanui". Save Rapanui. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2011. 
^ "Easter Island land dispute clashes leave dozens injured". BBC. 4 December 2010. Archived from the original on 10 February 2011. 
^ "Easter Island". Global Volcanism Program. Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved 18 March 2010. 
^ Baker, P. E.; Buckley, F.; Holland, J. G. (1974). "Petrology and geochemistry of Easter Island". Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology. 44 (2): 85–100. Bibcode:1974CoMP...44...85B. doi:10.1007/BF00385783. 
^ Haase, K. M.; Stoffers, P.; Garbe-Schonberg, C. D. (1997). "The Petrogenetic Evolution of Lavas from Easter Island and Neighbouring Seamounts, Near-ridge Hotspot Volcanoes in the SE Pacific". Journal of Petrology. 38 (6): 785. Bibcode:1997JPet...38..785H. doi:10.1093/petroj/38.6.785. 
^ a b c d e Vezzoli, Luigina; Acocella, Valerio (2009). "Easter Island, SE Pacific: An end-member typr of hotspot volcanism". Geological Society of America Bulletin. 121 (5/6): 869–886. 
^ Bandy, Mark (1937). "Geology and Petrology of Easter Island". Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. 48 (11): 1599–1602, 1605–1606, Plate 4. Bibcode:1937GSAB...48.1589B. doi:10.1130/GSAB-48-1589. 
^ Rapanui: Edmunds and Bryan Photograph Collection Archived 3 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine.. Libweb.hawaii.edu. Retrieved 6 November 2010.
^ "Enjoy Chile – climate". Enjoy-chile.org. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ Easter Island Article Archived 3 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine. in Letsgochile.com
^ Weather, Easter Island Foundation, archived from the original on 2 October 2009 
^ "Información climatológica de estaciones chilenas-Chile Norte" (in Spanish). Universidad de Chile. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2013. 
^ "Tabla 4.6: Medias mensuales de horas de sol diarias extraídas del WRDC ruso (en (hrs./dia))" (PDF). Elementos Para La Creación de Un Manual de Buenas Prácticas Para Instalaciones Solares Térmicas Domiciliarias (in Spanish). Universidad de Chile. September 2007. p. 81. Retrieved 21 January 2015. 
^ "Klimatafel von Mataveri / Osterinsel (Isla de Pascua) / Chile" (PDF). Baseline climate means (1961–1990) from stations all over the world (in German). Deutscher Wetterdienst. Retrieved 24 January 2016. 
^ Mieth, A.; Bork, H. R. (2010). "Humans, climate or introduced rats – which is to blame for the woodland destruction on prehistoric Rapa Nui (Easter Island)?". Journal of Archaeological Science. 37 (2): 417. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2009.10.006. 
^ Hogan, C. Michael. (2008). Chilean Wine Palm: Jubaea chilensis Archived 17 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. N. Stromberg
^ Steadman 2006, pp. 251, 395
^ Steadman 2006, pp. 248–252
^ Hucke-Gaete R., Aguayo-Lobo A., Yancovic-Pakarati S., Flores M. (2014). "Marine mammals of Easter Island (Rapa Nui) and Salas y Gómez Island (Motu Motiro Hiva), Chile: a review and new records" (PDF). Lat. Am. J. Aquat. Res. 42 (4): 743–751. doi:10.3856/vol42-issue4-fulltext-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2016. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Acevedo J., O’Grady M., Wallis B. (2012). "Sighting of the fin whale in the Eastern Subtropical South Pacific: Potential breeding ground?" (pdf). Revista de Biología Marina y Oceanografía Vol. 47, Nº3. University of Valparaíso: 559–563. Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ "Rapamycin – Introduction". Archived from the original on 26 July 2009. Retrieved 10 July 2009. 
^ "Rapamycin Extends Longevity in Mice". Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. 
^ a b c Jones, David T. (2007). "Easter Island, What to learn from the puzzles?". American Diplomacy. [permanent dead link]
^ Diamond 2005, p. 107
^ "Easter Island Statues Could Have 'Walked' Into Position". Wired. 
^ Finney (1994), Hunter Anderson (1998); P.D. Nunn (1999, 2003); Orliac and Orliac (1998)
^ Diamond 2005, pp. 79–119.
^ a b Heyerdahl 1961
^ Heyerdahl 1961, p. 57
^ Diamond 2005, p. 109
^ Kirch, Patrick (2003). "Introduction to Pacific Islands Archaeology". Social Science Computing Laboratory, Berkeley. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 21 December 2014. 
^ Flenley & Bahn 2003
^ Jo Anne van Tilburg (6 May 2009). "What is the Easter Island Statue Project?". Easter Island Statue Project. Retrieved 9 March 2016. 
^ Skjølsvold, Arne "Report 14: The Stone Statues and Quarries of Rano Raraku in Thor Heyerdahl and Edwin N. Ferdon Jr. (eds.) 'Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific'", Volume 1, Archaeology of Easter Island, Monographs of the School of American Research and The Museum of New Mexico, Number 24, Part 1, 1961, pp. 339–379. (esp. p. 346 for the description of the general statues and Fig. 91, p. 347, pp. 360–362 for the description of the kneeling statues)
^ Van Tilburg, Jo Anne. Easter Island. Archaeology, Ecology and Culture, British Museum Press 1994:134–135, fig. 106
^ Van Tilburg, Jo Anne (2009-05-05). "Moai Paro digital reconstruction". Easter Island Statue Project (eisp.org). Retrieved 2017-06-12. 
^ "Paro". pbs.org. Retrieved 2010-11-06. 
^ Flenley, J. R.; King, Sarah M. (1984). "Late Quaternary pollen records from Easter Island". Nature. 307 (5946): 47. Bibcode:1984Natur.307...47F. doi:10.1038/307047a0. 
^ "Anakena beach at Easter Island". Easter Island Traveling. Archived from the original on 14 May 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2015. 
^ Hunt, Terry; Lipo, Carl (2011). The Statues that Walked: Unraveling the Mystery of Easter Island. Free Press. 
^ "NG Live!: Walking With Giants: How the Easter Island Moai Moved". video.nationalgeographic.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ "NG Live!: Terry Hunt and Carl Lipo: The Statues That Walked". video.nationalgeographic.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. 
^ Romey, Kristin (22 February 2016). "Easter Islanders' Weapons Were Deliberately Not Lethal". National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 23 February 2016. Retrieved 24 February 2016. 
^ "Easter Island Statue Project Field Season IV". Eisp.org. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ Jo Anne Van Tilberg, Easter Island Statue Project[permanent dead link] (accessed 18 November 2016)
^ Diamond 2005, pp. 80.
^ Heavy erosion and landslides may have buried them in soil.
^ Heyerdahl 1961 However, Alfred Metraux pointed out that the rubble filled Rapanui walls were a fundamentally different design to those of the Inca, as these are trapezoidal in shape as opposed to the perfectly fitted rectangular stones of the Inca. See also "this FAQ". Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 2007-09-06. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ Lee 1992
^ Fischer, pp. 31, 63.
^ Routledge 1919, p. 268
^ Wooden gorget (rei miro). British Museum.
^ Brooklyn Museum, "Collections: Arts of the Pacific Islands: Lizard Figure (Moko Miro)." Last modified 2011.
^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica Online, "Moai Figure" Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine..
^ Primeros datos del Censo: Hay 37.626 mujeres más que hombres en la V Región Archived 16 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine.. Estrellavalpo.cl (11 June 2002). Retrieved 6 November 2010.
^ "Censo 2002". Ine.cl. Retrieved 23 June 2012. 
^ "Territorial division of Chile" (PDF) (in Spanish). National Statistics Institute. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2011. 



Bibliography[edit]

Diamond, Jared (2005). Collapse. How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking. ISBN 0-14-303655-6. 
Fischer, Steven Roger (1995). "Preliminary Evidence for Cosmogonic Texts in Rapanui's Rongorongo Inscriptions". Journal of the Polynesian Society (104): 303–21. 
Fischer, Steven Roger (1997). Glyph-breaker: A Decipherer's Story. New York: Copernicus/Springer-Verlag. 
Fischer, Steven Roger (1997). RongoRongo, the Easter Island Script: History, Traditions, Texts. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-823710-3. 
Heyerdahl, Thor (1961). Thor Heyerdahl & Edwin N. Ferdon Jr., ed. The Concept of Rongorongo Among the Historic Population of Easter Island. Stockholm: Forum. 
Heyerdahl, Thor (1958). Aku-Aku; The 1958 Expedition to Easter Island. 
McLaughlin, Shawn (2007). The Complete Guide to Easter Island. Los Osos: Easter Island Foundation. 
Metraux, Alfred (1940). "Ethnology of Easter Island". Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin. Honolulu: Bernice P. Bishop Museum Press (160). 
Pinart, Alphonse (1877). "Voyage à l'Ile de Pâques (Océan Pacifique)". Le Tour du Monde; Nouveau Journal des Voyags. Hachette. 36: 225. 
Routledge, Katherine (1919). The Mystery of Easter Island. The story of an expedition. London. ISBN 0-404-14231-1. 
Steadman, David (2006). Extinction and Biogeography in Tropical Pacific Birds. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-77142-7. 

Further reading[edit]

Altman, Ann M. (2004). Early Visitors to Easter Island 1864–1877 (translations of the accounts of Eugène Eyraud, Hippolyte Roussel, Pierre Loti and Alphonse Pinart; with an Introduction by Georgia Lee). Los Osos: Easter Island Foundation. 
Englert, Sebastian F. (1970). Island at the Center of the World. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Erickson, Jon D. and John M. Gowdy (2000). "Resource Use, Institutions, and Sustainability: A Tale of Two Pacific Island Cultures." Land Economics 76(3): 345–354.
Kjellgren, Eric (2001). Splendid isolation: art of Easter Island. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9781588390110. 
Lee, Georgia (1992). The Rock Art of Easter Island. Symbols of Power, Prayers to the Gods. Los Angeles: The Institute of Archaeology Publications. ISBN 0-917956-74-5. 
Pendleton, Steve; Maddock, David (2014). Collecting Easter Island – Stamps and Postal History. London: Pacific Islands Study Circle. ISBN 978-1-899833-22-1. 
Shepardson, Britton (2013). Moai: a New Look at Old Faces. Santiago: Rapa Nui Press. ISBN 9569337001. 
Thomson, William J. (1891). "Te Pito te Henua, or Easter Island. Report of the United States National Museum for the Year Ending June 30, 1889". Annual Reports of the Smithsonian Institution for 1889. Washington: Smithsonian Institution: 447–552. in Google Books
van Tilburg, Jo Anne (1994). Easter Island: Archaeology, Ecology and Culture. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. ISBN 0-7141-2504-0. 
Vergano, Dan. "Were rats behind Easter Island mystery?" USA Today (15 November 2009)

External links[edit]

Find more aboutEaster Islandat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Data from Wikidata



Easter Island at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Terevaka Archaeological Outreach (TAO) – Non-profit Educational Outreach & Cultural Awareness on Easter Island
Easter Island – The Statues and Rock Art of Rapa Nui – Bradshaw Foundation / Dr Georgia Lee
Chile Cultural Society – Easter Island
Rapa Nui Digital Media Archive—Creative Commons–licensed photos, laser scans, panoramas, focused in the area around Rano Raraku and Ahu Te Pito Kura with data from an Autodesk/CyArk research partnership
Mystery of Easter Island – PBS Nova program
Current Archaeology's comprehensive description of island and discussion of dating controversies







v
t
e


Easter Island



Culture



Language
History
Music
Mythology
Rongorongo glyphs
Tangata manu




Stone work



Ahu Tongariki
Ahu Vinapu
Moai
Orongo
Pukao











Geography and geology



Anakena
Easter Fracture Zone
Easter hotspot
Easter Plate
Moai Seamount
Pukao Seamount






Category: Easter Island








Articles and topics related to Easter Island











v
t
e


Polynesia



Polynesian triangle



Cook Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotus


Hawaiian Islands
New Zealand
Niue
Pitcairn Islands
Rotuma
Sala y Gómez
Samoan Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Wallis and Futuna Islands





Polynesian outliers



Aniwa
Anuta
Emae
Futuna
Kapingamarangi
Loyalty Islands
Mele
Nuguria
Nukumanu
Nukuoro
Ontong Java
Ouvéa
Pileni
Rennell
Sikaiana
Takuu
Tikopia





Polynesian-influenced



Lau Islands












v
t
e


Culture of indigenous Oceania




List of resources about traditional arts and culture of Oceania



Art



Ahu
Australia
Austronesia
Cook Islands
Hawaiʻi
kapa (Hawaiʻi)
Lei
magimagi
Māori
moai
New Zealand
nguzu nguzu
Oceania
Papua New Guinea
reimiro
tā moko
tabua
ta'ovala
tapa ["masi" (Fiji), "ngatu" (Tonga), "siapo" (Sāmoa), " ʻuha" (Rotuma)]
tattoo
tēfui
tivaevae





Broad culture



areca nut
kava, " ʻawa" (Hawaii), "yaqona" (Fiji), or "sakau" (Pohnpei)
Kava culture
Lapita
Māori
Polynesia
Polynesian navigation
Sāmoa 'ava ceremony
wood carving





Geo-specific,
general



Australia
Australian Aboriginal astronomy
Austronesia
Caroline Islands, -Pwo
Chatham Islands
Cook Islands
Easter Island
Fiji

Lau Islands
traditions and ceremonies


Guam
Hawaiʻi

Lomilomi massage


Kiribati
French Polynesia's Marquesas Islands
Marshall Islands

Stick charts of


Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Norfolk Island
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn Islands
Sāmoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Torres Strait Islands
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis and Futuna
Yap

navigation
Weriyeng navigation school







Canoes



Aboriginal Dugout
Alingano Maisu
Bangka
Drua
Dugout (boat)
Hawaiʻiloa
Hōkūleʻa
Kaep
Karakoa
Malia (Hawaiian)
Māori migration
Outrigger
Paraw
Polynesian sailing
Proa
Vinta
Waka

list


Walap





Dance



'Aparima
cibi
fara
fire dancing
firewalking
haka
hivinau
hula
kailao
kapa haka
Kiribati
meke
'ote'a
pa'o'a
poi
Rotuma
siva
Tahiti
tāmūrē
tautoga
Tonga
'upa'upa





Festivals



Australia

Garma Festival


Hawaiʻi

Aloha Festivals
Merrie Monarch Festival
World Invitational Hula Festival


Fiji
New Zealand

Pasifika Festival


The Pacific Community

Festival of Pacific Arts


Papua New Guinea





Languages




by area







v
t
e


Languages of Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna








by category

Languages of Oceania






Literature







v
t
e


Literature of Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna








Music



Austral Islands (French Polynesia)
Australia
Austronesia
Cook Islands
Easter Island
Fiji
Guam
Hawaiʻi
Kiribati
Lali
Māori
Melanesia
Micronesia
Federated States of Micronesia
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Polynesia
Sāmoa
Slit drum
Solomon Islands
Tahiti
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis and Futuna





Mythology



Australian Aboriginal
Fijian
Hawaiian
Mangarevan
Maohi
Māori
Melanesian
Menehune
Micronesian
Oceanian legendary creatures
Polynesian
Rapa Nui
Samoan
Tuvaluan
Vanuatuan





Research



Asian American and Pacific Islander Policy Research Consortium
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies





People



Indigneous Australian
Austronesian
Bajau
Chamorro
Chatham Islander (Moriori or Rekohu)
Fijian (iTaukei)
Igorot
Hawaiian (kānaka maoli)
Māori
Marshallese
Melanesian
Micronesian
Negrito
Norfolk Islander
Papuan
Polynesian
Indigenous Polynesian (Mā’ohi)
Rapa Nui
Rotuman
Ryukyuan
Samoan (Tagata Māo‘i)
Tahitian
Taiwanese aborigines
Tongan
Torres Strait Islander
Yami





Religion







v
t
e


Religion in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna









Not included: Oceanian: cinema, (indigenous) currency, dress, folkore, cuisine. Also see Category:Oceanian culture.










v
t
e


Provinces of Chile






Aysén
Antártica Chilena
Antofagasta
Arauco
Arica
Bío Bío
Cachapoal
Capitán Prat
Cardenal Caro
Cauquenes
Cautín
Chacabuco
Chañaral
Chiloé
Choapa
Coyhaique
Colchagua
Concepción
Copiapó
Cordillera
Curicó
El Loa
Elqui
General Carrera
Huasco
Iquique
Isla de Pascua
Limarí
Linares
Llanquihue
Los Andes
Magallanes
Maipo
Malleco
Marga Marga
Melipilla
Ñuble
Osorno
Palena
Parinacota
Petorca
Quillota
Ranco
San Antonio
San Felipe de Aconcagua
Santiago
Talagante
Talca
Tamarugal
Tierra del Fuego
Tocopilla
Última Esperanza
Valdivia
Valparaíso












v
t
e


< Communes and municipalities in Valparaíso Region >



Petorca



Cabildo
La Ligua
Papudo
Petorca
Zapallar








Los Andes



Calle Larga
Los Andes
Rinconada
San Esteban





San Felipe de Aconcagua



Catemu
Llay-Llay
Panquehue
Putaendo
San Felipe
Santa María





Quillota



Hijuelas
La Calera
La Cruz
Nogales
Quillota





Valparaíso



Casablanca
Concón
Juan Fernández
Puchuncaví
Quintero
Valparaíso
Viña del Mar





San Antonio



Algarrobo
Cartagena
El Quisco
El Tabo
San Antonio
Santo Domingo





Isla de Pascua



Isla de Pascua





Marga Marga



Limache
Olmué
Quilpué
Villa Alemana












v
t
e


Countries and territories of Oceania



Sovereign states




Entire



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





In part



Chile

Easter Island
Juan Fernández Islands


Indonesia

West Papua
Papua


Japan

Bonin Islands
Minami-Tori-Shima


United States

Hawaii
Palmyra Atoll














Associated states
of New Zealand




Niue
Cook Islands






Dependencies and
other territories





Australia



Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Kangaroo Island
Lord Howe Island
Macquarie Islands
Norfolk Island





United States



American Samoa
Baker Island
Guam
Howland Island
Jarvis Island
Johnston Atoll
Kingman Reef
Midway Atoll
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





New Zealand



Auckland Islands
Bounty Islands
Chatham Islands
Campbell Island
Tokelau





France



French Polynesia
New Caledonia
Wallis and Futuna





United Kingdom



Pitcairn Islands

















Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 242535628
GND: 4044035-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Easter_Island&oldid=818296781"					Categories: Easter IslandArchaeological sites in ChileArchaeological sites in OceaniaCommunes of ChileEcoregions of ChileEcoregions of OceaniaGeography of PolynesiaIslands of ChileIslands of OceaniaIslands of Valparaíso RegionProvinces of ChileVolcanic islandsHidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from May 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownUse dmy dates from September 2013Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Rapa Nui-language textArticles containing Spanish-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2014Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009Articles with unsourced statements from March 2009Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010Articles with unsourced statements from May 2007Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers