This article is about the Christian theological study. For 19th century sense of the word, the science of the building and decoration of churches, see Church (building).




Washington National Cathedral


In Christian theology, Ecclesiology is the study of the Christian Church, the origins of Christianity, its relationship to Jesus, its role in salvation, its polity, its discipline, its destiny, and its leadership. Since different ecclesiologies give shape to very different institutions or denominations, there are many subfields such as Catholic ecclesiology, Protestant ecclesiology, and ecumenical ecclesiology.
The word ecclesiology was defined in the 19th century as the science of the building and decoration of church buildings and at least one publication still uses the word in this sense.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Issues addressed by ecclesiology
3 Catholic ecclesiology
4 Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology
5 Ecclesiology of the Church of the East
6 Protestant ecclesiology

6.1 Magisterial Reformation ecclesiology
6.2 Radical Reformation ecclesiology


7 Latter-day Saints
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Sources
12 Further reading
13 External links



Etymology[edit]
The roots of the word ecclesiology come from the Greek ἐκκλησίᾱ, ekklēsiā (Latin ecclesia) meaning "congregation, church"[notes 1] and -λογία, -logia, meaning "words", "knowledge", or "logic", a combining term used in the names of sciences or bodies of knowledge.
The similar word ecclesialogy first appeared in the quarterly journal The British Critic in 1837, in an article written by an anonymous contributor[3] who defined it thus:

We mean, then, by Ecclesialogy, a science which may treat of the proper construction and operations of the Church, or Communion, or Society of Christians; and which may regard men as they are members of that society, whether members of the Christian Church in the widest acceptation of the term, or members of some branch or communion of that Church, located in some separate kingdom, and governed according to its internal forms of constitution and discipline.[4]

However, in volume 4 of the Cambridge Camden Society's journal The Ecclesiologist, published in January 1845 that society (the CCS) claimed that they had invented the word ecclesiology:[3]

...as a general organ of Ecclesiology; that peculiar branch of science to which it seems scarcely too much to say, that this very magazine gave first its being and its name.[5]

The Ecclesiologist was first published in October 1841 and dealt with the study of the building and decoration of churches. It particularly encouraged the restoration of Anglican churches back to their supposed Gothic splendour and it was at the centre of the wave of Victorian restoration that spread across England and Wales in the second half of the 19th century. Its successor Ecclesiology Today is still, as of 2017[update], being published by The Ecclesiological Society (successor to the CCS, now a registered charity).[6]
The situation regarding the etymology has been summed up by Alister McGrath: "'Ecclesiology' is a term that has changed its meaning in recent theology. Formerly the science of the building and decoration of churches, promoted by the Cambridge Camden Society, the Ecclesiological Society and the journal The Ecclesiologist, ecclesiology now stands for the study of the nature of the Christian church."[7]
Issues addressed by ecclesiology[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Who is the Church? Is it a visible or earthly corporation, or a unified and visible society — a "church" in the sense of a specific denomination or institution, for instance? Or is it the body of all 'believing Christians' (i.e. the invisible church), regardless of their denominational differences and disunity? What is the relationship between living Christians and departed Christians (the "cloud of witnesses")—do they (those on Earth and those in Heaven) constitute together the Church?
What is the relationship between a believer and the Church? That is, what is the role of corporate worship in the spiritual lives of believers? Is it in fact necessary? Can salvation be found outside formal membership in a given faith community, and what constitutes "membership"? (Baptism? Formal acceptance of a creed? Regular participation?)
What is the authority of the Church? Who gets to interpret the doctrines of the Church? Is the organizational structure itself, either in a single corporate body, or generally within the range of formal church structures, an independent vehicle of revelation or of God's grace? Or is the Church's authority instead dependent on and derivative of a separate and prior divine revelation external to the organization, with individual institutions being "the Church" only to the extent that they teach this message? For example, is the Bible a written part of a wider revelation entrusted to the Church as faith community, and therefore to be interpreted within that context? Or is the Bible the revelation itself, and the Church is to be defined as a group of people who claim adherence to it?
What does the Church do? What are the sacraments, divine ordinances, and liturgies, in the context of the Church, and are they part of the Church's mission to preach the Gospel? What is the comparative emphasis and relationship between worship service, spiritual formation, and mission, and is the Church's role to create disciples of Christ or some other function? Is the Eucharist the defining element of the rest of the sacramental system and the Church itself, or is it secondary to the act of preaching? Is the Church to be understood as the vehicle for salvation, or the salvific presence in the world, or as a community of those already "saved?"
How should the Church be governed? What was the mission and authority of the Apostles, and is this handed down through the sacraments today? What are the proper methods of choosing clergy such as bishops and priests, and what is their role within the context of the Church? Is an ordained clergy necessary? Who are the leaders of a church? Must there be a policy-making board of "leaders" within a church and what are the qualifications for this position, and by what process do these members become official, ordained "leaders"? Must leaders and clergy be "ordained," and is this possible only by those who have been ordained by others?
What are the roles of 'spiritual gifts' in the life of the church?
How does the Church's New Covenant relate to the covenants expressed in scripture with God's chosen people, the Jewish people?
What is the ultimate destiny of the Church in Christian eschatology?

Catholic ecclesiology[edit]
Main article: Ecclesiology (Catholic Church)
Catholic ecclesiology today has a plurality of models and views, as with all Catholic Theology since the acceptance of scholarly Biblical criticism that began in the early to mid 20th century. This shift is most clearly marked by the encyclical Divino afflante Spiritu in 1943. Avery Robert Cardinal Dulles, S.J. contributed greatly to the use of models in understanding ecclesiology. In his work Models of the Church, he defines five basic models of Church that have been prevalent throughout the history of the Catholic Church. These include models of the Church as institution, as mystical communion, as sacrament, as herald, and as servant.[8]
The ecclesiological model of Church as an Institution holds that the Catholic Church alone is the "one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church", and is the only Church of divine and apostolic origin. This view of the Church is dogmatically defined Catholic doctrine, and is therefore de fide. In this view, the Catholic Church— composed of all baptized, professing Catholics, both clergy and laity—is the unified, visible society founded by Christ himself, and its hierarchy derives its spiritual authority through the centuries, via apostolic succession of its bishops, most especially through the bishop of Rome (the Pope) whose successorship comes from St. Peter the Apostle, whom Christ gave "the keys to the Kingdom of Heaven". Thus, the Popes, in the Catholic view, have a God-ordained universal jurisdiction over the whole Church on earth. The Catholic Church is considered Christ's mystical body, and the universal sacrament of salvation, whereby Christ enables human to receive sanctifying grace.
The model of Church as Mystical Communion draws on two major Biblical images, the first of the "Mystical Body of Christ" (as developed in Paul's Epistles) and the second of the "People of God." This image goes beyond the Aristotelian-Scholastic model of "Communitas Perfecta" held in previous centuries. This ecclesiological model draws upon sociology and articulations of two types of social relationships: a formally organized or structured society (Gesellschaft) and an informal or interpersonal community (Gemeinschaft). The Catholic theologian Arnold Rademacher maintained that the Church in its inner core is community (Gemeinschaft) and in its outer core society (Gesellschaft). Here, the interpersonal aspect of the Church is given primacy and that the structured Church is the result of a real community of believers. Similarly, Yves Congar argued that the ultimate reality of the Church is a fellowship of persons. This ecclesiology opens itself to ecumenism[9] and was the prevailing model used by the Second Vatican Council in its ecumenical efforts. The Council, using this model, recognized in its document Lumen gentium that the Body of Christ subsists in a visible society governed by the Successor of Peter and by the Bishops in communion with him, although many elements of sanctification and of truth are found outside its visible structure.[10]
Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology[edit]
From the Eastern Orthodox perspective, the Church is one, even though She is manifested in many places. Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology operates with a plurality in unity and a unity in plurality. For Eastern Orthodoxy there is no 'either / or' between the one and the many. No attempt is made, or should be made, to subordinate the many to the one (the Roman Catholic model), nor the one to the many (the Protestant model). It is both canonically and theologically correct to speak of the Church and the churches, and vice versa.[11] Historically, that ecclesiological concept was applied in practice as patriarchal pentarchy, embodied in ecclesiastical unity of five major patriarchal thrones (Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem).[12]
There is disagreement between the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and the Patriarchate of Moscow on the question of separation between ecclesiological and theological primacy and separation of the different ecclesiological levels:

Position of the Moscow Patriarchate on the problem of primacy in the Universal Church
First without Equals. A Response to the Text on Primacy of the Moscow Patriarchate, by Elpidophoros Lambriniadis, Metropolitan of Bursa

Ecclesiology of the Church of the East[edit]
Historical development of the Church of the East outside the political borders of the Late Roman Empire and its eastern successor, the Byzantine Empire, resulted in the creation of its distinctive theological and ecclesiological traditions, regarding not only the questions of internal institutional and administrative organization of the Church, but also the questions of universal ecclesiastical order.[13]
Protestant ecclesiology[edit]
Main article: Protestant ecclesiology
Magisterial Reformation ecclesiology[edit]
Martin Luther argued that because the Catholic Church had "lost sight of the doctrine of grace", it had "lost its claim to be considered as the authentic Christian church." ; this argument was open to the counter-criticism from Catholics that he was thus guilty of schism and the heresy of Donatism, and in both cases therefore opposing central teachings of the early Church and most especially the Church father St. Augustine of Hippo.[14] It also challenged the Catholic doctrine that the Catholic Church was indefectible and infallible in its dogmatic teachings.
Radical Reformation ecclesiology[edit]
There is no single "Radical Reformation Ecclesiology". A variety of views is expressed among the various "Radical Reformation" participants.
A key "Radical Reformer" was Menno Simons, known as an "Anabaptist". He wrote:

They verily are not the true congregation of Christ who merely boast of his name. But they are the true congregation of Christ who are truly converted, who are born from above of God, who are of a regenerate mind by the operation of the Holy Spirit through the hearing of the divine Word, and have become the children of God, have entered into obedience to him, and live unblamably in his holy commandments, and according to his holy will with all their days, or from the moment of their call.[15]

This was in direct contrast to the hierarchical, sacramental ecclesiology that characterised the incumbent Roman Catholic tradition as well as the new Lutheran and other prominent Protestant movements of the Reformation.
Some other Radical Reformation ecclesiology holds that "the true church [is] in heaven, and no institution of any kind on earth merit[s] the name 'church of God.'"[14]
Latter-day Saints[edit]
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a work simply called the Handbook that unifies creed, ecclesiology, and polity for that faith.
See also[edit]


Christianity portal



Great Church

Notes[edit]


^ In the Greco-Roman world, ecclesia was used to refer to a lawful assembly, or a called legislative body. As early as Pythagoras, the word took on the additional meaning of a community with shared beliefs.[1] This is the meaning taken in the Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures (the Septuagint), and later adopted by the Christian community to refer to the assembly of believers.[2]


References[edit]


^ Diogenes Laertius, 8.41 (available online, retrieved 22 May 2008).
^ F. Bauer, W. Danker, A Greek English Lexicon of the New Testament and other Early Christian Literature, third ed., (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 2000), ἐκκλησία.
^ a b White, James F. (1979). The Cambridge Movement: the ecclesiologists and the Gothic revival (revised ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 48–9. 
^ Anon. (1837). "Ecclesialogy". The British Critic Quarterly Theological Review and Ecclesiastical Record. London: J.G. and F. Rivington. XXII (41): 218–248. 
^ "Preface". The Ecclesiologist. Cambridge Camden Society. IV (1): 2. January 1845. 
^ "The Ecclesiological Society - About". The Ecclesiological Society. Retrieved 9 February 2017. 
^ McGrath, Alister E. (1999). "Ecclesiology". The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Modern Christian Thought. Oxford: Blackwell. p. 127. 
^ Cardinal Dulles, Avery (2002). Models of the Church. New York: Image Book, Random House Inc. p. contents. ISBN 0-385-13368-5. 
^ John Anthony Berry, "Communion Ecclesiology in Theological Ecumenism", Questions Liturgiques/Studies in Liturgy 90/2-3 (2009): 92-105.
^ Lumen gentium § 8
^ Erickson 1992, p. 490-508.
^ Pheidas 2005, p. 65-82.
^ Jugie 1935, p. 5–25.
^ a b McGrath, Alister. E. (1998). Historical Theology, An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. p.200.
^ George, Timothy (1988). Theology of the Reformers. Nashville, Tennessee: Broadman Press. p. 285. 


Sources[edit]

Erickson, John H. (1992). "The Local Churches and Catholicity: An Orthodox Perspective". The Jurist. 52: 490–508. 
Jugie, Martin (1935). "L'ecclésiologie des Nestoriens". Échos d'Orient. 34 (177): 5–25. 
Pheidas, Blasios I. (2005). "Papal Primacy and Patriarchal Pentarchy in the Orthodox Tradition". The Petrine Ministry: Catholics and Orthodox in Dialogue. New York: The Newman Press. 

Further reading[edit]

Flanagan, Donal, ed. The Meaning of the Church: Papers of the Maynooth Union Summer School, 1965. Dublin, Ire.: Gill and Son, 1966. N.B.: Mostly concerns the Roman Catholic Church's own ecclesiology, but also includes a lengthy chapter on the Reformed/Presbyterian standpoint, "The Church in Protestant Theology".

External links[edit]



Look up ecclesiology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Ecclesiology



Ecclesiology journal
A primer on Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic ecclesiology from an Orthodox perspective
Eucharist, Bishop, Church: The Unity of the Church in the Divine Eucharist and the Bishop during the First Three Centuries by the Professor Metropolitan of Pergamus and Chairman of the Athens Academy John Zizioulas







v
t
e


Christian theology



Systematic




Scripture



Inspiration
Preservation
Canonics
Biblical studies
Exegesis
Law and Gospel
Hermeneutics





God







Attributes
Patriology
Christology
Pneumatology
Theocentricism
Theology proper
Immutability
Impassibility





Trinity



Father
Son (Hypostatic union
Incarnation
Jesus
Logos
Christocentric)
Holy Spirit








Cosmology



Creation
Angels
Angelic hierarchy
Humanity
Fallen angels
Satan
Theodicy





Soteriology



Absolution
Adoption
Assurance
Atonement
Baptism
Calling
Conversion
Election
Eternal life
Faith
Forgiveness
Glorification
Grace
Irresistible grace
Imputation
Justification
Lapsarianism
Means of grace
Monergism
Mortification
Ordo salutis
Perseverance
Predestination
Recapitulation
Reconciliation
Redemption
Regeneration
Repentance
Resurrection
Salvation
Sanctification
Synergism
Theosis
Union with Christ





Hamartiology



Adam
Anthropology
The Fall
Incurvatus in se
Original sin
Sin
Theodicy
Total depravity





Ecclesiology



Sacrament

Eucharist


Missiology
Polity (Congregational
Episcopal
Presbyterian)
Synod
Conciliarity





Eschatology



Summary of differences
Historicism
Idealism
Dispensationalism
Futurism
Preterism
Millenarianism (Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism)
Adventism
Antichrist
Apocalypse
Apocalypticism
Covenant / New Covenant theology
End times
Heaven
Hell
Last Judgment
Millennialism
New Jerusalem
Rapture
Second Coming
Soul sleep
Tribulation
War in Heaven








Historical



History of Christian theology
Calvinist–Arminian debate
Apostolic Age
Canon
Patristics
Caesaropapism
Semipelagianism
Iconoclasm
Scholasticism
Thomism
Conciliarism
Renaissance
Reformation
Counter-Reformation
Pietism
Great Awakenings





Practical



Apologetics
Biblical law
Education
Ethics
Homiletics
Liturgics
Missiology
Moral
Pastoral
Polemics
Political
Public





By tradition









Eastern Orthodox






Apophatic theology
Cataphatic theology
Economy
Essence–energies
Filioque
Gnomic will
Metousiosis
Phronema
Phyletism
Proskynesis
Sobornost
Symphonia
Tabor Light
Theoria
Theosis
Theotokos













Roman Catholic






Absolution
Apostolic succession
Assumption of Mary
Traditionalism
Ecumenical Councils
Immaculate Conception
Indulgences
Infant baptism
Josephology
Liturgy
Mariology
Mass
Modernism
Natural law
Papal infallibility
Priesthood
Purgatory
Quartodecimanism
Real presence
Sacerdotalism
Sacrament
Sainthood
Thomism
Transubstantiation
Ultramontanism
Veneration













Protestant







General



Adiaphora
Assurance
Believer's baptism
Protestant ecclesiology (Branch theory)
Priesthood of all believers





Anglican



Anglo-Catholicism
Evangelical Catholic
High church
Latitudinarian
Low church





Arminian / Wesleyan



Christian perfection
Conditional preservation of the saints
Imparted righteousness
Lordship salvation
Prevenient grace





Lutheran



Two kingdoms
Loci Theologici
Theology of the Cross
Confessional Lutheranism
Haugean
Lutheran orthodoxy
Lutheran scholasticism
Neo-Lutheranism





Reformed (Calvinist)



Christian Reconstructionism
Covenant theology
Free Grace
Monergism
Predestination
Five solae (Sola fide
Sola gratia
Sola scriptura
Soli Deo gloria
Solus Christus)
Supersessionism
Total depravity
TULIP





Pentecostalist



Baptism with the Holy Spirit
Faith healing
Fivefold ministry
Glossolalia





Other



Adventism
Anabaptism
Dispensationalism
Evangelicalism
Fundamentalism
Messianic Judaism
Pietism
Prosperity theology
Restorationism

















Outline of Christian theology
 Christianity portal












v
t
e


Theology: Outline








Conceptions of God







Theism




Forms




Deism
Dystheism
Henotheism
Hermeticism
Kathenotheism
Nontheism
Monolatry
Monotheism
Mysticism
Panentheism
Pandeism
Pantheism
Polydeism
Polytheism
Spiritualism
Theopanism





Concepts




Deity
Divinity
Gender of God and gods

Male deity
Goddess


Numen








Singular god
theologies




By faith



Abrahamic religions

Judaism
Christianity
Islam


the Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Zoroastrianism





Concepts



Absolute
Brahman
Emanationism
Logos
Supreme Being





God as



the Devil
Sustainer
Time








Trinitarianism



Athanasian Creed
Comma Johanneum
Consubstantiality
Homoousian
Homoiousian
Hypostasis
Perichoresis
Shield of the Trinity
Trinitarian formula
Trinity
Trinity of the Church Fathers
Trinitarian Universalism





Eschatology



Afterlife
Apocalypticism
Buddhist
Christian
Heaven
Hindu
Islamic
Jewish
Taoist
Zoroastrian





Feminist



Buddhism
Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Mormonism
Goddesses





Other concepts



The All
Aristotelian view
Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam
Binitarianism
Demiurge
Divine simplicity
Divine presence
Egotheism
Exotheology
Holocaust
Godhead in Christianity

Latter Day Saints


Great Architect of the Universe
Great Spirit
Apophatic theology
Olelbis
Open theism
Personal god
Phenomenological definition
Philo's view
Process
Tian
Unmoved mover





Names of God in



Christianity
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
















By Faith







Christian



History
Outline
Biblical canon
Glossary
Christology
Cosmology
Ecclesiology
Ethics
Hamartiology
Messianism
Nestorianism
Philosophy
Practical
Sophiology
Soteriology





Hindu



Ayyavazhi theology
Krishnology





Islamic



Oneness of God
Prophets
Holy Scriptures
Angels
Predestination
Last Judgment





Jewish



Abrahamic prophecy
Aggadah
Denominations
Kabbalah
Philosophy


















v
t
e


Christianity



Jesus



Christ
Jesus in Christianity
Virgin birth
Crucifixion
Resurrection
Son of God








Foundations



Church
Creed
Gospel
New Covenant





Bible



Books
Canon
Old Testament
New Testament





Theology



God
Trinity

Father
Son
Holy Spirit


Apologetics
Baptism
Christology
Ecclesiology
History of theology
Mission
Salvation






History and
tradition




Mary
Joseph
Apostles
Peter
Paul
Fathers
Early
Constantine
Ecumenical councils
Augustine
East–West Schism
Crusades
Aquinas
Reformation
Luther






Denomi-
nations
and
traditions
(list)





Western



Adventist
Anabaptist
Anglican
Baptist
Calvinist
Catholic
Charismatic
Evangelical
Holiness
Lutheran
Methodist
Pentecostal
Protestant





Eastern



Eastern Orthodox
Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite)
Assyrian Church of the East ("Nestorian")
Eastern Catholic Churches





Nontrinitarian



Jehovah's Witnesses
Latter Day Saint movement
Oneness Pentecostalism








Related topics



Art
Criticism
Culture
Ecumenism
Liturgy
Music
Other religions
Prayer
Sermon
Symbolism








 Category
 Christianity portal









Authority control



GND: 4070730-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecclesiology&oldid=806962977"					Categories: Christian philosophyChristian terminologyEcclesiologyHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles needing additional references from April 2012All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia articles with GND identifiers