For the academic journal, see Ecological Economics (journal).
Not to be confused with environmental economics.


Economics



A supply and demand diagram, illustrating
the effects of an increase in demand.






Index
Outline
Category








History
Types
Classification







History of economics
Economic history (academic study)
Schools of economics



Microeconomics
Macroeconomics
Methodology
Heterodox economics
JEL classification codes








Concepts
Theory
Techniques








Econometrics
Economic growth
Economic system
Experimental economics
Mathematical economics
Game theory
Post-scarcity
Market
National accounting





By application





Agricultural
Behavioral
Business
Computational
Cultural
Demographic
Development
Digitization
Ecological
Education
Engineering
Environmental
Evolutionary
Expeditionary
Geography
Health
Industrial organization
Information
International
Knowledge
Labour
Law
Managerial
Monetary / Financial
Natural resource
Organizational
Personnel
Public / Welfare economics
Regional
Rural
Service
Social
Urban
Welfare





Lists




Economists
Publications (journals)






 Business and economics portal







v
t
e





Ecological economics/eco-economics (also called Ecolonomy or Bioeconomics of Georgescu-Roegen) refers to both a transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary field of academic research addressing the interdependence and coevolution of human economies and natural ecosystems, both intertemporally and spatially.[1] By treating the economy as a subsystem of Earth's larger ecosystem, and by emphasizing the preservation of natural capital, the field of ecological economics is differentiated from environmental economics, which is the mainstream economic analysis of the environment.[2] One survey of German economists found that ecological and environmental economics are different schools of economic thought, with ecological economists emphasizing strong sustainability and rejecting the proposition that natural capital can be substituted by human-made capital (see the section on Weak versus strong sustainability below).[3]
Ecological economics was founded in the 1980s as a modern discipline on the works of and interactions between various European and American academics (see the section on History and development below). The related field of green economics is, in general, a more politically applied form of the subject.[4][5]
According to ecological economist Malte Faber, ecological economics is defined by its focus on nature, justice, and time. Issues of intergenerational equity, irreversibility of environmental change, uncertainty of long-term outcomes, and sustainable development guide ecological economic analysis and valuation.[6] Ecological economists have questioned fundamental mainstream economic approaches such as cost-benefit analysis, and the separability of economic values from scientific research, contending that economics is unavoidably normative rather than positive (i.e. descriptive).[7] Positional analysis, which attempts to incorporate time and justice issues, is proposed as an alternative.[8][9] Ecological economics shares many of its perspectives with feminist economics, including the focus on sustainability, nature, justice and care values.[10]



Contents


1 History and development
2 Nature and ecology
3 Ethics
4 Schools of thought
5 Differentiation from mainstream schools
6 Topics

6.1 Methodology
6.2 Allocation of resources
6.3 Weak versus strong sustainability
6.4 Energy economics
6.5 Energy accounting and balance
6.6 Ecosystem services
6.7 Not 'externalities', but cost shifting
6.8 Ecological-economic modeling


7 Criticism
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History and development[edit]
See also: Steady-state economy § Post-war economic expansion and emerging ecological concerns
The first principles, deriving from the radiochemist FA Soddy, were laid out in his 1926 book "Wealth, Money (Virtual Wealth) and Debt" in 1926. Early modern interest in ecology and economics dates back to the 1940s in the work of K. William Kapp and Karl Polanyi and the 1960s in work by Kenneth Boulding and Herman Daly. However, the first organized meetings of modern ecological economists occurred in the 1980s. These began in 1982, at the instigation of Lois Banner,[11] with a meeting held in Sweden (including Robert Costanza, Herman Daly, Charles Hall, Bruce Hannon, H.T. Odum, and David Pimentel).[12] Most were ecosystem ecologists or mainstream environmental economists, with the exception of Daly. In 1987, Daly and Costanza edited an issue of Ecological Modeling to test the waters. A book entitled Ecological Economics, by Juan Martinez-Alier, was published later that year.[12] 1989 saw the foundation of the International Society for Ecological Economics and publication of its journal, Ecological Economics, by Elsevier. Robert Costanza was the first president of the society and first editor of the journal, currently edited by Richard Howarth.
European conceptual founders include Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1971), K. William Kapp (1950)[13] and Karl Polanyi (1944).[14] Some key concepts of what is now ecological economics are evident in the writings of E.F. Schumacher, whose book Small Is Beautiful – A Study of Economics as if People Mattered (1973) was published just a few years before the first edition of Herman Daly's comprehensive and persuasive Steady-State Economics (1977).[15][16] Other figures include ecologists C.S. Holling, H.T. Odum and Robert Costanza, biologist Gretchen Daily and physicist Robert Ayres. CUNY geography professor David Harvey explicitly added ecological concerns to political economic literature. This parallel development in political economy has been continued by analysts such as sociologist John Bellamy Foster.
The antecedents can be traced back to the Romantics of the 19th century as well as some Enlightenment political economists of that era. Concerns over population were expressed by Thomas Malthus, while John Stuart Mill predicted the desirability of the stationary state of an economy. Mill thereby anticipated later insights of modern ecological economists, but without having had their experience of the social and ecological costs of the Post–World War II economic expansion. As Martinez-Alier explores in his book the debate on energy in economic systems can also be traced into the 19th century e.g. Nobel prize-winning chemist, Frederick Soddy (1877–1956). Soddy criticized the prevailing belief of the economy as a perpetual motion machine, capable of generating infinite wealth—a criticism echoed by his intellectual heirs in the now emergent field of ecological economics.[17]
The Romanian economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (1906–1994), who was among Daly's teachers at Vanderbilt University, provided ecological economics with a modern conceptual framework based on the material and energy flows of economic production and consumption. His magnum opus, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process (1971), has been highly influential.[18]
Articles by Inge Ropke (2004, 2005)[19] and Clive Spash (1999)[20] cover the development and modern history of ecological economics and explain its differentiation from resource and environmental economics, as well as some of the controversy between American and European schools of thought. An article by Robert Costanza, David Stern, Lining He, and Chunbo Ma[21] responded to a call by Mick Common to determine the foundational literature of ecological economics by using citation analysis to examine which books and articles have had the most influence on the development of the field. However, citations analysis has itself proven controversial and similar work has been criticized by Clive Spash for attempting to pre-determine what is regarded as influential in ecological economics through study design and data manipulation.[22] In addition, the journal Ecological Economics has itself been criticized for swamping the field with mainstream economics.[23] [24]
Nature and ecology[edit]
Main articles: Nature and Ecology




Natural resources flow through the economy and end up as waste and pollution


A simple circular flow of income diagram is replaced in ecological economics by a more complex flow diagram reflecting the input of solar energy, which sustains natural inputs and environmental services which are then used as units of production. Once consumed, natural inputs pass out of the economy as pollution and waste. The potential of an environment to provide services and materials is referred to as an "environment's source function", and this function is depleted as resources are consumed or pollution contaminates the resources. The "sink function" describes an environment's ability to absorb and render harmless waste and pollution: when waste output exceeds the limit of the sink function, long-term damage occurs.[25]:8 Some persistent pollutants, such as some organic pollutants and nuclear waste are absorbed very slowly or not at all; ecological economists emphasize minimizing "cumulative pollutants".[25]:28 Pollutants affect human health and the health of the climate.
The economic value of natural capital and ecosystem services is accepted by mainstream environmental economics, but is emphasized as especially important in ecological economics. Ecological economists may begin by estimating how to maintain a stable environment before assessing the cost in dollar terms.[25]:9 Ecological economist Robert Costanza led an attempted valuation of the global ecosystem in 1997. Initially published in Nature, the article concluded on $33 trillion with a range from $16 trillion to $54 trillion (in 1997, total global GDP was $27 trillion).[26] Half of the value went to nutrient cycling. The open oceans, continental shelves, and estuaries had the highest total value, and the highest per-hectare values went to estuaries, swamps/floodplains, and seagrass/algae beds. The work was criticized by articles in Ecological Economics Volume 25, Issue 1, but the critics acknowledged the positive potential for economic valuation of the global ecosystem.[25]:129
The Earth's carrying capacity is a central issue in ecological economics. Early economists such as Thomas Malthus pointed out the finite carrying capacity of the earth, which was also central to the MIT study Limits to Growth. Diminishing returns suggest that productivity increases will slow if major technological progress is not made. Food production may become a problem, as erosion, an impending water crisis, and soil salinity (from irrigation) reduce the productivity of agriculture. Ecological economists argue that industrial agriculture, which exacerbates these problems, is not sustainable agriculture, and are generally inclined favorably to organic farming, which also reduces the output of carbon.[25]:26
Global wild fisheries are believed to have peaked and begun a decline, with valuable habitat such as estuaries in critical condition.[25]:28 The aquaculture or farming of piscivorous fish, like salmon, does not help solve the problem because they need to be fed products from other fish. Studies have shown that salmon farming has major negative impacts on wild salmon, as well as the forage fish that need to be caught to feed them.[27][28]
Since animals are higher on the trophic level, they are less efficient sources of food energy. Reduced consumption of meat would reduce the demand for food, but as nations develop, they tend to adopt high-meat diets similar to that of the United States. Genetically modified food (GMF) a conventional solution to the problem, presents numerous problems – Bt corn produces its own Bacillus thuringiensis toxin/protein, but the pest resistance is believed to be only a matter of time.[25]:31 The overall effect of GMF on yields is contentious, with the USDA and FAO acknowledging that GMFs do not necessarily have higher yields and may even have reduced yields.[29]
Global warming is now widely acknowledged as a major issue, with all national scientific academies expressing agreement on the importance of the issue. As the population growth intensifies and energy demand increases, the world faces an energy crisis. Some economists and scientists forecast a global ecological crisis if energy use is not contained – the Stern report is an example. The disagreement has sparked a vigorous debate on issue of discounting and intergenerational equity.

GLOBAL GEOCHEMICAL CYCLES CRITICAL FOR LIFE






Nitrogen cycle









Water cycle









Carbon cycle









Oxygen cycle




Ethics[edit]
See also: Environmental ethics


Part of a series on


Renewable energy




Biofuel
Biomass
Geothermal
Hydropower
Solar energy
Tidal power
Wave power
Wind power






Topics by country
100% renewable energy
Marketing and policy trends







v
t
e





Mainstream economics has attempted to become a value-free 'hard science', but ecological economists argue that value-free economics is generally not realistic. Ecological economics is more willing to entertain alternative conceptions of utility, efficiency, and cost-benefits such as positional analysis or multi-criteria analysis. Ecological economics is typically viewed as economics for sustainable development,[30] and may have goals similar to green politics.
Schools of thought[edit]
Various competing schools of thought exist in the field. Some are close to resource and environmental economics while others are far more heterodox in outlook. An example of the latter is the European Society for Ecological Economics. An example of the former is the Swedish Beijer International Institute of Ecological Economics. Clive Spash has argued for the classification of the ecological economics movement, and more generally work by different economic schools on the environment, into three main categories. These are the mainstream new resource economists, the new environmental pragmatists,[31] and the more radical social ecological economists.[32] International survey work comparing the relevance of the categories for mainstream and heterodox economists shows some clear divisions between environmental and ecological economists.[33]
Differentiation from mainstream schools[edit]
Some ecological economists prioritise adding natural capital to the typical capital asset analysis of land, labor, and financial capital. These ecological economists then use tools from mathematical economics as in mainstream economics, but may apply them more closely to the natural world. Whereas mainstream economists tend to be technological optimists, ecological economists are inclined to be technological sceptics. They reason that the natural world has a limited carrying capacity and that its resources may run out. Since destruction of important environmental resources could be practically irreversible and catastrophic, ecological economists are inclined to justify cautionary measures based on the precautionary principle.[34]
The most cogent example of how the different theories treat similar assets is tropical rainforest ecosystems, most obviously the Yasuni region of Ecuador. While this area has substantial deposits of bitumen it is also one of the most diverse ecosystems on Earth and some estimates establish it has over 200 undiscovered medical substances in its genomes - most of which would be destroyed by logging the forest or mining the bitumen. Effectively, the instructional capital of the genomes is undervalued by analyses which view the rainforest primarily as a source of wood, oil/tar and perhaps food. Increasingly the carbon credit for leaving the extremely carbon-intensive ("dirty") bitumen in the ground is also valued - the government of Ecuador set a price of US$350M for an oil lease with the intent of selling it to someone committed to never exercising it at all and instead preserving the rainforest.
While this natural capital and ecosystems services approach has proven popular amongst many it has also been contested as failing to address the underlying problems with mainstream economics, growth, market capitalism and monetary valuation of the environment.[35][36][37] Critiques concern the need to create a more meaningful relationship with Nature and the non-human world than evident in the instrumentalism of shallow ecology and the environmental economists commodification of everything external to the market system.[38][39][40]
Topics[edit]
Among the topics addressed by ecological economics are methodology, allocation of resources, weak versus strong sustainability, energy economics, energy accounting and balance, environmental services, cost shifting, and modeling.
Methodology[edit]


Thermodynamics



The classical Carnot heat engine





Branches



Classical
Statistical
Chemical



Equilibrium / Non-equilibrium








Laws



Zeroth
First
Second
Third









Systems



State




Equation of state
Ideal gas
Real gas
State of matter
Equilibrium
Control volume
Instruments




Processes




Isobaric
Isochoric
Isothermal
Adiabatic
Isentropic
Isenthalpic
Quasistatic
Polytropic
Free expansion
Reversibility
Irreversibility
Endoreversibility




Cycles




Heat engines
Heat pumps
Thermal efficiency











System properties

Note: Conjugate variables in italics




Property diagrams
Intensive and extensive properties




Functions of state




Temperature / Entropy (introduction)
Pressure / Volume
Chemical potential / Particle number
Vapor quality
Reduced properties




Process functions





Work
Heat












Material properties


Property databases




Specific heat capacity 




c
=


{\displaystyle c=}









T


{\displaystyle T}






∂
S


{\displaystyle \partial S}








N


{\displaystyle N}






∂
T


{\displaystyle \partial T}







Compressibility 




β
=
−


{\displaystyle \beta =-}









1


{\displaystyle 1}






∂
V


{\displaystyle \partial V}








V


{\displaystyle V}






∂
p


{\displaystyle \partial p}







Thermal expansion 




α
=


{\displaystyle \alpha =}









1


{\displaystyle 1}






∂
V


{\displaystyle \partial V}








V


{\displaystyle V}






∂
T


{\displaystyle \partial T}















Equations



Carnot's theorem
Clausius theorem
Fundamental relation
Ideal gas law



Maxwell relations
Onsager reciprocal relations
Bridgman's equations
Table of thermodynamic equations








Potentials



Free energy
Free entropy




Internal energy




U
(
S
,
V
)


{\displaystyle U(S,V)}


Enthalpy




H
(
S
,
p
)
=
U
+
p
V


{\displaystyle H(S,p)=U+pV}


Helmholtz free energy




A
(
T
,
V
)
=
U
−
T
S


{\displaystyle A(T,V)=U-TS}


Gibbs free energy




G
(
T
,
p
)
=
H
−
T
S


{\displaystyle G(T,p)=H-TS}














History
Culture






History





General
Heat
Entropy
Gas laws



"Perpetual motion" machines




Philosophy





Entropy and time
Entropy and life
Brownian ratchet
Maxwell's demon
Heat death paradox
Loschmidt's paradox
Synergetics





Theories





Caloric theory
Theory of heat



Vis viva ("living force")
Mechanical equivalent of heat
Motive power




Key publications





"An Experimental Enquiry
Concerning ... Heat"


"On the Equilibrium of
Heterogeneous Substances"


"Reflections on the
Motive Power of Fire"





Timelines





Thermodynamics
Heat engines








Art
Education







Maxwell's thermodynamic surface
Entropy as energy dispersal











Scientists



Bernoulli
Boltzmann
Carnot
Clapeyron
Clausius
Carathéodory
Duhem
Gibbs
von Helmholtz
Joule
Maxwell
von Mayer
Onsager
Rankine
Smeaton
Stahl
Thompson
Thomson
van der Waals
Waterston







Book:Thermodynamics





v
t
e





A primary objective of ecological economics (EE) is to ground economic thinking and practice in physical reality, especially in the laws of physics (particularly the laws of thermodynamics) and in knowledge of biological systems. It accepts as a goal the improvement of human well-being through development, and seeks to ensure achievement of this through planning for the sustainable development of ecosystems and societies. Of course the terms development and sustainable development are far from lacking controversy. Richard B. Norgaard argues traditional economics has hi-jacked the development terminology in his book Development Betrayed.[41]
Well-being in ecological economics is also differentiated from welfare as found in mainstream economics and the 'new welfare economics' from the 1930s which informs resource and environmental economics. This entails a limited preference utilitarian conception of value i.e., Nature is valuable to our economies, that is because people will pay for its services such as clean air, clean water, encounters with wilderness, etc.
Ecological economics is distinguishable from neoclassical economics primarily by its assertion that the economy is embedded within an environmental system. Ecology deals with the energy and matter transactions of life and the Earth, and the human economy is by definition contained within this system. Ecological economists argue that neoclassical economics has ignored the environment, at best considering it to be a subset of the human economy.
The neoclassical view ignores much of what the natural sciences have taught us about the contributions of nature to the creation of wealth e.g., the planetary endowment of scarce matter and energy, along with the complex and biologically diverse ecosystems that provide goods and ecosystem services directly to human communities: micro- and macro-climate regulation, water recycling, water purification, storm water regulation, waste absorption, food and medicine production, pollination, protection from solar and cosmic radiation, the view of a starry night sky, etc.
There has then been a move to regard such things as natural capital and ecosystems functions as goods and services.[42][43] However, this is far from uncontroversial within ecology or ecological economics due to the potential for narrowing down values to those found in mainstream economics and the danger of merely regarding Nature as a commodity. This has been referred to as ecologists 'selling out on Nature'.[44] There is then a concern that ecological economics has failed to learn from the extensive literature in environmental ethics about how to structure a plural value system.
Allocation of resources[edit]
Resource and neoclassical economics focus primarily on the efficient allocation of resources, and less on two other fundamental economic problems which are central to ecological economics: distribution (equity) and the scale of the economy relative to the ecosystems upon which it is reliant.[45] Ecological Economics also makes a clear distinction between growth (quantitative increase in economic output) and development (qualitative improvement of the quality of life) while arguing that neoclassical economics confuses the two. Ecological economists point out that, beyond modest levels, increased per-capita consumption (the typical economic measure of "standard of living") does not necessarily lead to improvement in human well-being, while this same consumption can have harmful effects on the environment and broader societal well-being.
Weak versus strong sustainability[edit]
Main article: Weak and strong sustainability
See also: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen § Criticising neoclassical economics (weak versus strong sustainability)








The three nested systems of sustainability - the economy wholly contained by society, wholly contained by the biophysical environment. Clickable.


Ecological economics challenges the conventional approach towards natural resources, claiming that it undervalues natural capital by considering it as interchangeable with human-made capital—labor and technology.
The impending depletion of natural resources and increase of climate-changing greenhouse gasses should motivate us to examine how political, economic and social policies can benefit from alternative energy. Interestingly enough, shifting our dependence on fossil fuels with specific interest within just one of the above-mentioned factors easily benefits at least one other. For instance, photo voltaic (or solar) panels have a 15% efficiency when absorbing the sun's energy, but its construction demand has increased 120% within both commercial and residential properties. Additionally, this construction has led to a roughly 30% increase in work demands (Chen).
The potential for the substitution of man-made capital for natural capital is an important debate in ecological economics and the economics of sustainability. There is a continuum of views among economists between the strongly neoclassical positions of Robert Solow and Martin Weitzman, at one extreme and the 'entropy pessimists', notably Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen and Herman Daly, at the other.[46]
Neoclassical economists tend to maintain that man-made capital can, in principle, replace all types of natural capital. This is known as the weak sustainability view, essentially that every technology can be improved upon or replaced by innovation, and that there is a substitute for any and all scarce materials.
At the other extreme, the strong sustainability view argues that the stock of natural resources and ecological functions are irreplaceable. From the premises of strong sustainability, it follows that economic policy has a fiduciary responsibility to the greater ecological world, and that sustainable development must therefore take a different approach to valuing natural resources and ecological functions.
Recently, Stanislav Shmelev developed a new methodology for the assessment of progress at the macro scale based on multi-criteria methods, which allows consideration of different perspectives, including strong and weak sustainability or conservationists vs industrialists and aims to search for a 'middle way' by providing a strong neo-Keynsian economic push without putting excessive pressure on the natural resources, including water or producing emissions, both directly and indirectly.[47]
Energy economics[edit]




Exergy analysis can be performed to find connections between economic value and the physical world. Here the costs of heating (vertical axis) are compared with the exergy content of different energy carriers (horizontal axis). Red dots and trend line indicate energy prices for consumers, blue dots and trend line indicate total price for consumers including capital expenditure for the heating system. Energy carriers included are district heating (D), ground-source heat pump (G), exhaust air heat pump (A), bioenergy meaning firewood (B), heating oil (O) and direct electric heating (E).[48]


Main article: Energy economics
A key concept of energy economics is net energy gain, which recognizes that all energy requires energy to produce. To be useful the energy return on energy invested (EROEI) has to be greater than one. The net energy gain from production coal, oil and gas has declined over time as the easiest to produce sources have been most heavily depleted.[49]
Ecological economics generally rejects the view of energy economics that growth in the energy supply is related directly to well being, focusing instead on biodiversity and creativity - or natural capital and individual capital, in the terminology sometimes adopted to describe these economically. In practice, ecological economics focuses primarily on the key issues of uneconomic growth and quality of life. Ecological economists are inclined to acknowledge that much of what is important in human well-being is not analyzable from a strictly economic standpoint and suggests an interdisciplinary approach combining social and natural sciences as a means to address this.
Thermoeconomics is based on the proposition that the role of energy in biological evolution should be defined and understood through the second law of thermodynamics, but also in terms of such economic criteria as productivity, efficiency, and especially the costs and benefits (or profitability) of the various mechanisms for capturing and utilizing available energy to build biomass and do work.[50][51] As a result, thermoeconomics is often discussed in the field of ecological economics, which itself is related to the fields of sustainability and sustainable development.
Exergy analysis is performed in the field of industrial ecology to use energy more efficiently.[52] The term exergy, was coined by Zoran Rant in 1956, but the concept was developed by J. Willard Gibbs. In recent decades, utilization of exergy has spread outside of physics and engineering to the fields of industrial ecology, ecological economics, systems ecology, and energetics.
Energy accounting and balance[edit]
See also: Net energy gain
An energy balance can be used to track energy through a system, and is a very useful tool for determining resource use and environmental impacts, using the First and Second laws of thermodynamics, to determine how much energy is needed at each point in a system, and in what form that energy is a cost in various environmental issues.[citation needed] The energy accounting system keeps track of energy in, energy out, and non-useful energy versus work done, and transformations within the system.[53]
Scientists have written and speculated on different aspects of energy accounting.[54]
Ecosystem services[edit]
See also: Ecosystem valuation and Price of life
A study was carried out by Costanza and colleagues[55] to determine the 'price' of the services provided by the environment. This was determined by averaging values obtained from a range of studies conducted in very specific context and then transferring these without regard to that context. Dollar figures were averaged to a per hectare number for different types of ecosystem e.g. wetlands, oceans. A total was then produced which came out at 33 trillion US dollars (1997 values), more than twice the total GDP of the world at the time of the study. This study was criticized by pre-ecological and even some environmental economists - for being inconsistent with assumptions of financial capital valuation - and ecological economists - for being inconsistent with an ecological economics focus on biological and physical indicators.[56]
The whole idea of treating ecosystems as goods and services to be valued in monetary terms remains controversial. A common objection[57][58][59] is that life is precious or priceless, but this demonstrably degrades to it being worthless under the assumptions of any branch of economics. Reducing human bodies to financial values is a necessary part of every branch of economics and not always in the direct terms of insurance or wages. Economics, in principle, assumes that conflict is reduced by agreeing on voluntary contractual relations and prices instead of simply fighting or coercing or tricking others into providing goods or services. In doing so, a provider agrees to surrender time and take bodily risks and other (reputation, financial) risks. Ecosystems are no different from other bodies economically except insofar as they are far less replaceable than typical labour or commodities.
Despite these issues, many ecologists and conservation biologists are pursuing ecosystem valuation. Biodiversity measures in particular appear to be the most promising way to reconcile financial and ecological values, and there are many active efforts in this regard. The growing field of biodiversity finance[60] began to emerge in 2008 in response to many specific proposals such as the Ecuadoran Yasuni proposal[61][62] or similar ones in the Congo. US news outlets treated the stories as a "threat"[63] to "drill a park"[64] reflecting a previously dominant view that NGOs and governments had the primary responsibility to protect ecosystems. However Peter Barnes and other commentators have recently argued that a guardianship/trustee/commons model is far more effective and takes the decisions out of the political realm.
Commodification of other ecological relations as in carbon credit and direct payments to farmers to preserve ecosystem services are likewise examples that enable private parties to play more direct roles protecting biodiversity. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization achieved near-universal agreement in 2008[65] that such payments directly valuing ecosystem preservation and encouraging permaculture were the only practical way out of a food crisis. The holdouts were all English-speaking countries that export GMOs and promote "free trade" agreements that facilitate their own control of the world transport network: The US, UK, Canada and Australia.[66]
Not 'externalities', but cost shifting[edit]
Ecological economics is founded upon the view that the neoclassical economics (NCE) assumption that environmental and community costs and benefits are mutually canceling "externalities" is not warranted. Joan Martinez Alier,[67] for instance shows that the bulk of consumers are automatically excluded from having an impact upon the prices of commodities, as these consumers are future generations who have not been born yet. The assumptions behind future discounting, which assume that future goods will be cheaper than present goods, has been criticized by David Pearce[68] and by the recent Stern Report (although the Stern report itself does employ discounting and has been criticized for this and other reasons by ecological economists such as Clive Spash).[69]
Concerning these externalities, some like the eco-businessman Paul Hawken argue an orthodox economic line that the only reason why goods produced unsustainably are usually cheaper than goods produced sustainably is due to a hidden subsidy, paid by the non-monetized human environment, community or future generations.[70] These arguments are developed further by Hawken, Amory and Hunter Lovins to promote their vision of an environmental capitalist utopia in Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution.[71]
In contrast, ecological economists, like Joan Martinez-Alier, appeal to a different line of reasoning.[72] Rather than assuming some (new) form of capitalism is the best way forward, an older ecological economic critique questions the very idea of internalizing externalities as providing some corrective to the current system. The work by Karl William Kapp explains why the concept of "externality" is a misnomer.[73] In fact the modern business enterprise operates on the basis of shifting costs onto others as normal practice to make profits.[74] Charles Einsentein has argued that this method of privatising profits while socialising the costs through externalities, passing the costs to the community, to the natural environment or to future generations is inherently destructive[75] As social ecological economist Clive Spash has noted, externality theory fallaciously assumes environmental and social problems are minor aberrations in an otherwise perfectly functioning efficient economic system.[76] Internalizing the odd externality does nothing to address the structural systemic problem and fails to recognize the all pervasive nature of these supposed 'externalities'.
Ecological-economic modeling[edit]
Mathematical modeling is a powerful tool that is used in ecological economic analysis. Various approaches and techniques include:[77][78] evolutionary, input-output, neo-Austrian modeling, entropy and thermodynamic models,[79] multi-criteria, and agent-based modeling, the environmental Kuznets curve, and Stock-Flow consistent model frameworks. System dynamics and GIS are techniques applied, among other, to spatial dynamic landscape simulation modeling.[80][81] The Matrix accounting methods of Christian Felber provide a more sophisticated method for identifying "the common good"[82]
Criticism[edit]
Assigning monetary value to natural resources such as biodiversity, and the emergent ecosystem services is often viewed as a key process in influencing economic practices, policy, and decision-making.[83][84] While this idea is becoming more and more accepted among ecologists and conservationist, some argue that it is inherently false.
McCauley argues that ecological economics and the resulting ecosystem service based conservation can be harmful.[85] He describes four main problems with this approach:
Firstly, it seems to be assumed that all ecosystem services are financially beneficial. This is undermined by a basic characteristic of ecosystems: they do not act specifically in favour of any single species. While certain services might be very useful to us, such as coastal protection from hurricanes by mangroves for example, others might cause financial or personal harm, such as wolves hunting cattle.[86] The complexity of Eco-systems makes it challenging to weigh up the value of a given species. Wolves play a critical role in regulating prey populations, the absence of such an apex predator in the Scottish Highlands have caused the over population of deer, preventing afforestation, which increases the risk of flooding and damage to property.
Secondly, allocating monetary value to nature would make its conservation reliant on markets that fluctuate. This can lead to devaluation of services that were previously considered financially beneficial. Such is the case of the bees in a forest near former coffee plantations in Finca Santa Fe, Costa Rica. The pollination services were valued to over US$60,000 a year, but soon after the study, coffee prices dropped and the fields were replanted with pineapple.[87] Pineapple does not require bees to be pollinated, so the value of their service dropped to zero.
Thirdly, conservation programmes for the sake of financial benefit underestimate human ingenuity to invent and replace ecosystem services by artificial means. McCauley argues that such proposals are deemed to have a short lifespan as the history of technology is about how Humanity developed artificial alternatives to nature’s services and with time passing the cost of such services tend to decrease. This would also lead to the devaluation of ecosystem services.
Lastly, it should not be assumed that conserving ecosystems is always financially beneficial as opposed to alteration. In the case of the introduction of the Nile perch to Lake Victoria, the ecological consequence was decimation of native fauna. However, this same event is praised by the local communities as they gain significant financial benefits from trading the fish.
McCauley argues that, for these reasons, trying to convince decision-makers to conserve nature for monetary reasons is not the path to be followed, and instead appealing to morality is the ultimate way to campaign for the protection of nature.
See also[edit]


Science portal
Sustainable development portal
Environment portal
Ecology portal
Earth sciences portal
Systems science portal




Agroecology
Deep ecology
Degrowth
Earth Economics (policy think tank)
Eco-socialism
Ecofeminism
Ecological values of mangrove
Ecology of contexts
Emergy synthesis
Embodied energy
Embodied water
Energy accounting
Energy quality
Environmental economics
Green accounting
The Green Economist (newsletter)
Human development theory
Human ecology
Inclusive Democracy
Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare
International Society for Ecological Economics
Natural capital accounting
Natural resource economics
Outline of green politics
Social metabolism
Spaceship Earth
Steady-state economy
Thermoeconomics


References[edit]


^ Anastasios Xepapadeas (2008). "Ecological economics". The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics 2nd Edition. Palgrave MacMillan. 
^ Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh (2001). "Ecological Economics: Themes, Approaches, and Differences with Environmental Economics," Regional Environmental Change, 2(1), pp. 13-23 Archived 2008-10-31 at the Wayback Machine. (press +).
^ Illge L, Schwarze R. (2006). A Matter of Opinion: How Ecological and Neoclassical Environmental Economists Think about Sustainability and Economics Archived 2006-11-30 at the Wayback Machine.. German Institute for Economic Research.
^ Paehlke R. (1995). Conservation and Environmentalism: An Encyclopedia, p. 315. Taylor & Francis.
^ Scott Cato, M. (2009). Green Economics. Earthscan, London. ISBN 978-1-84407-571-3.
^ Malte Faber. (2008). How to be an ecological economist. Ecological Economics 66(1):1-7. Preprint.
^ Peter Victor. (2008). Book Review: Frontiers in Ecological Economic Theory and Application. Ecological Economics 66(2-3).
^ Mattson L. (1975). Book Review: Positional Analysis for Decision-Making and Planning by Peter Soderbaum. The Swedish Journal of Economics.
^ Soderbaum, P. 2008. Understanding Sustainability Economics. Earthscan, London. ISBN 978-1-84407-627-7. pp.109-110, 113-117.
^ Aslaksen, Iulie; Bragstad, Torunn; Ås, Berit (2014). "Feminist Economics as Vision for a Sustainable Future". In Bjørnholt, Margunn; McKay, Ailsa. Counting on Marilyn Waring: New Advances in Feminist Economics. Demeter Press/Brunswick Books. pp. 21–36. ISBN 9781927335277. 
^ Røpke, I. (2004) The early history of modern ecological economics. Ecological Economics 50(3-4): 293-314.
^ a b Costanza R. (2003). Early History of Ecological Economics and ISEE. Internet Encyclopaedia of Ecological Economics.
^ Kapp, K. W. (1950) The Social Costs of Private Enterprise. New York: Shocken.
^ Polanyi, K. (1944) The Great Transformation. New York/Toronto: Rinehart & Company Inc.
^ Schumacher, E.F. 1973. Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as if People Mattered. London: Blond and Briggs.
^ Daly, H. 1991. Steady-State Economics (2nd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
^ Zencey, Eric. (2009, April 12). Op-ed. New York Times, p. WK9. Accessed: December 23, 2012.
^ Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1971). The Entropy Law and the Economic Process (Full book accessible in three parts at SlideShare). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0674257804. 
^ Røpke, I. (2004) The early history of modern ecological economics. Ecological Economics 50(3-4): 293-314. Røpke, I. (2005) Trends in the development of ecological economics from the late 1980s to the early 2000s. Ecological Economics 55(2): 262-290.
^ "Spash, C. L. (1999) The development of environmental thinking in economics. Environmental Values 8(4): 413-435" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-12-23. 
^ Costanza, R., Stern, D. I., He, L., Ma, C. (2004). Influential publications in ecological economics: a citation analysis. Ecological Economics 50(3-4): 261-292.
^ Spash, C. L. (2013) Influencing the perception of what and who is important in ecological economics. Ecological Economics 89: 204-209.
^ Spash, C. L. (2013) The Shallow or the Deep Ecological Economics Movement? Ecological Economics 93:351-362.
^ Anderson, B., M'Gonigle, M., 2012. Does ecological economics have a future?: contradiction and reinvention in the age of climate change. Ecological Economics 84, 37–48.
^ a b c d e f g Harris J. (2006). Environmental and Natural Resource Economics: A Contemporary Approach. Houghton Mifflin Company.
^ Costanza R; et al. (1998). "The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital1". Ecological Economics. 25 (1): 3–15. doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(98)00020-2. 
^ Knapp G, Roheim CA and Anderson JL (2007) The Great Salmon Run: Competition Between Wild And Farmed Salmon World Wildlife Fund. ISBN 0-89164-175-0
^ Washington Post. Salmon Farming May Doom Wild Populations, Study Says.
^ Soil Association. UK Organic Group Exposes Myth that Genetically Engineered Crops Have Higher Yields. Organic Consumers Association.
^ Soderbaum P. (2004). Politics and Ideology in Ecological Economics. Internet Encyclopaedia of Ecological Economics.
^ http://www.clivespash.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Spash_NEP_2009_EV.pdf
^ "Spash, C.L. (2011) Social ecological economics: Understanding the past to see the future. American Journal of Economics and Sociology 70, 340-375" (PDF). Retrieved 2014-01-07. 
^ Jacqui Lagrue (2012-07-30). "Spash, C.L., Ryan, A. (2012) Economic schools of thought on the environment: Investigating unity and division. Cambridge Journal of Economics 36, 1091-1121". Cje.oxfordjournals.org. Retrieved 2014-01-07. 
^ Costanza R. (1989). What is ecological economics? Ecological Economics 1:1-7. [1].
^ Martinez-Alier, J., 1994. Ecological economics and ecosocialism, in: O'Connor, M. (Ed.), Is Capitalism Sustainable? Guilford Press, New York, pp. 23-36
^ Spash, C.L., Clayton, A.M.H., 1997. The maintenance of natural capital: Motivations and methods, in: Light, A., Smith, J.M. (Eds.), Space, Place and Environmental Ethics. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Lanham, pp. 143-173
^ Toman, M., 1998. Why not to calculate the value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital. Ecological Economics 25, 57-60
^ O'Neill, J.F., 1993. Ecology, Policy and Politics: Human Well-Being and the Natural World. Routledge, London
^ O'Neill, J.F. (1997) Managing without prices: On the monetary valuation of biodiversity. Ambio 26, 546-550
^ Vatn, A., 2000. The environment as commodity. Environmental Values 9, 493-509
^ Norgaard, R. B. (1994) Development Betrayed: The End of Progress and a Coevolutionary Revisioning of the Future. London: Routledge
^ Daily, G.C. 1997. Nature's Services: Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
^ Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Biodiversity Synthesis. Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute.
^ McCauley, D. J. (2006) Selling out on nature. Nature 443(7): 27-28
^ Daly, H. and Farley, J. 2004. Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications. Washington: Island Press.
^ Ayres, R.U. 2007. On the practical limits of substitution. Ecological Economics 61: 115-128.
^ Shmelev, S.E. 2012. Ecological Economics. Sustainability in Practice, Springer
^ A. Müller, L. Kranzl, P. Tuominen, E. Boelman, M. Molinari, A.G. Entrop: Estimating exergy prices for energy carriers in heating systems: Country analyses of exergy substitution with capital expenditures. Energy and Buildings, Volume 43, Issue 12, December 2011, Pages 3609–3617.
^ Hall, Charles A.S.; Cleveland, Cutler J.; Kaufmann, Robert (1992). Energy and Resource Quality: The ecology of the Economic Process. Niwot, Colorado: University Press of colorado. 
^ Peter A. Corning 1 *, Stephen J. Kline. (2000). Thermodynamics, information and life revisited, Part II: Thermoeconomics and Control information Systems Research and Behavioral Science, Apr. 07, Volume 15, Issue 6, Pages 453 – 482
^ Corning, P. (2002). “Thermoeconomics – Beyond the Second Law Archived 2008-09-22 at the Wayback Machine.” – source: www.complexsystems.org
^ Wall, Göran. "Exergy - a useful concept". Exergy.se. Retrieved 2012-12-23. 
^ "Environmental Decision making, Science and Technology". Telstar.ote.cmu.edu. Retrieved 2012-12-23. 
^ Stabile, Donald R. "Veblen and the Political Economy of the Engineer: the radical thinker and engineering leaders came to technocratic ideas at the same time," American Journal of Economics and Sociology (45:1) 1986, 43-44.
^ Costanza, R.; d'Arge, R.; de Groot, R.; Farber, S.; Grasso, M.; Hannon, B.; Naeem, S.; Limburg, K.; Paruelo, J.; O'Neill, R.V.; Raskin, R.; Sutton, P.; and van den Belt, M. (1997). "The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital" (PDF). Nature. 387 (6630): 253–260. Bibcode:1997Natur.387..253C. doi:10.1038/387253a0. 
^ Norgaard, R.B.; Bode, C. (1998). "Next, the value of God, and other reactions". Ecological Economics. 25: 37–39. doi:10.1016/s0921-8009(98)00012-3. 
^ Brouwer, Roy (January 2000). "Environmental value transfer: state of the art and future prospects". Ecological Economics. 32 (1). doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(99)00070-1. Retrieved 11 November 2016. 
^ Gómez-Baggethun, Erik; de Groot, Rudolf; Lomas, Pedro; Montes, Carlos (1 April 2010). "The history of ecosystem services in economic theory and practice: From early notions to markets and payment schemes". Ecological Economics. 69 (6). doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.11.007. Retrieved 11 November 2016. 
^ Farber, Stephen; Constanza, Robert; Wilson, Matthew (June 2002). "Economic and ecological concepts for valuing ecosystem services". Ecological Economics. 41 (3). doi:10.1016/S0921-8009(02)00088-5. Retrieved 11 November 2016. 
^ SocialEdge.org. Accessed: December 23, 2012.
^ [2] Archived June 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Multinational Monitor, 9/2007. Accessed: December 23, 2012.
^ "Ecuador threat to drill jungle oil". Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. 
^ "International News | World News - ABC News". Abcnews.go.com. 4 June 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-23. 
^ http://www.panna.org/jt/agAssessment
^ Emmott, Bill (April 17, 2008). "GM crops can save us from food shortages". The Daily Telegraph. London. 
^ Costanza, Robert; Segura, Olman; Olsen, Juan Martinez-Alier (1996). Getting Down to Earth: Practical Applications of Ecological Economics. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. ISBN 1559635037. 
^ Pearce, David "Blueprint for a Green Economy"
^ "Spash, C. L. (2007) The economics of climate change impacts à la Stern: Novel and nuanced or rhetorically restricted? Ecological Economics 63(4): 706-713" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-02-02. Retrieved 2012-12-23. 
^ Hawken, Paul (1994) "The Ecology of Commerce" (Collins)
^ Hawken, Paul; Amory and Hunter Lovins (2000) "Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next Industrial Revolution" (Back Bay Books)
^ Martinez-Alier, Joan (2002) The Environmentalism of the Poor: A Study of Ecological Conflicts and Valuation. Cheltenham, Edward Elgar
^ Kapp, Karl William (1963) The Social Costs of Business Enterprise. Bombay/London, Asia Publishing House.
^ Kapp, Karl William (1971) Social costs, neo-classical economics and environmental planning. The Social Costs of Business Enterprise, 3rd edition. K. W. Kapp. Nottingham, Spokesman: 305-318
^ Einsentein, Charles (2011), "Sacred Economics: Money, Gift and Society in an Age in Transition" (Evolver Editions)
^ Spash, Clive L. (16 July 2010). "The brave new world of carbon trading". New Political Economy. Taylor and Francis Online. 15 (2): 169–195. doi:10.1080/13563460903556049.  Copy also available at "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-10. Retrieved 2013-09-13. 
^ Proops, J., and Safonov, P. (eds.) (2004), Modelling in Ecological Economics, Edward Elgar
^ Faucheux, S., Pearce, D., and Proops, J. (eds.) (1995), Models of Sustainable Development, Edward Elgar
^ Chen, Jing (2015). The Unity of Science and Economics: A New Foundation of Economic Theory. https://www.springer.com/us/book/9781493934645: Springer. 
^ Costanza, R., and Voinov, A. (eds.) (2004), Landscape Simulation Modeling. A Spatially Explicit, Dynamic Approach, Springer-Verlag New-York, Inc.
^ Voinov, Alexey (2008). Systems science and modeling for ecological economics (1st ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier Academic Press. ISBN 0080886175. 
^ Felber, Christian (2012), "La economia del bien commun" (Duestro)
^ Mace GM. Whose conservation? Science (80- ). 2014 Sep 25;345(6204):1558–60.
^ Dasgupta P. Nature’s role in sustaining economic development. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010 Jan 12;365(1537):5–11.
^ McCauley D. Selling out on nature. Nature. 2006;443(September):7–8.
^ Mech LD. The Challenge and Opportunity of Recovering Wolf Populations. Conserv Biol. 1995 Apr;9(2):270–8
^ Ricketts TH, Daily GC, Ehrlich PR, Michener CD. Economic value of tropical forest to coffee production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 24;101(34):12579–82


Further reading[edit]

Common, M. and Stagl, S. 2005. Ecological Economics: An Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Costanza, R., Cumberland, J. H., Daly, H., Goodland, R., Norgaard, R. B. (1997). An Introduction to Ecological Economics, St. Lucie Press and International Society for Ecological Economics, (e-book at the Encyclopedia of Earth)
Costanza, R., Stern, D. I., He, L., Ma, C. (2004). Influential publications in ecological economics: a citation analysis. Ecological Economics 50(3-4): 261-292. - http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeeecolec/v_3A50_3Ay_3A2004_3Ai_3A3-4_3Ap_3A261-292.htm
Daly, H. (1980). Economics, Ecology, Ethics: Essays Toward a Steady-State Economy, W.H. Freeman and Company, ISBN 0716711796.
Daly, H. and Townsend, K. (eds.) 1993. Valuing The Earth: Economics, Ecology, Ethics. Cambridge, Mass.; London, England: MIT Press.
Daly, H. (1994). “Steady-state Economics”. In: Ecology - Key Concepts in Critical Theory, edited by C. Merchant. Humanities Press, ISBN 0391037951.
Daly, H., and J.B. Cobb (1994). For the Common Good: Redirecting the Economy Toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future. Beacon Press, ISBN 0807047058.
Daly, H. (1997). Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable Development. Beacon Press, ISBN 0807047090.
Daly, H., and J. Farley (2010). Ecological Economics: Principles and Applications. Island Press, ISBN 1597266817.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. 1975. Energy and economic myths. Southern Economic Journal 41: 347-381.
Georgescu-Roegen, N. (1999). The Entropy Law and the Economic Process. iUniverse Press, ISBN 1583486003.
Gowdy, J., and J.D. Erickson (2005). The approach of ecological economics. Cambridge Journal of Economics 29: 207-222.
Greer, J. M. (2011). The Wealth of Nature: Economics as if Survival Mattered. New Society Publishers, ISBN 0865716730.
Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011). Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044, 464 pp.
Kevlar, M. (2014) Eco-Economics on the horizon, Economics and human nature from a behavioural perspective.
Jackson, Tim (2009). Prosperity without Growth - Economics for a finite Planet. London: Routledge/Earthscan. ISBN 9781849713238.
Krishnan R, Harris J.M., and N.R. Goodwin (1995). A Survey of Ecological Economics. Island Press. ISBN 978-1-55963-411-3.
Martinez-Alier, J. (1990) Ecological Economics: Energy, Environment and Society. Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
Martinez-Alier, J., Ropke, I. eds. (2008). Recent Developments in Ecological Economics, 2 vols., E. Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.
Røpke, I. (2004) The early history of modern ecological economics. Ecological Economics 50(3-4): 293-314.
Røpke, I. (2005) Trends in the development of ecological economics from the late 1980s to the early 2000s. Ecological Economics 55(2): 262-290.
Shmelev S. E. (2012) Ecological Economics: Sustainability in Practice, Springer 256 pp. https://www.amazon.co.uk/Ecological-Economics-Sustainability-Stanislav-Shmelev/dp/940071971X
Soddy, F. A. (1926) "Wealth, Money and Debt" London, England: George Allen & Unwin.
Spash, C. L. (1999) The development of environmental thinking in economics. Environmental Values 8(4): 413-435.
Stern, D. I. (1997) Limits to substitution and irreversibility in production and consumption: A neoclassical interpretation of ecological economics. Ecological Economics 21(3): 197-215. - http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeeecolec/v_3A21_3Ay_3A1997_3Ai_3A3_3Ap_3A197-215.htm
Tacconi, L. (2000) Biodiversity and Ecological Economics: Participation, Values, and Resource Management. London, UK: Earthscan Publications.
Vatn, A. (2005) Institutions and the Environment. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Vinje, Victor Condorcet (2015) Economics as if Soil & Health Matters. Nisus Publications.

External links[edit]






This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: raw URLs & getting out of control Please help improve this section if you can. (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Brazilian Society for Ecological Economics
Earth Economics
Ecological Economics (journal)
Ecological Economics Encyclopedia
International Journal of Green Economics
International Society for Ecological Economics
US Society of Ecological Economics

Schools and institutes:

Gund Institute for Ecological Economics - http://www.uvm.edu/giee
"PhD in Ecological Economics". economics.rpi.edu. Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
Beijer International Institute for Ecological Economics - http://www.beijer.kva.se/
Green Economics Institute - http://www.greeneconomics.org.uk

Environmental data:

EarthTrends World Resources Institute - https://web.archive.org/web/20081204023722/http://earthtrends.wri.org/index.php
Eco-Economy Indicators: http://www.earth-policy.org/Indicators/
NOAA Economics of Ecosystems Data & Products – http://www.economics.noaa.gov/?goal=ecosystems

Miscellaneous:

New Economics Foundation (NEF)- http://www.neweconomics.org
Green Economist - http://greeneconomist.org/
Sustainable Prosperity - http://sustainableprosperity.ca/
An ecological economics article about reconciling economics and its supporting ecosystem - https://web.archive.org/web/20060111191147/http://www.fs.fed.us/eco/s21pre.htm
"Economics in a Full World", by Herman E. Daly - https://web.archive.org/web/20081217023718/http://sef.umd.edu/files/ScientificAmerican_Daly_05.pdf
Robert Nadeau (2008). "Environmental and ecological economics". The Encyclopedia of Earth. Retrieved 11 February 2017.  (A thorough account of the historical development of ecological economics)
Steve Charnovitz, "Living in an Ecolonomy: Environmental Cooperation and the GATT," Kennedy School of Government, April 1994.
Global list of Ecological Economics related Organizations on WiserEarth
Ecological Economics portal on WiserEarth







v
t
e


Environmental science



Main fields



Atmospheric sciences
Biogeochemistry
Ecology
Environmental chemistry
Geosciences
Hydrology
Limnology
Oceanography
Soil science








Related fields



Biology
Chemistry

green


Ecological economics
Environmental design
Environmental economics
Environmental engineering
Environmental health

epidemiology


Environmental studies
Environmental toxicology
Geodesy
Physics
Sustainability science
Systems ecology
Urban ecology





Applications



Energy conservation
Environmental technology
Natural resource management
Pollution control
Recycling
Remediation
Renewable energy
Road ecology
Sewage treatment
Urban metabolism
Water purification
Waste management





See also



Human impact on the environment
Sustainability








 Environment portal
 Category

scientists


Glossary
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes












v
t
e


Environmental social science



Fields



Ecological anthropology
Ecological economics
Environmental anthropology
Environmental economics
Environmental communication
Environmental history
Environmental politics
Environmental psychology
Environmental sociology
Human ecology
Human geography
Political ecology
Regional science








Related



Agroecology
Anthrozoology
Behavioral geography
Community studies
Demography
Design

ecological
environmental


Ecological humanities
Economics

energy
thermo


Environmental

education
ethics
law
science
studies


Ethnobiology

botany
ecology
zoology


Forestry
Industrial ecology
Integrated geography
Permaculture
Rural sociology
Science, technology and society

science studies


Sustainability

science
studies


Systems ecology
Urban

ecology
geography
metabolism
studies







Applied



Architecture

landscape
sustainable


Ecopsychology
Engineering

ecological
environmental


Green criminology
Health

environmental
epidemiology
occupational
public


Management

environmental
fisheries
forest
natural resource
waste


Planning

environmental
land use
regional
spatial
urban


Policy

energy
environmental










 Environment portal
 Category
Concepts
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes
Scholars












v
t
e


Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Trophic components



General



Abiotic component
Abiotic stress
Behaviour
Biogeochemical cycle
Biomass
Biotic component
Biotic stress
Carrying capacity
Competition
Ecosystem
Ecosystem ecology
Ecosystem model
Keystone species
List of feeding behaviours
Metabolic theory of ecology
Productivity
Resource





Producers



Autotrophs
Chemosynthesis
Chemotrophs
Foundation species
Mixotrophs
Myco-heterotrophy
Mycotroph
Organotrophs
Photoheterotrophs
Photosynthesis
Photosynthetic efficiency
Phototrophs
Primary nutritional groups
Primary production





Consumers



Apex predator
Bacterivore
Carnivores
Chemoorganotroph
Foraging
Generalist and specialist species
Intraguild predation
Herbivores
Heterotroph
Heterotrophic nutrition
Insectivore
Mesopredators
Mesopredator release hypothesis
Omnivores
Optimal foraging theory
Predation
Prey switching





Decomposers



Chemoorganoheterotrophy
Decomposition
Detritivores
Detritus





Microorganisms



Archaea
Bacteriophage
Environmental microbiology
Lithoautotroph
Lithotrophy
Microbial cooperation
Microbial ecology
Microbial food web
Microbial intelligence
Microbial loop
Microbial mat
Microbial metabolism
Phage ecology





Food webs



Biomagnification
Ecological efficiency
Ecological pyramid
Energy flow
Food chain
Trophic level





Example webs



Cold seeps
Hydrothermal vents
Intertidal
Kelp forests
Lakes
North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
Rivers
San Francisco Estuary
Soil
Tide pool





Processes



Ascendency
Bioaccumulation
Cascade effect
Climax community
Competitive exclusion principle
Consumer-resource systems
Copiotrophs
Dominance
Ecological network
Ecological succession
Energy quality
Energy Systems Language
f-ratio
Feed conversion ratio
Feeding frenzy
Mesotrophic soil
Nutrient cycle
Oligotroph
Paradox of the plankton
Trophic cascade
Trophic mutualism
Trophic state index





Defense/counter



Animal coloration
Antipredator adaptations
Camouflage
Deimatic behaviour
Herbivore adaptations to plant defense
Mimicry
Plant defense against herbivory
Predator avoidance in schooling fish












v
t
e


Ecology: Modelling ecosystems: Other components



Population ecology



Abundance
Allee effect
Depensation
Ecological yield
Effective population size
Intraspecific competition
Logistic function
Malthusian growth model
Maximum sustainable yield
Overpopulation in wild animals
Overexploitation
Population cycle
Population dynamics
Population modeling
Population size
Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations
Recruitment
Resilience
Small population size
Stability





Species



Biodiversity
Density-dependent inhibition
Ecological effects of biodiversity
Ecological extinction
Endemic species
Flagship species
Gradient analysis
Indicator species
Introduced species
Invasive species
Latitudinal gradients in species diversity
Minimum viable population
Neutral theory
Occupancy–abundance relationship
Population viability analysis
Priority effect
Rapoport's rule
Relative abundance distribution
Relative species abundance
Species diversity
Species homogeneity
Species richness
Species distribution
Species-area curve
Umbrella species





Species interaction



Antibiosis
Biological interaction
Commensalism
Community ecology
Ecological facilitation
Interspecific competition
Mutualism
Storage effect





Spatial ecology



Biogeography
Cross-boundary subsidy
Ecocline
Ecotone
Ecotype
Disturbance
Edge effects
Foster's rule
Habitat fragmentation
Ideal free distribution
Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis
Island biogeography
Landscape ecology
Landscape epidemiology
Landscape limnology
Metapopulation
Patch dynamics
r/K selection theory
Resource selection function
Source–sink dynamics





Niche



Ecological niche
Ecological trap
Ecosystem engineer
Environmental niche modelling
Guild
Habitat
Marine habitats
Limiting similarity
Niche apportionment models
Niche construction
Niche differentiation





Other networks



Assembly rules
Bateman's principle
Bioluminescence
Ecological collapse
Ecological debt
Ecological deficit
Ecological energetics
Ecological indicator
Ecological threshold
Ecosystem diversity
Emergence
Extinction debt
Kleiber's law
Liebig's law of the minimum
Marginal value theorem
Thorson's rule
Xerosere





Other



Allometry
Alternative stable state
Balance of nature
Biological data visualization
Ecocline
Ecological economics
Ecological footprint
Ecological forecasting
Ecological humanities
Ecological stoichiometry
Ecopath
Ecosystem based fisheries
Endolith
Evolutionary ecology
Functional ecology
Industrial ecology
Macroecology
Microecosystem
Natural environment
Regime shift
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Theoretical ecology






List of ecology topics










v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_economics&oldid=816020363"					Categories: Ecological economicsIndustrial ecologyNatural resourcesEnvironmental social scienceEnergy economicsSchools of economic thoughtHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2009Articles needing cleanup from November 2012All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2012Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2012