See Wikipedia:How to edit a page for information on editing Wikipedia. To experiment with editing, please use the sandbox.
"Editor" redirects here. For other uses, see Editor (disambiguation).




"Quarters of the news editor", one of a group of four photos in the 1900 brochure Seattle and the Orient, which was collectively captioned "The Seattle Daily Times—Editorial Department".


Editing is the process of selecting and preparing written, visual, audible, and film media used to convey information. The editing process can involve correction, condensation, organization, and many other modifications performed with an intention of producing a correct, consistent, accurate and complete work.[1]
The editing process often begins with the author's idea for the work itself, continuing as a collaboration between the author and the editor as the work is created. As such, editing can involve creative skills, human relations and a precise set of methods.[2][3]




Editors work on producing an issue of Bild, West Berlin, 1977. Previous front pages are affixed to the wall behind them.


There are various editorial positions in publishing. Typically, one finds editorial assistants reporting to the senior-level editorial staff and directors who report to senior executive editors. Senior executive editors are responsible for developing a product for its final release. The smaller the publication, the more these roles overlap.
The top editor at many publications may be known as the chief editor, executive editor, or simply the editor. A frequent and highly regarded contributor to a magazine may acquire the title of editor-at-large or contributing editor. Mid-level newspaper editors often manage or help to manage sections, such as business, sports and features. In U.S. newspapers, the level below the top editor is usually the managing editor.
In the book publishing industry, editors may organize anthologies and other compilations, produce definitive editions of a classic author's works (scholarly editor), and organize and manage contributions to a multi-author book (symposium editor or volume editor). Obtaining manuscripts or recruiting authors is the role of an acquisitions editor or a commissioning editor in a publishing house.[4] Finding marketable ideas and presenting them to appropriate authors are the responsibilities of a sponsoring editor.
Copy editors correct spelling, grammar and align writings to house style. Changes to the publishing industry since the 1980s have resulted in nearly all copy editing of book manuscripts being outsourced to freelance copy editors.[4]
At newspapers and wire services, copy editors write headlines and work on more substantive issues, such as ensuring accuracy, fairness, and taste. In some positions, they design pages and select news stories for inclusion. At U.K. and Australian newspapers, the term is sub-editor. They may choose the layout of the publication and communicate with the printer. These editors may have the title of layout or design editor or (more so in the past) makeup editor.



Contents


1 Scholarly books and journals
2 Technical editing
3 Editing services
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Scholarly books and journals
Within the publishing environment, editors of scholarly books are of three main types, each with particular responsibilities:

Acquisitions editor (or commissioning editor in Britain), who contracts with the author to produce the copy
Project editor or production editor, who sees the copy through its stages from manuscript to bound book and usually assumes most of the budget and schedule responsibilities
Copy editor or manuscript editor, who prepares the copy for conversion into printed form.

In the case of multi-author edited volumes, before the manuscript is delivered to the publisher it has undergone substantive and linguistic editing by the volume's editor, who works independently of the publisher.
As for scholarly journals, where spontaneous submissions are more common than commissioned works, the position of journal editor or editor-in-chief replaces the acquisitions editor of the book publishing environment, while the roles of production editor and copy editor remain. However, another editor is sometimes involved in the creation of scholarly research articles. Called the authors' editor, this editor works with authors to get a manuscript fit for purpose before it is submitted to a scholarly journal for publication.
The primary difference between copy editing scholarly books and journals and other sorts of copy editing lies in applying the standards of the publisher to the copy. Most scholarly publishers have a preferred style that usually specifies a particular dictionary and style manual—for example, the Chicago Manual of Style, the MLA Style Manual or the APA Publication Manual in the US, or the New Hart's Rules in the U.K.
Technical editing
See also: Technical writing and Technical communication
Technical editing involves reviewing text written on a technical topic, identifying usage errors and ensuring adherence to a style guide.
Technical editing may include the correction of grammatical mistakes, misspellings, mistyping, incorrect punctuation, inconsistencies in usage, poorly structured sentences, wrong scientific terms, wrong units and dimensions, inconsistency in significant figures, technical ambivalence, technical disambiguation, statements conflicting with general scientific knowledge, correction of synopsis, content, index, headings and subheadings, correcting data and chart presentation in a research paper or report, and correcting errors in citations.
Large companies dedicate experienced writers to the technical editing function. Organizations that cannot afford dedicated editors typically have experienced writers peer-edit text produced by less experienced colleagues.
It helps if the technical editor is familiar with the subject being edited. The "technical" knowledge that an editor gains over time while working on a particular product or technology does give the editor an edge over another who has just started editing content related to that product or technology. But essential general skills are attention to detail, the ability to sustain focus while working through lengthy pieces of text on complex topics, tact in dealing with writers, and excellent communication skills.
Editing services
"Paid editing" redirects here. For paid editing on Wikipedia, see Paid editing on Wikipedia.
Editing is a growing field of work in the service industry. Paid editing services may be provided by specialized editing firms or by self-employed (freelance) editors.
Editing firms may employ a team of in-house editors, rely on a network of individual contractors or both.[5] Such firms are able to handle editing in a wide range of topics and genres, depending on the skills of individual editors. The services provided by these editors may be varied and can include proofreading, copy editing, online editing, developmental editing, editing for search engine optimization (SEO), etc.
Self-employed editors work directly for clients (e.g., authors, publishers) or offer their services through editing firms, or both. They may specialize in a type of editing (e.g., copy editing) and in a particular subject area. Those who work directly for authors and develop professional relationships with them are called authors' editors.
See also

Audio editing
Author editing
Film editing
Stealth edit
Textual scholarship
Video editing
Writer

References


^ Mamishev, Alexander, Williams, Sean, Technical Writing for Teams: The STREAM Tools Handbook, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, John Wiley & Sons. Inc., Hoboken, 2009, p. 128.
^ "Encarta Dictionary definition of "editing"". Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. 
^ "Encarta Dictionary definition of "editor"". Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. 
^ a b Poland, Louise, The business, Craft and Profession of the Book Editor, in Carter, David, Galligan, Anne, (eds.), Making books: contemporary Australian publishing, Queensland University Press, 2007, p. 100.
^ Appiah, Bernard (2009). "Science editing at an Indian firm: perspectives of two US visitors" (PDF). Science Editing. 32 (4): 118–119. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-09-28. 


Further reading

Morrison, Blake (6 August 2005). "Black day for the blue pencil". The Guardian. 
Overholser, Geneva (December 1998). "Editor Inc". American Journalism Review. 
Stephen, Leslie (1898). "The Evolution of Editors". Studies of a Biographer. 1. London: Duckworth and Co. pp. 37–73. 
Ó Brógáin, Séamas (2015). A Dictionary of Editing. 1. Dublin: Claritas. 
Greenberg, Susan L. (2015) Editors talk about editing: insights for readers, writers and publishers, New York: Peter Lang

External links


Library resources about
Editing





Resources in your library





 The dictionary definition of editing at Wiktionary
 Media related to Editing at Wikimedia Commons







v
t
e


The book publishing process



Copy preparation



Submission
author or literary agent
Publisher's reader


Contract negotiation
intellectual property rights
royalty rates, format, etc


Editing





Prepress

Literary editor  •  Commissioning editor  •  Developmental editor  •  Authors' editor  •  Book editor

Design
Typesetting
Proof-reading
List of Proofreader's Marks





Book production



Printing
Folding
Binding
Trimming












v
t
e


Journalism roles



Editing



Editor
Copy editor
Contributing editor
Assignment editor
Public editor
Duty editor
Political editor
Managing editor
Editor-at-large
Editor-in-chief
Editorial board





Staff



Journalists (reporters)
Columnist
Blogger
Meteorologist
News presenter
Pundit / commentator
Fixer
Stringer
Correspondent
Fact checker
Food critic
Gossip columnist
News analyst
Staff writer
Photographer












v
t
e


Journalism



Roles



Journalist
Reporter
Editor
Columnist
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Political commentator
Blogger





Profession



News
News writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
Values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school





Areas



Arts
Business
Data-driven
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Global
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technical
Trade
Traffic
Video games
Weather
World





Genres



Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Churnalism
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Community
Data
Database
Embedded
Gonzo
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
New Journalism
Non-profit journalism
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Presstitute
Scientific
Visual
Watchdog





Social impact



Fake news
Fourth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Yellow journalism





News media



Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media






List of journalism articles







Authority control



NDL: 00563117











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Editing&oldid=796629715"					Categories: Journalism occupationsMedia occupationsEditorsEditingHidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism