For other uses, see Education (disambiguation).




Lecture at the Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, CTU, in Prague






School children sitting in the shade of an orchard in Bamozai, near Gardez, Paktya Province, Afghanistan






Student participants in the FIRST Robotics Competition, Washington, D.C.


Education is the process of facilitating learning, or the acquisition of knowledge, skills, values, beliefs, and habits. Educational methods include storytelling, discussion, teaching, training, and directed research. Education frequently takes place under the guidance of educators, but learners may also educate themselves.[1] Education can take place in formal or informal settings and any experience that has a formative effect on the way one thinks, feels, or acts may be considered educational. The methodology of teaching is called pedagogy.
Education is commonly divided formally into such stages as preschool or kindergarten, primary school, secondary school and then college, university, or apprenticeship.
A right to education has been recognized by some governments and the United Nations.[2] In most regions, education is compulsory up to a certain age.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History
3 Formal education

3.1 Preschool
3.2 Primary
3.3 Secondary
3.4 Tertiary (higher)
3.5 Vocational
3.6 Special


4 Other educational forms

4.1 Alternative
4.2 Indigenous
4.3 Informal learning
4.4 Self-directed learning
4.5 Open education and electronic technology


5 Education sector
6 Development goals

6.1 Internationalization
6.2 Education and technology in developing countries
6.3 Private vs public funding in developing countries


7 Educational theory

7.1 Educational psychology
7.2 The intelligence–education relationship
7.3 Learning modalities
7.4 Mind, Brain and Education
7.5 Philosophy
7.6 Purpose of education
7.7 Curriculum
7.8 Instruction


8 Economics of education
9 The future of education
10 See also
11 Sources
12 References
13 External links



Etymology
Etymologically, the word "education" is derived from the Latin ēducātiō ("A breeding, a bringing up, a rearing") from ēducō ("I educate, I train") which is related to the homonym ēdūcō ("I lead forth, I take out; I raise up, I erect") from ē- ("from, out of") and dūcō ("I lead, I conduct").[3]
History
Main article: History of education




Nalanda, ancient centre for higher learning






Plato's academy, mosaic from Pompeii


Education began in prehistory, as adults trained the young in the knowledge and skills deemed necessary in their society. In pre-literate societies, this was achieved orally and through imitation. Story-telling passed knowledge, values, and skills from one generation to the next. As cultures began to extend their knowledge beyond skills that could be readily learned through imitation, formal education developed. Schools existed in Egypt at the time of the Middle Kingdom.[4]




Matteo Ricci (left) and Xu Guangqi (right) in the Chinese edition of Euclid's Elements published in 1607


Plato founded the Academy in Athens, the first institution of higher learning in Europe.[5] The city of Alexandria in Egypt, established in 330 BCE, became the successor to Athens as the intellectual cradle of Ancient Greece. There, the great Library of Alexandria was built in the 3rd century BCE. European civilizations suffered a collapse of literacy and organization following the fall of Rome in CE 476.[6]
In China, Confucius (551–479 BCE), of the State of Lu, was the country's most influential ancient philosopher, whose educational outlook continues to influence the societies of China and neighbours like Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Confucius gathered disciples and searched in vain for a ruler who would adopt his ideals for good governance, but his Analects were written down by followers and have continued to influence education in East Asia into the modern era.[citation needed]
After the Fall of Rome, the Catholic Church became the sole preserver of literate scholarship in Western Europe. The church established cathedral schools in the Early Middle Ages as centres of advanced education. Some of these establishments ultimately evolved into medieval universities and forebears of many of Europe's modern universities.[6] During the High Middle Ages, Chartres Cathedral operated the famous and influential Chartres Cathedral School. The medieval universities of Western Christendom were well-integrated across all of Western Europe, encouraged freedom of inquiry, and produced a great variety of fine scholars and natural philosophers, including Thomas Aquinas of the University of Naples, Robert Grosseteste of the University of Oxford, an early expositor of a systematic method of scientific experimentation,[7] and Saint Albert the Great, a pioneer of biological field research.[8] Founded in 1088, the University of Bologne is considered the first, and the oldest continually operating university.[9]
Elsewhere during the Middle Ages, Islamic science and mathematics flourished under the Islamic caliphate which was established across the Middle East, extending from the Iberian Peninsula in the west to the Indus in the east and to the Almoravid Dynasty and Mali Empire in the south.
The Renaissance in Europe ushered in a new age of scientific and intellectual inquiry and appreciation of ancient Greek and Roman civilizations. Around 1450, Johannes Gutenberg developed a printing press, which allowed works of literature to spread more quickly. The European Age of Empires saw European ideas of education in philosophy, religion, arts and sciences spread out across the globe. Missionaries and scholars also brought back new ideas from other civilizations – as with the Jesuit China missions who played a significant role in the transmission of knowledge, science, and culture between China and Europe, translating works from Europe like Euclid's Elements for Chinese scholars and the thoughts of Confucius for European audiences. The Enlightenment saw the emergence of a more secular educational outlook in Europe.
In most countries today, full-time education, whether at school or otherwise, is compulsory for all children up to a certain age. Due to this the proliferation of compulsory education, combined with population growth, UNESCO has calculated that in the next 30 years more people will receive formal education than in all of human history thus far.[10]
Formal education
Formal education occurs in a structured environment whose explicit purpose is teaching students. Usually, formal education takes place in a school environment with classrooms of multiple students learning together with a trained, certified teacher of the subject. Most school systems are designed around a set of values or ideals that govern all educational choices in that system. Such choices include curriculum, organizational models, design of the physical learning spaces (e.g. classrooms), student-teacher interactions, methods of assessment, class size, educational activities, and more.[11][12]
Preschool




Young children in a kindergarten in Japan


Main article: Early childhood education
Preschools provide education from ages approximately three to seven, depending on the country when children enter primary education. These are also known as nursery schools and as kindergarten, except in the US, where kindergarten is a term used for primary education.[citation needed] Kindergarten "provide[s] a child-centred, preschool curriculum for three- to seven-year-old children that aim[s] at unfolding the child's physical, intellectual, and moral nature with balanced emphasis on each of them."[13]
Primary




Primary school students with their teacher, Colombia, 2014


Main article: Primary education
Primary (or elementary) education consists of the first five to seven years of formal, structured education. In general, primary education consists of six to eight years of schooling starting at the age of five or six, although this varies between, and sometimes within, countries. Globally, around 89% of children aged six to twelve are enrolled in primary education, and this proportion is rising.[14] Under the Education For All programs driven by UNESCO, most countries have committed to achieving universal enrollment in primary education by 2015, and in many countries, it is compulsory. The division between primary and secondary education is somewhat arbitrary, but it generally occurs at about eleven or twelve years of age. Some education systems have separate middle schools, with the transition to the final stage of secondary education taking place at around the age of fourteen. Schools that provide primary education, are mostly referred to as primary schools or elementary schools. Primary schools are often subdivided into infant schools and junior school.
In India, for example, compulsory education spans over twelve years, with eight years of elementary education, five years of primary schooling and three years of upper primary schooling. Various states in the republic of India provide 12 years of compulsory school education based on a national curriculum framework designed by the National Council of Educational Research and Training.
Secondary




Students working with a teacher at Albany Senior High School, New Zealand


Main article: Secondary education




Chilean high school students during a class photograph, 2002


In most contemporary educational systems of the world, secondary education comprises the formal education that occurs during adolescence. It is characterized by transition from the typically compulsory, comprehensive primary education for minors, to the optional, selective tertiary, "postsecondary", or "higher" education (e.g. university, vocational school) for adults. Depending on the system, schools for this period, or a part of it, may be called secondary or high schools, gymnasiums, lyceums, middle schools, colleges, or vocational schools. The exact meaning of any of these terms varies from one system to another. The exact boundary between primary and secondary education also varies from country to country and even within them but is generally around the seventh to the tenth year of schooling. Secondary education occurs mainly during the teenage years. In the United States, Canada, and Australia, primary and secondary education together are sometimes referred to as K-12 education, and in New Zealand Year 1–13 is used. The purpose of secondary education can be to give common knowledge, to prepare for higher education, or to train directly in a profession.
Secondary education in the United States did not emerge until 1910, with the rise of large corporations and advancing technology in factories, which required skilled workers. In order to meet this new job demand, high schools were created, with a curriculum focused on practical job skills that would better prepare students for white collar or skilled blue collar work. This proved beneficial for both employers and employees, since the improved human capital lowered costs for the employer, while skilled employees received higher wages.
Secondary education has a longer history in Europe, where grammar schools or academies date from as early as the 16th century, in the form of public schools, fee-paying schools, or charitable educational foundations, which themselves date even further back.
Community colleges offer another option at this transitional stage of education. They provide nonresidential junior college courses to people living in a particular area.
Tertiary (higher)




Students in a laboratory, Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical University


See also: Higher education and Adult education
Higher education, also called tertiary, third stage, or postsecondary education, is the non-compulsory educational level that follows the completion of a school such as a high school or secondary school. Tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education, as well as vocational education and training. Colleges and universities mainly provide tertiary education. Collectively, these are sometimes known as tertiary institutions. Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates, diplomas, or academic degrees.
Higher education typically involves work towards a degree-level or foundation degree qualification. In most developed countries, a high proportion of the population (up to 50%) now enter higher education at some time in their lives. Higher education is therefore very important to national economies, both as a significant industry in its own right and as a source of trained and educated personnel for the rest of the economy.
University education includes teaching, research, and social services activities, and it includes both the undergraduate level (sometimes referred to as tertiary education) and the graduate (or postgraduate) level (sometimes referred to as graduate school). Universities are generally composed of several colleges. In the United States, universities can be private and independent like Yale University; public and state-governed like the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education; or independent but state-funded like the University of Virginia. A number of career specific courses are now available to students through the Internet.
One type of university education is a liberal arts education, which can be defined as a "college or university curriculum aimed at imparting broad general knowledge and developing general intellectual capacities, in contrast to a professional, vocational, or technical curriculum."[15] Although what is known today as liberal arts education began in Europe,[16] the term "liberal arts college" is more commonly associated with institutions in the United States.[17]
Vocational




Carpentry is normally learned through apprenticeship.


Main article: Vocational education
Vocational education is a form of education focused on direct and practical training for a specific trade or craft. Vocational education may come in the form of an apprenticeship or internship as well as institutions teaching courses such as carpentry, agriculture, engineering, medicine, architecture and the arts.
Special
Main article: Special education
In the past, those who were disabled were often not eligible for public education. Children with disabilities were repeatedly denied an education by physicians or special tutors. These early physicians (people like Itard, Seguin, Howe, Gallaudet) set the foundation for special education today. They focused on individualized instruction and functional skills. In its early years, special education was only provided to people with severe disabilities, but more recently it has been opened to anyone who has experienced difficulty learning.[18]
Other educational forms
Alternative
Main article: Alternative education
While considered "alternative" today, most alternative systems have existed since ancient times. After the public school system was widely developed beginning in the 19th century, some parents found reasons to be discontented with the new system. Alternative education developed in part as a reaction to perceived limitations and failings of traditional education. A broad range of educational approaches emerged, including alternative schools, self learning, homeschooling, and unschooling. Example alternative schools include Montessori schools, Waldorf schools (or Steiner schools), Friends schools, Sands School, Summerhill School, Walden's Path, The Peepal Grove School, Sudbury Valley School, Krishnamurti schools, and open classroom schools. Charter schools are another example of alternative education, which have in the recent years grown in numbers in the US and gained greater importance in its public education system.[19][20]
In time, some ideas from these experiments and paradigm challenges may be adopted as the norm in education, just as Friedrich Fröbel's approach to early childhood education in 19th-century Germany has been incorporated into contemporary kindergarten classrooms. Other influential writers and thinkers have included the Swiss humanitarian Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi; the American transcendentalists Amos Bronson Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau; the founders of progressive education, John Dewey and Francis Parker; and educational pioneers such as Maria Montessori and Rudolf Steiner, and more recently John Caldwell Holt, Paul Goodman, Frederick Mayer, George Dennison, and Ivan Illich.
Indigenous




Teaching indigenous knowledge, models, methods in Yanyuan County, Sichuan in China


Main article: Indigenous education
Indigenous education refers to the inclusion of indigenous knowledge, models, methods, and content within formal and non-formal educational systems. Often in a post-colonial context, the growing recognition and use of indigenous education methods can be a response to the erosion and loss of indigenous knowledge and language through the processes of colonialism. Furthermore, it can enable indigenous communities to "reclaim and revalue their languages and cultures, and in so doing, improve the educational success of indigenous students."[21]
Informal learning
Main article: informal learning
Informal learning is one of three forms of learning defined by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Informal learning occurs in a variety of places, such as at home, work, and through daily interactions and shared relationships among members of society. For many learners, this includes language acquisition, cultural norms, and manners.
In informal learning, there is often a reference person, a peer or expert, to guide the learner. If learners have a personal interest in what they are informally being taught, learners tend to expand their existing knowledge and conceive new ideas about the topic being learned.[22] For example, a museum is traditionally considered an informal learning environment, as there is room for free choice, a diverse and potentially non-standardized range of topics, flexible structures, socially rich interaction, and no externally imposed assessments.[23]
While informal learning often takes place outside educational establishments and does not follow a specified curriculum, it can also occur within educational settings and even during formal learning situations. Educators can structure their lessons to directly utilize their students informal learning skills within the education setting.[22]
In the late 19th century, education through play began to be recognized as making an important contribution to child development.[24] In the early 20th century, the concept was broadened to include young adults but the emphasis was on physical activities.[25] L.P. Jacks, also an early proponent of lifelong learning, described education through recreation: "A master in the art of living draws no sharp distinction between his work and his play, his labour and his leisure, his mind and his body, his education and his recreation. He hardly knows which is which. He simply pursues his vision of excellence through whatever he is doing and leaves others to determine whether he is working or playing. To himself, he always seems to be doing both. Enough for him that he does it well."[26] Education through recreation is the opportunity to learn in a seamless fashion through all of life's activities.[27] The concept has been revived by the University of Western Ontario to teach anatomy to medical students.[27]
Self-directed learning
Main article: Autodidacticism
Autodidacticism (also autodidactism) is a term used to describe self-directed learning. One may become an autodidact at nearly any point in one's life. Notable autodidacts include Abraham Lincoln (U.S. president), Srinivasa Ramanujan (mathematician), Michael Faraday (chemist and physicist), Charles Darwin (naturalist), Thomas Alva Edison (inventor), Tadao Ando (architect), George Bernard Shaw (playwright), Frank Zappa (composer, recording engineer, film director), and Leonardo da Vinci (engineer, scientist, mathematician).
Open education and electronic technology
Main articles: Open education and Educational technology
In 2012, the modern use of electronic educational technology (also called e-learning) had grown at 14 times the rate of traditional learning.[clarification needed][28] Open education is fast growing to become the dominant form of education, for many reasons such as its efficiency and results compared to traditional methods.[29] Cost of education has been an issue throughout history, and a major political issue in most countries today. Online courses often can be more expensive than face-to-face classes. Out of 182 colleges surveyed in 2009 nearly half said tuition for online courses was higher than for campus-based ones.[30] Many large university institutions are now starting to offer free or almost free full courses such as Harvard, MIT and Berkeley teaming up to form edX. Other universities offering open education are Stanford, Princeton, Duke, Johns Hopkins, Edinburgh, U. Penn, U. Michigan, U. Virginia, U. Washington, and Caltech. It has been called the biggest change in the way we learn since the printing press.[31] Despite favourable studies on effectiveness, many people may still desire to choose traditional campus education for social and cultural reasons.[32]
The conventional merit-system degree is currently not as common in open education as it is in campus universities, although some open universities do already offer conventional degrees such as the Open University in the United Kingdom. Presently, many of the major open education sources offer their own form of certificate. Due to the popularity of open education, these new kind of academic certificates are gaining more respect and equal "academic value" to traditional degrees.[33] Many open universities are working to have the ability to offer students standardized testing and traditional degrees and credentials.[34]
A culture is beginning to form around distance learning for people who are looking to social connections enjoyed on traditional campuses. For example, students may create study groups, meetups, and movements such as UnCollege.
Education sector
The education sector or education system is a group of institutions (ministries of education, local educational authorities, teacher training institutions, schools, universities, etc.) whose primary purpose is to provide education to children and young people in educational settings. It involves a wide range of people (curriculum developers, inspectors, school principals, teachers, school nurses, students, etc.). These institutions can vary according to different contexts.[35]
Schools deliver education, with support from the rest of the education system through various elements such as education policies and guidelines – to which school policies can refer – curricula and learning materials, as well as pre- and in-service teacher training programmes. The school environment – both physical (infrastructures) and psychological (school climate) – is also guided by school policies that should ensure the well-being of students when they are in school.[35] The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has found that schools tend to perform best when principals have full authority and responsibility for ensuring that students are proficient in core subjects upon graduation. They must also seek feedback from students for quality-assurance and improvement. Governments should limit themselves to monitoring student proficiency.[36]
The education sector is fully integrated into society, through interactions with a large number of stakeholders and other sectors. These include parents, local communities, religious leaders, NGOs, stakeholders involved in health, child protection, justice and law enforcement (police), media and political leadership.[35]
Development goals




World map indicating Education Index (according to 2007/2008 Human Development Report)


The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by the United Nations (UN) General Assembly in September 2015, calls for a new vision to address the environmental, social and economic concerns facing the world today. The Agenda includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 4 on education.[37][38]
Since 1909, the ratio of children in the developing world attending school has increased. Before then, a small minority of boys attended school. By the start of the 21st century, the majority of all children in most regions of the world attended school.
Universal Primary Education is one of the eight international Millennium Development Goals, towards which progress has been made in the past decade, though barriers still remain.[39] Securing charitable funding from prospective donors is one particularly persistent problem. Researchers at the Overseas Development Institute have indicated that the main obstacles to funding for education include conflicting donor priorities, an immature aid architecture, and a lack of evidence and advocacy for the issue.[39] Additionally, Transparency International has identified corruption in the education sector as a major stumbling block to achieving Universal Primary Education in Africa.[40] Furthermore, demand in the developing world for improved educational access is not as high as foreigners have expected. Indigenous governments are reluctant to take on the ongoing costs involved. There is also economic pressure from some parents, who prefer their children to earn money in the short term rather than work towards the long-term benefits of education.[citation needed]
A study conducted by the UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning indicates that stronger capacities in educational planning and management may have an important spill-over effect on the system as a whole.[41] Sustainable capacity development requires complex interventions at the institutional, organizational and individual levels that could be based on some foundational principles:

national leadership and ownership should be the touchstone of any intervention;
strategies must be context relevant and context specific;[clarification needed]
plans should employ an integrated set of complementary interventions, though implementation may need to proceed in steps;[clarification needed]
partners should commit to a long-term investment in capacity development while working towards some short-term achievements;
outside intervention should be conditional on an impact assessment of national capacities at various levels;
a certain percentage of students should be removed for improvisation of academics (usually practiced in schools, after 10th grade).

Internationalization
Nearly every country now has Universal Primary Education.
Similarities – in systems or even in ideas – that schools share internationally have led to an increase in international student exchanges. The European Socrates-Erasmus Program[42] facilitates exchanges across European universities. The Soros Foundation[43] provides many opportunities for students from central Asia and eastern Europe. Programs such as the International Baccalaureate have contributed to the internationalization of education. The global campus online, led by American universities, allows free access to class materials and lecture files recorded during the actual classes.
The Programme for International Student Assessment and the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement objectively monitor and compare the proficiency of students from a wide range of different nations.
Education and technology in developing countries




The OLPC laptop being introduced to children in Haiti


Main article: Education and technology
Technology plays an increasingly significant role in improving access to education for people living in impoverished areas and developing countries. Charities like One Laptop per Child are dedicated to providing infrastructures through which the disadvantaged may access educational materials.
The OLPC foundation, a group out of MIT Media Lab and supported by several major corporations, has a stated mission to develop a $100 laptop for delivering educational software. The laptops were widely available as of 2008. They are sold at cost or given away based on donations.
In Africa, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) has launched an "e-school program" to provide all 600,000 primary and high schools with computer equipment, learning materials and internet access within 10 years.[44] An International Development Agency project called nabuur.com,[45] started with the support of former American President Bill Clinton, uses the Internet to allow co-operation by individuals on issues of social development.
India is developing technologies that will bypass land-based telephone and Internet infrastructure to deliver distance learning directly to its students. In 2004, the Indian Space Research Organisation launched EDUSAT, a communications satellite providing access to educational materials that can reach more of the country's population at a greatly reduced cost.[46]
Private vs public funding in developing countries
Research into LCPS (low-cost private schools) found that over 5 years to July 2013, debate around LCPSs to achieving Education for All (EFA) objectives was polarized and finding growing coverage in international policy.[47] The polarization was due to disputes around whether the schools are affordable for the poor, reach disadvantaged groups, provide quality education, support or undermine equality, and are financially sustainable. The report examined the main challenges encountered by development organizations which support LCPSs.[47] Surveys suggest these types of schools are expanding across Africa and Asia. This success is attributed to excess demand. These surveys found concern for:

Equity: This concern is widely found in the literature, suggesting the growth in low-cost private schooling may be exacerbating or perpetuating already existing inequalities in developing countries, between urban and rural populations, lower- and higher-income families, and between girls and boys. The report findings suggest that girls may be underrepresented and that LCPS are reaching low-income families in smaller numbers than higher-income families.
Quality and educational outcomes: It is difficult to generalize about the quality of private schools. While most achieve better results than government counterparts, even after their social background is taken into account, some studies find the opposite. Quality in terms of levels of teacher absence, teaching activity, and pupil to teacher ratios in some countries are better in LCPSs than in government schools.
Choice and affordability for the poor: Parents can choose private schools because of perceptions of better-quality teaching and facilities, and an English language instruction preference. Nevertheless, the concept of 'choice' does not apply in all contexts, or to all groups in society, partly because of limited affordability (which excludes most of the poorest) and other forms of exclusion, related to caste or social status.
Cost-effectiveness and financial sustainability: There is evidence that private schools operate at low cost by keeping teacher salaries low, and their financial situation may be precarious where they are reliant on fees from low-income households.

The report showed some cases of successful voucher and subsidy programmes; evaluations of international support to the sector are not widespread.[47] Addressing regulatory ineffectiveness is a key challenge. Emerging approaches stress the importance of understanding the political economy of the market for LCPS, specifically how relationships of power and accountability between users, government, and private providers can produce better education outcomes for the poor.
Educational theory




A class size experiment in the United States found that attending small classes for 3 or more years in the early grades increased high school graduation rates of students from low income families.[48]


Main article: Educational theory
Educational psychology
Main article: Educational psychology
Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations. Although the terms "educational psychology" and "school psychology" are often used interchangeably, researchers and theorists are likely to be identified as educational psychologists, whereas practitioners in schools or school-related settings are identified as school psychologists. Educational psychology is concerned with the processes of educational attainment in the general population and in sub-populations such as gifted children and those with specific disabilities.




Knowledge Day in Donetsk, Ukraine, 2013


Educational psychology can in part be understood through its relationship with other disciplines. It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine and biology. Educational psychology, in turn, informs a wide range of specialties within educational studies, including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum development, organizational learning, special education and classroom management. Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning sciences. In universities, departments of educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education, possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology content in introductory psychology textbooks (Lucas, Blazek, & Raley, 2006).
The intelligence–education relationship
Main article: Psychology of education
Intelligence is an important factor in how the individual responds to education. Those who have higher intelligence tend to perform better at school and go on to higher levels of education.[49] This effect is also observable in the opposite direction, in that education increases measurable intelligence.[50] Studies have shown that while educational attainment is important in predicting intelligence in later life, intelligence at 53 is more closely correlated to intelligence at 8 years old than to educational attainment.[51]
Learning modalities
There has been much interest in learning modalities and styles over the last two decades. The most commonly employed learning modalities are:[52]

Visual: learning based on observation and seeing what is being learned.
Auditory: learning based on listening to instructions/information.
Kinesthetic: learning based on movement, e.g. hands-on work and engaging in activities.

Other commonly employed modalities include musical, interpersonal, verbal, logical, and intrapersonal.
Dunn and Dunn[53] focused on identifying relevant stimuli that may influence learning and manipulating the school environment, at about the same time as Joseph Renzulli[54] recommended varying teaching strategies. Howard Gardner[55] identified a wide range of modalities in his Multiple Intelligences theories. The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and Keirsey Temperament Sorter, based on the works of Jung,[56] focus on understanding how people's personality affects the way they interact personally, and how this affects the way individuals respond to each other within the learning environment. The work of David Kolb and Anthony Gregorc's Type Delineator[57] follows a similar but more simplified approach.
Some theories propose that all individuals benefit from a variety of learning modalities, while others suggest that individuals may have preferred learning styles, learning more easily through visual or kinesthetic experiences.[58] A consequence of the latter theory is that effective teaching should present a variety of teaching methods which cover all three learning modalities so that different students have equal opportunities to learn in a way that is effective for them.[59] Guy Claxton has questioned the extent that learning styles such as Visual, Auditory and Kinesthetic(VAK) are helpful, particularly as they can have a tendency to label children and therefore restrict learning.[60][61] Recent research has argued, "there is no adequate evidence base to justify incorporating learning styles assessments into general educational practice."[62]
Mind, Brain and Education
Educational neuroscience is an emerging scientific field that brings together researchers in cognitive neuroscience, developmental cognitive neuroscience, educational psychology, educational technology, education theory and other related disciplines to explore the interactions between biological processes and education.[63][64][65][66] Researchers in educational neuroscience investigate the neural mechanisms of reading,[65] numerical cognition,[67] attention, and their attendant difficulties including dyslexia,[68][69] dyscalculia,[70] and ADHD as they relate to education. Several academic institutions around the world are beginning to devote resources to the establishment of educational neuroscience research.
Philosophy




John Locke's work Some Thoughts Concerning Education was written in 1693 and still reflects traditional education priorities in the Western world.


Main article: Philosophy of education
As an academic field, philosophy of education is "the philosophical study of education and its problems (...) its central subject matter is education, and its methods are those of philosophy".[71] "The philosophy of education may be either the philosophy of the process of education or the philosophy of the discipline of education. That is, it may be part of the discipline in the sense of being concerned with the aims, forms, methods, or results of the process of educating or being educated; or it may be metadisciplinary in the sense of being concerned with the concepts, aims, and methods of the discipline."[72] As such, it is both part of the field of education and a field of applied philosophy, drawing from fields of metaphysics, epistemology, axiology and the philosophical approaches (speculative, prescriptive or analytic) to address questions in and about pedagogy, education policy, and curriculum, as well as the process of learning, to name a few.[73] For example, it might study what constitutes upbringing and education, the values and norms revealed through upbringing and educational practices, the limits and legitimization of education as an academic discipline, and the relation between education theory and practice.
Purpose of education
There is no broad consensus as to what education's chief aim or aims are or should be. Some authors stress its value to the individual, emphasizing its potential for positively influencing students' personal development, promoting autonomy, forming a cultural identity or establishing a career or occupation. Other authors emphasize education's contributions to societal purposes, including good citizenship, shaping students into productive members of society, thereby promoting society's general economic development, and preserving cultural values.[74]
Curriculum
Main articles: Curriculum, Curriculum theory, and List of academic disciplines
In formal education, a curriculum is the set of courses and their content offered at a school or university. As an idea, curriculum stems from the Latin word for race course, referring to the course of deeds and experiences through which children grow to become mature adults. A curriculum is prescriptive and is based on a more general syllabus which merely specifies what topics must be understood and to what level to achieve a particular grade or standard.
An academic discipline is a branch of knowledge which is formally taught, either at the university–or via some other such method. Each discipline usually has several sub-disciplines or branches, and distinguishing lines are often both arbitrary and ambiguous. Examples of broad areas of academic disciplines include the natural sciences, mathematics, computer science, social sciences, humanities and applied sciences.[75]
Educational institutions may incorporate fine arts as part of K-12 grade curricula or within majors at colleges and universities as electives. The various types of fine arts are music, dance, and theatre.[76]
Instruction
Instruction is the facilitation of another's learning. Instructors in primary and secondary institutions are often called teachers, and they direct the education of students and might draw on many subjects like reading, writing, mathematics, science and history. Instructors in post-secondary institutions might be called teachers, instructors, or professors, depending on the type of institution; and they primarily teach only their specific discipline. Studies from the United States suggest that the quality of teachers is the single most important factor affecting student performance, and that countries which score highly on international tests have multiple policies in place to ensure that the teachers they employ are as effective as possible.[77][78] With the passing of NCLB in the United States (No Child Left Behind), teachers must be highly qualified. A popular way to gauge teaching performance is to use student evaluations of teachers (SETS), but these evaluations have been criticized for being counterproductive to learning and inaccurate due to student bias.[79]
College basketball coach John Wooden the Wizard of Westwood would teach through quick "This not That" technique. He would show (a) the correct way to perform an action, (b) the incorrect way the player performed it, and again (c) the correct way to perform an action. This helped him to be a responsive teacher and fix errors on the fly. Also, less communication from him meant more time that the player could practice.[80]
Economics of education
Main article: Economics of education




Students on their way to school, Hakha, Chin State, Myanmar


It has been argued that high rates of education are essential for countries to be able to achieve high levels of economic growth.[81] Empirical analyses tend to support the theoretical prediction that poor countries should grow faster than rich countries because they can adopt cutting edge technologies already tried and tested by rich countries. However, technology transfer requires knowledgeable managers and engineers who are able to operate new machines or production practices borrowed from the leader in order to close the gap through imitation. Therefore, a country's ability to learn from the leader is a function of its stock of "human capital". Recent study of the determinants of aggregate economic growth have stressed the importance of fundamental economic institutions[82] and the role of cognitive skills.[83]
At the level of the individual, there is a large literature, generally related to the work of Jacob Mincer,[84] on how earnings are related to the schooling and other human capital. This work has motivated a large number of studies, but is also controversial. The chief controversies revolve around how to interpret the impact of schooling.[85][86] Some students who have indicated a high potential for learning, by testing with a high intelligence quotient, may not achieve their full academic potential, due to financial difficulties.[citation needed]
Economists Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis argued in 1976 that there was a fundamental conflict in American schooling between the egalitarian goal of democratic participation and the inequalities implied by the continued profitability of capitalist production.[87]
The future of education
Many countries are now drastically changing the way they educate their citizens. The world is changing at an ever quickening rate, which means that a lot of knowledge becomes obsolete and inaccurate more quickly. The emphasis is therefore shifting to teaching the skills of learning: to picking up new knowledge quickly and in as agile a way as possible. Finnish schools have even begun to move away from the regular subject-focused curricula, introducing instead developments like phenomenon-based learning, where students study concepts like climate change instead.[88]
Education is also becoming a commodity no longer reserved for children. Adults need it too.[89] Some governmental bodies, like the Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra in Finland, have even proposed compulsory life-long education.[90]
See also


Education portal
Schools portal
University portal



Alternative education
Co-teaching
Education for Sustainable Development
Educational technology
Glossary of education terms
Human rights education
Index of education articles
List of education articles by country
Outline of education
Progressive education
Right to education
Sociology of education
Student
School
School uniform
Unschooling

Sources


This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Licence statement: Out in the Open: Education sector responses to violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity/expression, 54, UNESCO.
To learn how to add freely licensed text to Wikipedia articles, please see the terms of use.



This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licence statement: Cracking the code: girls' and women's education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), UNESCO.
To learn how to add freely licensed text to Wikipedia articles, please see the terms of use.

References


^ Dewey, John (1944) [1916]. Democracy and Education. The Free Press. pp. 1–4. ISBN 0-684-83631-9. 
^ Article 13 of the United Nations' 1966 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognizes a universal right to education. ICESCR, Article 13.1
^ educate. Etymonline.com. Retrieved on 2011-10-21.
^ Assmann, Jan (2002). The Mind of Egypt: History and Meaning in the Time of the Pharaohs. p. 127. 
^ "Plato". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2002. 
^ a b Geoffrey Blainey; A Very Short History of the World; Penguin Books, 2004
^ "Robert Grosseteste". Catholic Encyclopedia. Newadvent.org. 1 June 1910. Retrieved 2011-07-16. 
^ "St. Albertus Magnus". Catholic Encyclopedia. Newadvent.org. 1 March 1907. Retrieved 2011-07-16. 
^ Nuria Sanz, Sjur Bergan: "The heritage of European universities", 2nd edition, Higher Education Series No. 7, Council of Europe, 2006, ISBN, p. 136
^ Robinson, K.: Schools Kill Creativity. TED Talks, 2006, Monterey, CA, US.
^ "Enhancing Education". 
^ "Perspectives Competence Centre, Lifeling Learning Programme". Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. 
^ Ross, Elizabeth Dale (1976). The Kindergarten Crusade: The Establishment of Preschool in the United States. Athens: Ohio University Press. p. 1. 
^ UNESCO, Education For All Monitoring Report 2008, Net Enrollment Rate in primary education
^ "Liberal Arts: Britannica Concise Encyclopædia". Encyclopædia Britannica. 
^ Harriman, Philip (1935). "Antecedents of the Liberal Arts College". The Journal of Higher Education. 6 (2): 63–71. doi:10.2307/1975506. JSTOR 1975506. 
^ Redden, Elizabeth (2009-04-06). "A Global Liberal Arts Alliance". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved 2015-01-08. 
^ Special Education. Oxford: Elsevier Science and Technology. 2004. 
^ Lazarin, Melissa (October 2011). "Federal Investment in Charter Schools" (PDF). Institute of Education Sciences. Center for American Progress. Retrieved 2 October 2015. 
^ Resmovits, Joy (10 December 2013). "Charter Schools Continue Dramatic Growth Despite Controversies". The Huffington Post. The Huffington Post. Retrieved 2 October 2015. 
^ May, S.; Aikman, S. (2003). "Indigenous Education: Addressing Current Issues and Developments". Comparative Education. 39 (2): 139–45. doi:10.1080/03050060302549. JSTOR 3099875. 
^ a b Barbara Rogoff, Review of Research in Education, March 2016, Vol. 40, pp. 356–401. DOI: 10.3102/0091732X16680994
^ Crowley, Kevin; Pierroux, Palmyre; Knutson, Karen. "Informal Learning in Museums". The Cambridge Handbook of the Learning Sciences: 461–478. doi:10.1017/cbo9781139519526.028. 
^ Mead, GH (1896). "The Relation of Play to Education". University Record. 1: 141–45. 
^ Johnson, GE (1916). "Education through recreation". Cleveland Foundation, Ohio. 
^ Jacks, LP (1932). Education through recreation. New York: Harper and Brothers. pp. 1–2. 
^ a b Ullah, Sha; Bodrogi, Andrew; Cristea, Octav; Johnson, Marjorie; McAlister, Vivian C. (2012). "Learning surgically oriented anatomy in a student-run extracurricular club: an education through recreation initiative". Anat Sci Educ. 5 (3): 165–70. doi:10.1002/ase.1273. PMID 22434649. 
^ "The State of Digital Education Infographic". Knewton.com. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ Lohr, Steve (19 August 2009). "Study Finds That Online Education Beats the Classroom". The New York Times. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ Parry, M. (2010). "Such a Deal? Maybe Not. Online learning can cost more than traditional education". The Chronicle of Higher Education. 57 (11). (Subscription required (help)). 
^ "Free courses provided by Harvard, MIT, Berkeley, Stanford, Princeton, Duke, Johns Hopkins, Edinburgh, U.Penn, U. Michigan, U. Virginia, U. Washington". Neurobonkers.com. 2 August 2012. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ Harriet Swain (1 October 2012). "Will university campuses soon be 'over'?". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ "Is the Certificate the New College Degree?". Good.is. 8 June 2012. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ Cloete, ElsabeÂ. "Electronic Education System Model." Department of Computer Science and Information Systems in South Africa, 17 Oct. 2000. Web. 3 June 2015.
^ a b c UNESCO (2016). Out in the Open: Education sector responses to violence based on sexual orientation and gender identity/expression (PDF). Paris, UNESCO. p. 54. ISBN 978-92-3-100150-5. 
^ "School Governance, Assessments and Accountability" (PDF). Programme for International Student Assessment. OECD. 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2017. 
^ Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals. New York: UN. 2016. 
^ Cracking the code: girls' and women's education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). Paris: UNESCO. 2017. p. 14. ISBN 9789231002335. 
^ a b Liesbet Steer and Geraldine Baudienville 2010. What drives donor financing of basic education? London: Overseas Development Institute.
^ news room/latest news/press_releases/2010/2010_02_23_AEW_launch_en Archived 27 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine.. Transparency.org (23 February 2010). Retrieved on 2011-10-21.
^ de Grauwe, A. 2009. Without capacity, there is no development. Paris: UNESCO-IIPE "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 1 October 2010. .
^ "Socrates-Erasmus Program". Erasmus.ac.uk. Retrieved 2010-06-19. 
^ "Soros Foundation". Soros.org. Retrieved 2010-06-19. 
^ "African nations embrace e-learning, says new report". PC Advisor. 16 October 2012. Retrieved 2012-10-24. 
^ "nabuur.com". nabuur.com. Retrieved 2013-10-03. 
^ "EDUSAT". ISRO. Retrieved 2013-01-01. 
^ a b c "Low-cost private schools: evidence, approaches and emerging issues". Eldis. Retrieved 10 January 2014. 
^ Finn, J. D.; Gerber, S. B.; Boyd-Zaharias, J. (2005). "Small classes in the early grades, academic achievement, and graduating from high school" (PDF). Journal of Educational Psychology. 97 (2): 214–33. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.97.2.214. 
^ Butler, S.; Marsh, H.; Sheppard, J. (1985). "Seven year longitudinal study of the early prediction of reading achievement". Journal of Educational Psychology. 77: 349–61. 
^ Baltes, P.; Reinert, G. (1969). "Cohort effects in cognitive development in children as revealed by cross sectional sequences". Developmental Psychology. 1: 169–77. 
^ Richards, M.; Sacker, A. (2003). "Lifetime Antecedents of Cognitive Reserve". Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology. 25: 614–24. 
^ Swassing, R. H., Barbe, W. B., & Milone, M. N. (1979). The Swassing-Barbe Modality Index: Zaner-Bloser Modality Kit. Columbus, OH: Zaner-Bloser.
^ "Dunn and Dunn". Learningstyles.net. Retrieved 2009-04-20. 
^ "Biographer of Renzulli". Indiana.edu. Retrieved 2009-04-20. 
^ Thomas Armstrong's website detailing Multiple Intelligences
^ "Keirsey web-site". Keirsey.com. Retrieved 2009-04-20. 
^ "Type Delineator description". Algonquincollege.com. Archived from the original on 1 March 2009. Retrieved 20 April 2009. 
^ Barbe, W. B., & Swassing, R. H., with M. N. Milone. (1979). Teaching through modality strengths: Concepts and practices. Columbus, OH: Zaner-Bloser
^ "Learning modality description from the Learning Curve website". Library.thinkquest.org. Archived from the original on 4 April 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2010. 
^ "Guy Claxton speaking on What's The Point of School?". dystalk.com. Retrieved 2009-04-23. 
^ J. Scott Armstrong (1983). "Learner Responsibility in Management Education, or Ventures into Forbidden Research (with Comments)" (PDF). Interfaces. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2010. 
^ Pashler, Harold; McDonald, Mark; Rohrer, Doug; Bjork, Robert (2009). "Learning Styles: Concepts and Evidence" (PDF). Psychological Science in the Public Interest. 9 (3): 105–19. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6053.2009.01038.x. PMID 26162104. 
^ Ansari, D; Coch, D (2006). "Bridges over troubled waters: Education and cognitive neuroscience". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. Elsevier Science. 10 (4): 146–51. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.02.007. PMID 16530462. 
^ Coch, D; Ansari, D (2008). "Thinking about mechanisms is crucial to connecting neuroscience and education". Cortex. Elsevier Science. 45 (4): 546–47. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2008.06.001. PMID 18649878. 
^ a b Goswami, U (2006). "Neuroscience and education: from research to practice?". Nature Reviews Neuroscience. Nature Publishing Group. 7 (5): 406–11. doi:10.1038/nrn1907. PMID 16607400. 
^ Meltzoff, AN; Kuhl, PK; Movellan, J; Sejnowski, TJ (2009). "Foundations for a New Science of Learning". Science. AAAS. 325 (5938): 284–88. Bibcode:2009Sci...325..284M. doi:10.1126/science.1175626. PMC 2776823 . PMID 19608908. 
^ Ansari, D (2008). "Effects of development and enculturation on number representation in the brain". Nature Reviews Neuroscience. Nature Publishing Group. 9 (4): 278–91. doi:10.1038/nrn2334. PMID 18334999. 
^ McCandliss, BD; Noble, KG (2003). "The development of reading impairment: a cognitive neuroscience model" (PDF). Mental Retardation and Developmental Disability Research Review. 9 (3): 196–204. doi:10.1002/mrdd.10080. PMID 12953299. 
^ Gabrieli, JD (2009). "Dyslexia: a new synergy between education and cognitive neuroscience" (PDF). Science. AAAS. 325 (5938): 280–83. Bibcode:2009Sci...325..280G. doi:10.1126/science.1171999. PMID 19608907. 
^ Price, GR; Holloway, I; Räsänen, P; Vesterinen, M; Ansari, D (2007). "Impaired parietal magnitude processing in developmental dyscalculia". Current Biology. Cell Press. 17 (24): R1042–43. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2007.10.013. PMID 18088583. 
^ Noddings, Nel (1995). Philosophy of Education. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. p. 1. ISBN 0-8133-8429-X. 
^ Frankena, William K.; Raybeck, Nathan; Burbules, Nicholas (2002). "Philosophy of Education". In Guthrie, James W. Encyclopedia of Education, 2nd edition. New York, NY: Macmillan Reference. ISBN 0-02-865594-X. 
^ Noddings 1995, pp. 1–6
^ Christopher Winch and John Gingell, Philosophy of Education: The Key Concepts (2nd edition). London:Routledge, 2008. pp. 10–11.
^ "Examples of subjects". Curriculumonline.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 21 August 2008. Retrieved 20 April 2009. 
^ "Fine Arts". Education World. 2011-02-24. Retrieved 2013-10-03. 
^ Winters, Marcus. Teachers Matter: Rethinking How Public Schools Identify, Reward, and Retain Great Educators. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 160. ISBN 978-1-4422-1077-6. 
^ How the world's best-performing school systems come out on top Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. mckinsey.com. September 2007
^ J. Scott Armstrong (2012). "Natural Learning in Higher Education". Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning. 
^ Coyle, Daniel. The Talent Code. Bantam Books. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-553-80684-7. 
^ Eric A. Hanushek (2005). Economic outcomes and school quality. International Institute for Educational Planning. ISBN 978-92-803-1279-9. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ Daron Acemoglu; Simon Johnson; James A. Robinson (2001). "The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation". American Economic Review. 91 (5): 1369–401. doi:10.2139/ssrn.244582. JSTOR 2677930. 
^ Eric A. Hanushek; Ludger Woessmann (2008). "The role of cognitive skills in economic development" (PDF). Journal of Economic Literature. 46 (3): 607–08. doi:10.1257/jel.46.3.607. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 January 2011. 
^ Jacob Mincer (1970). "The distribution of labor incomes: a survey with special reference to the human capital approach". Journal of Economic Literature. 8 (1): 1–26. JSTOR 2720384. 
^ David Card, "Causal effect of education on earnings," in Handbook of labor economics, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (Eds). Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999: pp. 1801–63
^ James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd., "Earnings functions, rates of return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond," in Handbook of the Economics of Education, Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch (Eds). Amsterdam: North Holland, 2006: pp. 307–458.
^ Samuel Bowles; Herbert Gintis (18 October 2011). Schooling In Capitalist America: Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-60846-131-8. Retrieved 21 October 2011. 
^ "Finnish National Agency for Education - Curricula 2014". www.oph.fi. 
^ "For many people, flexibility at work can be a liberation". 
^ "Could compulsory education last a lifetime? - Sitra". 


External links

Find more aboutEducationat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity




Library resources about
Education





Resources in your library





Education at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Educational Resources from UCB Libraries GovPubs
UNESCO Institute for Statistics: International comparable statistics on education systems
World Bank Education
Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER)
Education Statistics (EdStats)
Smarter Education Systems Interactive Mapping Tool
OECD Education GPS: Statistics and policy analysis, interactive portal
OECD Statistics
Planipolis: a portal on education plans and policies
IIEP Publications on Education Systems







v
t
e


Topics in education







General



Glossary
Index
Outline
Aims and objectives
Anthropology
Assessment
Economics
Evaluation
History
Leadership
Philosophy
Policy
Politics
Psychology
Research
Rights
Sociology
Technology
Theory
Types of institutions





By subject



Agricultural
Art
Bilingual
Business
Chemistry
Design
Economics
Engineering
Environmental
Euthenics
Health
Language
Legal
Mathematics
Medical
Military
Music
Nursing
Peace
Performing arts
Philosophy
Physical
Physics
Reading
Religious
Science
Sex
Teacher
Technology
Values
Vocational
More...





Alternative



Autodidacticism
Education reform
Gifted education
Homeschooling
Religious education
Special education
More...





Wikimedia



Books
Definitions
Images
Learning resources
News
Quotes
Texts















v
t
e


Stages of formal education







Early childhood education
Primary education
Secondary education
Tertiary education









Preschool
→
Kindergarten
→

















Elementary school
→









Infant
→
Junior
→
























High school
→









Junior high school
→
Senior high school
→
























Higher education
 
Vocational
Further
continuing









Undergraduate
→
Postgraduate
 



























Alternative education

Homeschooling


Adult education
 Portal














Education by region










v
t
e


Education in Africa



Sovereign states



Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde (Cabo Verde)
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire)
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe






States with limited
recognition




Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
Somaliland






Dependencies and
other territories





Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla / (see also plazas de soberanía) (Spain)
Madeira (Portugal)
Mayotte / Réunion (France)
Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom)











v
t
e


Education in Asia



Sovereign states



Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen





States with
limited recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan





Dependencies and
other territories



British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau










v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union










v
t
e


Education in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands










v
t
e


Education in Oceania



Sovereign states



Australia
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Zealand
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu





Associated states
of New Zealand



Cook Islands
Niue





Dependencies
and other territories



American Samoa
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Easter Island
French Polynesia
Guam
Hawaii
New Caledonia
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Pitcairn Islands
Tokelau
Wallis and Futuna










v
t
e


Education in South America



Sovereign states



Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela






Dependencies and
other territories




Falkland Islands
French Guiana
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands














 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Higher education by country






Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Benin
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Latvia
Lithuania
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Myanmar
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
North Korea
Norway
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Macedonia
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Vietnam












v
t
e


Social sciences



Primary



Anthropology

archaeology
cultural
linguistics
social


Economics

microeconomics
macroeconomics


Geography

human
integrative


History

cultural
economic
military
political
social


Law

jurisprudence
legal history
legal systems


Political science

international relations
psephology
public administration
public policy


Psychology

abnormal
biological
cognitive
developmental
personality
social


Sociology

criminology
demography
internet
rural
urban







Interdisciplinary



Anthrozoology
Area studies
Business studies
Cognitive science
Communication studies
Community studies
Cultural studies
Development studies
Education
Environmental (social science
studies)
Food studies
Gender studies
Global studies
History of technology
Human ecology
Information science
International studies
Media studies
Philosophy of science

economics
history
psychology
social science


Planning

land use
regional
urban


Political ecology
Political economy
Public health
Regional science
Science and technology studies
Science studies

historical


Social work





Other categorizations



Humanities
Geisteswissenschaft
Human science








Index
Journals
Outline
Wikiversity









Authority control



LCCN: sh85040989
GND: 4006650-2
NDL: 00567137











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Education&oldid=814722266"					Categories: EducationKnowledge sharingHidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only contentWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from January 2013Use Canadian English from September 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2014Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2014Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2012Free-content attributionFree content from UNESCOArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers