Not to be confused with Education Scotland.

Education in Scotland




Scottish Government


Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills
Minister for Childcare and Early Years
Minister for Further Education, Higher Education and Science
Minister for Employability and Training
John Swinney MSP
Maree Todd MSP
Shirley-Anne Somerville MSP
Jamie Hepburn MSP


National education budget


Budget
£2.6 bn[2]


Per student
£3,855 (2004–2005)[1]‡


General details


Primary languages
English, Scots and Scottish Gaelic


System type
National


Compulsory education
1872


Literacy (2005 est)


Total
99%


Male
99%


Female
99%


Enrollment


Total
1,452,240


Primary
390,260


Secondary
322,980


Post secondary
739,000#


‡: Expenditure on Pre-school, Primary and Secondary education only.
#: 2004, All further and higher education institutions includes overseas students.


Education in Scotland is overseen by the Scottish Government and has a history of universal provision of public education, and the Scottish education system is distinctly different from those in the other countries of the United Kingdom. The Scotland Act 1998 gives the Scottish Parliament legislative control over all education matters, and the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 is the principal legislation governing education in Scotland. Traditionally, the Scottish system at secondary school level has emphasised breadth across a range of subjects, while the English, Welsh and Northern Irish systems have emphasised greater depth of education over a smaller range of subjects.
Following this, Scottish universities generally have courses a year longer (typically 4 years) than their counterparts elsewhere in the UK, though it is often possible for students to take more advanced specialised exams and join the courses at the second year. One unique aspect is that the ancient universities of Scotland issue a Master of Arts as the first degree in humanities. State schools are owned and operated by the local authorities which act as Education Authorities, and the compulsory phase is divided into primary school and secondary school (often called high school). Schools are supported in delivering learning and teaching by Education Scotland (formerly Learning and Teaching Scotland). There are also private schools across the country, although the distribution is uneven with such schools in 22 of the 32 Local Authority areas. At September 2011 the total pupil population in Scotland was 702,104, of which 31,425 pupils, or 4.5%, were being educated in independent schools.[3]
Qualifications at the secondary school and post-secondary (further education) level are provided by the Scottish Qualifications Authority, which is the national awarding and accrediting body in Scotland, and delivered through various schools, colleges and other centres. Political responsibility for education at all levels is vested in the Scottish Parliament and the Learning Directorate.[4] Inspections and audits of educational standards are conducted by three bodies: Care Inspectorate inspects care standards in pre-school provision; Education Scotland (formerly Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education) for pre-school, primary, education, further and community education; with the Scottish office of the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA Scotland) responsible for higher education.
In 2014, research by the Office for National Statistics found that Scotland was the most highly educated country in Europe and among the most well-educated in the world in terms of tertiary education attainment, above countries like Finland, Ireland and Luxembourg, with roughly 40% of Scots aged 16–64 educated to NVQ level 4 and above.[5]



Contents


1 School years

1.1 Access to early years centres, primary and secondary school


2 Ministers responsible
3 National Curriculum
4 School qualifications
5 Scottish Attainment Challenge
6 Secondary school naming
7 School provision

7.1 Religion in Schools
7.2 Vocational education
7.3 Music education
7.4 Scottish Gaelic medium education


8 Higher Education in Scotland
9 History of education in Scotland
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



School years[edit]




Pupils and Early Years Minister Adam Ingram, Education and Lifelong Learning Secretary Fiona Hyslop and Schools and Skills Minister Maureen Watt with pupils at Avenue End Primary Campus in Glasgow.


Children start primary school aged between 4½ and 5½ depending on when the child's birthday falls.[6] Scottish school policy places all those born between March of a given year and February of the following year in the same year group. Children born between March and August start school in August at between 5½ and 5 years old, and those born between September and February start school in the previous August at between age 4 years 11 months and 4½ years old. The Scottish system is the most flexible in the UK, however, as parents of children born between September and December can request a deferral for 1 year (not automatic, requires approval), whilst children born between January and February can opt to hold their child back a year and let them start school the following August. This usually allows those not ready for formal education to have an extra year at an early years centre (formarly known as nursery). (Funding is only available for children born in January and February).
Pupils remain at primary school for seven years. Then aged eleven or twelve, they start secondary school for a compulsory four years with the following two years being optional. In Scotland, pupils sit National 4/5 exams (previously Standard Grade or Intermediate exams) at the age of fifteen/sixteen, normally for between 6 and eight subjects including compulsory exams in English and Mathematics. A Science subject (Physics, Biology or Chemistry) and a Social Subject (Geography, History or Modern Studies) were also compulsory, but this was changed is accordance with the new curriculum. It is now required by the Scottish Parliament for students to have two hours of physical education a week; each school may vary these compulsory combinations. The school leaving age is generally sixteen (after completion of National 4/5s), after which students may choose to remain at school and study for Higher and/or Advanced Higher exams.
A small number of students at certain private, independent schools may follow the English system and study towards GCSE instead of National 4/5s (Standard Grades), and towards A and AS-Levels instead of (or alongside) Higher Grade and Advanced Higher exams. The International Baccalaureate has also been introduced in some independent schools.
The table below lists rough equivalences with the year system in the rest of the United Kingdom (For England and Wales, the equivalence given is for children born before 1 September; the equivalence for those born from September to February [December for deferred pupils] is given in brackets):


Scotland
Age at start of school year
Age at end of school year
England and Wales
Northern Ireland


Playgroup
2-3
3-4
–
Play School


Early Years Centre
3-4
4-5
–
Nursery


Primary 1
4-5
5-6
Reception
P1


Primary 2
5-6
6-7
Year 1
P2


Primary 3
6-7
7-8
Year 2
P3


Primary 4
7-8
8-9
Year 3
P4


Primary 5
8-9
9-10
Year 4
P5


Primary 6
9-10
10-11
Year 5
P6


Primary 7
10-11
11-12
Year 6
P7


S1 (First year)
11-12
12-13
Year 7
Year 8 (1st Year)


S2 (Second year)
12-13
13-14
Year 8
Year 9 (2nd Year)


S3 (Third year)
13-14
14-15
Year 9
Year 10 (3rd Year)


S4 (Fourth year)
14-15
15-16
Year 10
Year 11 (4th Year)


S5 (Fifth year)
15-16
16-17
Year 11
Year 12 (5th Year)


S6 (Sixth Year)
16-17
17-18
Year 12
Year 13 (L6th Year)



17-18
18-19
Year 13
Year 14 (U6th Year)


Access to early years centres, primary and secondary school[edit]
Government funded schools are free for children aged 5–19.[7] In many cases, this applies to children of international post-graduate students,[8] and other immigrants.
The age ranges specify the youngest age for a child entering that year and the oldest age for a child leaving that year. Playgroup can be described as a daycare centre for toddlers, then children may go on to attend an early years centre as soon as they have passed their third birthday, and progress to Primary 1 in the August of the year in which they turn five.
In general, the cut-off point for ages is the end of February, so all children must be of a certain age on 1 March to begin class in August.
All parents of children born between September and February (i.e. still 4 years old on the school start date) are entitled to defer entry to Primary School if they believe their child is not ready for school.
Only children whose birthdays fall in January or February will be considered for funding for a subsequent year at an early years centre, unless there are special circumstances.
Children may leave school once they reach their statutory school leaving date; this is dependent on date of birth. For children born between 1 March and 30 September, this date is 31 May of their 4th year of secondary school. For children born between 1 October and 28 February, the last day of June is the first date they may leave school if they have a placement at college and the school have signed the health & safety forms.
Which high school the children go to depends on the area where they live, known as the "catchment area", which has a specific high school that takes children who live in that area.
Parents can also apply for a placement request if they would like their child to attend a school outside their catchment area and a panel will decide if the child is the most worthy (out of all placing requests) to take one of the spaces left after all children from the catchment area have been taken.
The table below lists list the numbers of children, schools and teachers in all publicly funded schools:[9]



Children
Schools
Teachers
pupil:teacher ratio


Early Years Education
102,871
2,504
1,288



Primary
377,372
2,056
22,905
16.5


Secondary
289,164
364
23,695
12.2


Special
6,984
149
2,020
3.5


Home education is also legal in Scotland. Parents wishing to home educate do not need the permission of the Local Authority unless the children are already registered at a school. There are no exact numbers available for children being educated at home in Scotland.[10]
Ministers responsible[edit]
Within the Scottish Government, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills has overall responsibility for education provision in Scotland. The Cabinet Secretary is assisted by three junior ministers, currently the Minister for Childcare and Early Years, the Minister for Further Education, Higher Education and Science and the Minister for Employability and Training[11].


Cabinet Secretaries and Ministers overseeing Education in Scotland


Portfolio
Minister
Image
Areas of Responsibility


Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills
(also serving as Deputy First Minister of Scotland)
John Swinney MSP

School Standards
Quality and Improvement
School Infrastructures and Staffing
Educational Attainment
Qualifications
Teaching profession
Behaviour and anti-bullying measures
Named Person and Looked After policies
Youth Work
Early Years Education
Children's Services
Children's hearing


Minister for Childcare and Early Years
Maree Todd MSP

Adoption and fostering
Early Years
Childcare
Child Protection
Children's Rights
Looked After Children
Protection of Vulnerable Groups
Social Services Workforce


Minister for Further Education, Higher Education and Science
Shirley-Anne Somerville MSP

Further education
Colleges
Universities
Student Funding
STEM Subjects
Widening access


Minister for Employability and Training
Jamie Hepburn MSP

Employment policy
Labour market strategy
Skills Development Scotland
Women's Employment
Youth Employment
Non-Advanced vocational skills


National Curriculum[edit]
Main article: Curriculum for Excellence
In 2003, work began on an education reform program, to produce a new Curriculum for Excellence that would replace existing guidance on the school curriculum.[12] Curriculum for Excellence was launched in Scottish secondary schools from school session 2012–2013.
In 2017, new reforms were introduced moving control over curriculum and schools more towards head teachers and parents.[13]
School qualifications[edit]




Kilmarnock Academy is the only school in Scotland to have educated two Nobel Peace Prize Laureates and one of only two schools worldwide to have educated more than one


Progression in Qualifications


S4
S5
S6


National 3
National 4
National 5


National 4
National 5
Higher


National 5
Higher
Advanced Higher


The vast majority of Scottish pupils take Scottish Qualifications Certificate qualifications provided by the Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA). Generally, most pupils take National 4/5s (previously Standard Grades, but some schools offered Intermediates instead) in S3-S4, and Highers in S5. For those who wish to remain at school for the final year (S6), more Highers and Advanced Highers (formerly CSYS) in S6 can be taken. Intermediate 1 and Intermediate 2 qualifications – were intended to be roughly equivalent to General and Credit Level Standard Grades respectively, but in practice (although may vary from subject to subject), Intermediate 1 was easier than General, and Intermediate 2 harder than Credit – can also be taken in lieu of any of the aforementioned qualifications.
Pupils can go to university at the end of S5, as Highers provide the entry requirements for Scottish universities where degrees are normally four years long; however, recently it is more common for students to remain until S6, taking further Highers and/or taking Advanced Highers. The majority of English universities, the most popular choice for Scottish students who wish to study university degrees outside of Scotland, require Advanced Higher qualification levels as these are deemed by the English universities to be most similar to A-levels.
All educational qualifications in Scotland are part of the Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework.
Scottish Attainment Challenge[edit]
In 2015, the Scottish Government launched the Scottish Attainment Challenge which aims to achieve equity in educational outcomes throughout Scotland. The Scottish Government envisages equity being achieved by ensuring every child has the same opportunity to succeed, with a particular focus on closing the poverty-related attainment gap. It is underpinned by national Scottish educational policies such as Curriculum for Excellence, Getting it Right for Every Child (GIRFEC) as well as the National Improvement Framework[14]. The attainment challenge focuses and accelerates targeted improvement activity in literacy, numeracy and health and wellbeing in specific areas of Scotland, known as "challenge authorities" (those councils with a higher percentage of children growing up in poverty and deprivation). At a cost of £750 million to the Scottish Government through the Attainment Scotland Fund, the challenge is a targeted initiative focused on supporting pupils in the local authorities of Scotland with the highest concentrations of deprivation. Currently, the nine 'Challenge Authorities' are Glasgow City Council, Dundee City Council, Inverclyde, West Dunbartonshire, North Ayrshire, Clackmannanshire, North Lanarkshire, East Ayrshire and Renfrewshire[15].
On 1 February 2017 the share each primary and secondary school will receive for the academic year 2017–2018 from the Scottish Government’s £120 million Pupil Equity Funding was announced by the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills John Swinney. This funding is provided through the Attainment Scotland Fund and allocated directly to schools, targeted at those children most affected by the poverty related attainment gap[16].
Secondary school naming[edit]




Marr College in Troon, South Ayrshire, carries the name College rather than High School or Academy


There is not a set name for secondary schools in Scotland, but whatever they might be called, with just a few specific exceptions in mainly rural or island authorities, state secondary schools in Scotland are fully comprehensive and non-selective. Amongst the state-run secondary schools:

188 are nominally High Schools. These are spread across the country. Almost all Catholic secondaries are high schools, with the majority of the other names being non-denominational schools. For example, in West Dunbartonshire, the non-denominational schools are Vale of Leven, Dumbarton, and Clydebank Academies while the Catholic schools are Our Lady & Saint Patrick's High School and St Peter the Apostle's High School.
131 are nominally Academies. These are spread across the country but are in high concentration in North-East Scotland and Ayrshire, an example is Aboyne Academy. There are also three Royal Academies, in Irvine, North Ayrshire; Tain; and Inverness.
15 are nominally Secondary Schools (colloquially abbreviated to "secondaries").
14 are nominally Grammar Schools. Most of these schools were defined as grammar schools under a previous (now dissolved) system but their names remain. Popular areas for grammar schools are Argyll and Bute, East Lothian and South Lanarkshire.
13 are simply Schools. These schools cater for Primary as well as Secondary school children. They are found in rural areas or islands.
8 are Junior High Schools. These schools are found exclusively in the Orkney and Shetland Islands. They cater for school children from P1 to S4.
4 are Colleges. These include Madras College (in St Andrews, Fife), Marr College (in Troon, South Ayrshire) and St Joseph's College (in Dumfries, Dumfries and Galloway).

Other schools include The Community School of Auchterarder, Auchterarder, Perth and Kinross; The Nicolson Institute, Stornoway, Western Isles; North Walls Community School on Hoy, Orkney Islands and Wester Hailes Education Centre, Wester Hailes, Edinburgh. All of these are, equally, fully comprehensive non-selective schools, differing only in designation from all other state secondary schools in Scotland.
School provision[edit]
Religion in Schools[edit]
The vast majority of schools are non-denominational, and include the parish schools, pioneered by the Church of Scotland and other Protestant Churches, which became state schools in 1872. Religious education is taught in non-denominational schools and in denominational schools. Of over 2,500 schools in Scotland there are 366 state schools which are Roman Catholic, three Episcopalian and one Jewish.The Education (Scotland) Act 1918 brought Roman Catholic schools within the State education system, ensuring the promotion of a Roman Catholic ethos within such schools.[17]
Vocational education[edit]
Vocational education is provided in Further Education Colleges and through apprenticeships. Due to the growing surplus of university graduates in many fields of study, along with that of lower level apprentices, higher level apprenticeships are seen as providing the lowest risk of unemployment or underemployment. Skills Development Scotland has introduced Graduate Level Apprenticeships in order to promote this option.[18]
Music education[edit]
Music Education is available at several levels. Formal music education begins at 4½ years and can progress as high as postgraduate studies. Music Education can take place within a Scottish Music school; through a music service or privately.
Scottish Gaelic medium education[edit]
Main article: Gaelic medium education in Scotland
Some schools in Scotland provide education given in the Scottish Gaelic language. They are mainly located in the main cities of Scotland and in areas with higher amounts of Gaelic speakers. Gaelic medium education is becoming increasingly popular throughout Scotland, and the number of pupils who are in Gaelic medium education at primary school level has risen from 24 in 1985, to 2500 in the 2012–13 school year.[19]
Higher Education in Scotland[edit]
Main article: Universities in Scotland
See also: List of Universities in Scotland




The Main Building of Queen Margaret University


There are fifteen universities in Scotland and three other institutions of higher education which have the authority to award academic degrees.[20] The oldest is St. Andrews, which was founded in 1413. Three other "ancient universities", Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh, date from before 1600.[21] The University of the Highlands and Islands (UHI) gained full university status in 2011, having been created through the federation of 13 colleges and research institutions across the Highlands and Islands, a process that began in 2001.[22]
All Scottish universities have the power to award degrees at all levels: undergraduate, taught postgraduate, and doctoral. Education in Scotland is controlled by the Scottish Government under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998. The minister responsible for higher education is the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, currently Angela Constance MSP of the Scottish National Party.[23] University status in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom today is conferred by the Privy Council which takes advice from the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education.[24][25]
All Scottish universities are public universities and funded by the Scottish Government (through its Scottish Funding Council[26]) and financial support is provided for Scottish-domiciled students by the Student Awards Agency for Scotland. Students ordinarily resident in Scotland or the European Union do not pay tuition fees for their first undergraduate degree, but tuition fees are charged for those from the rest of the United Kingdom. All students are required to pay tuition fees for postgraduate education (e.g. MSc, PhD), except in certain priority areas funded by the Scottish Government, or if another source of funding can be found (e.g. research council studentship for a PhD). A representative body called Universities Scotland works to promote Scotland's universities, as well as six other higher education institutions.[27]
The university sector in Scotland had a total income of £3.5 billion in 2014/15 with the Scottish Government giving approximately £623 million in funding for individual university student support. The Scottish Funding Council contributing £1.1 billion of public money to the fifteen universities, this was a six per cent reduction since 2010/11.[28]




St Andrews students in undergraduate gowns


In 2014–15, approximately 232,570 students studied at universities or institutes of higher education in Scotland, of which 56% were female and 44% male, with 66% being domiciled in Scotland, 12% from the rest of the United Kingdom, 9% from the EU and the remaining 13% being international students. Of all these, approximately 76% were studying for their first degree (i.e. undergraduate level) and 24% for a taught postgraduate degree (primarily a master's degree) or a doctoral research degree (primarily PhD). The remainder were mostly on other programmes such as Higher National Diploma.[28] 16,000 students were studying in Scotland with The Open University via distance-learning, and the Open University teaches 40 per cent of Scotland's part-time undergraduates.[29]
In the 2016–17 Times Higher Education World University Rankings, five Scottish universities are among the top 200 worldwide: University of Edinburgh (at 27), University of Glasgow (at 88), University of St. Andrews (at =110), University of Dundee (at =180), and the University of Aberdeen (at =188).[30]
History of education in Scotland[edit]
For information about the education system in Scotland in the past, see History of education in Scotland.
See also[edit]

List of schools in Scotland
List of independent schools in Scotland
Home education in the United Kingdom
Music schools in Scotland
Association of Educational Development and Improvement Professionals
List of further education colleges in Scotland
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education (Scotland)

References[edit]



^ "Expediture on School Education in Scotland, 2006" (PDF). Scottish Executive. 19 January 2006. Retrieved 24 July 2009. 
^ Scottish Budget Spending Review 20§§, Scottish Government
^ Scottish independent schools 'Pupil Number Comparisons by Local Authority Area 2011/12' http://www.scis.org.uk/assets/files/2011%20Local%20Authority%20comparisons%20by%20region.pdf[permanent dead link] accessed 21 February 2012
^ "About: People: Learning Directorate". Scottish Government. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ ITV (5 June 2014). "Scotland 'most highly educated country in Europe'". Retrieved 8 June 2014. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions". Scottish Government. 19 December 2013. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ UKCISA – 404
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2012. 
^ "Summary Statistics for Schools in Scotland, No.4 ¦ 2013 Edition" (PDF). Scottish Government. 11 February 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ Education Scotland, Home Education Archived 1 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ https://beta.gov.scot/about/who-runs-government/cabinet-and-ministers/cabinet-secretary-education-skills/
^ "How was the curriculum developed: Process of change: Timeline About Curriculum for Excellence". Education Scotland. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 24 August 2014. 
^ "SNP and Tories back John Swinney's school reforms". www.scotsman.com. Retrieved 2017-07-22. 
^ http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Education/Schools/Raisingeducationalattainment
^ http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Education/Schools/Raisingeducationalattainment
^ http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Education/Schools/Raisingeducationalattainment
^ http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Education/Schools/FAQs.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Evans, John (26 October 2016). "Non-graduate routes to skilled employment are more important than ever". Common Space. Retrieved 31 October 2016. Labour market intelligence shows that higher level apprenticeships are still evidently worthwhile qualifications to pursue, increasing individual earning power and providing a boost for the economy. 
^ "Our Work: Gaelic education". Bord na Gaidhlig. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ "Briefing". Universities Scotland. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 1 April 2011. 
^ M. Gardiner, Modern Scottish Culture (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005), ISBN 0748620273, p. 83.
^ "UHI is awarded taught degree awarding powers". Highland Council. 26 June 2008. Retrieved 29 June 2014. 
^ "Cabinet Secretary for Education & Lifelong Learning: Angela Constance MSP". Scottish Government. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ "The Privy Council, Standard Note: SN/PC/3708" (PDF). The Privy Council. 5 July 2005. pp. 5–6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2011. Retrieved 6 July 2010. 
^ "Degree-awarding powers and university title". Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (QAA). 29 November 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2014. 
^ "Education and Training: Universities and Colleges: Universities". The Scottish Government. 16 July 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. 
^ "Universities Scotland". Retrieved 7 September 2010. 
^ a b "Audit of higher education in Scottish universities" (PDF). Retrieved 18 November 2016. 
^ "The Open University in Scotland". The Open University. Retrieved 6 July 2010. 
^ "World University Rankings 2016-17". Retrieved 18 November 2016. 



External links[edit]

Silicon Glen, Scotland – Intro to Scottish Education







v
t
e


Scotland articles






List of topics





History



Timeline
Prehistoric
Roman times
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
Kingdom
High Middle Ages
Davidian Revolution
Wars of Independence
Late Middle Ages
Renaissance
Early modern
Reformation
Colonisation of the Americas
Glorious Revolution
1707 Acts of Union
Jacobitism
Enlightenment
Lowland Clearances
Highland Clearances
Industrial Revolution
Romanticism
Modern








Geography







Anglo-Scottish border
Central Belt
Climate
Fauna
Flora
Geology
Highlands
Islands
Lochs
Lowlands
Mountains and hills
Waterfalls








Politics




Government




Politics



Devolution
Elections
First Minister
Government
Human rights

LGBT rights


Independence
Local government
Military
Monarchs
Parliament
Political parties
Republicanism
Scotland Office
Secretary of State
Nationalism
Unionism





Law



Advocate General
Courts
Crown Office
Lord Advocate
Lord President
Procurator fiscal
Solicitor General
Sheriff principal
College of Justice
Udal law











Economy







Agriculture
Bank of Scotland
Charities
Companies
Fishing
Harris Tweed
Housing
Media
North Sea oil
Power stations
Renewable energy
Royal Bank of Scotland
Tourism
Transport
Whisky
Silicon Glen
Unemployment








Society








Culture



Architecture
Art
Clans
Cuisine
Education
Hogmanay
Identity
Inventions and discoveries
Literature
Museums
Music
Oldest buildings
Performing arts
Prostitution
Royal National Mòd
Sport
Surnames
Symbols

anthem
coat of arms
flags
Tartan
unicorn


World Heritage Sites





Demographics




Languages



Highland English
Scottish English
Scottish Gaelic
Scots
British Sign Language





People (list)



Actors
Artists
Inventors
Musicians
Scientists
Writers








Religion



Bahá'í Faith
Buddhism
Christianity

Christmas
Church of Scotland

General Assembly
Moderators


Roman Catholicism
Scottish Episcopal Church
Baptist Union


Hinduism
Islam
Judaism
Sikhism















Outline



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Education in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union












v
t
e


Education in the United Kingdom



Modern systems



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales





History



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales





Higher education



England
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
UK





Topics



Academies
Comprehensives
English medium education
Free school (England)
Gaelic medium education in Scotland
Irish medium education in Northern Ireland
Grammar schools
Studio schools
UTCs
Welsh medium education












v
t
e


Education in Scotland



History



Overview
Universities
Medieval
Early modern
Eighteenth century
Nineteenth century
Twentieth century





Institutions



Art
Law
Music
Schools
Universities





Agencies



Education Scotland
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education
Learning and Teaching Scotland
General Teaching Council for Scotland
Scottish Children's Reporter Administration
Scottish Funding Council
Scottish Qualifications Authority
Student Awards Agency for Scotland
Universities Scotland





Language medium



Gaelic
English





Lists



Art colleges
Further education colleges
Gaelic medium schools
Independent schools
State schools
Universities





Related articles



England
Northern Ireland
UK
Wales











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Education_in_Scotland&oldid=818478822"					Categories: Education in ScotlandSecondary education by countryPublic bodies of the Scottish GovernmentScottish Government Learning and Justice DirectorateHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksPages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsEngvarB from September 2015Use dmy dates from September 2015