This article is about the long fish. For other uses, see Eel (disambiguation).
"Eels" redirects here. For the band, see Eels (band).


Eels
Temporal range: Cretaceous–Recent

PreЄ
Є
O
S
D
C
P
T
J
K
Pg
N







[1]





Anguilla japonica


Scientific classification 


Kingdom:
Animalia


Phylum:
Chordata


Class:
Actinopterygii


Superorder:
Elopomorpha


Order:
Anguilliformes
L. S. Berg, 1943


Suborders



Anguilloidei
Congroidei
Nemichthyoidei
Synaphobranchoidei







The European conger is the heaviest of all eels.


An eel is any fish belonging to the order Anguilliformes (/æŋˌɡwɪlɪˈfɔːrmiːz/), which consists of four suborders, 20 families, 111 genera and about 800 species. Most eels are predators. The term "eel" (originally referring to the European eel) is also used for some other similarly shaped fish, such as electric eels and spiny eels, but these are not members of the Anguilliformes order.



Contents


1 Description
2 Life cycle
3 Classification
4 Suborders and families

4.1 Phylogeny


5 Commercial species
6 Use by humans
7 In human culture
8 Sustainable consumption
9 Etymology
10 Timeline of genera
11 References
12 Further references
13 External links



Description[edit]
Eels are elongated fish, ranging in length from 5 cm (2.0 in) in the one-jawed eel (Monognathus ahlstromi) to 4 m (13 ft) in the slender giant moray.[2] Adults range in weight from 30 g (1.1 oz) to well over 25 kg (55 lb). They possess no pelvic fins, and many species also lack pectoral fins. The dorsal and anal fins are fused with the caudal fin, forming a single ribbon running along much of the length of the animal.[1] Eels swim by generating body waves which travel the length of their bodies. They can swim backwards by reversing the direction of the wave.[3]
Most eels live in the shallow waters of the ocean and burrow into sand, mud, or amongst rocks. A majority of eel species are nocturnal, thus are rarely seen. Sometimes, they are seen living together in holes, or "eel pits". Some species of eels also live in deeper water on the continental shelves and over the slopes deep as 4,000 m (13,000 ft). Only members of the Anguilla regularly inhabit fresh water, but they, too, return to the sea to breed.[4]
The heaviest true eel is the European conger. The maximum size of this species has been reported as reaching a length of 3 m (10 ft) and a weight of 110 kg (240 lb).[5] Other eels are longer, but do not weigh as much, such as the slender giant moray which reaches 4 m (13 ft).[6]
Life cycle[edit]
Main article: Eel life history
Eels begin life as flat and transparent larvae, called leptocephali. Eel larvae drift in the surface waters of the sea, feeding on marine snow, small particles that float in the water. Eel larvae then metamorphose into glass eels and then become elvers before finally seeking out their juvenile and adult habitats.[2] Many eels remain in the sea throughout their lives, but freshwater elvers of eels in the family anguillidae travel upstream and are forced to climb up obstructions, such as weirs, dam walls, and natural waterfalls.




Lifecycle of a typical (catadromous) eel










Eel eggs hatch into the Leptocephalus larval stage...









...and become glass eels as they transition from ocean to fresh water











As freshwater elvers they work their way upstream









Mature silver stage eels migrate back to the ocean





Lady Colin Campbell found, at Ballisodare, the eel fisheries were greatly improved by the hanging of loosely plaited grass ladders over barriers, enabling the elvers to ascend.[7]
Classification[edit]
This classification follows FishBase in dividing the eels into 20 families. Additional families included in other classifications (notably ITIS and Systema Naturae 2000) are noted below the family with which they are synomized in the Fish Base system.
Identifying the origin of the freshwater species has been problematic. Genomic studies indicate they are a monophyletic group which originated among the deep-sea eels.[8]
Suborders and families[edit]





A moray eel





Gorgasia barnesi, a species of garden eel




Taxonomy based on Neslon, Grande and Wilson 2016.[9]

Suborder Protanguilloidei

Family Protanguillidae


Suborder Synaphobranchoidei

Family Synaphobranchidae (cutthroat eels) [incl. Dysommidae, Nettodaridae, and Simenchelyidae]


Suborder Muraenoidei

Family Heterenchelyidae (mud eels)
Family Myrocongridae (thin eels)
Family Muraenidae (moray eels)


Suborder Chlopsoidei

Family Chlopsidae (false morays)


Suborder Congroidei

Family Congridae (congers) [incl. Macrocephenchelyidae; Colocongridae]
Family Derichthyidae (longneck eels) [incl. Nessorhamphidae]
Family Muraenesocidae (pike congers)
Family Nettastomatidae (duckbill eels)
Family Ophichthidae (snake eels)


Suborder Moringuoidei

Family Moringuidae (spaghetti eels)


Suborder Saccopharyngoidei

Family Eurypharyngidae (pelican eels, umbrellamouth gulpers)
Family Saccopharyngidae
Family Monognathidae (onejaw gulpers)
Family Cyematidae (bobtail snipe eels)


Suborder Anguilloidei

Family Anguillidae (freshwater eels)
Family Nemichthyidae (snipe eels)
Family Serrivomeridae (sawtooth eels)



In some classifications, the family Cyematidae of bobtail snipe eels is included in the Anguilliformes, but in the FishBase system that family is included in the order Saccopharyngiformes.
The electric eel of South America is not a true eel, but is a South American knifefish more closely related to the carps and catfishes.
Phylogeny[edit]
Phylogeny based on Johnson et al. 2012.[10]


Anguilliformes



Protanguilloidei

Protanguillidae










Synaphobranchoidei

Synaphobranchidae










Muraenoidei





Heterenchelyidae












Myrocongridae








Muraenidae






















Chlopsoidei

Chlopsidae










Congroidei





Derichthyidae












Nettastomatidae












Congridae












Ophichthidae








Muraenesocidae


































Moringuoidei

Moringuidae










Saccopharyngoidei









Eurypharyngidae








Saccopharyngidae


















Monognathidae








Cyematidae


















Anguilloidei





Nemichthyidae












Serrivomeridae








Anguillidae




























































Commercial species[edit]


This article is part of a series on


Commercial fish









Large pelagic




billfish
bonito
mackerel
salmon
shark
tuna




Forage




anchovy
herring
menhaden
sardine
shad
sprat




Demersal




cod
eel
flatfish
pollock
ray




Mixed




carp
tilapia







v
t
e







Main commercial species


Common name
Scientific name
Maximum
length
Common
length
Maximum
weight
Maximum
age
Trophic
level
FishBase
FAO
ITIS
IUCN status


American eel
Anguilla rostrata (Lesueur, 1817)
152 cm
50 cm
7.33 kg
43 years
3.7
[11]

[12]
Not assessed


European eel
Anguilla anguilla (Linnaeus, 1758)
150 cm
35 cm
6.6 kg
88 years
3.5
[13]
[14]
[15]
 Critically endangered[16]


Japanese eel
Anguilla japonica Temminck & Schlegel, 1846
150 cm
40 cm
1.89 kg

3.6
[17]
[18]
[19]
Not assessed


Short-finned eel
Anguilla australis Richardson, 1841
130 cm
45 cm
7.48 kg
32 years
4.1
[20]

[21]
Not assessed


Use by humans[edit]
See also: Eel as food




Eel picker in Maasholm, sculpture by Bernd Maro




Green water culture system for Japanese eel




Freshwater eels (unagi) and marine eels (conger eel, anago) are commonly used in Japanese cuisine; foods such as unadon and unajū are popular, but expensive. Eels are also very popular in Chinese cuisine, and are prepared in many different ways. Hong Kong eel prices have often reached 1000 HKD (128.86 US Dollars) per kg, and once exceeded 5000 HKD per kg. The European eel and other freshwater eels are eaten in Europe, the United States, and other places. A traditional east London food is jellied eels, although the demand has significantly declined since World War II. The Northern Spanish delicacy angulas consists of elver (young eels) sautéed in olive oil with garlic; elvers usually reach prices of up to 1000 euro per kg.[22] New Zealand longfin eel is a traditional Māori food in New Zealand. In Italian cuisine, eels from the Valli di Comacchio, a swampy zone along the Adriatic coast, are especially prized, along with freshwater eels of Bolsena Lake and pond eels from Cabras, Sardinia. In northern Germany, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, Poland, Denmark, and Sweden, smoked eel is considered a delicacy.
Elvers, often fried, used to be a cheap dish in the United Kingdom; but, during the 1990s, their numbers collapsed across Europe.[23] They are now not just a delicacy, but the UK's most expensive species.[24]
Eels, particularly the moray eel, are popular among marine aquarists.
Ocellated Spiny Eel is a very attractive little fish but is shy when acquired at first. [25]
Eel blood is toxic to humans[26] and other mammals,[27][28][29] but both cooking and the digestive process destroy the toxic protein. The toxin derived from eel blood serum was used by Charles Robert Richet in his Nobel Prize-winning research which discovered anaphylaxis (by injecting it into dogs and observing the effect).[citation needed] The poison used by Richet was actually obtained from sea anemones.[30]
Eelskin leather is highly prized. It is very smooth and exceptionally strong. However, it does not come from eels. It comes from the Pacific hagfish, a jawless fish which is also known as the slime eel.[31][32]
In human culture[edit]
The large lake of Almere, which existed in the early Medieval Netherlands, got its names from the eels which lived in its water (the Dutch word for eel is aal or ael, so: "ael mere" = "eel lake"). The name is preserved in the new town of Almere in Flevoland, given in 1984 in memory of this body of water on whose site the town is located.
The daylight passage in the spring of Elvers upstream along the Thames was at one time called "eel fare". The word 'elver' is thought to be a corruption of "eel fare."[7]
A famous attraction on the French Polynesian island of Huahine (part of the Society Islands) is the bridge across a stream hosting 3- to 6-ft-long eels, deemed sacred by local culture.
Eel fishing in Nazi-time Danzig plays an important role in Günter Grass' novel The Tin Drum. The cruelty of humans to eels is used as a metaphor for Nazi atrocities, and the sight of eels being killed by a fisherman triggers the madness of the protagonist's mother.
Sinister implications of eels fishing are also referenced in Jo Nesbø's The Cockroaches, the second book of the Harry Hole detective series. The book's background includes a Norwegian village where eels in the nearby sea are rumored to feed on the corpses of drowned humans – making the eating of these eels verge on cannibalism.
Sustainable consumption[edit]
In 2010, Greenpeace International has added the European eel, Japanese eel, and American eel to its seafood red list.[33] Japan consumes more than 70% of the global eel catch.[34]







Eel fishing boat in France









Special boats to transport live eels Comacchio









Eel trap in Denmark around 1900









Gerookte paling (Dutch for smoked eel)




Etymology[edit]
The English name "eel" descends from Old English ǽl, Common Germanic *ǣlaz. Also from the common Germanic are German Aal, Middle Dutch ael, Old High German âl, and Old Norse áll. Katz (1998) identifies a number of Indo-European cognates, among them the second part of the Latin word for eels, anguilla, attested in its simplex form illa (in a glossary only), and the Greek word for "eel", egkhelys (the second part of which is attested in Hesychius as elyes).[35] The first compound member, anguis ("snake"), is cognate to other Indo-European words for "snake" (compare Old Irish escung "eel", Old High German unc "snake", Lithuanian angìs, Greek ophis, okhis, Vedic Sanskrit áhi, Avestan aži, Armenian auj, iž, Old Church Slavonic *ǫžь, all from Proto-Indo-European *oguhis, ēguhis).The word also appears in the Old English word for "hedgehog," which is igil (meaning "snake eater"), and perhaps in the egi- of Old High German egidehsa "wall lizard".
According to this theory, the name Bellerophon (Βελλεροφόντης, attested in a variant Ἐλλεροφόντης in Eustathius of Thessalonica), is also related, translating to "the slayer of the serpent" (ahihán). On this theory, the ελλερο- is an adjective form of an older word, ελλυ, meaning "snake", which is directly comparable to Hittite ellu-essar- "snake pit". This myth likely came to Greece via Anatolia. In the Hittite version of the myth, the dragon is called Illuyanka: the illuy- part is cognate to the word illa, and the -anka part is cognate to angu, a word for "snake". Since the words for "snake" (and similarly shaped animals) are often subject to taboo in many Indo-European (and non-Indo-European) languages, no unambiguous Proto-Indo-European form of the word for eel can be reconstructed. It may have been *ēl(l)-u-, *ēl(l)-o-, or something similar.
Timeline of genera[edit]


      Timeline                                





































































































References[edit]


^ a b Froese, Rainer, and Daniel Pauly, eds. (2009). "Anguilliformes" in FishBase. January 2009 version.
^ a b McCosker, John F. (1998). Paxton, J.R.; Eschmeyer, W.N., eds. Encyclopedia of Fishes. San Diego: Academic Press. pp. 86–90. ISBN 0-12-547665-5. 
^ Long Jr, J. H., Shepherd, W., & Root, R. G. (1997). Manueuverability and reversible propulsion: How eel-like fish swim forward and backward using travelling body waves". In: Proc. Special Session on Bio-Engineering Research Related to Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, 10th Int. Symp. (pp. 118–134).
^ Prosek, James (2010). Eels: An Exploration. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-056611-1. 
^ Conger conger, European conger: fisheries, gamefish, aquarium. Fishbase.org
^ FishBase Archived 10 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. FishBase (2011-11-15).
^ a b Campbell, Lady Colin (1886). A Book of the Running Brook: and of Still Waters. New York: O. Judd Co. pp. 9; 18. 
^ Inoue, Jun G.; et al. (2010). "Deep-ocean origin of the freshwater eels". Biol. Lett. 6 (3): 363–366. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2009.0989. PMC 2880065 . PMID 20053660. 
^ Nelson, Joseph S.; Grande, Terry C.; Wilson, Mark V. H. (2016). Fishes of the World (5th ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781118342336. 
^ Johnson, G. D.; Ida H.; Sakaue J.; Sado T.; Asahida T.; Miya M. (2012). "A 'living fossil' eel (Anguilliformes: Protanguillidae, fam nov) from an undersea cave in Palau". Proceedings of the Royal Society. (in press). doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.1289. 
^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2012). "Anguilla rostrata" in FishBase. May 2012 version.
^ "Anguilla rostrata". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved May 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2012). "Anguilla anguilla" in FishBase. May 2012 version.
^ Anguilla anguilla (Linnaeus, 1758) FAO, Species Fact Sheet. Retrieved 20 May 2012.
^ "Anguilla anguilla". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved May 2012.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Freyhof, J, Kottelat M (2010). "Anguilla anguilla". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2011.2. International Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved 20 May 2012. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2012). "Anguilla japonica" in FishBase. May 2012 version.
^ Anguilla japonica, Temminck & Schlegel, 1846 FAO, Species Fact Sheet. Retrieved May 2012.
^ "Anguilla japonica". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved May 2012.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2012). "Anguilla australis" in FishBase. May 2012 version.
^ "Anguilla australis". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved May 2012.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ http://www.buber.net/Basque/Food/food1.html
^ Champken, Neil (2 June 2006). "Would you pay £600 for a handful of baby eels?". theguardian.com. Retrieved 7 April 2015. 
^ Leake, Jonathan (7 February 2015). "EU's eel edict costs UK £100m". The Sunday Times. Retrieved 7 April 2015. 
^ "Types of Eel". 
^ "Poison in the Blood of the Eel". 9 April 1899. Retrieved 22 January 2010. 
^ "The plight of the eel (mentions that "Only 0.1 ml/kg is enough to kill small mammals, such as a rabbit.." BBC online. Retrieved 22 January 2010. 
^ "Blood serum of the eel." M. Sato. Nippon Biseibutsugakukai Zasshi (1917), 5 (No. 35), From: Abstracts Bact. 1, 474 (1917)
^ "Hemolytic and toxic properties of certain serums." Wm. J. Keffer, Albert E. Welsh. Mendel Bulletin (1936), 8 76–80.
^ "Charles Robert Richet". encyclopedia.com. 
^ snopes (4 December 2015). "Eelskin Demagnitizes : snopes.com". Snopes. Retrieved 21 April 2010. 
^ Barss, William (1993), "Pacific hagfish, Eptatretus stouti, and black hagfish, E. deani: the Oregon Fishery and Port sampling observations, 1988–92", Marine Fisheries Review (Fall, 1993), retrieved 21 April 2010 
^ "Greenpeace Seafood Red list". Greenpeace International. 
^ "Indonesia eel hot item for smugglers". The Japan Times. Retrieved 30 July 2013. 
^ Katz, J. (1998). "How to be a Dragon in Indo-European: Hittite illuyankas and its Linguistic and Cultural Congeners in Latin, Greek, and Germanic". In Jasanoff; Melchert; Oliver. Mír Curad. Studies in Honor of Calvert Watkins. Innsbruck. pp. 317–334. ISBN 3-85124-667-5. 


Further references[edit]

Tesch FW and White RJ (2008) The Eel John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781405173438.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anguilliformes.



Froese, Rainer, and Daniel Pauly, eds. (2006). "Anguilliformes" in FishBase. January 2006 version.
"Anguilliformes". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved 4 June 2008. 
 "Apodes". New International Encyclopedia. 1905. 







v
t
e


Eels



True eels



Anguilliformes
Anguilloidei

freshwater eels
false morays
mud eels
spaghetti eels
moray eels
thin eels
Protanguillidae


Congroideis

worm eels
congers
longneck eels
pike congers
duckbill eels


snake eels
Other

snipe eels
sawtooth eels
cutthroat eels










Other eels



Blind cave eel
Bobtail snipe eels
Cusk eels
Electric eel
Fire eel
Gulper eel
Pelican eel
Rubber eel
Sand eels
Slime eel
Spiny eel
Swamp eels
Tire track eel
Wolf eel





As food



Eel (food)
Anago
Eel pie
Jellied eels
Kabayaki
Unadon





Related topics



Eel life history
Eel ladder
Ely Eel Day
Eel pot
Glass eels
Leptocephalus (larvae)
Abaia
Eel cuddling
Sina and the Eel
Sniggle












v
t
e


Principal commercial fishery species groups



Wild




Large pelagic fish



Mackerel
Salmon
Saury
Shark
Swordfish
Tuna

albacore
bigeye
Atlantic bluefin
Pacific bluefin
southern bluefin
skipjack
yellowfin







Forage fish



Anchovy
Capelin
Herring
Ilish
Menhaden
Sardines
Shad
Sprat

european







Demersal fish



Catfish
Cod

Atlantic
Pacific
Alaska pollock


Flatfish

flounder
halibut
plaice
sole
turbot


Haddock
Mullet
Orange roughy
Pollock
Rockfish
Smelt-whitings
Toothfish





Freshwater fish



Carp
Sturgeon
Tilapia
Trout





Other wild fish



Eel
Whitebait
more...





Crustaceans



Crab
Krill
Lobster
Shrimp
more...





Molluscs



Abalone
Mussels
Octopus
Oysters
Scallops
Squid
more...





Echinoderms



Sea cucumbers
Sea urchin
more...















Farmed



Carp

bighead
common
crucian
grass
silver


Catfish
Freshwater prawns
Gilt-head bream
Mussels
Oysters
Salmon

Atlantic
salmon trout
coho
chinook


Scallops
Seaweed
Shrimp
Tilapia








Commercial fishing
World fish production
Commercial species
Fishing topics
Fisheries glossary












v
t
e


Extant Actinopterygii orders by subclass






Kingdom Animalia
Phylum Chordata
Subphylum Vertebrata
Infraphylum Gnathostomata
Superclass Osteichthyes





Cladistii



Polypteriformes





Actinopteri




Chondrostei



Acipenseriformes





Neopterygii




Holostei



Lepisosteiformes
Amiiformes





Teleostei




Elopomorpha



Elopiformes
Albuliformes
Notacanthiformes
Anguilliformes





Osteoglossomorpha



Osteoglossiformes
Hiodontiformes





Otomorpha



Clupeiformes
Alepocephaliformes
Gonorynchiformes
Cypriniformes
Characiformes
Gymnotiformes
Siluriformes





Lepidogalaxii



Lepidogalaxiiformes





Protacanthopterygii



Argentiniformes
Galaxiiformes
Salmoniformes
Esociformes





Stomiati



Osmeriformes
Stomiiformes





incertae sedis



Ateleopodiformes
Aulopiformes
Myctophiformes
Lampriformes
Polymixiiformes





Paracanthopterygii



Percopsiformes
Zeiformes
Stylephoriformes
Gadiformes





Acanthopterygii



Beryciformes
Trachichthyiformes
Holocentriformes
Ophidiiformes
Batrachoidiformes
Kurtiformes
Gobiiformes
Syngnathiformes
Scombriformes
Synbranchiformes
Anabantiformes
Istiophoriformes
Carangiformes
Pleuronectiformes
Cichliformes
Atheriniformes
Cyprinodontiformes
Beloniformes
Mugiliformes
Gobiesociformes
Blenniiformes
Gerreiformes
Uranoscopiformes
Labriformes
Moroniformes
Ephippiformes
Chaetodontiformes
Acanthuriformes
Lutjaniformes
Lobotiformes
Spariformes
Scatophagiformes
Priacanthiformes
Caproiformes
Lophiiformes
Tetraodontiformes
Pempheriformes
Centrarchiformes
Perciformes


















Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q128685
ADW: Anguilliformes
EoL: 8280
Fauna Europaea: 12015
Fossilworks: 35343
GBIF: 495
ITIS: 161123
NCBI: 7933
WoRMS: 10295











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eel&oldid=818050027"					Categories: EelsCommercial fishElopomorphaSeafood red listExtant Cretaceous first appearancesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 errors: datesCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from May 2013Articles with 'species' microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaArticles which contain graphical timelines