





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Feminism




Women
Girls
Femininity






History



Social




Feminist history
History of feminism



Women's history

American
British
Canadian
German







Timelines





Women's suffrage

Muslim countries
US





Other women's rights




Suffrage by country





Australia
Canada
Japan
Kuwait
New Zealand
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Wales


United States

In states

Utah









Waves





First
Second
Third
Fourth












Variants (general)



Amazon
Analytical
Anarchist
Atheist
Conservative
Cultural
Cyber
Difference
Eco-

Vegetarian


Equality
Fat
French

French post-structuralist


Gender
Global
Hip-hop/Hip hop
Individualist
Jineology
Labor
Lesbian

Radical lesbians


Liberal

Equity


Lipstick
Marxist
Material
Maternal
Neo-
New
Post-
Postcolonial
Postmodern
Anti-abortion
Post-structural
Multicultural

Black
Chicana
White
Indigenous

Native American




Radical
Separatist
Sex-positive
Social
Socialist
Standpoint
Third world
Trans
Transnational
Womanism

Africana











Variants (religious)



Buddhist
Christian
Neopagan

Dianic Wicca
Reclaiming


Hindu
Islamic
Jewish

Orthodox


Mormon
Sikh









Concepts



Antifeminism
Bicycling
Criticism of marriage
Children's literature
Effects on society
Equality
Embedded feminism
Female education
Female genital mutilation
Femicide
Feminazi
Feminism in culture
Feminist stripper
Gender equality
Girl power
Honor killing
International Women's Day
Language reform
Male gaze
Matriarchal religion
Media
Men and feminism
Meninism
Movement

African-American woman suffrage movement
Art movement
In hip hop


Networked feminism
Oedipus complex
Political lesbianism

Lesbian separatism


Pro-feminism
Protofeminism
Reproductive justice
Sex workers' rights
Sexual harassment
Sexual objectification
State feminism
Straw feminism
Theory

in composition studies


Triple oppression
Victim feminism
Violence against women
Views on BDSM
Views on pornography
Views on prostitution
Views on sexual orientation
Views on sexuality
Views on transgender and transsexual people
War on Women
Women's health
Women's rights









Theory






Feminist method
Gender studies
Gender mainstreaming
Gynocentrism
Kyriarchy
Matriarchy
Women's studies
Men's studies
Patriarchy
Écriture féminine





Feminist...





anthropology
archaeology
architecture
art

art criticism
literary criticism
film theory


biology
composition studies
criminology

pathways perspective


economics
fpda
geography
international relations

constructivism


legal theory
pedagogy
philosophy

aesthetics
empiricism
epistemology
ethics

justice ethics


existentialism
metaphysics


political ecology
political theory
pornography
psychology
revisionist mythology
science fiction
sex wars
sexology
sociology
technoscience
theology

thealogy
womanist theology














By country



Albania
Australia
Bangladesh
Canada
China
Republic of the Congo
Denmark
Egypt
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Republic of Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latin America

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Haiti
Honduras
Mexico
Paraguay
Trinidad and Tobago


Lebanon
Malaysia
Mali
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Northern Cyprus
Norway
Pakistan
Philippines
Poland
Russia
Syria
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Vietnam
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States

Feminist movement
History of women











Lists and categories



Lists





Articles
Feminists

by nationality


Literature

American feminist literature
Feminist comic books





Conservative feminisms
Countries by women's average years in school
Ecofeminist authors
Feminist art critics
Feminist economists
Feminist philosophers
Feminist poets
Feminist rhetoricians
Jewish feminists
Muslim feminists
Feminist parties
Suffragists and suffragettes
Women's rights activists
Women's studies journals
Women's suffrage organizations




Categories




Women's rights by country
Feminists by nationality









 Feminism portal





v
t
e







Part of a series on


Masculism




Men
Boys
Masculinity






Movements





Men's movement
Mythopoetic men's movement
Men's liberation movement
Men's rights movement
Fathers' rights movement
Egalitarianism











Topics and issues



Topics




Sex differences in humans
Human male sexuality
Gender equality



(Misandry
Hegemonic masculinity)




Gender roles
Machismo



Men and feminism



(Pro-feminism
Anti-feminism)





Issues





Genital mutilation
Forced circumcision



Rape



(Prison rape
Male rape
False accusation of rape)



Domestic violence (against men)
Violence against LGBT people



(Homophobia
Gay bashing
Transphobia)



Conscription



Reproductive Rights
Paternal rights and abortion
No-fault divorce












By country



Men's rights




India




Fathers' rights





Australia
Italy
United Kingdom
United States












Notable persons





Warren Farrell
Robert Bly











Lists and categories





Index of masculism topics
Category:Men's movement
Category:Men's organizations











See also





Airline sex discrimination policy controversy
Boys are stupid, throw rocks at them! controversy
International Men's Day
Meninism









 Men's rights portal





v
t
e





Egalitarianism (from French égal, meaning 'equal') – or equalitarianism[1][2] – is a school of thought that prioritizes equality for all people.[3] According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Egalitarian doctrines maintain that all humans are equal in fundamental worth or social status.[4] According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the term has two distinct definitions in modern English:[5] either as a political doctrine that all people should be treated as equals and have the same political, economic, social and civil rights;[6] or as a social philosophy advocating the removal of economic inequalities among people, economic egalitarianism, or the decentralization of power. Some sources define egalitarianism as the point of view that equality reflects the natural state of humanity.[7][8][9]



Contents


1 Forms

1.1 Legal egalitarianism

1.1.1 Equality of person
1.1.2 Equality of men and women in rights and responsibilities
1.1.3 Gender equality


1.2 Social egalitarianism

1.2.1 Economic


1.3 Religious and spiritual egalitarianism

1.3.1 Sikhism
1.3.2 Christianity
1.3.3 Judaism
1.3.4 Islam


1.4 Military egalitarianism
1.5 Modern egalitarianism theory


2 Reception

2.1 Marxism


3 See also
4 References
5 External links



Forms[edit]
Some specifically focused egalitarian concerns include communism, legal egalitarianism, luck egalitarianism, political egalitarianism, gender egalitarianism, racial equality, equality of outcome and Christian egalitarianism. Common forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical.
Legal egalitarianism[edit]
For more details on this topic, see equality before the law.
One argument is that liberalism provides democratic societies with the means to carry out civic reform by providing a framework for developing public policy and thus providing the right conditions for individuals to achieve civil rights.[10]
Equality of person[edit]
The English Bill of Rights of 1689 and the United States Constitution use only the term "person" in operative language involving fundamental rights and responsibilities, except for (a) a reference to "men" in the English Bill of Rights regarding men on trial for treason; and (b) a rule of proportional Congressional representation in the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.
As the rest of the Constitution, in its operative language the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution uses the term "person" stating, for example, that "[...] nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws".
Equality of men and women in rights and responsibilities[edit]
An example of this form is the Tunisian Constitution of 2014 which provides that "men and women shall be equal in their rights and duties".
Gender equality[edit]
The motto "Liberté, égalité, fraternité" was used during the French Revolution and is still used as an official motto of the French government. The 1789 Rights of Man and of the Citizen French Constitution is framed also with this basis in equal rights of men, but not of women.[citation needed] This was satirized by Olympe de Gouges during this time with her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen.
The Declaration of Independence of the United States is an example of an assertion of equality of men, but not of women[citation needed] under natural rights, with its language "all men are created equal". This assertion may be understood by the use of "man" or "men" as a proper noun in the sense of "mankind". John Locke is sometimes considered the founder of this form.
Some of the framers of the United States Constitution, most notably John Dickinson, refused to sign the Declaration of Independence in part because of this use of "rights of man" rather than "rights of person".[citation needed]
Many state constitutions in the United States also use "rights of man" language rather than "rights of person" (see the Kentucky State Constitution).
It is generally accepted by egalitarians that some feminists have given up equal thinking and only focused on women's rights and the exclusion of other gender rights. By the original definition, feminism falls under egalitarianism and some feminists identify as egalitarian.
Social egalitarianism[edit]
At a cultural level, egalitarian theories have developed in sophistication and acceptance during the past two hundred years. Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are socialism, communism, social anarchism, libertarian socialism, left-libertarianism, one-nation conservatism and progressivism, some of which propound economic egalitarianism. Several egalitarian ideas enjoy wide support among intellectuals and in the general populations of many countries. However, whether any of these ideas have been significantly implemented in practice remains a controversial question. A position of opposition to egalitarianism is antiegalitarianism.[11]

Economic[edit]
An early example of equality of outcome economic egalitarianism is Xu Xing, a scholar of the Chinese philosophy of agriculturalism, who supported the fixing of prices and in which all similar goods and services, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.[12]
In socialism, social ownership of means of production is sometimes considered to be a form of economic egalitarianism because in an economy characterized by social ownership, the surplus product generated by industry would accrue to the population as a whole as opposed to a class of private owners, thereby granting each individual increased autonomy and greater equality in their relationships with one another. Although the economist Karl Marx is sometimes mistaken to be an egalitarian, Marx eschewed normative theorizing on moral principles altogether. However, Marx did have a theory of the evolution of moral principles in relation to specific economic systems.[13]
The American economist John Roemer has put forth a new perspective of equality and its relationship to socialism. Roemer attempts to reformulate Marxist analysis to accommodate normative principles of distributive justice, shifting the argument for socialism away from purely technical and materialist reasons to one of distributive justice. Roemer argues that according to the principle of distributive justice, the traditional definition of socialism based on the principle that individual compensation be proportional to the value of the labour one expends in production is inadequate. Roemer concludes that egalitarians must reject socialism as it is classically defined in order for equality to be realized.[14]
Religious and spiritual egalitarianism[edit]
Sikhism[edit]
The Sikh faith was founded upon egalitarian principles, reaffirming the notion of equality not only based upon race, but also between the genders. This equality led to denunciation of sati, the practice of widows sacrificing themselves on the funeral pyres of deceased husbands, albeit being very rare at the time, but occurred due to the wives of warriors preferring to commit self-immolation than becoming the bounty of war for the marauding jihadists that were waging wars in India and Afghanistan during the early Ghazni wars. The scriptural injunction is often ascribed as providing women in the Sikh faith equal rights to practice their faith and be regarded as created equal in the eyes of God. Whilst the noble premise to strive for egalitarianism, many Sikhs still practice strong tribal casteism, with greater rigidity than the hindu archetype from which the practice was inherited.[15] Despite the rhetoric of equality, scholars have "found contradictions in the Sikh rhetoric of equality and widespread discrimination against Sikh's of low castes".[15] Furthermore, despite many Sikh scholars decreeing the egalitarian tenets of Sikhism, denouncing sexism, female infanticide, dowry, sati or the condemning of widows to a life of solitude and isolation—the reality is these practices have remained prevalent whilst they have long fallen out of favour with the other ethnocultural religious groups in the Indian continent, like Hindus, Buddhists and Jains.[16]
Christianity[edit]
Main articles: Christian egalitarianism, Christian communism, and Christian universalism
The Christian egalitarian view holds that the Bible teaches the fundamental equality of women and men of all racial and ethnic mixes, all economic classes and all age groups, but within the teachings and example of Jesus Christ, God and the overarching principles of scripture.[17]
Within the wide range of Christianity there are dissenting views to this from opposing groups, some of which are complementarians and patriarchalists. There are also those who may say that whilst the Bible encourages equality, it also encourages law and order and social structure (for example, parents having authority over their children and the view that wife should submit to her husband and husband's should in return love their wives.[Eph. 5:22–33] These ideas are considered by some to be contrary to the ideals of egalitarianism. At its foundation, Galatians 3:28 holds: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus" – defining all as equal in the sight of God. Similarly, Colossians 3:11 says: "Here there is no Gentile or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all, and is in all", defining all as equal in the sight of God in relationship to faith in Jesus Christ. Various Christian groups have attempted to hold to this view and develop Christian oriented communities. In Acts, chapter 2, members of the early Christian community sell their possessions, give the proceeds to a common fund overseen by the disciples, then take "according to their need". One of the most notable of present-day communities are the Hutterite groups of Europe and North America, living in agricultural and collective communities.
Judaism[edit]
Judaism is not a universalist religion and teaches that Jews (defined as either the biological descendants of Jacob "Israel", the son of Isaac and grandson of Abraham or someone who converted) have a specific covenant with God as a chosen people (Deutoronomy 7:6 "chosen as God's treasured people") to serve as an example of God's light to the rest of the world. The oral Torah and Rabbinic literature codified in the Talmud makes key distinctions in religious and legal contexts between Jews and the gentiles (literally, "the nations"). However, Judaism teaches that all people are the creations of God and are commanded in the seven universal moral laws known as the Seven Laws of Noah. In this aspect, Judaism is universalist in its divine message, but not in its religious obligations. In reform and conservative Judaism, egalitarian refers to nullification of religious gender separations. Synagogues that identify as egalitarian allow mixed seating (i.e. no mechitza) and allow women to lead services with men in attendance as well as read publicly from the Torah.
Islam[edit]
The Islamic stance on equality is to some extent similar to that of Christianity as a universal religion and stresses that all humans are equal in the eyes of God, regardless of gender, class and race. The Quran states: "O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the most noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted".[18] Louise Marlow's Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought compares the egalitarianism of early Islam to current practice.[19]
Military egalitarianism[edit]
Military egalitarianism has been noted since ancient times, such as with Shakespeare's St Crispin's Day Speech. This occurs in spite of the distinctions military forces attempt to make between officers and enlisted men. For example, former Major General Charles J. Dunlap, Jr. said that United States Air Force culture included an egalitarianism bred from officers as warriors who work with small groups of enlisted airmen either as the service crew or onboard crew of their aircraft.[20]
Modern egalitarianism theory[edit]
Modern egalitarianism is a theory that rejects the classic definition of egalitarianism as a possible achievement economically, politically and socially. Modern egalitarianism theory (or  "new egalitarianism") outlines that if everyone had the same opportunity cost, then there would be no comparative advances and no one would gain from trading with each other. In essence, the immense gains people receive from trading with each other arise because they are unequal in characteristics and talents—these differences may be innate or developed so that people can gain from trading with each other.[21]
Reception [edit]
The cultural theory of risk holds egalitarianism as defined by (1) a negative attitude towards rules and principles; and (2) a positive attitude towards group decision-making, with fatalism termed as its opposite.[22] The theory distinguishes between hierarchists, who are positive towards both rules and groups; and egalitarianists, who are positive towards groups, but negative towards rules.[22] This is by definition a form of "anarchist equality" as referred to by Berkman. The fabric of an "egalitarianist society" is thus held together by cooperation and implicit peer pressure rather than by explicit rules and punishment. However, Thompson et al. theorise that any society consisting of only one perspective, be it egalitarianist, hierarchist, individualist, fatalist or autonomist, will be inherently unstable: the claim is that an interplay between all these perspectives are required if each perspective is to be fulfilling. For instance, although an individualist according to cultural theory is aversive towards both principles and groups, individualism is not fulfilling if individual brilliance cannot be recognised by groups, or if individual brilliance cannot be made permanent in the form of principles.[22] Accordingly, egalitarianists have no power except through their presence, unless they (by definition, reluctantly) embrace principles which enable them to cooperate with fatalists and hierarchists. They will also have no individual sense of direction in the absence of a group. This could be mitigated by following individuals outside their group: autonomists or individualists.
Alexander Berkman suggests that "equality does not mean an equal amount but equal opportunity [...] Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the forced equality of the convict camp. True anarchist equality implies freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that every one must eat, drink, or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same manner. Far from it: the very reverse in fact [...] Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is equal opportunity to satisfy them that constitutes true equality [...] Far from levelling, such equality opens the door for the greatest possible variety of activity and development. For human character is diverse".[23]
Marxism[edit]
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels believed that a revolution would bring about a socialist society which would then eventually give way to a communist stage of social development, which would be a classless, stateless, humane society erected on common ownership and the principle of "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs".
However, Marxism rejected egalitarianism in the sense of greater equality between classes, clearly distinguishing it from the socialist notion of the abolition of classes based on the division between workers and owners of productive property. Marx's view of classlessness was not the subordination of society to a universal interest (such as a universal notion of "equality"), but was about the creation of the conditions that would enable individuals to pursue their true interests and desires—thus Marx's notion of communist society is radically individualistic.[24]
Marx was a proponent of two principles, the first applied to socialism and the second to an advanced communist society: "To each according to his contribution" and "From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs". Although Marx's position is often confused or conflated with distributive egalitarianism in which only the goods and services resulting from production are distributed according to a notional equality, in reality Marx eschewed the entire concept of equality as abstract and bourgeois in nature, preferring to focus on more concrete principles such as opposition to exploitation on materialist grounds and economic logic.[25]
See also[edit]


"All men are created equal"
Anarchism
Basic income
Deep ecology
Discrimination
Elitism
Equal opportunity
Equality of outcome
Feminism
Same-sex marriage
Gift economy
Inequity aversion
Law of Jante
Left-wing politics
Meritocracy
Mutualism
Reciprocal altruism
Redistributive justice


References[edit]



^ "Definition of equalitarianism". The Free Dictionary. Houghton Mifflin Company. 2009. 
^ "Definition of equalitarianism". Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com, LLC. 2012. 
^ Egalitarian | Define Egalitarian at Dictionary.com
^ Arneson Richard, "Egalitarianism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2002.) Web: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/egalitarianism
^ Egalitarianism – Definition – Merriam-Webster Dictionary
^ The American Heritage Dictionary (2003). "egalitarianism". 
^ John Gowdy (1998). Limited Wants, Unlimited Means: A reader on Hunter-Gatherer Economics and the Environment. St Louis: Island Press. p. 342. ISBN 1-55963-555-X. 
^ Dahlberg, Frances. (1975). Woman the Gatherer. London: Yale university press. ISBN 0-300-02989-6. 
^ Erdal, D. & Whiten, A. (1996) "Egalitarianism and Machiavellian Intelligence in Human Evolution" in Mellars, P. & Gibson, K. (eds) Modeling the Early Human Mind. Cambridge MacDonald Monograph Series.
^ Rosales, José María. "Liberalism, Civic Reformism and Democracy." 20th World Contress on Philosophy: Political Philosophy. Web: 12 March 2010. Liberalism, Civic Reformism and Democracy
^ Sidanius, Jim, et al. "Social dominance orientation, anti‐egalitarianism and the political psychology of gender: an extension and cross‐cultural replication." European Journal of Social Psychology 30.1 (2000): 41-67.
^ Denecke, Wiebke (2011). The Dynamics of Masters Literature: Early Chinese Thought from Confucius to Han Feizi. Harvard University Press. p. 38. 
^ "Egalitarianism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 16 August 2002. Retrieved 20 November 2013. 
^ Socialism vs Social Democracy as Income-Equalizing Institutions, by Roemer, John. 2008. Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 34, issue 1, pp. 14–26.
^ a b Darshan, S. T. "7 Sikhism and development: a perfect match?." Handbook of Research on Development and Religion (2013): 97.
^ Singh, I. J. "What sikhism says about gender and sex." International Sikh Conferences. 2004.
^ Stagg, Evelyn and Frank. Woman in the World of Jesus. Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1978. ISBN 0-664-24195-6
^ The Quran 49:13 – English translation by Saheeh International
^ Poonawala, Ismail K. (Summer 1999). "Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought by Louise Marlow". www.jstor.org. Iranian Studies Vol. 32, No. 3 (Summer, 1999), pp. 405–407. Retrieved 10 July 2014. 
^ "Understanding Airmen: A primer for soldiers" (PDF). Retrieved 13 December 2011. 
^ Whaples, Robert M. (2017). "Egalitarianism:Fair and Equal? New Thinking on Egalitarianism" (PDF). The Independent Review. Archived from the original on 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017.  line feed character in |title= at position 31 (help)
^ a b c Thompson et al., Cultural Theory (1990)
^ Alexander Berkman What is Anarchism? pp. 164–165.
^ Karl Marx on Equality, by Woods, Allen. http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/docs/IO/19808/Allen-Wood-Marx-on-Equality.pdf: "Marx thinks the idea of equality is actually a vehicle for bourgeois class oppression, and something quite different from the communist goal of the abolition of classes ... A society that has transcended class antagonisms, therefore, would not be one in which some truly universal interest at last reigns, to which individual interests must be sacrificed."
^ Rejecting Egalitarianism, by Nielsen, Kai. 1987. Political Theory, Vol. 15, No. 3 (Aug., 1987), pp. 411–423.



External links[edit]



Look up egalitarian in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Look up egalitarianism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Egalitarianism



Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:

Egalitarianism.
Moral Egalitarianism.


Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:

Egalitarianism, by R. Arneson (2002).
Equality, by S. Gosepath (2007).
Equality of opportunity, by R. Arneson (2002).


Lepowsky, Maria. 1993. Fruit of the Motherland: Gender in an Egalitarian Society. New York: Columbia University Press.
The Equality Studies Centre
Twin Oaks Intentional Community
Federation of Egalitarian Communities




Authority control



LCCN: sh85044503
GND: 4151082-3
NDL: 00561152











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egalitarianism&oldid=818011939"					Categories: EgalitarianismPolitical cultureSocial theoriesEthical theoriesDecentralizationSocial inequalityPolitical ideologiesSocial justiceFair divisionEquality rightsHuman rights activismEconomic ideologiesHidden categories: CS1 errors: invisible charactersUse dmy dates from July 2012Articles needing additional references from October 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2017Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers