For other uses, see El Salvador (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 13°50′N 88°55′W﻿ / ﻿13.833°N 88.917°W﻿ / 13.833; -88.917


Republic of El Salvador
República de El Salvador (Spanish)







Flag



Coat of arms






Motto: "Dios, Unión, Libertad" (Spanish)
English: "God, Unity, Freedom"




Anthem: Himno Nacional de El Salvador
English: "National Anthem of El Salvador"












Capital
and largest city
San Salvador
13°40′N 89°10′W﻿ / ﻿13.667°N 89.167°W﻿ / 13.667; -89.167


Official languages
Spanish


Ethnic groups



86.3% Mestizo
12.7% White
0.23% Indigenous
0.13% Black
0.64% Other [1]





Demonym
Salvadoran
Guanaco (Informal)


Government
Unitary presidential constitutional republic



• President

Salvador Sánchez Cerén



• Vice President

Óscar Ortiz


Legislature
Legislative Assembly


Independence



• Declared from Spain

15 September 1821



• Declared from the
First Mexican Empire

1 July 1823



• Becomes an independent nation[2]

18 February 1841


Area



• Total

21,041 km2 (8,124 sq mi) (148th)



• Water (%)

1.5


Population



• 2016 estimate

6,344,722[3] (99th)



• Density

303.1/km2 (785.0/sq mi) (47th)


GDP (PPP)
2015 estimate



• Total

$52.666 billion[4]



• Per capita

$8,668[4]


GDP (nominal)
2015 estimate



• Total

$28.986 billion[4]



• Per capita

$4,776[4]


Gini (2013)
43.5[5]
medium


HDI (2014)
 0.686[6]
medium · 116th


Currency
United States dollara (USD)


Time zone
CST (UTC−6)


Drives on the
right


Calling code
+503b


ISO 3166 code
SV


Internet TLD
.sv





The United States dollar is the currency in use. Financial information can be expressed in U.S. dollars and in Salvadoran colón, but the colón is out of circulation.[7]
Telephone companies (market share): Tigo (45%), Claro (25%), Movistar (24%), Digicel (5.5%), Red (0.5%).





El Salvador (/ɛl ˈsælvədɔːr/ ( listen); Spanish: [el salβaˈðor]), officially the Republic of El Salvador (Spanish: República de El Salvador, literally "Republic of The Savior"), is the smallest and the most densely populated country in Central America. El Salvador's capital and largest city is San Salvador. As of 2016[update], the country had a population of approximately 6.34 million,[3] consisting largely of Mestizos of European and Indigenous American descent.
El Salvador was for centuries inhabited by several Mesoamerican nations, especially the Cuzcatlecs, as well as the Lenca and Maya. In the early 16th century, the Spanish Empire conquered the territory, incorporating it into the Viceroyalty of New Spain ruled from Mexico City. In 1821, the country achieved independence from Spain as part of the First Mexican Empire, then further seceded, as part of the Federal Republic of Central America, in 1823. When the Republic dissolved in 1841, El Salvador became a sovereign nation, then formed a short-lived union with Honduras and Nicaragua called the Greater Republic of Central America, which lasted from 1895 to 1898.[8][9][10]
From the late 19th to the mid-20th century, El Salvador endured chronic political and economic instability characterized by coups, revolts, and a succession of authoritarian rulers. Persistent socioeconomic inequality and civil unrest culminated in the devastating Salvadoran Civil War (1979–1992), which was fought between the military-led government and a coalition of left-wing guerrilla groups. The conflict ended with the Chapultepec Peace Accords. This negotiated settlement established a multiparty constitutional republic, which remains in place to this day.
El Salvador's economy has historically been dominated by agriculture, beginning with the indigo plant (añil in Spanish), the most important crop during the colonial period,[11][12] and followed thereafter by coffee, which by the early 20th century accounted for 90 percent of export earnings.[13][14] El Salvador has since reduced its dependence on coffee and embarked on diversifying the economy by opening up trade and financial links and expanding the manufacturing sector.[15] The colón, the official currency of El Salvador since 1892, was replaced by the U.S. dollar in 2001.
As of 2010[update], El Salvador ranks 12th among Latin American countries in terms of the Human Development Index and fourth in Central America (behind Panama, Costa Rica, and Belize) due in part to ongoing rapid industrialisation.[16] However, the country continues to struggle with high rates of poverty, inequality, and crime.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Prehistoric
2.2 Pre-Columbian
2.3 European contact (1522)

2.3.1 Conquest of Cuzcatlán (1524–1525)


2.4 Spanish rule (1525–1821)
2.5 Independence (1821)
2.6 20th century
2.7 Salvadoran Civil War (1979–1992)
2.8 Post-war (1992–present)


3 Geography

3.1 Climate
3.2 Natural disasters

3.2.1 Extreme weather events
3.2.2 Earthquakes and volcanic activity


3.3 Biodiversity and endangered species


4 Government and politics

4.1 Political culture
4.2 Foreign relations
4.3 Military
4.4 Human rights
4.5 Administrative divisions


5 Economy

5.1 Remittances from abroad
5.2 Free trade agreements
5.3 Official corruption and foreign investment
5.4 Tourism


6 Infrastructure

6.1 Water supply and sanitation


7 Demographics

7.1 Ethnic groups
7.2 Languages
7.3 Largest cities
7.4 Religion


8 Health
9 Education
10 Crime
11 Culture

11.1 Public holidays
11.2 Cuisine
11.3 Music
11.4 Sport


12 See also
13 References
14 Further reading
15 External links



Etymology






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Conquistador Pedro de Alvarado named the new province for Jesus Christ – El Salvador ("The Savior"). The full name was "Provincia De Nuestro Señor Jesus Cristo, El Salvador Del Mundo" ("Province of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World"), which was subsequently abbreviated to "El Salvador" (The Savior).
History
Prehistoric




Excavation of a Megatherium in the Tomayate site Apopa.






Skull fossil of an ancient-horse in the Tomayate site Apopa.


Tomayate (es) is a paleontological site located on the banks of the river of the same name in the municipality of Apopa. The site has produced abundant Salvadoran megafauna fossils belonging to the Pleistocene epoch. The paleontological site was discovered accidentally in 2000, and in the following year an excavation by the Museum of Natural History of El Salvador revealed not only several remnants of Cuvieronius, but also several other species of vertebrates. In the Tomayate site, they have recovered at least 19 species of vertebrates, including giant tortoises, Megatherium, Glyptodon, Toxodon, extinct horses, paleo-llamas and especially a large number of skeletal remains of proboscis genus Cuvieronius. The Tomayate site stands out from most Central American Pleistocene deposits, being more ancient and much richer, which provides valuable information of the Great American Interchange, in which the Central American isthmus landbridge played the title primordial role. At the same time, it is considered the richest vertebrate paleontological site in Central America and one of the largest accumulations of proboscideans in the Americas.
Main article: History of El Salvador




Temazcal in Joya de Ceren.


Pre-Columbian
Main article: Cuzcatlan
Sophisticated civilization in El Salvador dates to its settlement by the indigenous Lenca people; theirs was the first and the oldest indigenous civilization to settle in El Salvador. The Lenca were succeeded by the Olmecs, who eventually also disappeared, leaving their monumental architecture in the form of the pyramids still extant in western El Salvador. The Maya arrived and settled in place of the Olmecs, but their numbers were greatly diminished when the Ilopango supervolcano eruption caused a massive Mayan exodus out of what is now El Salvador.[17]
Centuries later they themselves were replaced by the Pipil people, Nahua speaking groups[17] who migrated from Mexico in the centuries before the European conquest and occupied the central and western regions. The Pipil were the last indigenous people to arrive in El Salvador.[18] They called their territory Kuskatan, a Pipil word[19] meaning The Place of Precious Jewels, backformed into Classical Nahuatl Cōzcatlān, and Hispanicized as Cuzcatlán.[20][21] The people of El Salvador today are referred to as Salvadoran, while the term Cuzcatleco is commonly used to identify someone of Salvadoran heritage.
In pre-Columbian times, the country was also inhabited by various other indigenous peoples, including the Lenca, a Chilanga Lencan-speaking group[22] who settled in the eastern highlands.[23] Cuzcatlan was the larger domain until the Spanish conquest. Since El Salvador resided on the eastern edge of the Maya Civilization, the origins of many of El Salvador's ruins are controversial. However, it is widely agreed that Mayas likely occupied the areas around Lago de Guija and Cihuatán. Other ruins such as Tazumal, Joya de Cerén and San Andrés may have been built by the Pipil or the Maya or possibly both.[24]
European contact (1522)
By 1521, the indigenous population of the Mesoamerican area had been drastically reduced by the smallpox epidemic that was spreading throughout the territory, although it had not yet reached pandemic levels in Cuzcatlán.[25][26][27] The first known visit by Spaniards to what is now Salvadoran territory was made by the Spanish admiral, Andrés Niño, who led a Spanish expedition to Central America. He disembarked in the Gulf of Fonseca on May 31, 1522, at Meanguera island, naming it Petronila,[28] and then discovered Jiquilisco Bay on the mouth of Lempa River. The first indigenous people to have contact with the Spanish were the Lenca of eastern El Salvador.
Conquest of Cuzcatlán (1524–1525)
Main article: Spanish conquest of El Salvador




Spanish Conquistador Pedro de Alvarado.


In 1524, after participating in the conquest of Mexico, Spanish conquistadors led by Pedro de Alvarado and his brother Gonzalo crossed the Rio Paz (Peace River) from the area comprising the present Republic of Guatemala into what is now the Republic of El Salvador. The Spaniards were disappointed to discover that the indigenous Pipil people had no gold or jewels like those they had found in Guatemala or Mexico, but recognized the richness of the land's volcanic soil.
Pedro de Alvarado led the first incursion by Spanish forces to extend their dominion to the nation of Cuzcatlan (El Salvador), in June 1524.[29] When he arrived at the borders of the Cuzcatlan kingdom he saw that civilians had been evacuated. Cuzcatlec warriors moved to the coastal city of Acajutla and waited for Alvarado and his forces. Alvarado approached, confident that the result would be similar to what occurred in Mexico and Guatemala where the people believed the Spanish were gods. He thought he would easily defeat this new indigenous force since his Mexican allies and the Pipil of Cuzcatlan spoke a similar language.
The Indigenous peoples of El Salvador did not see the Spanish as gods, but as foreign invaders. Alvarado saw that the Cuzcatan force outnumbered his Spanish soldiers and Mexican Indian allies. The Spanish withdrew and the Cuzcatlec army attacked, running behind them with war chants and shooting bow arrows. Alvarado had no choice but to fight to survive.[citation needed]
Alvarado described the Cuzcatlec soldiers in great detail as having shields made of colorful exotic feathers, a vest-like armor made of three inch cotton which arrows could not penetrate, and large spears. Both armies suffered many casualties, with a wounded Alvarado retreating and losing a lot of his men, especially among the Mexican Indian auxiliaries. Once his army had regrouped, Alvarado decided to head to the Cuzcatlan capital and again faced armed Cuzcatlec. Wounded, unable to fight and hiding in the cliffs, Alvarado sent his Spanish men on their horses to approach the Cuzcatlec to see if they would fear the horses, but they did not retreat, Alvarado recalls in his letters to Hernan Cortez.[citation needed]
The Cuzcatlec attacked again, and on this occasion stole Spanish weaponry. Alvarado retreated and sent Mexican Indian messengers to demand that the Cuzcatlec warriors return the stolen weapons and surrender to the Spanish king. The Cuzcatlec responded with the famous response, "If you want your weapons, come get them". As days passed, Alvarado, fearing an ambush, sent more Mexican Indian messengers to negotiate, but these messengers never came back and were presumably executed.




Tazumal ruins in Santa Ana, El Salvador.


The Spanish efforts were firmly resisted by the indigenous people, including the Pipil and their Mayan-speaking neighbors. They defeated the Spaniards and what was left of their Mexican Tlaxcala Indian allies, forcing them to withdraw to Guatemala. After being wounded, Alvarado abandoned the war and appointed his brother, Gonzalo de Alvarado, to continue the task. Two subsequent expeditions (the first in 1525, followed by a smaller group in 1528) brought the Pipil under Spanish control, since the Pipil also were weakened by a regional epidemic of smallpox. In 1525, the conquest of Cuzcatlán was completed and the city of San Salvador was established. The Spanish faced much resistance from the Pipil and were not able to reach eastern El Salvador, the area of the Lencas.
In 1526 the Spanish founded the garrison town of San Miguel, headed by another explorer and conquistador, Luis de Moscoso Alvarado, nephew of Pedro Alvarado. Oral history holds that a Maya-Lenca crown princess, Antu Silan Ulap I, organized resistance to the conquistadors.[30] The kingdom of Lenca was alarmed by de Moscoso's invasion, and Antu Silan travelled from village to village, uniting all the Lenca towns in present-day El Salvador and Honduras against the Spaniards. Through surprise attacks and overwhelming numbers, they were able to drive the Spanish out of San Miguel and destroy the garrison.
For ten years the Lencas prevented the Spanish from building a permanent settlement. Then the Spanish returned with more soldiers, including about 2,000 forced conscripts from indigenous communities in Guatemala. They pursued the Lenca leaders further up into the mountains of Intibucá.
Antu Silan Ulap eventually handed over control of the Lenca resistance to Lempira (also called Empira). Lempira was noteworthy among indigenous leaders in that he mocked the Spanish by wearing their clothes after capturing them and using their weapons captured in battle. Lempira fought in command of thousands of Lenca forces for six more years in El Salvador and Honduras until he was killed in battle. The remaining Lenca forces retreated into the hills. The Spanish were then able to rebuild their garrison town of San Miguel in 1537.
Spanish rule (1525–1821)




A painting of the First Independence Movement celebration in San Salvador. At the center, José Matías Delgado.






Manuel José Arce joined the movement for independence from Spain, joining in the first Cry for Independence on November 5, 1811 in San Salvador.


During the colonial period, El Salvador was part of the Captaincy General of Guatemala, also known as the Kingdom of Guatemala (Spanish: Reino de Guatemala), created in 1609 as an administrative division of New Spain. The Salvadoran territory was administered by the Mayor of Sonsonate, with San Salvador being established as an intendancia in 1786.
Towards the end of 1811, a combination of internal and external factors motivated Central American elites to attempt to gain independence from the Spanish Crown. The most important internal factors were the desire of local elites to control the country's affairs free of involvement from Spanish authorities, and the long-standing Creole aspiration for independence. The main external factors motivating the independence movement were the success of the French and American revolutions in the 18th century, and the weakening of the Spanish Crown's military power as a result of the Napoleonic Wars, with the resulting inability to control its colonies effectively.
In November 1811 Salvadoran priest José Matías Delgado rang the bells of Iglesia La Merced in San Salvador, calling for insurrection and launching the 1811 Independence Movement. This insurrection was suppressed and many of its leaders were arrested and served sentences in jail. Another insurrection was launched in 1814, and again this insurrection was also suppressed.
Independence (1821)
In 1821 in light of unrest in Guatemala, Spanish authorities capitulated and signed the Act of Independence of Central America, which released all of the Captaincy of Guatemala (comprising current territories of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica and the Mexican state of Chiapas) from Spanish rule and declared its independence. In 1821, El Salvador joined Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua in a union named the Federal Republic of Central America.
In early 1822, the authorities of the newly independent Central American provinces, meeting in Guatemala City, voted to join the newly constituted First Mexican Empire under Agustín de Iturbide. El Salvador resisted, insisting on autonomy for the Central American countries. A Mexican military detachment marched to San Salvador and suppressed dissent, but with the fall of Iturbide on 19 March 1823, the army decamped back to Mexico. Shortly thereafter, the authorities of the provinces revoked the vote to join Mexico, deciding instead to form a federal union of the five remaining provinces. (Chiapas permanently joined Mexico at this juncture.)
When the Federal Republic of Central America dissolved in 1841, El Salvador maintained its own government until it joined Honduras and Nicaragua in 1896 to form the Greater Republic of Central America, which dissolved in 1898.
After the mid-19th century, the economy was based on coffee growing. As the world market for indigo withered away, the economy prospered or suffered as the world coffee price fluctuated. The enormous profits that coffee yielded as a monoculture export served as an impetus for the concentration of land into the hands of an oligarchy of just a few families.[31]
Throughout the last half of the 19th century, a succession of presidents from the ranks of the Salvadoran oligarchy, nominally both conservative and liberal, generally agreed on the promotion of coffee as the predominant cash crop, the development of infrastructure (railroads and port facilities) primarily in support of the coffee trade, the elimination of communal landholdings to facilitate further coffee production, the passage of anti-vagrancy laws to ensure that displaced campesinos and other rural residents provided sufficient labor for the coffee fincas (plantations), and the suppression of rural discontent. In 1912, the national guard was created as a rural police force.
20th century




Gen. Tomás Regalado


In 1898, Gen. Tomas Regalado gained power by force, deposing Rafael Antonio Gutiérrez and ruling as president until 1903. Once in office he revived the practice of presidents designating their successors. After serving his term, he remained active in the Army of El Salvador, and was killed July 11, 1906, at El Jicaro during a war against Guatemala. Until 1913 El Salvador was politically stable, with undercurrents of popular discontent. When President Dr. Manuel Enrique Araujo was killed in 1913, many hypotheses were advanced for the political motive of his murder.




Dios, Union, Libertad (God, Unity, Liberty) El Salvador 1912 Flag.


Araujo's administration was followed by the Melendez-Quinonez dynasty that lasted from 1913 to 1927. Pio Romero Bosque, ex-Minister of the Government and a trusted collaborator of the dynasty, succeeded President Jorge Meléndez and in 1930 announced free elections, in which Arturo Araujo came to power on March 1, 1931 in what was considered the country's first freely contested election. His government lasted only nine months before it was overthrown by junior military officers who accused his Labor Party of lacking political and governmental experience and of using its government offices inefficiently. President Araujo faced general popular discontent, as the people had expected economic reforms and the redistribution of land. There were demonstrations in front of the National Palace from the first week of his administration. His vice president and minister of war was Gen. Maximiliano Hernández Martínez.
In December 1931, a coup d'état organized by junior officers and led by Gen. Martínez started in the First Regiment of Infantry across from the National Palace in downtown San Salvador. Only the First Regiment of Cavalry and the National Police defended the presidency (the National Police had been on its payroll), but later that night, after hours of fighting, the badly outnumbered defenders surrendered to rebel forces.
The Directorate, composed of officers, hid behind a shadowy figure,[32] a rich anti-Communist banker called Rodolfo Duke, and later installed the ardent fascist Gen. Martínez as president. The revolt was probably due to the army's discontent at not having been paid by President Araujo for some months. Araujo left the National Palace and unsuccessfully tried to organize forces to defeat the revolt.
The U.S. Minister in El Salvador met with the Directorate and later recognized the government of Martínez, which agreed to hold presidential elections. He resigned six months prior to running for re-election, winning back the presidency as the only candidate on the ballot. He ruled from 1935 to 1939, then from 1939 to 1943. He began a fourth term in 1944, but resigned in May after a general strike. Martínez had said he was going to respect the Constitution, which stipulated he could not be re-elected, but he refused to keep his promise.
From December 1931, the year of the coup that brought Martínez to power, there was brutal suppression of rural resistance. The most notable event was the February 1932 Salvadoran peasant uprising, originally led by Farabundo Martí and Abel Cuenca, and university students Alfonso Luna and Mario Zapata, but these leaders were captured before the planned insurrection. Only Cuenca survived; the other insurgents were killed by the government. After the capture of the movement leaders, the insurrection erupted in a disorganized and mob-controlled fashion, resulting in government repression that was later referred to as La Matanza (The Massacre), because tens of thousands of peasants died in the ensuing chaos on the orders of President Martinez.
In the unstable political climate of the previous few years, the social activist and revolutionary leader Farabundo Martí helped found the Communist Party of Central America, and led a Communist alternative to the Red Cross called International Red Aid, serving as one of its representatives. Their goal was to help poor and underprivileged Salvadorans through the use of Marxist-Leninist ideology (strongly rejecting Stalinism). In December 1930, at the height of the country's economic and social depression, Martí was once again exiled due to his popularity among the nation's poor and rumors of his upcoming nomination for President the following year. Once Arturo Araujo was elected president in 1931, Martí returned to El Salvador, and along with Alfonso Luna and Mario Zapata began the movement that was later truncated by the military.
They helped start a guerrilla revolt of indigenous farmers. The government responded by killing over 30,000 people at what was to have been a "peaceful meeting" in 1932; this became known as La Matanza (The Slaughter). The peasant uprising against Martínez was crushed by the Salvadoran military ten days after it had begun. The Communist-led rebellion, fomented by collapsing coffee prices, enjoyed some initial success, but was soon drowned in a bloodbath. President Martínez, who had himself toppled an elected government only weeks earlier, ordered the defeated Martí shot after a perfunctory hearing.
Historically, the high Salvadoran population density has contributed to tensions with neighboring Honduras, as land-poor Salvadorans emigrated to less densely populated Honduras and established themselves as squatters on unused or underused land. This phenomenon was a major cause of the 1969 Football War between the two countries.[33] As many as 130,000 Salvadorans were forcibly expelled or fled from Honduras.[34]




José Napoleón Duarte.


The Christian Democratic Party (PDC) and the National Conciliation Party (PCN) were active in Salvadoran politics from 1960 until 2011, when they were disbanded by the Supreme Court because they had failed to win enough votes in the 2004 presidential election;[35] Both parties have since reconstituted. They share common ideals, but one represents the middle class and the latter the interests of the Salvadoran military.
PDC leader José Napoleón Duarte was the mayor of San Salvador from 1964 to 1970, winning three elections during the regime of PCN President Julio Adalberto Rivera Carballo, who allowed free elections for mayors and the National Assembly. Duarte later ran for president with a political grouping called the National Opposition Union (UNO) but was defeated in the 1972 presidential elections. He lost to the ex-Minister of Interior, Col. Arturo Armando Molina, in an election that was widely viewed as fraudulent; Molina was declared the winner even though Duarte was said to have received a majority of the votes. Duarte, at some army officers' request, supported a revolt to protest the election fraud, but was captured, tortured and later exiled. Duarte returned to the country in 1979 to enter politics after working on projects in Venezuela as an engineer.
Salvadoran Civil War (1979–1992)
Further information: Salvadoran Civil War
In October 1979, a coup d'état brought the Revolutionary Government Junta of El Salvador to power. It nationalized many private companies and took over much privately owned land. The purpose of this new junta was to stop the revolutionary movement already underway in response to Duarte's stolen election. Nevertheless, the oligarchy opposed agrarian reform, and a junta formed with young liberal elements from the army such as Gen. Majano and Gen. Gutierrez,[36][37] as well as with progressives such as Guillermo Ungo and Alvarez.




A billboard serving as a reminder of one of many massacres that occurred during the civil war.


Pressure from the oligarchy soon dissolved the junta because of its inability to control the army in its repression of the people fighting for unionization rights, agrarian reform, better wages, accessible health care and freedom of expression. In the meantime, the guerrilla movement was spreading to all sectors of Salvadoran society. Middle and high school students were organized in MERS (Movimiento Estudiantil Revolucionario de Secundaria, Revolutionary Movement of Secondary Students); college students were involved with AGEUS (Asociacion de Estudiantes Universitarios Salvadorenos; Association of Salvadoran College Students); and workers were organized in BPR (Bloque Popular Revolucionario, Popular Revolutionary Block). In October 1980, several other major guerrilla groups of the Salvadoran left had formed the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front, or FMLN. By the end of the 1970s, death squads were killing about 10 people each day, and the FMLN had 6,000 – 8,000 active guerrillas and hundreds of thousands of part-time militia, supporters, and sympathizers.[38]




ERP combatants in Perquín, 1990.


The U.S. supported and financed the creation of a second junta to change the political environment and stop the spread of a leftist insurrection. Napoleón Duarte was recalled from his exile in Venezuela to head this new junta. However, a revolution was already underway and his new role as head of the junta was seen by the general population as opportunistic. He was unable to influence the outcome of the insurrection. Monsignor Romero, Archbishop of San Salvador, denounced injustices and massacres committed against civilians by government forces. He was considered "the voice of the voiceless", but he was assassinated by a death squad while saying Mass on 24 March 1980.[39] Some consider this to be the beginning of the full Salvadoran Civil War, which lasted from 1980 to 1992. An unknown number of people "disappeared" during the conflict, and the UN reports that more than 75,000 were killed.[40] The Salvadoran Army's US-trained Atlacatl Battalion was responsible for the El Mozote massacre where more than 800 civilians were murdered, over half of them children, the El Calabozo massacre, and the murder of UCA scholars.[41]




A reconstruction of Radio Venceremos, at the Museo de la Palabra y la Imagen, San Salvador.


On January 16, 1992, the government of El Salvador, represented by president Alfredo Cristiani, and the FMLN, represented by the commanders of the five guerrilla groups – Shafik Handal, Joaquín Villalobos, Salvador Sánchez Cerén, Francisco Jovel and Eduardo Sancho, all signed peace agreements brokered by the United Nations ending the 12-year civil war. This event, held at Chapultepec Castle in Mexico, was attended by U.N. dignitaries and other representatives of the international community. After signing the armistice, the president stood up and shook hands with all the now ex-guerrilla commanders, an action which was widely admired.
Post-war (1992–present)
The so-called Chapultepec Peace Accords mandated reductions in the size of the army, and the dissolution of the National Police, the Treasury Police, the National Guard and the Civilian Defense, a paramilitary group. A new Civil Police was to be organized. Judicial immunity for crimes committed by the armed forces ended; the government agreed to submit to the recommendations of a Commission on the Truth for El Salvador (Comisión de la Verdad Para El Salvador), which would "investigate serious acts of violence occurring since 1980, and the nature and effects of the violence, and...recommend methods of promoting national reconciliation." In 1993 the Commission delivered its findings reporting human rights violations on both sides of the conflict.[42] Five days later the El Salvadoran legislature passed an amnesty law for all acts of violence during the period.
From 1989 until 2004, Salvadorans favored the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) party, voting in ARENA presidents in every election (Alfredo Cristiani, Armando Calderón Sol, Francisco Flores Pérez, Antonio Saca) until 2009, when Mauricio Funes was elected president from the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) party.
Economic reforms since the early 1990s brought major benefits in terms of improved social conditions, diversification of the export sector, and access to international financial markets at investment grade level. Crime remains a major problem for the investment climate.
This[clarification needed] all ended in 2001, and support for ARENA weakened. Internal turmoil in ARENA weakened the party also, while the FMLN united and broadened its support.[43]
The unsuccessful attempts of the left-wing party to win presidential elections led to its selection of a journalist rather than a former guerrilla leader as a candidate. On March 15, 2009, Mauricio Funes, a television figure, became the first president from the FMLN party. He was inaugurated on June 1, 2009. One focus of the Funes government has been revealing the alleged corruption from the past government.[44]
ARENA formally expelled Saca from the party in December 2009. With 12 loyalists in the National Assembly, Saca established his own party, GANA (Gran Alianza por la Unidad Nacional or Grand Alliance for National Unity), and entered into a tactical legislative alliance with the FMLN.[45] After three years in office, with Saca's GANA party providing the FMLN with a legislative majority, Funes had not taken action to either investigate or to bring corrupt former officials to justice.
Early in the new millennium, El Salvador's government created the Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales – the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) and began promoting the integration of climate change into national policy. This move was in response to the increase in extreme weather events affecting the country. Initially MARN aimed to fulfil the country’s obligations following its ratification of the UNFCCC and the Kyoto protocol However, since Hurricane Ida in 2009, the government’s stance has shifted towards integrating risk reduction into all areas of policy, including financial.[46]
In a specific effort to increase the resilience of its economy and people to climate-related events, El Salvador commissioned a project in 2011 to develop and implement a National Policy and Strategy for Climate Change, which culminated with the launch of the National Environmental Policy in June 2012 and the National Environmental Strategy in June 2013, both incorporating climate change goals. This work was undertaken with support from the Climate & Development Knowledge Network. The government is now preparing action plans for putting the strategy into practice.[46]
Geography
Main article: Geography of El Salvador





Panoramic of Los Volcanes National Park, Izalco (volcano) and Santa Ana Volcano








Panoramic of Coatepeque Caldera, Cerro Verde and Izalco (volcano)







A map of El Salvador.






dawn over Lake Ilopango






Dusk over Chalatenango Department






Goascorán River






Meanguera island is the largest of five island chain that is a part of an archipelago in eastern El Salvador in the Gulf of Fonseca






Meanguera del Golfo is a municipality in the La Unión department of El Salvador, on the island of Meanguera in the Gulf of Fonseca.






Cloud forest El Imposible National Park.






Miramundo rainforest, Chalatenango.






Cerro El Pital in Chalatenango.






Storm over Coatepeque Caldera






Camping site on Montecristo National Park






coast in the La Libertad Department (El Salvador)






El Balsamar, La Libertad Department (El Salvador)


El Salvador lies in the isthmus of Central America between latitudes 13° and 15°N, and longitudes 87° and 91°W. It stretches 270 km (168 mi) from west-northwest to east-southeast and 142 km (88 mi) north to south, with a total area of 21,041 km2 (8,124 sq mi). As the smallest country in continental America, El Salvador is affectionately called Pulgarcito de America (the "Tom Thumb of the Americas"). The highest point in El Salvador is Cerro El Pital, at 2,730 metres (8,957 ft), on the border with Honduras.
El Salvador has a long history of destructive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The capital San Salvador was destroyed in 1756 and 1854, and it suffered heavy damage in the 1919, 1982, and 1986 tremors. El Salvador has over twenty volcanoes, two of them, San Miguel and Izalco, active in recent years. From the early 19th century to the mid-1950s, Izalco erupted with a regularity that earned it the name "Lighthouse of the Pacific." Its brilliant flares were clearly visible for great distances at sea, and at night its glowing lava turned it into a brilliant luminous cone.
El Salvador has over 300 rivers, the most important of which is the Rio Lempa. Originating in Guatemala, the Rio Lempa cuts across the northern range of mountains, flows along much of the central plateau, and cuts through the southern volcanic range to empty into the Pacific. It is El Salvador's only navigable river. It and its tributaries drain about half of the country's area. Other rivers are generally short and drain the Pacific lowlands or flow from the central plateau through gaps in the southern mountain range to the Pacific. These include the Goascorán, Jiboa, Torola, Paz and the Río Grande de San Miguel.
There are several lakes enclosed by volcanic craters in El Salvador, the most important of which are Lake Ilopango (70 km²) and Lake Coatepeque (26 km²). Lake Güija is El Salvador's largest natural lake (44 km²). Several artificial lakes were created by the damming of the Lempa, the largest of which is Embalse Cerrón Grande (135 km²). There are a total 320 km2 (123.6 sq mi) of water within El Salvador's borders.
El Salvador shares borders with Guatemala and Honduras, the total national boundary length is 546 km (339 mi): 126 miles (203 km) with Guatemala and 343 km (213 mi) with Honduras. It is the only Central American country that has no Caribbean coastline. The coastline on the Pacific is 307 km (191 mi) long.
Two parallel mountain ranges cross El Salvador to the west with a central plateau between them and a narrow coastal plain hugging the Pacific. These physical features divide the country into two physiographic regions. The mountain ranges and central plateau, covering 85% of the land, comprise the interior highlands. The remaining coastal plains are referred to as the Pacific lowlands.
Climate
Main article: Climate of El Salvador




El Salvador's topography.






Corral de Mulas beach, Usulutan.






Los Cobanos beach in Sonsonate.






Sunzal beach, La Libertad, La Libertad.






Pacific sunset at Salinitas beach Sonsonate.


El Salvador has a Tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons. Temperatures vary primarily with elevation and show little seasonal change. The Pacific lowlands are uniformly hot; the central plateau and mountain areas are more moderate. The rainy season extends from May to October; this time of year is referred to as invierno or winter. Almost all the annual rainfall occurs during this period; yearly totals, particularly on southern-facing mountain slopes, can be as high as 2170 mm.
The best time to visit El Salvador would be at the beginning or end of the dry season. Protected areas and the central plateau receive less, although still significant, amounts. Rainfall during this season generally comes from low pressure systems formed over the Pacific and usually falls in heavy afternoon thunderstorms. Hurricanes occasionally form in the Pacific with the notable exception of Hurricane Mitch, which formed in the Atlantic and crossed Central America.
From November through April, the northeast trade winds control weather patterns; this time of year is referred to as verano, or summer. During these months, air flowing from the Caribbean has lost most of its precipitation while passing over the mountains in Honduras. By the time this air reaches El Salvador, it is dry, hot, and hazy, and the country experiences hot weather, excluding the northern higher mountain ranges, where temperatures will be cool. In the extreme northeastern part of the country near Cerro El Pital, snow is known to fall during summer as well as during winter due to the high elevations (it is the coldest part of the country).
Natural disasters
Extreme weather events




Volcanic range, Cordillera de Apaneca, view from Salcoatitán






The caldera of Lake Ilopango Supervolcano.






Coatepeque Caldera.






Usulutan volcano rises above the Pacific coastal plain in El Salvador.






The Santa Ana Volcano.






San Salvador (volcano) El Boqueron Park.






San Vicente (volcano) Chinchontepec.






Izalco (volcano).






San Miguel (volcano)






Volcanic formation in Los Tercios waterfall in Suchitoto


El Salvador's position on the Pacific Ocean also makes it subject to severe weather conditions, including heavy rainstorms and severe droughts, both of which may be made more extreme by the El Niño and La Niña effects. Severe deforestation and soil erosion have made the landscape vulnerable to landslides and forest fires. These characteristics, coupled with severe fiscal constraints, make the nation highly susceptible to the impacts of extreme weather events.[47]
In the summer of 2001 a severe drought destroyed 80% of El Salvador's crops, causing famine in the countryside.[48][49] On October 4, 2005, severe rains resulted in dangerous flooding and landslides, which caused a minimum of fifty deaths.[50] In 2010, losses to agriculture from flooding exceeded USD100 million, while those resulting from drought were USD38 million.[51]
El Salvador's location in Central America also makes it vulnerable to severe storms and hurricanes coming off the Caribbean. Since the 1990s, there has been an increase in the frequency and duration of storms, as well as a marked change in the pattern of their occurrence. Hurricanes used to strike El Salvador infrequently, only came from the Atlantic and were limited to the months of September and October. However, since the mid 1990s, such storms have occurred more frequently, originated in both the Atlantic and Pacific, and have struck in six different months of the year.[46]
Earthquakes and volcanic activity
El Salvador lies along the Pacific Ring of Fire, and is thus subject to significant tectonic activity, including frequent earthquakes and volcanic activity. Recent examples include the earthquake on January 13, 2001 that measured 7.7 on the Richter magnitude scale and caused a landslide that killed more than 800 people;[50] and another earthquake only a month later, on February 13, 2001, that killed 255 people and damaged about 20% of the nation's housing. Luckily, many families were able to find safety from the landslides caused by the earthquake.
The San Salvador area has been hit by earthquakes in 1576, 1659, 1798, 1839, 1854, 1873, 1880, 1917, 1919, 1965, 1986, 2001 and 2005.[52] The 5.7 Mw-earthquake of 1986 resulted in 1,500 deaths, 10,000 injuries, and 100,000 people left homeless.[53][54]
El Salvador's most recent destructive volcanic eruption took place on October 1, 2005, when the Santa Ana Volcano spewed a cloud of ash, hot mud and rocks that fell on nearby villages and caused two deaths. The most severe volcanic eruption in this area occurred in the 5th century AD when the Ilopango volcano erupted with a VEI strength of 6, producing widespread pyroclastic flows and devastating Mayan cities.[55]
The Santa Ana Volcano in El Salvador is active;[56] the most recent eruptions were in 1904 and 2005. Lago de Coatepeque (one of El Salvador's lakes) was created by water filling the caldera that formed after a massive eruption.
The British Imperial College's El Salvador Project aims to build earthquake-proof buildings in remote areas of the country.
Biodiversity and endangered species




The torogoz is El Salvador's national bird.


There are eight species of sea turtles in the world; six of them nest on the coasts of Central America, and four make their home on the Salvadoran coast: the leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), the hawksbill (Eretmochelys imbricata), the green sea turtle (Chelonia agasizzii) and the olive ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea). Of these four species, the most common is the olive ridley turtle, followed by the green sea turtle. The other two species, hawksbill and leatherback, are much more difficult to find as they are critically endangered, while the olive ridley and green sea turtle are in danger of extinction.
Recent conservation efforts provide hope for the future of the country's biological diversity. In 1997, the government established the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources. A general environmental framework law was approved by the National Assembly in 1999. Specific legislation to protect wildlife is still pending.[when?] In addition, a number of non-governmental organizations are doing important work to safeguard some of the country's most important forested areas. Foremost among these is SalvaNatura, which manages El Impossible, the country's largest national park under an agreement with El Salvador's environmental authorities.
Despite these efforts, much remains to be done.
It is estimated that there are 500 species of birds, 1,000 species of butterflies, 400 species of orchids, 800 species of trees, and 800 species of marine fish in El Salvador.
Government and politics
Main article: Politics of El Salvador
The 1983 Constitution is the highest legal authority in the country. El Salvador has a democratic and representative government, whose three bodies are:




Salvadoran cadets in the Legislative Assembly of El Salvador



The Executive Branch, headed by the President of the Republic, who is elected by direct vote and remains in office for five years. He can be elected to only one term. The president has a Cabinet of Ministers whom he appoints, and is also the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
The Legislative Branch, called El Salvador's Legislative Assembly (unicameral), consisting of 84 deputies.
The Judiciary, headed by the Supreme Court, which is composed of 15 judges, one of them being elected as President of the Judiciary.


After the Civil War, the Chapultepec Peace Accords (1992) created the new National Civil Police, the Attorney for the Defense of Human Rights and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal. The Peace Accords re-imagined the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) as a political party and redefined the role of the army to be for the defense of the sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Accords also removed some security forces who were in command of the army, such as the National Guard, Treasury Police and special battalions that were formed to fight against the insurgency of the 1980s.
The political framework of El Salvador is a presidential representative democratic republic with a multiform, multi-party system. The President, currently Salvador Sánchez Cerén, is both head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The country also has an independent Judiciary and Supreme Court.
Political culture
Further information: List of political parties in El Salvador




Salvador Sánchez Cerén is El Salvador's president.


El Salvador has a multi-party system. Two political parties, the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) and the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) have tended to dominate elections. ARENA candidates won four consecutive presidential elections until the election of Mauricio Funes of the FMLN in March 2009. The FMLN Party is Leftist in ideology, and is split between the dominant Marxist-Leninist faction in the legislature, and the liberal wing led by President Funes.
Geographically, the departments of the Central region, especially the capital and the coastal regions, known as departamentos rojos, or red departments, are relatively Leftist. The departamentos azules, or blue departments in the east, western and highland regions are relatively conservative. The winner of the 2014 presidential election, Salvador Sánchez Cerén belongs to the FMLN party. In the 2015 elections for mayors and members of the National Assembly, ARENA appeared to be the winner with tight control of the National Assembly.
Foreign relations
Further information: Foreign relations of El Salvador




José Atilio Benítez Parada is Salvadoran General, ambassador and former Minister of Defense.


In November, 1950 El Salvador helped the newly empowered 14th Dalai Lama by supporting his Tibetan Government cabinet minister's telegram requesting an appeal before the General Assembly of the United Nations to stop the Communist China's People's Liberation Army's invasion of Tibet. "Only the tiny country of El Salvador agreed to sponsor Tibet's plea."[57]"At the UN, no one was willing to stand up beside El Salvador. The other nations had overriding self-interests, which made it impossible for them to support San Salvador's attempt to bring the invasion before the General Assembly."[57] With no other countries in support, "the UN unanimously dropped the Tibetan plea from its agenda."[57]
El Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control.
El Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.
Military
Further information: Armed Forces of El Salvador




Bell UH-1 Iroquois of the Air Force of El Salvador






Cessna A-37 Dragonfly, Air Force of El Salvador


El Salvador has an army, airforce and modest navy. There are around 17,000 personnel in the armed forces in total.[58]
Human rights
Main article: Human rights in El Salvador
Amnesty International has drawn attention to several arrests of police officers for unlawful police killings. Other current issues to gain Amnesty International's attention in the past 10 years include missing children, failure of law enforcement to properly investigate and prosecute crimes against women, and rendering organized labor illegal.[59]
In El Salvador if a woman miscarries it is frequently assumed she deliberately induced an abortion or could have saved the baby. Women who did not know they were pregnant or who could not have prevented a miscarriage face long prison terms.[60][61]
Administrative divisions
Further information: Departments of El Salvador
El Salvador is divided into 14 departments (departamentos), which in turn are subdivided into 262 municipalities (municipios).
Department names and capitals for the 14 Salvadoran Departments:


Departments of El Salvador





Western El Salvador
Ahuachapán (Ahuachapán)
Santa Ana (Santa Ana)
Sonsonate (Sonsonate)
Central El Salvador
La Libertad (Santa Tecla)
Chalatenango (Chalatenango)
Cuscatlán (Cojutepeque)
San Salvador (San Salvador)
La Paz (Zacatecoluca)
Cabañas (Sensuntepeque)
San Vicente (San Vicente)
Eastern El Salvador
Usulután (Usulután)
San Miguel (San Miguel)
Morazán (San Francisco Gotera)
La Unión (La Unión)


Note: Departmental capitals are in parentheses.


Economy
Main article: Economy of El Salvador




A proportional representation of El Salvador's exports.


El Salvador's economy has been hampered at times by natural disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes, by government policies that mandate large economic subsidies, and by official corruption. Subsidies became such a problem that in April 2012, the International Monetary Fund suspended a $750 million loan to the central government. President Funes' chief of cabinet, Alex Segovia, acknowledged that the economy was at the "point of collapse."[62]
Antiguo Cuscatlán has the highest per capita income of all the cities in the country, and is a center of international investment.[citation needed]
GDP in purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2008 was estimated at $25.895 billion USD. The service sector is the largest component of GDP at 64.1%, followed by the industrial sector at 24.7% (2008 est.). Agriculture represents only 11.2% of GDP (2010 est.)
The GDP grew after 1996 at an annual rate that averaged 3.2% real growth. The government committed to free market initiatives, and the 2007 GDP's real growth rate was 4.7%.[63]
In December 1999, net international reserves equaled US $1.8 billion or roughly five months of imports. Having this hard currency buffer to work with, the Salvadoran government undertook a monetary integration plan beginning January 1, 2001 by which the U.S. dollar became legal tender alongside the Salvadoran colón, and all formal accounting was done in U.S. dollars. Thus, the government has formally limited the implementing of open market monetary policies to influence short-term variables in the economy. As of September 2007, net international reserves stood at $2.42 billion.[50][64]
It has long been a challenge in El Salvador to develop new growth sectors for a more diversified economy. In the past, the country produced gold and silver,[65] but recent attempts to reopen the mining sector, which were expected to add hundreds of millions of dollars to the local economy, collapsed after President Saca shut down the operations of Pacific Rim Mining Corporation. Nevertheless, according to the Central American Institute for Fiscal Studies (Instituto Centroamericano for Estudios Fiscales, by its acronym in Spanish), the contribution of metallic mining was a minuscule 0.3% of the country's GDP between 2010 and 2015. [66]Saca's decision although not lacking political motives, had strong support from local residents and grassroots movements in the country. According to NACLA, incoming President Funes later rejected a company's application for a further permit based on the risk of cyanide contamination on one of the country's main rivers.[67]
As with other former colonies, El Salvador was considered a mono-export economy (an economy that depended heavily on one type of export) for many years. During colonial times, El Salvador was a thriving exporter of indigo, but after the invention of synthetic dyes in the 19th century, the newly created modern state turned to coffee as the main export.




San Miguel is an important economic center of El Salvador and home to the "Carnival of San Miguel", one of the biggest festivals of entertainment and food in Central America.[68]


The government has sought to improve the collection of its current revenues, with a focus on indirect taxes. A 10% value-added tax (IVA in Spanish), implemented in September 1992, was raised to 13% in July 1995.
Inflation has been steady and among the lowest in the region. Since 1997 inflation has averaged 3%, with recent years increasing to nearly 5%. As a result of the free trade agreements, from 2000 to 2006, total exports have grown 19% from $2.94 billion to $3.51 billion, and total imports have risen 54% from $4.95 billion to $7.63 billion. This has resulted in a 102% increase in the trade deficit, from $2.01 billion to $4.12 billion.[69]




El Chorreron, El Salvador; tourism is the fastest-growing sector of the Salvadoran economy.


El Salvador has promoted an open trade and investment environment, and has embarked on a wave of privatization extending to telecommunications, electricity distribution, banking, and pension funds. In late 2006, the government and the Millennium Challenge Corporation signed a five-year, $461 million compact to stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty in the country's northern region, the primary conflict zone during the civil war, through investments in education, public services, enterprise development, and transportation infrastructure. With the adoption of the US dollar as its currency in 2001, El Salvador lost control over monetary policy. Any counter-cyclical policy response to the downturn must be through fiscal policy, which is constrained by legislative requirements for a two-thirds majority to approve any international financing.


Exports to
Imports from


Country
 %
Country
 %


 United States
66%
 United States
43.4%


Caribbean
26%
 Guatemala
8.2%


 Mexico
1%
 Mexico
7.8%


 Spain
1%
Europe
7.0%


Others
6%
Others
33.6%


Remittances from abroad




Torre Cuscatlan bank building.


El Salvador leads the region in remittances per capita, with inflows equivalent to nearly all export income; about a third of all households receive these financial inflows. Remittances from Salvadorans living and working in the United States, sent to family members in El Salvador, are a major source of foreign income and offset the substantial trade deficit of $4.12 billion. Remittances have increased steadily in the last decade, and reached an all-time high of $3.32 billion in 2006 (an increase of 17% over the previous year).[70] approximately 16.2% of gross domestic product(GDP).
Remittances have had positive and negative effects on El Salvador. In 2005, the number of people living in extreme poverty in El Salvador was 20%,[71] according to a United Nations Development Program report. Without remittances, the number of Salvadorans living in extreme poverty would rise to 37%. While Salvadoran education levels have gone up, wage expectations have risen faster than either skills or productivity. For example, some Salvadorans are no longer willing to take jobs that pay them less than what they receive monthly from family members abroad. This has led to an influx of Hondurans and Nicaraguans who are willing to work for the prevailing wage. Also, the local propensity for consumption over investment has increased.
Money from remittances has also increased prices for certain commodities such as real estate. With much higher wages, many Salvadorans abroad can afford higher prices for houses in El Salvador than local Salvadorans, and thus push up the prices that all Salvadorans must pay.[72]
Free trade agreements




Torre Futura at World Trade Center San Salvador.






Centro Financiero Gigante building






Torre Roble building of Grupo Roble


In 2006, El Salvador was the first country to ratify the Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement. CAFTA has bolstered exports of processed foods, sugar, and ethanol, and supported investment in the apparel sector, which faced Asian competition with the expiration of the Multi-Fiber Agreement in 2005. In anticipation of the declines in the apparel sector's competitiveness, the previous administration sought to diversify the economy by promoting the country as a regional distribution and logistics hub, and by promoting tourism investment through tax incentives.
There are a total of 15 free trade zones in El Salvador. El Salvador signed the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) — negotiated by the five countries of Central America and the Dominican Republic — with the United States in 2004. CAFTA requires that the Salvadoran government adopt policies that foster free trade. El Salvador has signed free trade agreements with Mexico, Chile, the Dominican Republic, and Panama and increased its trade with those countries. El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua also are negotiating a free trade agreement with Canada. In October 2007, these four countries and Costa Rica began free trade agreement negotiations with the European Union. Negotiations started in 2006 for a free trade agreement with Colombia.
Official corruption and foreign investment
In an analysis of ARENA's electoral defeat in 2009, the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador pointed to official corruption under the Saca administration as a significant reason for public rejection of continued ARENA government. According to a secret diplomatic cable made public by WikiLeaks, "While the Salvadoran public may be inured to self-serving behavior by politicians, many in ARENA believe that the brazen manner in which Saca and his people are widely perceived to have used their positions for personal enrichment went beyond the pale. ARENA deputy Roberto d'Aubuisson, son of ARENA founder Roberto d'Aubuisson, told [a U.S. diplomat] that Saca 'deliberately ignored' his Public Works Minister’s government contract kickbacks scheme, even after the case was revealed in the press. Furthermore, considerable evidence exists, including from U.S. business sources, that the Saca administration pushed laws and selectively enforced regulations with the specific intent to benefit Saca family business interests."[73]
Subsequent policies under Funes administrations improved El Salvador to foreign investment, and the World Bank in 2014 rated El Salvador 109, a little better than Belize (118) and Nicaragua (119) in the World Bank's annual "Ease of doing business" index.[74]
As per Santander Trade, a Spanish think tank in foreign investment, "Foreign investment into El Salvador has been steadily growing during the last few years. In 2013, the influx of FDI increased. Nevertheless, El Salvador receives less FDI than other countries of Central America. The government has made little progress in terms of improving the business climate. In addition to this, the limited size of its domestic market, weak infrastructures and institutions, as well as the high level of criminality have been real obstacles to investors. However, El Salvador is the second most "business friendly" country in South America in terms of business taxation. It also has a young and skilled labor force and a strategic geographical position. The country's membership in the DR-CAFTA, as well as its reinforced integration to the C4 countries (producers of cotton) should lead to an increase of FDI."[75]
Foreign companies have lately resorted to arbitration in international trade tribunals in total disagreement with Salvadoran government policies. In 2008, El Salvador sought international arbitration against Italy's Enel Green Power, on behalf of Salvadoran state-owned electric companies for a geothermal project Enel had invested in. Four years later, Enel indicated it would seek arbitration against El Salvador, blaming the government for technical problems that prevent it from completing its investment.[76] The government came to its defense claiming that Art 109 of the constitution does not allow any government (regardless of the party they belong), to privatize the resources of the national soil (in this case geothermic energy). The dispute came to an end in December 2014 when both parties came to a settlement, from which no details have been released. The small country had yielded to pressure from the Washington based powerful ICSID.[77] The U.S. Embassy warned in 2009 that the Salvadoran government's populist policies of mandating artificially low electricity prices were damaging private sector profitability, including the interests of American investors in the energy sector.[78] The U.S. Embassy noted the corruption of El Salvador's judicial system and quietly urged American businesses to include "arbitration clauses, preferably with a foreign venue," when doing business in the country.[79]
The U.S. Embassy warned in 2009 that the Salvadoran government's populist policies of mandating artificially low electricity prices were damaging private sector profitability, including the interests of American investors in the energy sector.[78] The U.S. Embassy noted the corruption of El Salvador's judicial system and quietly urged American businesses to include "arbitration clauses, preferably with a foreign venue," when doing business in the country.[79] On the other hand, a 2008 report by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [3] indicates that one third of the generation of electricity in El Salvador was publicly owned while two thirds was in American hands and other foreign ownership. It is only natural for a small, under-developed country like El Salvador to subsidize some of the resources for the vast majority of its poor population.
Although some events may have tarnished the image of the El Salvadoran government,[80] not everything is bad news. In terms of how people perceived the levels of public corruption in 2014, El Salvador ranks 80 out of 175 countries as per the Corruption Perception Index.[81] El Salvador's rating compares relatively well with Panama (94 of 175) and Costa Rica (47 of 175).
Pacific Rim Mining Corp. sues El Salvador for $301 million
According to the Center for International Environmental Law, "the Pacific Rim Mining Corporation (Pac Rim) has attempted to bypass El Salvador’s environmental protection laws using investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) to sue the country for $77 million USD – as of July 2014 now more than $300 million USD – under the US-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA). El Salvador has upheld a nationally supported mining moratorium and is now defending itself against the Pac Rim allegations.".[82]
After having lost its intent to sue under CAFTA-DR, in 2012, The World Bank arbitration panel ruled that the Canada-based company cannot use CAFTA, but the case could be pursued under Salvadoran national investment law under International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes. The Canadian owned company, then opened a subsidiary in the United States and continued suing. In September 2014, a tribunal of the World Bank's International, the ICSID was supposed to rule in the dispute. As of April 2015, no news on the ruling have been released, but the Salvadoran government is confident that it will be favorable. The government has received overwhelming worldwide and local support for its cause, trying to ban mining in Salvadoran territory. Costa Rica has banned mining on Costa Rican soil. There is a strong popular rejection of mining companies in El Salvador due to the scarcity of local resources; mining companies are not traditionally perceived in a favorable light in El Salvador, (Cabanas Department) due to their poor environmental record. Pacific Rim is not the best example of a good friend of the environment. The news of a powerful corporation suing a small country has generated considerable controversy worldwide. Robin Broad and John Cavanagh of the Foreign Policy in Focus, an international network of policy analysts and advocates, presented a first hand report on the situation.[83]
The authors actually traveled to El Salvador and interviewed the locals who are directly involved in the drama. According to an IPS article of September, 2014, "Last year, OceanaGold purchased Pacific Rim, despite the latter’s primary asset being the El Salvador gold-mining project, which has never been allowed to go forward. Although OceanaGold did not respond to a request for comment for this story, last year the company noted that it would continue with the arbitration case while also seeking "a negotiated resolution to the … permitting impasse". For its part, the Salvadoran government says it has halted the permitting process not only over environmental and health concerns but also over procedural matters. While these include Pacific Rim’s failure to abide by certain reporting requirements, the company also appears not to have gained important local approvals. Under Salvadoran law, an extractive company needs to gain titles, or local permission, for any lands it wants to develop. Yet Pacific Rim had such access to just 13 percent of the lands covered by its proposal, according to Oxfam America, a humanitarian and advocacy group.".[84]
Tourism
Further information: Tourism in El Salvador




Moncagua, San Miguel.






Coatepeque Caldera during seasonal turquoise color






Izalco is the most climbed volcano in El Salvador






La Laguna Botanical Gardens in San Salvador Department






Campestre Golf Club in the San Salvador Department






Chorros La Calera waterfall in Juayúa


It was estimated that 1,394,000 international tourists would visit El Salvador in 2014.[85] Tourism contributed US$855.5 million to El Salvador's GDP in 2013. This represented 3.5% of total GDP.[86]
Tourism directly supported 80,500 jobs in 2013. This represented 3.1% of total employment in El Salvador.[86] In 2013, tourism indirectly supported 210,000 jobs, representing 8.1% of total employment in El Salvador.[86]
The airport serving international flights in El Salvador is Comalapa International Airport. This airport is located about 40 km (25 mi) southeast of San Salvador.[87]




El Salvador has surf tourism due to large waves from the Pacific Ocean.


Most North American and European tourists seek out El Salvador's beaches and nightlife. Besides these two attractions, El Salvador's tourism landscape is slightly different from those of other Central American countries. Because of its geographic size and urbanization there are not many nature-themed tourist destinations such as ecotours or archaeological sites open to the public. Surfing is a natural tourism sector that has gained popularity in recent years as Salvadoran beaches have become increasingly popular.
Surfers visit many beaches on the coast of La Libertad and the east end of El Salvador, finding surfing spots that are not yet overcrowded. The use of the United States dollar as Salvadoran currency and direct flights of 4 to 6 hours from most cities in the United States are factors that attract American tourists. Urbanization and Americanization of Salvadoran culture has also led to the abundance of American-style malls, stores, and restaurants in the three main urban areas, especially greater San Salvador.
According to the El Salvadoran newspaper El Diario De Hoy, the top 10 attractions are: the coastal beaches, La Libertad, Ruta Las Flores, Suchitoto, Playa Las Flores in San Miguel, La Palma, Santa Ana (location of the country's highest volcano), Nahuizalco, Apaneca, Juayua, and San Ignacio.[88]
Infrastructure




El Salvador International Airport Monseñor Óscar Arnulfo Romero International Airport at night






RN-21 (Boulevard Diego Holguin), now known as Boulevard Oscar Romero, is El Salvador's and one of Central America's first freeways. El Salvador is one of the top listed Latin American countries with the best road infrastructure.






Ilopango International Airport






3rd littoral tunnel in La Libertad, La Libertad


Water supply and sanitation
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in El Salvador
The level of access to water supply and sanitation has been increased significantly. A 2015 conducted study by the University of North Carolina called El Salvador the country that has achieved the greatest progress in the world in terms of increased access to water supply and sanitation and the reduction of inequity in access between urban and rural areas.[89] However, water resources are seriously polluted and a large part of the wastewater discharged into the environment without any treatment. Institutionally a single public institution is both de facto in charge of setting sector policy and of being the main service provider. Attempts at reforming and modernizing the sector through new laws have not borne fruit over the past 20 years.
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of El Salvador




El Salvador's population, 1961–2015






Ethnic Groups – 2007 El Salvador Census [90]


Self-identified Race


Percent of population



Mestizo (Mezcla de Blanco con Indigena)

 

86.3%


White/Caucasian

 

12.7%


Indigenous Native American

 

0.2%


Black

 

0.1%


Other

 

0.6%


Total

 

100%




El Salvador's population was 6,344,722 in 2016,[3] compared to 2,200,000 in 1950. In 2010 the percentage of the population below the age of 15 was 32.1%, 61% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6.9% were 65 years or older.[91]
The capital city of San Salvador has a population of about 2.1 million people. An estimated 42% of El Salvador's population live in rural areas. Urbanization has expanded at a phenomenal rate in El Salvador since the 1960s, with millions moving to the cities and creating associated problems for urban planning and services.
Ethnic groups
El Salvador's population is composed of Mestizos, whites, and indigenous peoples. Eighty-six percent of Salvadorans are of mestizo ancestry, having mixed indigenous and European ancestry.[90][92] In the mestizo population, Salvadorans who are racially European, especially Mediterranean, as well as Afro-Salvadoran, and the indigenous people in El Salvador who do not speak indigenous languages or have an indigenous culture, all identify themselves as being culturally mestizo.[93]
12.7% of Salvadorans are white. A majority of Central European immigrants in El Salvador arrived during World War II as refugees from the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Switzerland. There are also a small community of Jews, Palestinian Christians, and Arab Muslims (in particular Palestinians).
There are up to 100,000 Nicaraguans living in El Salvador.[94]
0.23% of the population are of full indigenous origin, the ethnic groups are Kakawira which represents 0.07% of the total country's population, then (Pipil) 0.06%, (Lenca) 0.04% and others minors groups 0.06%. Very few Amerindians have retained their customs and traditions, having over time assimilated into the dominant Mestizo/Spanish culture.[95]
There is a small Afro-Salvadoran that is 0.13% of the total population, with Blacks having traditionally been prevented from immigrating via government policies.[96][97]




Salvadoran model Irma Dimas was crowned Miss El Salvador in 2005. She made headlines recently for her entry into Salvadoran politics.


Among the immigrant groups in El Salvador, Palestinian Christians stand out.[98] Though few in number, their descendants have attained great economic and political power in the country, as evidenced by the election of ex-president Antonio Saca, whose opponent in the 2004 election, Schafik Handal, was also of Palestinian descent, and the flourishing commercial, industrial, and construction firms owned by this ethnic group.
As of 2004[update], there were approximately 3.2 million Salvadorans living outside El Salvador, with the United States traditionally being the destination of choice for Salvadoran economic migrants. By 2012, there were about 2.0 million Salvadoran immigrants and Americans of Salvadoran descent in the U.S.,[99][100] making them the sixth largest immigrant group in the country.[101] The second destinatation of Salvadorans living outside is Guatemala, with more than 111,000 persons, mainly in Guatemala City. Salvadorans also live in other nearby countries such as Belize, Honduras and Nicaragua.[102] Other countries with notable Salvadoran communities include Canada, Mexico, the United Kingdom (including the Cayman Islands), Sweden, Brazil, Italy, Colombia, and Australia.
Languages




Linguistic variations of Salvadoran Spanish within Central American Spanish.


Spanish is the official language and is spoken by virtually all inhabitants. Some indigenous people speak their native tongues (such as Nawat and Maya), but indigenous Salvadorans who do not identify as mestizo constitute only 1% of the country's population. However, all of them can speak Spanish. Q'eqchi' is spoken by immigrants of Guatemalan and Belizean indigenous people living in El Salvador. There have also been recent large migrations of Hondurans and Nicaraguans into the country.[103]
The local Spanish vernacular is called Caliche. Salvadorans use voseo, which is also used in Argentina, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Uruguay. This refers to the use of "vos" as the second person pronoun, instead of "tú". "Caliche" is considered informal, and a few people choose not to use it. Nawat is an indigenous language that has survived, though it is only used by small communities of some elderly Salvadorans in western El Salvador.
Largest cities
Further information: List of cities in El Salvador



 


v
t
e


Largest cities or towns in El Salvador
2007 El Salvador Bureau of Statistics estimate[104]




Rank
Name
Department
Pop.
Rank
Name
Department
Pop.




San Salvador

Santa Ana
1
San Salvador
San Salvador
540,989
11
Colón
La Libertad
96,989

Soyapango

San Miguel


2
Santa Ana
Santa Ana
245,421
12
Tonacatepeque
San Salvador
90,896


3
Soyapango
San Salvador
241,403
13
Opico
La Libertad
74,280


4
San Miguel
San Miguel
218,410
14
Chalchuapa
Santa Ana
74,038


5
Santa Tecla
La Libertad
164,171
15
Usulután
Usulután
73,064


6
Mejicanos
San Salvador
140,751
16
San Martín
San Salvador
72,758


7
Apopa
San Salvador
131,286
17
Sonsonate
Sonsonate
71,541


8
Delgado
San Salvador
120,200
18
Izalco
Sonsonate
70,959


9
Ahuachapán
Ahuachapán
110,511
19
Cuscatancingo
San Salvador
66,400


10
Ilopango
San Salvador
103,862
20
Metapán
Santa Ana
65,826







Panoramic view of San Salvador (volcano) towering over the city.








San Salvador skyline, panoramic picture taken from San Salvador Volcano








Basilica Sagrado Corazon de Jesus, Downtown San Salvador








Historic Downtown San Salvador



Religion
Main article: Religion in El Salvador

El Salvador Cathedrals






Iglesia El Rosario, San Salvador



San Salvador Cathedral



Cathedral Basilica of Queen of Peace, San Miguel



Iglesia Don Rua, San Salvador





Iglesia El Calvario, San Salvador



Iglesia El Carmen, San Salvador



Basílica del Sagrado Corazón de Jesús, San Salvador



Cathedral of Santa Ana (El Salvador)





Iglesia Santa Lucía, Suchitoto



Church in Dulce Nombre de María



Iglesia El Carmen, Santa Ana, El Salvador



Iglesia Nuestra Señora de la Asunción, Ahuachapán










Religious background in El Salvador


Religion


Percent



Roman Catholic

 

47%


Protestant

 

33%


None

 

17%


Other

 

3%




The majority of the population in El Salvador is Christian. Roman Catholics (47%) and Protestants (33%) are the two major denominations in the country.[105] Those not affiliated with any religious group amount to 17% of the population.[105] The remainder of the population (3%) is made up of Jehovah's Witnesses, Hare Krishnas, Muslims, Jews, Buddhists, Latter-day Saints, and those adhering to indigenous religious beliefs.[105] The number of evangelicals in the country is growing rapidly.[106]
Health




Salvadoran boy being examined in the Sonsonate Department


For the period between 2005 and 2010, El Salvador had the third lowest birth rate in Central America, with 22.8 births per 1,000. However, during the same period, it had the highest death rate in Central America, 5.9 deaths per 1,000. According to the most recent United Nations survey, life expectancy for men was 68 years and 74 years for women. Healthy life expectancy was 57 for males and 62 for females in 2003.[107]
Education
Further information: Education in El Salvador




Dr. Prudencio Llach Observatory


The public education system in El Salvador is severely lacking in resources. Class sizes in public schools can be as large as 50 children per classroom. Salvadorans who can afford the cost often choose to send their children to private schools, which are regarded as being better-quality than public schools. Most private schools follow American, European or other advanced systems. Lower-income families are forced to rely on public education.[citation needed]
Education in El Salvador is free through high school. After nine years of basic education (elementary–middle school), students have the option of a two-year high school or a three-year high school. A two-year high school prepares the student for transfer to a university. A three-year high school allows the student to graduate and enter the workforce in a vocational career, or to transfer to a university to further their education in their chosen field.[citation needed]
Universities in El Salvador include a central public institution, the Universidad de El Salvador, and many other specialised private universities.
Crime
Main article: Crime in El Salvador




Salvadoran special forces troops of the Armed Forces of El Salvador






National Civil Police of El Salvador helicopter


Since the early twenty-first century, El Salvador has experienced high crime rates, including gang-related crimes and juvenile delinquency.[108] Some say that this was a result of the deportation of thousands of Salvadorans from the U.S, the majority of whom were members of MS-13 (Mara Salvatrucha, or La Mara), in the mid-1990s. The gangs in which Salvadorans had been involved in the United States began to show up in El Salvador.[109]
El Salvador has one of the highest murder rates in the world.[110] El Salvador is also considered an epicenter of a gang crisis, along with Guatemala and Honduras.[111] In response to this, the government has set up countless programs to try to guide the youth away from gang membership; so far its efforts have not produced any quick results. One of the government programs was a gang reform called "Super Mano Dura" (Super Firm Hand). Super Mano Dura had little success and was highly criticized by the UN. It saw temporary success in 2004 but then saw a rise in crime after 2005. In 2004, the rate of intentional homicides per 100,000 citizens was 41, with 60% of the homicides committed being gang-related.[111]
The Salvadoran government reported that the Super Mano Dura gang legislation led to a 14% drop in murders in 2004. However, El Salvador had 66 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants in 2012, more than triple the rate in Mexico that year.[112][113][114] There are an estimated 25,000 gang members at large in El Salvador with another 9,000 in prison.[112] The most well-known gangs, called "maras" in colloquial Spanish, are Mara Salvatrucha and their rivals Calle 18. Maras are hunted by death squads including Sombra Negra. New rivals also include the rising mara, The Rebels 13.[115]
As of March 2012, El Salvador has seen a 40% drop in crime due to what the Salvadoran government called a gang truce; however, extortions affecting small businesses are not taken into account. In early 2012, there were on average of 16 killings per day; in late March of that year that number dropped to fewer than 5 per day. On April 14, 2012 for the first time in over 3 years there were no killings in El Salvador.[116] Overall, there were 411 killings in January 2012, and in March the number was 188, more than a 40% reduction,[117] while crime in neighboring Honduras had risen to an all-time high.[118] In 2014, crime rose 56% in El Salvador, with the government attributing the rise to a break in the truce between the two major gangs in El Salvador, which began having turf wars.[119]
Presently, the Alto al Crimen or Crime Stoppers program is in operation and provides financial rewards for information leading to the capture of gang leadership. The reward often ranges between $100 and $500 US Dollars per call.[120]
Culture
Main article: Culture of El Salvador




The iconic statue of Christ on the globe sphere of planet earth is part of the Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo (Monument to the Divine Savior of the world) on Plaza El Salvador del Mundo (The Savior of the World Plaza), a landmark located in the country's capital, San Salvador.






The typical picturesque colonial Salvadoran houses of Suchitoto, are always a staple feature in Salvadoran romanization art, painting and murals.






The town of Concepción de Ataco is famed for its murals and paintings.






La Palma-type art, is a staple feature in modern Salvadoran cultural arts and craft found in the town of La Palma, Chalatenango.






Arts and craft from Ilobasco






La Palma-type art form from Santa Ana, El Salvador






Mesoamerican souvenirs from Juayua






Coffee production in El Salvador has fueled the Salvadoran economy and shaped its history for more than a century.






Three Salvadoran synthetic-thread hammocks (hamacas) strung inside a living room.El Salvador is a hammock cultured country, and a large producer and exporter of hammocks.






Salvadoran children dancing traditional colonial music La Unión, El Salvador






Young Salvadoran girls dancing traditional colonial music San Miguel, El Salvador






El Salvador's Bolas de Fuego (Balls of Fire) festival in Nejapa






Colorful cemetery San Miguel, El Salvador


Mestizo culture dominates the country, heavy in both Native American Indigenous and European Spanish influences. A new composite population was formed as a result of intermarrying between the native Mesoamerican population of Cuzcatlan with the European settlers. The Catholic Church plays an important role in the Salvadoran culture. Archbishop Óscar Romero is a national hero for his role in resisting human rights violations that were occurring in the lead-up to the Salvadoran Civil War.[121] Significant foreign personalities in El Salvador were the Jesuit priests and professors Ignacio Ellacuria, Ignacio Martín-Baró, and Segundo Montes, who were murdered in 1989 by the Salvadoran Army during the height of the civil war.
Painting, ceramics and textiles are the principal manual artistic mediums. Writers Francisco Gavidia (1863–1955), Salarrué (Salvador Salazar Arrué) (1899–1975), Claudia Lars, Alfredo Espino, Pedro Geoffroy Rivas, Manlio Argueta, José Roberto Cea, and poet Roque Dalton are among the most important writers from El Salvador. Notable 20th-century personages include the late filmmaker Baltasar Polio, female film director Patricia Chica, artist Fernando Llort, and caricaturist Toño Salazar.
Amongst the more renowned representatives of the graphic arts are the painters Augusto Crespin, Noe Canjura, Carlos Cañas, Giovanni Gil, Julia Díaz, Mauricio Mejia, Maria Elena Palomo de Mejia, Camilo Minero, Ricardo Carbonell, Roberto Huezo, Miguel Angel Cerna, (the painter and writer better known as MACLo), Esael Araujo, and many others. For more information on prominent citizens of El Salvador, check the List of Salvadorans.
Public holidays
See also: List of festivals in El Salvador




Celebration of La Fiestas Patrias in Las Chinamas



Holidays

Date
English name
Local name
Observance


March/April
Holy Week/Easter
Semana Santa
Celebrated with Carnival-like events in different cities by the large Catholic population.


May 1
Labor Day
Día del trabajo
International Labor Day


May 3
The Day of the Cross
Día de la Cruz
A celebration with precolonial origins, linked to the advent of the rainy season. People decorate a cross in their yards with fruit and garlands, in the belief that if they do not, the devil will appear and dance at their yard. They then go from house to house to kneel in front of the altar and make the sign of the cross.


May 7
Soldiers' Day
Día del Soldado
Marks the founding of its armed forces in 1824.


May 10
Mothers' Day
Día de las Madres
A day to celebrate motherhood, similar to many other countries Mother's Day.


June 17
Father's Day
Día del Padre
A day to celebrate fatherhood, similar to other countries Father's Day.


August 1–7
August Festivals*
Fiestas de agosto
Week-long festival in celebration of El Salvador del Mundo, patron saint of San Salvador.


September 15
Independence Day
Día de la Independencia
Celebrates independence from Spain, achieved in 1821.


October 1
Day of the children
"Día del niño"
Celebration dedicated to the Children of the country, celebrated across the country.


October 12
Day of the race
Día de la raza
Celebration dedicated to Christopher Columbus' arrival in America.


November 2
Day of the Dead
El día de los difuntos
A day when most people visit the tombs of deceased loved ones. (November 1 may be commemorated as well.)


November 7–13
National Festival Of Pupusa
Festival Nacional De La Pupusa
This week is the national commemoration of the national food (Pupusa).


November 21
Queen of the Peace Day
Dia de la Reina de la Paz
Day of the Queen of Peace, the patron saint. Also celebrated, the San Miguel Carnival, (carnaval de San Miguel), celebrated in San Miguel City, similar to Mardi Gras of New Orleans, where one can enjoy about 45 music bands on the street.


December 25
Christmas Day (Celebrated Dec. 24th)
Noche Buena
In many communities, December 24 (Christmas Eve) is the major day of celebration, often to the point that it is considered the actual day of Navidad — with December 25 serving as a day of rest.


December 31
New Year's Eve
Fin de año
The final day of the Gregorian year, and the day before New Year's Day is celebrated in El Salvador with family reunions.


Cuisine
Main article: Salvadoran cuisine




Pupusas, the national and most famous dish of El Salvador.






Salvadoran tortillas are a staple of the Salvadoran diet. These are thicker (5 mm) than Mexican tortillas, about 10 cm in diameter.






Yuca is eaten fried or boiled with salads, as a side dish or in the yuca frita dish. The oldest direct evidence of cassava cultivation in the world comes from a 1,400-year-old Maya site, Joya de Cerén, in El Salvador.






Sopa de pata


One of El Salvador's notable dishes is the pupusa. Pupusas are handmade corn tortillas (made of masa de maíz or masa de arroz, a maize or rice flour dough used in Latin American cuisine) stuffed with one or more of the following: cheese (usually a soft Salvadoran cheese such as quesillo, similar to mozzarella), chicharrón, or refried beans. Sometimes the filling is queso con loroco (cheese combined with loroco, a vine flower bud native to Central America).[122]
Pupusas revueltas are pupusas filled with beans, cheese and pork. There are also vegetarian options. Some adventurous restaurants even offer pupusas stuffed with shrimp or spinach. The name pupusa comes from the Pipil-Nahuatl word, pupushahua. The precise origins of the pupusa are debated, although its presence in El Salvador is known to predate the arrival of the Spaniards.[122]
Two other typical Salvadoran dishes are yuca frita and panes con pollo. Yuca frita is deep fried cassava root served with curtido (a pickled cabbage, onion and carrot topping) and pork rinds with pescaditas (fried baby sardines). The Yuca is sometimes served boiled instead of fried. Pan con pollo/pavo (bread with chicken/turkey) are warm turkey or chicken-filled submarine sandwiches. The bird is marinated and then roasted with Pipil spices and handpulled. This sandwich is traditionally served with tomato and watercress along with cucumber, onion, lettuce, mayonnaise, and mustard.
One of El Salvador's typical breakfasts is fried plantain, usually served with cream. It is common in Salvadoran restaurants and homes, including those of immigrants to the United States.
Alguashte, a condiment made from dried, ground pepitas, is commonly incorporated into savoury and sweet Salvadoran dishes.
"Maria Luisa" is a dessert commonly found in El Salvador. It is a layered cake that is soaked in orange marmalade and sprinkled with powdered sugar.
A popular drink that Salvadorans enjoy is Horchata, a drink native to the Valencian Community in Spain. Horchata is most commonly made of the morro seed ground into a powder and added to milk or water, and sugar. Horchata is drank year-round, and can be drank at any time of day. It mostly is accompanied by a plate of pupusas or fried yuca. Horchata from El Salvador has a very distinct taste and is not to be confused with Mexican horchata, which is rice-based. Coffee is also a common morning beverage.[123]
Other popular drinks in El Salvador include Ensalada, a drink made of chopped fruit swimming in fruit juice, and Kolachampan, a sugar cane-flavored carbonated beverage.
One of the most popular desserts is the cake Pastel de tres leches (Cake of three milks), consisting of three types of milk: evaporated milk, condensed milk, and cream.
Music
Main article: Music of El Salvador




Young Salvadoran man playing a guitar


Salvadoran music is a mixture of indigenous Lenca, Maya, Cacaopera, Pipil and Spanish influences. Music includes religious songs (mostly used to celebrate Christmas and other holidays, especially feast days of the saints). Satirical and rural lyrical themes are common. Cuban, Colombian, and Mexican music has infiltrated the country, especially salsa and cumbia. Popular music in El Salvador uses marimba, tehpe'ch, flutes, drums, scrapers and gourds, as well as more recently imported guitars and other instruments. El Salvador's well known folk dance is known as Xuc which originated in Cojutepeque, Cuscatlan. Other musical repertoire consists of danza, pasillo, marcha and canciones.
Sport




Salvadoran players of the El Salvador national baseball team






The Estadio Cuscatlán in San Salvador is the largest stadium in Central America


Main article: Sport in El Salvador
Football is the most popular sport in El Salvador. The El Salvador national football team qualified for the FIFA World Cup in 1970 and 1982. Their qualification for the 1970 tournament was marred by the Football War, a war against Honduras, whose team El Salvador's had defeated.
The national football team play at the Estadio Cuscatlán in San Salvador. It opened in 1976 and seats 53,400, making it the largest stadium in Central America and the Caribbean.[124]
See also


Central America portal
Latin America portal
El Salvador portal



Index of El Salvador-related articles
Outline of El Salvador





References


^ "CIA The World Factbook: People and Society – El Salavador". 
^ David Scott FitzGerald (22 April 2014). Culling the Masses. Harvard University Press. p. 363. ISBN 978-0-674-36967-2. 
^ a b c "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ a b c d [1]
^ "Gini index". World Bank. Retrieved 21 November 2015. 
^ (PDF) http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Main Aspects of the Law". Archived from the original on July 8, 2007. Retrieved 2007-07-08. . bcr.gob.sv
^ Roy Boland (1 January 2001). Culture and Customs of El Salvador. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-313-30620-4. 
^ Maureen Ihrie; Salvador Oropesa (20 October 2011). World Literature in Spanish: An Encyclopedia [3 volumes]: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 332. ISBN 978-0-313-08083-8. 
^ Jeanne M. Haskin (2012). From Conflict to Crisis: The Danger of U.S. Actions. Algora Publishing. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-87586-961-2. 
^ Tommie Sue Montgomery (1995). Revolution in El Salvador: From Civil Strife to Civil Peace. Westview Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8133-0071-9. 
^ Kevin Murray (1 January 1997). El Salvador: Peace on Trial. Oxfam. pp. 8–. ISBN 978-0-85598-361-1. 
^ Roy Boland (1 January 2001). Culture and Customs of El Salvador. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-313-30620-4. 
^ Thomas L. Pearcy (2006). The History of Central America. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-313-32293-8. 
^ Erin Foley; Rafiz Hapipi (2005). El Salvador. Marshall Cavendish. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-7614-1967-9. 
^ Jeni Klugman (2010). "Human Development Report 2010" (Report). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 152. Retrieved 18 October 2013. 
^ a b Lyle Campbell (1985). The Pipil Language of El Salvador. Walter de Gruyter. pp. 924–925. ISBN 978-0-89925-040-3. 
^ William R. Fowler, Jr. (6 August 1991). The Formation of Complex Society in Southeastern Mesoamerica. CRC Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-8493-8831-6. 
^ Juan Luna Cárdenas (1950). Tratado de etimologías de la lengua aztekatl: para uso de profesores y estudiantes de historias de América y de México, de ciencias naturales y ciencias sociales de las escuela secundarias, normales y preparatorias. U. Tl. I. Aztekatl. p. 27. 
^ María de Baratta (1951). Cuzcatlán típico: ensayo sobre etnofonía de El Savator, folklore, folkwisa y folkway. Ministerio de Cultura. p. 15. 
^ Juan Luna Cárdenas (1964). Aztequismos en el español de México. Secretaría de Educación Pública. p. 47. 
^ Lyle Campbell. American Indian Languages. Oxford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-19-534983-2. 
^ Catherine M. Tucker (2008). Changing Forests: Collective Action, Common Property, and Coffee in Honduras. Springer. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-4020-6977-2. 
^ Thompson, John Eric Sidney (1990). Maya History and Religion, pp. 84–102.
^ Stephanie True Peters (2005). Smallpox in the New World. Marshall Cavendish. pp. 13–18. ISBN 978-0-7614-1637-1. 
^ Jeb J. Card (2007). The Ceramics of Colonial Ciudad Vieja, El Salvador: Culture Contact and Social Change in Mesoamerica. ProQuest. p. 99. ISBN 978-0-549-26142-1. 
^ Explorer's Guide El Salvador: A Great Destination. Countryman Press. 4 October 2010. p. 36. ISBN 978-1-58157-114-1. 
^ Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés (28 August 2006). Writing from the edge of the world: the memoirs of Darién, 1514–1527. University of Alabama Press. p. 164. ISBN 978-0-8173-1518-4. 
^ Deborah L. Nichols; Christopher A. Pool (18 October 2012). The Oxford Handbook of Mesoamerican Archaeology. Oxford University Press. p. 94. ISBN 978-0-19-539093-3. 
^ Minority Rights Group International. "World Directory of Minorities" (PDF). Retrieved June 3, 2016. 
^ Thomas P. Anderson (1988). Politics in Central America: Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-92883-4. Retrieved 29 July 2012 – via Google Books. 
^ Thomas P. Anderson (1992). Matanza: The 1932 "Slaughter" That Traumatized a Nation, Shaping Us-Salvadoran Policy to This Day. Curbstone Press. ISBN 978-1-880684-04-7. Retrieved 29 July 2012. 
^ "El Salvador – Demographics". Library of Congress Country Studies.
^ "El Salvador – Migration". Library of Congress Country Studies.
^ "El Salvador Supreme Court disbands two parties". BBC News. 2011-04-30. Retrieved 2014-07-02. 
^ Román Mayorga Assume Embajada en Venezuela. www.elsalvador.com. (2009-10-29)
^ "Chronology" Archived 2016-03-26 at the Wayback Machine.. Chronology of the Salvadoran Civil War, Kellogg Institute, University of Notre Dame. Retrieved 2008-01-17.
^ Mason, T.D.; D.A. Krane (1989). "The Political Economy of Death Squads: Toward a Theory of the Impact of State-Sanctioned Terror". International Studies Quarterly. 33 (2): 175–198. doi:10.2307/2600536. 
^ Oscar Romero: Bishop of the Poor. www.uscatholic.org. Retrieved 18 February 2013
^ "Report of the UN Truth Commission on El Salvador" United Nations, 1 April 1993
^ Notorious Salvadoran Battalion Is Disbanded : Military: U.S.-trained Atlacatl unit was famed for battle prowess but was also implicated in atrocities. Los Angeles Times. 9 December 1992.
^ From madness to hope: the 12-year war in El Salvador, Part IV. Cases and patterns of violence, Truth Commissions Digital Collection: Reports: El Salvador, United States Institute of Peace. Retrieved 2008-07-16
^ "El Salvador Country Brief". World Bank. 2008. 
^ "Funes saca a luz corrupción en gobiernos de ARENA" (in Spanish). Diario CoLatino. 2009. Archived from the original on 2014-07-06. 
^ United States Embassy San Salvador, "ARENA Expels Former President Saca," classified diplomatic cable, December 15, 2009, released by WikiLeaks, Cable ID 09SANSALVADOR1103.
^ a b c El Salvador builds resilience in the face of a stormy future Climate & Development Knowledge Network, 24 December 2013
^ El Salvador builds resilience in the face of a stormy future Climate & Development Knowledge Network, 24 December 2013
^ "Photo Essay: El Salvador, the Makings of a Gangland". Pbs.org. 2006-07-11. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ "El Salvador" (PDF). Fiu.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-07-02. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ a b c "El Salvador landslide". Travel.state.gov. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ Winds of change for facing climate change in El Salvador: Foundations for a National Strategy, 2012.
^ Lomnitz, Cinna; Schultz, Rudolf (1966). "The San Salvador earthquake of May 3, 1965". Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 56 (2): 561–575. 
^ Harlow, David H. (1993). "The San Salvador earthquake of 10 October 1986 and its historical context". Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America. 83 (4): 1143–1154. 
^ Bommer, Julian; Ledbetter, Stephen (1987). "The San Salvador earthquake of 10th October 1986". Disasters. 11 (2): 83–95. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7717.1987.tb00620.x. 
^ Dull, Robert A.; Southon; Sheets (2001). "Volcanism, Ecology and Culture: A Reassessment of the Volcan Ilopango Tbj eruption in the Southern Maya Realm". Latin American Antiquity. 12 (1): 25–44. doi:10.2307/971755. 
^ "How is a volcano defined as being active, dormant, or extinct?". Volcano World. Retrieved 2013-02-18. 
^ a b c Laird, Thomas (2006). The Story of Tibet:Conversations with His Holiness the Dalai Lama. New York: Grove Press. pp. 303–305. ISBN 9780802118271. 
^ "NationMaster.com". 
^ El Salvador Human Rights Archived 2011-04-29 at the Wayback Machine.. Amnesty International. Retrieved 2012-07-28.
^ El Salvador: Where women may be jailed for miscarrying
^ El Salvador abortion controversy shows lack of progress on Cairo agenda
^ FMI suspende acuerdo de préstamo con el país Archived 2012-07-02 at the Wayback Machine., La Prensa Grafica (2012-04-26).
^ "Gross Domestic Product, annual rates, main economic sectors". Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved 2007-11-17. 
^ "Saldos a fin de año o mes" (in Spanish). Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved 2007-11-17. 
^ Dan Oancea (January 2009). Mining in Central America Archived 2011-05-16 at the Wayback Machine.. MINING.com
^ http://icefi.org/noticias/estudio-sobre-mineria-metalica-en-triangulo-norte-se-presenta-en-el-salvador
^ https://nacla.org/blog/2012/6/8/pacific-rim-ruling-threatens-el-salvador%25E2%2580%2599s-national-sovereignty
^ Maria Herrera-Sobek (31 July 2012). Celebrating Latino Folklore. ABC-CLIO. p. 459. ISBN 978-0-313-34340-7. 
^ "Trade Balance, Annual and Monthly Accumulated". Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved 2007-11-17. 
^ "Family Remittances". Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador. Archived from the original on November 7, 2007. Retrieved 2007-11-17. 
^ "Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on May 27, 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-23. 
^ Aizenman, N.C. (2006-05-13). "Money Earned in U.S. Pushes Up Prices in El Salvador". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ U.S. Embassy San Salvador, "Reorganizing ARENA: The party's future after Avila's defeat," secret diplomatic cable, 6 October 2009, released by WikiLeaks, ID No. 09SANSALVADOR947.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-02-06. Retrieved 2014-10-01.  Annual index, Doing Business 2014, World Bank.
^ https://en.santandertrade.com/establish-overseas/el-salvador/investing-3
^ "CEL a punto de ir a otro arbitraje," El Diario de Hoy (2012-05-21).
^ [2]
^ a b U.S. Embassy San Salvador, "Electricity Sector Reforms Threaten Private Sector Profitability," 14 December 2009, released by WikiLeaks, ID No. 09SANSALVADOR1184.
^ a b U.S. Embassy San Salvador, "El Salvador: 2009 Investment Statement," diplomatic cable, 15 January 2009, released by WikiLeaks, ID No. 09SANSALVADOR47.
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-04-15. Retrieved 2012-01-21. 
^ http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results,
^ http://www.ciel.org/HR_Envir/PacRim_Home.html
^ http://fpif.org/meet-company-suing-el-salvador-right-poison-water/
^ http://www.ipsnews.net/2014/09/world-bank-tribunal-weighs-final-arguments-in-el-salvador-mining-dispute/
^ "Travel and Tourism, Economic Impact 2014 – El Salvador", World Travel and Tourism Council, 2014, p. 5.
^ a b c "Travel and Tourism, Economic Impact 2014 – El Salvador", World Travel and Tourism Council, 2014, p. 1.
^ "CEPA – Aeropuerto Internacional de El Salvador". Aeropuertoelsalvador.gob.sv. Archived from the original on 2006-02-13. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ Milady Cruz (2007-06-24). "Los 10 destinos turísticos más apetecidos". elsalvador.com. Archived from the original on 2008-02-23. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ The Water Institute; University of North Carolina (eds.). "The WASH Performance Index Report". 
^ a b www.digestyc.gob.sv Ethnic Groups − 2007 official Census. Page 13.
^ Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision Archived May 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "CIA – The World Factbook – El Salvador". CIA. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 2013-10-12. 
^ EL SALVADOR Visa Application – Tourist Visas, Business Visas, Expedited Visas – El Salvador Page Archived 2010-12-01 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "The Nicaragua case_M Orozco2 REV.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-11. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ Military Rule, 1931–1979 – History – El Salvador – Central America: 1979 history, center poverty, cause condition, party pdc, soccer war
^ Elena Salamanca (October 23, 2005). "NO a 'los otros'" (in Spanish). La Prensa Gráfica. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved 2007-12-29. 
^ Montgomery, Tommie Sue (1995). Revolution in El Salvador: from civil strife to civil peace. Boulder, Colo: Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-0071-1. 
^ Marín-Guzmán, Roberto (2000). A Century of Palestinian Immigration into Central America: A study of their economic and cultural contributions. San Jose, CR: Universidad de Costa Rica. 
^ US Census Bureau 2012 American Community Survey B03001 1-Year Estimates Hispanic or Latino Origin by Specific Origin. Retrieved September 20, 2013
^ "Salvadorans Seek a Voice To Match Their Numbers". The Washington Post. September 24, 2009
^ "Salvadoran Immigrants in the United States", Migration Policy Institute (MPI), January 2010
^ "Comunidad Salvadorena: Republica de Nicaragua" (PDF). Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de El Salvador. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-03. Retrieved 2008-01-06. 
^ Ethnologue report for language code:kek. Ethnologue.com. Retrieved 2012-07-28.
^ "2007 El Salvador Bureau of Statistics estimate" (PDF). General (Salvadoran) Institute of Statistics and Census. April 2008. Retrieved 2 September 2011. 
^ a b c "International Religious Freedom Report for 2012". U.S. State Department. Retrieved 2014-03-27. 
^ Stephen Offutt, New Centers of Global Evangelicalism in Latin America and Africa (Cambridge University Press, 2015) focuses on El Salvador and South Africa.
^ "El Salvador". Who.int. 2009-03-30. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ Peetz, Peter (June 2008). "Youth, Crime, and the Responses of the State: Discourses on Violence in Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Nicaragua" (PDF). GIGA Working Papers. 80. 
^ El Salvador: Year In Review 1999 – Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Encyclopædia Britannica. (1999-03-07). Retrieved 2012-07-28.
^ UNODC Homicide Statistics. unodc.org
^ a b Ribando, Clare (2005-05-10). "Gangs in Central America" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. The Library of Congress. Retrieved 2007-06-30. 
^ a b Alma Guillermoprieto (2011-11-10). "In the New Gangland of El Salvador", New York Review of Books, p.46
^ Bresnahan, Ryann (2006-08-21). "El Salvador Dispatches Additional Contingent to Iraq:Domestic Issues Overrule Anxiety over War". Council on Hemispheric Affairs (COHA). Retrieved 2007-06-30. 
^ "Workers dig near a yellow police line during an exhumation at a clandestine cemetery in Villa Madrir". Yahoo News. May 2012. Archived from the original on 2012-07-09. 
^ "Número de Víctimas y Tasas de Homicidios Dolosos en El Salvador (1999–2006)" (PDF) (in Spanish). Observatorio Centroamericano sobre Violencia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-25. Retrieved 2007-12-26. 
^ El Salvador celebrates murder-free day – ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). Australian Broadcasting Corporation.au (2012-04-16). Retrieved 2012-07-28.
^ Archibold, Randal C. (2012-03-24). "Homicides in El Salvador Drop, and Questions Arise". The New York Times. 
^ Honduras among world's most dangerous places – News. JamaicaObserver.com (2012-04-10). Retrieved 2012-07-28.
^ https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/31/world/americas/el-salvador-murder-rate-soars.html
^ '+comment.find('name').text()+' (2012-03-10). "El Salvador: Reward program encourages crime-fighting tip". Infosurhoy.com. Archived from the original on 2013-02-16. Retrieved 2013-06-15. 
^ Eaton, Helen-May (1991). The impact of the Archbishop Óscar Romero's alliance with the struggle for liberation of the Salvadoran people: A discussion of church-state relations (El Salvador) (M.A. thesis) Wilfrid Laurier University
^ a b "Pobladores prehispánicos inventaron las pupusas". Elsalvador.com. 2003-10-31. Archived from the original on 2011-05-03. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ "Culture of El Salvador – traditional, history, People, clothing, women, beliefs, food, customs, family". everyculture.com. 
^ "Estadio Cuscatlán". Radio Guanaca. Retrieved 25 February 2014. 


Further reading

"Background Notes", Background Notes: El Salvador, January 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2008.
Bonner, Raymond. Weakness and Deceit: U.S. Policy and El Salvador. New York: Times Books, 1984.
CIA World Factbook, "El Salvador", February 28, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2008.
"Country Specific Information", U.S. State Department, October 3, 2007. Retrieved March 6, 2008.
Danner, Mark. The Massacre at El Mozote: A Parable of the Cold War. New York: Vintage Books, 1994.
Foley, Erin. 'Cultures of the world, El Salvador. 1995
Montgomery, Tommie Sue. Revolution in El Salvador: From Civil Strife to Civil Peace. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1995.
Rosa, Audrey Celeste (1998). The courage to change: Salvadoran stories of personal and social transformation (El Salvador) (M.A. thesis). Wilfrid Laurier University.  External link in |title= (help)
Stadler, Sidney. It started with an oyster. The Memoirs of Sidney M. Stadler, CBE. Penna Press 1975. Autobiography of a British businessman and diplomat in El Salvador, with much on Salvadoran society and politics from the 1920s to 1950s.
Vilas, Carlos. Between Earthquakes and Volcanoes: Market, State, and the Revolution America. New York: Monthly Review Press. 1995.

External links

Find more aboutEl Salvadorat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Embassy of El Salvador in London – Content rich site about every aspect of Salvadorean life, government, business, and politics.
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
"El Salvador". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
El Salvador at UCB Libraries GovPubs
El Salvador at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
El Salvador profile from the BBC News
 Wikimedia Atlas of El Salvador
Salvadoran American Humanitarian Foundation (SAHF)
Fundacion Salvadoreña Para la Salud y el Desarollo Humano (FUSAL)
Key Development Forecasts for El Salvador from International Futures
World Bank Summary Trade Statistics El Salvador
Teaching Central America







v
t
e


El Salvador articles



History



Pre-Columbian history
Spanish conquest
New Spain
Captaincy General (Guatemalan)
1811 Independence Movement
Federal Republic of Central America
World War II
History of El Salvador (1931–79)
Salvadoran Civil War (1979–1992)








Geography







Biota
Cities
Earthquakes
Islands
National parks
Rivers
Volcanism
Water resources








Politics







Administrative divisions
Constitution
Court system
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
Law enforcement
Legislative Assembly
Military
Political parties
Presidents








Economy







Central bank
Coffee production
Currency
Energy
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport








Society







Abortion
Crime
Demographics
Regions by HDI
Education
Gender Inequality
Languages
Religion
Water supply and sanitation





Culture



Anthem
Coat of arms
Cuisine
Flag
Literature
Music
Public holidays
Sport
Television












Outline
Index



Category
Portal












v
t
e


Central America



Sovereign states



Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama















v
t
e


North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Navassa Island
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 126625611
GND: 4014499-9
BNF: cb11934436j (data)
HDS: 6531











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=El_Salvador&oldid=818517763"					Categories: 1821 establishments in North AmericaCountries in North AmericaCountries in Central AmericaEl SalvadorFormer Spanish coloniesLiberal democraciesMember states of the United NationsRepublicsSpanish-speaking countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1821Hidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 Spanish-language sources (es)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesCoordinates on WikidataArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2010Articles needing additional references from August 2016All articles needing additional referencesInterlanguage link template link numberAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2016All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2004Articles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2014CS1 errors: external linksArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers