For the most recent general election, see United Kingdom general election, 2017.



United Kingdom






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
the United Kingdom




Constitution


Constitution

Cabinet Manual
Erskine May


Taxation








The Crown

British Monarchy


Monarch

Queen Elizabeth II


Heir apparent

The Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession to the British throne
Royal prerogative








Executive

HM Government


Prime Minister

Theresa May


Cabinet

Current ministry


Her Majesty's Civil Service
Departments
Executive agencies
Public bodies

Privy Council


Crown-in-Council

Queen Elizabeth II










Legislature

Parliament
(56th Parliament)

Crown-in-Parliament

Queen Elizabeth II

House of Lords

Lord Speaker

The Lord Fowler



House of Commons

Speaker

John Bercow


Leader of the Opposition

Jeremy Corbyn





Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition
Shadow Cabinet
State Opening of Parliament
Prime Minister's Questions
Act of Parliament
Statutory Instruments








Judiciary

Supreme Court


President

Lord Neuberger


Deputy President

Lady Hale


Judges of the Supreme Court



Courts of the United Kingdom
Courts of England and Wales
Courts of Scotland
Courts of Northern Ireland








Devolution


Joint Ministerial Committee
Scotland

Government
Parliament


Wales

Government
National Assembly


Reserved matters
Northern Ireland

Executive
Assembly










Administrative geography


England

Subdivisions of England
Local government in England


Scotland

Subdivisions of Scotland
Local government in Scotland


Wales

Local government in Wales


Northern Ireland

Local government in Northern Ireland










Elections


Parliament constituencies
Political parties
Last election
Next election
Referendums








Foreign relations


History
Foreign policy
UK and the United Nations
Politics of the European Union
Commonwealth of Nations






 United Kingdom portal


Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





There are six types of elections in the United Kingdom: elections to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, elections to devolved parliaments and assemblies, elections to the European Parliament, local elections, mayoral elections and Police and Crime Commissioner elections. Within each of those categories, there may be by-elections as well as general elections. Elections are held on Election Day, which is conventionally a Thursday. Since the passing of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 for general elections, all six types of elections are held after fixed periods, though early elections to parliament and the devolved assemblies and parliaments can occur in certain situations. Currently, six electoral systems are used: the single member plurality system (first past the post), the multi member plurality system, party-list proportional representation, the single transferable vote, the additional member system and the supplementary vote.
Elections are administered locally: in each lower-tier local authority, the polling procedure is operated by the Acting Returning Officer or Returning Officer, and the compiling and maintenance of the electoral roll by the Electoral Registration Officer (except in Northern Ireland, where the Electoral Office for Northern Ireland assumes both responsibilities). The Electoral Commission sets standards for and issues guidelines to Returning Officers and Electoral Registration Officers, and is responsible for nationwide electoral administration (such as the registration of political parties and directing the administration of national referendums).[1]



Contents


1 Electoral registration

1.1 Entitlement to register
1.2 Registration procedure
1.3 Electoral Register


2 Party system

2.1 Parliamentary candidate selection


3 Polling procedure

3.1 In person
3.2 By post
3.3 By proxy
3.4 Accessibility


4 General elections

4.1 Timing
4.2 Post-election
4.3 Previous results


5 Devolved parliament and assembly elections

5.1 Scottish Parliament elections
5.2 Welsh Assembly elections
5.3 Northern Ireland Assembly elections


6 European Parliament elections
7 Regional and local elections
8 Police and Crime Commissioners
9 History

9.1 Expansion of the parliamentary franchise

9.1.1 19th century
9.1.2 20th century
9.1.3 Summary


9.2 Labour (post-1997) reforms


10 Current issues

10.1 Electoral reform

10.1.1 Proportional representation
10.1.2 Parliamentary and party positions


10.2 Low turnout


11 See also
12 References
13 External links



Electoral registration[edit]
The total number of names in the United Kingdom appearing in Electoral Registers published on 1 December 2010 and based on a qualifying date of 15 October 2010 was 45,844,691.[2]
Entitlement to register[edit]
In England and Wales, anyone who will be aged 18 or over on polling day[3] and who is a national of the United Kingdom (all forms of British nationality but excluding British protected persons[4]), the Republic of Ireland, a Commonwealth country (including Fiji, Zimbabwe[5] and the whole of Cyprus [6][7]) or a European Union Member State,[8] can apply to the Electoral Registration Officer in the local authority area where they reside with a 'considerable degree of permanence'[9] to be listed in that area's Electoral Register.
In Scotland, those fulfilling the nationality requirements (as stated in the previous paragraph) who will be aged 16 or over on polling day can register to vote, as the age for voting in Scottish Parliament and local elections is 16. However, voters in Scotland under 18 are not entitled to vote in European Parliament and UK general elections.[10]
A person can still register at their ordinary address if they will be away temporarily (for example, away working, on holiday, in student accommodation or in hospital).[11] A person who has two homes (such as a university student who has a term-time address and lives at home during holidays) may be able to register to vote at both addresses as long as they are not in the same electoral area[12] (though an elector can only vote once in any single election or referendum).
In addition, to qualify to appear on the Electoral Register, applicants who are Commonwealth citizens must either possess leave to enter or remain in the UK or not require such leave on the date of their application[13] and no applicant may be a convicted person detained in prison or a mental hospital (or unlawfully at large if they would otherwise have been detained)[14] or a person found guilty of certain corrupt or illegal practices.[15]
In Northern Ireland, a further criterion has to be fulfilled to qualify for registration: it is only possible for a person to apply to be listed on the Electoral Register if they have been resident in Northern Ireland for at least three months prior to the date of application.[16]
Remand prisoners, voluntary patients in mental hospitals and people without a fixed place of residence can register to vote by making a declaration of local connection.
Members of HM Forces and their immediate family members have the option of registering as a service voter, by making a service declaration based on their last UK address.
British citizens (but not other categories of British nationals) residing outside the United Kingdom can register as an overseas voter provided that they were on the Electoral Register in the UK within the previous 15 years.[17] The 15-year period begins when they no longer appeared in the electoral register, not the date they moved abroad. British citizens who moved abroad before they turned 18 years old can still qualify for registration, with the 15-years period calculated from the date their parent(s)/guardian ceased to appear in the Electoral Register. Overseas voters can only vote in European Parliament and UK Parliamentary elections in the constituency of their last registered UK address (or for those who moved abroad as a minor, the last registered UK address of their parent(s)/guardian). British citizens who are away overseas temporarily do not need to register as overseas electors and can register to vote in the usual way at their UK address.
Crown servants[18] and British Council employees[19] (as well as their spouses who live abroad[20]) employed in a post outside the UK can register by making a Crown Servant declaration, allowing them to vote in all UK elections.
An individual can register as an anonymous elector if his/her safety (or that of any other person in the same household) would be at risk were his/her name and address to be disclosed publicly on the Electoral Register, but the application needs to be supported by a relevant court order, injunction or an attestation by a chief police officer or a Director of Social Services.[21]
The right of Commonwealth and Irish citizens to vote is a legacy of the Representation of the People Act 1918, which limited the vote to British subjects. At that time, "British subjects" included the people of Ireland — then part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland — and all other parts of the British Empire. Though most of Ireland (see Ireland Act 1949) and the majority of the colonies became independent nations, their citizens have retained the right to vote if they live in the United Kingdom.
In theory, members of the Royal Family who are not members of the House of Lords (including those who are peers who lost their right to sit following the House of Lords Act 1999) are eligible to vote, although in practice they do not exercise that right.[22]
Registration procedure[edit]
See also: Electoral registration in the United Kingdom
In Great Britain, most electors are enrolled during the course of the annual canvass, which Electoral Registration Officers are obliged to conduct every year between August and November.[23] Canvass forms are sent to all households, and must be returned, otherwise a fine of £1000 can be imposed.[24] One person in the household must confirm the details of all residents who are existing electors, which includes adding or deleting residents who have moved in or out and are eligible to register to vote.
Between December and early August, the rolling registration procedure applies instead. Applications must be submitted individually (unlike the annual canvass forms where one person is responsible for registering all eligible people in a household) using registration forms available from local Electoral Registration Officers or the Electoral Commission's website [4]. Although no proof of identity or address is necessary when submitting an application, the Electoral Registration Officer can require the applicant to provide further information regarding the applicant's age, nationality, residence and whether or not they are disqualified[25] and/or evidence to prove the applicant's age and/or nationality.[26] Application forms can be returned to the local Electoral Registration Officer by post, by fax or by e-mail as a scanned attachment.[27]
As of June 2014, as part of the Government's Digital By Default policy, voters in England and Wales can register to the electoral roll online.[28]
Special category electors do not register through the annual canvass procedure.[29] Instead, they submit applications at any time during the year and have to renew their electoral application periodically (every one year for overseas electors and voters with a declaration of local connection and every three years for service voters).
After applications are received by the Electoral Registration Officer, he/she must add them to a list of applications (unless they are applications to register as an anonymous elector[30]). The list is open for inspection for five working days, during which any other elector may raise an objection to an application. The Electoral Registration Officer can initiate an application hearing if he/she considers that there are reasonable integrity concerns about the application.
In Northern Ireland, there is no annual canvass, and instead people register individually at any time during the year. Applicants must supply their National Insurance number or, if they do not have one, make a declaration to that effect. Proof of identity, address, three months' residency in NI and date of birth must also be included with applications,[31] which are submitted by post to the Electoral Office for Northern Ireland.
Knowingly giving false information to an Electoral Registration Officer anywhere in the UK is an offence with a maximum penalty, upon conviction, of £5000 and/or six months' imprisonment.[32]
Electoral Register[edit]
Each district council or unitary authority has an Electoral Register which is compiled by the Electoral Registration Officer listing all registered electors. The Electoral Register contains the name, qualifying address and electoral number of every ordinary elector, the name of every special category elector (such as service voters) and the electoral number of every anonymous elector. Any elector who was not aged 18 yet at the time of registration will also have his/her date of birth printed. Each district's Electoral Register is subdivided into separate registers for each polling district.[33]
Because the franchise differs between individual voters, various markers may be placed next to voters' names to identify in which elections they are entitled to vote.[34] European Union citizens who are not Commonwealth or Irish citizens have their entry prefixed either with G (meaning they can only vote in local government elections) or K (meaning they can only vote in European Parliamentary and local government elections). Overseas electors are prefixed with the letter F, meaning they can only vote in European and UK Parliamentary elections. Members of the House of Lords residing in the UK are prefixed with the letter L, meaning they can only vote in European Parliamentary and local government elections, whilst peers who are overseas electors are prefixed with the letter E, indicating that they can only vote in European Parliamentary elections.
The Register is published every year on 1 December after the annual canvass period[35] (unless there has been an election during the annual canvass period between 1 July and 1 December,[35] in which case the publication date is 1 February in the following year[36]). However, in 2012, because the Police and Crime Commissioner elections were held on 15 November, the annual canvass in England and Wales (excluding London) was held between July and October and the Electoral Register was published on 16 October.[37] Between January and September, during the 'rolling registration' period, notices of alteration are published on the first working day of each month to add, remove or amend names. Notices of alteration are also published 5 working days before an election at any time of the year[38] and just before the close of poll at any election to correct any clerical errors or to implement any court decisions.[39] With the exception of a deceased elector who is removed from the Register, any individual who is added or removed from the Register must be notified by the Electoral Registration Officer.[40]
There are two versions of the Register: the full Register and the edited Register. The full Register can only be inspected under supervision at the office of the local Electoral Registration Officer, and must be supplied free of charge to the district's Returning Officer, the British Library, the Electoral Commission, the Office for National Statistics (only English and Welsh Registers), the General Register Office for Scotland (only Scottish Registers), the National Library of Wales (only English and Welsh Registers), the National Library of Scotland (only English and Scottish Registers) and the relevant Boundary Commission.[41] The edited Register is available for general sale from Electoral Registration Officers and can be used for any purpose.[42] Electors can choose to opt out from appearing in the edited Register by informing their local Electoral Registration Officer.
Party system[edit]




A pre-election husting at the Oxford West and Abingdon constituency, England.


Political parties are the dominant organisations in the modern UK political system.[43] The majority of election candidates stand on behalf of political parties of varying sizes. All parties, however large or small, must be registered with the Electoral Commission to be able to operate and stand candidates. Parties must regularly report donations, loans and spending on national elections. Larger parties must also submit audited accounts on an annual basis.
Most parties will have an individual leader (some parties choose to nominate one or more "spokespersons" rather than having a "leader"). Leaders of the main parties will be those parties' "candidates" for the post of prime minister - though there is no formal position of "prime ministerial candidate" since the prime minister is appointed by the monarch rather than being elected directly. Where a party has members elected to a parliament, devolved assembly or local council, they will typically seek to follow a united position and maintain a disciplined group using the whip system.
Historically (until 2005, with the sole exception of 1923), the United Kingdom has effectively had a two party system as a result of the First-Past-The-Post system used for general and local elections. Duverger's law certainly seems borne out in the history of British parliamentary politics. Before World War I, the United Kingdom had a true two-party system: the main parties were the Tories (which became the Conservative Party) and the Whigs (which became the Liberal Party), though after Catholic Emancipation there was also a substantial Irish Parliamentary Party. After World War II, the dominant parties have been Conservative and Labour. No third party has come close to winning a parliamentary majority, although Johnston et al. wrote of the elections from 1950 to 1997, "Increasingly, a number of smaller (or third) parties has won a substantial proportion of the votes cast."[44] Third parties and smaller parties have always polled at least 20% of the vote between them since the 1980s, while the Liberal Democrats won 62 of the 646 seats in the House of Commons in 2005, which led some spectators to regard the Westminster Parliament as a "two and a half" party system.[45][46]
More recently, in 2010 the share of the vote for the two largest parties fell to 65%, with seats won by several other parties, including nationalist parties. In 2015, televised election debates included leaders of up to seven different parties. In the general election, the Scottish National Party (SNP) won over 90% of Scottish constituencies, to become the third party in terms of seats in the House of Commons. At the same time, the United Kingdom Independence Party won nearly 13% of the UK vote (more than double the UK-wide share obtained by the SNP) to finish third in terms of popular support, yet they won only one seat. Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats remain the third largest political party in the House of Lords, with over 100 seats.
Smaller parties receive a higher proportion of votes, and a much higher proportion of seats, in those elections which use some form of proportional system: i.e. the regional elections for the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly, Northern Ireland Assembly and London Assembly, and the European Parliament elections. Parties, such as Plaid Cymru, the United Kingdom Independence Party and Green Parties perform better in these elections, which can therefore be considered to produce a multi-party system.[47]
It is relatively easy to stand for election as an independent candidate, although wins are very rare and usually involve special circumstances (for example Martin Bell's 1997 victory against the discredited Conservative MP Neil Hamilton was aided by the major parties standing aside and not contesting the election). Following the 2005 General Election there were three independent MPs, the highest number since 1945, however only one of these was returned in the 2010 election.
Parliamentary candidate selection[edit]
See also: Prospective parliamentary candidate
Almost any registered elector is entitled to stand for election to parliament, provided they are able to submit nomination forms signed by ten voters from the constituency they wish to contest, along with a £500 deposit (which is returned to the candidate after the election if they poll more than 5% of the vote).[48] The selection of candidates standing for political parties is the responsibility of the party itself, and all parties follow different procedures.[43] Per the Registration of Political Parties Act 1998, political party candidates must be authorised to stand for election for their party by their party's "nominating officer", or someone authorised in writing by the nominating officer.[49] The three largest parties, the Conservative Party, Labour Party, and Liberal Democrats, have centrally-approved lists of candidates.[50]
In the Conservative Party, constituency Associations select their constituency's candidates.[50][51] Some associations have organised open parliamentary primaries. A Constituency Association must choose a candidate using the rules approved by, and (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) from a list established by, the Committee on Candidates of the Board of the Conservative Party.[52] Prospective candidates apply to the Conservative Central Office to be included on the approved list of candidates, some candidates will be given the option of applying for any seat they choose, while others may be restricted to certain constituencies.[53][54] A Conservative MP can only be deselected at a special general meeting of the local Conservative association, which can only be organised if backed by a petition of more than fifty members.[53]
In the Labour Party, the Constituency Labour Parties (CLP) select the parliamentary general election candidates using procedures agreed by the National Executive Committee (NEC). The selection will always involve a "one member, one vote" ballot where all members of the CLP are entitled to select their candidate from a shortlist. The methods used to draw up the shortlist will vary according to the structure of the CLP, the time available before the election, and the number of candidates who express an interest in the selection. All selected candidates must attend and pass an interview conducted on behalf of the NEC - most candidates will do this before starting to apply for selections, though the interview can occur after a candidate is selected. Different procedures apply when a sitting Labour MP indicates they wish to stand for re-selection. On very rare occasions, the NEC may withdraw their endorsement of a candidate (including sitting MPs) after the selection process is complete. They exercised this power with regards to some of the MPs involved in the expenses scandal prior to the 2010 General Election.[55]
The Liberal Democrats operate an assessment process for members wishing to join the party's list of potential candidates. Once on the list, candidates are free to apply for selection in any constituency. The candidate in each seat is selected by local party members following a hustings.[54]
The United Kingdom Independence Party, Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru select their candidates in a similar manner to the Liberal Democrats.[54]
The Green Party's selections are open to all members to apply. Applicants are not shortlisted, so local parties vote directly on the full list of applicants.[54]
Polling procedure[edit]
A person may only cast a vote if he or she is on the Electoral Register - even if he or she would otherwise qualify to vote.[56] If, because of a clerical error, someone's name has been left off the Electoral Register (even though a correctly completed application form was submitted by the deadline), the Electoral Registration Officer can amend the Register up to 9pm on polling day. Because the franchise between electors varies (for example, EU citizens who are not Commonwealth or Irish citizens cannot vote in UK Parliamentary elections) ballot papers are only issued after checking the marker in the Electoral Register before an elector's name to identify in which elections the individual is eligible to vote.
Votes can be cast either in person at a polling station, by post or by proxy. British citizens residing abroad and registered as overseas electors cannot vote at British high commissions, embassies or consulates - their votes can only be cast either in person in the constituency where they are enrolled in the United Kingdom, by proxy (who must reside in and be eligible to vote in the UK) or by post (although this option is less popular as postal ballot packs are only despatched by returning officers at 4pm, 19 working days before polling day at the earliest and must be received by the returning officer by the close of poll to be counted).[57][58]
In person[edit]
Polling stations (also known as polling places) are open from 7am to 10pm on polling day.[59] Voters receive a poll card from the returning officer at their local authority with details of their allocated polling place. They are not required to show their poll card (unless they are an anonymous elector[60][61]) or any other form of identification at the polling place in order to vote, except in Northern Ireland, where one piece of photographic ID (current or expired) must be presented at the polling station - a NI Electoral Identity Card, a photographic NI or GB or other EEA driving licence, a British or other EU passport, a Translink 60+ SmartPass, a Translink Senior SmartPass, a Translink Blind Person's SmartPass or a Translink War Disabled SmartPass.[62]
At 7am when the poll opens, the presiding officer must show the empty ballot box to those who are present inside the polling station, before closing and sealing it.[63]
Having verified and marked off the voter's name and address on the list of electors, the presiding officer or poll clerk issues the ballot paper, calling out the voter's name, elector number and polling district reference,[64][65] unless the voter is an anonymous elector, in which case only his/her elector number is called out.[61] Ballot papers cannot be issued before 7am and can only be issued after 10pm to a voter who was present in the queue at/outside the polling station at 10pm.[66] All ballot papers contain both an official mark (e.g. a watermark or perforation) and a unique identifying number; any papers issued without both these features (even if it is the presiding officer/poll clerk's mistake) will be invalid and rejected at the count. On a separate list (called the corresponding number list) the presiding officer or poll clerk writes the voter's elector number next to the unique identifying number of the ballot paper issued. However, the secrecy of the vote is usually maintained, as at the close of the poll this list linking voters to their ballot paper numbers is sealed inside a packet which may only be opened by the order of a court in the event that the election result is challenged. The ballot paper is folded and then handed to the voter.
The voter marks the ballot papers in the privacy of a voting booth. Polling stations must provide a writing implement for voters; usually pencils are provided (for practical reasons, as ink pens may dry out or spill), but there is no legal requirement for voters to mark their ballot papers with a pencil (they can use their own pen instead).[66] If the ballot paper has been spoilt, the presiding officer/poll clerk can issue a new one after the old ballot paper is cancelled. Before placing the ballot papers in the ballot box, the voter has (in theory) to show the presiding officer or the poll clerk the official mark and the unique identifying number printed on the reverse of the ballot papers.
If a voter requests a ballot paper but someone has already voted in their name, or they are listed as having requested a postal vote, they can only cast a tendered ballot. After marking the tendered ballot in private, the voter must not place it in the ballot box. Instead, it must be returned to the presiding officer who will endorse it with the voter's name, elector number and polling district reference, before placing it in a special envelope. The voter's name and elector number is then written down in the 'List of Tendered Votes'. Although tendered ballots are not included at the count, they serve as a formal record that a voter has tried, but has been unable, to cast a vote and is evidence of a voter's concern about the conduct of an election. If a voter wants to make a complaint, marking a tendered ballot is the first step in pursuing the complaints procedure.[67]
Voters may bring their underage children with them inside the polling station, but they may only observe the voting procedure and are not permitted to participate (for example, by marking the voter's ballot paper).[63]
The presiding officer and the poll clerk(s) are responsible for maintaining order in the polling station (this includes ensuring that candidates/agents/tellers in the vicinity of the polling station do not interfere with the election process and/or impede voters' access to/from the polling station, and removing any campaign literature from inside the polling station) and ensuring the secrecy and security of all ballots cast. They are under a duty to act impartially at all times.[66]
Candidates may appoint polling agents to observe the voting process in polling stations.[68]
Tellers are often present outside the polling station and record the elector number (as it appears on the Electoral Register and poll card) of those who have voted. Tellers volunteer on behalf of political parties (identifiable by their rosette), but have no legal or official status, and voters are not obliged to give them their elector number.[69][70] By recording who has voted, tellers help their parties identify supporters who have not yet voted, so that they can be contacted and encouraged to vote, and offered assistance — such as transport to the polling station — if necessary.
At the close of poll, the slot at the top of the ballot box is sealed by the presiding officer or poll clerk (the election and polling agents appointed by candidates can also apply their own seals to the boxes) before being transported 'directly and without delay' by the presiding officer to the central counting location.[66]
By post[edit]
Main article: Postal voting in the United Kingdom
Voters can apply to receive a postal ballot either for specific elections or on a permanent basis until further notice without having to give a reason (except in Northern Ireland, where voters have to give a specific reason explaining why they cannot physically attend their allocated polling station[71]). Applications for postal ballots close at 5pm 11 working days before polling day. Postal ballots can be sent anywhere within and outside the United Kingdom, although if they are not sent to a voter's registered address, a reason must be provided to the Electoral Registration Officer as to why the postal ballot is to be sent to an alternative address.
The returning officer must issue and send out postal ballot packs 'as soon as is practicable' (i.e. as soon as possible after the close of nominations at 4pm 19 working days before polling day).[57]
Where an elector has applied for a postal ballot to be sent to an overseas address, the returning officer should prioritise the dispatch of their postal ballot packs (over those sent to UK addresses), send them by air mail and ensure that the postal ballot pack includes a return envelope with sufficient postage to be sent to the UK from abroad.[72]
Voters return their postal ballots together with postal voting statements filled in with their date of birth and signature either by post or by hand directly to the returning officer, or by hand to the presiding officer on polling day at a polling station situated within the constituency/ward printed on the postal ballot return envelope. However, for the postal ballot to be counted, the returning officer (or the presiding officer if returned at a polling station) must receive the ballot paper by the close of poll (usually 10pm on polling day).[73]
By proxy[edit]
Any person who is eligible to vote[74] (he/she does not necessarily have to be on the Electoral Register already) can be appointed by another voter as his/her proxy, but for the proxy to be able to vote in an election the proxy application must be received by the Electoral Registration Officer at the voter's local authority by 5pm 6 working days before polling day. The proxy can either vote in person, or can apply for a postal proxy vote (though a postal proxy vote application has an even earlier deadline - any such request must be received by the Electoral Registration Officer by 5pm 11 working days before polling day at the latest). A voter who has become ill or disabled after 5pm six working days before polling day can make an emergency application to vote by proxy as long as the application is received by the Electoral Registration Officer by 5pm on polling day.[75] Unless a close relative, a person can only vote as a proxy on behalf of a maximum of 2 other voters in any single election in each constituency/ward.[76] When applying to vote by proxy for more than one particular election, the application must be accompanied by a relevant attestation and must be justified based on one of the following reasons: blindness; other disability; employment; on an education course; registered as a service, overseas or anonymous elector.[77] If only applying to vote by proxy for one particular election, the elector only needs to explain why he/she cannot vote in person, but does not need an attestation.[78] If it is only possible to get to the polling station from the registered address by air or by sea, the elector can apply for a permanent proxy vote without an attestation.[79]
In Northern Ireland, voters can only appoint another person to be their proxy if they can provide a specific reason explaining why they cannot physically attend their allocated polling station.[71]
Accessibility[edit]
All polling stations are legally required to be wheelchair-accessible[80] and be equipped with a tactile voting device and at least one large print display version of the ballot paper to assist visually impaired voters.[81] Though the large print version cannot be marked, it can be used for reference. Disabled voters can also request the Presiding Officer in the polling station or bring along a family member to mark their ballot papers for them if they wish. If a voter is unable to enter the polling station because of a disability, the Presiding Officer can take the ballot paper to him/her.[82]
Although the Electoral Commission provides electoral registration forms in a number of foreign languages [5], by law all voting materials (e.g. ballot papers) are only printed in English (and also in Welsh in Wales).[80]
General elections[edit]




UK parliamentary election results, 1950–2017


See also: United Kingdom general elections overview
United Kingdom general elections are held following a dissolution of Parliament. All the Members of Parliament (MPs) forming the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom are elected. Following the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, parliamentary sessions last five years and the only way that an early election can be called is in a vote by a two-thirds majority of the House.[83] Under the Act, dissolution occurs automatically 25 working days before the election (previously, a minimum period of 17 working days applied). At this point, all parliamentary business ends and the role of MP ceases to exist until after polling day.[84]
Candidates for each constituency are chosen by political parties or stand as independents. Almost all successful candidates are members of a political party, with only one independent elected in the 2010 election.[85] Each constituency elects one MP by the first past the post system of election. At the 2005 general election, there were 646 constituencies, thus 646 MPs were elected to Parliament. At the 2010 election the number of MPs was 650.
A party with an overall parliamentary majority (more seats than all the other parties combined) following an election forms the government. If no party has an outright majority, parties can seek to form coalitions. At the 2010 election, even though the Conservatives won the greatest number of seats, it would have been possible for the Liberal Democrats to form a coalition with Labour (and maybe also other, smaller parties) instead of with the Conservatives.[86] Situations such as these can give smaller parties considerable power: the eventual outcome of the 2010 election was effectively decided by the Liberal Democrats, while in 2017 the support of the Democratic Unionist Party allowed the Conservative Party to govern with a minority.
The largest party not in government forms Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition.
Timing[edit]
A general election must take place before each parliamentary term begins. Since the maximum term of a parliament is five years, the interval between successive general elections can exceed that period by no more than the combined length of the election campaign and the time for the new parliament to assemble (a total of typically around four weeks). The five years runs from the first meeting of Parliament following the election.
After the 2010 general election, the coalition government enacted the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 which set fixed term parliaments of five years. Thus the next general election was held on 7 May 2015, with subsequent elections scheduled to be held every five years thereafter on the first Thursday in May. However the Act also contains provisions for Parliament to be dissolved and an early election held if no government can be formed within 14 days after a vote of no confidence in the government. Similarly, the Act allows for an election to be triggered by a vote of two-thirds of MPs in the House of Commons calling for one.[87]
The Prime Minister asks the Monarch to dissolve Parliament by Royal Proclamation. The Proclamation also orders the issue of the formal Writs of Election which require an election to be held in each constituency. The election is held 17 working days after the date of the Proclamation, as regulated by the Representation of the People Act 1983, s. 23 and Schedule 1 ("Parliamentary election rules"), rule 1 ("Timetable").
Since 1935 every general election has been held on a Thursday. Of the 18 general elections between 1945 and 2010, five were held in May, four each in June and October, two in February and one each in March, April and July.
The Cabinet Office imposes Purdah before elections. This is a period of roughly six weeks in which Government Departments are not allowed to communicate with members of the public about any new or controversial Government initiatives (such as modernisation initiatives, and administrative and legislative changes).
Post-election[edit]
Voting ends at 10 pm (or once all voters present in a queue at/outside the polling station at 10 pm have cast their vote).[88] Presiding officers are responsible for sealing ballot boxes in polling stations (election and polling agents appointed by candidates can also apply their own seals to the boxes) and transporting them 'directly and without delay' to the central counting location for the constituency.[66] Returning officers are required to 'take reasonable steps to begin counting ... as soon as practicable within the period of four hours starting with the close of the poll' (i.e. no later than 2 am).[89][90] In most constituencies, upon receipt by the returning officer at the central counting location, ballot boxes are unsealed and emptied, and ballot papers are verified and counted immediately. Ballot papers are verified manually and counted by hand. The counting process is observed by candidates and their agents.
Results are declared in each individual constituency by the local returning officer. The earliest results are declared by about 11 pm, with most having been declared by 3 or 4 am; some constituencies do not declare their results until later the following day. Each individual MP assumes office immediately upon the declaration by the local returning officer.
When all the results are known, or when one party achieves an absolute majority of the seats in the House of Commons, the first response comes from the current (and possibly outgoing) Prime Minister. If a majority in the new Parliament has been achieved by their party, they remain in office without the need for reconfirmation or reappointment—no new "term" of office is started. If a majority has not been achieved, and it is obvious that another party has the numbers to form a government, the Prime Minister submits his/her resignation to the Monarch. The Monarch then commissions the leader of the new majority party to form a new government. The Prime Minister can try to remain in power even without a majority. The subsequent "Queen's Speech" (giving an outline of the government's proposed legislative programme) offers a chance for the House of Commons to cast a vote of confidence or no confidence in the government by accepting or rejecting the Queen's Speech.
By precedent, and in the absence of any formal written constitutional objection, the Monarch could in theory dismiss the incumbent Prime Minister and seek to appoint a replacement. However, this has not occurred since the dismissal of Lord Melbourne in 1834, and would almost certainly trigger a constitutional crisis, similar to the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis.
The most recent Prime Ministers who, having failed to win a majority, opted not to resign immediately, were Edward Heath in 1974, Gordon Brown in 2010 and Theresa May in 2017. In 1974, after initial negotiations with the Liberal Party failed to provide a coalition deal, Heath resigned, allowing Queen Elizabeth II to commission Labour leader Harold Wilson to form an administration. Until the Prime Minister reacts to the election result, either by deciding to remain on or by resigning, the Monarch has no role. Only if the Prime Minister resigns can the Monarch then commission someone else to form a government.
The largest party not in government becomes the Official Opposition, known as Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition. Any smaller parties not in government are collectively known as "the opposition".
After each election, having remained in power, a Prime Minister may engage in a major or minor reshuffle of ministers; such a reshuffle may occur at any time if the Prime Minister wishes it. Any vacancy arising in the House, due to death, ennoblement, or resignation is filled by a by-election. The timing for this is not automatic and it can be months after the vacancy arose, or even abandoned if there is a general election due soon.
Previous results[edit]
See United Kingdom general elections, List of UK by-elections
Devolved parliament and assembly elections[edit]
Scottish Parliament elections[edit]
Scottish Parliament elections occur every four years to elect the Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs). The first election to the unicameral Scottish Parliament that was created by the Scotland Act 1998, was held in 1999. Elections to the Scottish Parliament are by the Additional Member System, which is a hybrid of single member plurality and party list.

Scottish Parliament Election 1999
Scottish Parliament Election 2003
Scottish Parliament Election 2007
Scottish Parliament Election 2011
Scottish Parliament Election 2016

Welsh Assembly elections[edit]
Welsh Assembly elections normally occur every four years. They elect the Members of the National Assembly for Wales (AMs). They began in 1999, when the unicameral Welsh Assembly, created by the Government of Wales Act 1998, began its first session. However AMs voted to hold the most recent election in 2016 to avoid a clash with the UK parliamentary general election in 2015.[91] For elections to the Welsh Assembly the Additional Member System is used, which is a hybrid of single member plurality and proportional representation.

Welsh Assembly Election 1999
Welsh Assembly Election 2003
Welsh Assembly Election 2007
Welsh Assembly Election 2011
Welsh Assembly Election 2016

Northern Ireland Assembly elections[edit]
Northern Ireland Assembly elections occur every four years on the first Thursday in May. They began in 1998, when the assembly created by the Northern Ireland Act 1998 began its first session. For elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly, the Single Transferable Vote system, is used.[92] Under this system, voters rank individual candidates in order of preference. STV was chosen as the electoral method to attempt to give adequate representation to the different sectarian groups in Northern Ireland. Elections continued even when the assembly was suspended between 2002 and 2007.

Northern Ireland Assembly election 1998
Northern Ireland Assembly election 2003
Northern Ireland Assembly election 2007
Northern Ireland Assembly election 2011
Northern Ireland Assembly election 2016
Northern Ireland Assembly election 2017

European Parliament elections[edit]
Elections to the European Parliament have taken place since 1979, the first year in which the parliament was directly elected. (From 1973 to 1979, members were elected by national parliaments).
Since the 1999 election, Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) representing England, Scotland and Wales have been elected in regional constituencies using the party list, a closed list (i.e. candidates are chosen by parties). In Northern Ireland the Single Transferable Vote system has been used since 1979.
The United Kingdom is divided into twelve electoral regions, which are the three smaller nations (Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), and nine Regions of England.
The use of proportional representation greatly increased the representation of minor parties. Until the 1999 election, the First Past the Post system was used, which had prevented parties with moderately large, but geographically spread out vote shares from receiving any seats. For example, in the 1989 election the Green Party received 2,292,718 votes, constituting a 15% vote share, but no seats. The European Parliamentary Elections Act 1999 changed the system in time for the 1999 election.
From 1979 to 1989, the United Kingdom had 81 MEPs (78 in England, Wales and Scotland, 3 in Northern Ireland). The European Parliamentary Elections Act 1993 increased the number to 87, adding five more seats in England and one more in Wales. The number was reduced to 78 for the 2004 election, and to 72 for the 2009 election, but increased to 73 during the term of the 2009-2014 parliament. The UK's representation in Europe remained at this level in 2014.


Year
Date
Members
Constituencies


European Parliament election, 1979
7 June 1979
81
79


European Parliament election, 1984
14 June 1984
81
79


European Parliament election, 1989
15 June 1989
81
79


European Parliament election, 1994
9 June 1994
87
85


European Parliament election, 1999
10 June 1999
87
12


European Parliament election, 2004
10 June 2004
78
12


European Parliament election, 2009
4 June 2009
72
12


European Parliament election, 2014
22 May 2014
73
12


Regional and local elections[edit]
See also: Administrative geography of the United Kingdom and Local government in the United Kingdom
In local elections, councillors are elected forming the local administrations of the United Kingdom. A number of tiers of local council exist, at region, county, district/borough and town/parish levels. A variety of voting systems are used for local elections. In Northern Ireland and Scotland, the single transferable vote system is used, whilst in most of England and Wales the single member plurality system is used. The remainder of England (including all of the London Boroughs) and Wales use the plurality at-large system, except for the elections of the Mayor and Assembly of the Greater London Authority (GLA).
The only Region of England which has a directly elected administration is London. London Assembly elections began in 2000, when it was created. The Additional Member System is used for elections to the Assembly. The Mayor is elected via the Supplementary Vote system.
Local elections are held in different parts of the country each year. In general, local elections are held on the first Thursday in May.[93] In years with a general election it is usual practice to hold both general and local elections on the same day. In 2004, for the first time, local elections were held on the same day as European elections, and London Mayoral and Assembly elections. The date was referred to as 'Super Thursday'.
Unlike general elections, for local elections there is no legal requirement as to when the count should begin after the close of poll.[94] For this reason, some returning officers have decided to store the sealed ballot boxes overnight at the central counting location and begin the count the next working day. However, once the count has started, the returning officer must, so far as practicable, proceed continuously with the count between the hours of 9am and 7pm (subject to refreshments).[95] Ballot papers are verified manually and counted by hand (with the exception of London Mayoral and Assembly elections, where optical scanners are used).[96]
Police and Crime Commissioners[edit]
From 2012, England and Wales have voted for regional Police and Crime Commissioners.
History[edit]
See also: Parliament in the Making § Historical events in the development of Parliament
The system of universal suffrage did not exist in the United Kingdom until 1928.[97] From 1265, a few percent of the adult male population in the Kingdom of England (of which Wales was a full and equal member from 1542) were able to vote in parliamentary elections that occurred at irregular intervals to the Parliament of England.[98][99] From 1432 only forty-shilling freeholders held the parliamentary franchise. The franchise for the Parliament of Scotland developed separately. The Bill of Rights 1689 in England and Claim of Right Act 1689 in Scotland established the principles of regular parliaments and free elections,[100] but no significant changes to the electoral franchise took place until 1832 under the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The franchise was restricted to males by custom rather than statute;[101] on rare occasions women had been able to vote in parliamentary elections as a result of property ownership, until the 1832 Great Reform Act specified 'male persons'.[102]
The history of local government in England stretches over the same period with the election of town mayors and the development of town councils taking place since the Middle Ages. Local government in Scotland and in Wales evolved separately before more consistency across Britain developed in the 19th and 20th centuries. In local government elections, single women ratepayers received the right to vote in the Municipal Franchise Act 1869. This right was confirmed in the Local Government Act 1894 and extended to include some married women.[103][104][105]
Expansion of the parliamentary franchise[edit]
19th century[edit]
The first Act to increase the size of the electorate was the Reform Act 1832 (sometimes known as the Great Reform Act). It abolished 56 rotten boroughs (which had elected 112 MPs) and decreased the property qualification in boroughs. It gave some parliamentary representation to the industrial towns (142 MPs) by redistributing some MPs from boroughs who had disproportional representation. The electoral register was created. The overall result of the Act was that the electorate was increased to 14% of the adult male population. Although this was not a large increase, the Act was the first big step towards equal representation.
Between 1838 and 1848 a popular movement, Chartism, organised around six demands including universal male franchise and the secret ballot.
The Reform Act 1867 redistributed more MPs from boroughs which had disproportional representation (42) to London and industrial towns. It decreased the property qualification in boroughs, so that all men with an address in boroughs could vote. For the first time some of the working class could vote and MPs had to take these new constituents into account. Some political parties decided to become national parties. Overall, the Act increased the size of the electorate to 32% of the adult male population.
The Ballot Act 1872 replaced open elections with a secret ballot system. The Corrupt and Illegal Practices Prevention Act 1883 criminalised attempts to bribe voters and standardised the amount that could be spent on election expenses. The Representation of the People Act 1884 and the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 (the Third Reform Act) together increased the electorate to 56% of the adult male population.
20th century[edit]
The Representation of the People Act 1918 expanded the electorate to include all men over the age of 21 and most women over the age of 30. Later that year, the Parliament (Qualification of Women) Act 1918 gave women over 21 the right to stand for election as MPs. The first woman to become an MP was Constance Markievicz in 1918. However she declined to take up her seat, being a member of Sinn Féin. Nancy Astor, elected in 1919, was the second woman to become an MP, and the first to sit in the Commons. The Equal Franchise Act 1928 lowered the minimum age for women to vote from 30 to 21, making men and women equal in terms of suffrage for the first time. The Representation of the People Act 1949 abolished additional votes for graduates (university constituencies) and the owners of business premises.
The Representation of the People Act 1969 lowered the voting age from 21 to 18. The Representation of the People Act 1985 gave British citizens abroad the right to vote for a five-year period after they had left the United Kingdom. The Representation of the People Act 1989 extended the period to 20 years; and citizens who were too young to vote when they left the country also became eligible.
Summary[edit]
The following table summarises historic developments in extending the franchise in England and later the UK (after 1707). At each stage, it shows the percentage of the adult population entitled to vote and the voting age, separately for males and females.


Year
Adult male entitlement percent
Male voting age
Adult female entitlement percent
Female voting age
Act of Parliament
Notes


1265 to 1689
<10




Periodic elected parliaments[98]


1689 to 1832
<10



Bill of Rights 1689
Established the principles of regular parliaments and free elections[106][107]


1832
14
21
0
-
Reform Act 1832
Standardised form of franchise for all boroughs introduced for the first time


1867
32
21
0
-
Reform Act 1867
Householders now enfranchised - working classes gained the vote


1885
56
21
0
-
Third Reform Act and
Redistribution of Seats Act 1885
The Act extended the 1867 concessions from boroughs to county constituencies


1918
100
21
40
30
Representation of the People Act 1918
Abolished most property qualifications for men; enfranchised some women


1928
100
21
100
21
Equal Franchise Act 1928
Abolished age disparity and property qualifications for women


1948
100
21
100
21
Representation of the People Act 1948
Removed double vote entitlements regarding business premises and university constituencies


1969
100
18
100
18
Representation of the People Act 1969
Extended suffrage to include 18- to 20-year-olds


Labour (post-1997) reforms[edit]
Prior to 1997, and the Labour Party government of Tony Blair, there were only three types of elections: elections to the House of Commons, local government elections, and elections to the European Parliament. Most elections were conducted under the First Past the Post (FPTP) electoral system. In Northern Ireland, both local government and European elections were conducted under the Single Transferable Vote (STV) system. Labour's constitutional reforms introduced elected assemblies for London, Scotland and Wales, and elected mayors in certain cities. Proportional Representation (PR) was introduced outside Northern Ireland for the first time.
The hybrid (part PR, part FPTP) Additional Member System was introduced in 1999 for the newly created devolved assemblies: the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly and London Assembly and STV was used for the newly created Northern Ireland Assembly. The regional party list (Closed list) system was introduced for European elections in Great Britain (which had previously used single member constituency FPTP) though Northern Ireland continues to use STV.
Labour passed the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000, which created the Electoral Commission, which since 2000 has been responsible for the running of elections and referendums and to a limited extent regulating party funding. It also reduced the period during which British expatriates can vote, from 20 years after they emigrate to 15.
In 2008 the Ministry of Justice delivered a report that failed to conclusively recommend any particular voting system as "best" and instead simply compared working practices used in the different elections. The Minister of State for Justice, Ministry of Justice (Michael Wills) issued a statement following its publication stating that no action would be taken on the various reports that, since 1997, have suggested a move towards proportional representation for the UK general election until reform of the House of Lords is completed.
Labour also made many changes to the election administration underpinning the way that elections are run. Changes included postal voting on demand, rolling registration and some innovative pilots such as internet voting[108][109]
Current issues[edit]
Electoral reform[edit]
Proportional representation[edit]
Main article: United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum, 2011
Some British parties and campaigners have long argued that the current First Past the Post system used for Parliamentary elections should be replaced with another system. The introduction of proportional representation has been advocated for some time by the Liberal Democrats, and by some pressure groups such as Charter 88, Unlock Democracy and the Electoral Reform Society. In 1998 and 2003 independent commissions were formed to look into electoral reform.[110] After the 2005 election, in which Labour was elected with the lowest share of the national vote for any single party majority government in British history, more public attention was drawn to the issue. The national newspaper The Independent started a petition for the introduction of a more proportional system immediately after the election, under the title "Campaign For Democracy". The broad-based Make Votes Count Coalition currently[when?] brings together those groups advocating reform.
After the UK 2010 general election, the new coalition government agreed to hold a referendum on voting reform. This took place on 5 May 2011: voters were given the choice of switching to the Alternative Vote system or retaining the current one. The country voted against AV, with 32% in favour and 68% against.[111]
Parliamentary and party positions[edit]
The All-Party Parliamentary Group on Electoral Reform is a cross-party group consisting of 150[when?] MPs who support electoral reform, chaired by Richard Burden.
Labour pledged in its manifesto for the 1997 general election to set up a commission on alternatives to the first-past-the-post system for general elections and to hold a referendum on whether to change the system. The Independent Commission on the Voting System, headed by Lord Jenkins of Hillhead and known as the Jenkins Commission, was established in December 1997. It reported in October 1998 and suggested the Alternative vote top-up or AV+ system.
The government had expected a recommendation which could have been implemented within the Parliament, and decided that it would be impractical to have a general election using First Past the Post (FPTP) after a referendum decision to adopt a different system, and therefore delayed the referendum until after the next general election. Those elements within the Labour Party opposed to any change persuaded the party not to repeat the pledge for a referendum in the 2001 manifesto, and therefore none was held once the party was re-elected.
After the 2005 election, Lord Chancellor Lord Falconer said there was "no groundswell" for change, although a Cabinet committee was given the task of investigating reform. John Prescott was appointed as Chair; given his known opposition to change, proponents were critical and dismissive of the move. Several prominent Labour MPs expressed a desire for investigating electoral reform, including Peter Hain (who argued in the House of Commons in March 2004 for the Alternative Vote), Patricia Hewitt, Tessa Jowell and Baroness Amos.
As mentioned above, in January 2008 the government produced a "desk-bound" review of the experience to date of new voting systems in the United Kingdom since Labour came to power in 1997. This review was non-committal as to the need for further reform, especially as regards reform of the voting system used in Parliamentary Elections.
The Conservative Party in the 2005–2010 parliament were predominantly in favour of retaining FPTP. Although the Conservative Party would have won significantly more seats in the 2005 election if some form of proportional representation had been used[citation needed], some in the party[who?] felt it might find itself politically isolated on the right, and face Labour/Lib Dem coalition governments. Electoral reform, towards a proportional model, was desired by the Liberal Democrat party, the Green party, and several other small parties.
Low turnout[edit]
As in many Western democracies, voter apathy is a current concern, after a dramatic decline in election turnout around the end of the 20th century. Turnout in UK General Elections fell from 77% in 1992, and 71% in 1997, to a historic low of 59% in 2001. It has, however, increased since, to 61% in 2005, 65% in 2010, 66% in 2015 and 69% in 2017.[112] In other elections turnout trends have been more varied. At the referendum on Scottish independence in 2014, turnout exceeded 84.5% - the highest in a large-scale poll since the introduction of universal suffrage - and some local authorities recorded turnouts of over 90%.[113] Conversely, the Police and Crime Commissioner elections in November 2012 saw a record low turnout of just 15% and the Parliamentary by-election in Manchester Central also had a record low peacetime by-election turnout of 18%.[114] Parliamentary by-election turnout is usually around 30-50%,[115] while Local Government elections typically see turnouts of around 30% when they are not held alongside higher profile contests such as General or European elections.
See also[edit]


British Polling Council
Electoral register
Electoral calendar
Election Day (United Kingdom)
Electoral system
Election agent

Polling agent
Counting agent


United Kingdom general elections (for election results)
United Kingdom national and local elections
List of UK by-elections (for by-election results)
List of UK Parliamentary election petitions
Referendums in the United Kingdom
Political campaigning on election practicalities.
Historical anomalies of the British electoral system

University constituency
Rotten borough


Marginal constituencies in the United Kingdom
Electoral Administration Act 2006
Electoral Reform Society
Electoral Commission
United Kingdom Election Results
Parliament Week


References[edit]


^ "Electoral Commission: Who we are and what we do" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ "Office for National Statistics: UK Electoral Statistics 2010". Retrieved 2011-04-16. 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 4(5)
^ As the Representation of the People Act 1983 was enacted after the British Nationality Act 1981, any reference to 'Commonwealth citizen' is defined as a British citizen, a British overseas territories citizen, a British National (Overseas), a British overseas citizen, a British subject or a citizen of a country listed in Schedule 3 of the latter piece of legislation, but not a British protected person.
^ As the Representation of the People Act 1983 was enacted after the British Nationality Act 1981, any reference to 'Commonwealth citizen' is defined as nationals of countries listed in Schedule 3 of the latter piece of legislation (which includes Fiji and Zimbabwe despite the two countries' current suspension from the Commonwealth).
^ including both the Republic of Cyprus and the semi-recognized Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, but excluding the Akrotiri and Dhekelia sovereign base areas.
^ "Part B" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ Sections 4(1)(c) and 4(3)(c), Representation of the People Act 1983
^ "The Electoral Commission: Electoral registration in Great Britain" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ Registering to vote and the electoral register electoralcommission.org.uk, accessed 4 January 2016
^ "The Representation of the People (Form of Canvass) (England and Wales) Regulations 2006, Schedule Part 1". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "I have two homes. Can I register at both addresses?". The Electoral Commission. Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 4(6)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Sections 3 and 3A
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 173
^ "The Electoral Office for Northern Ireland: Registering to Vote" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ "British citizens living abroad". Aboutmyvote.co.uk. Archived from the original on 17 January 2011. Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 14(1)(b)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 14(1)(c)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 14(1)(e)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 9B
^ "The Queen and Voting", "Royal Family official website".
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 10
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 23(3) (in England and Wales); Representation of the People (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (in Scotland)
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 23
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 24(2)
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 6
^ "Register to vote - GOV.U". Government Digital Service. 27 June 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2014. 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 10(3)
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulations 28(2) and 29(2B)
^ "Electoral Office for Northern Ireland: Electoral Registration Form" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 13D
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 38
^ Regulation 42, Representation of the People Regulations 2001
^ a b Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 13(1)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Sections 13BB and 13B(4)
^ "Electoral Commission: Managing the 2012 canvass in England and Wales (excluding London)" (PDF). 
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Sections 13B(2) and (3)
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Sections 13B(3A) to (3E)
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 36(2)(b)
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 43
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulation 93
^ a b "Political Parties". The Constitution Society. Retrieved 24 May 2014. 
^ Johnston, Ron; Pattie, Charles; Dorling, Danny; Rossiter, David (2001). From Votes To Seats: The Operation of the UK Electoral System since 1945. Manchester University Press. p. 44. 
^ Lynch, P. & Garner, R. (2005). The Changing Party System. Parliamentary Affairs. 58(3), pp. 533–554
^ Siaroff, Alan (May 2003). "Two-and-a-Half-Party Systems and the Comparative Role of the 'Half'". Party Politics. 9 (3): 267–290. doi:10.1177/1354068803009003001. Retrieved 19 September 2012. 
^ Lynch, P. (2007). Party System Change in Britain: Multi-Party Politics in a Multi-Level Polity. British Politics. 2, pp. 323–346
^ "Guidance for candidates and agents", "Electoral Commission".
^ "How MPs are elected". 
^ a b Knight, Julian (2015). British Politics For Dummies (2nd ed.). p. 202. ISBN 978-1-118-97152-9. 
^ Conservative and Unionist Central Office v. James Robert Samuel Burrell (HM Inspector of Taxes) [1981] EWCA Civ 2 (10 December 1981)
^ Constitution of the Conservative Party, Schedule 6
^ a b Colomer, Josep M. (2013). Personal Representation: The Neglected Dimension of Electoral Systems. European Consortium for Political Research. p. 45. 
^ a b c d Webber, Esther (2 August 2013). "The costly process of becoming an election candidate". BBC News. 
^ "BBC NEWS - UK - UK Politics - Gibson barred from standing again". news.bbc.co.uk. 
^ Sections 1(1)(a) and 2(1)(a), Representation of the People Act 1983]
^ a b "UK Parliamentary elections in Great Britain: guidance for (Acting) Returning Officers (Part D – Absent voting)" (pdf). The Electoral Commission. p. 1 (para 1.1). Retrieved 2017-04-23. 
^ "British citizens living abroad" Archived 5 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine., About My Vote.
^ "Representation of the People Act 1983". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "Electoral Commission Guidance Manual: The poll" (PDF). Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ a b Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 37(2)
^ "Electoral Office for Northern Ireland: Voting at a polling place". Retrieved 2017-04-19. 
^ a b "Handbook for polling station staff" (PDF). The Electoral Commission. April 2017. p. 10. Retrieved 8 June 2017. 
^ "Voting in person", "About My Vote".
^ Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 37(1)(a)
^ a b c d e "Electoral Commission: Polling station handbook" (PDF). 
^ "Electoral Commission: Handbook for polling station staff" (PDF). 2010. Retrieved 2013-11-06. 
^ "Guidance for candidates and agents (Part 5 – Your right to attend key electoral events)" (PDF). The Electoral Commission. April 2017. p. 9 (para 1.25). Retrieved 7 June 2017. 
^ "Electoral Commission: Tellers do's and don'ts" (PDF). Retrieved 2017-06-07. 
^ "Guidance on the conduct of tellers in and around polling places" (PDF). Retrieved 2017-06-07. 
^ a b "Voting by post or proxy". The Electoral Office for Northern Ireland. Retrieved 2011-01-05. 
^ "UK Parliamentary elections in Great Britain: guidance for (Acting) Returning Officers (Part D – Absent voting)" (pdf). The Electoral Commission. pp. 10 (para 3.22–3.24). Retrieved 2017-04-23. 
^ "Voting by Post", About My Vote.
^ Representation of the People Act 2000, Schedule 4, Paragraph 6
^ Representation of the People Regulations 2001, Regulations 55 and 56(3A)
^ "Voting by Proxy", About My Vote.
^ Representation of the People Act 2000, Schedule 4, Paragraph 3(3)
^ Representation of the People Act 2000, Schedule 4, Paragraph 4(2)
^ Representation of the People Act 2000, Schedule 4, Paragraph 3(3)(d)
^ a b Matters, Your Vote. "Home - Your Vote Matters". Your Vote Matters. 
^ [1]
^ [2]
^ "Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "Frequently Asked Questions: General Election". UK Parliament. 
^ "Election 2010 - national result", BBC News.
^ Wintour, Patrick; editor, political (11 May 2010). "Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition hopes end in recriminations" – via The Guardian. 
^ "Nick Clegg pushes fixed-term parliament plan". London: The Independent. 2010-11-13. 
^ "Electoral Registration and Administration Act 2013, Section 19". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "Constitutional Reform and Governance Act 2010, Section 48". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ "Representation of the People Act 1983, Schedule 1, Rules 44-45". www.legislation.gov.uk. 
^ [3], 2015 Welsh assembly election delayed, says Carwyn Jones
^ Whyte, Nicholas. "The Single Transferable Vote (STV)". Northern Ireland Elections. Retrieved 28 June 2016. 
^ >"Representation of the People Act 1983, Section 37(1)(a)". 
^ COMMISSIONER RICHARD PRICE OBE QC. "Williams v Patrick & Ors [2014] EWHC 4120 (QB)". 
^ "The Local Elections (Principal Areas) (England and Wales) Rules 2006, Rule 45". 
^ "The Greater London Authority Elections Rules 2007, Schedule 3, Rule 48". 
^ "The History of the Parliamentary Franchise". House of Commons Library. 1 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2016. 
^ a b "Origins and growth of Parliament". The National Archives. Retrieved 18 May 2015. 
^ "Getting the vote". The National Archives. Retrieved 18 May 2015. 
^ "Rise of Parliament". The National Archives. Retrieved 18 May 2015. 
^ "Ancient voting rights", The History of the Parliamentary Franchise, House of Commons Library, 1 March 2013, p. 6, retrieved 16 March 2016 
^ Heater, Derek (2006). Citizenship in Britain: A History. Edinburgh University Press. p. 107. ISBN 9780748626724. 
^ Heater, Derek (2006). Citizenship in Britain: A History. Edinburgh University Press. p. 136. ISBN 9780748626724. 
^ "Women's rights". The National Archives. Retrieved 11 February 2015. 
^ "Which Act Gave Women the Right to Vote in Britain?". Synonym. Retrieved 11 February 2015. 
^ "Bill of Rights". British Library. Retrieved 23 June 2015. 
^ "The Convention and Bill of Rights". UK Parliament. Retrieved 2 November 2014. 
^ James, Toby S (31 May 2010). "Electoral modernisation or elite statecraft: Electoral administration in the United Kingdom 1997–2007". British Politics. 5 (2): 179–201. doi:10.1057/bp.2009.31. 
^ James, Toby S (March 2011). "Fewer Costs, More Votes? United Kingdom Innovations in Election Administration 2000–2007 and the Effect on Voter Turnout". Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy. 10 (1): 37–52. doi:10.1089/elj.2009.0059. 
^ Electoral Process - Questions, archived from the original on 28 January 2011 
^ "Vote 2011: UK rejects alternative vote". BBC News. Retrieved 22 August 2015. 
^ "Turnout in UK General Elections since 1945". www.politicsresources.net. 
^ "Highest-ever election turnout for Scottish referendum". 
^ Travis, Alan; Wintour, Patrick (16 November 2012). "None of the above: electorate spurns David Cameron's police polls" – via The Guardian. 
^ "By-election turnout since 1997 - UK Political Info". www.ukpolitical.info. 


External links[edit]

British Election Campaign Material from the University of Salford site
June 2006: Boundary changes make it more difficult for Labour to win an overall majority
NSD: European Election Database - UK
Adam Carr's Election Archive
Parties and elections
The Electoral Commission Statutory organisation that regulates electoral practices
Elections around the World: United Kingdom
Make My Vote Count
Jan 2008: Review of Voting Systems
Guardian Special Report - Electoral Reform
Buxton, Sydney Charles (1882). Electoral purity and economy. London: The London and Counties Liberal Union. 
Elections and voting UK Parliament website
Electoral franchise UK Parliament website
Voting systems in the UK House of Commons Library Note







v
t
e


 Elections and referendums in the United Kingdom



General elections



1801 co-option
1802
1806
1807
1812
1818
1820
1826
1830
1831
1832
1835
1837
1841
1847
1852
1857
1859
1865
1868
1874
1880
1885
1886
1892
1895
1900
1906
1910 (Jan)
1910 (Dec)
1918
1922
1923
1924
1929
1931
1935
1945
1950
1951
1955
1959
1964
1966
1970
1974 (Feb)
1974 (Oct)
1979
1983
1987
1992
1997
2001
2005
2010
2015
2017
Next





Local elections



1889
1890
1892
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018





European elections



1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
2004
2009
2014





Referendums



1975
2011
2016












v
t
e


By-elections in the United Kingdom



Parliament of the United Kingdom



1801–06
1806–18
1818–32
1832–47
1847–57
1857–68
1868–85
1885–1900
1900–18
1918–31
1931–50
1950–79
1979–2010
2010–present
Hereditary peers





Parliament of Great Britain



1707–15
1715–34
1734–54
1754–74
1774–90
1790–1800





Parliament of England



1689–1700
1701–07





Other



Scottish Parliament
National Assembly for Wales
European Parliament
House of Commons of Northern Ireland (1921-72)
Northern Ireland Assembly vacancies are filled by co-option
Local government by-election results are generally given on the page for the last election in that area












v
t
e


Elections in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom

Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales


Vatican City





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union












v
t
e


United Kingdom articles



History




Chronology



Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
UK since 1945 (social history)





By topic



Economic
Empire
Maritime
Military








Geography








Administrative



Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies





Physical



British Isles

terminology
Great Britain


Coastline
Geology

Northern Ireland


Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes





Resources



Energy/Renewable energy

Biodiesel
Coal
Geothermal
Hydraulic frac.
Hydroelectricity
Marine
North Sea oil
Solar
Wind


Food

Agriculture
Fishing

English
Scottish


Hunting


Materials

Flora
Forestry
Mining













Politics











Constitution
Courts
Elections
Foreign relations

History


Human rights

Intersex
LGBT
Transgender


Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Legislation
Monarchy

monarchs


Nationality
Parliament

House of Commons
House of Lords


Political parties





Government



Cabinet

list


Civil service
Departments
Prime Minister

list







Military



Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction











Economy







Banks

Bank of England


Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound (currency)
Stock Exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
British Rail








Society







Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Ethnic groups
Health care
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty

Food banks


Prostitution
Public holidays
Social care
Social structure





Culture



Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Identity
Literature
Media

television


Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre

















Countries of the United Kingdom







England



History

social
timeline


Geography
Politics
Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Northern Ireland



History
Geography
Politics

Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Scotland



History

timeline


Geography
Politics

Parliament
Government
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols





Wales



History
Geography
Welsh Government
Politics

Assembly
First Minister


Law
Economy

tourism


Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols


















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elections_in_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=813840328"					Categories: Elections in the United KingdomHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from May 2014Use British English from May 2014All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from March 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2016All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2010