A State Electoral District is an electorate within the Lower House or Legislative Assembly of Australian states and territories. Most state electoral districts (except Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania, which have multi-member electorates using a proportional voting method) send a single member to a state or territory's parliament using the preferential method of voting. The size of a state electoral district is dependent upon the Electoral Acts in the various states and vary in size between them. At present, there are 409 state electoral districts in Australia.
State electoral districts do not apply to the Upper House, or Legislative Council, in those states that have one (New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western Australia). In New South Wales and South Australia, MLCs represent the entire state, in Tasmania they represent single-member districts, and in Victoria and Western Australia they represent a region formed by grouping electoral districts together.



Contents


1 By State/Territory

1.1 Australian Capital Territory
1.2 New South Wales
1.3 Northern Territory
1.4 Queensland
1.5 South Australia
1.6 Tasmania
1.7 Victoria
1.8 Western Australia


2 See also
3 References



By State/Territory[edit]
Australian Capital Territory[edit]
Main article: Electorates of the Australian Capital Territory
There are five electorates for the Legislative Assembly, each with five members each, making up 25 members in total.
New South Wales[edit]




Results of the New South Wales state election, 2007 showing the state electoral districts



Results of the New South Wales state election, 2007 showing the districts in Sydney




Main article: Electoral districts of New South Wales
There are currently 93 electoral districts in New South Wales.
Northern Territory[edit]
Main article: Electoral divisions of the Northern Territory
There are 25 single-member electoral divisions in the Northern Territory, and 17 former divisions.
Queensland[edit]
Main article: Electoral districts of Queensland
There are 93 electoral districts in Queensland, for the Legislative Assembly of Queensland. Information about the QLD electoral districts for the 2006 elections can be obtained from the Electoral Commission of Queensland website.[1]
South Australia[edit]




Results of the South Australian state election, 2006 showing state electoral districts



Results of the South Australian state election, 2006 showing metro electoral districts around Adelaide




Main article: Electoral districts of South Australia
There are 47 single-member electoral districts in South Australia, for the South Australian House of Assembly.

Tasmania[edit]




Tasmanian State Electorates


Main article: Tasmanian House of Assembly § Electorates
There are 15 electoral divisions in Tasmania.

Victoria[edit]
Main article: Electoral districts of Victoria




Electoral districts of Victoria



Electoral districts in the Melbourne area




There are 88 electoral districts in Victoria, for the Victorian Legislative Assembly.

Western Australia[edit]
Main article: Electoral districts of Western Australia
There are 59 single-member electoral districts in Western Australia for the Western Australian Legislative Assembly. 42 are in the Perth metropolitan area and 17 are in the rest of the state.
See also[edit]

Divisions of the Australian House of Representatives (for federal seats)
Local government in Australia (for local councils)
Parliaments of the Australian states and territories

References[edit]



^ "2006 State General Election : 9 September 2006". Electoral Commission of Queensland. 14 October 2010. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 19 September 2012. 









v
t
e


Australian state and territory electoral districts






New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
Western Australia
South Australia
Tasmania
Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory












v
t
e


Australian state upper house electoral regions



Electoral regions / divisions



Tasmania
Victoria
Western Australia





Single state electorate



New South Wales
South Australia





None (no upper house)



Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory
Queensland











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electorates_of_the_Australian_states_and_territories&oldid=812300850"					Categories: Australian electorates