For other uses, see English law (disambiguation).




The Royal Courts of Justice on the Strand in London is the seat of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal.


English law is the common law legal system governing England and Wales, comprising criminal law and civil law.
English law has no formal codification: the essence of English common law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts applying statute, and legal precedent (stare decisis) from previous cases. A decision of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, the highest civil appeal court of the United Kingdom, is binding on every other court.
Some rulings are derived from legislation; others, known as common law, are based on rulings of previous courts. For example, murder is a common law crime rather than one established by an Act of Parliament. Common law can be amended or repealed by Parliament; murder, for example, now carries a mandatory life sentence rather than the death penalty.



Contents


1 Statute law

1.1 Statutory framework
1.2 Types of statute law
1.3 Citation style


2 Common law

2.1 Description
2.2 Early development
2.3 Precedent
2.4 Overseas influences


3 Application to Wales
4 Subjects and links

4.1 Criminal law
4.2 Administrative law
4.3 Family law
4.4 Tort
4.5 Contract
4.6 Company and insolvency law
4.7 Property
4.8 Trusts
4.9 Labour law
4.10 Evidence
4.11 Miscellaneous


5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Statute law[edit]
Statutory framework[edit]
The first schedule of the Interpretation Act 1978, defines the following terms: "British Islands", "England", and "United Kingdom". The use of the term "British Isles" is virtually obsolete in statutes and, when it does appear, it is taken to be synonymous with "British Islands". For interpretation purposes, England includes a number of specified elements:

Wales and Berwick Act 1746, section 3 (entire Act now repealed) formally incorporated Wales and Berwick-upon-Tweed into England. But section 4 Welsh Language Act 1967 provided that references to England in future Acts of Parliament should no longer include Wales (see now Interpretation Act 1978, Schedule 3, part 1). But Dicey & Morris say (at p28) "It seems desirable to adhere to Dicey's [the original] definition for reasons of convenience and especially of brevity. It would be cumbersome to have to add "or Wales" after "England" and "or Welsh" after "English" every time those words are used."
the "adjacent islands" of the Isle of Wight and Anglesey are a part of England and Wales by custom, while Harman v Bolt (1931) 47 TLR 219 expressly confirms that Lundy is a part of England.
the "adjacent territorial waters" by virtue of the Territorial Waters Jurisdiction Act 1878 and the Continental Shelf Act 1964 as amended by the Oil and Gas Enterprise Act 1982.

"Great Britain" means England, Wales, Scotland, their adjacent territorial waters and the islands of Orkney and Shetland, the Hebrides and, by virtue of the Island of Rockall Act 1972, Rockall. "United Kingdom" means Great Britain and Northern Ireland and their adjacent territorial waters, but not the Isle of Man, nor the Channel Islands, whose independent status was discussed in Rover International Ltd. v Canon Film Sales Ltd. (1987) 1 WLR 1597 and Chloride Industrial Batteries Ltd. v F. & W. Freight Ltd. (1989) 1 WLR 823. "British Islands" – but not "British Isles" – means the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands.
Types of statute law[edit]

Acts of the Old Irish Parliament
Acts of the Scottish Parliament
Acts of the United Kingdom Parliament
Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Measures of the National Assembly for Wales
Acts of the National Assembly for Wales
Ministerial Order
Northern Ireland Statutory Rules
UK Statutory Instruments

Citation style[edit]
Main article: Short title
Statutory law is referred to as "Title of Act Year",[1] where the title is the "short title", and ends in "Act", as in "Interpretation Act 1978". Compare with American convention, which includes "of", as in "Civil Rights Act of 1964".
This became the usual way to refer to Acts in the second half of the 19th century, starting in the 1840s; previously Acts were referred to by their long title together with the regnal year of the parliamentary session in which they received Royal Assent, and the chapter number. For example, the Pleading in English Act 1362 was referred to as 36 Edw. III c. 15, meaning "36th year of the reign of Edward III, chapter 15", though in the past this was all spelt out, together with the long title.
Common law[edit]
Description[edit]
Common law is a term with historical origins in the legal system of England. It denotes, in the first place, the judge-made law that developed from the early Middle Ages as described in a work published at the end of the 19th century, The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I,[2] in which Pollock and Maitland expanded the work of Coke (17th century) and Blackstone (18th century). Specifically, the law developed in England's Court of Common Pleas and other common law courts, which became also the law of the colonies settled initially under the crown of England or, later, of the United Kingdom, in North America and elsewhere; and this law as further developed after those courts in England were reorganised by the Supreme Court of Judicature Acts passed in the 1870s, and developed independently, in the legal systems of the United States and other jurisdictions, after their independence from the United Kingdom, before and after the 1870s. The term is used, in the second place, to denote the law developed by those courts, in the same periods (pre-colonial, colonial and post-colonial), as distinct from within the jurisdiction, or former jurisdiction, of other courts in England: the Court of Chancery, the ecclesiastical courts, and the Admiralty court.
In the Oxford English Dictionary (1933) "common law" is described as "The unwritten law of England, administered by the King's courts, which purports to be derived from ancient usage, and is embodied in the older commentaries and the reports of abridged cases", as opposed, in that sense, to statute law, and as distinguished from the equity administered by the Chancery and similar courts, and from other systems such as ecclesiasical law, and admiralty law.[3] For usage in the United States the description is "the body of legal doctrine which is the foundation of the law administered in all states settled from England, and those formed by later settlement or division from them".[4]
Early development[edit]
Since 1189, English law has been described as a common law rather than a civil law system; in other words, no major codification of the law has taken place and judicial precedents are binding as opposed to persuasive. This may be a legacy of the Norman conquest of England, when a number of legal concepts and institutions from Norman law were introduced to England. In the early centuries of English common law, the justices and judges were responsible for adapting the system of writs to meet everyday needs, applying a mixture of precedent and common sense to build up a body of internally consistent law. An example is the Law Merchant derived from the "Pie-Powder" Courts, named from a corruption of the French pieds-poudrés ("dusty feet") implying ad hoc marketplace courts. As the Parliament of England became ever more established and influential, legislation gradually overtook judicial law-making such that today, judges are only able to innovate in certain very narrowly defined areas.
In 1276, the concept of "time immemorial" often applied in common law was defined as being any time before 6 July 1189 (i.e. before Richard I's accession to the English throne).
Precedent[edit]
One of the major challenges in the early centuries was to produce a system that was certain in its operation and predictable in its outcomes. Too many judges were either partial or incompetent, acquiring their positions only by virtue of their rank in society. Thus, a standardised procedure slowly emerged, based on a system termed stare decisis which roughly means "let the decision stand". The doctrine of precedent which requires similar cases to be adjudicated in a like manner, falls under the principle of stare decisis. Thus, the ratio decidendi (reason for decision) of each case will bind future cases on the same generic set of facts both horizontally and vertically in the court structure. The highest appellate court in the UK is the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and its decisions are binding on every other court in the hierarchy which are obliged to apply its rulings as the law of the land. The Court of Appeal binds the lower courts, and so on.
Overseas influences[edit]
The influences are two-way.

England exported English Common law and English Statute law to most parts of the British Empire, and many aspects of that system have survived after Independence or otherwise cessation of British rule. "English law" prior to the American Revolutionary Wars (American War of Independence) is still an influence on United States law, and provides the basis for many American legal traditions and policies. Many jurisdictions that have maintained the use of English Common law continue to incorporate modern developments of the Common law in England, and decisions from England are in many jurisdictions usually considered persuasive. The common law as taken or received from England has developed within each jurisdiction, and in that context, "common law" has been described as a body of judge-made law enforced and developed by the courts which includes equity and admiralty law, but has always been "unintelligible without reference to statute". After the colonial period, the common law was developed within each jurisdiction under its final court of appeal: for a time in jurisdictions remaining under the British crown, it was the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, while from the founding of the United States each state has its own supreme court with final appellate jurisdiction, and in respect of federal law the US Supreme Court has the final appellate jurisdiction.[5]
For a number of jurisdictions within the Commonwealth of Nations, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Britain remains the ultimate court of appeal in place of a local Supreme Court. The decisions of the committee made before the change of jurisdiction remain binding legal precedent.
Britain is a dualist in its relationship with international law, i.e., international obligations have to be formally incorporated into English law before the courts are obliged to apply supranational laws. For example, the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was signed in 1950 and Britain allowed individuals to directly petition the European Commission on Human Rights from 1966. Now s6(1) Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA) makes it unlawful "... for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with a convention right", where a "public authority" is any person or body which exercises a public function, expressly including the courts but expressly excluding Parliament. Although the European Convention has begun to be applied to the acts of non-state agents, the HRA does not make the Convention specifically applicable between private parties. Courts have taken the Convention into account in interpreting the common law. They also must take the Convention into account in interpreting Acts of Parliament, but must ultimately follow the terms of the Act even if inconsistent with the Convention (s3 HRA).
Similarly, because Britain remains a strong international trading nation, international consistency of decision making is of vital importance, so Admiralty Law is strongly influenced by Public International Law and the modern commercial treaties and conventions regulating shipping.

Application to Wales[edit]
Unlike Scotland and Northern Ireland, Wales is not a separate jurisdiction within the United Kingdom. The customary laws of Wales within the Kingdom of England were abolished by King Henry VIII's Laws in Wales Acts which brought Wales into legal conformity with England. While Wales now has a devolved Assembly, any legislation which that Assembly passes is enacted in particular circumscribed policy areas defined by the Government of Wales Act 2006, other legislation of the British Parliament, or by Orders in Council given under the authority of the 2006 Act.
Between 1746 and 1967, any reference to England in legislation was deemed to include Wales. This ceased with the enactment of the Welsh Language Act 1967 and the jurisdiction is now commonly referred to as "England and Wales". Although devolution has accorded some degree of political autonomy to Wales in the National Assembly for Wales, it did not have the ability to pass primary legislation until the Government of Wales Act 2006 came into force after the 2007 Welsh general election. That said, the Welsh legal system remains English common law, in that the legal system administered through both civil and criminal courts remains unified throughout England and Wales. This is different from the situation of Northern Ireland, for example, which did not cease to be a distinct jurisdiction when its legislature was suspended (see Northern Ireland (Temporary Provisions) Act 1972). A major difference is also the use of the Welsh language, as laws concerning it apply in Wales and not in the rest of the United Kingdom. The Welsh Language Act 1993 is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which put the Welsh language on an equal footing with the English language in Wales with regard to the public sector. Welsh may also be spoken in Welsh courts.
Subjects and links[edit]
Criminal law[edit]
Main article: English criminal law
English criminal law derives its main principles from the common law. The main elements of a crime are the actus reus (doing something which is criminally prohibited) and a mens rea (having the requisite criminal state of mind, usually intention or recklessness). A prosecutor must show that a person has caused the offensive conduct, or that the culprit had some pre-existing duty to take steps to avoid a criminal consequence. The types of different crimes range from those well known ones like manslaughter, murder, theft and robbery to a plethora of regulatory and statutory offences. It is estimated that in the UK, there are 3,500 classes of criminal offence. Certain defences may exist to crimes, which include self-defence, intention, necessity, duress, and in the case of a murder charge, under the Homicide Act 1957, diminished responsibility, provocation and, in very rare cases, survival of a suicide pact. It has often been suggested that England and Wales should codify its criminal law in an English Criminal Code, but there has been no overwhelming support for this in the past.
Administrative law[edit]
Main article: English administrative law
Family law[edit]
Main article: Family law system in England and Wales

Alimony
Residence in English family law
Bastard

Tort[edit]
Main article: English tort law
Contract[edit]
Main article: English contract law
Company and insolvency law[edit]
Main articles: United Kingdom company law and United Kingdom insolvency law
Property[edit]
Main article: English property law

Chose

Trusts[edit]
Main article: Trust law in England and Wales
Labour law[edit]
Main article: British labour law
Evidence[edit]

Hearsay
Ladd v Marshall

Miscellaneous[edit]

Alcohol licensing laws of the United Kingdom
Costs

See also[edit]


Law of England and Wales portal



Books of authority
Open justice
Law Commission (England and Wales)
Scots law
Welsh law

Contemporary Welsh law (New powers for the Welsh Assembly)



Notes[edit]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





^ There was originally a comma after the name of the Act, as is usual to separate a qualifier, but this has been dropped, yielding the more abrupt current form.
^ The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, 2 vols., on line, with notes, by Professor S. F. C. Milsom, originally published in Cambridge University Press’s 1968 reissue.[1]
^ OED, 1933 edition: citations supporting that description, before Blackstone, are from the 14th and 16th centuries.
^ OED, 1933 edition: citations supporting that description are two from 19th century sources.
^ Liam Boyle, An Australian August Corpus: Why There is Only One Common Law in Australia, Bond Law Review, Volume 27, 2015.[2]


References[edit]

Beale, Joseph H. (1935) A Treatise on the Conflict of Laws. ISBN 1-58477-425-8
Dicey & Morris (1993). The Conflict of Laws 12th edition. London: Sweet & Maxwell Ltd. ISBN 0-420-48280-6
Slapper, Gary; David Kelly (2008-07-15). The English Legal System. London: Routledge-Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-415-45954-9. 
Barnett, Hilaire (2008-07-21). Constitutional & Administrative Law. London: Routledge-Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-415-45829-0. 

Further reading[edit]

Milsom, S.F.C., A Natural History of the Common Law. Columbia University Press (2003) ISBN 0231129947
Milsom, S.F.C., Historical Foundations of the Common Law (2nd ed.). Lexis Law Publishing (Va), (1981) ISBN 0406625034

External links[edit]

The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, 2 vols., on line, with notes, by S. F. C. Milsom, originally published in Cambridge University Press’s 1968 reissue.







v
t
e


English law



Core subjects



UK Constitution
Administrative law
Criminal law
Contract
Tort
Property
Trusts
European Union law








Further subjects



Company law
Competition law
Labour law
Commercial law
Procedure
Family law
Courts of England and Wales





Related systems



Law of the United Kingdom
Northern Ireland law
Scots law
Welsh law
Australian law
British Virgin Islands law
Canadian law
Hong Kong law
Indian law
New Zealand law
Singaporean law
United States law
Anglo-Saxon law
Common law
Equity
English case law








Category
Portal












v
t
e


United Kingdom legislation



Pre-Parliamentary legislation



List of English statutes
Charter of Liberties
Magna Carta





Acts of Parliament by states preceding
the Kingdom of Great Britain




Parliament of England





to 1483
1485–1601
1603–1641
Interregnum (1642–1660)
1660–1699
1700–1706







Parliament of Scotland



to 1706








Acts of Parliament of the
Kingdom of Great Britain



1707–1719
1720–1739
1740–1759
1760–1779
1780–1800





Acts of the Parliament of Ireland



to 1700
1701–1800





Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland



1801–1819
1820–1839
1840–1859
1860–1879
1880–1899
1900–1919
1920–1939
1940–1959
1960–1979
1980–1999
2000 to date
Halsbury's Statutes
Legislation.gov.uk
Short titles




relating to the European Union



1972 to date








Church of England measures



List
Church of England Assembly (Powers) Act 1919





Legislation of devolved institutions



Acts of the Scottish Parliament

List


Acts and Measures of the National Assembly for Wales

List


Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Acts of the Parliament of Northern Ireland





Orders-in-Council / Orders in Council



Orders-in-Council




for Northern Ireland (1972-2009)



Orders in Council for Northern Ireland








Secondary legislation




United Kingdom Statutory Instruments

various



Scottish Statutory Instruments



Acts of Sederunt
Acts of Adjournal
all others















v
t
e


 Law of the United Kingdom



Common fields



Constitutional law
Civil liberties
Company and insolvency law
Competition law
Labour law
Commercial law
European Union law








Parallel fields



Scots delict and English tort law
Scots and English contract law
Scots and English land law
Trusts
Scots and English administrative law
Scots and English criminal law
Scots and English family law
Scots and English civil procedure





Related systems



English law
Northern Ireland law
Scots law
Welsh law
Law of the British Virgin Islands
Law of Australia
Law of Canada
Law of India
Law of the Republic of Ireland
Law of New Zealand
Law of the United States
Anglo-Saxon law
Law of Hong Kong
Common law
Equity
English case law





See also



Legal services in the United Kingdom






United Kingdom law category










v
t
e


Law in Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City





States with limited
recognition



Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria





Dependencies and
other entities



Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard





Other entities



European Union











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_law&oldid=806046588"					Categories: English lawLegal codesLaw in the United KingdomCommon law legal systemsEngland and WalesLegal history of EnglandPublic policy in EnglandPublic policy in WalesHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2007All articles needing additional references