Not to be confused with Etymology, the study of the history of words.




A phasmid, mimicking a leaf


Entomology (from Ancient Greek ἔντομον (entomon), meaning 'insect', and -λογία (-logia), meaning 'study of'[1]) is the scientific study of insects, a branch of zoology. In the past the term "insect" was more vague, and historically the definition of entomology included the study of terrestrial animals in other arthropod groups or other phyla, such as arachnids, myriapods, earthworms, land snails, and slugs. This wider meaning may still be encountered in informal use.
Like several of the other fields that are categorized within zoology, entomology is a taxon-based category; any form of scientific study in which there is a focus on insect-related inquiries is, by definition, entomology. Entomology therefore overlaps with a cross-section of topics as diverse as molecular genetics, behavior, biomechanics, biochemistry, systematics, physiology, developmental biology, ecology, morphology, and paleontology.
At some 1.3 million described species, insects account for more than two-thirds of all known organisms,[2] date back some 400 million years, and have many kinds of interactions with humans and other forms of life on earth.



Contents


1 History
2 In pest control
3 Taxonomic specialization
4 Organizations
5 Museums

5.1 Asia
5.2 Africa
5.3 Europe
5.4 United States
5.5 Canada


6 Depiction in media
7 See also
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History[edit]




Plate from Transactions of the Entomological Society, 1848


See also: Timeline of entomology
Entomology is rooted in nearly all human cultures from prehistoric times, primarily in the context of agriculture (especially biological control and beekeeping), but scientific study began only as recently as the 16th century.[3]
William Kirby is widely considered as the father of Entomology. In collaboration with William Spence, he published a definitive entomological encyclopedia, Introduction to Entomology, regarded as the subject's foundational text. He also helped to found the Royal Entomological Society in London in 1833, one of the earliest such societies in the world; earlier antecedents, such as the Aurelian society date back to the 1740s.[4]
Entomology developed rapidly in the 19th and 20th centuries, and was studied by large numbers of people, including such notable figures as Charles Darwin, Jean-Henri Fabre, Vladimir Nabokov, Karl von Frisch (winner of the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine),[5] and two-time Pulitzer Prize winner E. O. Wilson.
There has also been a history of people becoming entomologists through museum curation and research assistance,[6] such as Sophie Lutterlough at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History. Insect identification is an increasingly common hobby, with butterflies and dragonflies being the most popular.




These 100 Trigonopterus species were described simultaneously using DNA barcoding


Most insects can easily be recognized to order such as Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, and ants) or Coleoptera (beetles). However, insects other than Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) are typically identifiable to genus or species only through the use of Identification keys and Monographs. Because the class Insecta contains a very large number of species (over 330,000 species of beetles alone) and the characteristics separating them are unfamiliar, and often subtle (or invisible without a microscope), this is often very difficult even for a specialist. This has led to the development of automated species identification systems targeted on insects, for example, Daisy, ABIS, SPIDA and Draw-wing.
In pest control[edit]
In 1994 the Entomological Society of America launched a new professional certification program for the pest control industry called The Associate Certified Entomologist (ACE). To qualify as a "true entomologist" an individual would normally require an advanced degree, with most entomologists pursuing their PhD. While not true entomologists in the traditional sense, individuals who attain the ACE certification may be referred to as ACEs, Amateur entomologists, Associate entomologist
Taxonomic specialization[edit]




Part of a large beetle collection


Many entomologists specialize in a single order or even a family of insects, and a number of these subspecialties are given their own informal names, typically (but not always) derived from the scientific name of the group:

Coleopterology - beetles
Dipterology - flies
Odonatology - dragonflies and damselflies
Hemipterology - true bugs
Isopterology - termites
Lepidopterology - moths and butterflies
Melittology (or Apiology) - bees
Myrmecology - ants
Orthopterology - grasshoppers, crickets, etc.
Trichopterology - caddis flies
Vespology - Social wasps

Organizations[edit]
Like other scientific specialties, entomologists have a number of local, national, and international organizations. There are also many organizations specializing in specific subareas.

Amateur Entomologists' Society
Deutsches Entomologisches Institut
Entomological Society of America
Entomological Society of Canada
Entomological Society of Japan
International Union for the Study of Social Insects
Netherlands Entomological Society
Royal Belgian Entomological Society
Royal Entomological Society of London
Société entomologique de France

Museums[edit]
Here is a list of selected museums which contain very large insect collections.
Asia[edit]
Zoological survey of India

Pakistan Museum of Natural History Garden Avenue, Shakarparian, Islamabad, Pakistan

Africa[edit]

Natal Museum, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa[7]

Europe[edit]

Muséum national d'histoire naturelle, Paris, France
Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Germany
Natural History Museum, Budapest Hungarian Natural History Museum[8]
Natural History Museum, Geneva[9]
Natural History Museum, Leiden, the Netherlands
Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom
Natural History Museum, Oslo[10] Norway
Natural History Museum, St. Petersburg Zoological Collection of the Russian Academy of Science
Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna, Austria
Oxford University Museum of Natural History, Oxford[11]
Royal Museum for Central Africa, Brussels, Belgium
Swedish Museum of Natural History, Stockholm, Sweden
The Bavarian State Collection of Zoology Zoologische Staatssammlung München
World Museum Liverpool, the Bug House

United States[edit]

Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
American Museum of Natural History, New York City
Auburn University Museum of Natural History,[12] Auburn, Alabama
Audubon Insectarium, New Orleans
Bohart Museum of Entomology, Davis, California
California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco
Carnegie Museum of Natural History,[13] Pittsburgh
Essig Museum, Berkeley, California
Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago
Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, Illinois
J. Gordon Edwards Museum, San Jose, California
Museum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Los Angeles
National Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.
New Mexico State University Arthropod Museum[14]
North Carolina State University Insect Museum, Raleigh, North Carolina
Peabody Museum of Natural History, New Haven, Connecticut
The National Museum of Play, Rochester, N.Y.
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
University of Minnesota, St. Paul campus (UMSP), Minnesota
University of Kansas Natural History Museum, Lawrence, Kansas
University of Nebraska State Museum, Lincoln, Nebraska
University of Missouri Enns Entomology Museum,[15] University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri

Canada[edit]

Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa
Canadian National Collection of Insects, Arachnids and Nematodes,[16] Ottawa, Ontario
E.H. Strickland Entomological Museum,[17] University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
Lyman Entomological Museum,[18] Macdonald Campus of McGill University, Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue, Quebec
Montreal Insectarium, Montreal, Quebec
Newfoundland Insectarium, Reidville, Newfoundland and Labrador
Royal Alberta Museum, Edmonton, Alberta
Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto
University of Guelph Insect Collection,[19] Guelph, Ontario
Victoria Bug Zoo,[20] Victoria, British Columbia

Depiction in media[edit]
Entomology has been depicted in various films such as:

Arachnophobia,
Mimic, and
The Silence of the Lambs[21]

See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Insect collecting devices.



Arachnology
Cultural entomology
Ethnoentomology
Forensic entomology
Forensic entomologist
Forensic entomology and the law
Insect thermoregulation
Insects on stamps
List of entomologists
List of entomological journals
Myriapodology
Timeline of entomology – 1800–1850
Timeline of entomology – 1850–1900
Timeline of entomology since 1900
Medical entomology

References[edit]


^ Liddell, Henry George and Robert Scott (1980). A Greek-English Lexicon (Abridged Edition). United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-910207-4. 
^ Chapman, A. D. (2009). Numbers of living species in Australia and the World (2 ed.). Canberra: Australian Biological Resources Study. pp. 60pp. ISBN 978-0-642-56850-2. 
^ Antonio Saltini, Storia delle scienze agrarie, 4 vols, Bologna 1984-89, ISBN 88-206-2412-5, ISBN 88-206-2413-3, ISBN 88-206-2414-1, ISBN 88-206-2415-X
^ Clark, John F.M. (2009). Bugs and the Victorians. Yale University Press. pp. 26–27. ISBN 0300150911. 
^ "Karl von Frisch - Nobel Lecture: Decoding the Language of the Bee". 
^ Starrs, Siobhan (10 August 2010). "A Scientist and a Tinkerer – A Story in a Frame". National Museum of Natural History Unearthed. National Museum of Natural History. Retrieved 19 March 2017. 
^ "KwaZulu-Natal Museum". 
^ "Magyar Természettudományi Múzeum". 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 26, 2003. Retrieved 2007-01-02. CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
^ "Home". 
^ "O.U.M.N.H. Homepage". 
^ "Auburn University Museum of Natural History". 
^ "Collections". Archived from the original on 2010-08-24. 
^ NMSU Entomology Plant Pathology; Weed science. "New Mexico State University Arthropod Museum". Archived from the original on 2013-05-01. Retrieved 2013-07-15. 
^ "Enns Entomology Museum, MU". 
^ "Canadian National Collection of Insects, Arachnids, and Nematodes - Homepage". 
^ "E.H. Strickland Entomological Museum - Department of Biological Sciences, Studies in Life Sciences". 
^ "Lyman Entomological Museum". 
^ "University of Guelph Insect Collection". uoguelph.ca. Retrieved 20 April 2015. 
^ "The Victoria Bug Zoo TM". 
^ "INSECT scenes: Silence of the Lambs (entomology!!)". YouTube. 


Further reading[edit]

Chiang, H.C. and G. C. Jahn 1996. Entomology in the Cambodia-IRRI-Australia Project. (in Chinese) Chinese Entomol. Soc. Newsltr. (Taiwan) 3: 9-11.
Davidson, E. 2006. Big Fleas Have Little Fleas: How Discoveries of Invertebrate Diseases Are Advancing Modern Science University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 208 pages, ISBN 0-8165-2544-7.
Triplehorn, Charles A. and Norman F. Johnson (2005-05-19). Borror and DeLong's Introduction to the Study of Insects, 7th edition, Thomas Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-03-096835-6. — a classic textbook in North America.
Grimaldi, D. & Engel, M.S. (2005). Evolution of the Insects. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-82149-5. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
Capinera, JL (editor). 2008. Encyclopedia of Entomology, 2nd Edition. Springer. ISBN 1-4020-6242-7.

External links[edit]



Look up entomology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




"I suppose you are an entomologist?"

What does a entomologist study?

"Not quite so ambitious as that, sir. I should like to put my eyes on the individual entitled to that name. No man can be truly called an entomologist, sir; the subject is too vast for any single human intelligence to grasp."

Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., The Poet at the Breakfast Table






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Professor Andrew Speilman. "Malaria video". Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
Rob Hutchinson. "Mosquitoes video". Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
University of Vermont. "Entomology Laboratory". Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
Iowa State University. "Iowa State Entomology Index of Internet Resources". Retrieved 2011-07-23. 
Meganeura, University of Barcelona. "Fossil Insects". Archived from the original on 2006-11-14. Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
"Goliathus (Entomology hobbyist site)". Archived from the original on 2006-12-06. Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
"Medical Entomology images". Archived from the original on 2007-02-07. Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
University of Nebraska State Museum. "Division of Entomology". Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
Graeme Cocks. "Insects of Townsville, Australia". Archived from the original on 2006-12-13. Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
Actronic. "Compendium of References on Flies and Disease". Archived from the original on 2006-10-15. Retrieved 2006-12-09. 
USDA Collecting methods.Detailed instructions
Arthropa Extensive photo album sorted by topic (French language).
Virtual Insect Museum
Extensive Catalogue of Butterfly Photos and Insect Data
Best of the Bugs Entomology Web sites selected by entomologists
G.D. Hale Carpenter, A Naturalist on Lake Victoria, with an Account of Sleeping Sickness and the Tse-tse Fly; 1920. T.F. Unwin Ltd, London; Biodiversity Archive.
Tereshkin Scientific illustration in entomology Tereshkin, A. 2008: Methodology of a scientific drawings preparation in entomology on example of ichneumon flies (Hymenoptera, Ichneumonidae). Euroasian Entomological Journal, 7(1): 1-9 + I-VII
Alex Wild Photography (insect photography)

This website was highlighted by Genetic Engineering & Biotechnolgy News in its "Best of the Web" section in January 2015. See: "Alex Wild Photography". Best of the Web. Genetic Engineering & Biotechnolgy News. 35 (2). 15 January 2015. p. 38. 









v
t
e


Insect orders






Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
(unranked): Pancrustacea
Subphylum: Hexapoda










Extant











Monocondylia



Archaeognatha (jumping bristletails)











D
i
c
o
n
d
y
l
i
a








Apterygota *



Thysanura (Zygentoma) (silverfish, firebrats)








P
t
e
r
y
g
o
t
a








Palaeoptera




Ephemeropteroidea



Ephemeroptera (mayflies)





Odonatoptera



Odonata (dragonflies, damselflies)











N
e
o
p
t
e
r
a








Polyneoptera







Plecoptera (stoneflies)
Dermaptera (earwigs)
Embioptera (webspinners)
Phasmatodea (stick and leaf insects)
Notoptera (ice-crawlers, gladiators)
Orthoptera (crickets, wetas, grasshoppers, locusts)
Zoraptera (angel insects)









Dictyoptera



Blattodea (cockroaches, termites)
Mantodea (mantises)














E
u
m
e
t
a
b
o
l
a








Paraneoptera *



Psocodea (barklice, lice)
Thysanoptera (thrips)
Hemiptera (cicadas, aphids, true bugs)








E
n
d
o
p
t
e
r
y
g
o
t
a




basal



Hymenoptera (sawflies, wasps, ants, bees)





Neuropteroidea




Coleopterida



Strepsiptera (twisted-winged parasites)
Coleoptera (beetles)





Neuropterida



Raphidioptera (snakeflies)
Megaloptera (alderflies, dobsonflies, fishflies)
Neuroptera (net-winged insects: lacewings, mantidflies, antlions)








Panorpida
(Mecopterida)




Antliophora



Mecoptera (scorpionflies) + Siphonaptera (fleas)
Diptera (gnats, mosquitoes, flies)





Amphiesmenoptera



Trichoptera (caddisflies)
Lepidoptera (moths, butterflies)


























Four most speciose orders are marked in bold
Italic are paraphyletic groups
Based on Sasaki et al. (2013)
















Extinct










Aethiocarenodea
Alienoptera
Archodonata
Blattoptera
Caloneurodea
Campylopteridae
Carbotriplurida
Coxoplectoptera
Diaphanopterodea
Eoblattodea
Eudiaphanoptera
Geroptera
Glosselytrodea
Heraridea
Hypoperlida
Lapeyriidae
Meganisoptera
Megasecoptera
Miomoptera
Monura
Palaeodictyoptera
Paoliida
Permoplecoptera
Protanisoptera
Protelytroptera
Protephemerida
Protodiptera
Protorthoptera
Protozygoptera
Syntonoptera
Titanoptera
Triadophlebioptera








Extinct incertae sedis families and genera are marked in italic












Wikispecies










v
t
e


Entomology








Branches of Entomology






Coleopterology
Dipterology
Ethnoentomology
Heteropterology
Hemipterology
Lepidopterology
Melittology
Myrmecology
Neuropterology
Odonatology
Orthopterology
Trichopterology
Vespology













Entomology Organisations







Africa



The Egyptian Entomological Society
Entomological Society of Southern Africa





Americas



Entomological Society of America
Entomological Society of Canada
Kansas Entomological Society
Entomological Society of Brasil





Asia



Entomological Society of China
Entomological Society of Japan
Indian Society for the Advancement of Insect Science
Japanese Society of Applied Entomology and Zoology





Europe



Amateur Entomologists' Society
Deutsches Entomologisches Institut
Netherlands Entomological Society
Royal Belgian Entomological Society
Royal Entomological Society of London
Société entomologique de France





Oceania



Australian Entomological Society
Entomological Society of Queensland





Global



International Entomological Society
International Union for the Study of Social Insects


















v
t
e


Zoology



Branches



Apiology
Arachnology
Arthropodology
Batrachology
Biological Anthropology
Cetology
Coleopterology
Conchology
Entomology
Ethology
Helminthology
Herpetology (Ophiology)
Ichthyology
Lepidopterology
Malacology (Teuthology)
Mammalogy
Myrmecology
Nematology
Ornithology
Paleozoology
Planktology
Primatology
Zooarchaeology
Zoosemiotics





Zoologists



Karl Ernst von Baer
Richard C. Banks
Georges Cuvier
Charles Darwin
Jean-Henri Fabre
William Kirby
Carl Linnaeus
Konrad Lorenz
Thomas Say
Jakob von Uexküll
Alfred Russel Wallace
more...





History



Pre-Darwin
Post-Darwin
Timeline of zoology








 Animals portal
 Biology portal
 Category








Biology portal
Insects portal





Authority control



GND: 4152382-9
HDS: 45522











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Entomology&oldid=817606785"					Categories: EntomologyBiologySubfields of arthropodologyHidden categories: CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknownCommons category with local link different than on WikidataCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia external links cleanup from April 2015Wikipedia spam cleanup from April 2015Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers