"Entrepreneur" redirects here. For other uses, see Entrepreneur (disambiguation).
"Co-founder" redirects here. For someone who cultivates a startup, see Startup company § Co-founders.






This article's lead section may be too long for the length of the article. Please help by moving some material from it into the body of the article. Please read the layout guide and lead section guidelines to ensure the section will still be inclusive of all essential details. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (November 2017)



Entrepreneurship is the process of designing, launching and running a new business which is often initially a small business and the people who create these businesses are called entrepreneurs.[1][need quotation to verify][2]
Entrepreneurship has been described as the "capacity and willingness to develop, organize and manage a business venture along with any of its risks in order to make a profit".[3] While definitions of entrepreneurship typically focus on the launching and running of businesses due to the high risks involved in launching a start-up, a significant proportion of businesses have to close due to "lack of funding, bad business decisions, an economic crisis, lack of market demand – or a combination of all of these.[4]



Contents


1 Elements
2 History

2.1 Historical usage
2.2 20th century
2.3 Millennial entrepreneurs
2.4 2000s
2.5 Relationship between small business and entrepreneurship
2.6 Ethnic entrepreneurship
2.7 Institutional entrepreneur
2.8 Cultural entrepreneurship
2.9 Feminist entrepreneur


3 Entrepreneurial behaviors

3.1 Uncertainty perception and risk-taking
3.2 "Coachability" and advice taking
3.3 Strategies
3.4 Designing individual/opportunity nexus
3.5 Opportunity perception and biases
3.6 Styles
3.7 Communication

3.7.1 Links to sea piracy




4 Psychological makeup

4.1 Entrepreneurship
4.2 Leadership in entrepreneurship
4.3 Global leadership and entrepreneurship


5 Educational effects
6 Project entrepreneurship
7 Financing

7.1 Bootstrapping
7.2 Additional financing
7.3 Effect of taxes


8 Predictors of success
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading



Elements[edit]
Entrepreneurs act as managers and oversee the launch and growth of an enterprise. Entrepreneurship is the process by which either an individual or a team identifies a business opportunity and acquires and deploys the necessary resources required for its exploitation. The exploitation of entrepreneurial opportunities may include:[5]

Developing a business plan
Hiring the human resources
Acquiring financial and material resources
Providing leadership
Being responsible for both the venture's success or failure
Risk aversion

The economist Joseph Schumpeter (1883–1950) saw the role of the entrepreneur in the economy as "creative destruction" – launching innovations that simultaneously destroy old industries while ushering in new industries and approaches. For Schumpeter, the changes and "dynamic disequilibrium brought on by the innovating entrepreneur [were] the norm of a healthy economy".[6]
While entrepreneurship is often associated with new, small, for-profit start-ups, entrepreneurial behavior can be seen in small-, medium- and large-sized firms, new and established firms and in for-profit and not-for-profit organizations, including voluntary-sector groups, charitable organizations and government.[7]
Entrepreneurship may operate within an entrepreneurship ecosystem which often includes:

Government programs and services that promote entrepreneurship and support entrepreneurs and start-ups
Non-governmental organizations such as small-business associations and organizations that offer advice and mentoring to entrepreneurs (e.g. through entrepreneurship centers or websites)
Small-business advocacy organizations that lobby governments for increased support for entrepreneurship programs and more small business-friendly laws and regulations
Entrepreneurship resources and facilities (e.g. business incubators and seed accelerators)
Entrepreneurship education and training programs offered by schools, colleges and universities
Financing (e.g. bank loans, venture capital financing, angel investing and government and private foundation grants)[8][need quotation to verify]

In the 2000s, the definition of "entrepreneurship" expanded to explain how and why some individuals (or teams) identify opportunities, evaluate them as viable and then decide to exploit them, whereas others do not[9] and in turn how entrepreneurs use these opportunities to develop new products or services, launch new firms or even new industries and create wealth.[10] The entrepreneurial process is fundamentally uncertain because opportunities cannot be discovered or identified prior to their actualization into profits.[11] What appears as a real opportunity ex-ante might actually be a non-opportunity or one that cannot be actualized by entrepreneurs lacking the necessary business skills, financial or social capital.
Entrepreneurs tend to be good at perceiving new business opportunities and they often exhibit positive biases in their perception (i.e. a bias towards finding new possibilities and seeing unmet market needs) and a tendency towards risk-taking that makes them more likely to exploit the opportunity.[12][13] An entrepreneur may be in control of a commercial undertaking, directing the factors of production – the human, financial and material resources – that are required to exploit a business opportunity.


Part of a series on


Capitalism







Concepts


Business
Business cycle
Businessperson
Capital
Capital accumulation
Capital markets
Capitalist mode of production
Company
Corporation
Competitive markets
Economic interventionism
Economic surplus
Entrepreneurship
Fictitious capital
Financial market
Free price system
Free market
Goods and services
Investor
Invisible hand
Liberalization
Marginalism
Money
Private property
Privatization
Profit
Supply and demand
Surplus value
Value
Wage labour
Wage slavery








Economic systems


Anglo-Saxon
Free market
Laissez-faire
Mercantile
Mixed
Nordic
Regulated market
Regulatory
Rhine
Social market
State
Welfare
East Asian








Economic theories


American
Austrian
Chicago
Classical
Institutional
Keynesian
Marxian
Modern Monetary
Monetarist
Neoclassical
New institutional
New Keynesian
Supply-side








Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Capitalism and Islam
Commercial Revolution
Feudalism
Industrial Revolution
Mercantilism
Primitive accumulation
Physiocracy
Simple commodity production








Development


Advanced
Consumer
Corporate
Crony
Finance
Global
Late
Marxist
Merchant
Rentier
State monopoly
Techno








People


Adam Smith
John Stuart Mill
David Ricardo
Thomas Malthus
Jean-Baptiste Say
Milton Friedman
Friedrich Hayek
John Maynard Keynes
Alfred Marshall
Ludwig von Mises
Ayn Rand
Murray Rothbard
Joseph Schumpeter
Thorstein Veblen
Max Weber
Ronald Coase








Related topics


Anti-capitalism
Black capitalism
Capitalist state
Consumerism
Corporatism
Crisis theory
Criticism of capitalism
Cronyism
Culture of capitalism
Exploitation
Globalization
History
History of theory
Market economy
Periodizations of capitalism
Perspectives on capitalism
Post-capitalism
Speculation
Spontaneous order
Venture philanthropy








Ideologies


Anarcho-capitalism
Democratic capitalism
Dirigisme
Eco-capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Inclusive capitalism
Liberalism (economic)
Libertarianism
Neo-Capitalism
Neoliberalism
Objectivism
Ordoliberalism
Social democracy








Capitalism portal
Economics portal
Philosophy portal
Politics portal







v
t
e





History[edit]
Historical usage[edit]




Emil Jellinek-Mercedes (1853–1918), here at the steering wheel of his Phoenix Double-Phaeton, was a European entrepreneur who helped design the first modern car


"Entrepreneur" (/ˌɒntrəprəˈnɜːr/ ( listen)) is a loanword from French. The word first appeared in the French dictionary entitled Dictionnaire Universel de Commerce compiled by Jacques des Bruslons and published in 1723.[14] Especially in Britain, the term "adventurer" was often used to denote the same meaning.[15] The study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work in the late 17th and early 18th centuries of Irish-French economist Richard Cantillon, which was foundational to classical economics. Cantillon defined the term first in his Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en Général, or Essay on the Nature of Trade in General, a book William Stanley Jevons considered the "cradle of political economy".[16][17] Cantillon defined the term as a person who pays a certain price for a product and resells it at an uncertain price, "making decisions about obtaining and using the resources while consequently admitting the risk of enterprise". Cantillon considered the entrepreneur to be a risk taker who deliberately allocates resources to exploit opportunities in order to maximize the financial return.[18][19] Cantillon emphasized the willingness of the entrepreneur to assume the risk and to deal with uncertainty, thus he drew attention to the function of the entrepreneur and distinguished between the function of the entrepreneur and the owner who provided the money.[18][20]
Dating back to the time of the medieval guilds in Germany, a craftsperson required special permission to operate as an entrepreneur, the small proof of competence (Kleiner Befähigungsnachweis), which restricted training of apprentices to craftspeople who held a Meister certificate. This institution was introduced in 1908 after a period of so-called freedom of trade (Gewerbefreiheit, introduced in 1871) in the German Reich. However, proof of competence was not required to start a business. In 1935 and in 1953, greater proof of competence was reintroduced (Großer Befähigungsnachweis Kuhlenbeck), which required craftspeople to obtain a Meister apprentice-training certificate before being permitted to set up a new business.[21]
20th century[edit]
In the 20th century, entrepreneurship was studied by Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s and other Austrian economists such as Carl Menger, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. While the loan from French of the word "entrepreneur" dates to the 1850, the term "entrepreneurship" was coined around the 1920s. According to Schumpeter, an entrepreneur is willing and able to convert a new idea or invention into a successful innovation.[22] Entrepreneurship employs what Schumpeter called "the gale of creative destruction" to replace in whole or in part inferior offerings across markets and industries, simultaneously creating new products and new business models, thus creative destruction is largely responsible for long-term economic growth. The idea that entrepreneurship leads to economic growth is an interpretation of the residual in endogenous growth theory[clarification needed] and as such continues to be debated in academic economics. An alternate description by Israel Kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be incremental improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the construction of a drinking straw that require no special qualities.
For Schumpeter, entrepreneurship resulted in new industries and in new combinations of currently existing inputs. Schumpeter's initial example of this was the combination of a steam engine and then current wagon making technologies to produce the horseless carriage. In this case, the innovation (i.e. the car) was transformational, but did not require the development of dramatic new technology. It did not immediately replace the horse-drawn carriage, but in time incremental improvements reduced the cost and improved the technology, leading to the modern auto industry. Despite Schumpeter's early 20th-century contributions, the traditional microeconomic theory did not formally consider the entrepreneur in its theoretical frameworks (instead of assuming that resources would find each other through a price system). In this treatment, the entrepreneur was an implied but unspecified actor, consistent with the concept of the entrepreneur being the agent of x-efficiency.
For Schumpeter, the entrepreneur did not bear risk: the capitalist did. Schumpeter believed that the equilibrium was imperfect. Schumpeter (1934) demonstrated that the changing environment continuously provides new information about the optimum allocation of resources to enhance profitability. Some individuals acquire the new information before others and recombine the resources to gain an entrepreneurial profit. Schumpeter was of the opinion that entrepreneurs shift the production possibility curve to a higher level using innovations.[23]
Initially, economists made the first attempt to study the entrepreneurship concept in depth.[24] Alfred Marshall viewed the entrepreneur as a multi-tasking capitalist and observed that in the equilibrium of a completely competitive market there was no spot for "entrepreneurs" as an economic activity creator.[25]
Millennial entrepreneurs[edit]
The term "millennial entrepreneur" refers to a business owner who is affiliated with the generation that was brought up using digital technology and mass media—the products of Baby Boomers, those people born during the 1980s and early 1990s. Also known as Generation Y, these business owners are well equipped with knowledge of technology and have a strong grasp of its applications toward businesses. There have been many breakthrough businesses that have come from millennial entrepreneurs such as Mark Zuckerberg, who created Facebook.[26][27] Despite the expectation of millennial success, there have been recent studies that have proven this to not be the case. The comparison between millennials who are self-employed and those who are not self-employed shows that the latter is higher. The reason for this is because they have grown up in a different generation and attitude than their elders. Some of the barriers to entry for entrepreneurs are the economy, debt from schooling and the challenges of regulatory compliance.[28]
2000s[edit]




In 2012, Ambassador-at-Large for Global Women's Issues Melanne Verveer greets participants in an African Women's Entrepreneurship Program at the State Department in Washington, D.C.


In the 2000s, entrepreneurship has been extended from its origins in for-profit businesses to include social entrepreneurship, in which business goals are sought alongside social, environmental or humanitarian goals and even the concept of the political entrepreneur.[according to whom?] Entrepreneurship within an existing firm or large organization has been referred to as intrapreneurship and may include corporate ventures where large entities "spin-off" subsidiary organizations.[29]
Entrepreneurs are leaders willing to take risk and exercise initiative, taking advantage of market opportunities by planning, organizing and deploying resources,[30] often by innovating to create new or improving existing products or services.[31] In the 2000s, the term "entrepreneurship" has been extended to include a specific mindset (see also entrepreneurial mindset) resulting in entrepreneurial initiatives, e.g. in the form of social entrepreneurship, political entrepreneurship or knowledge entrepreneurship.
According to Paul Reynolds, founder of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, "by the time they reach their retirement years, half of all working men in the United States probably have a period of self-employment of one or more years; one in four may have engaged in self-employment for six or more years. Participating in a new business creation is a common activity among U.S. workers over the course of their careers".[32] In recent years, entrepreneurship has been claimed as a major driver of economic growth in both the United States and Western Europe.
Entrepreneurial activities differ substantially depending on the type of organization and creativity involved. Entrepreneurship ranges in scale from solo, part-time projects to large-scale undertakings that involve a team and which may create many jobs. Many "high value" entrepreneurial ventures seek venture capital or angel funding (seed money) in order to raise capital for building and expanding the business.[33] Many organizations exist to support would-be entrepreneurs, including specialized government agencies, business incubators (which may be for-profit, non-profit, or operated by a college or university), science parks and non-governmental organizations, which include a range of organizations including not-for-profits, charities, foundations and business advocacy groups (e.g. Chambers of commerce). Beginning in 2008, an annual "Global Entrepreneurship Week" event aimed at "exposing people to the benefits of entrepreneurship" and getting them to "participate in entrepreneurial-related activities" was launched.[who?]
Relationship between small business and entrepreneurship[edit]
The term "entrepreneur" is often conflated with the term "small business" or used interchangeably with this term. While most entrepreneurial ventures start out as a small business, not all small businesses are entrepreneurial in the strict sense of the term. Many small businesses are sole proprietor operations consisting solely of the owner—or they have a small number of employees—and many of these small businesses offer an existing product, process or service and they do not aim at growth. In contrast, entrepreneurial ventures offer an innovative product, process or service and the entrepreneur typically aims to scale up the company by adding employees, seeking international sales and so on, a process which is financed by venture capital and angel investments. Successful entrepreneurs have the ability to lead a business in a positive direction by proper planning, to adapt to changing environments and understand their own strengths and weakness.[34]
Ethnic entrepreneurship[edit]
The term "ethnic entrepreneurship" refers to self-employed, business owners who belong to racial or ethnic minority groups in the United States and Europe. A long tradition of academic research explores the experiences and strategies of ethnic entrepreneurs as they strive to integrate economically into mainstream U.S. or European society. Classic cases include Jewish merchants and tradespeople in large U.S. cities in the 19th and early 20th centuries as well as Chinese and Japanese small business owners (restaurants, farmers, shop clerks) on the West Coast.[35]
In the 2010s, ethnic entrepreneurship has been studied in the case of Cuban business owners in Miami, Indian motel owners of the U.S. and Chinese business owners in Chinatowns across the United States. While entrepreneurship offers these groups many opportunities for economic advancement, self-employment and business ownership in the United States remain unevenly distributed along racial/ethnic lines.[36] Despite numerous success stories of Asian entrepreneurs, a recent statistical analysis of U.S. census data shows that whites are more likely than Asians, African-Americans and Latinos to be self-employed in high prestige, lucrative industries.[36]
Institutional entrepreneur[edit]
The American-born British economist Edith Penrose has highlighted the collective nature of entrepreneurship. She mentions that in modern organizations, human resources need to be combined in order to better capture and create business opportunities.[37] The sociologist Paul DiMaggio (1988:14) has expanded this view to say that "new institutions arise when organized actors with sufficient resources [institutional entrepreneurs] see in them an opportunity to realize interests that they value highly".[38] The notion has been widely applied.[39][40][41][42]
Cultural entrepreneurship[edit]
According to Christopher Rea and Nicolai Volland, cultural entrepreneurship is "practices of individual and collective agency characterized by mobility between cultural professions and modes of cultural production". In their book The Business of Culture (2015), Rea and Volland identify three types of cultural entrepreneur: "cultural personalities", defined as "individuals who buil[d] their own personal brand of creativity as a cultural authority and leverage it to create and sustain various cultural enterprises"; "tycoons", defined as "entrepreneurs who buil[d] substantial clout in the cultural sphere by forging synergies between their industrial, cultural, political, and philanthropic interests"; and "collective enterprises", organizations which may engage in cultural production for profit or not-for-profit purposes.[43]
Feminist entrepreneur[edit]
A feminist entrepreneur is an individual who applies feminist values and approaches through entrepreneurship, with the goal of improving the quality of life and wellbeing of girls and women.[44] Many are doing so by creating "for women, by women' enterprises". Feminist entrepreneurs are motivated to enter commercial markets by desire to create wealth and social change, based on the ethics of cooperation, equality and mutual respect.[45][46]
Entrepreneurial behaviors[edit]




British entrepreneur Karren Brady has an estimated net worth of $123 million[47]


The entrepreneur is commonly seen as an innovator—a designer of new ideas and business processes.[48] Management skills and strong team building abilities are often perceived as essential leadership attributes for successful entrepreneurs.[49] Political economist Robert Reich considers leadership, management ability and team-building to be essential qualities of an entrepreneur.[50][51]
Uncertainty perception and risk-taking[edit]




Dell Women's Entrepreneur Network event in New York City


Theorists Frank Knight[52] and Peter Drucker defined entrepreneurship in terms of risk-taking. The entrepreneur is willing to put his or her career and financial security on the line and take risks in the name of an idea, spending time as well as capital on an uncertain venture. However, entrepreneurs often do not believe that they have taken an enormous amount of risks because they do not perceive the level of uncertainty to be as high as other people do. Knight classified three types of uncertainty:

Risk, which is measurable statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red color ball from a jar containing 5 red balls and 5 white balls)
Ambiguity, which is hard to measure statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red ball from a jar containing 5 red balls but an unknown number of white balls)
True uncertainty or Knightian uncertainty, which is impossible to estimate or predict statistically (such as the probability of drawing a red ball from a jar whose contents are entirely unknown)





Malala Yousafzai, a Pakistani activist, social entrepreneur and the youngest-ever Nobel Peace Prize winner, was named in the Forbes 30 list


Entrepreneurship is often associated with true uncertainty, particularly when it involves the creation of a novel good or service, for a market that did not previously exist, rather than when a venture creates an incremental improvement to an existing product or service. A 2014 study at ETH Zürich found that compared with typical managers, entrepreneurs showed higher decision-making efficiency and a stronger activation in regions of frontopolar cortex (FPC) previously associated with explorative choice.[53]
"Coachability" and advice taking[edit]
The ability of entrepreneurs to work closely with and take advice from early investors and other partners (i.e. their coachability) has long been considered a critical factor in entrepreneurial success.[54] At the same time, economists have argued that entrepreneurs should not simply act on all advice given to them, even when that advice comes from well-informed sources, because entrepreneurs possess far deeper and richer local knowledge about their own firm than any outsider. Indeed, measures of coachability are not actually predictive of entrepreneurial success (e.g. measured as success in subsequent funding rounds, acquisitions, pivots and firm survival). This research also shows that older and larger founding teams, presumably those with more subject expertise, are less coachable than younger and smaller founding teams.
Strategies[edit]
Strategies that entrepreneurs may use include:

Innovation of new products, services or processes[55]
Continuous process improvement (CPI)[55]
Exploration
Use of technology[55]
Use of business intelligence
Use of economical strategics
Development of future products and services[55]
Optimized talent management[55]

Designing individual/opportunity nexus[edit]
According to Shane and Venkataraman, entrepreneurship comprises both "enterprising individuals" and "entrepreneurial opportunities", so researchers should study the nature of the individuals who identify opportunities when others do not, the opportunities themselves and the nexus between individuals and opportunities.[56] On the other hand, Reynolds et al.[57] argue that individuals are motivated to engage in entrepreneurial endeavors driven mainly by necessity or opportunity, that is individuals pursue entrepreneurship primarily owing to survival needs, or because they identify business opportunities that satisfy their need for achievement. For example, higher economic inequality tends to increase entrepreneurship rates at the individual level, suggesting that most entrepreneurial behavior is based on necessity rather than opportunity.[58]
Opportunity perception and biases[edit]
The ability of entrepreneurs to innovate relates to innate traits, including extroversion and a proclivity for risk-taking.[59] According to Joseph Schumpeter, the capabilities of innovating, introducing new technologies, increasing efficiency and productivity, or generating new products or services, are characteristic qualities of entrepreneurs.[60] One study has found that certain genes affecting personality may influence the income of self-employed people.[61] Some people may be able to use[weasel words] "an innate ability" or quasi-statistical sense to gauge public opinion[62] and market demand for new products or services. Entrepreneurs tend to have the ability to see unmet market needs and underserved markets. While some entrepreneurs assume they can sense and figure out what others are thinking, the mass media plays a crucial role in shaping views and demand.[63] Ramoglou argues that entrepreneurs are not that distinctive and that it is essentially poor conceptualizations of "non-entrepreneurs" that maintain laudatory portraits of "entrepreneurs" as exceptional innovators or leaders [64][65] Entrepreneurs are often overconfident, exhibit illusion of control, when they are opening/expanding business or new products/services.[12]
Styles[edit]
Differences in entrepreneurial organizations often partially reflect their founders' heterogenous identities. Fauchart and Gruber have classified entrepreneurs into three main types: Darwinians, communitarians and missionaries. These types of entrepreneurs diverge in fundamental ways in their self-views, social motivations and patterns of new firm creation.[66]
Communication[edit]
Entrepreneurs need to practice effective communication both within their firm and with external partners and investors in order to launch and growth a venture and enable it to survive. An entrepreneur needs a communication system that links the staff of her firm and connects the firm to outside firms and clients. Entrepreneurs should be charismatic leaders, so they can communicate a vision effectively to their team and help to create a strong team. Communicating a vision to followers may be well the most important act of the transformational leader.[67] Compelling visions provide employees with a sense of purpose and encourage commitment. According to Baum et al.[68] and Kouzes and Posner,[69] the vision must be communicated through written statements and through in-person communication. Entrepreneurial leaders must speak and listen to effectively articulate their vision to others.[70]
Communication is pivotal in the role of entrepreneurship because it enables leaders to convince potential investors, partners and employees about the feasibility of a venture.[71] Entrepreneurs need to communicate effectively to shareholders.[72] Nonverbal elements in speech such as the tone of voice, the look in the sender's eyes, body language, hand gestures and state of emotions are also important communication tools. The Communication Accommodation Theory posits that throughout communication people will attempt to accommodate or adjust their method of speaking to others.[73] Face Negotiation Theory describes how people from different cultures manage conflict negotiation in order to maintain "face".[74] Hugh Rank's "intensify and downplay" communications model can be used by entrepreneurs who are developing a new product or service. Rank argues that entrepreneurs need to be able to intensify the advantages of their new product or service and downplay the disadvantages in order to persuade others to support their venture.[75]
Links to sea piracy[edit]
Research from 2014 found links between entrepreneurship and historical sea piracy. In this context, the claim is made for a non-moral approach to looking at the history of piracy as a source of inspiration for entrepreneurship education[76] as well as for research in entrepreneurship[77] and business model generation.[78]
Psychological makeup[edit]




Apple co-founder and longtime leader Steve Jobs (pictured in 2010) led the introduction of many innovations in the computer, smartphone and digital music industry


Stanford University economist Edward Lazear found in a 2005 study that variety in education and work experience was the most important trait that distinguished entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs[79] A 2013 study by Uschi Backes-Gellner of the University of Zurich and Petra Moog of the University of Siegen in Germany found that a diverse social network was also important in distinguishing students that would go on to become entrepreneurs.[80][81]
Studies show that the psychological propensities for male and female entrepreneurs are more similar than different. Empirical studies suggest that female entrepreneurs possess strong negotiating skills and consensus-forming abilities.[82] Asa Hansson, who looked at empirical evidence from Sweden, found that the probability of becoming self-employed decreases with age for women, but increases with age for men.[83] She also found that marriage increased the probability of a person becoming an entrepreneur.[83]
Jesper Sørensen wrote that significant influences on the decision to become an entrepreneur are workplace peers and social composition. Sørensen discovered a correlation between working with former entrepreneurs and how often these individuals become entrepreneurs themselves, compared to those who did not work with entrepreneurs.[84] Social composition can influence entrepreneurialism in peers by demonstrating the possibility for success, stimulating a "He can do it, why can't I?" attitude. As Sørensen stated: "When you meet others who have gone out on their own, it doesn't seem that crazy".[85]
Entrepreneurs may also be driven to entrepreneurship by past experiences. If they have faced multiple work stoppages or have been unemployed in the past, the probability of them becoming an entrepreneur increases[83] Per Cattell's personality framework, both personality traits and attitudes are thoroughly investigated by psychologists. However, in case of entrepreneurship research these notions are employed by academics too, but vaguely. According to Cattell, personality is a system that is related to the environment and further adds that the system seeks explanation to the complex transactions conducted by both—traits and attitudes. This is because both of them bring about change and growth in a person. Personality is that which informs what an individual will do when faced with a given situation. A person's response is triggered by his/her personality and the situation that is faced.[86]
Innovative entrepreneurs may be more likely to experience what psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi calls "flow". "Flow" occurs when an individual forgets about the outside world due to being thoroughly engaged in a process or activity. Csikszentmihalyi suggested that breakthrough innovations tend to occur at the hands of individuals in that state.[87] Other research has concluded that a strong internal motivation is a vital ingredient for breakthrough innovation.[88] Flow can be compared to Maria Montessori's concept of normalization, a state that includes a child's capacity for joyful and lengthy periods of intense concentration.[89] Csikszentmihalyi acknowledged that Montessori's prepared environment offers children opportunities to achieve flow.[90] Thus quality and type of early education may influence entrepreneurial capability.
Research on high-risk settings such as oil platforms, investment banking, medical surgery, aircraft piloting and nuclear power plants has related distrust to failure avoidance.[91] When non-routine strategies are needed, distrusting persons perform better while when routine strategies are needed trusting persons perform better. This research was extended to entrepreneurial firms by Gudmundsson and Lechner.[92] They argued that in entrepreneurial firms the threat of failure is ever present resembling non-routine situations in high-risk settings. They found that the firms of distrusting entrepreneurs were more likely to survive than the firms of optimistic or overconfident entrepreneurs. The reasons were that distrusting entrepreneurs would emphasize failure avoidance through sensible task selection and more analysis. Kets de Vries has pointed out that distrusting entrepreneurs are more alert about their external environment.[93] He concluded that distrusting entrepreneurs are less likely to discount negative events and are more likely to engage control mechanisms. Similarly, Gudmundsson and Lechner found that distrust leads to higher precaution and therefore increases chances of entrepreneurial firm survival.
Researchers Schoon and Duckworth completed a study in 2012 that could potentially help identify who may become an entrepreneur at an early age. They determined that the best measures to identify a young entrepreneur are family and social status, parental role modeling, entrepreneurial competencies at age 10, academic attainment at age 10, generalized self-efficacy, social skills, entrepreneurial intention and experience of unemployment.[94]
Entrepreneurship[edit]
Entrepreneurship is the act of being an entrepreneur, or "an owner or manager of a business enterprise who makes money through risk and initiative".[95] Early 19th century French economist J.B. Say provided a broad definition of entrepreneurship, saying that it "shifts economic resources out of an area of lower and into an area of higher productivity and greater yield". Entrepreneurs create something new, something different—they change or transmute values.[96] Regardless of the firm size, big or small, they can partake in entrepreneurship opportunities.
The opportunity to be an entrepreneur arises with the fulfillment of four criteria. First, there must exist opportunities or situations in which people believe that they can use new means-ends frameworks to recombine resources to generate profit. Second, entrepreneurship requires differences between people. Specifically, the preferential access to or ability to recognize information about opportunities. Third, risk bearing is a necessary part of the entrepreneurial process. Fourth, the entrepreneurial process requires the organization of people and resources.[97]
The entrepreneur is a factor in microeconomics and the study of entrepreneurship reaches back to the work of Richard Cantillon and Adam Smith in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, but was largely ignored theoretically until the late 19th and early 20th centuries and empirically until a profound resurgence in business and economics in the last forty years. In the 20th century, the understanding of entrepreneurship owes much to the work of economist Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s and other Austrian economists such as Carl Menger, Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich von Hayek. According to Schumpeter, an entrepreneur is a person who is willing and able to convert a new idea or invention into a successful innovation. Entrepreneurship employs what Schumpeter called "the gale of creative destruction" to replace in whole or in part inferior innovations across markets and industries, simultaneously creating new products including new business models. In this way, creative destruction is largely responsible for the dynamism of industries and long-run economic growth. The supposition that entrepreneurship leads to economic growth is an interpretation of the residual in endogenous growth theory and as such is hotly debated in academic economics. An alternate description posited by Israel Kirzner suggests that the majority of innovations may be much more incremental improvements such as the replacement of paper with plastic in the construction of a drinking
Some scholars have constructed an operational definition of a more specific subcategory called "Strategic Entrepreneurship". Closely tied with principles of strategic management, this form of entrepreneurship is "concerned about growth, creating value for customers and subsequently creating wealth for owners".[98]
A 2011 article for the Academy of Management provided a three-step, "Input-Process-Output" model of strategic entrepreneurship. The model's three steps entail the collection of different resources, the process of orchestrating them in the necessary manner and the subsequent creation of competitive advantage, value for customers, wealth and other benefits. Through the proper use of strategic management/leadership techniques and the implementation of risk-bearing entrepreneurial thinking, the strategic entrepreneur is therefore able to align resources to create value and wealth.[98]
Leadership in entrepreneurship[edit]
Leadership in entrepreneurship can be defined as "process of social influence in which one person can enlist the aid and support of others in the accomplishment of a common task"[99] in "one who undertakes innovations, finance and business acumen in an effort to transform innovations into economic goods".[97] This refers to not only the act of entrepreneurship as managing or starting a business, but how one manages to do so by these social processes, or leadership skills. Entrepreneurship in itself can be defined as "the process by which individuals, teams, or organizations identify and pursue entrepreneurial opportunities without being immediately constrained by the resources they currently control".[100] An entrepreneur typically has a mindset that seeks out potential opportunities during uncertain times.[100] This leads us to see that an entrepreneur must have leadership skills or qualities in order to see potential opportunities and act upon them. At the core, an entrepreneur is a decision maker. Such decisions often affect an organization as a whole, which is representative of their leadership amongst the organization.
According to Fisher (1970), there are four phases of decision-making: orientation, conflict, emergence and reinforcement.[101] As a communicative approach, the orientation stage is where the members involved are becoming acquainted both with themselves as well as the problem at hand. The conflict stage is where the problem is analyzed with several possibilities presented to resolve the problem. Upon discussing these possibilities, the emergence phase becomes known when a decision is made about which solution is to be used. The reinforcement stage is the supportive of the decision.[102] These phases are not without objection from many theorists in the field. Morley and Stephenson (1977) claim that such a staged model of decision-making is not so rigid between phases and varies depending upon the types of decisions made.[103]
With the growing global market and increasing technologies throughout all industries, the core of entrepreneurship and the decision-making has become an ongoing process rather than isolated incidents This becomes knowledge management which is "identifying and harnessing intellectual assets" for organizations to "build on past experiences and create new mechanisms for exchanging and creating knowledge".[104] This belief draws upon a leader's past experiences that may prove useful. It is a common mantra for one to learn from their past mistakes, so leaders should take advantage of their failures for their benefit. This is how one may take their experiences as a leader for the use in the core of entrepreneurship- decision making.
Global leadership and entrepreneurship[edit]
It is important to note that the majority of scholarly research done on these topics have been from North America.[105] Words like "leadership" and "entrepreneurship" do not always translate well into other cultures and languages. For example, in North America a leader is often thought to be charismatic, but German culture frowns on such charisma due to the charisma of Adolph Hitler. Other cultures, like some Europeans, view the term "leader" negatively, like the French.[106] The participative leadership style that is encouraged in the United States is considered disrespectful in many other parts of the world due to the differences in power distance.[107] Many Asian and Middle Eastern countries do not have "open door" policies and would never informally approach their managers/bosses. For countries like that, an authoritarian approach to management and leadership works best as is custom.
Despite cultural differences, the successes and failures of entrepreneurs can be traced to how leaders adapt to local conditions.[108] With the increasingly global environment a successful leader must be able to make these adaptations and have some insight into other cultures. In response to the environment, corporate visions are becoming transnational in nature due to the changes an organization must make in order to operate or provide services/goods for other cultures.[109]
Educational effects[edit]
Michelacci and Schivardi[110] are a pair of researchers who believe that identifying and comparing the relationships between an entrepreneur's earnings and education level would determine the rate and level of success. Their study focused on two education levels, college degree and post-graduate degree. While Michelacci and Schivardi do not specifically determine characteristics or traits for successful entrepreneurs, they do believe that there is a direct relationship between education and success, noting that having a college degree does contribute to advancement in the workforce.
Michelacci and Schivardi state there has been a rise in the number of self-employed people with a baccalaureate degree. However, their findings also show that those who are self-employed and possess a graduate degree has remained consistent throughout time at about 33 percent. They briefly mention those famous entrepreneurs like Steve Jobs and Mark Zuckerberg who were college dropouts, but they call these cases all but exceptional as it is a pattern that many entrepreneurs view formal education as costly, mainly because of the time that needs to be spent on it. Michelacci and Schivardi believe that in order for an individual to reach the full success they need to have education beyond high school. Their research shows that the higher the education level the greater the success. The reason is that college gives people additional skills that can be used within their business and to operate on a higher level than someone who only "runs" it.
Project entrepreneurship[edit]
Project entrepreneurs are individuals who are engaged in the repeated assembly or creation of temporary organizations.[111] These are organizations that have limited lifespans which are devoted to producing a singular objective or goal and get disbanded rapidly when the project ends. Industries where project-based enterprises are widespread include: sound recording, film production, software development, television production, new media and construction.[112] What makes project-entrepreneurs distinctive from a theoretical standpoint is that they have to "rewire" these temporary ventures and modify them to suit the needs of new project opportunities that emerge. A project entrepreneur who used a certain approach and team for one project may have to modify the business model or team for a subsequent project.
Project entrepreneurs are exposed repeatedly to problems and tasks typical of the entrepreneurial process.[113] Indeed, project-entrepreneurs face two critical challenges that invariably characterize the creation of a new venture: locating the right opportunity to launch the project venture and assembling the most appropriate team to exploit that opportunity effectively. Resolving the first challenge requires project-entrepreneurs to access an extensive range of information needed to seize new investment opportunities. Resolving the second challenge requires assembling a collaborative team that has to fit well with the particular challenges of the project and has to function almost immediately to reduce the risk that performance might be adversely affected.
Another type of project entrepreneurship involves entrepreneurs working with business students to get analytical work done on their ideas.
Financing[edit]
Bootstrapping[edit]
At least early on, entrepreneurs often "bootstrap-finance"[114] their start-up rather than seeking external investors from the start. One of the reasons that some entrepreneurs prefer to "bootstrap" is that obtaining equity financing requires the entrepreneur to provide ownership shares to the investors. If the start-up becomes successful later on, these early equity financing deals could provide a windfall for the investors and a huge loss for the entrepreneur. If investors have a significant stake in the company, they may as well be able to exert influence on company strategy, chief executive officer (CEO) choice and other important decisions. This is often problematic since the investor and the founder might have different incentives regarding the long-term goal of the company. An investor will generally aim for a profitable exit and therefore promotes a high-valuation sale of the company or IPO in order to sell their shares. Whereas the entrepreneur might have philanthropic intentions as their main driving force. Soft values like this might not go well with the short-term pressure on yearly and quarterly profits that publicly traded companies often experience from their owners.
One consensus definition of bootstrapping sees it as "a collection of methods used to minimize the amount of outside debt and equity financing needed from banks and investors".[115] The majority of businesses require less than $10,000 to launch,[116] which means that personal savings are most often used to start. In addition, bootstrapping entrepreneurs often incur personal credit-card debt, but they also can utilize a wide variety of methods. While bootstrapping involves increased personal financial risk for entrepreneurs, the absence of any other stakeholder gives the entrepreneur more freedom to develop the company. Many successful companies, including Dell Computer and Facebook, started by bootstrapping.[117]
Bootstrapping methods include:[118]

Owner financing, including savings, personal loans and credit card debt
Working capital management that minimizes accounts receivable
Joint utilization, such as reducing overhead by coworking or using independent contractors
Increasing accounts payable by delaying payment, or leasing rather than buying equipment
Lean manufacturing strategies such as minimizing inventory and lean startup to reduce product development costs
Subsidy finance

Additional financing[edit]






This section includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this section by introducing more precise citations. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Many businesses need more capital than can be provided by the owners themselves. In this case, a range of options is available including a wide variety of private and public equity, debt and grants.[119] Private equity options include:

Startup accelerators
Angel investors
Venture capital investors
Equity crowdfunding
Hedge funds

Debt options open to entrepreneurs include:

Loans from banks, financial technology companies and economic development organizations
Line of credit also from banks and financial technology companies
Microcredit also known as microloans
Merchant cash advance
Revenue-based financing

Grant options open to entrepreneurs include:

Equity-free accelerators[120]
Business plan/business pitch competitions for college entrepreneurs[121] and others
Small Business Innovation Research grants from the U.S. government

Effect of taxes[edit]
Entrepreneurs are faced with liquidity constraints and often lack the necessary credit needed to borrow large amounts of money to finance their venture.[122] Because of this, many studies have been done on the effects of taxes on entrepreneurs. The studies fall into two camps: the first camp finds that taxes help and the second argues that taxes hurt entrepreneurship.
Cesaire Assah Meh found that corporate taxes create an incentive to become an entrepreneur to avoid double taxation.[122] Donald Bruce and John Deskins found literature suggesting that a higher corporate tax rate may reduce a state's share of entrepreneurs.[123] They also found that states with an inheritance or estate tax tend to have lower entrepreneurship rates when using a tax-based measure.[123] However, another study found that states with a more progressive personal income tax have a higher percentage of sole proprietors in their workforce.[124] Ultimately, many studies find that the effect of taxes on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur is small. Donald Bruce and Mohammed Mohsin found that it would take a 50 percentage point drop in the top tax rate to produce a one percent change in entrepreneurial activity.[125]
Predictors of success[edit]
Factors that may predict entrepreneurial success include the following:[126]

Methods


Establishing strategies for the firm, including growth and survival strategies
Maintaining the human resources (recruiting and retaining talented employees and executives)
Ensuring the availability of required materials (e.g. raw resources used in manufacturing, computer chips, etc.)
Using that the firm has one or more unique competitive advantages
Ensuring good organizational design, sound governance and organizational coordination
Congruency with the culture of the society[127]


Market


Business-to-business (B2B) or business-to-consumer (B2C) models can be used
High growth market
Target customers or markets that are untapped or missed by others


Industry


Growing industry
High technology impact on the industry
High capital intensity
Small average incumbent firm size


Team


Large, gender-diverse and racially diverse team with a range of talents, rather than an individual entrepreneur
Graduate degrees
Management experience prior to start-up
Work experience in the start-up industry
Employed full-time prior to new venture as opposed to unemployed
Prior entrepreneurial experience
Full-time involvement in the new venture
Motivated by a range of goals, not just profit
Number and diversity of team members' social ties and breadth of their business networks


Company


Written business plan
Focus on a unified, connected product line or service line
Competition based on a dimension other than price (e.g. quality or service)
Early, frequent intense and well-targeted marketing
Tight financial controls
Sufficient start-up and growth capital
Corporation model, not sole proprietorship


Status


Wealth can enable an entrepreneur to cover start-up costs and deal with cash flow challenges
Dominant race, ethnicity or gender in a socially stratified culture[128]

See also[edit]


Economics portal







Book: Entrepreneurship







Wikiversity has learning resources about Entrepreneurship




List of entrepreneurs
Business administration
Business opportunity
Businessperson
Corporate social entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship ecosystem
Innovation
Small Business Administration
Spiral of silence
University spin-off


References[edit]


^ AK Yetisen; LR Volpatti; AF Coskun; S Cho; E Kamrani; H Butt; A Khademhos\\seini; SH Yun (2015). "Entrepreneurship". Lab Chip. 15 (18): 3638–3660. doi:10.1039/c5lc00577a. PMID 26245815. 
^ Riitta Katila, Eric L. Chen,, and Henning Piezunka (7 June 2012). "All the right moves: How entrepreneurial firms compete effectively" (PDF). Strategic Entrepreneurship Jnl. 6 (2): 116–132. doi:10.1002/sej.1130. Retrieved 18 May 2017. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "Business Dictionary definition". Business Dictionary. 
^ Belicove, Mikal E. (2 August 2012). "How to Properly Close Your Business". 
^ Hisrich, Robert D. (2011). Entrepreneurship. McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07062-017-9. 
^ "Entrepreneurial Ambition - Innovation Provincial Rankings - How Canada Performs". 
^ Clifford, Catherine. "Why everyone will have to become an entrepreneur". entrepreneur.com. Retrieved 8 May 2016. 
^ "Venture Investment - Regional Aggregate Data". National Venture Capital Association and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Retrieved 23 April 2016. 
^ Scott, S.; Venkatraman, S. (2000). "The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research". Academy of Management Review. 25: 217–226. 
^ Brush, C.; et al. (2003). "Doctoral education in the field of entrepreneurship". Journal of Management. 29 (3): 309–331. doi:10.1016/s0149-2063(03)00014-x. 
^ Ramoglou, S.; Tsang, E.W.K.; et al. (2016). "A realist perspective of entrepreneurship: Opportunities as propensities". Academy of Management Review. 41 (3): 409–434. doi:10.5465/amr.2014.0281. 
^ a b S.X. Zhang; J. Cueto (2015). "The Study of Bias in Entrepreneurship". Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 41 (3): 419–454. doi:10.1111/etap.12212. 
^ Black, Ervin L.; Burton, F. Greg; Wood, David A.; Zimbelman, Aaron F. (August 2010). "Entrepreneurial success: differing perceptions of entrepreneurs and venture capitalists". The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation. 11 (3): 189–198. doi:10.5367/000000010792217272. Retrieved 28 July 2016. 
^ Navale,, Ashok Bhanudas (October 2013). "Developing Entrepreneur Skills for Corporate Work" (PDF). Research Directions. 1 (4). ISSN 2321-5488. 
^ Carlen, Joe (2016). A Brief History of Entrepreneurship: The Pioneers, Profiteers, and Racketeers Who Shaped Our World. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780231542814. 
^ Brewer, Anthony (1992). Richard Cantillon: Pioneer of Economic Theory. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-07577-0. 
^ William Stanley Jevons (January 1881). Richard Cantillon and the Nationality of Political Economy. Contemporary Review. The Contemporary Review Company. pp. 333–360. 
^ a b Cantillon, Richard (1755). Essai sur la nature du commerce en général. London: MacMillan. 
^ Stevenson, H.; Jarillo, J. (26 May 2007). Cuervo, Álvaro; Ribeiro, Domingo; Roig, Salvador, eds. A Paradigm of Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Management, in. Entrepreneurship: Concepts, Theory and Perspective. Springer Science Business Media. pp. 5–. ISBN 978-3-540-48543-8. 
^ • Landström, H. & SpringerLink 2005, Pioneers in entrepreneurship and small business research, Springer Science+Business Media, New York, N.Y.
^ Rostam-Afschar, D. (2013) "Entry regulation and entrepreneurship: a natural experiment in German craftsmanship" (PDF; 495 kB)
^ Schumpeter, Joseph Alois (1976). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-10762-4. 
^ Schumpeter, Joseph Alois (1934). The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry Into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87855-698-4. 
^ Landstrom, H. (31 December 2007). Pioneers in Entrepreneurship and Small Business Research. Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-23633-9. 
^ Marshall, Alfred; Guillebaud, C. W. (1961). Principles of Economics. 9th (variorum) Ed. Macmillan. 
^ "The 10 Richest Millennial Entrepreneurs in America". Inc.com. December 12, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2017. 
^ Bell, D'Vaughn. "Top Successful Millennial Entrepreneurs". Retrieved October 16, 2017. 
^ Wilmouth, Daniel. "The Missing Millennial Entrepreneurs" (PDF). U.S. Small Business Administration. Retrieved June 2, 2017. 
^ Shane, Scott Andrew (2000). A General Theory of Entrepreneurship: The Individual-opportunity Nexus. Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78100-799-0. 
^ Deakins & Freel 2012.
^ Johnson, D. P. M. (2005). "A Glossary of Political Economy Terms, 2005". Auburn University. Archived from the original on 20 July 2014. 
^ Paul D. Reynolds (30 September 2007). Entrepreneurship in the United States: The Future Is Now. Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-45671-3. 
^ Mark Van Osnabrugge; Robert J. Robinson (2000). Angel Investing. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-7879-5202-8. 
^ Driessen, Martyn P.; Zwart, Peter S. (2010). "The role of the entrepreneur in small business success: the Entrepreneurship Scan" (PDF). 
^ "Out Of Print : Ethnic Enterprise in America: Business and Welfare Among Chinese, Japanese, and Blacks : Ivan Light - University of California Press". www.ucpress.edu. Retrieved 2016-01-16. 
^ a b Chaudhary, Ali R. (2015-06-01). "Racialized Incorporation: The Effects of Race and Generational Status on Self-Employment and Industry-Sector Prestige in the United States". International Migration Review. 49 (2): 318–354. doi:10.1111/imre.12087. ISSN 1747-7379. 
^ Penrose, Edith T. (1959). The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. New York: John Wiley.
^ DiMaggio, P. 1988 'Interest and agency in institutional theory'. In Institutional patterns and culture, L. Zucker (ed.), Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Company: 3-22.
^ Levy, D.; Scully, M. (2007). "The institutional entrepreneur as modern prince: The strategic face of power in contested fields". Organization Studies. 28 (7): 971–991. doi:10.1177/0170840607078109. 
^ Khan, F., K. Munir, and H. Willmott 2007 'A Dark Side of Institutional Entrepreneurship: Soccer Balls, Child Labour and Postcolonial Impoverishment'. Organization Studies 28/7: 1055—1077.
^ Hardy, C., and S. Maguire: "Entrepreneurship" in Handbook of organizational institutionalism. R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, K. Sahlin-Andersson and R. Suddaby (eds).
^ Almeida, J., de Paula, N., Pessali, H. 'Institutional entrepreneurship in building the Brazilian market of functional yogurts.' British Food Journal, vol. 116, p. 2-15, 2014.
^ Christopher Rea and Nicolai Volland, "The Business of Culture" (UBC Press, 2015), pp. 4-7. (See also pp. 9-31: "Enter the Cultural Entrepreneur")
^ Orser, Barbara; Elliott, Catherine (2015-03-25). Feminine Capital: Unlocking the Power of Women Entrepreneurs. Stanford Business Books. p. 214. ISBN 9780804783798. 
^ Barbara J. Orser; Catherine Elliott; Joanne Leck (2011-11-08). "Feminist attributes and entrepreneurial identity". Gender in Management: an International Journal. 26 (8): 561–589. doi:10.1108/17542411111183884. ISSN 1754-2413. 
^ Orser, Barbara, and Joanne Leck. "Physician as feminist entrepreneur: The gendered nature of venture creation and the Shirley E. Greenberg Women’s Health Centre." Women entrepreneurs and the global environment for growth (2010): 284-302.
^ "Karren Brady Net Worth". 10 January 2014. 
^ Investopedia; Investopedia.com; access date.
^ Prive, Tanya (19 December 2012). "Top 10 Qualities That Make A Great Leader". Forbes. Retrieved 1 August 2013. 
^ Cantillon, Richard (1755). Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en Général. 
^ Drucker, Peter F. (1985). Innovation and Entrepreneurship.  attributes the coining and defining of "entrepreneur" to Jean-Baptiste Say in his A Treatise on Political Economy; (1834).
^ Knight, Frank Hyneman (2005). Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Cosimo, Inc. ISBN 978-1-59605-242-0. 
^ Laureiro-Martínez, Daniella; Canessa, Nicola; Brusoni, Stefano; Zollo, Maurizio; Hare, Todd; Alemanno, Federica; Cappa, Stefano F. (22 January 2014). "Frontopolar cortex and decision-making efficiency: comparing brain activity of experts with different professional background during an exploration-exploitation task". Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 7: 927. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00927. 
^ Timmons, Jeffry A.; Bygrave, William D. (1986). "Venture capital's role in financing innovation for economic growth". Journal of Business Venturing. 1 (2): 161–176. doi:10.1016/0883-9026(86)90012-1. 
^ a b c d e Qureshi, Hamid (3 September 2015). "Decoding Right Strategies for Entrepreneurship". Greater Kashmir. Retrieved 30 March 2016. 
^ Shane, S. (2000). "THE PROMISE OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS A FIELD OF RESEARCH". Academy of Management Review. 25 (1): 217–226. doi:10.5465/AMR.2000.2791611. 
^ Reynolds PD, Hay M, Bygrave WD et al. (2002) Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: 2002 Global Executive Report. Kansas City, MO: Kauffman Foundation.
^ Xavier-Oliveira et al. (1 July 2015). What motivates entrepreneurial entry under economic inequality? The role of human and financial capital. Human Relations 68(7): 1183-1207, Sage.
^ Mike Smith. "Why risk-taking is Important as an Entrepreneur". Best Business Books Blog. Retrieved 22 Aug 2017. 
^ "The basic characteristics of a successful entrepreneur". 
^ Shane, S.; Nicolaou, N. (2013). "The genetics of entrepreneurial performance". International Small Business Journal. 31 (5): 473–495. doi:10.1177/0266242613485767. 
^ Miller 2005, p. 278.
^ Scheufele & Moy 1999[page needed].
^ Ramoglou, S. (2013). "Who is a 'non-entrepreneur'? Taking the 'others' of entrepreneurship seriously". International Small Business Journal. 31 (4): 432–453. doi:10.1177/0266242611425838. 
^ Gartner, William B. (2001). "Is There an Elephant in Entrepreneurship? Blind Assumptions in Theory Development; Business research" (PDF). Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 25 (4): 27–39. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-08-09. 
^ Fauchart, E; Gruber, M. (2011). "Darwinians, Communitarians, and Missionaries: The Role of Founder Identify in Entrepreneurship". Academy of Management Journal. 54 (5): 935–957. doi:10.5465/amj.2009.0211. 
^ Hackman, M.Z.; Johnson, C.E. (2009). Leadership: A communication perspective (5th ed.). Long Grove, IL: Waveland. 
^ Baum, Robert J.; Locke, Edwin A.; Kirkpatrick, Shelley A. (1998). "A longitudinal study of the relation of vision and vision communication to venture growth in entrepreneurial firms". Journal of Applied Psychology. 83 (1): 43–54. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.83.1.43. 
^ Kouzes, J.M; Posner, B.Z. (1987). The leadership challenge: How to get extraordinary things done in organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
^ Locke, E.A.; Kirkpatrick, S.; Wheeler , J.K; Schneider, J; Niles, K.; Goldstein, H; Welsh, K; Chah, D.O. (1991). The essence of leadership. New York: Lexington Books. 
^ Clarke, J.; Cornelissen, J (2011). "Language, communication, and socially situated cognition in entrepreneurship. Academy Of Management Review". Academy of Management Review. 36 (4): 776–778. doi:10.5465/AMR.2011.65554783. 
^ Euler, M; Vollmar, B. H.; Kraus, S. (2011). "Communication matters--Network constellations in entrepreneurship". International Journal of Economics and Business Research. 3 (3): 283–301. doi:10.1504/ijebr.2011.040021. 
^ Giles, H; Wiemann, J.M (1987). Language, social comparison and power. The handbook of communication science. pp. 350–384. 
^ Ting-Toomey, S (1985). Toward a theory of conflict and culture in communication. Culture & Organizational processes. pp. 71–86. 
^ Rank, H (1976). Teaching about public persuasion. National Council of Teachers of English. 
^ Lawrence, D. (2014) Disruptors are just pirates on the high seas of capitalism. The Globe and Mail Special on Business Education, 5 November 2014. Available at https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/careers/business-education/disruptors-are-just-pirates-on-the-high-seas-of-capitalism/article21443149/
^ Roth, S (2014). "Booties, bounties, business models: a map to the next red oceans". International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business. 22 (4): 439–448. doi:10.1504/ijesb.2014.064272. 
^ Roth, S (2014). "The eye-patch of the beholder". International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Small Business. 22 (4): 399–407. doi:10.1504/ijesb.2014.064271. 
^ Lazear, Edward (2005). "Entrepreneurship" (PDF). 23 (4). Journal of Labor Economics. Retrieved 24 February 2015. 
^ Backes-Ge1llner, Uschi; Moog, Petra (December 2013). "The disposition to become an entrepreneur and the jacks-of-all-trades in social and human capital". The Journal of Socio-Economics. The Journal of Socio-Economics. 47: 55–72. doi:10.1016/j.socec.2013.08.008. Retrieved 24 February 2015. 
^ Baer, Drake (19 February 2015). "Scientists have discovered a personality difference between entrepreneurs and employees". Retrieved 25 February 2015. 
^ Muljadi, Paul (ed.). Entrepreneurship. Paul Muljadi. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. 
^ a b c Hanssan, Asa (2012). "Tax policy and entrepreneurship: empirical evidence from Sweden". Small Business Economics. 
^ Sørensen, J.; Nanda, R. (July 2010). "Workplace Peers and Entrepreneurship" (PDF). Management Science. 56 (7): 1116–1126. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1100.1179. Retrieved 30 June 2013. 
^ "Peers Influence Decision to Become an Entrepreneur". Stanford Graduate School of Business; News. 1 September 2009. Retrieved 30 June 2013. 
^ ENTREPRENEURIAL BEHAVIOR, Retrieved 17 December 2014.
^ Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (13 October 2009). Flow. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-187672-1. 
^ Christensen, Clayton; Johnson, Curtis W.; Horn, Michael B. (14 May 2008). Disrupting Class: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns. McGraw Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-164174-6. 
^ Montessori, Maria (1967). The Absorbent Mind. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
^ Rathunde, Kevin; Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly (May 2005). "Middle School Students' Motivation and Quality of Experience: A Comparison of Montessori and Traditional School Environments". American Journal of Education. 111 (3): 341–371. doi:10.1086/428885. 
^ Conchie, S. M.; Donald, I. J. (2007). "The functions and development of safety-specific trust and distrust". Safety Science. 46 (1): 92–103. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2007.03.004. 
^ Gudmundsson, S.V.; Lechner, C. (2013). "Cognitive Biases, Organization, and Entrepreneurial Firm Survival". European Management Journal. 31 (3): 278–294. doi:10.1016/j.emj.2013.01.001. 
^ Kets de Vries, M. (2003). "The entrepreneur on the couch". INSEAD Quarterly. 5: 17–19. 
^ Schoon, Ingrid; Duckworth, Kathryn (2012). "Who becomes an entrepreneur? Early life experiences as predictors of entrepreneurship". Developmental Psychology. 48 (6): 1719–1726. doi:10.1037/a0029168. 
^ http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/entrepreneur
^ Drucker, P. F. (1993). Innovation and entrepreneurship: practice and principles. New York: HarperBusiness.
^ a b Shane, S. A. (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship: the individual-opportunity nexus. Northampton, Massachusetts: E. Elgar.
^ a b Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R., Sirmon, D. G., & Trahms, C. A. (2011). Strategic Entrepreneurship: Creating Value for Individuals, Organizations, and Society. Academy of Management Perspectives, 25(2), 57-75. doi:10.5465/AMP.2011.61020802
^ Chemers, M. An integrative theory of leadership. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. ISBN 978-0-8058-2679-1. 
^ a b Hitt, M. A., Ireland, R. D., Hoskisson, R. E.. (2011). Strategic Management. (9th ed.). Mason, Ohio: South-Western Cengage Learning.
^ Fisher, B. A. (1970). "Decision Emergence: Phases in Group Making". Communication Monographs. 37: 53–66. 
^ Miller, K. (2009). Organizational Communication Approaches and Processes, 8, 146-149.
^ Morley, I. E. & Stephenson, G. M. (1977). The Social Psychology of Bargaining. London: Allen & Unwin.
^ Heaton, L. H. (2008) Knowledge Management. International Encyclopedia of Communication. Boston: Blackledge.
^ Boyacigiller, N. & Adler, N. J. (1991). The Parochial Dinosaur: The Organizational Sciences in Global Context. Academy of Management Review.
^ Grauman, C. F. (1986). Changing Conceptions of Leadership.
^ Hofestede, G. (1991). Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind.
^ Hofstede, G. (1980). Motivation, Leadership and Organization: Do American Theories Apply Abroad? Organizational Dynamics.
^ Adler, N. J. % Gundersen, A. (2008). International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior.
^ Michelacci, Claudio (24 June 2015). "Are They All Like Bill, Mark, and Steve? The Education Premium for Entrepreneurs" (PDF). EIEF. Retrieved 27 November 2015. 
^ Ferriani, S., Cattani, G., C. Baden-Fuller (2009) "The Relational Antecedents of Project-Entrepreneurship: Network Centrality, Team Composition, and Project Performance", Research Policy, 2009, 38 (10): 1545–1558.[1]
^ Faulkner, R. R.; Anderson, A. B. (1987). "Short-term projects and emergent careers: evidence from Hollywood". American Journal of Sociology. 92 (4): 879–909. doi:10.1086/228586. 
^ DeFillippi, R., & Spring, S. 2004 Project entrepreneurs for project-based enterprises: Extension or complement to project management competencies? Projects and Profits, 4(2): 50-57.
^ Bhide, Amar (1999). The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. http://www.bhide.net/books/Origin%20and%20Evolution/part1.pdf: Oxford University Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0195170313. 
^ Ebbena, Jay; Johnson, Alec (2006). "Bootstrapping in small firms: An empirical analysis of change over time". Journal of Business Venturing (published November 2006). 21 (6): 851–865. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2005.06.007. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Bootstrapping has taken on many definitions in the literature, but there has been some recent consensus that it is a collection of methods used to minimize the amount of outside debt and equity financing needed from banks and investors (Winborg and Landstrom, 2001 and Harrison and Mason, 1997). 
^ Quickbooks, Writer at (1 August 2014). "Did You Know? Most Small Businesses Start With $10,000 Or Less". Intuit. 
^ "Ten Successful Companies That Started by Bootstrapping". Richtopia. Retrieved 21 May 2016. 
^ Narayanan, V. K.; Colarelli O'Connor, Gina (15 March 2010). Encyclopedia of Technology and Innovation Management. John Wiley & Sons. p. 60. ISBN 978-1-4051-6049-0. 
^ Gooding, Donald (1 June 2017). "What Are The Four Colors of Money for Entrepreneurs?". 
^ "Your First Investor". Your First Investor. 
^ "Business Plan Competitions for College Students". 7 November 11 2017.  Check date values in: |date= (help)
^ a b Meh, Cesaire Assah (2002). "Entrepreneurial Risk, Credit Constraints, and the Corporate Income Tax: A Quantitative Exploration". Bank of Canada, Working Papers 2002-21. 
^ a b Bruce, Donald and John Deskins (2012). "Can state tax policies be used to promote entrepreneurial activity?". Small Business Economics. 
^ Asoni, Andrea and Tino Sanandaji (2012). "Taxation and the quality of entrepreneurship". J Econ. 
^ Bruce, Donald and Mohammed Mohsin (2006). "Tax Policy and Entrepreneurship: New Time Series Evidence". Small Business Economics. 
^ D.S Adegbenro I.C.T Poytechnic Lecture on EED 126, 2015">Entrepreneurship Lecture( EED 126) in D.S adegbenro Polytechnic, on 1 July 2015. Nigeria
^ Scott A. Shane (1 October 2008). "7". The Illusions of Entrepreneurship: The Costly Myths That Entrepreneurs, Investors, and Policy Makers Live By. Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-15006-7. 
^ Perry-Rivers, P. (October 2014). "Stratification, Economic Adversity, and Entrepreneurial Launch: The Converse Effect of Resource Position on Entrepreneurial Strategy". Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice. 40 (3): n/a. doi:10.1111/etap.12137. 


Further reading[edit]



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Entrepreneurship



Blackburn, Robert (2008). "Small Business and Entrepreneurship". doi:10.4135/9781446263433. ISBN 9781412934374. 
Bowman, Erik (July 2011). Entrepreneur Training Manual, Third Edition: Certified Entrepreneur Workbook. Guanzi Institute Press. ISBN 978-0-9837862-9-0. 
Deakins, D.; Freel, M. S. (2009). "Entrepreneurial activity, the economy and the importance of small firms". Entrepreneurship and small firms. McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0-07-712162-4. 
Dana, Leo Paul 2010, "Nunavik, Arctic Quebec: Where Co-operatives Supplement Entrepreneurship," Global Business and Economics Review 12 (1/2), January 2010, pp. 42–71.
Duening, Thomas N.; Hisrich, Robert A.; Lechter, Michael A. (21 October 2009). Technology Entrepreneurship: Creating, Capturing, and Protecting Value. Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-08-092288-1. 
Entrepreneurship Resources: http://www.entrepreneurship.org/
Entrepreneurship Lesson Plan http://www.econedlink.org/teacher-lesson/228s
Foo, M.D. (2011). "Emotions and entrepreneurial opportunity evaluation". Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 35 (2): 375–393. 
James W. Halloran. (2014). Your Small Business Adventure: Finding Your Niche and Growing a Successful Business. ALA/Huron Street Press. ISBN 978-1-937589-44-8. 
Leitão, João; Baptista, Rui (10 June 2009). Public Policies for Fostering Entrepreneurship: A European Perspective. Springer Science Business Media. ISBN 978-1-4419-0249-8. 
Lundstrom, Anders; Stevenson, Lois A. (30 March 2005). Entrepreneurship Policy: Theory and Practice. Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-24140-1. 
Minniti, M.; Moren, L. (2010). "Entrepreneurial types and economic growth". Journal of Business Venturing. 25 (3): 305–314. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.10.002. 
Rea, Christopher; Volland, Nicolai (2015). The Business of Culture: Cultural Entrepreneurs in China and Southeast Asia, 1900-65. UBC Press. ISBN 9780774827829. 
Shane, S.; Venkataraman, S. (2000). "The Promise of Entrepreneurship as A Field of Research". Academy of Management Review. 25 (1): 217–226. doi:10.5465/amr.2000.2791611. JSTOR 259271. 
Shane, S. (2013). "The genetics of entrepreneurial performance". International Small Business Journal. 31 (5): 473–495. doi:10.1177/0266242613485767. 
Zahra, Shaker A. (2009). "A typology of social entrepreneurs: Motives, search processes and ethical challenges". Journal of Business Venturing. 24 (5): 519–532. doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2008.04.007. 
Zhang, S.X.; Cueto, J. (2015). "The Study of Bias in Entrepreneurship". Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. 41 (3): 419–454. doi:10.1111/etap.12212. 







v
t
e


Private equity and venture capital



Basic investment types



Buyout
Venture
Mezzanine
Growth
Secondaries
Equity co-investment








History



History of private equity and venture capital
Early history of private equity
Private equity in the 1980s
Private equity in the 1990s
Private equity in the 2000s





Terms and concepts




Buyout



Financial sponsor
Management buyout
Divisional buyout
Buy–sell agreement
Leveraged recapitalization
Dividend recapitalization





Venture



Angel investor
Business incubator
Post-money valuation
Pre-money valuation
Seed money
Startup company
Venture capital financing
Venture debt
Venture round





Structure



Private equity firms and funds
Limited partnership
Limited liability company
Carried interest
Management fee
Publicly traded private equity

Business Development Company
Venture capital trust


Private investment in public equity (PIPE)
Pledge fund








Investors



Corporations
Institutional investors
Pension funds
Insurance companies
Fund of funds
Endowments
Foundations
Investment banks
Merchant banks
Commercial banks
High-net-worth individuals
Family offices
Sovereign wealth funds
Crowdfunding





Related financial terms



AUM
Cap table
Capital call
Capital commitment
Capital structure
Distribution waterfall
EBITDA
Envy ratio
High-yield debt
IPO
IRR
Leverage
Liquidation preference
M&A
PME
Taxation of private equity and hedge funds
Undercapitalization
Vintage year








Private equity and venture capital investors
Private equity firms
Venture capital firms
Angel investors
Portfolio companies












v
t
e


Aspects of capitalism
(academic views)



General



Business cycle
Competition
Economic bubble
Economic development
Entrepreneurship
Ecoprenuership
Externalities
Financial Revolution
Globalization
History of capitalist theory
Industrial Revolution
Innovation
Invention
Market failure
Merit
Multinational corporation
Oligopoly
Privatization
Profit
Property rights
Regulation
Wage labour
Wealth





Ideology



American Dream
Bipartisanship
Democracy
Free market
Individualism
Laissez-faire
Libertarianism
Neoliberalism





Cultural aspects



Culture of capitalism
Advertising
Consumerism
Decentralization
Economic mobility
Liberty
Mainstream
Philanthropy
Private foundation
Rule of law
Social alienation
Spontaneous order





Social aspects



Economic inequality
Employment
Freedom of association
Labour market flexibility
Labour supply
Productivity
Prosperity
Social venture capital
Unemployment





Criticism



Criticism
Anti-capitalism
Market fundamentalism
Marxism
Wage slavery





Antithesis



Anarchism
Anarcho-syndicalism
Communism
Eco-socialism
Libertarian socialism
Mercantilism
Post-scarcity economy
Sharing economy
Social anarchism
Socialism
Syndicalism









Authority control



GND: 7588126-3
NDL: 01058089











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Entrepreneurship&oldid=818373826"					Categories: Business occupationsBusiness modelsBusiness termsEntrepreneurshipManagement occupationsSmall businessHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2013CS1 errors: datesWikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2017All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyUse dmy dates from July 2017Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2017Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2017Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (English)Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2013All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2013Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2013Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2015Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2014All articles lacking in-text citationsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers