This article is about envelopes in packaging. For other uses, see Envelope (disambiguation).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Front of an envelope mailed in the U.S. in 1906, with a postage stamp and address






Back of the above envelope, showing an additional receiving office postmark


An envelope is a common packaging item, usually made of thin flat material. It is designed to contain a flat object, such as a letter or card.
Traditional envelopes are made from sheets of paper cut to one of three shapes: a rhombus, a short-arm cross or a kite. These shapes allow for the creation of the envelope structure by folding the sheet sides around a central rectangular area. In this manner, a rectangle-faced enclosure is formed with an arrangement of four flaps on the reverse side.



Contents


1 Overview
2 Sizes

2.1 International standard sizes
2.2 North American sizes


3 Manufacture

3.1 History of envelopes
3.2 Present and future state of envelopes


4 Types of envelopes

4.1 Windowed envelopes
4.2 Security envelopes
4.3 Mailers

4.3.1 Padded mailers




5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Overview[edit]




Patent drawing of Americus Callahan's windowed envelope


When the folding sequence is such that the last flap to be closed is on a short side it is referred to in commercial envelope manufacture as a pocket - a format frequently employed in the packaging of small quantities of seeds. Although in principle the flaps can be held in place by securing the topmost flap at a single point (for example with a wax seal), generally they are pasted or gummed together at the overlaps. They are most commonly used for enclosing and sending mail (letters) through a prepaid-postage postal system.
Window envelopes have a hole cut in the front side that allows the paper within to be seen.[1] They are generally arranged so that the receiving address printed on the letter is visible, saving the sender from having to duplicate the address on the envelope itself. The window is normally covered with a transparent or translucent film to protect the letter inside, as was first designed by Americus F. Callahan in 1901 and patented the following year.[2] In some cases, shortages of materials or the need to economize resulted in envelopes that had no film covering the window.[citation needed] One innovative process, invented in Europe about 1905, involved using hot oil to saturate the area of the envelope where the address would appear. The treated area became sufficiently translucent for the address to be readable. As of 2009[update] there is no international standard for window envelopes, but some countries, including Germany and the United Kingdom, have national standards.[3]
An aerogram is related to a lettersheet, both being designed to have writing on the inside to minimize the weight. Any handmade envelope is effectively a lettersheet because prior to the folding stage it offers the opportunity for writing a message on that area of the sheet that after folding becomes the inside of the face of the envelope.




A Japanese funeral envelope used for offering condolence money. The white and black cords represent death. Similar-looking envelopes with red and silver cords are used for weddings.


The "envelope" used to launch the Penny Post component of the British postal reforms of 1840 by Sir Rowland Hill and the invention of the postage stamp, was a lozenge-shaped lettersheet known as a Mulready.[4] If desired, a separate letter could be enclosed with postage remaining at one penny provided the combined weight did not exceed half an ounce (14 grams). This was a legacy of the previous system of calculating postage, which partly depended on the number of sheets of paper used.
During the U.S. Civil War those in the Confederate States Army occasionally used envelopes made from wallpaper, due to financial hardship.
A "return envelope" is a pre-addressed, smaller envelope included as the contents of a larger envelope and can be used for courtesy reply mail, metered reply mail, or freepost (business reply mail). Some envelopes are designed to be reused as the return envelope, saving the expense of including a return envelope in the contents of the original envelope. The direct mail industry makes extensive use of return envelopes as a response mechanism.
Up until 1840, all envelopes were handmade, each being individually cut to the appropriate shape out of an individual rectangular sheet. In that year George Wilson in the United Kingdom patented the method of tessellating (tiling) a number of envelope patterns across and down a large sheet, thereby reducing the overall amount of waste produced per envelope when they were cut out. In 1845 Edwin Hill and Warren de la Rue obtained a patent for a steam-driven machine that not only cut out the envelope shapes but creased and folded them as well. (Mechanised gumming had yet to be devised.) The convenience of the sheets ready cut to shape popularized the use of machine-made envelopes, and the economic significance of the factories that had produced handmade envelopes gradually diminished.
As envelopes are made of paper, they are intrinsically amenable to embellishment with additional graphics and text over and above the necessary postal markings. This is a feature that the direct mail industry has long taken advantage of—and more recently the Mail Art movement. Custom printed envelopes has also become an increasingly popular marketing method for small business.
Most of the over 400 billion envelopes of all sizes made worldwide are machine-made.
Sizes[edit]
International standard sizes[edit]
International standard ISO 269 defines several standard envelope sizes, which are designed for use with ISO 216 standard paper sizes:


Format
Dimensions (mm)
Dimensions (in)
Suitable for content format


DL
110 × 220
4.33 × 8.66
​1⁄3 A4


C7
81 × 114
3.2 × 4.5
A7 (or ​1⁄2 A6)


C7/C6
81 × 162
3.19 × 6.4
​1⁄3 A5


C6
114 × 162
4.5 × 6.4
A6 (or ​1⁄2 A5 or ​1⁄4 A4)


C6/C5
114 × 229
4.5 × 9
​1⁄3 A4


C5
162 × 229
6.4 × 9
A5 (or ​1⁄2 A4)


C4
229 × 324
9.0 × 12.8
A4


C3
324 × 458
12.8 × 18
A3


B6
125 × 176
4.9 × 6.9
C6


B5
176 × 250
6.9 × 9.8
C5


B4
250 × 353
9.8 × 13.9
C4


E4
280 × 400
11 × 15.75
B4


The German standard DIN 678 defines a similar list of envelope formats.
North American sizes[edit]
There are dozens of sizes of envelopes available.
The designations such as "A2" do not correspond to ISO paper sizes. (Often, North American paper jobbers and printers will insert a hyphen to distinguish from ISO sizes, thus: A-2.)


Format
Dimensions (in)
Dimensions (mm)
Ratio


A2
​4 3⁄8 × ​5 3⁄4
111.1 × 146.1
132%


A6
​4 3⁄4 × ​6 1⁄2
120.7 × 165.1
137%


A7
​5 1⁄4 × ​7 1⁄4
133.4 × 184.2
138%


A8
​5 1⁄2 × ​8 1⁄8
139.7 × 206.4
148%


A9
​5 3⁄4 × ​8 3⁄4
146.1 × 222.3
152%


A10
6 × ​9 1⁄2
152.4 × 241.3
158%


No. ​6 3⁄4
​3 5⁄8 × ​6 1⁄2
92.1 × 165.1
179%


No. ​7 3⁄4 (Monarch)
​3 7⁄8 × ​7 1⁄2
98.4 × 190.5
194%


No. 9
​3 7⁄8 × ​8 7⁄8
98.4 × 225.4
229%


No. 10
​4 1⁄8 × ​9 1⁄2
104.8 × 241.3
230%


No. 11
​4 1⁄2 × ​10 3⁄8
114.3 × 263.5
231%


No. 12
​4 3⁄4 × 11
120.7 × 279.4
232%


No. 14
5 × ​11 1⁄2
127.0 × 292.1
230%


Envelopes accepted by the U.S. Postal Service to be eligible for mailing at the price for letters must be:

Rectangular with a width-to-height "aspect ratio" between 1.3 and 2.5
At least ​3 1⁄2 inches high × 5 inches long × 0.007 inch thick.
No more than ​6 1⁄8 inches high × ​11 1⁄2 inches long × ​1⁄4 inch thick.[5]

Manufacture[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



History of envelopes[edit]




Tablet and its sealed envelope: employment contract. Girsu, Sumer, circa 2037 BC. Terra cotta. Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon.






Red envelopes are an example of paper envelopes. They are used for monetary gifts.


The first known envelope was nothing like the paper envelope we know of today. It can be dated back to around 3500 to 3200 BC in the ancient Middle East. Hollow, clay spheres were molded around financial tokens and used in private transactions. The two people who discovered these first envelopes were Jacques de Morgan, in 1901, and Roland de Mecquenem, in 1907.
Paper envelopes were developed in China, where paper was invented by 2nd century BC.[6] Paper envelopes, known as chih poh, were used to store gifts of money. In the Southern Song dynasty, the Chinese imperial court used paper envelopes to distribute monetary gifts to government officials.[7]
Prior to 1845, hand-made envelopes were all that were available for use, both commercial and domestic. In 1845, Edwin Hill and Warren De La Rue were granted a British patent for the first envelope-making machine.[8]
The "envelopes" produced by the Hill/De La Rue machine were not as we know them today. They were flat diamond, lozenge (or rhombus)-shaped sheets or "blanks" which had been precut to shape before being fed to the machine for creasing and made ready for folding to form a rectangular enclosure. The edges of the overlapping flaps treated with a paste or adhesive and the method of securing the envelope or wrapper was a user choice. The symmetrical flap arrangement meant that it could be held together with a single wax seal at the apex of the topmost flap. (That the flaps of an envelope can be held together by applying a seal at a single point is a classic design feature of an envelope.)[citation needed]
Nearly 50 years passed before a commercially successful machine for producing pre-gummed envelopes effectively as we know them today appeared.
The origin of the use of the diamond shape for envelopes is debated. However, as an alternative to simply wrapping a sheet of paper around a folded letter or an invitation and sealing the edges, it is a tidy and ostensibly paper-efficient way of producing a rectangular-faced envelope. Where the claim to be paper-efficient fails is a consequence of paper manufacturers normally making paper available in rectangular sheets, because the largest size of envelope that can be realised by cutting out a diamond or any other shape which yields an envelope with symmetrical flaps is smaller than the largest that can be made from that sheet simply by folding.




Envelope with advertising from 1905 used in the U.S.


The folded diamond-shaped sheet (or "blank") was in use at the beginning of the 19th century as a novelty wrapper for invitations and letters among the proportion of the population that had the time to sit and cut them out and were affluent enough not to bother about the waste offcuts. Their use first became widespread in the UK when the British government took monopoly control of postal services and tasked Rowland Hill with its introduction. The new service was launched in May 1840 with a postage-paid machine-printed illustrated (or pictorial) version of the wrapper and the much-celebrated first adhesive postage stamp: the Penny Black- for the production of which the Jacob Perkins printing process was used to deter counterfeiting and forgery. The wrappers were printed and sold as a sheet of 12, with cutting the purchaser's task. Known as Mulready stationery, because the illustration was created by the respected artist William Mulready, the envelopes were withdrawn when the illustration was ridiculed and lampooned. Nevertheless, the public apparently saw the convenience of the wrappers being available ready-shaped, and it must have been obvious that with the stamp available totally plain versions of the wrapper could be produced and postage prepaid by purchasing a stamp and affixing it to the wrapper once folded and secured. In this way although the postage-prepaid printed pictorial version died ignominiously, the diamond-shaped wrapper acquired de facto official status and became readily available to the public notwithstanding the time taken to cut them out and the waste generated. With the issuing of the stamps and the operation and control of the service (which is a communications medium) in government hands the British model spread around the world and the diamond-shaped wrapper went with it.
Hill also installed his brother Edwin as The Controller of Stamps, and it was he with his partner Warren De La Rue who patented the machine for mass-producing the diamond-shaped sheets for conversion to envelopes in 1845. Today, envelope-making machine manufacture is a long- and well-established international industry, and blanks are produced with a short-arm-cross shape and a kite shape as well as diamond shape. (The short-arm-cross style is mostly encountered in "pocket" envelopes i.e. envelopes with the closing flap on a short side. The more common style, with the closing flap on a long side, are sometimes referred to as "standard" or "wallet" style for purposes of differentiation.)




Envelope-making machines at the Post Office Savings Bank, Blythe House, West Kensington, London






Machine Envelope Printer was one of the machine presses at the Bulaq Press. It present now in Bibliotheca Alexandrina


The most famous paper-making machine was the Fourdrinier machine. The process involves taking processed pulp stock and converting it to a continuous web which is gathered as a reel. Subsequently, the reel is guillotined edge to edge to create a large number of properly rectangular sheets because ever since the invention of Gutenberg's press paper has been closely associated with printing.
To this day, all other mechanical printing and duplicating equipments devised in the meantime, including the typewriter (which was used up to the 1990s for addressing envelopes), have been primarily designed to process rectangular sheets. Hence the large sheets are in turn are guillotined down to the sizes of rectangular sheet commonly used in the commercial printing industry, and nowadays to the sizes commonly used as feed-stock in office-grade computer printers, copiers and duplicators (mainly ISO, A4 and US Letter).
Using any mechanical printing equipment to print on envelopes, which although rectangular, are in fact folded sheets with differing thicknesses across their surfaces, calls for skill and attention on the part of the operator. In commercial printing the task of printing on machine-made envelopes is referred to as "overprinting" and is usually confined to the front of the envelope. If printing is required on all four flaps as well as the front, the process is referred to as "printing on the flat". Eye-catching illustrated envelopes or pictorial envelopes, the origins of which as an artistic genre can be attributed to the Mulready stationery – and which was printed in this way - are used extensively for direct mail. In this respect, direct mail envelopes have a shared history with propaganda envelopes (or "covers") as they are called by philatelists.
Present and future state of envelopes[edit]
At the end of the 20th century, in 1998, the digital printing revolution delivered another benefit for small businesses when the U.S. Postal Service became the first postal authority to approve the introduction of a system of applying to an envelope in the printer bin of a PC sheet printer a digital frank or stamp delivered via the Internet. With this innovative alternative to an adhesive-backed postage stamp as the basis for an Electronic Stamp Distribution (ESD) service, a business envelope could be produced in-house, addressed and customised with advertising information on the face, and ready to be mailed.
The fortunes of the commercial envelope manufacturing industry and the postal service go hand in hand, and both link to the printing industry and the mechanized envelope processing industry producing equipments such as franking and addressing machines. They are all four symbiotic: technological developments affecting one obviously ricochet through the others: addressing machines print addresses, postage stamps are a print product, franking machines imprint a frank on an envelope. If fewer envelopes are required; fewer stamps are required; fewer franking machines are required and fewer addressing machines are required.[citation needed] For example, the advent and adoption of information-based indicia (IBI) (commonly referred to as digitally-encoded electronic stamps or digital indicia) by the US Postal Service in 1998 caused widespread consternation in the franking machine industry, as their equipments were effectively rendered obsolescent and resulted in a flurry of lawsuits involving Pitney Bowes among others. The advent of e-mail in the late 1990s appeared to offer a substantial threat to the postal service. By 2008 letter-post service operators were reporting significantly smaller volumes of letter-post, specifically stamped envelopes, which they attributed mainly to replacement by e-mail. Although a corresponding reduction in the volume of envelopes required would have been expected, no such decrease was reported as widely as the reduction in letter-post volumes.
Although as regards e-mail developments there is a substantial threat of "technology replacing tradition", this is offset by the equal reasoning that the Universal Postal Union is an international specialised agency of the United Nations, and a source of revenue for government. Consequently, any deterioration of domestic and international postal services attended by loss of revenue is a matter of governmental concern.
Types of envelopes[edit]
Windowed envelopes[edit]
Main article: Windowed envelope




Windowed envelope


A windowed envelope is an envelope with a plastic or glassine window in it. The plastic in these envelopes creates problems in paper recycling. Consumers who do not want to go through the trouble of ripping out the plastic window should put the envelope in a trash bag after use.[citation needed]
Security envelopes[edit]
Main article: Security envelope
Security envelopes have special tamper-resistant and tamper-evident features. They are used for high value products and documents as well as for evidence for legal proceedings.
Some security envelopes have a patterned tint printed on the inside, which makes it difficult to read the contents. Various patterns exist.[9]
Mailers[edit]
Some envelopes are available for full size documents. Some carriers have large mailing envelopes for their express services. Other similar envelopes are available at stationery supply locations.
These mailers usually have an opening on an end with a flap that can be attached by gummed adhesive, integral pressure-sensitive adhesive, adhesive tape, or security tape. Construction is usually:

Paperboard
Corrugated fiberboard
Polyethylene, often a coextrusion
Nonwoven fabric

Padded mailers[edit]
Main article: Padded mailer
Shipping envelopes can have padding to provide stiffness and some degree of cushioning. The padding can be ground newsprint, plastic foam sheets, or bubble packing.
See also[edit]


Back-of-the-envelope calculation
✉ Envelope character in the Dingbats section of Unicode
Return address
Secrecy of correspondence
Red envelope, a Chinese custom
Green envelope, a Malay custom


References[edit]



^ "History of Envelopes". BE. Retrieved 27 December 2014. Window envelopes have a small plastic pane that fits an address printed onto the letter inside. Windowed envelopes soon became the standard for business envelopes, as they reduce the time and cost required to send mail while still ensuring it gets delivered to its intended destination. 
^ "US 701839 A". Retrieved 27 December 2014. 
^ A software company's information on US and ISO international standard envelope styles and sizes
^ "Mulready stationery: Lettersheets and envelopes". The Queen's Own: Stamps That Changed the World. National Postal Museum. Retrieved 2006-09-25. 
^ "Sizes for Letters". USPS. 2016. Retrieved 2016-12-24. 
^ Tsien, Tsuen-Hsuin (1985). "Paper and Printing". Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in China, Chemistry and Chemical Technology. 5 part 1. Cambridge University Press: 38. 
^ Joseph Needham (1985). Science and Civilisation in China: Paper and Printing. Cambridge University Press. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-521-08690-5. In the Southern Sung dynasty, gift money for bestowing upon officials by the imperial court was wrapped in paper envelopes (chih pao) 
^ "The Heroic Age". Making the Modern World. Retrieved 2012-11-06. 
^ See Security Patterns by Joseph King for a selection of security patterns from around the world



External links[edit]



Look up envelope in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Envelopes.



Maynard H. Benjamin (2002). "History of Envelopes" (PDF). Envelope Manufacturers Association.  Available via the Smithsonian National Postal Museum
"ISO 216:2007 - Writing paper and certain classes of printed matter". International Organization for Standardization. 
Markus Kuhn. "International standard paper sizes". University of Cambridge.  the ISO 216 paper size system and the ideas behind its design.
Bodleian Library (2001). "De la Rue's Stationery Stand and Envelope Machine (1851)". John Johnson Collection Exhibition. University of Oxford. 
Gerard Hughes. "Envelope and Letterfolding".  Methods from the Envelope and Letter Folding Association
Alex Macmillan. "Letterfu envelopes templates".  (Creative Commons)
'Paper thickness cross reference guide
paper-papers. "Help understanding US envelope sizes".  (US Envelope Sizes)







v
t
e


Packaging



General topics



Active packaging
Child-resistant packaging
Contract packager
Disposable food packaging
Food packaging
Luxury packaging
Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging
Package pilferage
Package testing
Packaging engineering
Pharmaceutical packaging
Reusable packaging
Shelf life
Sustainable packaging
Tamper-evident
Tamper resistance
Wrap rage





Containers



Aerosol Container
Aluminium bottle
Aluminum can
Ampoule
Antistatic bag
Bag-in-box
Bags and flexible containers
Barrel
Beer bottle
Biodegradable bag
Blister pack
Boil-in-Bag
Bottle
Box
Bulk box
Cage
Case
Carboy
Carton
Chub
Clamshell
Corrugated box design
Crate
Disposable cup
Drum
Envelope
Flexible intermediate bulk container
Foam food container
Folding carton
Glass bottle
Growler
Insulated shipping container
Intermediate bulk container
Jar
Jerrycan
Jug
Juicebox
Keg
Multi-pack
Oyster pail
Packet (container)
Padded mailer
Pail
Paper bag
Paper sack
Plastic bag
Plastic bottle
Popcorn bag
Retort pouch
Sachet
Security bag
Self-heating can
Self-heating food packaging
Shipping container
Skin pack
Spray bottle
Tin can
Tub (container)
Tube
Unit load
Vial
Wooden box





Materials and
components



Adhesive
Aluminium foil
Bioplastic
Biodegradable plastic
BoPET
Bubble wrap
Bung
Cellophane
Closure
Coated paper
Coating
Coextrusion
Corrugated fiberboard
Corrugated plastic
Cushioning
Desiccant
Double seam
Foam peanut
Glass
Hot-melt adhesive
Kraft paper
Label
Lid
Linear low-density polyethylene
Liquid packaging board
Low-density polyethylene
Metallised film
Modified atmosphere
Molded pulp
Nonwoven fabric
Overwrap
Oxygen scavenger
Packaging gas
Pallet
Paper
Paper pallet
Paperboard
Plastic film
Plastic pallet
Plastic wrap
Polyester
Polyethylene
Polypropylene
Pressure-sensitive tape
Screw cap
Screw cap (wine)
Security printing
Security tape
Shock detector
Shock and vibration data logger
Shrink wrap
Slip sheet
Staple (fastener)
Strapping
Stretch wrap
Susceptor
Tamper-evident band
Tear tape
Temperature data logger
Time temperature indicator
Tinplate
Velostat





Processes



Aseptic processing
Authentication
Automatic identification and data capture
Blow fill seal
Blow molding
Calendering
Canning
Coating
Containerization
Curtain Coating
Die cutting
Die forming (plastics)
Electronic article surveillance
Extrusion
Extrusion coating
Glass production
Graphic design
HACCP
Hermetic seal
Induction sealing
Injection molding
Laminating
Laser cutting
Molding
Papermaking
Plastic welding
Plastics extrusion
Printing
Quality assurance
Radio-frequency identification
Roll slitting
Shearing (manufacturing)
Thermoforming
Track and trace
Vacuum forming
Ultrasonic welding
Vacuum packaging
Verification and validation





Machinery



Barcode printer
Barcode reader
Bottling line
Calender
Can seamer
Cartoning machine
Case sealer
Check weigher
Conveyor system
Extended core stretch wrapper
Filler
Heat gun
Heat sealer
Industrial robot
Injection molding machine
Label printer applicator
Lineshaft roller conveyor
Logistics automation
Material handling equipment
Mechanical brake stretch wrapper
Multihead weigher
Orbital stretch wrapping
Palletizer
Rotary wheel blow molding systems
Shrink tunnel
Staple gun
Tape dispenser
Turntable stretch wrapper
Vertical form fill sealing machine





Environment,
post-use



Biodegradation
Environmental engineering
Glass recycling
Industrial ecology
Life-cycle assessment
Litter
Paper recycling
Plastic recycling
Recycling
Reusable packaging
Reverse logistics
Source reduction
Sustainable packaging
Waste management












v
t
e


Paper products



Containers



Box
Carton
Corrugated box
Cigarette pack
Coffee cup sleeve
Corrugated fiberboard
Envelope
Molded pulp
Oyster pail
Paper bag
Paperboard
Paper cup





Hygiene



Facial tissue
Napkin
Paper towel
Toilet paper
Wet wipe





Stationery



Continuous stationery
Greeting card
Index card
Letter
Manila folder
Postage stamp
Postcard
Post-it note





Financial



Banknote
Business card
Coupon
Pay card
Passbook





Decorations



Ingrain wallpaper
Wallpaper





Media



Book
Newspaper
Newsprint
Pamphlet





Recreation



Confetti
Paper craft
Paper toys
Playing card





Other



Beverage coaster
Filter paper
Form
Sandpaper
Security paper












v
t
e


Mail and postal systems



History



Timeline of postal history
African countries
Asian countries
European countries
Oceania countries
American countries










Components



Advertising mail
Bulk mail
Envelope
Indicia
Information-Based Indicia
Letter box
Mail
Mail bag
Meter stamp
Packstation
Parcel
Post box / Mailbox
Post office
Post-office box
Postage meter
Postage stamp
Postal code
Postmark





Delivery



Airmail
Express
Package delivery
Registered
Surface
Surface Air Lifted (SAL)





Staff



Mail carrier
Postal worker
Postmaster
Postmaster General





Processing



Intelligent Mail barcode
Mail Isolation Control and Tracking
Multiline Optical Character Reader
Mail cover
Mail sorter
PLANET
POSTNET






Institutions
and systems




Postal entities
Postal museums
Postal services
Postal systems by country
Trade unions





Related



Courier
Philately
Stamp collecting





List of entities that have
issued postage stamps



A-E
F-L
M-Z








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Envelope&oldid=812657953"					Categories: Paper productsChinese inventionsDomestic implementsEnglish inventionsEnvelopesPackagingPostal historyPostal systemStationeryHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2014Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles needing additional references from July 2009Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017