See also: Ecological engineering
Environmental engineering is the branch of engineering concerned with the application of scientific and engineering principles for protection of human populations from the effects of adverse environmental factors; protection of environments, both local and global, from potentially deleterious effects of natural and human activities; and improvement of environmental quality.[1]
Environmental engineering can also be described as a branch of applied science and technology that addresses the issues of energy preservation, protection of assets and control of waste from human and animal activities. Furthermore, it is concerned with finding plausible solutions in the field of public health, such as waterborne diseases, implementing laws which promote adequate sanitation in urban, rural and recreational areas. It involves waste water management, air pollution control, recycling, waste disposal, radiation protection, industrial hygiene, animal agriculture, environmental sustainability, public health and environmental engineering law. It also includes studies on the environmental impact of proposed construction projects.
Environmental engineers study the effect of technological advances on the environment. To do so, they conduct studies on hazardous-waste management to evaluate the significance of such hazards, advise on treatment and containment, and develop regulations to prevent mishaps. Environmental engineers design municipal water supply and industrial wastewater treatment systems.[2][3] They address local and worldwide environmental issues such as the effects of acid rain, global warming, ozone depletion, water pollution and air pollution from automobile exhausts and industrial sources.[4][5][6][7]
At many universities environmental engineering programs are offered at either the department of civil engineering or the department of chemical engineering at engineering faculties. Environmental "civil" engineers focus on hydrology, water resources management, bioremediation, and water treatment plant design. Environmental "chemical" engineers, on the other hand, focus on environmental chemistry, advanced air and water treatment technologies and separation processes.[citation needed]
Additionally, engineers are more frequently obtaining specialized training in law (J.D.) and are utilizing their technical expertise in the practices of environmental engineering law.[citation needed]
Most jurisdictions also impose licensing and registration requirements.




Contents


1 Development
2 Scope

2.1 Solid waste management
2.2 Environmental impact assessment and mitigation
2.3 Water supply and treatment
2.4 Wastewater treatment
2.5 Air pollution management
2.6 Environmental Protection Agency


3 Ecological engineering for sustainable agriculture in arid and semiarid West African regions[13]
4 Education
5 Prominent environmental engineers
6 See also
7 References



Development[edit]
Ever since people first recognized that their health is related to the quality of their environment, they have applied principles to attempt to improve the quality of their environment. The ancient Indian Harappan civilization utilized early sewers in some cities more than 5000 years ago. The Romans constructed aqueducts to prevent drought and to create a clean, healthful water supply for the metropolis of Rome. In the 15th century, Bavaria created laws restricting the development and degradation of alpine country that constituted the region's water supply.
The field emerged as a separate environmental discipline during the middle third of the 20th century in response to widespread public concern about water and pollution and increasingly extensive environmental quality degradation. However, its roots extend back to early efforts in public health engineering.[8] Modern environmental engineering began in London in the mid-19th century when Joseph Bazalgette designed the first major sewerage system that reduced the incidence of waterborne diseases such as cholera. The introduction of drinking water treatment and sewage treatment in industrialized countries reduced waterborne diseases from leading causes of death to rarities.[9]
In many cases, as societies grew, actions that were intended to achieve benefits for those societies had longer-term impacts which reduced other environmental qualities. One example is the widespread application of the pesticide DDT to control agricultural pests in the years following World War II. While the agricultural benefits were outstanding and crop yields increased dramatically thus reducing world hunger substantially, and malaria was controlled better than it ever had been, numerous species were brought to the verge of extinction due to the impact of the DDT on their reproductive cycles. The story of DDT as vividly told in Rachel Carson's Silent Spring (1962) is considered to be the birth of the modern environmental movement and of the modern field of "environmental engineering."[10]
Conservation movements and laws restricting public actions that would harm the environment have been developed by various societies for millennia. Notable examples are the laws decreeing the construction of sewers in London and Paris in the 19th century and the creation of the U.S. national park system in the early 20th century.
Scope[edit]
Solid waste management[edit]
Environmental impact assessment and mitigation[edit]
Main article: Environmental impact assessment
Scientists have air pollution dispersion models to evaluate the concentration of a pollutant at a receptor or the impact on overall air quality from vehicle exhausts and industrial flue gas stack emissions. To some extent, this field overlaps the desire to decrease carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions from combustion processes. They apply scientific and engineering principles to evaluate if there are likely to be any adverse impacts to water quality, air quality, habitat quality, flora and fauna, agricultural capacity, traffic impacts, social impacts, ecological impacts, noise impacts, visual (landscape) impacts, etc. If impacts are expected, they then develop mitigation measures to limit or prevent such impacts. An example of a mitigation measure would be the creation of wetlands in a nearby location to mitigate the filling in of wetlands necessary for a road development if it is not possible to reroute the road.
In the United States, the practice of environmental assessment was formally initiated on January 1, 1970, the effective date of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Since that time, more than 100 developing and developed nations either have planned specific analogous laws or have adopted procedure used elsewhere. NEPA is applicable to all federal agencies in the United States.[11]
Water supply and treatment[edit]




Sewage treatment plant, Australia


They evaluate the water balance within a watershed and determine the available water supply, the water needed for various needs in that watershed, the seasonal cycles of water movement through the watershed and they develop systems to store, treat, and convey water for various uses. Water is treated to achieve water quality objectives for the end uses. In the case of a potable water supply, water is treated to minimize the risk of infectious disease transmission, the risk of non-infectious illness, and to create a palatable water flavor. Water distribution systems are designed and built to provide adequate water pressure and flow rates to meet various end-user needs such as domestic use, fire suppression, and irrigation.
Wastewater treatment[edit]




Water pollution


There are numerous wastewater treatment technologies. A wastewater treatment train can consist of a primary clarifier system to remove solid and floating materials, a secondary treatment system consisting of an aeration basin followed by flocculation and sedimentation or an activated sludge system and a secondary clarifier, a tertiary biological nitrogen removal system, and a final disinfection process. The aeration basin/activated sludge system removes organic material by growing bacteria (activated sludge). The secondary clarifier removes the activated sludge from the water. The tertiary system, although not always included due to costs, is becoming more prevalent to remove nitrogen and phosphorus and to disinfect the water before discharge to a surface water stream or ocean outfall.[12]
Air pollution management[edit]
Scientists have developed air pollution dispersion models to evaluate the concentration of a pollutant at a receptor or the impact on overall air quality from vehicle exhausts and industrial flue gas stack emissions. To some extent, this field overlaps the desire to decrease carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions from combustion processes.
Environmental Protection Agency[edit]
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is one of the many agencies that work with environmental engineers to solve key issues. An important component of EPA's mission is to protect and improve air, water, and overall environmental quality in order to avoid or mitigate the consequences of harmful effects.
Ecological engineering for sustainable agriculture in arid and semiarid West African regions[13][edit]
Ecological engineering offers new alternatives for the management of agricultural systems that are more tailored to the ever-changing social and environmental necessities in these regions. This requires managing the complexity of agrosystems, while striving to mimic the functioning of natural ecosystems of West African drylands and taking advantage of traditional practices and local know-how resulting from a long process of adaptation to environmental constraints.

Acting on biodiversity. Biodiversity is essential to the productivity of ecosystems and their temporal stability under the impact of external disturbances. Several ecological processes related to biodiversity may be intensified for the benefit of agrosilvopastoral systems: promoting diversity and soil microorganism activity to benefit plants, associating and utilizing the mutual benefits of plants
Utilizing organic matter and nutrient cycles. The productivity of agrosystems with low chemical input use in dryland regions is primarily based on efficient organic resource management, and in turn on the nutrient and energy flows they induce. It is thus possible to intervene at several levels: enhancing crop-livestock farming integration to preserve natural resources, restoring the biological activity of soils via specific organic inputs, supplying nutrients to plants locally.
Enhancing available water use. Water supplies are limited and irregular in dryland areas. Current management of these supplies—which involves capturing rainwater and surface runoff—could be improved in several ways: adapting to erratic rainfall or drought risks by focusing on: (i) the organization of the farm and community (farm plot patterns in association with the random rainfall distribution, etc.), and on (ii) cropping techniques to reduce crop water needs (plant choices, weeding, etc.), preserving water in crop fields by hampering runoff, accounting for the essential role of trees regarding soil and water in drylands.
Managing landscapes and associated ecological processes. Ecological crop pest regulation by their natural enemies is one ecosystem service provided by biodiversity. Better pest management could be considered in association with promoting biodiversity at different scales, e.g. from the plant to the landscape.

Education[edit]
Courses aimed at developing graduates with specific skills in environmental systems or environmental technology are becoming more common and fall into broad classes:

Mechanical engineering courses oriented towards designing machines and mechanical systems for environmental use such as water treatment facilities, pumping stations, garbage segregation plants and other mechanical facilities;
Environmental engineering or environmental systems courses oriented towards a civil engineering approach in which structures and the landscape are constructed to blend with or protect the environment;
Environmental chemistry, sustainable chemistry or environmental chemical engineering courses oriented towards understanding the effects (good and bad) of chemicals in the environment. Focus on mining processes, pollutants and commonly also cover biochemical processes;
Environmental technology courses oriented towards producing electronic or electrical graduates capable of developing devices and artifacts able to monitor, measure, model and control environmental impact, including monitoring and managing energy generation from renewable sources.

Prominent environmental engineers[edit]

G. D. Agrawal
Braden Allenby
Ashraf Choudhary
Marc Edwards (civil engineering professor)
Robert A. Gearheart
Alfred Stowell Jones
Sudhakar Kesavan
Joseph Lstiburek
Daniel Oerther
George Pinder
Ellen Swallow Richards
Paul V. Roberts
Daniel A. Vallero
Abel Wolman

See also[edit]


Sustainable development portal
Environment portal
Ecology portal




American Academy of Environmental Engineers and Scientists
Association of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors
Association of Environmental Professionals
Atmospheric dispersion modeling
Biofiltration
Confederation of European Environmental Engineering Societies
Ecological sanitation
Engineering geology
Environmental design
Environmental engineering law
Environmental engineering science
Environmental health
Environmental impact assessment
Environmental management
Environmental restoration
Environmental science
Environmental studies
Civil engineering
Geoprofessions
Hydraulic engineering
Hydrology
Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment
List of environmental degrees
List of environmental engineers
Society of Environmental Engineers
Water purification
Water quality modeling


References[edit]


^ The American Academy of Environmental Engineers
^ Beychok, Milton R. (1967). Aqueous Wastes from Petroleum and Petrochemical Plants (1st ed.). John Wiley & Sons. LCCN 67019834. 
^ Tchobanoglous, G.; Burton, F.L. & Stensel, H.D. (2003). Wastewater Engineering (Treatment Disposal Reuse) / Metcalf & Eddy, Inc (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill Book Company. ISBN 0-07-041878-0. 
^ Turner, D.B. (1994). Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.). CRC Press. ISBN 1-56670-023-X. 
^ Beychok, M.R. (2005). Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published. ISBN 0-9644588-0-2. 
^ "Architecture and Engineering Occupations : Occupational Outlook Handbook : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics". Bls.gov. 2012-03-29. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ Career Information Center. Agribusiness, Environment, and Natural Resources (9th ed.). Macmillan Reference. 2007. 
^ "Funding - Environmental Engineering - US National Science Foundation (NSF)". nsf.gov. Retrieved 2013-07-01. 
^ [1]
^ Sustainable Development (n.d.) Environmental Science. Detroit. 2009. 
^ McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Environmental Science and Engineering (3rd ed.). McGraw-Hill, Inc. 1993. 
^ Sims, J. (2003). Activated sludge, Environmental Encyclopedia. Detroit. 
^ D. Masse; JL. Chotte; E. Scopel (2015). "Ecological engineering for sustainable agriculture in arid and semiarid West African regions". Fiche thématique du CSFD (11): 2. 



Davis, M. L. and D. A. Cornwell, (2006) Introduction to environmental engineering (4th ed.) McGraw-Hill ISBN 978-0072424119




At Wikiversity, you can learn more and teach others about Environmental engineering at the Department of Environmental engineering








v
t
e


Engineering



Civil



Architectural
Construction
Environmental
Earthquake
Geotechnical
Hydraulic
Mining
Structural
Transportation





Mechanical



Acoustical
Aerospace
Automotive
Marine
Mechatronics
Railway





Electrical



Computer
Control
Electromechanics
Electronics
Microwaves
Power
Radio Frequency
Telecommunications





Chemical



Biochemical
Biological
Molecular
Petroleum
Process
Reaction
Thermodynamics
Transport phenomena





Interdisciplinarity



Audio
Biomedical
Ceramics
Engineering mathematics
Engineering mechanics
Engineering science
Fire
Industrial
Materials science
Metallurgy
Military
Nanotechnology
Nuclear
Optical
Photonics
Privacy
Robotics
Security
Systems








List of engineering branches
 Category:Engineering
  Engineering portal












v
t
e


Sustainability



Principles



Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development





Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons





Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth





Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable





Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species





Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable
Energy poverty





Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture





Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed





Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield





Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism





Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste





Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals








Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees












v
t
e


Environmental science



Main fields



Atmospheric sciences
Biogeochemistry
Ecology
Environmental chemistry
Geosciences
Hydrology
Limnology
Oceanography
Soil science








Related fields



Biology
Chemistry

green


Ecological economics
Environmental design
Environmental economics
Environmental engineering
Environmental health

epidemiology


Environmental studies
Environmental toxicology
Geodesy
Physics
Sustainability science
Systems ecology
Urban ecology





Applications



Energy conservation
Environmental technology
Natural resource management
Pollution control
Recycling
Remediation
Renewable energy
Road ecology
Sewage treatment
Urban metabolism
Water purification
Waste management





See also



Human impact on the environment
Sustainability








 Environment portal
 Category

scientists


Glossary
Degrees
Institutions
Journals
Research institutes












v
t
e


Human impact on the environment



General



Anthropocene
Environmental issues
Human impact
Impact assessment
List of issues
Planetary boundaries








Causes



Agriculture

fishing
irrigation
meat production
palm oil


Energy industry

biofuels
biodiesel
coal
electricity generation
nuclear power
oil shale
petroleum
reservoirs
wind power


Genetic pollution
Industrialization
Land use
Manufacturing

cleaning agents
concrete
plastics
nanotechnology
paint
paper
pesticides
pharmaceuticals and personal care


Mining
Overdrafting
Overexploitation
Overpopulation
Particulates
Pollution
Quarrying
Reservoirs
Tourism
Transport

aviation
roads
shipping


Urbanization

urban sprawl


war





Effects



Biodiversity threats

Biodiversity loss


Climate change

Global warming
Runaway climate change


Coral reefs
Deforestation
Desertification
Ecocide
Erosion
Environmental degradation
Freshwater cycle
Habitat destruction
Holocene extinction
Nitrogen cycle
Land degradation
Land surface effects on climate
Loss of green belts
Phosphorus cycle
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Resource depletion
Water degradation
Water scarcity





Mitigation



Birth control
Cleaner production
Climate change mitigation
Climate engineering
Ecological engineering
Environmental engineering
Environmental mitigation
Industrial ecology
Mitigation banking
Organic farming
Reforestation

urban


Restoration ecology
Sustainable consumption
Waste minimization








  Commons
  Category
by country
assessment
mitigation









Authority control



LCCN: sh85044170
GND: 4061650-2
BNF: cb11976343v (data)
NDL: 00564909
BNE: XX524846











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_engineering&oldid=811746494"					Categories: Chemical engineeringCivil engineeringEnvironmental engineeringEnvironmental scienceEngineering disciplinesEnvironmental terminologyHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2014Articles with unsourced statements from September 2007Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers