For the 18th-century Greek newspaper, see Efimeris.
In astronomy and celestial navigation, an ephemeris (plural: ephemerides; from Latin ephemeris, meaning 'diary', from Greek εφημερίς (ephemeris), meaning 'diary, journal' [1][2][3][4]) gives the positions of naturally occurring astronomical objects as well as artificial satellites in the sky at a given time or times. Historically, positions were given as printed tables of values, given at regular intervals of date and time. Modern ephemerides are often computed electronically from mathematical models of the motion of astronomical objects and the Earth. Even though the calculation of these tables was one of the first applications of mechanical computers, printed ephemerides are still produced, as they are useful when computational devices are not available.
The astronomical position calculated from an ephemeris is given in the spherical polar coordinate system of right ascension and declination. Some of the astronomical phenomena of interest to astronomers are eclipses, apparent retrograde motion/planetary stations, planetary ingresses, sidereal time, positions for the mean and true nodes of the moon, the phases of the Moon, and the positions of minor celestial bodies such as Chiron.
Ephemerides are used in celestial navigation and astronomy. They are also used by some astrologers.



Contents


1 History
2 Modern ephemeris
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links



History[edit]




A Latin translation of al-Khwārizmī's zīj, page from Corpus Christi College MS 283






Alfonsine tables






Page from Almanach Perpetuum



1st millennium BC – Ephemerides in Babylonian astronomy.
2nd century AD – the Almagest and the Handy Tables of Ptolemy
8th century AD – the zīj of Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī
9th century AD – the zīj of Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī
12th century AD – the Tables of Toledo – based largely on Arabic zīj sources of Islamic astronomy – were edited by Gerard of Cremona to form the standard European ephemeris until the Alfonsine Tables.
13th century – the Zīj-i Īlkhānī (Ilkhanic Tables) were compiled at the Maragheh observatory in Persia.
13th century – the Alfonsine Tables were compiled in Spain to correct anomalies in the Tables of Toledo, remaining the standard European ephemeris until the Prutenic Tables almost 300 years later.
1408 – Chinese ephemeris table (copy in Pepysian Library, Cambridge, UK (refer book '1434'); Chinese tables believed known to Regiomontanus).
1496 – the Almanach Perpetuum of Abraão ben Samuel Zacuto (one of the first books published with a movable type and printing press in Portugal)
1504 – While shipwrecked on the island of Jamaica, Christopher Columbus successfully predicted a lunar eclipse for the natives, using the ephemeris of the German astronomer Regiomontanus.
1531 – Work of Johannes Stöffler is published posthumously at Tübingen, extending the ephemeris of Regiomontanus through 1551.
1551 – the Prutenic Tables of Erasmus Reinhold were published, based on Copernicus's theories.
1554 – Johannes Stadius published Ephemerides novae et auctae, the first major ephemeris computed according to Copernicus' heliocentric model, using parameters derived from the Prutenic Tables. Although the Copernican model provided an elegant solution to the problem of computing apparent planetary positions (it avoided the need for the equant and better explained the apparent retrograde motion of planets), it still relied on the use of epicycles, leading to some inaccuracies - for example, periodic errors in the position of Mercury of up to ten degrees. One of the users of Stadius's tables is Tycho Brahe.
1627 – the Rudolphine Tables of Johannes Kepler based on elliptical planetary motion became the new standard.
1679 – La Connaissance des Temps ou calendrier et éphémérides du lever & coucher du Soleil, de la Lune & des autres planètes, first published yearly by Jean Picard and still extent.
1975 – Owen Gingerich, using modern planetary theory and digital computers, calculates the actual positions of the planets in the 16th Century and graphs the errors in the planetary positions predicted by the ephemerides of Stöffler, Stadius and others. According to Gingerich, the error patterns "are as distinctive as fingerprints and reflect the characteristics of the underlying tables. That is, the error patterns for Stöffler are different from those of Stadius, but the error patterns of Stadius closely resemble those of Maestlin, Magini, Origanus, and others who followed the Copernican parameters."[5]

Modern ephemeris[edit]
For scientific uses, a modern planetary ephemeris comprises software that generates positions of planets and often of their satellites, asteroids, or comets, at virtually any time desired by the user.
Typically, such ephemerides cover several centuries, past and future; the future ones can be covered because the field of celestial mechanics has developed several accurate theories. Nevertheless, there are secular phenomena which cannot adequately be considered by ephemerides. The greatest uncertainties in the positions of planets are caused by the perturbations of numerous asteroids, most of whose masses and orbits are poorly known, rendering their effect uncertain. Reflecting the continuing influx of new data and observations, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) has revised its published ephemerides nearly every year for the past 20 years.[6]
Solar system ephemerides are essential for the navigation of spacecraft and for all kinds of space observations of the planets, their natural satellites, stars, and galaxies.
Scientific ephemerides for sky observers mostly contain the positions of celestial bodies in right ascension and declination, because these coordinates are the most frequently used on star maps and telescopes. The equinox of the coordinate system must be given. It is, in nearly all cases, either the actual equinox (the equinox valid for that moment, often referred to as "of date" or "current"), or that of one of the "standard" equinoxes, typically J2000.0, B1950.0, or J1900. Star maps almost always use one of the standard equinoxes.
Scientific ephemerides often contain further useful data about the moon, planet, asteroid, or comet beyond the pure coordinates in the sky, such as elongation to the sun, brightness, distance, velocity, apparent diameter in the sky, phase angle, times of rise, transit, and set, etc. Ephemerides of the planet Saturn also sometimes contain the apparent inclination of its ring.
Celestial navigation serves as a backup to the Global Positioning System. Software is widely available to assist with this form of navigation; some of this software has a self-contained ephemeris.[7] When software is used that does not contain an ephemeris, or if no software is used, position data for celestial objects may be obtained from the modern Nautical Almanac or Air Almanac.[8]
An ephemeris is usually only correct for a particular location on the Earth. In many cases, the differences are too small to matter. However, for nearby asteroids or the Moon, they can be quite important.
Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation satellites transmit electronic ephemeris data consisting of health and exact location data. A GPS receiver can use the transmissions from multiple such satellites to calculate its own location using trilateration.
Other modern ephemerides recently created are the EPM (Ephemerides of Planets and the Moon), from the Russian Institute for Applied Astronomy of the Russian Academy of Sciences,[9] and the INPOP (Intégrateur numérique planétaire de l'Observatoire de Paris) by the French IMCCE.[10]
See also[edit]


Almanac
American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac

The Astronomical Almanac (new name)


Ephemera
Ephemeris time
Epoch (astronomy)
Epoch (reference date)
Fundamental ephemeris
January 0 or March 0
Keplerian elements
Nautical almanac
Osculating orbit
Two-line elements


Notes[edit]



^ ephemeris 1992.
^ "Liddell & Scott Dictionary on Perseus at University of Chicago". 
^ "Dictionary − ephemeris". Merriam-Webster. 
^ "ephemeris". Dictionnaire Gaffiot latin-français. 
^ Gingerich, Owen (1975). ""Crisis" versus Aesthetic in the Copernican Revolution" (PDF). Vistas in Astronomy. Elsevier BV. 17 (1): 85–95. Retrieved 23 June 2016. 
^ Georgij A. Krasinsky and Victor A. Brumberg, Secular Increase of Astronomical Unit from Analysis of the Major Planet Motions, and its Interpretation Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 90: 267–288, (2004).
^ American Practical Navigator: An Epitiome of Navigation. Bethesda, MD: National Imagery and Mapping Agency. 2002. p. 270. 
^ "Almanacs and Other Publications — Naval Oceanography Portal". United States Naval Observatory. Retrieved 11 November 2016. 
^ Pitjeva, Elena V. (August 2006). "The dynamical model of the planet motions and EPM ephemerides". Highlights of Astronomy. 14: 470. Bibcode:2007HiA....14..470P. doi:10.1017/S1743921307011453. 
^ "INPOP10e, a 4-D planetary ephemeris". IMCCE. Retrieved 2 May 2013. 



References[edit]

Duffett-Smith, Peter (1990). Astronomy With Your Personal Computer. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-38995-X. 
"ephemeris". American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (3rd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 1992. 
MacCraig, Hugh (1949). The 200 Year Ephemeris. Macoy Publishing Company. 
Meeus, Jean (1991). Astronomical Algorithms. Willmann-Bell. ISBN 0-943396-35-2. 
Michelsen, Neil F. (1990). Tables of Planetary Phenomena. ACS Publications, Inc. ISBN 0-935127-08-9. 
Michelsen, Neil F. (1982). The American Ephemeris for the 21st Century - 2001 to 2100 at Midnight. Astro Computing Services. ISBN 0-917086-50-3. 
Montenbruck, Oliver (1989). Practical Ephemeris Calculations. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-50704-3. 
Seidelmann, Kenneth (2006). Explanatory supplement to the astronomical almanac. University Science Books. ISBN 1-891389-45-9. 

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ephemeris.



The JPL HORIZONS online ephemeris
Introduction to the JPL ephemerides







v
t
e


Chronology



Key topics



Archaeology
Astronomy
Geology
History
Paleontology
Time








Eras
Epochs







Calendar eras



Human Era
Ab urbe condita
Anno Domini / Common Era
Anno Mundi
Byzantine era
Seleucid era
Spanish era
Before Present
Hijri
Egyptian
Sothic cycle
Hindu units of time (Yuga)
Mesoamerican

Long Count
Short Count
Tzolk'in
Haab'







Regnal year



Canon of Kings
Lists of kings
Limmu





Era names



Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Vietnamese








Calendars




Pre-Julian / Julian



Pre-Julian Roman
Original Julian
Proleptic Julian
Revised Julian





Gregorian



Gregorian
Proleptic Gregorian
Old Style and New Style dates
Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
Dual dating





Astronomical



Lunisolar
Solar
Lunar
Astronomical year numbering





Others



Chinese sexagenary cycle
Geologic Calendar
Hebrew
Iranian
Islamic
ISO week date
Mesoamerican

Maya
Aztec


Winter count (Plains Indians)








Astronomic time



Cosmic Calendar
Ephemeris
Galactic year
Metonic cycle
Milankovitch cycles





Geologic time




Concepts



Deep time
Geological history of Earth
Geological time units





Standards



Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP)





Methods



Chronostratigraphy
Geochronology
Isotope geochemistry
Law of superposition
Luminescence dating
Samarium–neodymium dating








Chronological
dating




Absolute dating



Amino acid racemisation
Archaeomagnetic dating
Dendrochronology
Ice core
Incremental dating
Lichenometry
Paleomagnetism
Radiometric dating

Radiocarbon
Uranium–lead
Potassium–argon


Tephrochronology
Luminescence dating
Thermoluminescence dating





Relative dating



Fluorine absorption
Nitrogen dating
Obsidian hydration
Seriation
Stratigraphy








Genetic methods



Molecular clock





Linguistic methods



Glottochronology





Related topics



Chronicle
New Chronology
Periodization
Synchronoptic view
Timeline
Year zero
Circa
Floruit
Terminus post quem
ASPRO chronology








 Portal












v
t
e


Gravitational orbits



Types




General



Box
Capture
Circular
Elliptical / Highly elliptical
Escape
Graveyard
Horseshoe
Hyperbolic trajectory
Inclined / Non-inclined
Osculating
Parabolic trajectory
Parking
Synchronous

semi
sub


Transfer orbit





Geocentric



Geosynchronous
Geostationary
Sun-synchronous
Low Earth
Medium Earth
High Earth
Molniya
Near-equatorial
Orbit of the Moon
Polar
Tundra





About other points



Areosynchronous
Areostationary
Halo
Lissajous
Lunar
Heliocentric
Heliosynchronous








Parameters







Shape
Size






e  Eccentricity
a  Semi-major axis
b  Semi-minor axis
Q, q  Apsides





Orientation



i  Inclination
Ω  Longitude of the ascending node
ω  Argument of periapsis
ϖ  Longitude of the periapsis





Position



M  Mean anomaly
ν  True anomaly
E  Eccentric anomaly
L  Mean longitude
l  True longitude





Variation



T  Orbital period
n  Mean motion
v  Orbital speed
t0  Epoch








Maneuvers



Collision avoidance (spacecraft)
Delta-v
Delta-v budget
Bi-elliptic transfer
Geostationary transfer
Gravity assist
Gravity turn
Hohmann transfer
Low energy transfer
Oberth effect
Inclination change
Phasing
Rocket equation
Rendezvous
Transposition, docking, and extraction





Orbital mechanics



Celestial coordinate system
Characteristic energy
Escape velocity
Ephemeris
Equatorial coordinate system
Ground track
Hill sphere
Interplanetary Transport Network
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
Lagrangian point
n-body problem
Orbit equation
Orbital state vectors
Perturbation
Retrograde motion
Specific orbital energy
Specific relative angular momentum
Two-line elements








List of orbits









Authority control



GND: 4130421-4
SUDOC: 027426882
BNF: cb11947080v (data)
NDL: 00572871











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ephemeris&oldid=814647697"					Categories: Astronomical tablesAstrometryAstronomy booksCalendarsCelestial navigationHidden categories: Use dmy dates from November 2016Articles containing French-language textWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers