For other uses, see Epidemiology (disambiguation).
"Clinical Epidemiology" redirects here. For the journal, see Clinical Epidemiology (journal).
Epidemiology is the study and analysis of the distribution[disambiguation needed] and determinants of health and disease conditions in defined populations. It is the cornerstone of public health, and shapes policy decisions and evidence-based practice by identifying risk factors for disease and targets for preventive healthcare. Epidemiologists help with study design, collection, and statistical analysis of data, amend interpretation and dissemination of results (including peer review and occasional systematic review). Epidemiology has helped develop methodology used in clinical research, public health studies, and, to a lesser extent, basic research in the biological sciences.[1]
Major areas of epidemiological study include disease causation, transmission, outbreak investigation, disease surveillance, forensic epidemiology, Occupational epidemiology, screening, biomonitoring, and comparisons of treatment effects such as in clinical trials. Epidemiologists rely on other scientific disciplines like biology to better understand disease processes, statistics to make efficient use of the data and draw appropriate conclusions, social sciences to better understand proximate and distal causes, and engineering for exposure assessment.



Contents


1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Modern era


3 Types of studies

3.1 Case series
3.2 Case-control studies
3.3 Cohort studies
3.4 Outbreak investigation


4 Causal inference

4.1 Bradford Hill criteria
4.2 Legal interpretation


5 Population-based health management
6 Applied field epidemiology

6.1 Humanitarian context


7 Validity: precision and bias

7.1 Random error
7.2 Systematic error

7.2.1 Selection bias
7.2.2 Information bias
7.2.3 Confounding




8 The profession
9 See also
10 References

10.1 Notes
10.2 Bibliography


11 External links



Etymology[edit]
Epidemiology, literally meaning "the study of what is upon the people", is derived from Greek epi, meaning 'upon, among', demos, meaning 'people, district', and logos, meaning 'study, word, discourse', suggesting that it applies only to human populations. However, the term is widely used in studies of zoological populations (veterinary epidemiology), although the term "epizoology" is available, and it has also been applied to studies of plant populations (botanical or plant disease epidemiology).[2]
The distinction between "epidemic" and "endemic" was first drawn by Hippocrates,[3] to distinguish between diseases that are "visited upon" a population (epidemic) from those that "reside within" a population (endemic).[4] The term "epidemiology" appears to have first been used to describe the study of epidemics in 1802 by the Spanish physician Villalba in Epidemiología Española.[4] Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as a syndemic.
The term epidemiology is now widely applied to cover the description and causation of not only epidemic disease, but of disease in general, and even many non-disease, health-related conditions, such as high blood pressure and obesity. Therefore, this epidemiology is based upon how the pattern of the disease cause changes in the function of everyone.
History[edit]
The Greek physician Hippocrates is known as the father of medicine,[5][6] sought a logic to sickness; he is the first person known to have examined the relationships between the occurrence of disease and environmental influences.[7] Hippocrates believed sickness of the human body to be caused by an imbalance of the four humors (air, fire, water and earth “atoms”). The cure to the sickness was to remove or add the humor in question to balance the body. This belief led to the application of bloodletting and dieting in medicine.[8] He coined the terms endemic (for diseases usually found in some places but not in others) and epidemic (for diseases that are seen at some times but not others).[9]
Modern era[edit]
See also: History of emerging infectious diseases
In the middle of the 16th century, a doctor from Verona named Girolamo Fracastoro was the first to propose a theory that these very small, unseeable, particles that cause disease were alive. They were considered to be able to spread by air, multiply by themselves and to be destroyable by fire. In this way he refuted Galen's miasma theory (poison gas in sick people). In 1543 he wrote a book De contagione et contagiosis morbis, in which he was the first to promote personal and environmental hygiene to prevent disease. The development of a sufficiently powerful microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1675 provided visual evidence of living particles consistent with a germ theory of disease.
Wu Youke (1582–1652) developed the concept that some diseases were caused by transmissible agents, which he called liqi (pestilential factors). His book Wenyi Lun (Treatise on Acute Epidemic Febrile Diseases) can be regarded as the main etiological work that brought forward the concept, ultimately attributed to Westerners, of germs as a cause of epidemic diseases (source: http://baike.baidu.com/view/143117.htm). His concepts are still considered in current scientific research in relation to Traditional Chinese Medicine studies (see: http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/d/Js6170e/4.html).
Another pioneer, Thomas Sydenham (1624–1689), was the first to distinguish the fevers of Londoners in the later 1600s. His theories on cures of fevers met with much resistance from traditional physicians at the time. He was not able to find the initial cause of the smallpox fever he researched and treated.[8]




Original map by John Snow showing the clusters of cholera cases in the London epidemic of 1854.


John Graunt, a haberdasher and amateur statistician, published Natural and Political Observations ... upon the Bills of Mortality in 1662. In it, he analysed the mortality rolls in London before the Great Plague, presented one of the first life tables, and reported time trends for many diseases, new and old. He provided statistical evidence for many theories on disease, and also refuted some widespread ideas on them.
John Snow is famous for his investigations into the causes of the 19th century cholera epidemics, and is also known as the father of (modern) epidemiology.[10][11] He began with noticing the significantly higher death rates in two areas supplied by Southwark Company. His identification of the Broad Street pump as the cause of the Soho epidemic is considered the classic example of epidemiology. Snow used chlorine in an attempt to clean the water and removed the handle; this ended the outbreak. This has been perceived as a major event in the history of public health and regarded as the founding event of the science of epidemiology, having helped shape public health policies around the world.[12][13] However, Snow’s research and preventive measures to avoid further outbreaks were not fully accepted or put into practice until after his death.
Other pioneers include Danish physician Peter Anton Schleisner, who in 1849 related his work on the prevention of the epidemic of neonatal tetanus on the Vestmanna Islands in Iceland.[14][15] Another important pioneer was Hungarian physician Ignaz Semmelweis, who in 1847 brought down infant mortality at a Vienna hospital by instituting a disinfection procedure. His findings were published in 1850, but his work was ill-received by his colleagues, who discontinued the procedure. Disinfection did not become widely practiced until British surgeon Joseph Lister 'discovered' antiseptics in 1865 in light of the work of Louis Pasteur.
In the early 20th century, mathematical methods were introduced into epidemiology by Ronald Ross, Janet Lane-Claypon, Anderson Gray McKendrick, and others.[16][17][18][19]
Another breakthrough was the 1954 publication of the results of a British Doctors Study, led by Richard Doll and Austin Bradford Hill, which lent very strong statistical support to the link between tobacco smoking and lung cancer.
In the late 20th century, with advancement of biomedical sciences, a number of molecular markers in blood, other biospecimens and environment were identified as predictors of development or risk of a certain disease. Epidemiology research to examine the relationship between these biomarkers analyzed at the molecular level, and disease was broadly named “molecular epidemiology”. Specifically, "genetic epidemiology" has been used for epidemiology of germline genetic variation and disease. Genetic variation is typically determined using DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes. Since the 2000s, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been commonly performed to identify genetic risk factors for many diseases and health conditions.
While most molecular epidemiology studies are still using conventional disease diagnosis and classification systems, it is increasingly recognized that disease evolution represents inherently heterogeneous processes differing from person to person. Conceptually, each individual has a unique disease process different from any other individual (“the unique disease principle”),[20][21] considering uniqueness of the exposome (a totality of endogenous and exogenous / environmental exposures) and its unique influence on molecular pathologic process in each individual. Studies to examine the relationship between an exposure and molecular pathologic signature of disease (particularly cancer) became increasingly common throughout the 2000s. However, the use of molecular pathology in epidemiology posed unique challenges including lack of research guidelines and standardized statistical methodologies, and paucity of interdisciplinary experts and training programs.[22] Furthermore, the concept of disease heterogeneity appears to conflict with the long-standing premise in epidemiology that individuals with the same disease name have similar etiologies and disease processes. To resolve these issues and advance population health science in the era of molecular precision medicine, “molecular pathology” and “epidemiology” was integrated to create a new interdisciplinary field of “molecular pathological epidemiology” (MPE),[23][24] defined as “epidemiology of molecular pathology and heterogeneity of disease”. In MPE, investigators analyze the relationships between; (A) environmental, dietary, lifestyle and genetic factors; (B) alterations in cellular or extracellular molecules; and (C) evolution and progression of disease. A better understanding of heterogeneity of disease pathogenesis will further contribute to elucidate etiologies of disease. The MPE approach can be applied to not only neoplastic diseases but also non-neoplastic diseases.[25] The concept and paradigm of MPE have become widespread in the 2010s.[26][27][28][29][30][31][32]
Types of studies[edit]
Main article: Study design
Epidemiologists employ a range of study designs from the observational to experimental and generally categorized as descriptive, analytic (aiming to further examine known associations or hypothesized relationships), and experimental (a term often equated with clinical or community trials of treatments and other interventions). In observational studies, nature is allowed to “take its course," as epidemiologists observe from the sidelines. Conversely, in experimental studies, the epidemiologist is the one in control of all of the factors entering a certain case study.[33] Epidemiological studies are aimed, where possible, at revealing unbiased relationships between exposures such as alcohol or smoking, biological agents, stress, or chemicals to mortality or morbidity. The identification of causal relationships between these exposures and outcomes is an important aspect of epidemiology. Modern epidemiologists use informatics as a tool.
Observational studies have two components, descriptive and analytical. Descriptive observations pertain to the “who, what, where and when of health-related state occurrence”. However, analytical observations deal more with the ‘how’ of a health-related event.[33] Experimental epidemiology contains three case types: randomized controlled trials (often used for new medicine or drug testing), field trials (conducted on those at a high risk of contracting a disease), and community trials (research on social originating diseases).[33]
The term 'epidemiologic triad' is used to describe the intersection of Host, Agent, and Environment in analyzing an outbreak.
Case series[edit]
Case-series may refer to the qualitative study of the experience of a single patient, or small group of patients with a similar diagnosis, or to a statistical factor with the potential to produce illness with periods when they are unexposed.
The former type of study is purely descriptive and cannot be used to make inferences about the general population of patients with that disease. These types of studies, in which an astute clinician identifies an unusual feature of a disease or a patient's history, may lead to formulation of a new hypothesis. Using the data from the series, analytic studies could be done to investigate possible causal factors. These can include case control studies or prospective studies. A case control study would involve matching comparable controls without the disease to the cases in the series. A prospective study would involve following the case series over time to evaluate the disease's natural history.[34]
The latter type, more formally described as self-controlled case-series studies, divide individual patient follow-up time into exposed and unexposed periods and use fixed-effects Poisson regression processes to compare the incidence rate of a given outcome between exposed and unexposed periods. This technique has been extensively used in the study of adverse reactions to vaccination, and has been shown in some circumstances to provide statistical power comparable to that available in cohort studies.
Case-control studies[edit]
Case-control studies select subjects based on their disease status. It is a retrospective study. A group of individuals that are disease positive (the "case" group) is compared with a group of disease negative individuals (the "control" group). The control group should ideally come from the same population that gave rise to the cases. The case-control study looks back through time at potential exposures that both groups (cases and controls) may have encountered. A 2×2 table is constructed, displaying exposed cases (A), exposed controls (B), unexposed cases (C) and unexposed controls (D). The statistic generated to measure association is the odds ratio (OR), which is the ratio of the odds of exposure in the cases (A/C) to the odds of exposure in the controls (B/D), i.e. OR = (AD/BC).



Cases
Controls


Exposed
A
B


Unexposed
C
D


If the OR is significantly greater than 1, then the conclusion is "those with the disease are more likely to have been exposed," whereas if it is close to 1 then the exposure and disease are not likely associated. If the OR is far less than one, then this suggests that the exposure is a protective factor in the causation of the disease. Case-control studies are usually faster and more cost effective than cohort studies, but are sensitive to bias (such as recall bias and selection bias). The main challenge is to identify the appropriate control group; the distribution of exposure among the control group should be representative of the distribution in the population that gave rise to the cases. This can be achieved by drawing a random sample from the original population at risk. This has as a consequence that the control group can contain people with the disease under study when the disease has a high attack rate in a population.
A major drawback for case control studies is that, in order to be considered to be statistically significant, the minimum number of cases required at the 95% confidence interval is related to the odds ratio by the equation:






total cases

=
A
+
C
=

1.96

2


(
1
+
N
)


(


1

ln
⁡
(
O
R
)



)


2



(



O
R
+
2


O
R


+
1


O
R



)

≈
15.5
(
1
+
N
)


(


1

ln
⁡
(
O
R
)



)


2




{\displaystyle {\text{total cases}}=A+C=1.96^{2}(1+N)\left({\frac {1}{\ln(OR)}}\right)^{2}\left({\frac {OR+2{\sqrt {OR}}+1}{\sqrt {OR}}}\right)\approx 15.5(1+N)\left({\frac {1}{\ln(OR)}}\right)^{2}}



where N is the ratio of cases to controls. As the odds ratio approached 1, approaches 0; rendering case control studies all but useless for low odds ratios. For instance, for an odds ratio of 1.5 and cases = controls, the table shown above would look like this:



Cases
Controls


Exposed
103
84


Unexposed
84
103


For an odds ratio of 1.1:



Cases
Controls


Exposed
1732
1652


Unexposed
1652
1732


Cohort studies[edit]
Cohort studies select subjects based on their exposure status. The study subjects should be at risk of the outcome under investigation at the beginning of the cohort study; this usually means that they should be disease free when the cohort study starts. The cohort is followed through time to assess their later outcome status. An example of a cohort study would be the investigation of a cohort of smokers and non-smokers over time to estimate the incidence of lung cancer. The same 2×2 table is constructed as with the case control study. However, the point estimate generated is the relative risk (RR), which is the probability of disease for a person in the exposed group, Pe = A / (A + B) over the probability of disease for a person in the unexposed group, Pu = C / (C + D), i.e. RR = Pe / Pu.


.....
Case
Non-case
Total


Exposed
A
B
(A + B)


Unexposed
C
D
(C + D)


As with the OR, a RR greater than 1 shows association, where the conclusion can be read "those with the exposure were more likely to develop disease."
Prospective studies have many benefits over case control studies. The RR is a more powerful effect measure than the OR, as the OR is just an estimation of the RR, since true incidence cannot be calculated in a case control study where subjects are selected based on disease status. Temporality can be established in a prospective study, and confounders are more easily controlled for. However, they are more costly, and there is a greater chance of losing subjects to follow-up based on the long time period over which the cohort is followed.
Cohort studies also are limited by the same equation for number of cases as for cohort studies, but, if the base incidence rate in the study population is very low, the number of cases required is reduced by ½.
Outbreak investigation[edit]

For information on investigation of infectious disease outbreaks, please see outbreak investigation.

Causal inference[edit]
Main article: Causal inference
Although epidemiology is sometimes viewed as a collection of statistical tools used to elucidate the associations of exposures to health outcomes, a deeper understanding of this science is that of discovering causal relationships.
"Correlation does not imply causation" is a common theme for much of the epidemiological literature. For epidemiologists, the key is in the term inference. Correlation, or at least association between two variables, is a necessary but not sufficient criteria for inference that one variable causes the other. Epidemiologists use gathered data and a broad range of biomedical and psychosocial theories in an iterative way to generate or expand theory, to test hypotheses, and to make educated, informed assertions about which relationships are causal, and about exactly how they are causal.
Epidemiologists emphasize that the "one cause – one effect" understanding is a simplistic mis-belief.[citation needed] Most outcomes, whether disease or death, are caused by a chain or web consisting of many component causes.[35] Causes can be distinguished as necessary, sufficient or probabilistic conditions. If a necessary condition can be identified and controlled (e.g., antibodies to a disease agent, energy in an injury), the harmful outcome can be avoided (Robertson, 2015).
Bradford Hill criteria[edit]
Main article: Bradford Hill criteria
In 1965, Austin Bradford Hill proposed a series of considerations to help assess evidence of causation,[36] which have come to be commonly known as the "Bradford Hill criteria". In contrast to the explicit intentions of their author, Hill's considerations are now sometimes taught as a checklist to be implemented for assessing causality.[37] Hill himself said "None of my nine viewpoints can bring indisputable evidence for or against the cause-and-effect hypothesis and none can be required sine qua non."[36]

Strength of Association: A small association does not mean that there is not a causal effect, though the larger the association, the more likely that it is causal.[36]
Consistency of Data: Consistent findings observed by different persons in different places with different samples strengthens the likelihood of an effect.[36]
Specificity: Causation is likely if a very specific population at a specific site and disease with no other likely explanation. The more specific an association between a factor and an effect is, the bigger the probability of a causal relationship.[36]
Temporality: The effect has to occur after the cause (and if there is an expected delay between the cause and expected effect, then the effect must occur after that delay).[36]
Biological gradient: Greater exposure should generally lead to greater incidence of the effect. However, in some cases, the mere presence of the factor can trigger the effect. In other cases, an inverse proportion is observed: greater exposure leads to lower incidence.[36]
Plausibility: A plausible mechanism between cause and effect is helpful (but Hill noted that knowledge of the mechanism is limited by current knowledge).[36]
Coherence: Coherence between epidemiological and laboratory findings increases the likelihood of an effect. However, Hill noted that "... lack of such [laboratory] evidence cannot nullify the epidemiological effect on associations".[36]
Experiment: "Occasionally it is possible to appeal to experimental evidence".[36]
Analogy: The effect of similar factors may be considered.[36]

Legal interpretation[edit]
Epidemiological studies can only go to prove that an agent could have caused, but not that it did cause, an effect in any particular case:

"Epidemiology is concerned with the incidence of disease in populations and does not address the question of the cause of an individual's disease. This question, sometimes referred to as specific causation, is beyond the domain of the science of epidemiology. Epidemiology has its limits at the point where an inference is made that the relationship between an agent and a disease is causal (general causation) and where the magnitude of excess risk attributed to the agent has been determined; that is, epidemiology addresses whether an agent can cause a disease, not whether an agent did cause a specific plaintiff's disease."[38]

In United States law, epidemiology alone cannot prove that a causal association does not exist in general. Conversely, it can be (and is in some circumstances) taken by US courts, in an individual case, to justify an inference that a causal association does exist, based upon a balance of probability.
The subdiscipline of forensic epidemiology is directed at the investigation of specific causation of disease or injury in individuals or groups of individuals in instances in which causation is disputed or is unclear, for presentation in legal settings.
Population-based health management[edit]
Epidemiological practice and the results of epidemiological analysis make a significant contribution to emerging population-based health management frameworks.
Population-based health management encompasses the ability to:

Assess the health states and health needs of a target population;
Implement and evaluate interventions that are designed to improve the health of that population; and
Efficiently and effectively provide care for members of that population in a way that is consistent with the community's cultural, policy and health resource values.

Modern population-based health management is complex, requiring a multiple set of skills (medical, political, technological, mathematical etc.) of which epidemiological practice and analysis is a core component, that is unified with management science to provide efficient and effective health care and health guidance to a population. This task requires the forward looking ability of modern risk management approaches that transform health risk factors, incidence, prevalence and mortality statistics (derived from epidemiological analysis) into management metrics that not only guide how a health system responds to current population health issues, but also how a health system can be managed to better respond to future potential population health issues.[39]
Examples of organizations that use population-based health management that leverage the work and results of epidemiological practice include Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control, Health Canada Tobacco Control Programs, Rick Hansen Foundation, Canadian Tobacco Control Research Initiative.[40][41][42]
Each of these organizations use a population-based health management framework called Life at Risk that combines epidemiological quantitative analysis with demographics, health agency operational research and economics to perform:

Population Life Impacts Simulations: Measurement of the future potential impact of disease upon the population with respect to new disease cases, prevalence, premature death as well as potential years of life lost from disability and death;
Labour Force Life Impacts Simulations: Measurement of the future potential impact of disease upon the labour force with respect to new disease cases, prevalence, premature death and potential years of life lost from disability and death;
Economic Impacts of Disease Simulations: Measurement of the future potential impact of disease upon private sector disposable income impacts (wages, corporate profits, private health care costs) and public sector disposable income impacts (personal income tax, corporate income tax, consumption taxes, publicly funded health care costs).

Applied field epidemiology[edit]
Applied epidemiology is the practice of using epidemiological methods to protect or improve the health of a population. Applied field epidemiology can include investigating communicable and non-communicable disease outbreaks, mortality and morbidity rates, and nutritional status, among other indicators of health, with the purpose of communicating the results to those who can implement appropriate policies or disease control measures.
Humanitarian context[edit]
As the surveillance and reporting of diseases and other health factors becomes increasingly difficult in humanitarian crisis situations, the methodologies used to report the data are compromised. One study found that less than half (42.4%) of nutrition surveys sampled from humanitarian contexts correctly calculated the prevalence of malnutrition and only one-third (35.3%) of the surveys met the criteria for quality. Among the mortality surveys, only 3.2% met the criteria for quality. As nutritional status and mortality rates help indicate the severity of a crisis, the tracking and reporting of these health factors is crucial.
Vital registries are usually the most effective ways to collect data, but in humanitarian contexts these registries can be non-existent, unreliable, or inaccessible. As such, mortality is often inaccurately measured using either prospective demographic surveillance or retrospective mortality surveys. Prospective demographic surveillance requires lots of manpower and is difficult to implement in a spread-out population. Retrospective morality surveys are prone to selection and reporting biases. Other methods are being developed, but are not common practice yet.
WHO, “Health topics: Epidemiology.” http://www.who.int/topics/epidemiology/en/ Accessed: October 30, 2017.
Porta, Miquel. “A Dictionary of Epidemiology.” Sixth Edition. International Epidemiological Society. Oxford University Press. 2014. Accessed: October 30, 2017.
Prudhon, C & Spiegel, P. “A review of methodology and analysis of nutrition and mortality surveys conducted in humanitarian emergencies from October 1993 to April 2004” Emerging Themes in Epidemiology 2007, 4:10. http://www.ete-online.com/content/4/1/10 Accessed: October 30, 2017.
Roberts, B et al. “A new method to estimate mortality in crisis-affected and resource-poor settings: validation study.” International Journal of Epidemiology 2010;39:1584–1596. Accessed: October 30, 2017.
Validity: precision and bias[edit]
Different fields in epidemiology have different levels of validity. One way to assess the validity of findings is the ratio of false-positives (claimed effects that are not correct) to false-negatives (studies which fail to support a true effect). To take the field of genetic epidemiology, candidate-gene studies produced over 100 false-positive findings for each false-negative. By contrast genome-wide association appear close to the reverse, with only one false positive for every 100 or more false-negatives.[43] This ratio has improved over time in genetic epidemiology as the field has adopted stringent criteria. By contrast other epidemiological fields have not required such rigorous reporting and are much less reliable as a result.[43]
Random error[edit]
Random error is the result of fluctuations around a true value because of sampling variability. Random error is just that: random. It can occur during data collection, coding, transfer, or analysis. Examples of random error include: poorly worded questions, a misunderstanding in interpreting an individual answer from a particular respondent, or a typographical error during coding. Random error affects measurement in a transient, inconsistent manner and it is impossible to correct for random error.
There is random error in all sampling procedures. This is called sampling error.
Precision in epidemiological variables is a measure of random error. Precision is also inversely related to random error, so that to reduce random error is to increase precision. Confidence intervals are computed to demonstrate the precision of relative risk estimates. The narrower the confidence interval, the more precise the relative risk estimate.
There are two basic ways to reduce random error in an epidemiological study. The first is to increase the sample size of the study. In other words, add more subjects to your study. The second is to reduce the variability in measurement in the study. This might be accomplished by using a more precise measuring device or by increasing the number of measurements.
Note, that if sample size or number of measurements are increased, or a more precise measuring tool is purchased, the costs of the study are usually increased. There is usually an uneasy balance between the need for adequate precision and the practical issue of study cost.
Systematic error[edit]
A systematic error or bias occurs when there is a difference between the true value (in the population) and the observed value (in the study) from any cause other than sampling variability. An example of systematic error is if, unknown to you, the pulse oximeter you are using is set incorrectly and adds two points to the true value each time a measurement is taken. The measuring device could be precise but not accurate. Because the error happens in every instance, it is systematic. Conclusions you draw based on that data will still be incorrect. But the error can be reproduced in the future (e.g., by using the same mis-set instrument).
A mistake in coding that affects all responses for that particular question is another example of a systematic error.
The validity of a study is dependent on the degree of systematic error. Validity is usually separated into two components:

Internal validity is dependent on the amount of error in measurements, including exposure, disease, and the associations between these variables. Good internal validity implies a lack of error in measurement and suggests that inferences may be drawn at least as they pertain to the subjects under study.
External validity pertains to the process of generalizing the findings of the study to the population from which the sample was drawn (or even beyond that population to a more universal statement). This requires an understanding of which conditions are relevant (or irrelevant) to the generalization. Internal validity is clearly a prerequisite for external validity.

Selection bias[edit]
Selection bias occurs when study subjects are selected or become part of the study as a result of a third, unmeasured variable which is associated with both the exposure and outcome of interest.[44] For instance, it has repeatedly been noted that cigarette smokers and non smokers tend to differ in their study participation rates. (Sackett D cites the example of Seltzer et al., in which 85% of non smokers and 67% of smokers returned mailed questionnaires.)[45] It is important to note that such a difference in response will not lead to bias if it is not also associated with a systematic difference in outcome between the two response groups.
Information bias[edit]
Information bias is bias arising from systematic error in the assessment of a variable.[46] An example of this is recall bias. A typical example is again provided by Sackett in his discussion of a study examining the effect of specific exposures on fetal health: "in questioning mothers whose recent pregnancies had ended in fetal death or malformation (cases) and a matched group of mothers whose pregnancies ended normally (controls) it was found that 28% of the former, but only 20% of the latter, reported exposure to drugs which could not be substantiated either in earlier prospective interviews or in other health records".[45] In this example, recall bias probably occurred as a result of women who had had miscarriages having an apparent tendency to better recall and therefore report previous exposures.
Confounding[edit]
Confounding has traditionally been defined as bias arising from the co-occurrence or mixing of effects of extraneous factors, referred to as confounders, with the main effect(s) of interest.[46][47] A more recent definition of confounding invokes the notion of counterfactual effects.[47] According to this view, when one observes an outcome of interest, say Y=1 (as opposed to Y=0), in a given population A which is entirely exposed (i.e. exposure X = 1 for every unit of the population) the risk of this event will be RA1. The counterfactual or unobserved risk RA0 corresponds to the risk which would have been observed if these same individuals had been unexposed (i.e. X = 0 for every unit of the population). The true effect of exposure therefore is: RA1 − RA0 (if one is interested in risk differences) or RA1/RA0 (if one is interested in relative risk). Since the counterfactual risk RA0 is unobservable we approximate it using a second population B and we actually measure the following relations: RA1 − RB0 or RA1/RB0. In this situation, confounding occurs when RA0 ≠ RB0.[47] (NB: Example assumes binary outcome and exposure variables.)
Some epidemiologists prefer to think of confounding separately from common categorizations of bias since, unlike selection and information bias, confounding stems from real causal effects.[44]
The profession[edit]
To date, few universities offer epidemiology as a course of study at the undergraduate level. One notable undergraduate program exists at Johns Hopkins University, where students who major in public health can take graduate level courses, including epidemiology, their senior year at the Bloomberg School of Public Health.[48]
Although epidemiologic research is conducted by individuals from diverse disciplines, including clinically trained professionals such as physicians, formal training is available through Masters or Doctoral programs including Master of Public Health (MPH), Master of Science of Epidemiology (MSc.), Doctor of Public Health (DrPH), Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD), Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), Doctor of Science (ScD). Many other graduate programs, e.g., Doctor of Social Work (DSW), Doctor of Clinical Practice (DClinP), Doctor of Podiatric Medicine (DPM), Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM), Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP), Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT), or for clinically trained physicians, Doctor of Medicine (MD) or Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery (MBBS or MBChB) and Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO), include some training in epidemiologic research or related topics, but this training is generally substantially less than offered in training programs focused on epidemiology or public health. Reflecting the strong historical tie between epidemiology and medicine, formal training programs may be set in either schools of public health and medical schools.
As public health/health protection practitioners, epidemiologists work in a number of different settings. Some epidemiologists work 'in the field'; i.e., in the community, commonly in a public health/health protection service, and are often at the forefront of investigating and combating disease outbreaks. Others work for non-profit organizations, universities, hospitals and larger government entities such as state and local health departments, various Ministries of Health, Doctors without Borders, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Health Protection Agency, the World Health Organization (WHO), or the Public Health Agency of Canada. Epidemiologists can also work in for-profit organizations such as pharmaceutical and medical device companies in groups such as market research or clinical development.
See also[edit]


Health and fitness portal




Age adjustment
Caerphilly Heart Disease Study
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED)
Critical community size
Disease diffusion mapping
Epidemic model
Epidemiological methods
Epidemiological Transition
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Hispanic paradox
International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology
Mathematical modelling in epidemiology
Mendelian randomization
Population groups in biomedicine
Study of Health in Pomerania
Targeted Immunization Strategies
Whitehall Study


References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ Miquel Porta (2014). A Dictionary of Epidemiology (6th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-997673-7. Retrieved 16 July 2014. 
^ Nutter, Jr., F.W. (1999). "Understanding the interrelationships between botanical, human, and veterinary epidemiology: the Ys and Rs of it all". Ecosys Health. 5 (3): 131–40. doi:10.1046/j.1526-0992.1999.09922.x. 
^ Hippocrates. (~200BC). Airs, Waters, Places.
^ a b Carol Buck, Alvaro Llopis, Enrique Nájera, Milton Terris. (1998). The Challenge of Epidemiology: Issues and Selected Readings. Scientific Publication No. 505. Pan American Health Organization. Washington, DC. p3.
^ Alfredo Morabia (2004). A history of epidemiologic methods and concepts. Birkhäuser. p. 93. ISBN 3-7643-6818-7. 
^ Historical Developments in Epidemiology. Chapter 2. Jones & Bartlett Learning LLC.
^ Ray M. Merrill (2010). Introduction to Epidemiology. Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 24. ISBN 0-7637-6622-4. 
^ a b Merril, Ray M., PhD, MPH. "An Introduction to Epidemiology, Fifth Edition". Chapter 2: Historic Developments in Epidemiology. Jones and Bartlett Publishing, 2010. Web. 17 September 2012.
^ "Changing Concepts: Background to Epidemiology" (PDF). Duncan & Associates. Retrieved 3 February 2008. 
^ Doctor John Snow Blames Water Pollution for Cholera Epidemic, by David Vachon UCLA Department of Epidemlology, School of Public Health May & June 2005
^ John Snow, Father of Epidemiology NPR Talk of the Nation. 24 September 2004
^ The Importance of Snow. Gro Harlem Brundtland, M.D., M.P.H.former Director-General, World Health Organization. Geneva, Switzerland Talk, Washington, D.C., 28 October 1998
^ Dr. John Snow. John Snow, Inc. and JSI Research & Training Institute, Inc.
^ Ólöf Garðarsdóttir; Loftur Guttormsson (June 2008). "An isolated case of early medical intervention. The battle against neonatal tetanus in the island of Vestmannaeyjar (Iceland) during the 19th century" (PDF). Instituto de Economía y Geografía. Retrieved 19 April 2011. [permanent dead link]
^ Ólöf Garðarsdóttir; Loftur Guttormsson (25 August 2009). "Public health measures against neonatal tetanus on the island of Vestmannaeyjar (Iceland) during the 19th century". The History of the Family. 14 (3): 266–79. doi:10.1016/j.hisfam.2009.08.004. [verification needed]
^ Statisticians of the centuries. By C. C. Heyde, Eugene Senet
^ Anderson Gray McKendrick Archived 22 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Statistical methods in epidemiology: Karl Pearson, Ronald Ross, Major Greenwood and Austin Bradford Hill, 1900 – 1945. Trust Centre for the History of Medicine at UCL, London
^ Origins and early development of the case-control study
^ Ogino S, Fuchs CS, Giovannucci E (2012). "How many molecular subtypes? Implications of the unique tumor principle in personalized medicine". Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 12: 621–8. doi:10.1586/erm.12.46. PMC 3492839 . PMID 22845482. 
^ Ogino S, Lochhead P, Chan AT, Nishihara R, Cho E, Wolpin BM, Meyerhardt JA, Meissner A, Schernhammer ES, Fuchs CS, Giovannucci E (2013). "Molecular pathological epidemiology of epigenetics: Emerging integrative science to analyze environment, host, and disease". Mod Pathol. 26: 465–84. doi:10.1038/modpathol.2012.214. PMC 3637979 . PMID 23307060. 
^ Ogino S, King EE, Beck AH, Sherman ME, Milner DA, Giovannucci E (2012). "Interdisciplinary education to integrate pathology and epidemiology: Towards molecular and population-level health science". Am J Epidemiol. 176: 659–67. doi:10.1093/aje/kws226. 
^ Ogino S, Stampfer M (2010). "Lifestyle factors and microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer: the evolving field of molecular pathological epidemiology". J Natl Cancer Inst. 102: 365–7. doi:10.1093/jnci/djq031. PMC 2841039 . PMID 20208016. 
^ Ogino S, Chan AT, Fuchs CS, Giovannucci E (2011). "Molecular pathological epidemiology of colorectal neoplasia: an emerging transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary field". Gut. 60: 397–411. doi:10.1136/gut.2010.217182. PMC 3040598 . PMID 21036793. 
^ Field AE, Camargo CA, Ogino S (2013). "The merits of subtyping obestity: one size does not fit all". JAMA. 310: 2147–8. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.281501. 
^ Curtin K, Slattery ML, Samowitz WS (2011). "CpG island methylation in colorectal cancer: past, present and future". Pathology Research International. 2011: 902674. 
^ Hughes LA, Khalid-de Bakker CA, Smits KM, den Brandt PA, Jonkers D, Ahuja N, Herman JG, Weijenberg MP, van Engeland M (2012). "The CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer: Progress and problems". Biochim Biophys Acta. 1825: 77–85. doi:10.1016/j.bbcan.2011.10.005. PMID 22056543. 
^ Ku CS, Cooper DN, Wu M, Roukos DH, Pawitan Y, Soong R, Iacopetta B (2012). "Gene discovery in familial cancer syndromes by exome sequencing: prospects for the elucidation of familial colorectal cancer type X". Mod Pathol. 25: 1055–68. doi:10.1038/modpathol.2012.62. PMID 22522846. 
^ Chia WK, Ali R, Toh HC (2012). "Aspirin as adjuvant therapy for colorectal cancer-reinterpreting paradigms". Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 9: 561–70. doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.137. 
^ Spitz MR, Caporaso NE, Sellers TA (2012). "Integrative cancer epidemiology—the next generation". Cancer Discov. 2: 1087–90. doi:10.1158/2159-8290.cd-12-0424. PMC 3531829 . PMID 23230187. 
^ Zaidi N, Lupien L, Kuemmerle NB, Kinlaw WB, Swinnen JV, Smans K (2013). "Lipogenesis and lipolysis: The pathways exploited by the cancer cells to acquire fatty acids". Prog Lipid Res. 52: 585–9. doi:10.1016/j.plipres.2013.08.005. PMC 4002264 . 
^ Ikramuddin S, Livingston EH (2013). "New Insights on Bariatric Surgery Outcomes". JAMA. 310: 2401–2. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.280927. 
^ a b c "Principles of Epidemiology." Key Concepts in Public Health. London: Sage UK, 2009. Credo Reference. 1 August 2011. Web. 30 September 2012.
^ Hennekens, Charles H.; Julie E. Buring (1987). Mayrent, Sherry L. (Ed.), ed. Epidemiology in Medicine. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-316-35636-7. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)
^ Rothman, Kenneth J. (1986). Modern Epidemiology. Boston/Toronto: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 0-316-75776-4. 
^ a b c d e f g h i j k Hill, Austin Bradford (1965). "The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation?". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine. 58 (5): 295–300. PMC 1898525 . PMID 14283879. 
^ Phillips, Carl V.; Karen J. Goodman (October 2004). "The missed lessons of Sir Austin Bradford Hill". Epidemiologic Perspectives and Innovations. 1 (3): 3. doi:10.1186/1742-5573-1-3. PMC 524370 . PMID 15507128. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008. 
^ Green, Michael D.; D. Michal Freedman, and Leon Gordis. Reference Guide on Epidemiology (PDF). Federal Judicial Centre. Retrieved 3 February 2008. 
^ Neil Myburgh; Debra Jackson. "Measuring Health and Disease I: Introduction to Epidemiology". Archived from the original on 1 August 2011. Retrieved 16 December 2011. 
^ Smetanin, P.; P. Kobak (October 2005). Interdisciplinary Cancer Risk Management: Canadian Life and Economic Impacts. 1st International Cancer Control Congress (PDF). 
^ Smetanin, P.; P. Kobak (July 2006). A Population-Based Risk Management Framework for Cancer Control. The International Union Against Cancer Conference. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2014. 
^ Smetanin, P.; P. Kobak (July 2005). Selected Canadian Life and Economic Forecast Impacts of Lung Cancer. 11th World Conference on Lung Cancer. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2014. 
^ a b Ioannidis, J. P. A.; Tarone, R.; McLaughlin, J. K. (2011). "The False-positive to False-negative Ratio in Epidemiologic Studies". Epidemiology. 22 (4): 450–456. doi:10.1097/EDE.0b013e31821b506e. PMID 21490505. 
^ a b Hernán, M. A.; Hernández-Díaz, S.; Robins, J. M. (2004). "A structural approach to selection bias". Epidemiology. 15 (5): 615–625. doi:10.1097/01.ede.0000135174.63482.43. PMID 15308962. 
^ a b [1] 24
^ a b Rothman, K. (2002). Epidemiology: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195135547. 
^ a b c Greenland S, Morgenstern H (2001). "Confounding in Health Research". Annu. Rev. Publ. Health. 22: 189–212. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.22.1.189. 
^ "Public Health Studies". Public Health Studies at Johns Hopkins. Retrieved 13 April 2017. 


Bibliography[edit]


Clayton, David and Michael Hills (1993) Statistical Models in Epidemiology Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852221-5
Miquel Porta, editor (2014) "A dictionary of epidemiology", 6th edn, New York: Oxford University Press. [2]
Morabia, Alfredo, editor. (2004) A History of Epidemiologic Methods and Concepts. Basel, Birkhauser Verlag. Part I. [3] [4]
Smetanin P, Kobak P, Moyer C, Maley O (2005). "The Risk Management of Tobacco Control Research Policy Programs" The World Conference on Tobacco OR Health Conference, 12–15 July 2006 in Washington DC.
Szklo M, Nieto FJ (2002). "Epidemiology: beyond the basics", Aspen Publishers.
Robertson LS (2015). Injury Epidemiology: Fourth Edition. Free online at www.nanlee.net
Rothman K, Sander Greenland, Lash T, editors (2008). "Modern Epidemiology", 3rd Edition, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 0-7817-5564-6, ISBN 978-0-7817-5564-1
Olsen J, Christensen K, Murray J, Ekbom A. An Introduction to Epidemiology for Health Professionals. New York: Springer Science+Business Media; 2010. ISBN 978-1-4419-1497-2


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Epidemiology.





Look up epidemiology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.




Library resources about
epidemiology





Resources in your library






The Health Protection Agency
The Collection of Biostatistics Research Archive
European Epidemiological Federation
'Epidemiology for the Uninitiated' by D. Coggon, G. Rose, D.J.P. Barker, British Medical Journal
Epidem.com – Epidemiology (peer reviewed scientific journal that publishes original research on epidemiologic topics)
'Epidemiology' – In: Philip S. Brachman, Medical Microbiology (fourth edition), US National Center for Biotechnology Information
Monash Virtual Laboratory – Simulations of epidemic spread across a landscape
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters – A WHO collaborating centre
People's Epidemiology Library








v
t
e


Clinical research and experimental design



Overview



Clinical trial

Trial protocols
Adaptive clinical trial


Academic clinical trials
Clinical study design





Controlled study
(EBM I to II-1; A to B)



Randomized controlled trial

Scientific experiment
Blind experiment
Open-label trial







Observational study
(EBM II-2 to II-3; B to C)



Cross-sectional study vs. Longitudinal study, Ecological study
Cohort study

Retrospective
Prospective


Case-control study (Nested case-control study)
Case series
Case study
Case report





Epidemiology/
methods



occurrence: Incidence (Cumulative incidence)
Prevalence

Point
Period




association: absolute (Absolute risk reduction, Attributable risk, Attributable risk percent)
relative (Relative risk, Odds ratio, Hazard ratio)


other: Clinical endpoint
Virulence
Infectivity
Mortality rate
Morbidity
Case fatality rate
Specificity and sensitivity
Likelihood-ratios
Pre/post-test probability





Trial/test types



In vitro
In vivo
Animal testing
Animal testing on non-human primates
First-in-man study
Multicenter trial
Seeding trial
Vaccine trial





Analysis of clinical trials



Risk–benefit ratio
Systematic review
Replication
Meta-analysis
Intention-to-treat analysis





Interpretation of results



Selection bias
Survivorship bias
Correlation does not imply causation
Null result








Category
Glossary
List of topics












v
t
e


Public health



General



Auxology
Biological hazard
Chief Medical Officer
Cultural competence
Deviance
Environmental health
Euthenics
Genomics
Globalization and disease
Health economics
Health literacy
Health policy

Health system
Health care reform
Public health law


Maternal health
Medical anthropology
Medical sociology
Mental health
Pharmaceutical policy
Public health laboratory
Reproductive health
Social psychology
Sociology of health and illness





Preventive healthcare



Behavior change

Theories


Family planning
Health promotion
Human nutrition
Preventive nutrition
Hygiene

Food safety
Hand washing
Infection control
Oral hygiene


Occupational safety and health

Human factors and ergonomics
Hygiene
Injury prevention
Medicine
Nursing


Patient safety

Organization


Pharmacovigilance
Safe sex
Sanitation

Emergency
Fecal–oral transmission
Open defecation
Sanitary sewer
Waterborne diseases


Smoking cessation
Vaccination
Vector control





Population health



Biostatistics
Child mortality
Community health
Epidemiology
Global health
Health impact assessment
Health system
Infant mortality
Open-source healthcare software
Public health informatics
Social determinants of health

Health equity
Race and health


Social medicine





Biological and
epidemiological statistics



Case-control study
Randomized controlled trial
Relative risk
Statistical hypothesis testing

Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Regression analysis
ROC curve
Student's t-test
Z-test


Statistical software





Infectious and epidemic
disease prevention



Asymptomatic carrier
Epidemics

List


Notifiable diseases

List


Public health surveillance

Disease surveillance


Quarantine
Sexually transmitted infection
Tropical disease
Vaccine trial





Food hygiene and
safety management



Food

Additive
Chemistry
Engineering
Microbiology
Processing
Safety
Safety scandals


Genetically modified food
Good agricultural practice
Good manufacturing practice

HACCP
ISO 22000







Health behavioral
sciences



Diffusion of innovations
Health belief model
Health communication
Health psychology
Positive deviance
PRECEDE-PROCEED model
Social cognitive theory
Social norms approach
Theory of planned behavior
Transtheoretical model





Organizations,
education
and history




Organizations



Europe

Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety


India

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare


U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
City and county health departments
Council on Education for Public Health
Public Health Service


World Health Organization
World Toilet Organization





Education



Health education
Higher education

Bachelor of Science in Public Health
Doctor of Public Health
Professional degrees of public health
Schools of public health







History



Sara Josephine Baker
Samuel Jay Crumbine
Carl Rogers Darnall
Joseph Lister
Margaret Sanger
John Snow
Typhoid Mary
Germ theory of disease
Social hygiene movement











 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Branches of life science and biology






Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biohistory
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biostatistics
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Cytogenetics
Developmental biology
Ecology
Embryology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Freshwater biology
Geobiology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Neontology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Origin of life
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Phylogenetics
Physiology
Quantum biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Taxonomy
Teratology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Zoology












v
t
e


Statistics






Outline
Index










Descriptive statistics







Continuous data




Center



Mean

arithmetic
geometric
harmonic


Median
Mode





Dispersion



Variance
Standard deviation
Coefficient of variation
Percentile
Range
Interquartile range





Shape



Central limit theorem
Moments

Skewness
Kurtosis
L-moments










Count data



Index of dispersion





Summary tables



Grouped data
Frequency distribution
Contingency table





Dependence



Pearson product-moment correlation
Rank correlation

Spearman's rho
Kendall's tau


Partial correlation
Scatter plot





Graphics



Bar chart
Biplot
Box plot
Control chart
Correlogram
Fan chart
Forest plot
Histogram
Pie chart
Q–Q plot
Run chart
Scatter plot
Stem-and-leaf display
Radar chart
















Data collection







Study design



Population
Statistic
Effect size
Statistical power
Sample size determination
Missing data





Survey methodology



Sampling

stratified
cluster


Standard error
Opinion poll
Questionnaire





Controlled experiments



Design

control
optimal


Controlled trial
Randomized
Random assignment
Replication
Blocking
Interaction
Factorial experiment





Uncontrolled studies



Observational study
Natural experiment
Quasi-experiment
















Statistical inference







Statistical theory



Population
Statistic
Probability distribution
Sampling distribution

Order statistic


Empirical distribution

Density estimation


Statistical model

Lp space


Parameter

location
scale
shape


Parametric family

Likelihood (monotone)
Location–scale family
Exponential family


Completeness
Sufficiency
Statistical functional

Bootstrap
U
V


Optimal decision

loss function


Efficiency
Statistical distance

divergence


Asymptotics
Robustness





Frequentist inference




Point estimation



Estimating equations

Maximum likelihood
Method of moments
M-estimator
Minimum distance


Unbiased estimators

Mean-unbiased minimum-variance

Rao–Blackwellization
Lehmann–Scheffé theorem


Median unbiased


Plug-in





Interval estimation



Confidence interval
Pivot
Likelihood interval
Prediction interval
Tolerance interval
Resampling

Bootstrap
Jackknife







Testing hypotheses



1- & 2-tails
Power

Uniformly most powerful test


Permutation test

Randomization test


Multiple comparisons





Parametric tests



Likelihood-ratio
Wald
Score








Specific tests







Z (normal)
Student's t-test
F





Goodness of fit



Chi-squared
Kolmogorov–Smirnov
Anderson–Darling
Lilliefors
Jarque–Bera
Normality (Shapiro–Wilk)
Likelihood-ratio test
Model selection

Cross validation
AIC
BIC







Rank statistics



Sign

Sample median


Signed rank (Wilcoxon)

Hodges–Lehmann estimator


Rank sum (Mann–Whitney)
Nonparametric anova

1-way (Kruskal–Wallis)
2-way (Friedman)
Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra)










Bayesian inference



Bayesian probability

prior
posterior


Credible interval
Bayes factor
Bayesian estimator

Maximum posterior estimator





















Correlation
Regression analysis










Correlation



Pearson product-moment
Partial correlation
Confounding variable
Coefficient of determination





Regression analysis



Errors and residuals
Regression model validation
Mixed effects models
Simultaneous equations models
Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS)





Linear regression



Simple linear regression
Ordinary least squares
General linear model
Bayesian regression





Non-standard predictors



Nonlinear regression
Nonparametric
Semiparametric
Isotonic
Robust
Heteroscedasticity
Homoscedasticity





Generalized linear model



Exponential families
Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions





Partition of variance



Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova)
Analysis of covariance
Multivariate ANOVA
Degrees of freedom
















Categorical / Multivariate / Time-series / Survival analysis







Categorical



Cohen's kappa
Contingency table
Graphical model
Log-linear model
McNemar's test





Multivariate



Regression
Manova
Principal components
Canonical correlation
Discriminant analysis
Cluster analysis
Classification
Structural equation model

Factor analysis


Multivariate distributions

Elliptical distributions

Normal









Time-series




General



Decomposition
Trend
Stationarity
Seasonal adjustment
Exponential smoothing
Cointegration
Structural break
Granger causality





Specific tests



Dickey–Fuller
Johansen
Q-statistic (Ljung–Box)
Durbin–Watson
Breusch–Godfrey





Time domain



Autocorrelation (ACF)

partial (PACF)


Cross-correlation (XCF)
ARMA model
ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins)
Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH)
Vector autoregression (VAR)





Frequency domain



Spectral density estimation
Fourier analysis
Wavelet








Survival




Survival function



Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit)
Proportional hazards models
Accelerated failure time (AFT) model
First hitting time





Hazard function



Nelson–Aalen estimator





Test



Log-rank test



















Applications







Biostatistics



Bioinformatics
Clinical trials / studies
Epidemiology
Medical statistics





Engineering statistics



Chemometrics
Methods engineering
Probabilistic design
Process / quality control
Reliability
System identification





Social statistics



Actuarial science
Census
Crime statistics
Demography
Econometrics
National accounts
Official statistics
Population statistics
Psychometrics





Spatial statistics



Cartography
Environmental statistics
Geographic information system
Geostatistics
Kriging














Category
Portal
Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Topics in epidemiology



Branches of epidemiology




by physiology/disease:



Cardiovascular disease epidemiology
Cancer epidemiology
Cognitive epidemiology
Dental/Oral epidemiology
Epidemiology of aging
Infectious disease epidemiology
Injury epidemiology
Intestinal epidemiology
Neuroepidemiology
Obesity/diabetes epidemiology
Occupational injury & illness epidemiology
Pediatric epidemiology
Psychiatric epidemiology
Quantitative parasitology
Renal epidemiology
Reproductive epidemiology
Respiratory epidemiology
Veterinary epidemiology
Epidemiology of zoonoses





by methodological approach:



Biomarker epidemiology
Biostatistics
Disease informatics
E-epidemiology
Environmental epidemiology
Economic epidemiology
Clinical epidemiology
Computational epidemiology
Conflict epidemiology
Genetic epidemiology
Life course approach
Meta-analysis
Molecular epidemiology
Molecular pathological epidemiology
Nutritional epidemiology
Paleoepidemiology
Pharmacoepidemiology
Primary care epidemiology
Public Health practice epidemiology
Social epidemiology
Spatial epidemiology
Tele-epidemiology
Surveillance epidemiology (Clinical surveillance)








Global epidemiology of:



Asthma
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Autism
Bed bugs
Binge drinking
Cancer

breast


Depression
Diabetes mellitus
Domestic violence
Hepatitis C
Herpes
HIV/AIDS
Leprosy
Malnutrition
Mental disorders

child


Motor vehicle collisions
Obesity

childhood


Periodontal diseases
Pneumonia
Representations
Schizophrenia
Snakebites
Suicide
Syphilis
Teenage pregnancy
Tuberculosis





Epidemiology journals




General



American Journal of Epidemiology
Canadian Journal of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Global Epidemiological News
Epidemiologic Reviews
Epidemiology
International Journal of Epidemiology
Annals of Epidemiology
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
European Journal of Epidemiology
Emerging Themes in Epidemiology
Epidemiologic Perspectives and Innovations
Eurosurveillance





Speciality



Cancer Causes & Control
Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers and Prevention
Epidemiology and Infection
Genetic Epidemiology
Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
Paediatric Perinatal Epidemiology
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety
Preventive Medicine












Authority control



GND: 4015016-1
NDL: 00561888











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epidemiology&oldid=818307388"					Categories: EpidemiologyDemographyEnvironmental social sciencePublic healthHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2011Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: editors listUse dmy dates from January 2017All articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from December 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2015Pages using div col with small parameterWikipedia articles with GND identifiers