

Eric Clapton
CBE



Clapton performing in Madison Square Garden, May 2015



Background information


Birth name
Eric Patrick Clapton


Also known as
Slowhand


Born
(1945-03-30) 30 March 1945 (age 72)
Ripley, Surrey, England


Genres



Rock
blues





Occupation(s)



Guitarist
singer
songwriter
record producer





Instruments



Guitar
vocals





Years active
1962–present


Labels



Surfdog
Warner Bros.
Reprise
Duck
Polydor
RSO
Atco
Apple





Associated acts



The Yardbirds
John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers
Cream
Plastic Ono Band
George Harrison
Blind Faith
Delaney & Bonnie and Friends
Derek and the Dominos
J. J. Cale
B.B. King





Website
www.ericclapton.com


Eric Patrick Clapton, CBE (born 30 March 1945), is an English rock and blues guitarist, singer, and songwriter. He is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and Cream. Clapton has been referred to as one of the most important and influential guitarists of all time.[1] Clapton ranked second in Rolling Stone magazine's list of the "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time"[2] and fourth in Gibson's "Top 50 Guitarists of All Time".[3] He was also named number five in Time magazine's list of "The 10 Best Electric Guitar Players" in 2009.[4]
In the mid-1960s Clapton left the Yardbirds to play with John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers. Immediately after leaving Mayall, Clapton formed the power trio Cream with drummer Ginger Baker and bassist Jack Bruce, in which Clapton played sustained blues improvisations and "arty, blues-based psychedelic pop".[5] After Cream broke up, he formed blues rock band Blind Faith with Baker, Steve Winwood, and Ric Grech. Clapton's solo career began in the 1970s, where his work bore the influence of the mellow style of J. J. Cale and the reggae of Bob Marley. His version of Marley's "I Shot the Sheriff" helped reggae reach a mass market.[6] Two of his most popular recordings were "Layla", recorded with Derek and the Dominos; and Robert Johnson's "Crossroads", recorded with Cream. Following the death of his son Conor in 1991, Clapton's grief was expressed in the song "Tears in Heaven", which was featured on his Unplugged album.
Clapton has been the recipient of 18 Grammy Awards, and the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 2004 he was awarded a CBE at Buckingham Palace for services to music.[7][8][9] He has received four Ivor Novello Awards from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors, including the Lifetime Achievement Award. In his solo career, Clapton has sold more than 130 million records worldwide.[10] In 1998, Clapton, a recovering alcoholic and drug addict, founded the Crossroads Centre on Antigua, a medical facility for recovering substance abusers.[11]



Contents


1 Early life
2 Career

2.1 Early career, breakthrough, and international success

2.1.1 The Yardbirds and the Bluesbreakers
2.1.2 Cream
2.1.3 Blind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends


2.2 "Layla" and solo career

2.2.1 Derek and the Dominos
2.2.2 Personal challenges and early solo success


2.3 Continued success
2.4 Tragedy, healing and resurgence
2.5 Collaboration albums
2.6 Clapton, Old Sock and I Still Do


3 Influences
4 Legacy
5 Guitars
6 Other media appearances
7 Personal life

7.1 Relationships and children
7.2 Political views
7.3 Controversy over remarks on immigration
7.4 Wealth and assets
7.5 Car collection
7.6 Charitable work
7.7 Football


8 Awards and honours
9 Clapton's music in film and TV
10 Discography

10.1 Solo studio albums
10.2 Collaborations


11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



Early life
Clapton was born on 30 March 1945 in Ripley, Surrey, England, to 16-year-old Patricia Molly Clapton (7 January 1929 – March 1999) and Edward Walter Fryer (21 March 1920 – 15 May 1985), a 25-year-old soldier from Montreal, Quebec.[12] Fryer shipped off to war prior to Clapton's birth and then returned to Canada. Clapton grew up believing that his grandmother, Rose, and her second husband, Jack Clapp, Patricia's stepfather, were his parents, and that his mother was actually his older sister. The similarity in surnames gave rise to the erroneous belief that Clapton's real surname is Clapp (Reginald Cecil Clapton was the name of Rose's first husband, Eric Clapton's maternal grandfather).[13] Years later, his mother married another Canadian soldier and moved to Germany,[14] leaving young Eric with his grandparents in Surrey.[15]
Clapton received an acoustic Hoyer guitar, made in Germany, for his thirteenth birthday, but the inexpensive steel-stringed instrument was difficult to play and he briefly lost interest.[15] Two years later Clapton picked it up again and started playing consistently.[15] Clapton was influenced by the blues from an early age, and practised long hours to learn the chords of blues music by playing along to the records.[16] He preserved his practice sessions using his portable Grundig reel-to-reel tape recorder, listening to them over and over until he felt he'd got it right.[16][17]
In 1961, after leaving Hollyfield School in Surbiton, Clapton studied at the Kingston College of Art but was dismissed at the end of the academic year because his focus remained on music rather than art. His guitar playing was so advanced that, by the age of 16, he was getting noticed.[17] Around this time, Clapton began busking around Kingston, Richmond, and the West End.[18] In 1962, Clapton started performing as a duo with fellow blues enthusiast David Brock in pubs around Surrey.[17] When he was seventeen years old, Clapton joined his first band, an early British R&B group, the Roosters, whose other guitarist was Tom McGuinness. He stayed with this band from January until August 1963.[11] In October of that year, Clapton did a seven-gig stint with Casey Jones & the Engineers.[11]
Career
Early career, breakthrough, and international success
The Yardbirds and the Bluesbreakers
Main articles: The Yardbirds and John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers
In October 1963, Clapton joined the Yardbirds, a blues-influenced rock and roll band, and stayed with them until March 1965. Synthesising influences from Chicago blues and leading blues guitarists such as Buddy Guy, Freddie King, and B. B. King, Clapton forged a distinctive style and rapidly became one of the most talked-about guitarists in the British music scene.[19] The band initially played Chess/Checker/Vee-Jay blues numbers and began to attract a large cult following when they took over the Rolling Stones' residency at the Crawdaddy Club in Richmond. They toured England with American bluesman Sonny Boy Williamson II; a joint LP album, recorded in December 1963, was issued in 1965.




Appearing at the Royal Albert Hall in London for the first time in 1964, Clapton has since performed at the venue over 200 times.[20]


Yardbirds' rhythm guitarist, Chris Dreja, recalled that whenever Clapton broke a guitar string during a concert, he would stay on stage and replace it. The English audiences would wait out the delay by doing what is called a "slow handclap". Clapton's nickname of 'Slowhand' came from Giorgio Gomelsky, a pun on the slow handclapping that ensued when Clapton stopped playing while he replaced a string.[21] In December 1964, Clapton made his first appearance at the Royal Albert Hall, London, with the Yardbirds.[20] Since then, Clapton has performed at the Hall over 200 times, and has stated that performing at the venue is like "playing in my front room".[22][23]
In March 1965, Clapton and the Yardbirds had their first major hit, "For Your Love", written by songwriter Graham Gouldman, who also wrote hit songs for Herman's Hermits and the Hollies (and would later achieve success of his own as a member of 10cc). In part because of its success, the Yardbirds elected to move toward a pop-oriented sound, much to the annoyance of Clapton, who was devoted to the blues and not commercial success. He left the Yardbirds on the day that "For Your Love" went public, a move that left the band without its lead guitarist and most accomplished member. Clapton suggested fellow guitarist Jimmy Page to be his replacement, but Page declined out of loyalty to Clapton,[24] putting Jeff Beck forward.[19] Beck and Page played together in the Yardbirds for a while, but Beck, Page, and Clapton were never in the group together. They first appeared together on the 12-date benefit tour for Action for Research into multiple sclerosis in 1983 with the first date taking place on 23 September at the Royal Albert Hall.[25]
Clapton joined John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers in April 1965, only to quit a few months later. In June, Clapton was invited to jam with Jimmy Page, recording a number of tracks that would be retroactively credited to The Immediate All-Stars. In the summer of 1965 he left for Greece with a band called the Glands, which included his old friend Ben Palmer on piano. In November 1965 he rejoined John Mayall. In March 1966, while still a member of the Bluesbreakers, Clapton briefly collaborated on a side project with Jack Bruce and Steve Winwood among others, recording only a few of tracks under the name Eric Clapton and the Powerhouse. During his second Bluesbreakers stint, Clapton gained a reputation as the best blues guitarist on the club circuit. Although Clapton gained world fame for his playing on the influential album, Blues Breakers – John Mayall – With Eric Clapton, this album was not released until he had left the band for the last time in July 1966.
Having swapped his Fender Telecaster and Vox AC30 amplifier for a 1960 Gibson Les Paul Standard guitar and Marshall amplifier, Clapton's sound and playing inspired the famous slogan "Clapton is God", spray-painted by an unknown admirer on a wall in Islington in 1967.[26] The graffiti was captured in a now-famous photograph, in which a dog is urinating on the wall. Clapton is reported to have been embarrassed by the slogan, saying in his The South Bank Show profile in 1987, "I never accepted that I was the greatest guitar player in the world. I always wanted to be the greatest guitar player in the world, but that's an ideal, and I accept it as an ideal".[27]
Cream
Main article: Cream (band)
Clapton left the Bluesbreakers in July 1966 (replaced by Peter Green) and was invited by drummer Ginger Baker to play in his newly formed band Cream, one of the earliest supergroups, with Jack Bruce on bass (previously of the Bluesbreakers, the Graham Bond Organisation and Manfred Mann).[28] Before the formation of Cream, Clapton was not well known in the United States; he left the Yardbirds before "For Your Love" hit the U.S. Top Ten, and had yet to perform there.[29] During his time with Cream, Clapton began to develop as a singer, songwriter, and guitarist, though Bruce took most of the lead vocals and wrote the majority of the material with lyricist Pete Brown.[19] Cream's first gig was an unofficial performance at the Twisted Wheel Club in Manchester on 29 July 1966 before their full debut two nights later at the National Jazz and Blues Festival in Windsor. Cream established its enduring legend with the high-volume blues jamming and extended solos of their live shows.




Clapton (right) with Cream


By early 1967, fans of the emerging blues-rock sound in Britain had begun to portray Clapton as Britain's top guitarist; however, he found himself rivalled by the emergence of Jimi Hendrix, an acid rock-infused guitarist who used wailing feedback and effects pedals to create new sounds for the instrument.[30] Hendrix attended a performance of the newly formed Cream at the Central London Polytechnic on 1 October 1966, during which he sat in on a double-timed version of "Killing Floor".[30] Top UK stars, including Clapton, Pete Townshend, members of the Rolling Stones, and the Beatles, avidly attended Hendrix's early club performances. Hendrix's arrival had an immediate and major effect on the next phase of Clapton's career.[31]
Clapton first visited the United States while touring with Cream. In March 1967, Cream performed a nine-show stand at the RKO Theater in New York. They recorded Disraeli Gears in New York from 11–15 May 1967. Cream's repertoire varied from hard rock ("I Feel Free") to lengthy blues-based instrumental jams ("Spoonful"). Disraeli Gears featured Clapton's searing guitar lines, Bruce's soaring vocals and prominent, fluid bass playing, and Baker's powerful, polyrhythmic jazz-influenced drumming. Together, Cream's talents secured them as an influential power trio.




Clapton's The Fool guitar (replica shown), with its bright artwork and famous "woman tone", was symbolic of the 1960s psychedelic rock era.


In 28 months, Cream had become a commercial success, selling millions of records and playing throughout the U.S. and Europe. They redefined the instrumentalist's role in rock and were one of the first blues-rock bands to emphasise musical virtuosity and lengthy jazz-style improvisation sessions. Their US hit singles include "Sunshine of Your Love" (#5, 1968), "White Room" (#6, 1968) and "Crossroads" (#28, 1969) – a live version of Robert Johnson's "Cross Road Blues". Though Cream was hailed as one of the greatest groups of its day, and the adulation of Clapton as a guitar legend reached new heights, the supergroup was short-lived. Drug and alcohol use escalated tension between the three members, and conflicts between Bruce and Baker eventually led to Cream's demise. A strongly critical Rolling Stone review of a concert of the group's second headlining U.S. tour was another significant factor in the trio's demise, and it affected Clapton profoundly.[32]
Cream's farewell album, Goodbye, featuring live performances recorded at The Forum, Los Angeles, 19 October 1968, was released shortly after Cream disbanded; it also featured the studio single "Badge", co-written by Clapton and George Harrison. Clapton met Harrison and became close friends with him after the Beatles shared a bill with the Clapton-era Yardbirds at the London Palladium. Clapton played the lead guitar solo on Harrison's "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" from the Beatles' White Album (1968). Harrison's debut solo album, Wonderwall Music, in 1968, became the first of many Harrison solo records to include Clapton on guitar. Clapton would go largely uncredited for his contributions to Harrison's albums due to contractual restraints, and Harrison was credited as "L'Angelo Misterioso" for his contributions to the song "Badge" on Goodbye. The pair would often play live together as each other's guest. A year after Harrison's death in 2001, Clapton was musical director for the Concert for George.[33]
In January 1969, when the Beatles were recording/filming what became Let It Be, tensions became so acute that Harrison quit the group for several days, prompting the others to consider replacing him with Clapton, an idea that particularly appealed to John Lennon.[34] Michael Lindsay-Hogg, television director of the recording sessions for Let It Be, states, "I was there when John mentioned Clapton—but that wasn't going to happen. Would Eric have become a Beatle? No. Paul didn't want to go there. He didn't want them to break up. Then George came back."[35] Clapton was on good terms with all four of the Beatles; in December 1968 he had played with Lennon at The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus as part of the one-off group the Dirty Mac.[36]
Cream briefly reunited in 1993 to perform at the ceremony inducting them into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; a full reunion took place in May 2005, with Clapton, Bruce, and Baker playing four sold-out concerts at London's Royal Albert Hall,[37] and three shows at New York's Madison Square Garden that October.[38] Recordings from the London shows, Royal Albert Hall London May 2-3-5-6, 2005, were released on CD, LP, and DVD in September/December 2005.[39]
Blind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends
Main articles: Blind Faith and Delaney and Bonnie and Friends




Blind Faith in 1969, with Clapton standing far right


Clapton's next group, Blind Faith (1969), was composed of Cream drummer Ginger Baker, Steve Winwood of Traffic, and Ric Grech of Family, and yielded one LP and one arena-circuit tour. The supergroup debuted before 100,000 fans in London's Hyde Park on 7 June 1969. They performed several dates in Scandinavia and began a sold-out American tour in July before their only album was released. The LP Blind Faith consisted of just six songs, one of them the hit "Can't Find My Way Home". The album's jacket image of a topless pubescent girl was deemed controversial in the United States and was replaced by a photograph of the band. Blind Faith dissolved after less than seven months.
Clapton subsequently toured as a sideman for an act that had opened for Blind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends. He also played two dates as a member of the Plastic Ono Band that autumn, including a recorded performance at the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival in September 1969 released as the album Live Peace in Toronto 1969.[40] On 30 September 1969, Clapton played lead guitar on Lennon's second solo single, "Cold Turkey".[41] On 15 December 1969 Clapton performed with Lennon, George Harrison, and others as the Plastic Ono Band at a fundraiser for UNICEF in London.[40]
Delaney Bramlett encouraged Clapton in his singing and writing. During the summer of 1969, Clapton and Bramlett contributed to the Music From Free Creek "supersession" project. Clapton, appearing as "King Cool" for contractual reasons, played with Dr. John on three songs, joined by Bramlett on two tracks. Using the Bramletts' backing group and an all-star cast of session players (including Leon Russell and Stephen Stills), Clapton recorded his first solo album during two brief tour hiatuses, titled Eric Clapton. Delaney Bramlett co-wrote six of the songs with Clapton, also producing the LP,[42] and Bonnie Bramlett co-wrote "Let It Rain".[43] The album yielded the unexpected US No. 18 hit, J. J. Cale's "After Midnight". Clapton also worked with much of Delaney and Bonnie's band to record George Harrison's All Things Must Pass in spring 1970. During this busy period, Clapton recorded with other artists including Dr. John, Leon Russell, Plastic Ono Band, Billy Preston, Ringo Starr and Dave Mason. Other notable recordings from this period include Clapton's guitar work on "Go Back Home" from Stephen Stills' self-titled first solo album.[44]
"Layla" and solo career
Derek and the Dominos
Main article: Derek and the Dominos
With the intention of counteracting the "star" cult faction that had begun to form around him, Clapton assembled a new band composed of Delaney and Bonnie's former rhythm section, Bobby Whitlock as keyboardist and vocalist, Carl Radle as the bassist, and drummer Jim Gordon, with Clapton playing guitar. It was his intention to show that he need not fill a starring role, and functioned well as a member of an ensemble.[45] During this period, Clapton was increasingly influenced by The Band and their album Music from Big Pink, saying, "What I appreciated about the Band was that they were more concerned with songs and singing. They would have three- and four-part harmonies, and the guitar was put back into perspective as being accompaniment. That suited me well, because I had gotten so tired of the virtuosity—or pseudo-virtuosity—thing of long, boring guitar solos just because they were expected. The Band brought things back into perspective. The priority was the song."[46]




Clapton (right) with Derek and the Dominos


The band was originally called "Eric Clapton and Friends". The name "Derek and the Dominos" was a fluke that occurred when the band's provisional name of "Del and the Dynamos" was misread as Derek and the Dominos.[47] Clapton's biography states that Tony Ashton of Ashton, Gardner and Dyke told Clapton to call the band "Del and the Dominos", since "Del" was his nickname for Eric Clapton. Del and Eric were combined and the final name became "Derek and the Dominos".[48]
Clapton's close friendship with George Harrison brought him into contact with Harrison's wife, Pattie Boyd, with whom he became deeply infatuated. When she spurned his advances, Clapton's unrequited affections prompted most of the material for the Dominos' album, Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs (1970). Heavily blues-influenced, the album features the twin lead guitars of Clapton and Duane Allman, with Allman's slide guitar as a key ingredient of the sound. Working at Criteria Studios in Miami with Atlantic Records producer Tom Dowd, who had worked with Clapton on Cream's Disraeli Gears, the band recorded a double album.
The album features the hit love song "Layla", inspired by the classical poet of Persian literature, Nizami Ganjavi's The Story of Layla and Majnun, a copy of which Ian Dallas had given to Clapton. The book moved Clapton profoundly, as it was the tale of a young man who fell hopelessly in love with a beautiful, unavailable woman and who went crazy because he could not marry her.[49][50] The two parts of "Layla" were recorded in separate sessions: the opening guitar section was recorded first, and for the second section, laid down a few weeks later, drummer Jim Gordon played the piano part for the melody which he claimed to have written (though Bobby Whitlock stated that Rita Coolidge wrote it).[48]
The Layla LP was actually recorded by a five-piece version of the group, thanks to the unforeseen inclusion of guitarist Duane Allman of the Allman Brothers Band. A few days into the Layla sessions, Dowd—who was also producing the Allmans—invited Clapton to an Allman Brothers outdoor concert in Miami. The two guitarists met first on stage, then played all night in the studio, and became friends. Duane first added his slide guitar to "Tell the Truth" and "Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out". In four days, the five-piece Dominos recorded "Key to the Highway", "Have You Ever Loved a Woman" (a blues standard popularised by Freddie King and others), and "Why Does Love Got to be So Sad". In September, Duane briefly left the sessions for gigs with his own band, and the four-piece Dominos recorded "I Looked Away", "Bell Bottom Blues", and "Keep on Growing". Duane returned to record "I am Yours", "Anyday", and "It's Too Late". On 9 September, they recorded Hendrix's "Little Wing" and the title track. The following day, the final track, "It's Too Late", was recorded.[51]




Eric Clapton in Barcelona, 1974


Tragedy dogged the group throughout its brief career. During the sessions, Clapton was devastated by news of the death of Jimi Hendrix; eight days previously the band had cut a cover of "Little Wing" as a tribute to Hendrix. On 17 September 1970, one day before Hendrix's death, Clapton had purchased a left-handed Fender Stratocaster that he had planned to give to Hendrix as a birthday gift. Adding to Clapton's woes, the Layla album received only lukewarm reviews upon release. The shaken group undertook a US tour without Allman, who had returned to the Allman Brothers Band. Despite Clapton's later admission that the tour took place amidst a veritable blizzard of drugs and alcohol, it resulted in the live double album In Concert.[52]
A second record was in the works when a clashing of egos took place and Clapton walked, thus disbanding the group. Allman was killed in a motorcycle accident on 29 October 1971. Clapton wrote later in his autobiography that he and Allman were inseparable during the sessions in Florida; he talked about Allman as the "musical brother I'd never had but wished I did".[53] Although Radle would remain Clapton's bass player until the summer of 1979 (Radle died in May 1980 from the effects of alcohol and narcotics), it would be 2003 before Clapton and Whitlock appeared together again (Clapton guested on Whitlock's appearance on the Later with Jools Holland show). Another tragic footnote to the Dominos story was the fate of drummer Jim Gordon, who was an undiagnosed schizophrenic and years later murdered his mother during a psychotic episode. Gordon was confined to 16-years-to-life imprisonment, later being moved to a mental institution, where he remains today.[19]
Personal challenges and early solo success
Clapton's career successes in the 1970s were in stark contrast with the struggles he coped with in his personal life, which was troubled by romantic longings and drug and alcohol addiction.[54] He became infatuated with Pattie Boyd, who at the time was married to close friend George Harrison, and withdrew from recording and touring to isolation in his Surrey residence as the band broke up. There he nursed a heroin addiction, which resulted in a lengthy career hiatus interrupted only by the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 (where he passed out on stage, was revived, and managed to finish his performance).[19] In January 1973, the Who's Pete Townshend organised a comeback concert for Clapton at London's Rainbow Theatre, aptly titled the "Rainbow Concert", to help Clapton kick his addiction. Clapton would return the favour by playing 'The Preacher' in Ken Russell's film version of the Who's Tommy in 1975; his appearance in the film (performing "Eyesight to the Blind") is notable as he is clearly wearing a fake beard in some shots, the result of deciding to shave off his real beard after the initial takes in an attempt to force the director to remove his earlier scene from the movie and leave the set.[48]




Yvonne Elliman with Clapton promoting 461 Ocean Boulevard in 1974


In 1974, Clapton started living with Pattie Boyd (they would not marry until 1979) and was no longer using heroin (although he gradually began to drink heavily). He assembled a low-key touring band that included Radle, Miami guitarist George Terry, keyboardist Dick Sims (who died in 2011[55]), drummer Jamie Oldaker, and vocalists Yvonne Elliman and Marcy Levy (also known as Marcella Detroit). With this band Clapton recorded 461 Ocean Boulevard (1974), an album with an emphasis on more compact songs and fewer guitar solos; the cover version of "I Shot the Sheriff" was Clapton's first number one hit and was important in bringing reggae and the music of Bob Marley to a wider audience. The 1975 album There's One in Every Crowd continued this trend. The album's original title, The World's Greatest Guitar Player (There's One in Every Crowd), was changed before pressing, as it was felt its ironic intention would be misunderstood. The band toured the world and subsequently released the 1975 live LP, E.C. Was Here.[56] Clapton continued to release albums and toured regularly. Highlights of the period include No Reason to Cry (a collaboration with Bob Dylan and The Band); Slowhand, which featured "Wonderful Tonight" and a second J. J. Cale cover, "Cocaine". In 1976 he performed as one of a string of notable guests at the farewell performance of The Band, filmed in a Martin Scorsese documentary called The Last Waltz.[57]
Continued success




A seven-times Platinum RIAA certification for the album Timepieces: The Best of Eric Clapton (1982)


In 1981 Clapton was invited by producer Martin Lewis to appear at the Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman's Other Ball in London. Clapton accepted the invitation and teamed up with Jeff Beck to perform a series of duets—reportedly their first ever billed stage collaboration. Three of the performances were released on the album of the show, and one of the songs was featured in the film. The performances at London's Drury Lane theatre heralded a return to form and prominence for Clapton in the new decade. Many factors had influenced Clapton's comeback, including his "deepening commitment to Christianity", to which he had converted prior to his heroin addiction.[58][59][60]
After calling his manager and admitting he was an alcoholic, Clapton flew to Minneapolis–Saint Paul in January 1982 and checked in at Hazelden Treatment Center, located in Center City, Minnesota. On the flight over, Clapton indulged in a large number of drinks, for fear he would never be able to drink again. Clapton wrote in his autobiography:[61]

In the lowest moments of my life, the only reason I didn't commit suicide was that I knew I wouldn't be able to drink any more if I was dead. It was the only thing I thought was worth living for, and the idea that people were about to try and remove me from alcohol was so terrible that I drank and drank and drank, and they had to practically carry me into the clinic.





Tina Turner and Eric Clapton at Wembley Arena, 18 June 1987


After being discharged, it was recommended by doctors of Hazelden that Clapton not partake in any activities that would act as triggers for his alcoholism or stress. A few months after his discharge, Clapton began working on his next album, against doctors' orders. Working with Tom Dowd, he produced what he thought as his "most forced" album to date, Money and Cigarettes. Clapton chose the name of the album "because that's all I saw myself having left" after his first rehabilitation from alcoholism.[62]
In 1984 he performed on former Pink Floyd member Roger Waters' solo album, The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking, and joined the supporting tour. Since then Waters and Clapton have had a close relationship. In 2005 they performed together for the Tsunami Relief Fund. In 2006 they performed at the Highclere Castle, in aid of the Countryside Alliance, playing two set pieces of "Wish You Were Here" and "Comfortably Numb". Clapton, now a seasoned charity performer, played at the Live Aid concert on 13 July 1985.[63] When offered a slot close to peak viewing hours, he was apparently flattered. As Clapton recovered from his addictions, his album output continued in the 1980s, including two produced with Phil Collins, 1985's Behind the Sun, which produced the hits "Forever Man" and "She's Waiting", and 1986's August.[64]




George Harrison and Clapton at the Prince's Trust Concert, Wembley Arena, London, 1987


August was suffused with Collins's trademark drum and horn sound, and became Clapton's biggest seller in the UK to date, matching his highest chart position, number 3. The album's first track, the hit "It's in the Way That You Use It", was featured in the Tom Cruise – Paul Newman movie The Color of Money. The horn-peppered "Run" echoed Collins' "Sussudio" and other work, while "Tearing Us Apart" (with Tina Turner) and "Miss You" continued Clapton's more angry sound. This rebound kicked off Clapton's two-year period of touring with Collins and their August collaborators, bassist Nathan East and keyboard player/songwriter Greg Phillinganes. While on tour for August, two concert videos were recorded of the four-man band, Eric Clapton Live from Montreux and Eric Clapton and Friends. Clapton later remade "After Midnight" as a single and a promotional track for the Michelob beer brand, which had also used earlier songs by Collins and Steve Winwood. Clapton won a British Academy Television Award for his collaboration with Michael Kamen on the score for the 1985 BBC Television thriller serial Edge of Darkness. In 1989, Clapton released Journeyman, an album which covered a wide range of styles including blues, jazz, soul and pop. Collaborators included George Harrison, Phil Collins, Daryl Hall, Chaka Khan, Mick Jones, David Sanborn and Robert Cray. At the 1987 Brit Awards in London, Clapton was awarded the prize for Outstanding Contribution to Music.[9]
Clapton would also get together with the Bee Gees for charity. The supergroup called itself The Bunburys, and recorded a charity album with the proceeds going to the Bunbury Cricket Club in Cheshire, which plays exhibition cricket matches to raise money for nonprofit organisations in England. The Bunburys recorded three songs for The Bunbury Tails: “We’re the Bunburys”, “Bunbury Afternoon”, and “Fight (No Matter How Long)”. The last song also appeared on The 1988 Summer Olympics Album, and went to #8 on the rock music chart.[65] Clapton also played at the cricket club's 25th anniversary celebrations in 2011 which was held at London's Grosvenor House Hotel.[66]
Tragedy, healing and resurgence
The 1990s brought a series of 32 concerts to the Royal Albert Hall, such as the 24 Nights series of concerts that took place around January through February 1990, and February to March 1991. On 27 August 1990, fellow blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan, who was touring with Clapton, and three members of their road crew were killed in a helicopter crash between concerts. Then, on 20 March 1991, Clapton's four-year-old son, Conor, died after falling from the 53rd-floor window of his mother's friend's New York City apartment at 117 East 57th Street. Conor's funeral took place on 28 March at St Mary Magdalene's Church in Clapton's home village in Ripley, Surrey.[67]


I almost subconsciously used music for myself as a healing agent, and lo and behold, it worked... I have got a great deal of happiness and a great deal of healing from music.

—Clapton on the healing process in writing "Tears in Heaven".[68]
Clapton's grief was expressed in the song "Tears in Heaven", which was co-written by Will Jennings.[69][70] At the 35th Annual Grammy Awards, Clapton received six Grammys for the single "Tears in Heaven" and his Unplugged album.[71] Unplugged features Clapton performing live in front of a small audience on 16 January 1992 at Bray Film Studios in Windsor, Berkshire, England. The album reached number one on the Billboard 200, and is certified Diamond by the RIAA for selling over 10 million copies in the US.[72] It reached number two in the UK Albums Chart and is certified four times platinum in the UK.[73] On 9 September 1992, Clapton performed "Tears in Heaven" at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards, and won the award for Best Male Video.[74][75] In 1992 he received the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors.[76]
In October 1992 Clapton was among the dozens of artists performing at Bob Dylan's 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration. Recorded at Madison Square Garden in New York City, the live two-disk CD/DVD captured a show full of celebrities performing classic Dylan songs, with Clapton playing the lead on a nearly 7-minute version of Dylan's "Knockin' on Heaven's Door" as part of the finale.[77] While Unplugged featured Clapton playing acoustic guitar, his 1994 album From the Cradle contained new versions of old blues standards, highlighted by his electric guitar playing.[78] In 1995, Clapton for the first and only time featured on a UK No. 1 single, collaborating with Chrissie Hynde, Cher and Neneh Cherry on a solo to a cover of "Love Can Build a Bridge" released in aid of the British charity telethon Comic Relief.[79]
Clapton's 1996 recording of the Wayne Kirkpatrick/Gordon Kennedy/Tommy Sims tune "Change the World" (featured in the soundtrack of the film Phenomenon) won the Grammy Award for Song of the Year in 1997, the same year he recorded Retail Therapy (an album of electronic music with Simon Climie under the pseudonym TDF). On 15 September 1997, Clapton appeared at the Music for Montserrat concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, performing "Layla" and "Same Old Blues" before finishing with "Hey Jude" alongside fellow English artists Paul McCartney, Elton John, Phil Collins, Mark Knopfler and Sting.[80] That autumn, Clapton released the album Pilgrim, the first record featuring new material for almost a decade.[60]
In 1996 Clapton had a relationship with singer-songwriter Sheryl Crow. They remain friends, and Clapton appeared as a guest on Crow's Central Park Concert. The duo performed a Cream hit single, "White Room". Later, Clapton and Crow performed an alternate version of "Tulsa Time" with other guitar legends at the Crossroads Guitar Festival in June 2007 as well as Robert Johnson's blues classic "Crossroads" at London's Hyde Park in August 2008 with John Mayer and Robert Randolph.
In 1998 Clapton, then 53, met 22-year-old administrative assistant Melia McEnery in Columbus, Ohio, at a party given for him after a performance. He quietly dated her for a year, and went public with the relationship in 1999. They married on 1 January 2001 at St Mary Magdalene church in Clapton's birthplace, Ripley. They have three daughters, Julie Rose (13 June 2001), Ella May (14 January 2003), and Sophie Belle (1 February 2005).
At the 41st Annual Grammy Awards on 24 February 1999, Clapton received his third Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance, for his song "My Father's Eyes".[81] In October 1999, the compilation album, Clapton Chronicles: The Best of Eric Clapton, was released, which contained a new song, "Blue Eyes Blue", that also appears in soundtrack for the film, Runaway Bride.[82][83] Clapton finished the twentieth century with collaborations with Carlos Santana and B.B. King.
Collaboration albums




Clapton performing for Tsunami Relief Cardiff at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, Wales on 22 January 2005


Following the release of the 2001 record Reptile, in June 2002, Clapton performed "Layla" and "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" at the Party at the Palace concert in the grounds of Buckingham Palace.[84] On 29 November 2002, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall, a tribute to George Harrison, who had died a year earlier of lung cancer.[85] Clapton was a performer and the musical director. The concert featured Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Jeff Lynne, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, Ravi Shankar, Gary Brooker, Billy Preston, Joe Brown and Dhani Harrison.[85] In 2004, Clapton released two albums of covers of songs by bluesman Robert Johnson, Me and Mr. Johnson and Sessions for Robert J. Guitarist Doyle Bramhall II worked on the album with Clapton (after opening Clapton's 2001 tour with his band Smokestack) and would join him on his 2004 tour. In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked Clapton No. 53 on their list of the "100 Greatest Artists of All Time".[86]




Clapton performing at the Ahoy Arena of Rotterdam on 1 June 2006


On 22 January 2005, Clapton performed in the Tsunami Relief Concert held at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, in aid of the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In May 2005 Eric Clapton, Jack Bruce, and Ginger Baker reunited as Cream for a series of concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Concert recordings were released on CD and DVD. Later, Cream performed in New York at Madison Square Garden. Back Home, Clapton's first album of new original material in nearly five years, was released on Reprise Records on 30 August.
A collaboration with guitarist J. J. Cale, titled The Road to Escondido, was released on 7 November 2006, featuring Derek Trucks and Billy Preston (Preston had also been a part of Clapton's 2004 touring band). The 14-track CD was produced and recorded by the duo in August 2005 in California. He invited Trucks to join his band for his 2006–2007 world tour. Bramhall remained in the band as well, giving Clapton three elite guitarists in his band and thus allowing him to revisit many Derek and the Dominos songs that he hadn't played in decades. Trucks became the third member of the Allman Brothers Band to tour supporting Clapton, the second being pianist/keyboardist Chuck Leavell, who appeared on the MTV Unplugged album and the 24 Nights performances at the Royal Albert Hall, London in 1990 and 1991, as well as Clapton's 1992 US tour.[87]
On 20 May 2006, Clapton performed with Queen drummer Roger Taylor and former Pink Floyd bassist/songwriter Roger Waters at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, in support of the Countryside Alliance which promotes issues relating to the British countryside.[88] On 13 August 2006, Clapton made a guest appearance at the Bob Dylan concert in Columbus, Ohio, playing guitar on three songs in Jimmie Vaughan's opening act.[89] The chemistry between Trucks and Clapton convinced him to invite The Derek Trucks Band to open for Clapton's set at his 2007 Crossroads Guitar Festival. Trucks remained on set afterward and performed with Clapton's band throughout his performances. The rights to Clapton's official memoirs, written by Christopher Simon Sykes and published in 2007, were sold at the 2005 Frankfurt Book Fair for US$4 million.[90]
On 26 February 2008, it was reported that North Korean officials had invited Clapton to play a concert in the communist state.[91] Clapton's management received the invitation and passed it on to the singer, who agreed in principle and suggested it take place sometime in 2009.[92] Kristen Foster, a spokesperson, said, "Eric Clapton receives numerous offers to play in countries around the world", and "[t]here is no agreement whatsoever for him to play in North Korea".[93]




Clapton (left) and actor Bill Murray kicking off the Crossroads Guitar Festival, Illinois on 27 July 2007


In 2007 Clapton learned more about his father, a Canadian soldier who left the UK after the war. Although Clapton's grandparents eventually told him the truth about his parentage, he only knew that his father's name was Edward Fryer. This was a source of disquiet for Clapton, as witnessed by his 1998 song "My Father's Eyes". A Montreal journalist named Michael Woloschuk researched Canadian Armed Forces service records and tracked down members of Fryer's family, and finally pieced together the story. He learned that Clapton's father was Edward Walter Fryer, born 21 March 1920, in Montreal and died 15 May 1985 in Newmarket, Ontario. Fryer was a musician (piano and saxophone) and a lifelong drifter who was married several times, had several children, and apparently never knew that he was the father of Eric Clapton.[94] Clapton thanked Woloschuk in an encounter at Macdonald Cartier Airport, in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.[95]
In February 2008 Clapton performed with his long-time friend Steve Winwood at Madison Square Garden and guested on his recorded single, "Dirty City", on Winwood's album Nine Lives. The two former Blind Faith bandmates met again for a series of 14 concerts throughout the United States in June 2009. Clapton's 2008 Summer Tour began on 3 May at the Ford Amphitheatre, Tampa, Florida, and then moved to Canada, Ireland, England, Norway, Iceland, Denmark, Poland, Germany, and Monaco. On 28 June 2008, he headlined Saturday night for Hard Rock Calling 2008 in London's Hyde Park (previously Hyde Park Calling) with support from Sheryl Crow and John Mayer.[96][97] In September 2008 Clapton performed at a private charity fundraiser for The Countryside Alliance at Floridita in Soho, London, that included such guests as the London Mayor Boris Johnson.




Clapton (right) performing with the Allman Brothers Band at the Beacon Theatre, New York City in March 2009


In March 2009, the Allman Brothers Band (amongst many notable guests) celebrated their 40th year, dedicating their string of concerts to the late Duane Allman on their annual run at the Beacon Theatre. Eric Clapton was one of the performers, with drummer Butch Trucks remarking that the performance was not the typical Allman Brothers experience, given the number and musical styles of the guests who were invited to perform. Songs like "In Memory of Elizabeth Reed" were punctuated with others, including "The Weight", with Levon Helm; Johnny Winter sitting in on Hendrix's "Red House"; and "Layla". On 4 May 2009 Clapton appeared as a featured guest at the Royal Albert Hall, playing "Further on Up the Road" with Joe Bonamassa.
Clapton was scheduled to be one of the performers at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 25th anniversary concert in Madison Square Garden on 30 October 2009, but cancelled due to gallstone surgery.[98] Van Morrison (who also cancelled)[99] said in an interview that he and Clapton were to do a "couple of songs", but that they would do something else together at "some other stage of the game".[100]
Clapton, Old Sock and I Still Do




Clapton performing in Munich, Germany on 5 June 2010


Clapton performed a two-night show with Jeff Beck at London's O2 Arena on 13–14 February 2010.[101] The two former Yardbirds extended their 2010 tour with stops at Madison Square Garden,[102] the Air Canada Centre in Toronto, and the Bell Centre in Montreal.[103] Clapton performed a series of concerts in 11 cities throughout the United States from 25 February to 13 March 2010, including Roger Daltrey as opening act. His third European tour with Steve Winwood began on 18 May and ended 13 June, including Tom Norris as opening act. He then began a short North American tour lasting from 26 June to 3 July, starting with his third Crossroads Guitar Festival on 26 June at Toyota Park in Bridgeview, Illinois. Clapton released a new studio album, Clapton, on 27 September 2010 in the United Kingdom and 28 September 2010 in the United States. On 17 November 2010, Clapton performed as guest on the Prince's Trust rock gala held at the Royal Albert Hall, supported by the house band for the evening, which included Jools Holland, Midge Ure and Mark King.[104]




Clapton, Keb' Mo' and Buddy Guy at the Crossroads Guitar Festival on 26 June 2010


On 24 June 2011, Clapton was in concert with Pino Daniele in Cava de' Tirreni stadium before performing a series of concerts in South America from 6 to 16 October 2011. He spent November and December 2011 touring Japan with Steve Winwood, playing 13 shows in various cities throughout the country. On 24 February 2012 Clapton, Keith Richards, Gary Clark Jr., Derek Trucks, Doyle Bramhall II, Kim Wilson and other artists performed together in the Howlin' For Hubert Tribute concert held at the Apollo Theater of New York honouring blues guitarist Hubert Sumlin who died at age 80 on 4 December 2011. On 29 November 2012, Clapton joined The Rolling Stones at London's O2 Arena during the band's second of five arena dates celebrating their 50th anniversary.[105] On 12 December, Clapton performed The Concert for Sandy Relief at Madison Square Garden, broadcast live via television, radio, cinemas and the Internet across six continents.[106]
In January 2013, Surfdog Records announced a signed deal with Clapton for the release of his forthcoming album Old Sock on 12 March. On 8 April 2013, Eric and Hard Rock International launched the limited-edition Eric Clapton Artist Spotlight merchandise programme benefiting Crossroads Centre Antigua.[107] Clapton toured the US and Europe from 14 March to 19 June 2013 to celebrate 50 years as a professional musician.[108] On 28 February 2013, Clapton announced his intention to stop touring in 2015 due to hassles with travel.[109][110]




Clapton in Prague, June 2013, during his 50th Celebration World Tour


On 15 October 2013, Clapton's popular Unplugged album and concert DVD were re-released, titled Unplugged: Expanded & Remastered. The album includes the original 14 tracks, remastered, as well as 6 additional tracks, including 2 versions of "My Father's Eyes". The DVD includes a restored version of the concert, as well as over 60 minutes of unseen footage from the rehearsal. On 13 and 14 November 2013, Clapton headlined the final two evenings of the "Baloise Sessions", an annual indoor music festival in Basel, Switzerland. On 20 November 2013, Warner Bros released Crossroads Guitar Festival 2013 in CD/DVD/Blu-ray. On 30 April 2014, Clapton announced the release of The Breeze: An Appreciation of JJ Cale as an homage to J. J. Cale who died on 26 July 2013. This tribute album is named after the 1972 single "Call Me the Breeze" and features 16 Cale songs performed by Clapton, Mark Knopfler, John Mayer, Willie Nelson, Tom Petty and others.[111]
On 21 June 2014, Clapton abruptly walked off stage during a concert at the Glasgow Hydro. Although he did return to perform one final song, thousands of fans were upset by the lack of explanation from Clapton or the venue and booed after the concert ended around 40 minutes before advertised to finish. Both Clapton and the venue apologised the next day, blaming 'technical difficulties' for making sound conditions 'unbearable' for Clapton on stage.[112][113][114] A week later he confirmed his retirement plans attributing his decision to the road being "unbearable" in addition to "odd ailments" that may force him to put down his guitar permanently.[115] In a 2016 interview with Classic Rock magazine, Clapton revealed that he had been diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in 2013, a condition which refers to damage in one's peripheral nerves and often results in stabbing, burning or tingling pain in the arms and legs.[116]
Clapton performed two shows at Madison Square Garden in New York on 1 and 3 May 2015 followed by a 7-night residency at London's Royal Albert Hall from 14 to 23 May 2015 to celebrate his 70th birthday on 30 March.[20] The shows also mark 50 years since Clapton first played at the Royal Albert Hall – his debut was on 7 December 1964 when he performed as part of The Yardbirds for the BBC's Top Beat Show.[20] The concert film, Slowhand at 70 – Live at the Royal Albert Hall, was released by Eagle Rock Entertainment on 13 November 2015 on DVD, CD, Blu-Ray and LP.[117] The 2-night concerts in the US marked the 46th anniversary since Clapton, with Cream, opened the "new" Madison Square Garden on 2 November 1968. Clapton has performed more times at Madison Square Garden than any other US venue, a total of 45 times.[118] On 20 May 2016, Clapton released his twenty-third studio album I Still Do. On 30 September 2016 the live-album Live in San Diego was released.[119]
Influences
Clapton cites Muddy Waters, Freddie King, B.B. King, Albert King, Buddy Guy, and Hubert Sumlin as guitar playing influences. Clapton stated blues musician Robert Johnson to be his single most important influence. In 2004 Clapton released CDs and DVDs entitled Sessions for Robert Johnson, featuring covers of Robert Johnson songs using electric and acoustic guitars.[120]
Clapton co-authored with others the book Discovering Robert Johnson, in which Clapton said Johnson was:

...the most important blues musician who ever lived. He was true, absolutely, to his own vision, and as deep as I have gotten into the music over the last 30 years, I have never found anything more deeply soulful than Robert Johnson. His music remains the most powerful cry that I think you can find in the human voice, really. ... it seemed to echo something I had always felt.[121]

Clapton also singled out Buddy Holly as an influence. The Chirping Crickets was the first album Clapton ever bought; he later saw Holly on Sunday Night at the London Palladium.[122] In his autobiography, Clapton recounted the first time he saw Holly and his Fender, saying, "I thought I'd died and gone to heaven ... it was like seeing an instrument from outer space and I said to myself: 'That's the future – that's what I want'".[122]
Legacy




Clapton's handprints (far right) with other members of the Yardbirds at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame


Clapton has been referred to as one of the most important and influential guitarists of all time.[1][123][124][125] Clapton is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist, and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and Cream.[5] He ranked second in Rolling Stone magazine's list of the "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time"[2] and fourth in Gibson's Top 50 Guitarists of All Time.[3]
Guitarists influenced by Clapton include Slash, Allen Collins, Richie Sambora, Stevie Ray Vaughan, Gary Moore, Duane Allman, Derek Trucks,[126] Eddie Van Halen,[127] Terry Kath,[128] Brian May, Tony Iommi, Lenny Kravitz, Ted Nugent, Orianthi, Vince Gill, Brad Paisley, Jonny Buckland, Joe Don Rooney, Alex Lifeson, John Mayer, Joe Satriani, Joe Bonamassa, Neal Schon, and Mark Knopfler.
In 2011, The Guardian attributed the creation of the cult of the guitar hero to Clapton, ranking it number seven on their list of the 50 key events in rock music history;

Nothing is more central to rock mythology than the cult of the lead guitarist. And no one did more to create that cult than Eric Clapton. He had already been a member of the Yardbirds before joining John Mayall's Bluesbreakers, the clearing house for guitarists, in April 1965. His two stints with Mayall saw his reputation grow to the extent that a famous graffito captured the popular appraisal of him among rock fans: "Clapton is God".[129]

In 2012, Clapton was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover – to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires to mark his 80th birthday.[130]
Guitars




Clapton on the There's One in Every Crowd Tour, with "Blackie" on 15 August 1975


Clapton's choice of electric guitars has been as notable as the man himself; like Hank Marvin, the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix, Clapton exerted a crucial and widespread influence in popularising particular models of electric guitar.[131] With the Yardbirds, Clapton played a Fender Telecaster, a Fender Jazzmaster, a double-cutaway Gretsch 6120, and a 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335. He became exclusively a Gibson player for a period beginning in mid-1965, when he purchased a used sunburst Gibson Les Paul guitar from a guitar store in London. Clapton commented on the slim profile of the neck, which would indicate it was a 1960 model.[132]
Early during his stint in Cream, Clapton's first Les Paul Standard was stolen. He continued to play Les Pauls exclusively with Cream (one bought from Andy Summers was almost identical to the stolen guitar)[133] until 1967, when he acquired his most famous guitar in this period, a 1964 Gibson SG, dubbed "the Fool".[134] Clapton used both the Les Paul and the SG to create his self-described "woman tone".[135] He explained in a 1967 interview, "I am playing more smoothly now. I’m developing what I call my 'woman tone.' It's a sweet sound, something like the solo on 'I Feel Free'."[135] Writer Michael Dregni describes it as "thick yet piercing, overdriven yet smooth, distorted yet creamy".[136] The tone is achieved by a combination of tone control settings on the guitars and Clapton's Marshall JTM45 amplifier.[137] Vintage Guitar magazine identifies "the opening riff and solo of 'Sunshine of Your Love' are arguably the best illustrations of full-blown woman tone".[135] Clapton's "Fool" acquired its name from its distinctive psychedelic paint job, created by the visual art collective also known as the Fool (just before Cream's first US appearance in 1967, Clapton's SG, Bruce's Fender VI, and Baker's drum head were all repainted in psychedelic designs).




Clapton with Blackie while on tour in the Netherlands, 1978. Clapton recorded hits such as "Cocaine", "I Shot the Sheriff", "Wonderful Tonight", "Farther Up the Road" and "Lay Down Sally" on Blackie


In 1968 Clapton bought a Gibson Firebird and started using the 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335 again.[134] The aforementioned 1964 ES-335 had a storied career. Clapton used it at the last Cream show in November 1968 as well as with Blind Faith, played it sparingly for slide pieces in the 1970s, used it on "Hard Times" from Journeyman, the Hyde Park live concert of 1996, and the From the Cradle sessions and tour of 1994–95. It was sold for US$847,500 at a 2004 auction.[138] Gibson produced a limited run of 250 "Crossroads 335" replicas. The 335 was only the second electric guitar Clapton bought.[139]
In July 1968 Clapton gave George Harrison a 1957 'goldtop' Gibson Les Paul that been refinished with a red colour, nicknamed Lucy. The following September, Clapton played the guitar on the Beatles' recording of "While My Guitar Gently Weeps". Lucy was stolen from Harrison, though later tracked down and returned to him - he lent it to Clapton for his 1973 comeback concert at the Rainbow. His SG found its way into the hands of George Harrison's friend Jackie Lomax, who subsequently sold it to musician Todd Rundgren for US$500 in 1972. Rundgren restored the guitar and nicknamed it "Sunny", after "Sunshine of Your Love". He retained it until 2000, when he sold it at an auction for US$150,000.[134] At the 1969 Blind Faith concert in Hyde Park, London Clapton played a Fender Custom Telecaster, which was fitted with "Brownie"'s neck.




Clapton's Lead II Fender, the first ever piece of memorabilia donated to the Hard Rock Cafe, London in 1979


In late 1969 Clapton made the switch to the Fender Stratocaster. "I had a lot of influences when I took up the Strat. First there was Buddy Holly, and Buddy Guy. Hank Marvin was the first well known person over here in England who was using one, but that wasn't really my kind of music. Steve Winwood had so much credibility, and when he started playing one, I thought, oh, if he can do it, I can do it".[140] The first—used during the recording of Eric Clapton—was "Brownie", which in 1973 became the backup to the most famous of all Clapton's guitars, "Blackie". In November 1970 Eric bought six Fender Stratocasters from the Sho-bud guitar shop in Nashville, Tennessee while on tour with the Dominos. He gave one each to George Harrison, Steve Winwood, and Pete Townshend.
Clapton assembled the best components of the remaining three to create "Blackie", which was his favourite stage guitar until its retirement in 1985. It was first played live 13 January 1973 at the Rainbow Concert.[141] Clapton called the 1956/57 Strat a "mongrel".[142] On 24 June 2004, Clapton sold "Blackie" at Christie's Auction House, New York, for US$959,500 to raise funds for his Crossroads Centre for drug and alcohol addictions.[143] "Brownie" is now on display at the Experience Music Project.[144] The Fender Custom Shop has since produced a limited run of 275 'Blackie' replicas, correct in every detail right down to the 'Duck Brothers' flight case, and artificially aged using Fender's 'Relic' process to simulate years of hard wear. One was presented to Clapton upon the model's release and was used for three numbers during a concert at the Royal Albert Hall on 17 May 2006.[145] In 1979 Clapton gave his signed Fender Lead II guitar to the Hard Rock Cafe in London to designate his favourite bar stool. Pete Townshend also donated his own Gibson Les Paul guitar, with a note attached: "Mine's as good as his! Love, Pete".[146]




Clapton playing an Eric Clapton Stratocaster at the Hard Rock Calling concert in Hyde Park, London in 2008


Signature guitars in Clapton's honour are made by Fender and C.F. Martin & Company. In 1988 Fender introduction his signature Eric Clapton Stratocaster.[147] Several signature-model 000-sized acoustic guitars made by Martin. The first, of these, introduced in 1995, was a limited edition 000-42EC Eric Clapton signature model with a production run of 461. For the single "Change the World" (1996) and the album Pilgrim (1998) he used a Martin 000-28 EC Eric Clapton signature model, which he subsequently gave to guitarist Paul Wassif.[148] His 1939 000-42 Martin that he played on the Unplugged album sold for US$791,500 at auction.[138]
In 1999, Clapton auctioned off some of his guitar collection to raise more than US$5 million for continuing support of the Crossroads Centre in Antigua, which he founded in 1997.[143] In 2004 Clapton organised and participated in the Crossroads Guitar Festival to benefit the centre. A second guitar auction, including the "Cream" of Clapton's collection – as well as guitars donated by famous friends – was held on 24 June 2004.[143] His Lowden acoustic guitar sold for US$41,825. The revenue garnered by this auction at Christie's was US$7,438,624.[138]
In 2010 Eric Clapton announced that he would be auctioning off over 150 items at a New York auction in 2011 with proceeds to go to his Crossroads Centre drug and rehabilitation centre in Antigua. Items included Clapton's guitar from the Cream reunion tour in 2005, speaker cabinets used in the early 1970s from his days with Derek and the Dominos, and some guitars from Jeff Beck, J. J. Cale, and Joe Bonamassa.[149] In March 2011 Clapton raised more than US$2.15 million when he auctioned off key items, including a 1984 Gibson hollow body guitar, a Gianni Versace suit from his 1990 concert at the Royal Albert Hall, and a replica of the famous Fender Stratocaster known as "Blackie", which fetched more than $30,000. All proceeds again went to Crossroads. Clapton uses Ernie Ball Slinky and Super Slinky strings, gauge .10 to.46.[150] His guitar technician for over thirty years was Lee Dickson.[151]
Other media appearances




Clapton's handprints in Hollywood, California


Clapton frequently appears as a guest on the albums of other musicians. He played lead guitar and synthesiser on The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking, Roger Waters' debut solo album. Other media appearances include the Toots & the Maytals Grammy award-winning[152] album True Love, where he played guitar on the track "Pressure Drop". He played on Paul Brady's 1985 album Back to the Centre on the track "Deep in your Heart". He can also be heard at the beginning of Frank Zappa's album, We're Only in It for the Money, repeating the phrase, "Are you hung up?" over and over again. In 1985, Clapton appeared on the charity concert Live Aid in Philadelphia with Phil Collins, Tim Renwick, Chris Stainton, Jamie Oldaker, Marcy Levy, Shaun Murphy, and Donald 'Duck' Dunn. In 1988 he played with Dire Straits and Elton John at the Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute at Wembley Stadium and the Prince's Trust rock gala at the Royal Albert Hall.[153] On 30 June 1990, Dire Straits, Clapton and Elton John made a guest appearance in the Nordoff-Robbins charity show held at Knebworth in England.[154] In 1991 Clapton was featured on Richie Sambora's album, Stranger in This Town, in a song dedicated to him, called "Mr. Bluesman". He contributed guitar and vocals to "Runaway Train", a duet with Elton John on the latter's The One album the following year.[155]
On 12 September 1996 Clapton played a party for Armani at New York City's Lexington Armory with Greg Phillinganes, Nathan East and Steve Gadd. Sheryl Crow appeared on one number, performing "Tearing Us Apart", a track from August, which was first performed by Tina Turner during the Prince's Trust All-Star Rock show in 1986. It was Clapton's sole US appearance that year, following the open-air concert held at Hyde Park.[156] The concert was taped and the footage was released both on VHS video cassette and later, on DVD.[156]
Clapton was featured in the movie version of Tommy, the first full length rock opera, written by the Who. The movie version gave Clapton a cameo appearance as the Preacher, performing Sonny Boy Williamson's song, "Eyesight to the Blind". He appeared in Blues Brothers 2000 as one of the Louisiana Gator Boys. In addition to being in the band, he had a small speaking role. Clapton has appeared in an advertisement for the Mercedes-Benz G-Wagen. In March 2007 Clapton appeared in an advertisement[157] for RealNetwork's Rhapsody online music service. In 2010 Clapton started appearing as a spokesman for T-Mobile, advertising their MyTouch Fender cell phone. Clapton also appeared in the 2011 BBC documentary Reggae Got Soul: The Story of Toots and the Maytals which was described as "The untold story of one of the most influential artists ever to come out of Jamaica."[158]
When asked to describe God by their minister, the characters Eric Forman and Steven Hyde both drew an image of Clapton in the episode "Holy Crap!" of season two of That '70s Show.[159] Clapton appeared on the BBC's Top Gear in 2013, during Series 19 Episode 4 and was involved in testing the new Kia Cee'd. He was called upon to test the Cee'd's auxiliary input, which he tested by plugging in one of his guitars and playing several bars of his most famous hits. He was introduced by Top Gear host Jeremy Clarkson as a "local guitarist".[160]
Personal life
Relationships and children
Clapton and Pattie Boyd married in 1979, but had no children. In 1984 while recording Behind The Sun, Clapton began a relationship with Yvonne Kelly, the manager of AIR Studios Montserrat. Although both were married to other partners at the time, they had a daughter in January 1985. She was named Ruth Kelly Clapton, but her existence was kept from the public until the media realised she was his child in 1991.[161][162]
Clapton and Boyd tried unsuccessfully to have children, even trying in vitro fertilisation in 1984, but were faced instead with miscarriages.[163] They divorced in 1988 following his affair with Italian model Lory Del Santo, who gave birth to their son, Conor, on 21 August 1986, who died in 1991 at the age of 4 1/2 after falling out of an open bedroom window on the 53rd floor of a Manhattan apartment building.[164]
Clapton married Melia McEnery in a low-key church ceremony in January 2002. They have three daughters: Julie Rose (born June 2001), Ella May (born 2003) and Sophie Belle (born 2005).[165] His grandson Isaac Eric Owen Bartlett was born in June 2013 to his oldest daughter Ruth and her husband Dean Bartlett.[166]
Political views
Clapton is a supporter of the Countryside Alliance which promotes issues relating to the British countryside. He has played in concerts to raise funds for the organisation and publicly opposed the Labour Party's ban on fox hunting with the 2004 Hunting Act. A spokesperson for Clapton said, "Eric supports the Countryside Alliance. He doesn't hunt himself, but does enjoy rural pursuits such as fishing and shooting sports. He supports the Alliance's pursuit to scrap the ban on the basis that he doesn't agree with the state's interference with people's private pursuits".[167]
Controversy over remarks on immigration
On 5 August 1976, Clapton provoked an uproar and lingering controversy when he spoke out against increasing immigration during a concert in Birmingham. Visibly intoxicated, Clapton voiced his support of controversial political candidate Enoch Powell, and announced on stage that Britain was in danger of becoming a "black colony". Among other things, Clapton said "Keep Britain white!"[168] which was at the time a National Front (NF) slogan.[169][170] This incident, along with some controversial remarks made around the same time by David Bowie, as well as uses of Nazi-related imagery by Sid Vicious and Siouxsie Sioux, were the main catalysts for the creation of Rock Against Racism, with a concert on 30 April 1978.[171]
In an interview from October 1976 with Sounds magazine, Clapton said that he was not a political person and that his rambling remarks that night were not appropriate.[172] However, in a 2004 interview with Uncut, Clapton referred to Powell as "outrageously brave".[173] He complained that the UK was "... inviting people in as cheap labour and then putting them in ghettos".[174] In 2004, Clapton told an interviewer for Scotland on Sunday, "There's no way I could be a racist. It would make no sense".[175] In his 2007 autobiography, Clapton called himself "deliberately oblivious to it all" and wrote, "I had never really understood or been directly affected by racial conflict ... when I listened to music, I was disinterested in where the players came from or what colour their skin was. Interesting, then, that 10 years later, I would be labelled a racist."[176] In a December 2007 interview with Melvyn Bragg on The South Bank Show, Clapton reiterated his support for Enoch Powell and again denied that Powell's views were racist.[177]
Wealth and assets
In 2009, Surrey Life Magazine ranked Clapton as number 17 in their list of richest Surrey residents, estimating his fortune at £120 million in assets. This was a combination of property and income which include a £9 million yacht, Va Bene (previously owned by Bernie Ecclestone), his back music catalogue, his touring income, and his holding company Marshbrook Ltd, which had earned him £110 million since 1989.[178] In 2003, he purchased a 50% share of gentleman's outfitters Cordings Piccadilly.[179] At the time, owner Noll Uloth was trying to save the shop from closure and is reported to have contacted Clapton, his "best client"; within five minutes, Clapton replied with "I can't let this happen".[179]
Car collection




Ferrari SP12 EC built for Clapton under Ferrari's Special Projects programme.[180]


Since the 1970s, Clapton considered himself a "car enthusiast" and often stated his passion for the Ferrari brand.[181] Clapton currently owns or has owned a range of Ferraris, and when asked about his Ferrari collection in 1989, he said he liked the touring cars for road use the company produces and commented "if I had more space and if I had been wise I would have a huge collection by now and I would be a multi-multi-millionaire".[182] In 2010, he explained that for him "Ferrari has always been the number one car" to own and drive, and that he always supported Ferrari on the road and in Formula One motor racing.[183]
In 2012, Ferrari honoured Clapton with the one-off special project car, the Ferrari SP12 EC. In July 2013 Clapton displayed it at the Goodwood Festival of Speed in England in the Michelin Supercar Run.[184] In 2014, Clapton explained that Ferrari is still his favourite car brand.[185] Among the other vehicles Clapton owns or has owned during his life are a vintage Mini Cooper Radford which was a gift from George Harrison.[186]
Charitable work
In 1993, Clapton was appointed a director of Clouds House, a UK treatment centre for drug and alcohol dependence, and served on their board until 1997.[187] Clapton also served on the board of directors for The Chemical Dependency Centre from 1994 until 1999.[188] Both charities subsequently merged to become Action on Addiction in 2007.
In 1998, he established the Crossroads Centre in Antigua to help others overcome their addictions to drugs and alcohol and is active in its management oversight and fundraising to the present day.[189][190] Clapton has organised the Crossroads Guitar Festival in 1999, 2004, 2007, 2010 and 2013 to raise funds for this centre.[191]
In 2008, he donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD to assist with the restoration of the devastation done to Southeast Asia from the 2004 tsunami.[192]
Football
Clapton is a fan of English Premier League football club West Bromwich Albion.[193] In 1982 he performed a concert before West Brom player John Wile's testimonial game at The Hawthorns. It has been reported that the club rejected his offer to invest cash in the club around this time. In the late 1970s Clapton positioned a West Brom scarf on the back cover of his album, Backless.[194] In the 1978-79 season Clapton sponsored West Brom's UEFA Cup home game against Turkish club Galatasaray.[193]
Awards and honours


Year
Award / Recognition


1983

Presented the Silver Clef Award from Princess Michael of Kent for outstanding contribution to British music.[195]



1985

Presented with BAFTA for Best Original Television Music for Score of Edge of Darkness with Michael Kamen.[196]



1993

"Tears in Heaven" won three Grammy awards for Song of the Year, Record of the Year, and Male Pop Vocal Performance. Clapton also won Album of the Year and Best Rock Vocal Performance for Unplugged and Best Rock Song for "Layla".[197]



1995

Made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to music, as part of the 1995 New Year Honours list.[198]



2000

Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame for the third time, this time as a solo artist. He was earlier inducted as a member of the bands Cream and the Yardbirds.[199]



2004

Promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE), receiving the award from the Princess Royal at Buckingham Palace as part of the 2004 New Year Honours list.[200][201]



2006

Awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award as a member of Cream.[202]



2017

Made a Commandeur of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres of France[203]



Clapton's music in film and TV









"Change the World"





"Change the World" (studio version) from the Phenomenon soundtrack.






Problems playing this file? See media help.


Clapton's music has appeared in dozens of movies and television shows as far back as 1973's Mean Streets which featured the song "I Looked Away". Other appearances in media include in the Miami Vice series ("Wonderful Tonight", "Knock on Wood", "She's Waiting", and "Layla"), Back to the Future ("Heaven Is One Step Away"), The Color of Money ("It's In The Way That You Use It"), Lethal Weapon 2 ("Knockin' On Heaven's Door"), Goodfellas ("Layla" and "Sunshine of Your Love"),[204] Freaks and Geeks episode "I'm With the Band" ("Sunshine of Your Love", "White Room" and "Crossroads (song)"), Friends episodes "The One with the Proposal, Part 2" ("Wonderful Tonight") and "The One Where Rachel Has A Baby" ("River of Tears"), Men in Black III ("Strange Brew"), Captain Phillips (film) ("Wonderful Tonight") and August: Osage County (film) ("Lay Down Sally") for which it was a significant part of the soundtrack, being played in the intro and twice more later on.[205]
Both Opel and Vauxhall used the guitar riff from "Layla" in their advertising campaigns throughout 1987–95. In addition to his music appearing in media, Clapton has contributed to several movies by writing or co-writing the musical scores or contributing original songs. These movies include Lethal Weapon (co-written with Michael Kamen),[206] Communion, Rush, Phenomenon ("Change the World"), and Lethal Weapon 3 (co-wrote and co-performed "It's Probably Me" with Sting and "Runaway Train" with Elton John).[207]
Discography
Main article: Eric Clapton discography
Solo studio albums


Eric Clapton (1970)
461 Ocean Boulevard (1974)
There's One in Every Crowd (1975)
No Reason to Cry (1976)
Slowhand (1977)
Backless (1978)
Another Ticket (1981)
Money and Cigarettes (1983)
Behind the Sun (1985)
August (1986)
Journeyman (1989)
Rush (1992)
From the Cradle (1994)
Pilgrim (1998)
Reptile (2001)
Me and Mr. Johnson (2004)
Sessions for Robert J (2004)
Back Home (2005)
Clapton (2010)
Old Sock (2013)[208]
The Breeze: An Appreciation of JJ Cale (2014)
I Still Do (2016)


Collaborations

Riding with the King (with B.B. King) (2000)
The Road to Escondido (with J. J. Cale) (2006)

References


^ a b "55 – Eric Clapton". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2014. 
^ a b "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time – 2. Eric Clapton". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 30 November 2011. 
^ a b "Top 50 Guitarists of All Time – 10 to 1". Gibson Guitar Company. Retrieved 22 July 2011. 
^ Tyrangiel, Josh (14 August 2009). "The 10 Greatest Electric Guitar Players". Time. Time Inc. Retrieved 26 April 2011. 
^ a b "Eric Clapton Biography – The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum". Rockhall.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Inductee: Eric Clapton". Rockhall.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Ex-rebel Clapton receives his CBE". Telegraph.co.uk. London. 4 November 2004. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton, All Music: Grammy Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ a b "Brit Awards 1987". Brits.co.uk. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton's Former California Estate Hits Market for $5.5 Million". RealClearPolitics. Retrieved 16 December 2017. 
^ a b c Kemp, Mark (2001). "Eric Clapton Biography". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 23 October 2011. 
^ Harry Shapiro (1992) Eric Clapton: Lost in the Blues pg. 29. Guinness, 1992
^ "Ladies and gentlemen, Eric Clapton". TODAY.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Profiles in Popular Music. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ a b c Bob Gulla (2008) Guitar Gods: The 25 Players Who Made Rock History pgs. 40–41. Retrieved 29 December 2010
^ a b Clapton, Eric (2007) Eric Clapton: The Autobiography, pg. 22. Century, 2007
^ a b c Thompson, Dave (2006) Cream: How Eric Clapton Took the World by Storm pgs. 31–32. Virgin Books, 2006
^ Welch, Chris (1994) Extract Archived 18 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d e Romanowski, Patricia (2003)
^ a b c d "Exclusive pictures: Eric Clapton hits 200 Royal Albert Hall shows" (24 May 2015). Royal Albert Hall.com. 12 July 2015. 
^ Welch, Chris. Clapton. Voyageur Press. p. 38. 
^ "Eric Clapton Starts Royal Albert Hall Run With Classics and Covers". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton celebrates 50 years as a professional musician". Life.royalalberthall.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Trouser Press : Jimmy Page interview transcript". Iem.ac.ru. Retrieved 17 April 2014. 
^ "Jeff Beck Opens Up About Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Gigs with Clapton Jeff Beck Group Reunion Prospects". Rolling Stone. 16 January 2017. 
^ McCormick, Neil (24 July 2015). "Just how good is Eric Clapton?". The Daily Telegraph. London. The Telegraph. 
^ Clapton Documentary (1987). South Bank Show. ITV.
^ Eric Clapton interviewed on the Pop Chronicles (1970)
^ Unterberger, Richie. "Cream". Allmusic. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ a b "Hendrix jams with Cream". BBC. 24 April 2016. 
^ Shadwick, Keith (2003). Jimi Hendrix: Musician. P. 84. Backbeat Books
^ Welch, Chris: "Cream" (2000), page 131
^ "Ex-Beatles at Harrison film tribute". News.bbc.co.uk. 25 September 2003. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Elliot J. Huntley (2004). "Mystical One: George Harrison : After the Break-up of the Beatles". p. 25. Guernica Editions, 2004
^ "That Time Eric Clapton Almost Became a Beatle". Esquire. 23 April 2016. 
^ Urish, Ben (2007). The Words and Music of John Lennon. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 7. 
^ Billboard 23 July 2005. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Eisner, Peter (26 October 2005). "Cream, Rising to the Occasion at Madison Square Garden". Washingpost.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Stephen Thomas Erlewine. "Royal Albert Hall: London May 2–3–5–6 2005". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 30 December 2010. 
^ a b The words and music of John Lennon. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Noyer, Paul Du (2010). "John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band". John Lennon: The Stories Behind Every Song 1970–1980 (Rev. ed.). London: Carlton Books Ltd. pp. 25–26. ISBN 978-1-84732-665-2. 
^ "allmusic ((( Eric Clapton > Overview )))". Retrieved 5 December 2009. 
^ "allmusic ((( Let It Rain )))". Retrieved 5 December 2009. 
^ Christgau, Robert. "Stephen Stills > Consumer Guide Reviews". Robert Christgau. Retrieved 16 December 2017. 
^ The Layla Sessions liner notes, page 4.
^ Fox, Darrin (June 2001). "Guitar Player magazine". p. 108. 
^ "Derek And The Dominoes". Artistfacts. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ a b c Schumacher, Michael (1992)
^ McKeen, William (2000). Rock and roll is here to stay: an anthology. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 127. Clapton poured all he had into Layla's title track, which was inspired by the Persian love story he had read, the story of Layla and Majnun. 
^ Santoro, Gene (1995). Dancing in Your Head: Jazz, Blues, Rock, and Beyond. Oxford University Press US. p. 62. At the time, he started to read The story of Layla and Majnun by the Persian poet Nizami Ganjavi 
^ "The Layla Sessions" CD liner notes.
^ The Layla Sessions liner notes, page 12.
^ Clapton, The Autobiography, 128.
^ Marc Roberty, Chris Charlesworth (1995) The complete guide to the music of Eric Clapton p.67. Omnibus Press, 1995
^ "Longtime Eric Clapton Keyboardist Dick Sims Dies". Gibson.com. 24 June 2008. Retrieved 30 December 2011. 
^ Legends of rock guitar: the essential reference of rock's greatest guitarists. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Christgau, Robert. "Robert Christgau Consumer Guide: The Band". Retrieved 2007-01-07. 
^ Conversations with Eric Clapton, Steve Turner
^ Moritz, Charles (1987)
^ a b Ruhlmann, William. "Eric Clapton". Allmusic. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ Clapton, Eric (2007). Clapton, The Autobiography. Broadway Books. p. 198. 
^ Clapton, Eric (2007). Clapton: The Autobiography. ISBN 978-0-385-51851-2. 
^ Legends of Rock Guitar: The Essential Reference of Rock's Greatest Guitarists. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ DeCurtis, Anthony (12 February 1987). "Eric Clapton August". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 15 August 2017. 
^ "The Bee Gees Meet Eric Clapton". Uncle John's Bathroom Reader. June 27, 2014. Retrieved July 29, 2017. 
^ "Clapton Helps Celebrate Bunbury Cricket Club's 25th Birthday". EricClapton.com. 4 December 2017. 
^ "In An English Country Churchyard, Eric Clapton and Friends Mourn the Death of His Son, Conor, 4". People.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Exclusive: Mother of 'Tears in Heaven' Inspiration Shares Story – ABC News". Abcnews.go.com. 7 September 2006. Retrieved 12 December 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton: 'Tears In Heaven'". Rolling Stone. Jann Wenner (88). December 7, 2000. 
^ Leerhsen, Charles (March 22, 1992). "His Saddest Song". Newsweek. 119 (12): 52. 
^ Billboard 6 March 1993. Books.google.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton – Unplugged (Certifications)". RIAA. Retrieved 10 June 2016. 
^ "British album certifications – Eric Clapton – Unplugged". British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Enter Unplugged in the search field and then press Enter
^ "1992 MTV Video Music Awards". Mtv.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "1992 MTV VMAS". Rockonthenet.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "1992 Ivor Novello Awards". The Ivors. Retrieved 3 January 2018
^ SPIN magaone. Nov 1993. p. 32
^ D. Dicaire, More blues singers: biographies of 50 artists from the later 20th century (McFarland, 2001), p. 203.
^ Kutner, Jon (2010). 1000 UK Number One Hits. Omnibus Press. ISBN 9780857123602. 
^ "Billboard 6 September 1997". p.59. Billboard. Retrieved 12 December 2014
^ "Past Winners Search: Eric Clapton". The GRAMMYs. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Clapton Chronicles: The Best of Eric Clapton". AllMusic. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "The Runaway Bride (Original Soundtrack)". AllMusic. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Palace party draws 15m viewers". News.bbc.co.uk. 4 June 2002. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ a b Stephen Thomas Erlewine. "Concert for George". Allmusic. Retrieved 15 May 2012
^ "The Immortals". Rolling Stone. No. 946. Archived from the original on 17 October 2006. 
^ Saulnier, Jason (8 April 2010). "Chuck Leavell Interview". Music Legends. Retrieved 6 May 2013. 
^ Glenn Povey (2007). Echoes: the complete history of Pink Floyd Mind Head Publishing. Retrieved 29 December 2011
^ "God has a summer home in Columbus". UWeekly. 15 August 2005. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 30 March 2007. 
^ "Joel Rickett on the latest news from the publishing industry". The Guardian. London. 22 October 2005. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ "Eric Clapton 'receives North Korean invite'". CNN. 26 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 March 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ "Clapton asked to play in North Korea". BBC News. 26 February 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2008. 
^ "North Korea Seeks A Clapton Concert". The New York Times. 27 February 2008. Retrieved 7 May 2010. 
^ Woloschuk, Michael. "His Father's Eyes". Ottawa Citizen. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ Woloschuk, Michael. "Clapton Thanks Reporter". Canoe Jam. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ "Hard Rock Calling". Live Nation (Music) UK Limited. Hard Rock Calling. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2010. 
^ "Hard Rock Calling, Hyde Park, London Saturday 28 June 2008". Eric Clapton Online. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 7 May 2010. 
^ "Eric Clapton pulls out of rock and roll gig". entertainment.oneindia.in. Retrieved 30 October 2009. 
^ "Leonard Cohen and Van Morrison at MSG this weekend but Van will not be back for Rock Hall of Fame". brooklynvegan.com. Retrieved 30 October 2009. 
^ "Imus in the morning: highlights and interviews". wabcradio.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2009. Retrieved 30 October 2009. 
^ McCormick, Neil (14 February 2010). "Eric Clapton & Jeff Beck at the O2 Arena, review: A meeting of guitar geniuses Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck at the O2 Arena felt too formal and polite. Rating: * * *". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 2 May 2010. 
^ Ratliff, Ben (20 February 2010). "Yes, Two Guitar Idols Are Better Than One". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 May 2010. 
^ "Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck announce London O2 Arena gig". NME. UK. 23 November 2009. Retrieved 21 October 2009. 
^ "In pictures: The Prince's Trust Rock Gala 2010". Telegraph.co.uk. London. 18 November 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Rolling Stones to perform with Lady Gaga and Bruce Springsteen". The Telegraph. 10 December 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2016. 
^ "12 Unforgettable Photos from the Epic 12-12-12 Sandy Benefit Concert". TIME.com. 13 December 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton's T-Shirt Hit A Crossroad(s)". Ticodo. 17 June 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013. 
^ "Eric Clapton Kicks Off 50th Anniversary Tour With Killer Setlist". Coolalbumreview.com. 15 March 2013. Retrieved 9 June 2013. 
^ "Eric Clapton: 'When I'm 70, I'll Stop Touring'". RollingStone Magazine. Retrieved 11 June 2014. 
^ "More Signs Point Towards Eric Clapton Touring Retirement". JamBase. Retrieved 11 June 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton and Friends Honor JJ Cale With New Tribute LP". RollingStone Magazine. Retrieved 11 June 2014. 
^ "Fans' anger as Eric Clapton strops off stage at SSE Hydro". Herald Scotland. 21 June 2014. Retrieved 22 June 2014. 
^ "BBC News - Eric Clapton cuts short concert after 'technical issue'". BBC Online. 22 June 2014. Retrieved 22 June 2014. 
^ "Clapton apologises for concert exit". Herald Scotland. 23 June 2014. Retrieved 23 June 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton Says Touring Has Become 'Unbearable,' Confirms Retirement Plans". Ultimate Classic Rock. Retrieved 27 June 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton reveals nerve damage that makes playing guitar ‘hard work’". Washington Post.
^ "Eric Clapton "Slowhand At 70 – Live At The Royal Albert Hall"". Retrieved 17 November 2015. 
^ "Eric Clapton to Celebrate 70th Birthday With Two Shows at Madison Square Garden". Billboard. 23 April 2016. 
^ George Varga (5 August 2016). "Eric Clapton & JJ Cale's 'Live in San Diego' album announced". U-T San Diego. Retrieved 5 August 2016. 
^ "Eric Clapton: Me and Mr. Johnson". AllMusic. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Crystal Caviness; Dan Kimpel; Eric Clapton; David A. Mitchell; Lisa Zhito; Kevin Zimmerman (Fall 2003). "Sesac Focus Fall 2003" (PDF). Magazine. Sesac. Retrieved 23 August 2008. 
^ a b Clapton, Eric (2010). Eric Clapton: The Autobiography. p. 19. Random House.
^ Meisel, Perry (2010) The myth of popular culture from Dante to Dylan p.143. Retrieved 30 December 2010
^ "Eric Clapton: Blues guitar legend". News.bbc.co.uk. 31 December 2003. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Chipkin, Kenn (March 1998). Real Blues Guitar. Alfred Music Publishing, 1998. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-89898-579-5. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ Tatangelo, Wade (4 January 2007). "Derek Trucks on playing with Allman, Clapton, Dylan". PopMatters. McClatchy Newspapers. Retrieved 17 November 2009. 
^ Classicvanhalen.com, Guitar World Interview (February 1990).
^ "Under Investigation: Terry Kath". www.guitarplayer.com. Retrieved 20 March 2016. 
^ Hann, Michael (12 June 2011). "Eric Clapton creates the cult of the guitar hero". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 December 2016. 
^ "New faces on Sgt Pepper album cover for artist Peter Blake's 80th birthday". The Guardian. 5 October 2016. 
^ "Clapton – The early years". Legendarytones.com. 31 July 1966. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Clapton's Bluesbreakers Guitar Was A 1960 Gibson Les Paul Standard". Xs4all.nl. Archived from the original on 16 July 2009. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Andy Summers". Guitarplayer.com. Retrieved 23 October 2011. 
^ a b c Bob Gulla (2008) Guitar Gods: The 25 Players Who Made Rock History p.45. Retrieved 30 December 2010
^ a b c Oxman, J. Craig (December 2011). "Clapton's Fool: History's Greatest Guitar?". Vintage Guitar. Alan Greenwood. Retrieved 8 May 2015. 
^ Dregni, Michael (September 2014). "The Dallas Rangemaster". Vintage Guitar. pp. 46–49. 
^ Drozdowski, Ted (9 January 2009). "How to Get Clapton's Classic 'Woman Tone'". Lifestyle. Gibson.com. Retrieved 6 August 2010. 
^ a b c "Eric Clapton Guitar Auction, 24 June 2004: More Information and Images". Stratcollector.com. 18 March 2004. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ Ochoa, Hugh (27 June 2004). "2004 Eric Clapton Crossroads Guitar Auction: the Auction, the Burst Brothers, and Lee Dickson". Stratcollector.com. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ Tom Wheeler (2004) The Stratocaster chronicles: Fender : celebrating 50 years of the Fender Strat p.8. Hal Leonard Corporation, 2004
^ Landers, Rick (28 June 2004). "Strat Collector News Desk: An Interview with Eric Clapton Guitar Technician Lee Dickson". Stratcollector.com. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "The Eric Clapton FAQ – Guitars". Xs4all.nl. 3 September 2001. Archived from the original on 23 August 2009. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ a b c "Christie's – Eric Clapton Guitars". 14 June 2004. Archived from the original on 14 June 2004. Retrieved 30 March 2016. 
^ "Rock Memorabilia Market Booms: Eric Clapton". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 15 July 2009. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Eric Clapton's Blackie – Guitar Center". Gc.guitarcenter.com. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ Clapton's guitar: watching Wayne Henderson build the perfect instrument. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ Heritage Music and Entertainment Dallas Signature Auction Catalog #634. Ivy Press Heritage Capital Corporation. 2006. p. 181. 
^ "Bonhams Auction". Bonhams.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Eric Clapton Will Auction Vintage Guitars & Amps For His Crossroads Centre". 
^ "Ernie Ball – Artists". Ernie Ball. Archived from the original on 5 August 2008. Retrieved 21 August 2008. 
^ Kelly, Will. "Lee Dickson: Three Decades with Clapton". Vintage Guitar. pp. 44–48. 
^ "Frederick "Toots" Hibbert Biography". biography.com. Retrieved 2 July 2016. 
^ "Eric Clapton on stage at Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute ." Getty Images. 17 December 2017. 
^ Tobler, John: Who's who in rock & roll p.1988. Crescent Books, 1991
^ Boehm, Mike (12 July 1992). "ELTON JOHN "The One" MCA". articles.latimes.com. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 2011-09-18. 
^ a b "Live in Hyde Park (Video/DVD)". AllMusic. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Rhapsody.com Eric Clapton advert". 2007. Archived from the original on 14 August 2013. Retrieved 23 March 2007. 
^ "Toots and the Maytals: Reggae Got Soul". BBC Four (documentary). Directed by George Scott. UK. 2011. 59 min. Retrieved 15 Dec. 2016.
^ "That '70s Show. Series 2. Episode "Holy Crap"". ABC. 17 December 2017. 
^ Eric Clapton plays guitar on a KIA Cee'd. YouTube. 18 February 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2015. 
^ Schumacher, Michael (1992), p. 263.
^ Sandford, Christopher (1994). Clapton: Edge of Darkness, Victor Gollancz, p. 210.
^ Boyd, Pattie; Junor, Penny (2008). Wonderful Tonight: George Harrison, Eric Clapton, and Me. Random House. p. 233. ISBN 0307450228. 
^ "Eric Clapton's Son Killed in a 49-Story Fall". The New York Times. 21 March 1991. 
^ Eric Clapton on IMDb
^ Ruth ClaptonBartlett [@ruthclapton] (4 June 2013). "So happy to welcome our beautiful son Isaac Eric Owen Bartlett to the world, he's already so loved by us all. t.co/RxKr7OYsvi" (Tweet). Retrieved 8 June 2013 – via Twitter. 
^ "Clapton Headlines Pro-Hunt Concert". Contact Music. 30 April 2006. Retrieved 9 June 2014. 
^ Bainbridge, Luke (14 October 2007). "The ten right-wing rockers". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 7 October 2016. 
^ Hall, John (19 August 2009). "Dabbling in right wing politics – David Bowie, Brian Ferry and Eric Clapton". The Independent. London. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Rebel Rock by J. Street. First Edition (1986). Oxford Press Basil Blackwell.pp.74–75.
^ Manzoor, Sarfraz (20 April 2008). "The year rock found the power to unite". The Observer. London. Retrieved 18 January 2010. 
^ Charone, Barbara (October 1976). "Eric Clapton: Farther On Up The Road". Reprint for the web, article from Sounds Magazine. Retrieved 19 October 2009. 
^ Tyler, Kieron (1 December 2007). "Eric Clapton is not God". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 24 July 2015. 
^ Boyd, Brian (25 March 2005). "Eric's old post-colonial blues". The Irish Times. Retrieved 24 July 2015. 
^ "A sentimental journey". The Scotsman. Retrieved 22 August 2010. [permanent dead link]
^ "The gospel according to God". The Guardian. London. 21 October 2007. Retrieved 2 May 2010. 
^ "Eric Clapton". The South Bank Show. 2 December 2007. ITV. 
^ Beresford, Philip (June 2009). "Surrey's Richest 50; The Top Ten". Rank of the wealthiest residents of Surrey, England. Surrey Life Magazine. Retrieved 27 August 2011. 
^ a b "Clapton rescues gentlemen's shop". BBC. 2 August 2004. 
^ Tan, Danny (29 May 2012). "Ferrari SP12 EC – Eric Clapton's one-off is a 458 Italia with styling inspired by the 512 BB". Paul Tan's Automotive News. Petaling Jaya, Malaysia: Driven Communications Sdn Bhd. Retrieved 29 May 2012. 
^ "The Many Cars of Eric 'Slowhand' Clapton". This Week in Motors. Retrieved 20 August 2016. 
^ "Desert Island Discs 1989 – Eric Clapton & Sue Lawley". YouTube Network. Retrieved 20 August 2016. 
^ "Eric Clapton interview on Ferrari.com". YouTube Network. Retrieved 20 August 2016. 
^ "Eric Clapton displays one-off Ferrari SP12 EC at Goodwood". Autocar.co.uk. Retrieved 4 December 2017
^ "Eric Clapton with his wife Melia – Grid Walk with Martin Brundle F1". YouTube Network. Retrieved 20 August 2016. 
^ "Vintage Mini Cooper Radford Harrison/Clapton". Equipboard, Inc. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2016.  Archived from the original.
^ "Company Check, List of Directors of UK Companies and Organizations: Eric Patrick Clapton, Director, Clouds House". Company Check. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Company Check, List of Directors of UK Companies and Organizations, Eric Patrick Clapton, Director, The Chemical Dependency Centre". Company Check. Retrieved 22 September 2014. 
^ "Treatment Alternatives for Addiction". 27 March 2013. Archived from the original on 27 March 2013. Retrieved 30 March 2016. 
^ "Crossroads Centre Antigua, Official website". Crossroadsantigua.org. Retrieved 3 October 2013. 
^ "Crossroads Guitar Festival, Official website". Crossroadsguitarfestival.com. 8 April 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013. 
^ "Green and Growing Aid Still Required Helps Darfur Refugees Take Root". Aid Still Required.org. Retrieved 4 December 2017
^ a b "Throwback Thursday: The West Brom Match Sponsored By Eric Clapton (September 27, 1978)". Paste Magazine. 26 October 2016. 
^ "West Bromwich Albion's famous supporters". Birmingham mail. 23 June 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2016. 
^ Michael Schumacher, Crossroads: The Life and Music of Eric Clapton. Consulted on 12 August 2007.
^ "Awards Database – The BAFTA site". BAFTA. Retrieved 10 October 2009. 
^ "1993 Grammy Winners". The New York Times. 26 February 1993. Retrieved 20 August 2008. 
^ "Supplement to The London Gazette: 1995 New Year Honours list". The Gazette. London. 30 December 1994. Retrieved 17 September 2015. 
^ "Clapton's Hall of Fame hat-trick". BBC News. 8 December 1999. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "CBEs – full list". BBC News. 31 December 2003. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Musician Clapton delighted by CBE". BBC News. 3 November 2004. Retrieved 22 August 2010. 
^ "Lifetime Achievement Award". The Recording Academy. National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 2012. Retrieved 27 September 2012. 
^ "France Honors Eric Clapton". Where's Eric! The Eric Clapton Fan Club Magazine. May 27, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017. 
^ "Soundtracks for Goodfellas". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved 17 February 2007. 
^ "Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Of 'August: Osage County' To Be Released On January 7, 2014". Prnewswire.com. Retrieved 2017-07-22. 
^ "Lethal Weapon". Allmusic. Retrieved 16 December 2017
^ "Lethal Weapon 3". Allmusic. Retrieved 16 December 2017
^ "New Eric Clapton Album 'Old Sock' Due in March". Rolling Stone. 29 January 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2013. 


Further reading

On Clapton's career





Eric Clapton, Clapton, The Autobiography, 2007 and 2008, Broadway Books, 352 pp. / Arrow, 400 pages / Century, 384 pp.
Eric Clapton, Derek Taylor and Peter Blake, 24 Nights, Genesis Publications, 2 volumes, 1992, 198 and 64 pp. Eric Clapton's signed limited edition books, in a Solander box with 2 live CD
Ray Coleman, Clapton!: The Authorized Biography, Warner Books, 368 pp, or Futura, 336 pages, 1986; originally publ. as "Survivor: The Authorized Biography", Sidgwick & Jackson, 1985, 300 pp.
Christopher Hjort w/ a foreword by John Mayall, Strange brew: Eric Clapton and the British Blues Boom, 1965–1970, Jawbone, 2007, 352 pp.
Marc Roberty, Eric Clapton: The Complete Recording Sessions 1963–1992, Blandford or St. Martin's Press, 1993, 192 pp.
Marc Roberty, Slowhand: The Life & Music of Eric Clapton, Octopus or Harmony, 1991, 176 pp; upd. ed. Crown, 1993, 192 pp.
Marc Roberty, Eric Clapton in His Own Words, Omnibus Press, 1993, 96 pp.
Marc Roberty, Eric Clapton: The New Visual Documentary, Omnibus Press, 1990, 128 pp.; rev. ed., 1994, ...pp.; originally publ. as Eric Clapton: A Visual Documentary, 1986, ... pp.
Marc Roberty, Eric Clapton: The Man, the Music and the Memorabilia, Paper Tiger-Dragon's World, 1994, 226 pp.
Marc Roberty, The Complete Guide to the Music of Eric Clapton, Omnibus Press, 1995, 152 pp. CD format; rev. ed., 2005, 128 pp.
Michael Schumacher, Crossroads: The Life and Music of Eric Clapton, Hyperion, 1995, 388 pp.; rev. ed, Time Warner p'backs, 1998, 411 pp.; new ed. titled Eric Clapton, Sphere, 2008, 432 pp.
Harry Shapiro, Eric Clapton: Lost in The Blues, Guinness Books or Muze, 1992, 256 pp.; rev. ed. Da Capo press, 1193, 225 pp.; originally publ. as Slowhand: The Story of Eric Clapton, Proteus Books, 1985, 160 pp.
Dave Thompson, Cream: The World's First Supergroup, Virgin Books, 2005, 256 pp.; rev., upd. & illustr. ed. titled Cream: How Eric Clapton Took the World By Storm, 2006, 320 pp.
Steve Turner, Conversations with Eric Clapton, London: Abacus, 1976, 116 pp.




About Clapton's playing and sound




David M. Brewster (2003). "Eric Clapton". Introduction to Guitar Tone & Effects. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 54. ISBN 978-0-634-06046-5. 
H. P. Newquist and Richard Maloof (2003). "Eric Clapton". The Blues-Rock Masters. Backbeat Books. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-87930-735-6. 
Pete Prown and Lisa Sharken (2003). "Eric Clapton". Gear Secrets of the Guitar Legends. Backbeat Books. p. 6. ISBN 9780879307516. 




External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Eric Clapton





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eric Clapton.



Official website
Eric Clapton at Encyclopædia Britannica
"Eric Clapton". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.  
Eric Clapton discography at MusicBrainz
Eric Clapton on IMDb







v
t
e


Eric Clapton



Studio albums



Eric Clapton
461 Ocean Boulevard
There's One in Every Crowd
No Reason to Cry
Slowhand
Backless
Another Ticket
Money and Cigarettes
Behind the Sun
August
Journeyman
From the Cradle
Pilgrim
Reptile
Me and Mr. Johnson / Sessions for Robert J
Back Home
Clapton
Old Sock
I Still Do





Live albums



Eric Clapton's Rainbow Concert
E. C. Was Here
Just One Night
Time Pieces Vol.II Live in the Seventies
24 Nights
Unplugged
Crossroads 2: Live in the Seventies
One More Car, One More Rider
Live in San Diego





Compilations



The History of Eric Clapton
Eric Clapton at His Best
Clapton
Steppin' Out
Timepieces: The Best of Eric Clapton
Backtrackin'
The Cream of Eric Clapton
Crossroads
Story
The Cream of Clapton
Blues
Clapton Chronicles: The Best of Eric Clapton
Complete Clapton
Forever Man





Singles



"After Midnight" / "Easy Now"
"Blues Power" / "Bottle of Red Wine"
"Let It Rain"
"I Shot the Sheriff" / "Give Me Strength"
"Willie and the Hand Jive"
"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot"
"Knockin' on Heaven's Door"
"Hello Old Friend"
"Carnival"
"Lay Down Sally" / "Cocaine"
"Wonderful Tonight"
"Tulsa Time"
"Promises" / "Watch Out for Lucy"
"Early in the Morning (Live)"
"I Can't Stand It"
"I've Got a Rock 'n' Roll Heart"
"Crosscut Saw"
"Forever Man"
"It's in the Way That You Use It"
"Behind the Mask"
"Tearing Us Apart"
"Pretending" / "Before You Accuse Me"
"Hound Dog"
"Bad Love"
"Tears in Heaven" / "White Room (Live)"
"Layla (Acoustic)"
"Down & Out"
"Motherless Child" / "Driftin'"
"Change the World"
"Born in Time"
"Circus"
"My Father's Eyes"
"Pilgrim"
"Blue Eyes Blue"
"(I) Get Lost"
"Come Rain or Come Shine" / "Ten Long Years"
"3 O'Clock Blues"
"Key to the Highway"
"Worried Life Blues"
"I Ain't Gonna Stand for It"
"Every Little Thing" / "No Sympathy"





Soundtracks



Edge of Darkness
Homeboy
Rush





Concert films



Live 1986
The Cream of Eric Clapton
Live in Hyde Park
In Concert: A Benefit for the Crossroads Centre at Antigua
Sessions for Robert J
Crossroads Guitar Festival 2004
Live at Montreux 1986
Crossroads Guitar Festival 2007
Crossroads Guitar Festival 2010
Crossroads Guitar Festival 2013
Planes, Trains and Eric
Slowhand at 70 – Live at the Royal Albert Hall





Collaborations



Riding with the King
The Road to Escondido
Live from Madison Square Garden
Play the Blues: Live from Jazz at Lincoln Center
Crossroads Guitar Festival 2013
The Breeze: An Appreciation of JJ Cale





Tours



Journeyman World Tour
1992 Eric Clapton World Tour





Related



Album discography
Singles discography
Videography
Blackie
Brownie
The Fool
Signature Stratocaster
Crossroads Centre
Crossroads Guitar Festival
Pattie Boyd (wife)
Ferrari SP12 EC
Va Bene
Wonderful Tonight: George Harrison, Eric Clapton, and Me










Associated bands











v
t
e


The Yardbirds






Original members (1963–68): Keith Relf
Paul Samwell-Smith
Chris Dreja
Jim McCarty
Top Topham
Eric Clapton
Jeff Beck
Jimmy Page


Later members (since 1992): John Idan
Gypie Mayo
Alan Glen
Jerry Donahue
Ben King
Johnny A.
Kenny Aaronson
Myke Scavone





Albums



For Your Love
Having a Rave Up
Roger the Engineer
Little Games
Birdland





Live albums



Five Live Yardbirds
Sonny Boy Williamson and the Yardbirds
Live Yardbirds! Featuring Jimmy Page
BBC Sessions
Reunion Jam
Live! Blueswailing July '64
Live at B.B. King Blues Club
Making Tracks





Compilations



The Yardbirds Greatest Hits
Shapes of Things
Cumular Limit
Ultimate!
Yardbirds '68





Bootlegs



Golden Eggs
More Golden Eggs





Singles



"I Wish You Would"
"Good Morning Little Schoolgirl"
"For Your Love"
"Heart Full of Soul"
"Evil Hearted You"
"I'm a Man"
"Shapes of Things"
"You're a Better Man Than I
"Boom Boom"
"Over Under Sideways Down"
"Happenings Ten Years Time Ago"
"Ten Little Indians"





Other songs



"Let It Rock"
"Who Do You Love"
"You Can't Judge a Book by Looking at the Cover"
"Too Much Monkey Business"
"Smokestack Lightning"
"Five Long Years"
"The Sky Is Crying"
"My Girl Sloopy"
"The Train Kept A-Rollin'"
"Spoonful"
"The Stumble"
"Dust My Blues"
"White Summer"
"Stealing Stealing"
"Most Likely You Go Your Way (And I'll Go Mine)"
"Dazed and Confused"
"Knowing That I'm Losing You"
"I'm Waiting for the Man"





Related
articles



Discography
Members
Giorgio Gomelsky
Simon Napier-Bell
Mickie Most
Peter Grant
Cream
Jeff Beck Group
Led Zeppelin
Renaissance
Box of Frogs






Media










v
t
e


Cream






Ginger Baker
Jack Bruce
Eric Clapton





Studio albums



Fresh Cream
Disraeli Gears
Wheels of Fire
Goodbye





Live albums



Live Cream
Live Cream Volume II
BBC Sessions
Royal Albert Hall London May 2-3-5-6, 2005





Compilations



Best of Cream
Heavy Cream
Strange Brew: The Very Best of Cream
The Very Best of Cream
Those Were the Days
Gold





Singles



"Wrapping Paper"
"I Feel Free"
"Strange Brew"/"Tales of Brave Ulysses"
"Spoonful"
"Sunshine of Your Love"/"SWLABR"
"Anyone for Tennis"
"White Room"
"Crossroads"
"Badge"
"Lawdy Mama"





Other songs



"Four Until Late"
"Rollin' and Tumblin'"
"I'm So Glad"
"Toad"
"We're Going Wrong"
"Outside Woman Blues"
"Sitting on Top of the World"
"Born Under a Bad Sign"
"Steppin' Out"
"Doing That Scrapyard Thing"





Film



Cream's Farewell Concert





Collaborators



Pete Brown
Felix Pappalardi
Martin Sharp
Gail Collins
Janet Godfrey
George Harrison
Mike Taylor
Robert Stigwood





Related articles



Discography
Songs
The Graham Bond Organisation
John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers
Eric Clapton and the Powerhouse
Blind Faith
BBM








 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Derek and the Dominos






Duane Allman
Eric Clapton
Jim Gordon
Carl Radle
Bobby Whitlock





Studio album



Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs





Live albums



In Concert
Live at the Fillmore





Reissues



The Layla Sessions: 20th Anniversary Edition





Songs



"Layla"
"Bell Bottom Blues"
"Tell the Truth"
"Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out"
"Key to the Highway"
"Have You Ever Loved a Woman"
"Little Wing"





Related articles



Blind Faith
Delaney & Bonnie
Dave Mason
The Allman Brothers Band
Pattie Boyd












v
t
e


John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers






John Mayall


Eric Clapton
Jack Bruce
Peter Green
John McVie
Mick Fleetwood
Hughie Flint
Mick Taylor
Colin Allen
Don "Sugarcane" Harris
Harvey Mandel
Larry Taylor
Aynsley Dunbar
Dick Heckstall-Smith
Andy Fraser
Roger Dean
Alan Skidmore
Keef Hartley
Jon Hiseman
Rick Vito
Henry Lowther
Tony Reeves
Rocky Athas
Jay Davenport
Greg Rzab





Studio albums



Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton (1966)
A Hard Road (1967)
Crusade (1967)
Bare Wires (1968)
Blues from Laurel Canyon (1968)
Wake Up Call (1993)
Road Dogs (2005)





John Mayall solo



The Blues Alone (1967)
Empty Rooms (1969)
USA Union (1970)
Memories (1971)
Back to the Roots (1971)
Ten Years Are Gone (1973)
Spinning Coin (1995)
Tough (2009)
A Special Life (2014)





Live and compilation albums



John Mayall Plays John Mayall (1965)
Looking Back (1969)
The Turning Point (1969)
Thru the Years (1971)
Jazz Blues Fusion (1972)
The 1982 Reunion Concert (1992)
70th Birthday Concert (2003)
Live from Austin, TX (2007)








 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Plastic Ono Band






John Lennon
Yoko Ono





Members 1969–1974



Eric Clapton
Klaus Voormann
Alan White
Ringo Starr
Delaney Bramlett
Bonnie Bramlett
Jim Gordon
George Harrison
Nicky Hopkins
Bobby Keys
Keith Moon
Billy Preston
Jim Price
Hugh McCracken
Stuart Scharf
David Spinozza
Kenneth Ascher
Michael Brecker
Arthur Jenkins
David Friedman
Pete Kleinow
Don Brooks
Jeremy Steig
Jesse Ed Davis
Eddie Mottau





Members 2009–present



Sean Lennon
Cornelius
Yuka Honda
Michael Leonhart
Erik Friedlander





Albums



Live Peace in Toronto 1969
John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band
Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band
Some Time in New York City
Approximately Infinite Universe
Feeling the Space
Mind Games
Walls and Bridges
Shaved Fish
Live in New York City
Don't Stop Me!
Between My Head and the Sky
The Flaming Lips with Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band
Take Me to the Land of Hell





Singles



"Give Peace a Chance"
"Cold Turkey"
"Instant Karma!"
"Mother
"Power to the People
"Happy Xmas (War Is Over)"
"Woman Is the Nigger of the World"
"Now or Never"
"Death of Samantha"
"Mind Games"
"Whatever Gets You thru the Night"
"#9 Dream





Related articles



List of Plastic Ono Band lineups
Elephant's Memory
The Dirty Mac
Toronto Rock and Roll Revival








 Category












v
t
e


People associated with the Beatles



Personnel



Neil Aspinall
Dave Dexter Jr.
Geoff Emerick
Mal Evans
Glyn Johns
Bert Kaempfert
Freda Kelly
Jeff Lynne
Magic Alex
Ken Mansfield
George Martin
Giles Martin
Phil McDonald
Ken Scott
Norman Smith
Phil Spector
Alistair Taylor
Chris Thomas
Ken Townsend
Peter Vince





Businessmen



Peter Bennett
Sid Bernstein
Peter Brown
Lee Eastman
Brian Epstein
Dick James
Allen Klein
Joseph Lockwood
Larry Parnes
Allan Williams





Musicians



Eric Clapton
The Dirty Mac
Donovan
Bob Dylan
Johnny Gentle
Nicky Hopkins
Johnny Hutchinson
Mick Jagger
Brian Jones
Jim Keltner
David Mason
Tommy Moore
Chas Newby
Jimmie Nicol
Harry Nilsson
Peter and Gordon
Plastic Ono Band
Billy Preston
Ronnie Scott
Ravi Shankar
Tony Sheridan
Rory Storm and the Hurricanes
Andy White





Writers



Tony Barrow
Alan Clayson
Ray Coleman
Ray Connolly
Hunter Davies
Peter Doggett
Walter Everett
Larry Kane
Mark Lewisohn
Ian MacDonald
Philip Norman
Alan W. Pollack
Nicholas Schaffner
Bruce Spizer
Derek Taylor





Girlfriends / wives



Nancy Lee Andrews
Jane Asher
Barbara Bach
Pattie Boyd
Olivia Harrison
Astrid Kirchherr
Cynthia Lennon
Linda McCartney
Heather Mills
Yoko Ono
Francie Schwartz
Maureen Starkey





Parents / guardians



Mona Best
Alfred Lennon
Julia Lennon
Jim and Mary McCartney
George Smith
Mimi Smith





Other



Tony Anthony
Peter Blake
George Dunning
Horst Fascher
The Fool
Robert Freeman
Bill Harry
Jann Haworth
Bruno Koschmider
Richard Lester
Ruth McCartney
Murray the K
Ed Sullivan
Saul Swimmer
Ivan Vaughan
Jürgen Vollmer
Klaus Voormann
Lord Woodbine
Bob Wooler
David Wynne
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
Roby Yonge

















v
t
e


Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Class of 2000



Performers



Eric Clapton
Earth, Wind & Fire (Philip Bailey, Larry Dunn, Johnny Graham, Ralph Johnson, Al McKay, Fred White, Maurice White, Verdine White, Andrew Woolfolk)
The Lovin' Spoonful (Steve Boone, Joe Butler, John Sebastian, Zal Yanovsky)
The Moonglows (Prentiss Barnes, Harvey Fuqua, Peter Graves, Billy Johnson, Bobby Lester)
Bonnie Raitt
James Taylor





Early influences



Nat King Cole
Billie Holiday





Non-performers
(Ahmet Ertegun Award)



Clive Davis





Sidemen



Hal Blaine
King Curtis
James Jamerson
Scotty Moore
Earl Palmer









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 46945873
LCCN: n84222859
ISNI: 0000 0003 6855 2322
GND: 119073102
SELIBR: 223940
SUDOC: 033662827
BNF: cb13892530m (data)
BIBSYS: 90600646
MusicBrainz: 618b6900-0618-4f1e-b835-bccb17f84294
NLA: 35799208
NDL: 00620495
NKC: ola2002145157
BNE: XX982874
IATH: w6h82h8s











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eric_Clapton&oldid=818465831"					Categories: Eric Clapton1945 births20th-century English singers21st-century English singersAlumni of Kingston College (England)Alumni of Kingston UniversityAtco Records artistsBlind Faith membersBlues rock musiciansBrit Award winnersBritish rhythm and blues boom musiciansCommanders of the Order of the British EmpireCream (band) membersDelaney & Bonnie & Friends membersDerek and the Dominos membersThe Dirty Mac membersEnglish autobiographersEnglish blues guitaristsMale guitaristsEnglish blues singersEnglish male singersEnglish songwritersEnglish people of Canadian descentEnglish rock guitaristsEnglish rock singersElectric blues musiciansGrammy Award winnersIvor Novello Award winnersJohn Mayall & the Bluesbreakers membersLead guitaristsLiving peoplePeople from Guildford (district)Plastic Ono Band membersPolydor Records artistsReprise Records artistsResonator guitaristsRock and Roll Hall of Fame inducteesRSO Records artistsSilver Clef Awards winnersSlide guitaristsSongwriters Hall of Fame inducteesThe Yardbirds membersWarner Bros. Records artistsBlues Hall of Fame inducteesEnglish huntersHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesEngvarB from July 2016Use dmy dates from July 2016Articles with hCardsArticles with hAudio microformatsArticles with Encyclopædia Britannica linksMusicBrainz artist same as WikidataArticles with MusicBrainz artist linksAC with 14 elementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersWikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers