For other uses, see Espionage (disambiguation).
"Spy" and "Secret agent" redirect here. For other uses, see Spy (disambiguation) and Secret agent (disambiguation).
Espionage (colloquially, spying) is the obtaining of secret or confidential information without the permission of the holder of the information. Spies help agencies uncover secret information.[1] Any individual or spy ring (a cooperating group of spies), in the service of a government, company or independent operation, can commit espionage. The practice is clandestine, as it is by definition unwelcome and in many cases illegal and punishable by law. Espionage is a subset of "intelligence" gathering, which includes espionage as well as information gathering from public sources.
Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern. However, the term tends to associate with state spying on potential or actual enemies for military purposes. Spying involving corporations is known as industrial espionage.
One of the most effective ways to gather data and information about the enemy (or potential enemy) is by infiltrating the enemy's ranks. This is the job of the spy (espionage agent). Spies can return all sorts of information concerning the size and strength of enemy forces. They can also find dissidents within the enemy's forces and influence them to defect. In times of crisis, spies can also oblige to steal technology and sabotage the enemy in various ways. Counterintelligence is the practice of various means of thwarting enemy espionage and intelligence-gathering. Almost all nations have strict laws concerning espionage and the penalty for being caught is often severe. However, the benefits through espionage are often great enough that most governments and many large corporations make use of it to varying degrees.
Further information on clandestine human intelligence and human intelligence information collection techniques is available, including discussions of operational techniques, asset recruiting, and the tradecraft used to collect this information.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Today


2 Targets of espionage
3 Methods and terminology

3.1 Technology and techniques


4 Organization
5 Industrial espionage
6 Agents in espionage
7 Law

7.1 History of espionage laws
7.2 Use against non-spies
7.3 Espionage laws in the UK
7.4 Government intelligence laws and its distinction from espionage
7.5 Military conflicts


8 List of famous spies

8.1 World War I
8.2 Post World War II


9 Spy fiction

9.1 World War II: 1939–1945
9.2 Cold War era: 1945–1991


10 See also
11 References

11.1 Works cited


12 Further reading
13 External links



History[edit]
Main article: History of espionage
Today[edit]
Today, espionage agencies target the illegal drug trade and terrorists as well as state actors. Since 2008 the United States has charged at least 57 defendants for attempting to spy for China.[2]
Different intelligence services value certain intelligence collection techniques over others. The former Union, for example, preferred human sources over research in open sources, while the United States has tended to emphasize technological methods such as SIGINT and IMINT. Both Soviet political (KGB) and military intelligence (GRU[3]) officers were judged by the number of agents they recruited.
Targets of espionage[edit]
Espionage agents are usually trained experts in a specific targeted field so they can differentiate mundane information from targets of intrinsic value to their own organizational development. Correct identification of the target at its execution is the sole purpose of the espionage operation.[citation needed]
Broad areas of espionage targeting expertise include:[citation needed]

Natural resources: strategic production identification and assessment (food, energy, materials). Agents are usually found among bureaucrats who administer these resources in their own countries
Popular sentiment towards domestic and foreign policies (popular, middle class, elites). Agents often recruited from field journalistic crews, exchange postgraduate students and sociology researchers
Strategic economic strengths (production, research, manufacture, infrastructure). Agents recruited from science and technology academia, commercial enterprises, and more rarely from among military technologists
Military capability intelligence (offensive, defensive, maneuver, naval, air, space). Agents are trained by special military espionage education facilities, and posted to an area of operation with covert identities to minimize prosecution
Counterintelligence operations specifically targeting opponents' intelligence services themselves, such as breaching confidentiality of communications, and recruiting defectors or moles

Methods and terminology[edit]
Although the news media may speak of "spy satellites" and the like, espionage is not a synonym for all intelligence-gathering disciplines. It is a specific form of human source intelligence (HUMINT). Codebreaking (cryptanalysis or COMINT), aircraft or satellite photography, (IMINT) and research in open publications (OSINT) are all intelligence gathering disciplines, but none of them are considered espionage. Many HUMINT activities, such as prisoner interrogation, reports from military reconnaissance patrols and from diplomats, etc., are not considered espionage. Espionage is the disclosure of sensitive information (classified) to people who are not cleared for that information or access to that sensitive information.
Unlike other forms of intelligence collection disciplines, espionage usually involves accessing the place where the desired information is stored or accessing the people who know the information and will divulge it through some kind of subterfuge. There are exceptions to physical meetings, such as the Oslo Report, or the insistence of Robert Hanssen in never meeting the people who bought his information.
The US defines espionage towards itself as "The act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation". Black's Law Dictionary (1990) defines espionage as: "... gathering, transmitting, or losing ... information related to the national defense". Espionage is a violation of United States law, 18 U.S.C. §§ 792–798 and Article 106a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice".[4] The United States, like most nations, conducts espionage against other nations, under the control of the National Clandestine Service. Britain's espionage activities are controlled by the Secret Intelligence Service.
Technology and techniques[edit]
See also: Tradecraft and List of intelligence gathering disciplines


Agent handling
Concealment device
Covert agent
Covert listening device
Cut-out
Cyber spying
Dead drop
False flag operations
Honeypot
Interrogation
Non-official cover
Numbers messaging
Official cover
One-way voice link
Safe house
Side channel attack
Steganography
Surveillance
Surveillance aircraft


[5]
Organization[edit]




An intelligence officer's clothing, accessories, and behavior must be as unremarkable as possible — their lives (and others') may depend on it.


A spy is a person employed to seek out top secret information from a source. Within the United States Intelligence Community, "asset" is a more common usage. A case officer, who may have diplomatic status (i.e., official cover or non-official cover), supports and directs the human collector. Cutouts are couriers who do not know the agent or case officer but transfer messages. A safe house is a refuge for spies. Spies often seek to obtain secret information from another source.
In larger networks the organization can be complex with many methods to avoid detection, including clandestine cell systems. Often the players have never met. Case officers are stationed in foreign countries to recruit and to supervise intelligence agents, who in turn spy on targets in their countries where they are assigned. A spy need not be a citizen of the target country—hence does not automatically commit treason when operating within it. While the more common practice is to recruit a person already trusted with access to sensitive information, sometimes a person with a well-prepared synthetic identity (cover background), called a legend in tradecraft, may attempt to infiltrate a target organization.
These agents can be moles (who are recruited before they get access to secrets), defectors (who are recruited after they get access to secrets and leave their country) or defectors in place (who get access but do not leave).
A legend is also employed for an individual who is not an illegal agent, but is an ordinary citizen who is "relocated", for example, a "protected witness". Nevertheless, such a non-agent very likely will also have a case officer who will act as controller. As in most, if not all synthetic identity schemes, for whatever purpose (illegal or legal), the assistance of a controller is required.
Spies may also be used to spread disinformation in the organization in which they are planted, such as giving false reports about their country's military movements, or about a competing company's ability to bring a product to market. Spies may be given other roles that also require infiltration, such as sabotage.
Many governments routinely spy on their allies as well as their enemies, although they typically maintain a policy of not commenting on this. Governments also employ private companies to collect information on their behalf such as SCG International Risk, International Intelligence Limited and others.
Many organizations, both national and non-national, conduct espionage operations. It should not be assumed that espionage is always directed at the most secret operations of a target country. National and terrorist organizations and other groups are also targets.[citation needed] This is because governments want to retrieve information that they can use to be proactive in protecting their nation from potential terrorist attacks.
Communications both are necessary to espionage and clandestine operations, and also a great vulnerability when the adversary has sophisticated SIGINT detection and interception capability. Agents must also transfer money securely.[citation needed]
Industrial espionage[edit]
Main article: Industrial espionage
Reportedly Canada is losing $12 billion[6] and German companies are estimated to be losing about €50 billion ($87 billion) and 30,000 jobs[7] to industrial espionage every year.
Agents in espionage[edit]
In espionage jargon, an "agent" is the person who does the spying; a citizen of one country who is recruited by a second country to spy on or work against his own country or a third country. In popular usage, this term is often erroneously applied to a member of an intelligence service who recruits and handles agents; in espionage such a person is referred to as an intelligence officer, intelligence operative or case officer. There are several types of agent in use today.

Double agent, "is a person who engages in clandestine activity for two intelligence or security services (or more in joint operations), who provides information about one or about each to the other, and who wittingly withholds significant information from one on the instructions of the other or is unwittingly manipulated by one so that significant facts are withheld from the adversary. Peddlers, fabricators, and others who work for themselves rather than a service are not double agents because they are not agents. The fact that doubles have an agent relationship with both sides distinguishes them from penetrations, who normally are placed with the target service in a staff or officer capacity."[8]

Re-doubled agent, an agent who gets caught as a double agent and is forced to mislead the foreign intelligence service.

Unwitting double agent, an agent who offers or is forced to recruit as a double or re-doubled agent and in the process is recruited by either a third party intelligence service or his own government without the knowledge of the intended target intelligence service or the agent. This can be useful in capturing important information from an agent that is attempting to seek allegiance with another country. The double agent usually has knowledge of both intelligence services and can identify operational techniques of both, thus making third party recruitment difficult or impossible. The knowledge of operational techniques can also affect the relationship between the Operations Officer (or case officer) and the agent if the case is transferred by an Operational Targeting Officer to a new Operations Officer, leaving the new officer vulnerable to attack. This type of transfer may occur when an officer has completed his term of service or when his cover is blown.

Triple agent, an agent that is working for three intelligence services.






Intelligence agent: Provides access to sensitive information through the use of special privileges. If used in corporate intelligence gathering, this may include gathering information of a corporate business venture or stock portfolio. In economic intelligence, "Economic Analysts may use their specialized skills to analyze and interpret economic trends and developments, assess and track foreign financial activities, and develop new econometric and modeling methodologies."[9] This may also include information of trade or tariff.
Access agent: Provides access to other potential agents by providing profiling information that can help lead to recruitment into an intelligence service.
Agent of influence: Someone who may provide political influence in an area of interest or may even provide publications needed to further an intelligence service agenda. The use of the media to print a story to mislead a foreign service into action, exposing their operations while under surveillance.
Agent provocateur: This type of agent instigates trouble, or may provide information to gather as many people as possible into one location for an arrest.
Facilities agent: A facilities agent may provide access to buildings such as garages or offices used for staging operations, resupply, etc.
Principal agent: This agent functions as a handler for an established network of agents usually "Blue Chip".
Confusion agent: May provide misleading information to an enemy intelligence service or attempt to discredit the operations of the target in an operation.
Sleeper agent: A sleeper agent is a person who is recruited to an intelligence service to wake up and perform a specific set of tasks or functions while living under cover in an area of interest. This type of agent is not the same as a deep cover operative, who continually contacts a case officer to file intelligence reports. A sleeper agent is not in contact with anyone until activated.
Illegal agent: This is a person who is living in another country under false credentials that does not report to a local station. A non official cover operative is a type of cover used by an intelligence operative and can be dubbed an "Illegal"[10] when working in another country without diplomatic protection.

Law[edit]
Espionage is a crime under the legal code of many nations. In the United States it is covered by the Espionage Act of 1917. The risks of espionage vary. A spy breaking the host country's laws may be deported, imprisoned, or even executed. A spy breaking his/her own country's laws can be imprisoned for espionage or/and treason (which in the USA and some other jurisdictions can only occur if he or she take ups arms or aids the enemy against his or her own country during wartime), or even executed, as the Rosenbergs were. For example, when Aldrich Ames handed a stack of dossiers of U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agents in the Eastern Bloc to his KGB-officer "handler", the KGB "rolled up" several networks, and at least ten people were secretly shot. When Ames was arrested by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), he faced life in prison; his contact, who had diplomatic immunity, was declared persona non grata and taken to the airport. Ames' wife was threatened with life imprisonment if her husband did not cooperate; he did, and she was given a five-year sentence. Hugh Francis Redmond, a CIA officer in China, spent nineteen years in a Chinese prison for espionage—and died there—as he was operating without diplomatic cover and immunity.[11]
In United States law, treason,[12] espionage,[13] and spying[14] are separate crimes. Treason and espionage have graduated punishment levels.
The United States in World War I passed the Espionage Act of 1917. Over the years, many spies, such as the Soble spy ring, Robert Lee Johnson, the Rosenberg ring, Aldrich Hazen Ames,[15] Robert Philip Hanssen,[16] Jonathan Pollard, John Anthony Walker, James Hall III, and others have been prosecuted under this law.
History of espionage laws[edit]
From ancient times, the penalty for espionage in many countries was execution. this was true right up until the era of World War II; for example, Josef Jakobs was a Nazi spy who parachuted into Great Britain in 1941 and was executed for espionage.
In modern times, many people convicted of espionage have been given penal sentences rather than execution. For example, Aldrich Hazen Ames is an American CIA analyst, turned KGB mole, who was convicted of espionage in 1994; he is serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole in the high-security Allenwood U.S. Penitentiary.[17] Ames was formerly a 31-year CIA counterintelligence officer and analyst who committed espionage against his country by spying for the Soviet Union and Russia.[18] So far as it is known, Ames compromised the second-largest number of CIA agents, second only to Robert Hanssen, who is also serving a prison sentence.
Use against non-spies[edit]
Espionage laws are also used to prosecute non-spies. In the United States, the Espionage Act of 1917 was used against socialist politician Eugene V. Debs (at that time the act had much stricter guidelines and amongst other things banned speech against military recruiting). The law was later used to suppress publication of periodicals, for example of Father Coughlin in World War II. In the early 21st century, the act was used to prosecute whistleblowers such as Thomas Andrews Drake, John Kiriakou, and Edward Snowden, as well as officials who communicated with journalists for innocuous reasons, such as Stephen Jin-Woo Kim.[19][20]
As of 2012, India and Pakistan were holding several hundred prisoners of each other's country for minor violations like trespass or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage attached. Some of these include cases where Pakistan and India both deny citizenship to these people, leaving them stateless. The BBC reported in 2012 on one such case, that of Mohammed Idrees, who was held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15-day visa by 2–3 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999. Much of the 13 years was spent in prison waiting for a hearing, and more time was spent homeless or living with generous families. The Indian People's Union for Civil Liberties and Human Rights Law Network both decried his treatment. The BBC attributed some of the problems to tensions caused by the Kashmir conflict.[21]
Espionage laws in the UK[edit]
Espionage is illegal in the UK under the Official Secrets Acts of 1911 and 1920. The UK law under this legislation considers espionage as actions "intend to help an enemy and deliberately harm the security of the nation". According to MI5, a person will be charged with the crime of espionage if they, "for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State": approaches, enters or inspects a prohibited area; makes documents such as plans that are intended, calculated, or could directly or indirectly be of use to an enemy; or "obtains, collects, records, or publishes, or communicates to any other person any secret official code word, or pass word, or any sketch, plan, model, article, or note, or other document which is calculated to be or might be or is intended to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy". The illegality of espionage also includes any action which may be considered 'preparatory to' spying, or encouraging or aiding another to spy.[22]
An individual convicted of espionage can be imprisoned for up to 14 years in the UK, although multiple sentences can be issued.
Government intelligence laws and its distinction from espionage[edit]
Government intelligence is very much distinct from espionage, and is not illegal in the UK, providing that the organisations of individuals are registered, often with the ICO, and are acting within the restrictions of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA). 'Intelligence' is considered legally as "information of all sorts gathered by a government or organisation to guide its decisions. It includes information that may be both public and private, obtained from many different public or secret sources. It could consist entirely of information from either publicly available or secret sources, or be a combination of the two."[23]
However, espionage and intelligence can be linked. According to the MI5 website, "foreign intelligence officers acting in the UK under diplomatic cover may enjoy immunity from prosecution. Such persons can only be tried for spying (or, indeed, any criminal offence) if diplomatic immunity is waived beforehand. Those officers operating without diplomatic cover have no such immunity from prosecution".
There are also laws surrounding government and organisational intelligence and surveillance. Generally, the body involved should be issued with some form of warrant or permission from the government, and should be enacting their procedures in the interest of protecting national security or the safety of public citizens. Those carrying out intelligence missions should act within not only RIPA, but also the Data Protection Act and Human Rights Act. However, there are spy equipment laws and legal requirements around intelligence methods that vary for each form of intelligence enacted.
Military conflicts[edit]




French spy captured during the Franco-Prussian War.


In military conflicts, espionage is considered permissible as many nations recognizes the inevitability of opposing sides seeking intelligence each about the dispositions of the other. To make the mission easier and successful, soldiers or agents wear disguises to conceal their true identity from the enemy while penetrating enemy lines for intelligence gathering. However, if they are caught behind enemy lines in disguises, they are not entitled to prisoner-of-war status and subject to prosecution and punishment—including execution.
The Hague Convention of 1907 addresses the status of wartime spies, specifically within "Laws and Customs of War on Land" (Hague IV); October 18, 1907: CHAPTER II Spies".[24] Article 29 states that a person is considered a spy who, acts clandestinely or on false pretenses, infiltrates enemy lines with the intention of acquiring intelligence about the enemy and communicate it to the belligerent during times of war. Soldiers who penetrates enemy lines in proper uniforms for the purpose of acquiring intelligence are not considered spies but are lawful combatants entitled to be treated as prisoners of war upon capture by the enemy. Article 30 states that a spy captured behind enemy lines may only be punished following a trial. However, Article 31 provides that if a spy successfully rejoined his own military and is then captured by the enemy as a lawful combatant, he cannot be punished for his previous acts of espionage and must be treated as a prisoner of war. Note that this provision does not apply to citizens who committed treason against their own country or co-belligerents of that country and may be captured and prosecuted at any place or any time regardless whether he rejoined the military to which he belongs or not or during or after the war.[25][26]
The ones that are excluded from being treated as spies while behind enemy lines are escaping prisoners of war and downed airmen as international law distinguishes between a disguised spy and a disguised escaper.[5] It is permissible for these groups to wear enemy uniforms or civilian clothes in order to facilitate their escape back to friendly lines so long as they do not attack enemy forces, collect military intelligence, or engage in similar military operations while so disguised.[27][28] Soldiers who are wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes simply for the sake of warmth along with other purposes rather than engaging in espionage or similar military operations while so attired is also excluded from being treated as unlawful combatants.[5]
Saboteurs are treated as spies as they too wear disguises behind enemy lines for the purpose of waging destruction on enemy's vital targets in addition to intelligence gathering.[29][30] For example, during World War II, eight German agents entered the U.S. in June 1942 as part of Operation Pastorius, a sabotage mission against U.S. economic targets. Two weeks later, all were arrested in civilian clothes by the FBI thanks to two German agents betraying the mission to the U.S. Under the Hague Convention of 1907, these Germans were classified as spies and tried by a military tribunal in Washington D.C.[31] On August 3, 1942, all eight were found guilty and sentenced to death. Five days later, six were executed by electric chair at the District of Columbia jail. Two who had given evidence against the others had their sentences reduced by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to prison terms. In 1948, they were released by President Harry S. Truman and deported to the American Zone of occupied Germany.
The U.S. codification of enemy spies is Article 106 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. This provides a mandatory death sentence if a person captured in the act is proven to be "lurking as a spy or acting as a spy in or about any place, vessel, or aircraft, within the control or jurisdiction of any of the armed forces, or in or about any shipyard, any manufacturing or industrial plant, or any other place or institution engaged in work in aid of the prosecution of the war by the United States, or elsewhere".[32]
List of famous spies[edit]






This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (March 2010)



See also: Intelligence agency, Special Operations Executive, and United States government security breaches




Howard Burnham (1915)






FBI file photo of the leader of the Duquesne Spy Ring (1941)



Reign of Elizabeth I of England

Sir Francis Walsingham
Christopher Marlowe


American Revolution

Thomas Knowlton, first American Spy
Nathan Hale
Hercules Mulligan
John Andre
James Armistead
Benjamin Tallmadge, case agent who organized of the Culper spy ring in New York City


Napoleonic Wars

Charles-Louis Schulmeister
William Wickham


American Civil War

One of the innovations in the American Civil War was the use of proprietary companies for intelligence collection by the Union; see Allan Pinkerton.
Confederate Secret Service
Belle Boyd[33]


Aceh War

Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje


Second Boer War

Fritz Joubert Duquesne
Sidney Reilly


Russo-Japanese War

Sidney Reilly
Ho Liang-Shung
Akashi Motojiro



World War I[edit]
See also: Espionage in Norway during World War I

Fritz Joubert Duquesne
Jules C. Silber
Mata Hari
Howard Burnham
T.E. Lawrence
Sidney Reilly
Maria de Victorica
Elsbeth Schragmüller

11 German spies were executed in the Tower of London during WW1.[34]

Executed: Carl Hans Lody on 6 November 1914, in the Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: Carl Frederick Muller on 23 June 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. Prepared bullets were used by the execution party.
Executed: Haicke Marinus Janssen & Willem Johannes Roos both executed on 30 July 1915, both in the Tower ditch.
Executed: Ernst Waldemar Melin on 10 September 1915, Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: Augusto Alfredo Roggen on 17 September 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: Fernando Buschman on 19 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: George Traugott Breeckow, otherwise known as Reginald Rowland or George T. Parker on 26 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. Worked with a lady called Lizzie Louise Wertheim who was sentenced to ten years penal servitude. Later on 17 January 1918 was certified as insane and died in Broadmoor criminal lunatic asylum on 29 July 1920.
Executed: Irving Guy Ries on 27 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: Albert Mayer on 2 December 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range.
Executed: Ludovico Hurwitz-y-Zender on 11 April 1916 in Miniature Rifle Range.

Carl Hans Lody has his own grave and black headstone in the East London Cemetery, Plaistow. The others are buried about 150 yards away under a small memorial stone alongside a pathway.
Spying has sometimes been considered a gentlemanly pursuit, with recruiting focused on military officers, or at least on persons of the class from whom officers are recruited. However, the demand for male soldiers, an increase in women's rights, and the tactical advantages of female spies led the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) to set aside any lingering Victorian Era prejudices and begin employing them in April 1942.[35] Their task was to transmit information from Nazi occupied France back to Allied Forces. The main strategic reason was that men in France faced a high risk of being interrogated by Nazi troops but women were less likely to arouse suspicion. In this way they made good couriers and proved equal to, if not more effective than, their male counterparts. Their participation in Organization and Radio Operation was also vital to the success of many operations, including the main network between Paris and London.
See also: Clandestine HUMINT asset recruiting § Love, honeypots and recruitment
Post World War II[edit]
Further information: Cold War espionage
In the United States, there are seventeen[36] (taking military intelligence into consideration, it's 22 agencies) federal agencies that form the United States Intelligence Community. The Central Intelligence Agency operates the National Clandestine Service (NCS)[37] to collect human intelligence and perform Covert operations.[38] The National Security Agency collects Signals Intelligence. Originally the CIA spearheaded the US-IC. Pursuant to the September 11 attacks the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) was created to promulgate information-sharing.

Kim Philby
Ray Mawby




Wikinews has related news: Azerbaijani official Samir Sharifov accused of spying


In 2016, it was revealed that Azerbaijan's Minister of Finance Samir Sharifov served as a human asset (agent) for Russian, Turkish, and American intelligence services, according to information leaked by sources inside the Russian intelligence community that was published in the Ukrainian newspaper Gordonua on March 9, 2016.[39][40]
On November 22, 2017, Egypt’s public prosecutor has ordered the detention of 29 people suspected of espionage on behalf of Turkey against Egypt national interest and joining a terrorist organization. They are also accused of money laundering, conducting overseas calls without a license and trading currency without a license. According to the results of an investigation by the General Intelligence Services, the group has been recording phone calls and passing information to Turkish intelligence as part of a plan to bring the Muslim Brotherhood back to power in Egypt.[41][42]
Spy fiction[edit]
Main article: Spy fiction






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



An early example of espionage literature is Kim by the English novelist Rudyard Kipling, with a description of the training of an intelligence agent in the Great Game between the UK and Russia in 19th century Central Asia. An even earlier work was James Fenimore Cooper's classic novel, The Spy, written in 1821, about an American spy in New York during the Revolutionary War.
During the many 20th century spy scandals, much information became publicly known about national spy agencies and dozens of real-life secret agents. These sensational stories piqued public interest in a profession largely off-limits to human interest news reporting, a natural consequence of the secrecy inherent to their work. To fill in the blanks, the popular conception of the secret agent has been formed largely by 20th and 21st century literature and cinema. Attractive and sociable real-life agents such as Valerie Plame find little employment in serious fiction, however. The fictional secret agent is more often a loner, sometimes amoral—an existential hero operating outside the everyday constraints of society. Loner spy personalities may have been a stereotype of convenience for authors who already knew how to write loner private investigator characters that sold well from the 1920s to the present.
Johnny Fedora achieved popularity as a fictional agent of early Cold War espionage, but James Bond is the most commercially successful of the many spy characters created by intelligence insiders during that struggle. His less fantastic rivals include Le Carre's George Smiley and Harry Palmer as played by Michael Caine. Most post-Vietnam era characters were modeled after the American, C.C. Taylor, reportedly the last sanctioned "asset" of the U.S. government. Taylor, a true "Double 0 agent", worked alone and would travel as an American or Canadian tourist or businessman throughout Europe and Asia, he was used extensively in the Middle East toward the end of his career. Taylor received his weapons training from Carlos Hathcock, holder of a record 93 confirmed kills from WWII through the Viet Nam conflict. According to documents made available through the Freedom of Information Act, his operations were classified as "NOC" or Non-Official Cover.
Jumping on the spy bandwagon, other writers also started writing about spy fiction featuring female spies as protagonists, such as The Baroness, which has more graphic action and sex, as compared to other novels featuring male protagonists.
It also made its way into the videogame world, hence the famous creation of Hideo Kojima, the Metal Gear Solid Series.
Espionage has also made its way into comedy depictions. The 1960s TV series Get Smart portrays an inept spy, while the 1985 movie Spies Like Us depicts a pair of none-too-bright men sent to the Soviet Union to investigate a missile.
World War II: 1939–1945[edit]


Author(s)
Title
Publisher
Date
Notes


Babington-Smith, Constance
Air Spy: The Story of Photo Intelligence in World War II
—
1957
—


Berg, Moe
The Catcher Was a Spy: The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg
Vintage Books
1994
— Major league baseball player and OSS Secret Intelligence (SI) spy in Yugoslavia


Bryden, John
Best-Kept Secret: Canadian Secret Intelligence in the Second World War
Lester
1993
—


Doundoulakis, Helias
Trained to be an OSS Spy
Xlibris
2014
OSS Secret Intelligence (SI) spy in Salonica, Greece, 1944Template:Self-pulished inline


Hall, Virginia
The Spy with the Wooden Leg: The Story of Virginia Hall
Alma Little
2012
SOE and OSS spy in France


Hinsley, F. H. and Alan Stripp
Codebreakers: The Inside Story of Bletchley Park
—
2001
—


Hinsley, F. H.
British Intelligence in the Second World War
—
1996
Abridged version of multivolume official history.


Hohne, Heinz
Canaris: Hitler's Master Spy
—
1979
—


Jones, R. V.
The Wizard War: British Scientific Intelligence 1939–1945
—
1978
—


Kahn, David
Hitler's Spies: German Military Intelligence in World War II
—
1978
—


Kahn, David
Seizing the Enigma: The Race to Break the German U-Boat Codes, 1939–1943
—
1991
FACE


Kitson, Simon
The Hunt for Nazi Spies: Fighting Espionage in Vichy France
—
2008


Leigh Fermor, Patrick
Abducting a General: The Kreipe Operation in Crete
New York Review Books
2015
SOE spy who abducted General Kreipe from Crete


Lewin, Ronald
The American Magic: Codes, Ciphers and the Defeat of Japan
—
1982
—


Masterman, J. C.
The Double Cross System in the War of 1935 to 1945
Yale
1972
—


Persico, Joseph
Roosevelt's Secret War: FDR and World War II Espionage
—
2001
—


Persico, Joseph
Casey: The Lives and Secrets of William J. Casey-From the OSS to the CIA
—
1991
—


Pinck, Dan
Journey to Peking: A Secret Agent in Wartime China
US Naval Institute Press
2003
OSS Secret Intelligence (SI) spy in Hong Kong, China, during WWII


Ronnie, Art
Counterfeit Hero: Fritz Duquesne, Adventurer and Spy
—
1995
ISBN 1-55750-733-3


Sayers, Michael & Albert E. Kahn
Sabotage! The Secret War Against America
—
1942
—


Smith, Richard Harris
OSS: The Secret History of America's First Central Intelligence Agency
—
2005
—


Stanley, Roy M.
World War II Photo Intelligence
—
1981
—


Wark, Wesley
The Ultimate Enemy: British Intelligence and Nazi Germany, 1933–1939
—
1985
—


Wark, Wesley
"Cryptographic Innocence: The Origins of Signals Intelligence in Canada in the Second World War" in Journal of Contemporary History 22
—
1987
—


West, Nigel
Secret War: The Story of SOE, Britain's Wartime Sabotage Organization
—
1992
—


Winterbotham, F. W.
The Ultra Secret
Harper & Row
1974
—


Winterbotham, F. W.
The Nazi Connection
Harper & Row
1978
—


Cowburn, B.
No Cloak No Dagger
Brown, Watson, Ltd.
1960
—


Wohlstetter, Roberta
Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision
—
1962
—


Cold War era: 1945–1991[edit]


Author(s)
Title
Publisher
Date
Notes


Ambrose, Stephen E.
Ike's Spies: Eisenhower and the Intelligence Establishment
—
1981–
—


Andrew, Christopher and Vasili Mitrokhin
The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB
Basic Books
1991, 2005
ISBN 0-465-00311-7


Andrew, Christopher, and Oleg Gordievsky
KGB: The Inside Story of Its Foreign Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev
—
1990
—


Aronoff, Myron J.
The Spy Novels of John Le Carré: Balancing Ethics and Politics
—
1999
—


Bissell, Richard
Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to the Bay of Pigs
—
1996
—


Bogle, Lori, ed.
Cold War Espionage and Spying
—
2001–
essays


Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin
The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World
—
—
—


Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin
The Mitrokhin Archive: The KGB in Europe and the West
Gardners Books
2000
ISBN 978-0-14-028487-4


Colella, Jim
My Life as an Italian Mafioso Spy
—
2000
—


Craig, R. Bruce
Treasonable Doubt: The Harry Dexter Spy Case
University Press of Kansas
2004
ISBN 978-0-7006-1311-3


Dorril, Stephen
MI6: Inside the Covert World of Her Majesty's Secret Intelligence Service
—
2000
—


Dziak, John J.
Chekisty: A History of the KGB
—
1988
—


Gates, Robert M.
From The Shadows: The Ultimate Insider's Story Of Five Presidents And How They Won The Cold War
—
1997
—


Frost, Mike and Michel Gratton
Spyworld: Inside the Canadian and American Intelligence Establishments
Doubleday Canada
1994
—


Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr
Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America
—
1999
—


Helms, Richard
A Look over My Shoulder: A Life in the Central Intelligence Agency
—
2003
—


Koehler, John O.
Stasi: The Untold Story of the East German Secret Police
—
1999
—


Persico, Joseph
Casey: The Lives and Secrets of William J. Casey-From the OSS to the CIA
—
1991
—


Murphy, David E., Sergei A. Kondrashev, and George Bailey
Battleground Berlin: CIA vs. KGB in the Cold War
—
1997
—


Prados, John
Presidents' Secret Wars: CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations Since World War II
—
1996
—


Rositzke, Harry.
The CIA's Secret Operations: Espionage, Counterespionage, and Covert Action
—
1988
—


Srodes, James
Allen Dulles: Master of Spies
Regnery
2000
CIA head to 1961


Sontag Sherry, and Christopher Drew
Blind Man's Bluff: The Untold Story of American Submarine Espionage
Harper
1998
—



Encyclopedia of Cold War Espionage, Spies and Secret Operations
Greenwood Press/Questia[43]
2004
—



Anderson, Nicholas NOC Enigma Books 2009 – Post Cold War era
Ishmael Jones The Human Factor: Inside the CIA's Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture Encounter Books 2008, rev. 2010
Michael Ross The Volunteer: The Incredible True Story of an Israeli Spy on the Trail of International Terrorists McClelland & Stewart 2007, rev. 2008
Jean-Marie Thiébaud, Dictionnaire Encyclopédique International des Abréviations, Sigles et Acronymes, Armée et armement, Gendarmerie, Police, Services de renseignement et Services secrets français et étrangers, Espionnage, Contrespionnage, Services de secours, Organisations révolutionnaires et terroristes, Paris, L'Harmattan, 2015, 827 p

See also[edit]


Animals used in espionage
Chinese intelligence operations in the United States
Classified information
Clandestine operation
Dumpster diving
Flying monkeys (psychology)
History of Soviet espionage
Human intelligence (intelligence gathering)
Intelligence assessment
Labor spies
List of cryptographers
List of intelligence agencies
List of intelligence gathering disciplines
Military intelligence
Ninja
Operation Snow White
Security clearance
Spymaster


References[edit]


^ "Espionage". MI5. 
^ Arrillaga, Pauline. "China's spying seeks secret US info." Archived May 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. AP, 7 May 2011.
^ Suvorov, Victor (1987). Inside the Aquarium. Berkley. ISBN 0-425-09474-X. 
^ US Department of Defense (2007-07-12). "Joint Publication 1-02 Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-11-08. Retrieved 2007-10-01. 
^ a b c Igor Primoratz (August 15, 2013). New Rules for Victims of Armed Conflicts: Commentary on the Two 1977 Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 (Nijhoff Classics in International Law). Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 214. 
^ "Defectors say China running 1,000 spies in Canada". CBC News. June 15, 2005.
^ "Beijing's spies cost German firms billions, says espionage expert". The Sydney Morning Herald. July 25, 2009.
^ "Double Agent". cia.gov. 
^ Cia.gov
^ Illegal Archived January 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Mi5.gov -How spies operate.
^ "CIA Status Improves Contractor's Case for Immunity". New America Media. 
^ treason Archived December 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ espionage
^ spying Archived December 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Aldrich Ames Criminal Complaint". jya.com. Archived from the original on 2011-05-13. Retrieved 2011-03-19. 
^ "USA v. Robert Philip Hanssen: Affidavit in Support of Criminal Complaint, Arrest Warrant and Search Warrant". fas.org. Retrieved 2011-03-19. 
^ "Aldrich Hazen Ames Register Number: 40087-083". Bop.gov. Federal Bureau of Prisons. Retrieved 2014-01-03.  (Search result)
^ "FBI — Aldrich Hazen Ames". FBI. Archived from the original on 2010-10-13. 
^ Gerstein, Josh (2011-03-07). "Obama's hard line on leaks". politico.com. Retrieved 2011-03-19. 
^ See the article on John Kiriakou
^ Your World: The Nowhere Man, Rupa Jha, October 21, 2012, BBC (retrieved 2012-10-20) (Program link:The Nowhere Man)
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2014-09-25. Retrieved 2014-08-19. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-11-01. Retrieved 2013-08-16. 
^ "Convention (IV) respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and its annex: Regulations concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land. The Hague, 18 October 1907". International Committee of the Red Cross. 
^ Paul Battersby; Joseph M. Siracusa; Sasho Ripiloski (January 19, 2011). Crime Wars: The Global Intersection of Crime, Political Violence, and International Law. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 125. 
^ Charlesworth, Lorie (2006). "2 SAS Regiment, War Crimes Investigations, and British Intelligence: Intelligence Officials and the Natzweiler Trial". The Journal of Intelligence History. 6 (2): 41. doi:10.1080/16161262.2006.10555131. 
^ "United States of America, Practice Relating to Rule 62. Improper Use of Flags or Military Emblems, Insignia or Uniforms of the Adversary". International Committee of the Red Cross. 
^ "2006 Operational Law Handbook". 
^ Leslie C. Green (February 1, 2000). The Contemporary Law Of Armed Conflict 2nd Edition. Juris Publishing, Inc. p. 142. ISBN 1-929446-03-9. 
^ George P. Fletcher (September 16, 2002). Romantics at War: Glory and Guilt in the Age of Terrorism. Princeton University Press. p. 106. 
^ J. H. W. Verziji (1978). International Law in Historical Perspective: The laws of war. Part IX-A. Brill Publishers. p. 143. ISBN 90-286-0148-1. 
^ "UCMJ – Article 106 – Spies". About.com US Military. 
^ "Famous Spies in History, CNN". Archives.cnn.com. 2001-02-21. Archived from the original on 2013-08-21. Retrieved 2012-07-07. 
^ Sellers, Leonard (2009). Shot in the Tower: The Story of the Spies Executed in the Tower of London During the First World War. Pen & Sword Military. ISBN 978-1848840263. 
^ "Special Operations Executive". Spartacus Educational. Archived from the original on 2013-08-02. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2013-05-02. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 
^ "Offices of CIA > Clandestine Service > Who We Are". cia.gov. Retrieved 2010-06-18. 
^ "Offices of CIA > Clandestine Service > Our Mission". cia.gov. Retrieved 2010-06-18. 
^ "Сокурсник Путина Швец: Фирмы при консульствах России на Западе получают $50–55 млн в год. Деньги идут в карман Лаврова". Gordonua (in Russian). 2016-03-09. Retrieved 2016-03-09. 
^ "Azerbaijani official Samir Sharifov accused of spying". Wikinews. 2016-03-09. Retrieved 2016-03-25. 
^ Egypt detains 29 people on suspicion of espionage for Turkey
^ In Pictures: Egypt foils Turkish espionage attempt
^ "Encyclopedia of Cold War Espionage, Spies, and Secret Operations". 


Works cited[edit]

Johnson, John (1997). The Evolution of British Sigint, 1653–1939. London: HMSO. OCLC 52130886. 
Winkler, Jonathan Reed (July 2009). "Information Warfare in World War I". The Journal of Military History. 73: 845–867. doi:10.1353/jmh.0.0324. ISSN 1543-7795. 

Further reading[edit]


Jenkins, Peter. Surveillance Tradecraft: The Professional's Guide to Surveillance Training ISBN 978-0-9535378-2-2
Felix, Christopher [pseudonym for James McCarger] "Intelligence Literature: Suggested Reading List". US CIA. Retrieved September 2, 2012. [dead link] A Short Course in the Secret War, 4th Edition. Madison Books, November 19, 2001.
West, Nigel. MI6: British Secret Intelligence Service Operations 1909–1945 1983
Smith Jr., W. Thomas. Encyclopedia of the Central Intelligence Agency 2003
Richelson, Jeffery T. The U.S. Intelligence Community 1999 fourth edition
Richelson, Jeffery T. A Century of Spies: Intelligence in the Twentieth Century 1977
Owen, David. Hidden Secrets: A Complete History of Espionage and the Technology Used to Support It
O'Toole, George. Honorable Treachery: A History of U.S. Intelligence, Espionage, Covert Action from the American Revolution to the CIA 1991
Lerner, Brenda Wilmoth & K. Lee Lerner, eds. Terrorism: essential primary sources Thomas Gale 2006 ISBN 978-1-4144-0621-3
Lerner, K. Lee and Brenda Wilmoth Lerner, eds. Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence and Security 2003 1100 pages.
Knightley, Philip The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying in the Twentieth Century Norton 1986
Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret Communication from Ancient Times to the Internet 1996 Revised edition. First published in 1967.
Johnson, Robert. Spying for Empire: The Great Game in Central and South Asia, 1757–1947 London: Greenhill 2006
Friedman, George. America's Secret War: Inside the Hidden Worldwide Struggle Between the United States and Its Enemies 2005
Doyle, David W., A Memoir of True Men and Traitors (2000)
Tunney, Thomas Joseph and Paul Merrick Hollister Throttled!: The Detection of the German and Anarchist Bomb Plotters Boston: Small, Maynard & company 1919 | available on Wikisource: s:Throttled!
Beesly, Patrick. Room 40, 1982.
Burnham, Frederick Russell Taking Chances 1944
May, Ernest (ed.) Knowing One's Enemies: Intelligence Assessment before the Two World Wars 1984
Tuchman, Barbara W. The Zimmermann Telegram Ballantine Books 1966
Words: Matt Bolton; photographs: Matt Munro. "The Tallinn Cables: A Glimpse into Tallinn's Secret History of Espionage". Lonely Planet Magazine, December 2011


External links[edit]



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Espionage





Look up espionage in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Aladashvili Besik., Fearless: A Fascinating Story of Secret Medieval Spies, 2017.
History of an espionage in Russia







v
t
e


Espionage






Agents
Assets






Agent handling
Field agent
Non-official cover

sockpuppet
strawperson


Official cover
Resident spy





Analysis



Intelligence assessment

cognitive traps
competing hypotheses







Devices and
communications



Concealment device
Covert listening device
Cryptography
Cut-out
Dead drop

USB


Invisible ink
Numbers station
One-way voice link
Short-range agent communications
Steganography

microdot







Operations



Black operation

black bag
Wetwork


Eavesdropping

SIGINT
MASINT


False flag
Industrial espionage
Interpersonal (HUMINT) intelligence

interrogation
safe house
surveillance


COINTELPRO
MINARET
SHAMROCK












v
t
e


Intelligence management



Collection




Interpersonal
(HUMINT)







Special reconnaissance

organizations







Clandestine



Asset recruiting
Cell system
Covert action
Direct action
Operational techniques





Espionage



Agents

field
handling


Asset
Black operation

black bag


Concealment device
Cryptography
Cut-out
Dead drop
Denial and deception
Eavesdropping
False flag
Industrial espionage
Intelligence assessment
Interrogation
Numbers station
Official cover

Non-official


One-way voice link
Resident spy
Steganography
Surveillance








Signals (SIGINT)



By alliances, nations and industries
In modern history
Operational platforms by nation
Direction finding
Traffic analysis
TEMPEST





Measurement and
signature (MASINT)



Electro-optical
Geophysical
Nuclear
Radar
Radiofrequency
Materials
Casualty estimation (earthquake)





Other



Cultural (CULTINT)
Financial (FININT)
Geospatial (GEOINT)
Imagery (IMINT)
Market (MARKINT)
Open-source (OSINT)
Technical (TECHINT)








Analysis



Cognitive traps
Competing hypotheses
Target-centric
Words of estimative probability





Dissemination



Intelligence cycle security
Counterintelligence

organizations


Counterintelligence and counter-terrorism organizations












v
t
e


Soviet and Russian spies



In the US




1940s and before



John Abt
Joel Barr
Elizabeth Bentley
Boris Bukov
Whittaker Chambers
Lona Cohen
Morris Cohen
Judith Coplon
Noel Field
Klaus Fuchs
Harold Glasser
Harry Gold
David Greenglass
Theodore Hall
John Herrmann
Alger Hiss
Donald Hiss
George Koval
William Malisoff
Hede Massing
Boris Morros
Isaiah Oggins
William Perl
Victor Perlo
J. Peters
William Ward Pigman
Lee Pressman
Vincent Reno
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
Alfred Sarant
Saville Sax
Morton Sobell
Alexander Ulanovsky
Julian Wadleigh
Harold Ware
Bill Weisband
Nathaniel Weyl
Harry Dexter White
Maria Wicher
Nathan Witt
Flora Wovschin
Anatoli Yatskov





1950s and 1960s



Rudolf Abel
Jack Dunlap
Reino Häyhänen
Robert Lee Johnson
Jack Soble
Myra Soble
Robert Soblen





1970s and after



Aldrich Ames
David Sheldon Boone
Christopher John Boyce
Evgeny Buryakov
Thomas Patrick Cavanaugh
Anna Chapman
James Hall III
Robert Hanssen
Edward Lee Howard
Karl Koecher
Andrew Daulton Lee
Clayton J. Lonetree
Richard Miller
Harold James Nicholson
Ronald Pelton
Earl Edwin Pitts
Illegals Program
Robert Thompson
George Trofimoff
John Anthony Walker
Jerry Whitworth








In the UK




Cambridge Five



Anthony Blunt
Guy Burgess
John Cairncross
Donald Maclean
Kim Philby





Portland Spy Ring



Lona Cohen
Morris Cohen
Ethel Gee
Harry Houghton
Konon Molody








Michael Bettaney
George Blake
David Crook
Litzi Friedmann
Klaus Fuchs
Melita Norwood
Alan Nunn May
John Peet
Geoffrey Prime
Goronwy Rees
Michael John Smith
Dave Springhall
John Alexander Symonds
Edith Tudor-Hart
John Vassall
Arthur Wynn








In Canada



Sam Carr
Jeffrey Delisle
Igor Gouzenko
Elena Miller
Gerda Munsinger
Stephen Joseph Ratkai
Fred Rose





In Japan



Hirohide Ishida
Yotoku Miyagi
Sanzō Nosaka
Hotsumi Ozaki
Ryūzō Sejima





Elsewhere



Alexander Gregory Barmine
Dieter Gerhardt
Walter Krivitsky
Kerttu Nuorteva
Vladimir Mikhaylovich Petrov
Fyodor Raskolnikov
Ignace Reiss
Vitaly Shlykov
Herman Simm
Richard Sorge









Authority control



LCCN: sh85044893
GND: 4056287-6
NDL: 00571691











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Espionage&oldid=817423826"					Categories: EspionageSecurityHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Russian-language sources (ru)Use American English from September 2013All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2015Articles needing cleanup from March 2010All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from March 2010Articles needing additional references from July 2011All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers