





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Estonian


eesti keel


Native to
Estonia


Ethnicity
Estonians



Native speakers

1.1 million (2012)[1]



Language family


Uralic

Finnic

Estonian








Writing system

Latin (Estonian alphabet)
Estonian Braille


Official status



Official language in

 Estonia
 European Union


Regulated by
Institute of the Estonian Language / Eesti Keele Instituut, Emakeele Selts (semi-official)


Language codes


ISO 639-1
et


ISO 639-2
est


ISO 639-3
est – inclusive code
Individual codes:
ekk – Standard Estonian
vro – Võro


Glottolog
esto1258[2]


Linguasphere
41-AAA-d


This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA.


Estonian (eesti keel [ˈeːsti ˈkeːl] ( listen)) is the official language of Estonia, spoken natively by about 1.1 million people: 922,000 people in Estonia and 160,000 outside Estonia.[3] It belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family.



Contents


1 Classification
2 History

2.1 Estonian literature
2.2 State language


3 Dialects
4 Writing system

4.1 Alphabet
4.2 Orthography


5 Phonology
6 Grammar
7 Vocabulary

7.1 Ex nihilo lexical enrichment


8 Sample text
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Classification[edit]
Estonian belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic languages, along with Finnish, Karelian, and other nearby languages. The Uralic languages do not belong to the Indo-European languages. Estonian is distantly related to Hungarian and to the Sami languages.
Estonian has been influenced by Swedish, German (initially Middle Low German, which was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League and spoken natively in the area known today as Estonia by a sizeable burgher community of Baltic Germans, and later, standard German), and Russian, though it is not related to them genetically.
Like Finnish and Hungarian, Estonian is a predominantly agglutinative language, but unlike them, it has lost vowel harmony, the front vowels occurring exclusively on the first or stressed syllable, although in older texts the vowel harmony can still be recognized. Furthermore, the loss of word-final sounds is extensive, and this has made its inflectional morphology a markedly more fusional than the rest of the language, especially with respect to noun and adjective inflection.[citation needed] Word order is considerably more flexible than English, but the basic order is subject–verb–object.
History[edit]
The two different historical Estonian languages (sometimes considered dialects), the North and South Estonian languages, are based on the ancestors of modern Estonians' migration into the territory of Estonia in at least two different waves, both groups speaking considerably different Finnic vernaculars.[4] Modern standard Estonian has evolved on the basis of the dialects of Northern Estonia.




Estonian grammar published in Reval in 1637 by Heinrich Stahl


The oldest written records of the Finnic languages of Estonia date from the 13th century. Originates Livoniae in Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.
Estonian literature[edit]
Main article: Estonian literature
The earliest extant samples of connected (north) Estonian are the so-called Kullamaa prayers dating from 1524 and 1528.[5] In 1525 the first book published in the Estonian language was printed. The book was a Lutheran manuscript, which never reached the reader and was destroyed immediately after publication.
The first extant Estonian book is a bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism by S. Wanradt and J. Koell dating to 1535, during the Protestant Reformation period. An Estonian grammar book to be used by priests was printed in German in 1637.[6] The New Testament was translated into southern Estonian in 1686 (northern Estonian, 1715). The two languages were united based on northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle.
Writings in Estonian became more significant in the 19th century during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750–1840).
The birth of native Estonian literature was in 1810 to 1820 when the patriotic and philosophical poems by Kristjan Jaak Peterson were published. Peterson, who was the first student at the then German-language University of Dorpat to acknowledge his Estonian origin, is commonly regarded as a herald of Estonian national literature and considered the founder of modern Estonian poetry. His birthday, March 14, is celebrated in Estonia as Mother Tongue Day.[7] A fragment from Peterson's poem "Kuu" expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language:

Kas siis selle maa keel
Laulutuules ei või
Taevani tõustes üles
Igavikku omale otsida?

In English:

Can the language of this land
In the wind of incantation
Rising up to the heavens
Not seek for eternity?



Kristjan Jaak Peterson





In the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in Estonian; by comparison, between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published.[citation needed]
In modern times Jaan Kross[8] and Jaan Kaplinski[9] remain as two of Estonia's best known and most translated writers.
State language[edit]
Writings in Estonian became significant only in the 19th century with the spread of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment, during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750–1840). Although Baltic Germans at large regarded the future of Estonians as being a fusion with themselves, the Estophile educated class admired the ancient culture of the Estonians and their era of freedom before the conquests by Danes and Germans in the 13th century.[10]
After the Estonian War of Independence in 1919, the Estonian language became the state language of the newly independent country. In 1945, 97.3% of Estonia considered itself ethnic Estonian[11] and spoke the language.
When Estonia was invaded and occupied by the Soviet Union in World War II, the status of the Estonian language changed to the first of two official languages (Russian being the other one).[12] As with Latvia many immigrants entered Estonia under Soviet encouragement.[11] In the second half of the 1970s, the pressure of bilingualism (for Estonians) intensified, resulting in widespread knowledge of Russian throughout the country. The Russian language was termed as ‘the language of friendship of nations’ and was taught to Estonian children, sometimes as early as in kindergarten. Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in schools was compulsory, in practice learning the language was often considered unnecessary.[11][13]
During the Perestroika era, The Law on the Status of the Estonian Language was adopted in January 1989. The 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union led to the restoration of Republic of Estonia's independence. Estonian went back to being the only state language in Estonia which in practice meant that use of Estonian was promoted while the use of Russian was discouraged.[14]
The return of Soviet immigrants to their countries of origin has brought the proportion of Estonians in Estonia back above 70%. And again as in Latvia, today many of the remnant non-Estonians in Estonia have adopted the Estonian language; about 40% at the 2000 census.[11]
Dialects[edit]




An 1885 ABC-book in Võro written by Johann Hurt: "Wastne Võro keeli ABD raamat"


The Estonian dialects[15][16] are divided into two groups – the northern and southern dialects, historically associated with the cities of Tallinn in the north and Tartu in the south, in addition to a distinct kirderanniku dialect, Northeastern coastal Estonian.
The northern group consists of the keskmurre or central dialect that is also the basis for the standard language, the läänemurre or western dialect, roughly corresponding to Lääne County and Pärnu County, the saarte murre (islands') dialect of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa and the idamurre or eastern dialect on the northwestern shore of Lake Peipus.
South Estonian consists of the Tartu, Mulgi, Võro and Seto varieties. These are sometimes considered either variants of South Estonian or separate languages altogether.[17] Also, Seto and Võro distinguish themselves from each other less by language and more by their culture and their respective Christian confession.[11][18]
Writing system[edit]
Main article: Estonian orthography
Alphabet[edit]
Like Finnish, Estonian employs the Latin script as the basis for its alphabet, which adds the letters ä, ö, ü, and õ, plus the later additions š and ž. The letters c, q, w, x and y are limited to proper names of foreign origin, and f, z, š, and ž appear in loanwords and foreign names only. Ö and ü are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German. Unlike in standard German but like Finnish and Swedish (when followed by 'r'), Ä is pronounced [æ], as in English mat. The vowels Ä, Ö and Ü are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian, although the letter shapes come from German. The letter õ denotes /ɤ/, unrounded /o/, or a close-mid back unrounded vowel. It is almost identical to the Bulgarian ъ /ɤ̞/ and the Vietnamese ơ, and is also used to transcribe the Russian ы.
Orthography[edit]
Although the Estonian orthography is generally guided by phonemic principles, with each grapheme corresponding to one phoneme, there are some historical and morphological deviations from this: for example preservation of the morpheme in declension of the word (writing b, g, d in places where p, k, t is pronounced) and in the use of 'i' and 'j'.[clarification needed] Where it is very impractical or impossible to type š and ž, they are substituted with sh and zh in some written texts, although this is considered incorrect. Otherwise, the h in sh represents a voiceless glottal fricative, as in Pasha (pas-ha); this also applies to some foreign names.
Modern Estonian orthography is based on the Newer Orthography created by Eduard Ahrens in the second half of the 19th century based on Finnish orthography. The Older Orthography it replaced was created in the 17th century by Bengt Gottfried Forselius and Johann Hornung based on standard German orthography. Earlier writing in Estonian had by and large used an ad hoc orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography. Some influences of the standard German orthography — for example, writing 'W'/'w' instead of 'V'/'v' — persisted well into the 1930s.
It should be noted that Estonian words and names quoted in international publications from Soviet sources are often back-transliterations from the Russian transliteration. Examples are the use of "ya" for "ä" (e.g. Pyarnu instead of Pärnu), "y" instead of "õ" (e.g., Pylva instead of Põlva) and "yu" instead of "ü" (e.g., Pyussi instead of Püssi). Even in the Encyclopædia Britannica one can find "ostrov Khiuma", where "ostrov" means "island" in Russian and "Khiuma" is back-transliteration from Russian instead of "Hiiumaa" (Hiiumaa > Хийума(а) > Khiuma).
Phonology[edit]






This article should include a summary of Estonian phonology. See Wikipedia:Summary style for information on how to incorporate it into this article's main text. (March 2015)



Main article: Estonian phonology
There are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs, 28 of which are native to Estonian.[1] All nine vowels can appear as the first component of a diphthong, but only /ɑ e i o u/ occur as the second component. A vowel characteristic of Estonian is the unrounded back vowel /ɤ/, which may be close-mid back, close back, or close-mid central.



Front
Back


Unrounded
Rounded
Unrounded
Rounded


Close
i
y
ɤ
u


Mid
e
ø
o


Open
æ

ɑ



Grammar[edit]
Main article: Estonian grammar
Typologically, Estonian represents a transitional form from an agglutinating language to a fusional language. The canonical word order is SVO (subject–verb–object).[19]
In Estonian, nouns and pronouns do not have grammatical gender, but nouns and adjectives decline in fourteen cases: nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive, abessive, and comitative, with the case and number of the adjective(s) always agreeing with that of the noun (except in the terminative, essive, abessive and comitative, where there is agreement only for the number, the adjective being in the genitive form). Thus the illative for kollane maja ("a yellow house") is kollasesse majja ("into a yellow house"), but the terminative is kollase majani ("as far as a yellow house"). With respect to the Proto-Finnic language, elision has occurred; thus, the actual case marker may be absent, but the stem is changed, cf. maja – majja and the Ostrobothnia dialect of Finnish maja – majahan.
The direct object of the verb appears either in the accusative (for total objects) or in the partitive (for partial objects). The accusative coincides with the genitive in the singular and with nominative in the plural. Accusative vs. partitive case opposition of the object used with transitive verbs creates a telicity contrast, just as in Finnish. This is a rough equivalent of the perfective vs. imperfective aspect opposition.
The verbal system lacks a distinctive future tense[20] (the present tense serves here) and features special forms to express an action performed by an undetermined subject (the "impersonal").
Vocabulary[edit]
Main article: Estonian vocabulary
Although the Estonian and Germanic languages are of very different origins, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and English, for example. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of German rule, and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22–25 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent.[citation needed]
Often 'b' & 'p' are interchangeable, for example 'baggage' becomes 'pagas', 'lob' (to throw) becomes 'loopima'. The initial letter 's' before another consonant is often dropped, for example 'skool' becomes 'kool', 'stool' becomes 'tool'.
Ex nihilo lexical enrichment[edit]
Estonian language planners such as Ado Grenzstein (a journalist active in Estonia in the 1870s–90s) tried to use formation ex nihilo, Urschöpfung;[21] i.e. they created new words out of nothing.
The most famous reformer of Estonian, Johannes Aavik (1880–1973), used creations ex nihilo (cf. ‘free constructions’, Tauli 1977), along with other sources of lexical enrichment such as derivations, compositions and loanwords (often from Finnish; cf. Saareste and Raun 1965: 76). In Aavik’s dictionary (1921), which lists approximately 4000 words, there are many words which were (allegedly) created ex nihilo, many of which are in common use today. Examples are

ese ‘object’,
kolp ‘skull’,
liibuma ‘to cling’,
naasma ‘to return, come back’,
nõme 'stupid, dull.'[21]

Many of the coinages that have been considered (often by Aavik himself) as words concocted ex nihilo could well have been influenced by foreign lexical items, for example words from Russian, German, French, Finnish, English and Swedish. Aavik had a broad classical education and knew Ancient Greek, Latin and French. Consider roim ‘crime’ versus English crime or taunima ‘to condemn, disapprove’ versus Finnish tuomita ‘to condemn, to judge’ (these Aavikisms appear in Aavik’s 1921 dictionary). These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item.[22]
Sample text[edit]
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Estonian:


Kõik inimesed sünnivad vabadena ja võrdsetena oma väärikuselt ja õigustelt. Neile on antud mõistus ja südametunnistus ja nende suhtumist üksteisesse peab kandma vendluse vaim.

(All people are born free and equal in their dignity and rights. They are given reason and conscience and they shall create their relationships to one another according to the spirit of brotherhood.)


See also[edit]

The BABEL Speech Corpus

References[edit]


^ Estonian at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
Standard Estonian at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
Võro at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015)
^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Estonian". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. 
^ Kilgi, Annika. 2012. "Eesti keel maailma taustal." Estonica: Entsüklopeedia Eestist.
^ Rannut, Mart (2004). "Language Policy in Estonia" (PDF). Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-07-03. Retrieved 2009-02-27. 
^ Aspects of Altaic Civilization By Denis Sinor ISBN 0-7007-0380-2
^ Dictionary of Languages By Andrew Dalby; p. 182 ISBN 0-231-11569-5
^ Culture and Customs of the Baltic States By Kevin O'Connor; P.126 ISBN 0-313-33125-1
^ Jaan Kross at google.books
^ Jaan Kaplinski at google.books
^ Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004-01-01). Estonia:Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 84. ISBN 90-420-0890-3. Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ a b c d e Mart Rannut (2004). "Language Policy in Estonia". Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística. 
^ Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education By Sylvia Prys Jones, Colin Baker ISBN 1-85359-362-1
^ Russification at estonica.org
^ Jacques Leclerc. "Estonie". Tlfq.ulaval.ca. Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ "Map of Estonian Dialects, Tartu University's Estonian Dialect Corpus". Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ "Tartu University's Estonian Dialect Corpus". Murre.ut.ee. 2013-03-28. Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ "Culture Tourism in South Estonia and Võru county" (PDF). Siksali. Retrieved 2 July 2013. 
^ "Estonian Dialects, The Institute of the Estonian Language". Portaal.eki.ee. Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ "Beltranslations.com/". Beltranslations.com/. Retrieved 2014-08-23. 
^ Pérez, Efrén O.; Tavits, Margit (January 24, 2017). "Language Shapes People's Time Perspective and Support for Future-Oriented Policies". American Journal of Political Science. Midwest Political Science Association. doi:10.1111/ajps.12290. 
^ a b Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2003), Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli Hebrew. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1403917232 [1], p. 149.
^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2003), Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli Hebrew. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1403917232, p. 150.


Further reading[edit]

Asu, Eva Liina; Teras, Pire (2009), "Estonian", Journal of the International Phonetic Association, 39 (3): 367–372, doi:10.1017/s002510030999017x 
Ross, Jaan; Lehiste, Ilse (2001), The temporal structure of Estonian runic songs, The Hague: Walter de Gruyter 

External links[edit]

Find more aboutEstonian languageat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Data from Wikidata





Estonian edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia





Estonian edition of Wikisource, the free library



Estonian language at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Estonica.org article







v
t
e


 Languages of Estonia



Official language



Estonian





Regional languages



South Estonian

Seto
Võro







Minority languages



German
Russian
Swedish





Sign languages



Estonian Sign Language
Russian Sign Language












v
t
e


Estonia articles



History



Timeline

list of wars


Ancient Estonia
Livonian Crusade
Danish Estonia
German Bishoprics
Livonian Order
Baltic Germans
Livonian War
Polish Livonia
Swedish Estonia
Great Northern War
Russian Estonia
Livonia
Age of Awakening
Declaration of Independence
War of Independence
Vaps Movement
Era of Silence
Occupation of Estonia
World War II
Forest Brothers
Deportations
Estonian SSR
Government in exile
Singing Revolution
Declaration of sovereignty
Restoration of independence








Geography







Climate
Extreme points
Fauna
Islands
Lakes
Populated places
Protected areas
Rivers
Towns








Politics







Administrative divisions

Municipalities


Constitution
Elections
Foreign relations
Government

exile


Human rights

LGBT


LGBT history
Law
Law enforcement
Military
Political parties
President
Prime Minister
Riigikogu (parliament)
Supreme Court








Economy







Agriculture
Central bank
Energy
Oil shale
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Estonians
Estonian language
Ethnic groups
Healthcare
Religion





Culture



Anthem
Architecture
Cinema
Coat of arms
Cuisine
Estonian names
Flags
Folklore
Internet
Languages
Literature
Music
Mythology
Name
Symbols
Newspapers
Public holidays
Radio
Sport
Television
Theatre












Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


Uralic languages



Finnic



Estonian

Northeastern coastal
South Estonian

Võro
Seto




Finnish

Kven
Meänkieli


Ingrian
Karelian

Karelian proper
Livvi
Ludic


Livonian †
Veps
Votic





Sami



Akkala †
Inari
Kainuu †
Kemi †
Kildin
Lule
Northern
Pite
Skolt
Southern
Ter
Ume





Mordvinic



Erzya
Moksha





Mari



Hill Mari
Meadow Mari





Permic



Komi

Zyrian
Permyak
Yodzyak


Udmurt





Ugric



Hungarian
Khanty
Mansi





Samoyedic



Enets
Yurats †
Nenets

Forest Nenets
Tundra Nenets


Nganasan
Kamassian †
Mator †
Selkup





Others



Merya †
Meshcherian †
Muromian †






† indicate extinct languages







Authority control



GND: 4120175-9
NDL: 00562052











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Estonian_language&oldid=817362459"					Categories: Estonian languageAgglutinative languagesFinnic languagesLanguages of EstoniaLanguages of FinlandLanguages of LatviaLanguages of RussiaSubject–verb–object languagesHidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 18Articles needing additional references from January 2016All articles needing additional referencesLanguages with ISO 639-2 codeLanguages with ISO 639-1 codeArticles containing Estonian-language textArticles with hAudio microformatsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2012Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers