Not to be confused with Ethology.
For the journal, see Ethnology (journal).


Anthropology








Outline
History







Types



Archaeological
Biological
Cultural
Linguistic
Social









Archaeological



Aerial
Aviation
Battlefield
Biblical
Bioarchaeological
Environmental
Ethnoarchaeological
Feminist
Forensic
Maritime
Paleoethnobotanical
Zooarchaeological









Biological



Anthrozoological
Biocultural
Evolutionary
Forensic
Molecular
Neurological
Nutritional
Palaeoanthropological
Primatological












Social
Cultural






Applied
Art
Cognitive
Cyborg
Development
Digital
Ecological
Environmental
Economic
Political economy
Historical
Feminist
Institutional
Kinship
Legal
Media
Medical
Museums
Musical
Political
Psychological
Public
Religion
Symbolic
Transpersonal
Urban
Visual









Linguistic



Anthropological
Descriptive
Ethnological
Ethnopoetical
Historical
Semiotic
Sociological









Research framework



Anthropometry
Ethnography (online)
Ethnology
Cross-cultural comparison
Participant observation
Holism
Reflexivity
Thick description
Cultural relativism
Ethnocentrism
Emic and etic









Key concepts



Culture
Development
Ethnicity
Evolution (sociocultural)
Gender
Kinship and descent
Meme
Prehistory

Race
Society
Value



Colonialism / Postcolonialism








Key theories



Actor–network theory
Alliance theory
Cross-cultural studies
Cultural materialism
Culture theory
Diffusionism
Feminism
Historical particularism
Boasian anthropology
Functionalism
Interpretive
Performance studies
Political economy
Practice theory
Structuralism
Post-structuralism
Systems theory









Lists


Anthropologists by nationality
Anthropology by year



Bibliography
Journals
List of indigenous peoples
Organizations









 Anthropology portal







v
t
e





Ethnology (from the Greek ἔθνος, ethnos meaning "nation"[1]) is the branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the characteristics of different peoples and the relationship between them (cf. cultural, social, or sociocultural anthropology).[2]



Contents


1 Scientific discipline
2 Scholars
3 See also
4 References
5 Bibliography
6 External links



Scientific discipline[edit]
Further information: Ethnicity
Compared to ethnography, the study of single groups through direct contact with the culture, ethnology takes the research that ethnographers have compiled and then compares and contrasts different cultures.




Adam František Kollár, 1779


The term ethnologia (ethnology) is credited to Adam Franz Kollár (1718-1783) who used and defined it in his Historiae ivrisqve pvblici Regni Vngariae amoenitates published in Vienna in 1783.[3] as: “the science of nations and peoples, or, that study of learned men in which they inquire into the origins, languages, customs, and institutions of various nations, and finally into the fatherland and ancient seats, in order to be able better to judge the nations and peoples in their own times.” [4]
Kollár's interest in linguistic and cultural diversity was aroused by the situation in his native multi-ethnic and multilingual Kingdom of Hungary and his roots among its Slovaks, and by the shifts that began to emerge after the gradual retreat of the Ottoman Empire in the more distant Balkans.[5]
Among the goals of ethnology have been the reconstruction of human history, and the formulation of cultural invariants, such as the incest taboo and culture change, and the formulation of generalizations about "human nature", a concept which has been criticized since the 19th century by various philosophers (Hegel, Marx, structuralism, etc.). In some parts of the world ethnology has developed along independent paths of investigation and pedagogical doctrine, with cultural anthropology becoming dominant especially in the United States, and social anthropology in Great Britain. The distinction between the three terms is increasingly blurry. Ethnology has been considered an academic field since the late 18th century especially in Europe and is sometimes conceived of as any comparative study of human groups.




Claude Lévi-Strauss


The 15th-century exploration of America by European explorers had an important role in formulating new notions of the Occidental, such as, the notion of the "Other". This term was used in conjunction with "savages", which was either seen as a brutal barbarian, or alternatively, as "noble savage". Thus, civilization was opposed in a dualist[disambiguation needed] manner to barbary, a classic opposition constitutive of the even more commonly shared ethnocentrism. The progress of ethnology, for example with Claude Lévi-Strauss's structural anthropology, led to the criticism of conceptions of a linear progress, or the pseudo-opposition between "societies with histories" and "societies without histories", judged too dependent on a limited view of history as constituted by accumulative growth.
Lévi-Strauss often referred to Montaigne's essay on cannibalism as an early example of ethnology. Lévi-Strauss aimed, through a structural method, at discovering universal invariants in human society, chief among which he believed to be the incest taboo. However, the claims of such cultural universalism have been criticized by various 19th and 20th century social thinkers, including Marx, Nietzsche, Foucault, Derrida, Althusser and Deleuze.
The French school of ethnology was particularly significant for the development of the discipline since the early 1950s with Paul Rivet, Marcel Griaule, Germaine Dieterlen, Claude Lévi-Strauss and Jean Rouch.




Izmir Ethnography Museum (İzmir Etnografya Müzesi) seen from the courtyard.


Scholars[edit]

List of scholars of ethnology

See also[edit]





Anthropology
Ethnography
Cultural survival
Culture
Ethnocentrism
Evolutionism
Indigenous peoples




Intangible cultural heritage
Marxism
Meta-analysis
Modernism
Post-Modernism
Postcolonial
Primitive culture




Primitivism
Scientific Racism
Secondary research
Society
Structural anthropology
Structural functionalism
Ethnobiology
Ethnopoetics





References[edit]



^ "ethno-". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 21 March 2013. 
^ "ethnology". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 21 March 2013. 
^ Zmago Šmitek and Božidar Jezernik, "The anthropological tradition in Slovenia." In: Han F. Vermeulen and Arturo Alvarez Roldán, eds. Fieldwork and Footnotes: Studies in the History of European Anthropology. 1995.
^ Kollár, Adam František − Historiae jurisque publici regni Ungariae amoenitates, I-II. Vienna., 1783
^ Gheorghiţă Geană, "Discovering the whole of humankind: the genesis of anthropology through the Hegelian looking-glass." In: Han F. Vermeulen and Arturo Alvarez Roldán, eds. Fieldwork and Footnotes: Studies in the History of European Anthropology. 1995.



Bibliography[edit]

Forster, Johann Georg Adam. Voyage round the World in His Britannic Majesty’s Sloop, Resolution, Commanded by Capt. James Cook, during the Years 1772, 3, 4, and 5 (2 vols), London (1777).
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Elementary Structures of Kinship, (1949), Structural Anthropology (1958)
Mauss, Marcel. originally published as Essai sur le don. Forme et raison de l'échange dans les sociétés archaïques in 1925, this classic text on gift economy appears in the English edition as The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies.
Maybury-Lewis, David. Akwe-Shavante society (1967), The Politics of Ethnicity: Indigenous Peoples in Latin American States (2003).
Clastres, Pierre. Society Against the State (1974).
Pop, Mihai and Glauco Sanga. "Problemi generali dell'etnologia europea", La Ricerca Folklorica, No. 1, La cultura popolare. Questioni teoriche (April 1980), pp. 89–96.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ethnology.



What is European Ethnology?
Webpage "History of German Anthropology/Ethnology 1945/49-1990
Languages describes the languages and ethnic groups found worldwide, grouped by host nation-state.
Division of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History - Over 160,000 objects from Pacific, North American, African, Asian ethnographic collections with images and detailed description, linked to the original catalogue pages, field notebooks, and photographs are available online.
National Museum of Ethnology - Osaka, Japan
 Texts on Wikisource:

Rhyn, G. A. F. Van (1879). "Ethnology". The American Cyclopædia. 
McGee, W. J. (1905). "Ethnology". New International Encyclopedia. 
"Ethnology". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907. 
"Ethnology and ethnography". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. 
"Ethnology". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914. 
Butler, Amos W. (1920). "Ethnology". Encyclopedia Americana. 
"Ethnology". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 









v
t
e


Ethnicity



Related
concepts



Clan
Ethnic group

Ethnolinguistic group
Ethnoreligious group


Indigenous peoples
Ingroups and outgroups
Meta-ethnicity
Metroethnicity
Minority group
Monoethnicity
Nation
Nationality
Panethnicity
Polyethnicity
Population
Race
Symbolic ethnicity
Tribe





Ethnology



Anthropology
Ethnic studies
Ethnoarchaeology
Ethnobiology

Ethnobotany
Ethnozoology
Ethnoecology


Ethnocinema
Ethnogeology
Ethnography

Autoethnography
Clinical
Critical
Cyber-
Netnography
Online
Person-centered
Salvage
Transidioethnography
Video


Ethnohistory
Ethnolinguistics
Ethnology
Ethnomathematics
Ethnomethodology
Ethnomuseology
Ethnomusicology
Ethnophilosophy
Ethnopoetics
Ethnoscience
Ethnosemiotics
Ethnotaxonomy





Groups
by region



Africa

Arab League


Americas

Indigenous
Canada
Mexico
United States
Central America
South America


Asia

Central Asia
East Asia
Northern Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
West Asia


Australia

Indigenous


Europe
Oceania

Indigenous
European








Identity and
ethnogenesis




Cross-race effect
Cultural assimilation
Cultural identity
Demonym
Development
Endonym
Ethnic flag
Ethnic option
Ethnic origin
Ethnic religion
Ethnicity in census
Ethnofiction
Ethnonym
Folk religion
Historical
Imagined community
Kinship
Legendary progenitor
Lineage-bonded society
Mores
Nation-building
Nation state
National language
National myth
Origin myth
Pantribal sodality
Tribal name
Tribalism
Urheimat





Multiethnic
society



Consociationalism
Diaspora politics
Dominant minority
Ethnic democracy
Ethnic enclave
Ethnic interest group
Ethnic majority
Ethnic media
Ethnic pornography
Ethnic theme park
Ethnoburb
Ethnocracy
Indigenous rights
Middleman minority
Minority rights
Model minority
Multinational state






Ideology and
ethnic conflict




Ethnic bioweapon
Ethnic cleansing
Ethnic hatred
Ethnic joke
Ethnic nationalism
Ethnic nepotism
Ethnic penalty
Ethnic slur
Ethnic stereotype
Ethnic violence
Ethnocentrism
Ethnocide
Ethnosymbolism
Indigenism
Separatist movements
Xenophobia









Authority control



LCCN: sh85045198
GND: 4078931-7
BNF: cb13318485j (data)
HDS: 8264
NDL: 00567698











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnology&oldid=818096462"					Categories: EthnologyEthnicityCultural anthropologySociological theoriesSociology of cultureHidden categories: Pages using deprecated image syntaxAll articles with links needing disambiguationArticles with links needing disambiguation from January 2018Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American CyclopaediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall EncyclopediaWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRWWikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameterWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's EncyclopediaWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers