






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article may require copy editing for consistency of style. You can assist by editing it. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: inconsistent use of italics, single quotation marks, and double quotation marks. Please help improve this article if you can. (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Sign in a Rite Aid drugstore using common American euphemisms for (from top) contraceptives, douches, tampons, and menstrual pads, respectively


A euphemism /ˈjuːfəˌmɪzəm/ is a generally innocuous word or expression used in place of one that may be found offensive or suggest something unpleasant.[1] Some euphemisms are intended to amuse; while others use bland, inoffensive terms for things the user wishes to downplay. Euphemisms are used to refer to taboo topics (such as disability, sex, excretion, and death) in a polite way, or to mask profanity.[2]



Contents


1 Etymology
2 Purpose
3 Formation

3.1 Phonetic modification
3.2 Figures of speech
3.3 Rhetoric
3.4 Slang
3.5 Words from a foreign language
3.6 Evolution


4 In popular culture
5 See also
6 Notes
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



Etymology[edit]
The word comes from Greek εὐφημία (euphemia) "the use of words of good omen", which is a compound of eû (εὖ) "good, well" and phḗmē (φήμη) "prophetic speech; rumour, talk".[3] Etymologically, the eupheme is the opposite of the blaspheme "evil-speaking". The term euphemism itself was used as a euphemism by the ancient Greeks, meaning "to keep a holy silence" (speaking well by not speaking at all).[4]
Purpose[edit]
Reasons for using euphemisms vary by context and intent, and can include avoiding discomfort in day-to-day social interactions, or at an extreme, evading responsibility for war crimes. For instance, one reason for the comparative scarcity of written evidence documenting the exterminations at Auschwitz (at least given the scale) is "directives for the extermination process obscured in bureaucratic euphemisms".[5]
The euphemism affirmative action meaning a preference for minorities or the historically disadvantaged usually in employment or academic admissions (also called reverse discrimination, or in the UK positive discrimination) is an example of a well-intentioned circumlocution to disguise intentional bias that might be legally prohibited, or otherwise unpalatable. [6]
A euphemism such as “enhanced interrogation,” for torture, may be less benign: columnist David Brooks called the euphemisms for torture at Abu Ghraib, Guantánamo and elsewhere an effort to "dull the moral sensibility".[7]
Formation[edit]
Phonetic modification[edit]
Phonetic euphemism is used to replace profanities, giving them the intensity of a mere interjection.

Shortening or "clipping" the term ("Jeez" for Jesus, "What the—" for "What the hell")
Mispronunciations, such as "Frak", "Frig" "What the fudge", "What the truck", "Oh my gosh", "Frickin", "Darn", "Oh, shoot", "Be-yotch", etc.
Using the first letter ("SOB", "What the eff", "S my D", "BS"). Sometimes, the word "word" is added after it ("F word", "S word", "B word", "N word"). Also, the letter can be phonetically respelled, for example, the word "piss" was shortened to "pee" (pronounced as the letter P) in this way.

Figures of speech[edit]

Ambiguous statements (it for excrement, the situation or "a girl in trouble" for pregnancy, going to the other side for death, do it or come together in reference to a sexual act, tired and emotional for drunkenness)
Understatements ("asleep" for "dead", "drinking" for "consuming alcohol", "hurt" for "injured", etc.)
Metaphors ("beat the meat" or "choke the chicken" or "jerking the gherkin" for masturbation, "take a dump" and "take a leak" for defecation and urination respectively)
Comparisons ("buns" for "buttocks", "weed" for "cannabis")
Metonymy ("lose a person" for "coping with a person's death", "pass away" for "die", "men's room" for "men's toilet")

Rhetoric[edit]
Euphemism may be used as a rhetorical strategy, in which case its goal is to change the valence of a description from positive to negative.
Slang[edit]
See also: Slang
Using a less harsh term with similar meaning. For instance, "screwed up" is a euphemism for "hook-up", "we hooked up", or "laid" for sexual intercourse.
There is some disagreement over whether certain terms are or are not euphemisms. For example, sometimes the phrase visually impaired is labeled as a politically correct euphemism for blind. However, visual impairment can be a broader term, including, for example, people who have partial sight in one eye, those with uncorrectable mild to moderate poor vision, or even those who wear glasses, a group that would be excluded by the word blind.
Words from a foreign language[edit]
Expressions or words from a foreign language may be imported for use as a replacement for an offensive word. For example, the French word enceinte was sometimes used instead of the English word "pregnant".[8] This practice of word substitution became so frequent that the expression "Pardon my French" was adopted in attempts to excuse the use of profanity.
Evolution[edit]
Euphemisms may be formed in a number of ways. Periphrasis, or circumlocution, is one of the most common: to "speak around" a given word, implying it without saying it. Over time, circumlocutions become recognized as established euphemisms for particular words or ideas.
To alter the pronunciation or spelling of a taboo word (such as a swear word) to form a euphemism is known as taboo deformation, or "minced oath". In American English, words that are unacceptable on television such as "fuck", may be represented by deformations such as freak, even in children's cartoons.[9] Some examples of rhyming slang may serve the same purpose: to call a person a berk sounds less offensive than to call a person a "cunt", though berk is short for Berkeley Hunt, which rhymes with cunt.[10]
Bureaucracies frequently spawn euphemisms of a more deliberate nature, doublespeak expressions. For example, in the past the US military used the term "sunshine units" for contamination by radioactive isotopes.[11] An effective death sentence in the Soviet Union during the Great Purge often used the clause "imprisonment without right to correspondence": the person sentenced never had a chance to correspond with anyone, because soon after imprisonment he would be shot.[12] As early as 1939, Nazi official Reinhard Heydrich used the term Sonderbehandlung ("special treatment") to mean summary execution (most likely by hanging) of persons viewed as "disciplinary problems" by the Nazis even before commencing the systematic extermination of the Jews. Heinrich Himmler, aware that the word had come to be known to mean murder, replaced that euphemism with one in which Jews would be "guided" (to their deaths) through the slave-labor and extermination camps[13] after having been "evacuated" to their doom. Such was part of the superficially innocuous formulation Endlösung der Judenfrage (the "Final Solution to the Jewish Question"), which became infamous to the entire world during the Nuremberg Trials.[14]
A euphemism may itself devolve into a taboo word, through the linguistic process known as semantic change (or perjoration) described by W.V.O. Quine,[15] and more recently dubbed the "euphemism treadmill" by Harvard professor Steven Pinker.[16] For instance, Toilet is an 18th-century euphemism, replacing the older euphemism House-of-Office, which in turn replaced the even older euphemisms privy-house and bog-house.[17] In the 20th century, where the words "lavatory" or "toilet" were deemed inappropriate (e.g. in the United States), they were sometimes replaced with bathroom or water closet, which in turn became "restroom", "W.C.", or "washroom".
The word "shit" appears to have originally been a euphemism for defecation in Pre-Germanic, as the Proto-Indo-European root *skined-, from which it was derived, meant to cut off.[18]
In popular culture[edit]
Main article: Doublespeak
Doublespeak is a term sometimes used for deliberate euphemistic misuse of incorrect words to disguise unacceptable meaning, as in a "Ministry of Peace" which wages war, and a "Ministry of Love" which imprisons and tortures. It is a portmanteau of the terms "newspeak" and "doublethink", which originate from George Orwell's novel 1984.
The "Dead Parrot sketch" from Monty Python's Flying Circus contains an extensive list of euphemisms for death, referring to the deceased parrot that the character played by John Cleese had purchased.
The word euphemism itself can be used as a euphemism. In the animated TV special Halloween Is Grinch Night (see Dr. Seuss), a child asks to go to the euphemism, where euphemism is being used as a euphemism for outhouse. This euphemistic use of "euphemism" also occurred in the play Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? where a character requests, "Martha, will you show her where we keep the, uh, euphemism?"
In Wes Anderson's film Fantastic Mr. Fox, the replacement of swear words by the word "cuss" became a humorous motif throughout the film.
In Tom Hanks's web series Electric City, the use of profanity has been censored by the word "expletive". "[Expletive deleted]" entered public discourse after its notorious use in censoring transcripts of the Watergate tapes.
In Isaac Asimov's Foundation series, the curses of the scientist Ebling Mis have all been replaced with the word "unprintable". In fact, there is only one case of his curses being referred to as such, leading some readers to mistakenly assume that the euphemism is Ebling's, rather than Asimov's. The same word has also been used in his short story "Flies".
George Carlin has stated in audio books and his stand up shows that euphemisms soften everyday's language and take the life out of it. The use of euphemisms, as he has stated, is so that white Americans will not have to face the toughness of life, especially what he calls whiny, narcissistic baby boomers.
See also[edit]


Call a spade a spade
Code word (figure of speech)
Dead Parrot sketch
Distinction without a difference
Dog-whistle politics
Double entendre
Dysphemism
Expurgation (often called bowdlerization, after Thomas Bowdler)
Framing (social sciences)
Minced oath
Minimisation
Persuasive definition
Polite fiction
Political correctness
Political euphemism
Sexual slang
Spin (public relations)
Word play


Notes[edit]

References[edit]



^ "Euphemism". Webster's Online Dictionary. 
^ "euphemism (n.)". Etymonline.com. Retrieved 7 January 2014. 
^ φήμη, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
^ "Euphemism" Etymology". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 10 June 2015. 
^ Timothy Ryback (November 15, 1993). "Evidence of Evil - The New Yorker". Newyorker.com. Retrieved December 1, 2015. 
^ affirmative action as euphemism

"Style Guide". The Economist. March 10, 2013. Retrieved 2013-03-10. Uglier even than human-rights abuses and more obscure even than comfort station, affirmative action is a euphemism with little to be said for it. 


Custred, Glynn & Campbell, Tom (2001-05-22). "Affirmative Action: A Euphemism for Racial Profiling by Government". Investors Business Daily. Retrieved 2013-03-10. 


Bayan, Rick (December 2009). "Affirmative Action". The New Moderate. Retrieved 2013-03-10. 


George F. Will (April 25, 2014). "The Supreme Court tangles over euphemisms for affirmative action". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 26, 2015. 


M. Ali Raza; A. Janell Anderson; Harry Glynn Custred (1 January 1999). The Ups and Downs of Affirmative Action Preferences. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-275-96713-0. Chapter 4: Affirmative Action Diversity: A Euphemism for Preferences, Quotas, and Set-asides 


A Journalist's Guide to Live Direct and Unbiased News Translation. Writescope Publishers. 2010. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-9577511-8-7. In modern times, various social and political movements have introduced euphemisms, from affirmative action to political correctness to international conflicts, which are linguistically and culturally driven. 


^ Enhanced interrogation as euphemism

David Brooks (December 12, 2014). "Shields and Brooks on the CIA interrogation report, spending bill sticking point". PBS Newshour. Retrieved 2014-12-14. [T]he report . . . cuts through the ocean of euphemism, the EITs, enhanced interrogation techniques, and all that. It gets to straight language. Torture — it's obviously torture. . . . the metaphor and the euphemism is designed to dull the moral sensibility. 


"Transcript of interview with CIA director Panetta". MSNBC. 2011-05-03. Retrieved 2011-08-21. Enhanced interrogation has always been a kind of handy euphemism (for torture) 


Pickering, Thomas (April 2013). "America Must Atone for the Torture It Inflicted". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2013-04-22. 


^ "Definition of ENCEINTE". www.merriam-webster.com. Merriam-Webster, Incorporated. Retrieved 2017-05-20. 
^ "Obscene, Indecent and Profane Broadcasts". FCC.gov. U.S. Federal Communications Commission. Archived from the original on 2013-12-09. Retrieved 2014-01-20. 
^ http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/berk Collins Dictionary, definition of "berk"/"burk", retrieved 22 July 2014.
^ McCool, W.C. (1957-02-06). "Return of Rongelapese to their Home Island — Note by the Secretary" (PDF). United States Atomic Energy Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-25. Retrieved 2007-11-07. 
^ Solzhenitsyn, Alexander (1974). The Gulag Archipelago I. New York, NY: Harper Perennial. p. 6. ISBN 0-06-092103-X
^ "Holocaust-history.org". www.holocaust-history.org. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 20 May 2017. 
^ "Wannsee Conference and the "Final Solution"". 
^ Quine, W.V. (1987). Quiddities. Belknap Press. pp. 53–54. 
^ "The game of the name" (PDF). Baltimore Sun. 1994-04-03. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-15. Retrieved 2011-01-19. 
^ Bell, Vicars Walker (1953). On Learning the English Tongue. Faber & Faber. p. 19. The Honest Jakes or Privy has graduated via Offices to the final horror of Toilet. 
^ Ringe, Don (2006). From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-955229-0. 



Further reading[edit]

A Keith; Burridge, Kate. Euphemism & Dysphemism: Language Used as Shield and Weapon, Oxford University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-7351-0288-0.
Benveniste, Émile, "Euphémismes anciens and modernes", in: Problèmes de linguistique générale, vol. 1, pp. 308–314. [originally published in: Die Sprache, I (1949), pp. 116–122].
 "Euphemism". Encyclopædia Britannica. 9 (11th ed.). 1911. 
Enright, D. J. (1986). Fair of Speech. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-283060-0. 
Fussell, Paul: Class: A Guide Through The American Status System, Touchstone – Simon & Schuster Inc., 1983. ISBN 0-671-44991-5; ISBN 0-671-79225-3.
R.W.Holder: How Not to Say What You Mean: A Dictionary of Euphemisms, Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-19-860762-8.
Keyes, Ralph (2010). Euphemania: Our Love Affair with Euphemisms. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-05656-4. 
Maledicta: The International Journal of Verbal Aggression (ISSN US).
McGlone, M. S., Beck, G., & Pfiester, R. A. (2006). "Contamination and camouflage in euphemisms". Communication Monographs, 73, 261–282.
Rawson, Hugh (1995). A Dictionary of Euphemism & Other Doublespeak (second ed.). ISBN 0-517-70201-0. 
Smyth, Herbert Weir (1920). Greek Grammar. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 678. ISBN 0-674-36250-0. 

External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of euphemism at Wiktionary







v
t
e


Media manipulation



Context



Bias
Crowd psychology
Deception
Dumbing down
False balance
Half-truths
Machiavellianism
Media
Obfuscation
Orwellian
Persuasion
Psychological manipulation





Activism



Alternative media
Boycott
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstrations
Guerrilla communication
Hacktivism
Internet
Media
Occupations
Petitions
Protests
Youth





Advertising



Billboards
False
Infomercials
Mobiles
Modeling
Radio
Sex
Slogans
Testimonials
TV
Criticism of advertising








Censorship
Regulation






Books
Broadcast law
Burying of scholars
Corporate
Cover-ups
Euphemism
Films
Historical negationism
Internet
Political
Religious
Self





Hoaxing



Alternative facts
April Fools'
Fake news website
Fakelore
Fictitious entries
Forgery
Gaslighting
List
Literary
Racial
Urban legend
Virus





Marketing



Branding
Loyalty
Product
Product placement
Publicity
Research
Word of mouth





News media



Agenda-setting
Broadcasting
Circus
Cycle
False balance
Infotainment
Managing
Narcotizing dysfunction
Newspeak
Pseudo-event
Scrum
Sensationalism
Tabloid journalism





Political campaigning



Advertising
Astroturfing
Attack ad
Canvassing
Character assassination
Charm offensive
Dog-whistle politics
Election promises
Lawn signs
Manifestos
Name recognition
Negative
Push polling
Smear campaign
Wedge issue





Propaganda



Bandwagon
Crowd manipulation
Disinformation
Fearmongering
Framing
Indoctrination
Loaded language
Lying press
National mythology
Techniques





Psychological warfare



Airborne leaflets
False flag
Fifth column
Information (IT)
Lawfare
Political
Public diplomacy
Sedition
Subversion





Public relations



Cult of personality
Doublespeak
Non-apology apology
Reputation management
Slogans
Sound bites
Spin
Transfer
Understatement
Weasel words





Sales



Cold calling
Door-to-door
Pricing
Product demonstrations
Promotion
Promotional merchandise
Telemarketing












v
t
e


Propaganda techniques






Ad hominem
Appeal to fear
Atrocity propaganda
Bandwagon effect
Big lie
Blood libel
Buzzword
Censorship
Cherry picking
Code word
Disinformation
Dog-whistle politics
Doublespeak
Fake news
Framing
Glittering generality
Historical negationism
Historical revisionism
Ideograph
Indoctrination
Lawfare
Loaded language
Newspeak
Obscurantism
Plain folks
Propaganda of the deed
Public relations
Slogan
Spin
Weasel word
Whataboutism












v
t
e


Censorship



Media regulation



Books (books banned)
Films (banned films)
Internet

circumvention


Music
Post
Press
Radio
Speech and expression
Thought
Video games








Methods



Bleeping
Book burning
Broadcast delay
Burying of scholars
Censor bars
Chilling effect
Concision
Conspiracy of silence
Content-control software
Euphemism

Minced oath


Expurgation
Fogging
Gag order
Heckling
Heckler's veto
Internet police
Memory hole
National intranet
Newspaper theft
Pixelization
Prior restraint
Propaganda
Purge
Revisionism
Sanitization
Self-censorship
Speech code
Strategic lawsuit
Surveillance

computer & network
mass


Whitewashing
Word filtering
Damnatio memoriae





Contexts



Criminal
Corporate
Hate speech
Ideological
Media bias
Moralistic fallacy
Naturalistic fallacy
Politics
Propaganda model
Religious (Islamic)
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias





By country



Censorship
Freedom of speech
Internet censorship









Authority control



GND: 4015680-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Euphemism&oldid=817678701"					Categories: EuphemismsCensorshipConnotationFigures of speechPolitical correctnessPropaganda techniquesSelf-censorshipHidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from November 2017All articles needing copy editArticles needing cleanup from May 2017All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from May 2017Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from May 2017Articles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing Ancient Greek-language textWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers