This article is about the continent. For the politico-economic union, see European Union. For other uses, see Europe (disambiguation).

Europe




Area
10,180,000 km2 (3,930,000 sq mi) (6th)[a]


Population
741,447,158 (2016; 3rd)[1]


Population density
72.9/km2 (188/sq mi) (2nd)


GDP (nominal)
$19.7 trillion (2016, 3rd)


GDP (PPP)
$25.9 trillion (2016, 3rd)


GDP per capita
$21,767 (2016, 3rd)[2]


HDI
 0.845[3]


Demonym
European


Countries
50 sovereign states
6 with limited recognition


Dependencies
4 dependencies


Largest cities
Largest urban areas:


Istanbul[b]
Moscow
Paris
London
Madrid[4]








a. ^ Figures include only European portions of transcontinental countries.[n]
b. ^ Istanbul is a transcontinental city with about two-thirds of the population residing in the European side.





Europe is a continent located entirely in the Northern Hemisphere and mostly in the Eastern Hemisphere. Europe is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. It comprises the westernmost part of Eurasia. Europe is generally considered as separated from Asia by the watershed divides of the Ural and Caucasus Mountains, the Ural River, the Caspian and Black Seas, and the waterways of the Turkish Straits.[5] Yet the non-oceanic boundary between Europe and Asia—a concept dating back to classical antiquity—is arbitrary and amounts to a historical and social construct. The primarily physiographic term "continent" as applied to Europe also incorporates cultural and political elements whose discontinuities are not always reflected by the continent's current overland boundary with Asia.
Europe covers about 10,180,000 square kilometres (3,930,000 sq mi), or 2% of the Earth's surface (6.8% of land area). Politically, Europe is divided into about fifty sovereign states of which the Russian Federation is the largest and most populous, spanning 39% of the continent and comprising 15% of its population. Europe had a total population of about 741 million (about 11% of world population) as of 2016[update].[1] The European climate is largely affected by warm Atlantic currents that temper winters and summers on much of the continent, even at latitudes along which the climate in Asia and North America is severe. Further from the sea, seasonal differences are more noticeable than close to the coast.
Europe, in particular ancient Greece, was the birthplace of Western civilization.[6][7][8] The fall of the Western Roman Empire, during the migration period, marked the end of ancient history and the beginning of an era known as the Middle Ages. Renaissance Humanism, exploration, art, and science led to the modern era. From the Age of Discovery onwards, Europe played a predominant role in global affairs. Between the 16th and 20th centuries, European powers controlled at various times the Americas, most of Africa, Oceania, and the majority of Asia.
The French Enlightenment, the subsequent revolution and the Napoleonic wars are events that deeply modeled and structured the future of the European continent, culturally, politically and economically from the end of the 17th century till the first half of the 19th century. The Industrial Revolution, which began in Great Britain at the end of the 18th century, gave rise to radical economic, cultural, and social change in Western Europe, and eventually the wider world. Both world wars took place for the most part in Europe, contributing to a decline in Western European dominance in world affairs by the mid-20th century as the Soviet Union and the United States took prominence.[9] During the Cold War, Europe was divided along the Iron Curtain between NATO in the west and the Warsaw Pact in the east, until the revolutions of 1989 and fall of the Berlin Wall.
In 1955, the Council of Europe was formed in Strasbourg following a speech by Sir Winston Churchill, with the idea of unifying Europe to achieve common goals. It includes all states except for Belarus, Kazakhstan and Vatican City. Further European integration by some states led to the formation of the European Union, a separate political entity that lies between a confederation and a federation.[10] The EU originated in Western Europe but has been expanding eastward since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. The currency of most countries of the European Union, the euro, is the most commonly used among Europeans; and the EU's Schengen Area abolishes border and immigration controls among most of its member states. The European Anthem is "Ode to Joy" and states celebrate peace and unity on Europe Day.



Contents


1 Name
2 Definition

2.1 Contemporary definition
2.2 History of the concept

2.2.1 Early history
2.2.2 Modern definitions




3 History

3.1 Prehistory
3.2 Classical antiquity
3.3 Early Middle Ages
3.4 High and Late Middle Ages
3.5 Early modern period
3.6 18th and 19th centuries
3.7 20th century to the present


4 Geography

4.1 Climate
4.2 Geology
4.3 Flora
4.4 Fauna


5 Politics
6 List of states and territories
7 Economy

7.1 Economic history


8 Demographics

8.1 Ethnic groups
8.2 Migration
8.3 Languages


9 Culture

9.1 Religion


10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Sources
14 External links



Name




Statue representing Europa at Palazzo Ferreria, in Valletta, Malta






Reconstruction of Herodotus' world map (450 BC)



Further information: Europa (mythology)
In classical Greek mythology, Europa (Ancient Greek: Εὐρώπη, Eurṓpē) is the name of either a Phoenician princess or of a queen of Crete. The name contains the elements εὐρύς (eurús), "wide, broad"[11] and ὤψ (ōps, gen. ὠπός, ōpós) "eye, face, countenance",[12] hence their composite Eurṓpē would mean "wide-gazing" or "broad of aspect". Broad has been an epithet of Earth herself in the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European religion and the poetry devoted to it.[13] For the second part compare also the divine attributes of "grey-eyed" Athena (γλαυκῶπις, glaukōpis) or ox-eyed Hera (βοῶπις, boōpis).
There have been attempts to connect Eurṓpē to a Semitic term for "west", this being either Akkadian erebu meaning "to go down, set" (said of the sun) or Phoenician 'ereb "evening, west",[14] which is at the origin of Arabic Maghreb and Hebrew ma'arav. Michael A. Barry, professor in Princeton University's Near Eastern Studies Department, finds the mention of the word Ereb on an Assyrian stele with the meaning of "night, [the country of] sunset", in opposition to Asu "[the country of] sunrise", i.e. Asia. The same naming motive according to "cartographic convention" appears in Greek Ἀνατολή (Anatolḗ "[sun] rise", "east", hence Anatolia).[15] Martin Litchfield West stated that "phonologically, the match between Europa's name and any form of the Semitic word is very poor."[16] Next to these hypotheses there is also a Proto-Indo-European root *h1regʷos, meaning "darkness", which also produced Greek Erebus.
Most major world languages use words derived from Eurṓpē or Europa to refer to the continent. Chinese, for example, uses the word Ōuzhōu (歐洲/欧洲); a similar Chinese-derived term Ōshū (欧州) is also sometimes used in Japanese such as in the Japanese name of the European Union, Ōshū Rengō (欧州連合), despite the katakana Yōroppa (ヨーロッパ) being more commonly used. In some Turkic languages the originally Persian name Frangistan ("land of the Franks") is used casually in referring to much of Europe, besides official names such as Avrupa or Evropa.[17]
Definition
Further information: List of transcontinental countries and Boundaries between the continents of Earth
Contemporary definition


Clickable map of Europe, showing one of the most commonly used continental boundaries[18]
Key: blue: states which straddle the border between Europe and Asia; green: countries not geographically in Europe, but closely associated with the continent


Alb.
Andorra
Austria
Azer.
Belarus
Belg.
Bosnia
Bulgaria
Channel
Is.(UK)
Croatia
Cz. Rep.
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Gib. (UK)
Germany
Georgia
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
IoM
(UK)
S. Mar.
Kazakhstan
Kos.
Latvia
Liech.
Lithuania
Lux.
Mac.
Malta
Moldova
Mon.
Mont.
Nether.
Norway
Svalbard (Nor)
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slo.
Spain
Sweden
Switz-
erland
Turkey
Ukraine
United
Kingdom
Far. (Dk)
Vat.
Armenia
Cyprus
Greenland (Dk)
Adr-
iatic
Sea
Arctic Ocean
Baltic
Sea
Aegean
Sea
Barents Sea
Bay of
Biscay
Black
Sea
Caspian
Sea
Celtic
Sea
Greenland Sea
Baffin Bay
Gulf of
Cádiz
Ligurian
Sea
Mediterranean Sea
North
Atlantic
Ocean
North
Sea
Norwegian
Sea
Strait of Gibraltar


The prevalent definition of Europe as a geographical term has been in use since the mid-19th century. Europe is taken to be bounded by large bodies of water to the north, west and south; Europe's limits to the far east are usually taken to be the Urals, the Ural River, and the Caspian Sea; to the southeast, including the Caucasus Mountains, the Black Sea and the waterways connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea.[19]
Islands are generally grouped with the nearest continental landmass, hence Iceland is generally considered to be part of Europe, while the nearby island of Greenland is usually assigned to North America. Nevertheless, there are some exceptions based on sociopolitical and cultural differences. Cyprus is closest to Anatolia (or Asia Minor), but is usually considered part of Europe both culturally and politically and is a member state of the EU. Malta was considered an island of North Africa for centuries.[20]
"Europe" as used specifically in British English may also refer to Continental Europe exclusively.[21]
History of the concept
Early history




A medieval T and O map from 1472 showing the three continents as domains of the sons of Noah — Asia to Sem (Shem), Europe to Iafeth (Japheth), and Africa to Cham (Ham)


The first recorded usage of Eurṓpē as a geographic term is in the Homeric Hymn to Delian Apollo, in reference to the western shore of the Aegean Sea. As a name for a part of the known world, it is first used in the 6th century BC by Anaximander and Hecataeus. Anaximander placed the boundary between Asia and Europe along the Phasis River (the modern Rioni River) in the Caucasus, a convention still followed by Herodotus in the 5th century BC.[22] Herodotus mentioned that the world had been divided by unknown persons into three parts, Europe, Asia, and Libya (Africa), with the Nile and the Phasis forming their boundaries—though he also states that some considered the River Don, rather than the Phasis, as the boundary between Europe and Asia.[23] Europe's eastern frontier was defined in the 1st century by geographer Strabo at the River Don.[24] The Book of Jubilees described the continents as the lands given by Noah to his three sons; Europe was defined as stretching from the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar, separating it from North Africa, to the Don, separating it from Asia.[25]
The convention received by the Middle Ages and surviving into modern usage is that of the Roman era used by Roman era authors such as Posidonius,[26] Strabo[27] and Ptolemy,[28] who took the Tanais (the modern Don River) as the boundary.
The term "Europe" is first used for a cultural sphere in the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century. From that time, the term designated the sphere of influence of the Western Church, as opposed to both the Eastern Orthodox churches and to the Islamic world.
A cultural definition of Europe as the lands of Latin Christendom coalesced in the 8th century, signifying the new cultural condominium created through the confluence of Germanic traditions and Christian-Latin culture, defined partly in contrast with Byzantium and Islam, and limited to northern Iberia, the British Isles, France, Christianised western Germany, the Alpine regions and northern and central Italy.[29] The concept is one of the lasting legacies of the Carolingian Renaissance: Europa often[dubious – discuss] figures in the letters of Charlemagne's court scholar, Alcuin.[30]
Modern definitions
Further information: Regions of Europe and Core Europe




Depiction of Europa regina ('Queen Europe') in 1582.


The question of defining a precise eastern boundary of Europe arises in the Early Modern period, as the eastern extension of Muscovy began to include Northern Asia.
Throughout the Middle Ages and into the 18th century, the traditional division of the landmass of Eurasia into two continents, Europe and Asia, followed Ptolemy, with the boundary following the Turkish Straits, the Black Sea, the Kerch Strait, the Sea of Azov and the Don (ancient Tanais). But maps produced during the 16th to 18th centuries tended to differ in how to continue the boundary beyond the Don bend at Kalach-na-Donu (where it is closest to the Volga, now joined with it by the Volga–Don Canal), into territory not described in any detail by the ancient geographers.
Philip Johan von Strahlenberg in 1725 was the first to depart from the classical Don boundary by drawing the line along the Volga, following the Volga north until the Samara Bend, along Obshchy Syrt (the drainage divide between Volga and Ural) and then north along Ural Mountains.[31] This was adopted by the Russian Empire, and introduced the convention that would eventually become adopted as standard, but not without criticism by many modern analytical geographers. [32]
The mapmakers continued to differ on the boundary between the lower Don and Samara well into the 19th century. The 1745 atlas published by the Russian Academy of Sciences has the boundary follow the Don beyond Kalach as far as Serafimovich before cutting north towards Arkhangelsk, while other 18th- to 19th-century mapmakers such as John Cary followed Strahlenberg's prescription. To the south, the Kuma–Manych Depression was identified circa 1773 by a German naturalist, Peter Simon Pallas, as a valley that, once upon a time, connected the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea,[33][34] and subsequently was proposed as a natural boundary between continents.
By the mid-19th century, there were three main conventions, one following the Don, the Volga–Don Canal and the Volga, the other following the Kuma–Manych Depression to the Caspian and then the Ural River, and the third abandoning the Don altogether, following the Greater Caucasus watershed to the Caspian. The question was still treated as a "controversy" in geographical literature of the 1860s, with Douglas Freshfield advocating the Caucasus crest boundary as the "best possible", citing support from various "modern geographers".[35]
In Russia and the Soviet Union, the boundary along the Kuma–Manych Depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906.[36] In 1958, the Soviet Geographical Society formally recommended that the boundary between the Europe and Asia be drawn in textbooks from Baydaratskaya Bay, on the Kara Sea, along the eastern foot of Ural Mountains, then following the Ural River until the Mugodzhar Hills, and then the Emba River; and Kuma–Manych Depression,[37] thus placing the Caucasus entirely in Asia and the Urals entirely in Europe.[38] However, most geographers in the Soviet Union favoured the boundary along the Caucasus crest[39] and this became the standard convention in the later 20th century, although the Kuma–Manych boundary remained in use in some 20th-century maps.
History
Main article: History of Europe
Prehistory
Main article: Prehistoric Europe




Paleolithic cave paintings from Lascaux in France (c 15,000 BC)


Homo erectus georgicus, which lived roughly 1.8 million years ago in Georgia, is the earliest hominid to have been discovered in Europe.[40] Other hominid remains, dating back roughly 1 million years, have been discovered in Atapuerca, Spain.[41] Neanderthal man (named after the Neandertal valley in Germany) appeared in Europe 150,000 years ago and disappeared from the fossil record about 28,000 BC, with their final refuge being present-day Portugal. The Neanderthals were supplanted by modern humans (Cro-Magnons), who appeared in Europe around 43 to 40 thousand years ago.[42]




Stonehenge in the United Kingdom (Late Neolithic from 3000 - 2000 BC).






Neolithic terracotta figurine from Vinča in Serbia (4500–4000 BC)






The Nebra sky disk from the Bronze Age (1600 BC), Germany


The European Neolithic period—marked by the cultivation of crops and the raising of livestock, increased numbers of settlements and the widespread use of pottery—began around 7000 BC in Greece and the Balkans, probably influenced by earlier farming practices in Anatolia and the Near East.[43] It spread from the Balkans along the valleys of the Danube and the Rhine (Linear Pottery culture) and along the Mediterranean coast (Cardial culture). Between 4500 and 3000 BC, these central European neolithic cultures developed further to the west and the north, transmitting newly acquired skills in producing copper artefacts. In Western Europe the Neolithic period was characterised not by large agricultural settlements but by field monuments, such as causewayed enclosures, burial mounds and megalithic tombs.[44] The Corded Ware cultural horizon flourished at the transition from the Neolithic to the Chalcolithic. During this period giant megalithic monuments, such as the Megalithic Temples of Malta and Stonehenge, were constructed throughout Western and Southern Europe.[45][46]
The European Bronze Age began c. 3200 BC in Greece with the Minoan civilization on Crete, the first advanced civilization in Europe.[47] The Minoans were followed by the Myceneans, who collapsed suddenly around 1200 BC, ushering the European Iron Age.[48] Iron Age colonisation by the Greeks and Phoenicians gave rise to early Mediterranean cities. Early Iron Age Italy and Greece from around the 8th century BC gradually gave rise to historical Classical antiquity, whose beginning is sometimes dated to 776 BC, the year the first Olympic Games.[49]
Classical antiquity
Main article: Classical antiquity
See also: Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome




The Parthenon in Athens (432 BC)


Ancient Greece was the founding culture of Western civilisation. Western democratic and rationalist culture are often attributed to Ancient Greece.[50] The Greeks city-state, the polis, was the fundamental political unit of classical Greece.[50] In 508 BC, Cleisthenes instituted the world's first democratic system of government in Athens.[51] The Greek political ideals were rediscovered in the late 18th century by European philosophers and idealists. Greece also generated many cultural contributions: in philosophy, humanism and rationalism under Aristotle, Socrates and Plato; in history with Herodotus and Thucydides; in dramatic and narrative verse, starting with the epic poems of Homer;[52] in drama with Sophocles and Euripides, in medicine with Hippocrates and Galen; and in science with Pythagoras, Euclid and Archimedes.[53][54][55] In the course of the 5th century BC, several of the Greek city states would ultimately check the Achaemenid Persian advance in Europe through the Greco-Persian Wars, considered a pivotal moment in world history,[56] as the 50 years of peace that followed are known as Golden Age of Athens, the seminal period of ancient Greece that laid many of the foundations of Western civilization.




The Roman Empire at its greatest extent in 117 AD.






Augustus wearing the Civic Crown


Greece was followed by Rome, which left its mark on law, politics, language, engineering, architecture, government and many more key aspects in western civilisation.[50] Expanding from their base in Italy beginning in the 3rd century BC, the Romans gradually expanded to eventually rule the entire Mediterranean basin and western Europe by the turn of the millennium. The Roman Republic ended in 27 BC, when Augustus proclaimed the Roman Empire. The two centuries that followed are known as the pax romana, a period of unprecedented peace, prosperity, and political stability in most of Europe.[57]
The empire continued to expand under emperors such as Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, who spent time on the Empire's northern border fighting Germanic, Pictish and Scottish tribes.[58][59] The Empire began to decline in the 3rd century, particularly in the west. Christianity was legalised by Constantine I in 313 AD after three centuries of imperial persecution. Constantine also permanently moved the capital of the empire from Rome to the city of Byzantium, which was renamed Constantinople in his honour (modern-day Istanbul) in 330 AD. Christianity became the sole official religion of the empire in 380 AD, and in 391-392 AD, the emperor Theodosius outlawed pagan religions.[60] This is sometimes considered to mark the end of antiquity; alternatively antiquity is considered to end with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476 AD; the closure of the pagan Platonic Academy of Athens in 529 AD;[61] or the rise of Islam in the early 7th century AD.
Early Middle Ages
Main articles: Late Antiquity and Early Middle Ages
See also: Dark Ages (historiography) and Age of Migrations




Europe c. 650




Charlemagne's empire in 814:      Francia,      Tributaries


During the decline of the Roman Empire, Europe entered a long period of change arising from what historians call the "Age of Migrations". There were numerous invasions and migrations amongst the Ostrogoths, Visigoths, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Franks, Angles, Saxons, Slavs, Avars, Bulgars and, later on, the Vikings, Pechenegs, Cumans and Magyars.[57] Renaissance thinkers such as Petrarch would later refer to this as the "Dark Ages".[62] Isolated monastic communities were the only places to safeguard and compile written knowledge accumulated previously; apart from this very few written records survive and much literature, philosophy, mathematics, and other thinking from the classical period disappeared from Western Europe though they were preserved in the east, in the Byzantine Empire.[63]
While the Roman empire in the west continued to decline, Roman traditions and the Roman state remained strong in the predominantly Greek-speaking Eastern Roman Empire, also known as the Byzantine Empire. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in Europe. Emperor Justinian I presided over Constantinople's first golden age: he established a legal code that forms the basis of many modern legal systems, funded the construction of the Hagia Sophia, and brought the Christian church under state control.[64]




Roland pledges fealty to Charlemagne, Holy Roman Emperor




Delegations of Croats and Serbs at Byzantine court of Basil I


From the 7th century onwards, as the Byzantines and neighbouring Sasanid Persians were severely weakened due the protracted, centuries-lasting and frequent Byzantine–Sasanian wars, the Muslim Arabs began to make inroads into historically Roman territory, taking the Levant and North Africa and making inroads into Asia Minor. In the mid 7th century AD, following the Muslim conquest of Persia, Islam penetrated into the Caucasus region.[65] Over the next centuries Muslim forces took Cyprus, Malta, Crete, Sicily and parts of southern Italy.[66] Between 711 and 720, most of the Iberian Peninsula was brought under Muslim rule — save for small areas in the northwest (Asturias) and largely Basque regions in the Pyrenees. This territory, under the Arabic name Al-Andalus, became part of the expanding Umayyad Caliphate. The unsuccessful second siege of Constantinople (717) weakened the Umayyad dynasty and reduced their prestige. The Umayyads were then defeated by the Frankish leader Charles Martel at the Battle of Poitiers in 732, which ended their northward advance.
During the Dark Ages, the Western Roman Empire fell under the control of various tribes. The Germanic and Slav tribes established their domains over Western and Eastern Europe respectively.[67] Eventually the Frankish tribes were united under Clovis I.[68] Charlemagne, a Frankish king of the Carolingian dynasty who had conquered most of Western Europe, was anointed "Holy Roman Emperor" by the Pope in 800. This led in 962 to the founding of the Holy Roman Empire, which eventually became centred in the German principalities of central Europe.[69]
East Central Europe saw the creation of the first Slavic states and the adoption of Christianity (circa 1000 AD). The powerful West Slavic state of Great Moravia spread its territory all the way south to the Balkans, reaching its largest territorial extent under Svatopluk I and causing a series of armed conflicts with East Francia. Further south, the first South Slavic states emerged in the late 7th and 8th century and adopted Christianity: the First Bulgarian Empire, the Serbian Principality (later Kingdom and Empire), and the Duchy of Croatia (later Kingdom of Croatia). To the East, the Kievan Rus expanded from its capital in Kiev to become the largest state in Europe by the 10th century. In 988, Vladimir the Great adopted Orthodox Christianity as the religion of state.[70][71] Further East, Volga Bulgaria became an Islamic state in the 10th century, but was eventually absorbed into Russia several centuries later.[72]
High and Late Middle Ages
Main articles: High Middle Ages, Late Middle Ages, and Middle Ages
See also: Medieval demography
The period between the year 1000 and 1300 is known as the High Middle Ages, during which the population of Europe experienced significant growth, culminating in the Renaissance of the 12th century. Economic growth, together with the lack of safety on the mainland trading routes, made possible the development of major commercial routes along the coast of the Mediterranean and Baltic Seas. The growing wealth and independence acquired by some coastal cities gave the Maritime Republics a leading role in the European scene.




Tancred of Sicily and Philip II of France, during the Third Crusade (1189–1192)


The Middle Ages on the mainland were dominated by the two upper echelons of the social structure: the nobility and the clergy. Feudalism developed in France in the Early Middle Ages and soon spread throughout Europe.[73] A struggle for influence between the nobility and the monarchy in England led to the writing of the Magna Carta and the establishment of a parliament.[74] The primary source of culture in this period came from the Roman Catholic Church. Through monasteries and cathedral schools, the Church was responsible for education in much of Europe.[73]
The Papacy reached the height of its power during the High Middle Ages. An East-West Schism in 1054 split the former Roman Empire religiously, with the Eastern Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire and the Roman Catholic Church in the former Western Roman Empire. In 1095 Pope Urban II called for a crusade against Muslims occupying Jerusalem and the Holy Land.[75] In Europe itself, the Church organised the Inquisition against heretics. In Spain, the Reconquista concluded with the fall of Granada in 1492, ending over seven centuries of Islamic rule in the Iberian Peninsula.[76]
In the east a resurgent Byzantine Empire recaptured Crete and Cyprus from the Muslims and reconquered the Balkans. Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe from the 9th to the 12th centuries, with a population of approximately 400,000.[77] The Empire was weakened following the defeat at Manzikert and was weakened considerably by the sack of Constantinople in 1204, during the Fourth Crusade.[78][79][80][81][82][83][84][85][86] Although it would recover Constantinople in 1261, Byzantium fell in 1453 when Constantinople was taken by the Ottoman Empire.[87][88][89]




The sacking of Suzdal by Batu Khan in 1238, during the Mongol invasion of Europe.


In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Pechenegs and the Cuman-Kipchaks, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north and temporarily halted the expansion of the Rus' state to the south and east.[90] Like many other parts of Eurasia, these territories were overrun by the Mongols.[91] The invaders, who became known as Tatars, were mostly Turkic-speaking peoples under Mongol suzerainty. They established the state of the Golden Horde with headquarters in Crimea, which later adopted Islam as a religion and ruled over modern-day southern and central Russia for more than three centuries.[92][93] After the collapse of Mongol dominions, the first Romanian states (principalities) emerged in the 14th century: Moldova and Walachia. Previously, these territories were under the successive control of Pechenegs and Cumans.[94] From the 12th to the 15th centuries, the Grand Duchy of Moscow grew from a small principality under Mongol rule to the largest state in Europe, overthrowing the Mongols in 1480 and eventually becoming the Tsardom of Russia. The state was consolidated under Ivan III the Great and Ivan the Terrible, steadily expanding to the east and south over the next centuries.
The Great Famine of 1315–1317 was the first crisis that would strike Europe in the late Middle Ages.[95] The period between 1348 and 1420 witnessed the heaviest loss. The population of France was reduced by half.[96][97] Medieval Britain was afflicted by 95 famines,[98] and France suffered the effects of 75 or more in the same period.[99] Europe was devastated in the mid-14th century by the Black Death, one of the most deadly pandemics in human history which killed an estimated 25 million people in Europe alone—a third of the European population at the time.[100]
The plague had a devastating effect on Europe's social structure; it induced people to live for the moment as illustrated by Giovanni Boccaccio in The Decameron (1353). It was a serious blow to the Roman Catholic Church and led to increased persecution of Jews, foreigners, beggars and lepers.[101] The plague is thought to have returned every generation with varying virulence and mortalities until the 18th century.[102] During this period, more than 100 plague epidemics swept across Europe.[103]
Early modern period
Main article: Early modern period
See also: Renaissance, Protestant Reformation, Scientific Revolution, and Age of Discovery




The School of Athens by Raphael (1511): Contemporaries such as Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci (centre) are portrayed as classical scholars.


The Renaissance was a period of cultural change originating in Florence and later spreading to the rest of Europe. The rise of a new humanism was accompanied by the recovery of forgotten classical Greek and Arabic knowledge from monastic libraries, often translated from Arabic into Latin.[104][105][106] The Renaissance spread across Europe between the 14th and 16th centuries: it saw the flowering of art, philosophy, music, and the sciences, under the joint patronage of royalty, the nobility, the Roman Catholic Church, and an emerging merchant class.[107][108][109] Patrons in Italy, including the Medici family of Florentine bankers and the Popes in Rome, funded prolific quattrocento and cinquecento artists such as Raphael, Michelangelo, and Leonardo da Vinci.[110][111]
Political intrigue within the Church in the mid-14th century caused the Western Schism. During this forty-year period, two popes—one in Avignon and one in Rome—claimed rulership over the Church. Although the schism was eventually healed in 1417, the papacy's spiritual authority had suffered greatly.[112]




Martin Luther (1483–1546) initiated the Protestant Reformation.


The Church's power was further weakened by the Protestant Reformation (1517–1648), initially sparked by the works of German theologian Martin Luther, an attempt to start a reform within the Church. The Reformation also damaged the Holy Roman Emperor's influence, as German princes became divided between Protestant and Roman Catholic faiths.[113] This eventually led to the Thirty Years War (1618–1648), which crippled the Holy Roman Empire and devastated much of Germany, killing between 25 and 40 percent of its population.[114] In the aftermath of the Peace of Westphalia, France rose to predominance within Europe.[115]
The 17th century in southern, central and eastern Europe was a period of general decline.[116] Central and Eastern Europe experienced more than 150 famines in a 200-year period between 1501 and 1700.[117] From the Union of Krewo (1385) central and eastern Europe was dominated by Kingdom of Poland and Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Between 1648 and 1655 in the central and eastern Europe ended hegemony of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. From the 15th to 18th centuries, when the disintegrating khanates of the Golden Horde were conquered by Russia, Tatars from the Crimean Khanate frequently raided Eastern Slavic lands to capture slaves.[118] Further east, the Nogai Horde and Kazakh Khanate frequently raided the Slavic-speaking areas of Russia, Ukraine and Poland for hundreds of years, until the Russian expansion and conquest of most of northern Eurasia (i.e. Eastern Europe, Central Asia and Siberia). Meanwhile, in the south, the Ottomans had conquered the Balkans by the 15th century, laying siege to Vienna in 1529. In the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, the Holy League checked Ottoman power in the Mediterranean. The Ottomans again laid siege to Vienna in 1683, but the Battle of Vienna permanently ended their advance into Europe, and marked the political hegemony of the Habsburg dynasty in central Europe.
The Renaissance and the New Monarchs marked the start of an Age of Discovery, a period of exploration, invention, and scientific development.[119] Among the great figures of the Western scientific revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries were Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Isaac Newton.[120] According to Peter Barrett, "It is widely accepted that 'modern science' arose in the Europe of the 17th century (towards the end of the Renaissance), introducing a new understanding of the natural world."[104]
In the 15th century, Europe started to extend itself beyond its geographic frontiers. Portugal and Spain, two of the greatest naval powers of the time, took the lead in exploring the world.[121][122] Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492 and Vasco da Gama opened the ocean route to the East in 1498, and soon after the Spanish and Portuguese began establishing colonial empires in the Americas and Asia.[123] France, the Netherlands and England soon followed in building large colonial empires with vast holdings in Africa, the Americas, and Asia.
18th and 19th centuries
Main article: Modern history
See also: Industrial Revolution, French Revolution, and Age of Enlightenment




Napoleon's retreat from Russia in 1812. Napoleon's Grande Armée had lost about half a million men.


The Age of Enlightenment was a powerful intellectual movement during the 18th century promoting scientific and reason-based thoughts.[124][125][126] Discontent with the aristocracy and clergy's monopoly on political power in France resulted in the French Revolution and the establishment of the First Republic as a result of which the monarchy and many of the nobility perished during the initial reign of terror.[127] Napoleon Bonaparte rose to power in the aftermath of the French Revolution and established the First French Empire that, during the Napoleonic Wars, grew to encompass large parts of Europe before collapsing in 1815 with the Battle of Waterloo.[128][129] Napoleonic rule resulted in the further dissemination of the ideals of the French Revolution, including that of the nation-state, as well as the widespread adoption of the French models of administration, law, and education.[130][131][132] The Congress of Vienna, convened after Napoleon's downfall, established a new balance of power in Europe centred on the five "Great Powers": the UK, France, Prussia, Austria, and Russia.[133] This balance would remain in place until the Revolutions of 1848, during which liberal uprisings affected all of Europe except for Russia and the UK. These revolutions were eventually put down by conservative elements and few reforms resulted.[134] The year 1859 saw the unification of Romania, as a nation-state, from smaller principalities. In 1867, the Austro-Hungarian empire was formed; and 1871 saw the unifications of both Italy and Germany as nation-states from smaller principalities.[135]




     Ottoman Europe in 1856


In parallel, the Eastern Question grew more complex ever since the Ottoman defeat in the Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774). As the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire seemed imminent, the Great Powers struggled to safeguard their strategic and commercial interests in the Ottoman domains. The Russian Empire stood to benefit from the decline, whereas the Habsburg Empire and Britain perceived the preservation of the Ottoman Empire to be in their best interests. Meanwhile, the Serbian revolution (1804) and Greek War of Independence (1821) marked the beginning of the end of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, which ended with the Balkan Wars in 1912-1913.[136] Formal recognition of the de facto independent principalities of Montenegro, Serbia and Romania ensued at the Congress of Berlin in 1878.




Marshall's Temple Works (1840), the Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain


The Industrial Revolution started in Great Britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout Europe. The invention and implementation of new technologies resulted in rapid urban growth, mass employment, and the rise of a new working class.[137] Reforms in social and economic spheres followed, including the first laws on child labour, the legalisation of trade unions,[138] and the abolition of slavery.[139] In Britain, the Public Health Act of 1875 was passed, which significantly improved living conditions in many British cities.[140] Europe's population increased from about 100 million in 1700 to 400 million by 1900.[141] The last major famine recorded in Western Europe, the Irish Potato Famine, caused death and mass emigration of millions of Irish people.[142] In the 19th century, 70 million people left Europe in migrations to various European colonies abroad and to the United States.[143] Demographic growth meant that, by 1900, Europe's share of the world's population was 25%.[144]
20th century to the present
Main articles: Modern era and History of Europe
See also: World War I, Great Depression, Interwar period, World War II, Cold War, and History of the European Union




Leaders of the Central Powers in 1918 (left to right): Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, Kaiser Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary, Sultan Mehmed V of the Ottoman Empire, and Tsar Ferdinand of Bulgaria.


Two world wars and an economic depression dominated the first half of the 20th century. World War I was fought between 1914 and 1918. It started when Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated by the Yugoslav nationalist[145] Gavrilo Princip.[146] Most European nations were drawn into the war, which was fought between the Entente Powers (France, Belgium, Serbia, Portugal, Russia, the United Kingdom, and later Italy, Greece, Romania, and the United States) and the Central Powers (Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire). The war left more than 16 million civilians and military dead.[147] Over 60 million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918.[148]




Serbian war efforts (1914–1918) cost the country one quarter of its population.[149][150][151][152][153]


Russia was plunged into the Russian Revolution, which threw down the Tsarist monarchy and replaced it with the communist Soviet Union.[154] Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire collapsed and broke up into separate nations, and many other nations had their borders redrawn. The Treaty of Versailles, which officially ended World War I in 1919, was harsh towards Germany, upon whom it placed full responsibility for the war and imposed heavy sanctions.[155]
Excess deaths in Russia over the course of World War I and the Russian Civil War (including the postwar famine) amounted to a combined total of 18 million.[156] In 1932–1933, under Stalin's leadership, confiscations of grain by the Soviet authorities contributed to the second Soviet famine which caused millions of deaths;[157] surviving kulaks were persecuted and many sent to Gulags to do forced labour. Stalin was also responsible for the Great Purge of 1937–38 in which the NKVD executed 681,692 people;[158] millions of people were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.[159]
The social revolutions sweeping through Russia also affected other European nations following The Great War: in 1919, with the Weimar Republic in Germany, and the First Austrian Republic; in 1922, with Mussolini's one party fascist government in the Kingdom of Italy, and in Ataturk's Turkish Republic, adopting the Western alphabet, and state secularism. Economic instability, caused in part by debts incurred in the First World War and 'loans' to Germany played havoc in Europe in the late 1920s and 1930s. This and the Wall Street Crash of 1929 brought about the worldwide Great Depression. Helped by the economic crisis, social instability and the threat of communism, fascist movements developed throughout Europe placing Adolf Hitler in power of what became Nazi Germany.[160][161]
In 1933, Hitler became the leader of Germany and began to work towards his goal of building Greater Germany. Germany re-expanded and took back the Saarland and Rhineland in 1935 and 1936. In 1938, Austria became a part of Germany following the Anschluss. Later that year, following the Munich Agreement signed by Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Italy, Germany annexed the Sudetenland, which was a part of Czechoslovakia inhabited by ethnic Germans, and in early 1939, the remainder of Czechoslovakia was split into the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, controlled by Germany, and the Slovak Republic. At the time, Britain and France preferred a policy of appeasement.




Bombed and burned-out buildings in Hamburg, 1944/45


With tensions mounting between Germany and Poland over the future of Danzig, the Germans turned to the Soviets, and signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which allowed the Soviets to invade the Baltic states and parts of Poland and Romania. Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, prompting France and the United Kingdom to declare war on Germany on 3 September, opening the European Theatre of World War II.[162][163] The Soviet invasion of Poland started on 17 September and Poland fell soon thereafter. On 24 September, the Soviet Union attacked the Baltic countries and later, Finland. The British hoped to land at Narvik and send troops to aid Finland, but their primary objective in the landing was to encircle Germany and cut the Germans off from Scandinavian resources. Around the same time, Germany moved troops into Denmark. The Phoney War continued.
In May 1940, Germany attacked France through the Low Countries. France capitulated in June 1940. By August Germany began a bombing offensive on Britain, but failed to convince the Britons to give up.[164] In 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union in the Operation Barbarossa.[165] On 7 December 1941 Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor drew the United States into the conflict as allies of the British Empire and other allied forces.[166][167]




The "Big Three" at the Yalta Conference in 1945; seated (from the left): Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin


After the staggering Battle of Stalingrad in 1943, the German offensive in the Soviet Union turned into a continual fallback. The Battle of Kursk, which involved the largest tank battle in history, was the last major German offensive on the Eastern Front. In June 1944, British and American forces invaded France in the D-Day landings, opening a new front against Germany. Berlin finally fell in 1945, ending World War II in Europe. The war was the largest and most destructive in human history, with 60 million dead across the world.[168] More than 40 million people in Europe had died as a result of World War II,[169] including between 11 and 17 million people who perished during the Holocaust.[170] The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people (mostly civilians) during the war, about half of all World War II casualties.[171] By the end of World War II, Europe had more than 40 million refugees.[172] Several post-war expulsions in Central and Eastern Europe displaced a total of about 20 million people.[173]
World War I and especially World War II diminished the eminence of Western Europe in world affairs. After World War II the map of Europe was redrawn at the Yalta Conference and divided into two blocs, the Western countries and the communist Eastern bloc, separated by what was later called by Winston Churchill an "Iron Curtain". The United States and Western Europe established the NATO alliance and later the Soviet Union and Central Europe established the Warsaw Pact.[174]




The Schuman Declaration led to the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community. It began the integration process of the European Union (9 May 1950, at the French Foreign Ministry).


The two new superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, became locked in a fifty-year-long Cold War, centred on nuclear proliferation. At the same time decolonisation, which had already started after World War I, gradually resulted in the independence of most of the European colonies in Asia and Africa.[9] In the 1980s the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev and the Solidarity movement in Poland accelerated the collapse of the Eastern bloc and the end of the Cold War. Germany was reunited, after the symbolic fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and the maps of Central and Eastern Europe were redrawn once more.[160]




Flag of Europe, adopted by the Council of Europe in 1955 as the flag for the whole of Europe.[175]


European integration also grew after World War II. The Treaty of Rome in 1957 established the European Economic Community between six Western European states with the goal of a unified economic policy and common market.[176] In 1967 the EEC, European Coal and Steel Community and Euratom formed the European Community, which in 1993 became the European Union. The EU established a parliament, court and central bank and introduced the euro as a unified currency.[177] Between 2004 and 2013, more Central and Eastern European countries began joining, expanding the EU to its current size of 28 European countries, and once more making Europe a major economical and political centre of power.[178] However, in June 2016 the people of the United Kingdom, in a non-binding referendum on EU membership voted to leave the European Union.
Geography
Main article: Geography of Europe




Relief map of Europe and surrounding regions


Europe makes up the western fifth of the Eurasian landmass.[19] It has a higher ratio of coast to landmass than any other continent or subcontinent.[179] Its maritime borders consist of the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, and the Mediterranean, Black, and Caspian Seas to the south.[180] Land relief in Europe shows great variation within relatively small areas. The southern regions are more mountainous, while moving north the terrain descends from the high Alps, Pyrenees, and Carpathians, through hilly uplands, into broad, low northern plains, which are vast in the east. This extended lowland is known as the Great European Plain, and at its heart lies the North German Plain. An arc of uplands also exists along the north-western seaboard, which begins in the western parts of the islands of Britain and Ireland, and then continues along the mountainous, fjord-cut spine of Norway.
This description is simplified. Sub-regions such as the Iberian Peninsula and the Italian Peninsula contain their own complex features, as does mainland Central Europe itself, where the relief contains many plateaus, river valleys and basins that complicate the general trend. Sub-regions like Iceland, Britain, and Ireland are special cases. The former is a land unto itself in the northern ocean which is counted as part of Europe, while the latter are upland areas that were once joined to the mainland until rising sea levels cut them off.
Climate
Main article: Climate of Europe




Biomes of Europe and surrounding regions:
     tundra      alpine tundra      taiga      montane forest
     temperate broadleaf forest      mediterranean forest      temperate steppe      dry steppe


Europe lies mainly in the temperate climate zones, being subjected to prevailing westerlies. The climate is milder in comparison to other areas of the same latitude around the globe due to the influence of the Gulf Stream.[181] The Gulf Stream is nicknamed "Europe's central heating", because it makes Europe's climate warmer and wetter than it would otherwise be. The Gulf Stream not only carries warm water to Europe's coast but also warms up the prevailing westerly winds that blow across the continent from the Atlantic Ocean.
Therefore, the average temperature throughout the year of Naples is 16 °C (61 °F), while it is only 12 °C (54 °F) in New York City which is almost on the same latitude. Berlin, Germany; Calgary, Canada; and Irkutsk, in the Asian part of Russia, lie on around the same latitude; January temperatures in Berlin average around 8 °C (14 °F) higher than those in Calgary, and they are almost 22 °C (40 °F) higher than average temperatures in Irkutsk.[181] Similarly, northern parts of Scotland have a tempertate marine climate. The yearly average temperature in city of Inverness is 9.05 °C (48.29 °F). However, Churchill, Manitoba, Canada, is on roughly the same latitude and has an average temperature of −6.5 °C (20.3 °F), giving it a nearly subarctic climate.
Geology
Main articles: Geology of Europe and Geological history of Europe




Mount Elbrus in Russia is the highest mountain in Europe.


The geological history of Europe traces back to the formation of the Baltic Shield (Fennoscandia) and the Sarmatian craton, both around 2.25 billion years ago, followed by the Volgo–Uralia shield, the three together leading to the East European craton (≈ Baltica) which became a part of the supercontinent Columbia. Around 1.1 billion years ago, Baltica and Arctica (as part of the Laurentia block) became joined to Rodinia, later resplitting around 550 million years ago to reform as Baltica. Around 440 million years ago Euramerica was formed from Baltica and Laurentia; a further joining with Gondwana then leading to the formation of Pangea. Around 190 million years ago, Gondwana and Laurasia split apart due to the widening of the Atlantic Ocean. Finally, and very soon afterwards, Laurasia itself split up again, into Laurentia (North America) and the Eurasian continent. The land connection between the two persisted for a considerable time, via Greenland, leading to interchange of animal species. From around 50 million years ago, rising and falling sea levels have determined the actual shape of Europe, and its connections with continents such as Asia. Europe's present shape dates to the late Tertiary period about five million years ago.[182]




Europa Point as seen from the Strait of Gibraltar.


The geology of Europe is hugely varied and complex, and gives rise to the wide variety of landscapes found across the continent, from the Scottish Highlands to the rolling plains of Hungary.[183] Europe's most significant feature is the dichotomy between highland and mountainous Southern Europe and a vast, partially underwater, northern plain ranging from Ireland in the west to the Ural Mountains in the east. These two halves are separated by the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and Alps/Carpathians. The northern plains are delimited in the west by the Scandinavian Mountains and the mountainous parts of the British Isles. Major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the Celtic Sea, the North Sea, the Baltic Sea complex and Barents Sea.
The northern plain contains the old geological continent of Baltica, and so may be regarded geologically as the "main continent", while peripheral highlands and mountainous regions in the south and west constitute fragments from various other geological continents. Most of the older geology of western Europe existed as part of the ancient microcontinent Avalonia.
Flora
Having lived side-by-side with agricultural peoples for millennia, Europe's animals and plants have been profoundly affected by the presence and activities of man. With the exception of Fennoscandia and northern Russia, few areas of untouched wilderness are currently found in Europe, except for various national parks.




Land use map of Europe with arable farmland (yellow), forest (dark green), pasture (light green), and tundra or bogs in the north (dark yellow)


The main natural vegetation cover in Europe is mixed forest. The conditions for growth are very favourable. In the north, the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift warm the continent. Southern Europe could be described as having a warm, but mild climate. There are frequent summer droughts in this region. Mountain ridges also affect the conditions. Some of these (Alps, Pyrenees) are oriented east-west and allow the wind to carry large masses of water from the ocean in the interior. Others are oriented south-north (Scandinavian Mountains, Dinarides, Carpathians, Apennines) and because the rain falls primarily on the side of mountains that is oriented towards the sea, forests grow well on this side, while on the other side, the conditions are much less favourable. Few corners of mainland Europe have not been grazed by livestock at some point in time, and the cutting down of the pre-agricultural forest habitat caused disruption to the original plant and animal ecosystems.




Floristic regions of Europe and neighbouring areas, according to Wolfgang Frey and Rainer Lösch


Probably 80 to 90 percent of Europe was once covered by forest.[184] It stretched from the Mediterranean Sea to the Arctic Ocean. Though over half of Europe's original forests disappeared through the centuries of deforestation, Europe still has over one quarter of its land area as forest, such as the broadleaf and mixed forests, taiga of Scandinavia and Russia, mixed rainforests of the Caucasus and the Cork oak forests in the western Mediterranean. During recent times, deforestation has been slowed and many trees have been planted. However, in many cases monoculture plantations of conifers have replaced the original mixed natural forest, because these grow quicker. The plantations now cover vast areas of land, but offer poorer habitats for many European forest dwelling species which require a mixture of tree species and diverse forest structure. The amount of natural forest in Western Europe is just 2–3% or less, in European Russia 5–10%. The country with the smallest percentage of forested area is Iceland (1%), while the most forested country is Finland (77%).[185]
In temperate Europe, mixed forest with both broadleaf and coniferous trees dominate. The most important species in central and western Europe are beech and oak. In the north, the taiga is a mixed spruce–pine–birch forest; further north within Russia and extreme northern Scandinavia, the taiga gives way to tundra as the Arctic is approached. In the Mediterranean, many olive trees have been planted, which are very well adapted to its arid climate; Mediterranean Cypress is also widely planted in southern Europe. The semi-arid Mediterranean region hosts much scrub forest. A narrow east-west tongue of Eurasian grassland (the steppe) extends eastwards from Ukraine and southern Russia and ends in Hungary and traverses into taiga to the north.
Fauna
Main article: Fauna of Europe




Biogeographic regions of Europe and bordering regions


Glaciation during the most recent ice age and the presence of man affected the distribution of European fauna. As for the animals, in many parts of Europe most large animals and top predator species have been hunted to extinction. The woolly mammoth was extinct before the end of the Neolithic period. Today wolves (carnivores) and bears (omnivores) are endangered. Once they were found in most parts of Europe. However, deforestation and hunting caused these animals to withdraw further and further. By the Middle Ages the bears' habitats were limited to more or less inaccessible mountains with sufficient forest cover. Today, the brown bear lives primarily in the Balkan peninsula, Scandinavia, and Russia; a small number also persist in other countries across Europe (Austria, Pyrenees etc.), but in these areas brown bear populations are fragmented and marginalised because of the destruction of their habitat. In addition, polar bears may be found on Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago far north of Scandinavia. The wolf, the second largest predator in Europe after the brown bear, can be found primarily in Central and Eastern Europe and in the Balkans, with a handful of packs in pockets of Western Europe (Scandinavia, Spain, etc.).




Once roaming the great temperate forests of Eurasia, European bison now live in nature preserves in Białowieża Forest, on the border between Poland and Belarus.[186][187]


European wild cat, foxes (especially the red fox), jackal and different species of martens, hedgehogs, different species of reptiles (like snakes such as vipers and grass snakes) and amphibians, different birds (owls, hawks and other birds of prey).
Important European herbivores are snails, larvae, fish, different birds, and mammals, like rodents, deer and roe deer, boars, and living in the mountains, marmots, steinbocks, chamois among others. A number of insects, such as the small tortoiseshell butterfly, add to the biodiversity.[188]
The extinction of the dwarf hippos and dwarf elephants has been linked to the earliest arrival of humans on the islands of the Mediterranean.[189]
Sea creatures are also an important part of European flora and fauna. The sea flora is mainly phytoplankton. Important animals that live in European seas are zooplankton, molluscs, echinoderms, different crustaceans, squids and octopuses, fish, dolphins, and whales.
Biodiversity is protected in Europe through the Council of Europe's Bern Convention, which has also been signed by the European Community as well as non-European states.

Politics
Main article: Politics of Europe
See also: List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe, International organizations in Europe, Regions of Europe, and European integration









































































A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements.


v
t
e





The political map of Europe is substantially derived from the re-organisation of Europe following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. The prevalent form of government in Europe is parliamentary democracy, in most cases in the form of Republic; in 1815, the prevalent form of government was still the Monarchy. Europe's remaining eleven monarchies[190] are constitutional.
European integration is the process of political, legal, economic (and in some cases social and cultural) integration of European states as it has been pursued by the powers sponsoring the Council of Europe since the end of World War II The European Union has been the focus of economic integration on the continent since its foundation in 1993. More recently, the Eurasian Economic Union has been established as a counterpart comprising former Soviet states.
28 European states are members of the politico-economic European Union, 26 of the border-free Schengen Area and 19 of the monetary union Eurozone. Among the smaller European organizations are the Nordic Council, the Benelux, the Baltic Assembly and the Visegrád Group.
List of states and territories
Main articles: List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe and Area and population of European countries






It has been suggested that this section be split out into another article titled List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Europe. (Discuss) (October 2016)



The list below includes all entities[clarification needed] falling even partially under any of the various common definitions of Europe,[clarification needed] geographic or political.


Flag
Symbol
Name
Area
(km2)
Population
Population density
(per km2)
Capital
Name(s) in official language(s)




Albania
28,748
2,831,741
98.5
Tirana
Shqipëria




Andorra
468
68,403
146.2
Andorra la Vella
Andorra




Armenia [j]
29,743
3,060,631
101.5
Yerevan
Hayastan




Austria
83,858
8,169,929
97.4
Vienna
Österreich




Azerbaijan [k]
86,600
9,165,000
105.8
Baku
Azǝrbaycan




Belarus
207,560
9,458,000
45.6
Minsk
Беларусь (Belaruś)




Belgium
30,528
11,007,000
360.6
Brussels
België/Belgique/Belgien




Bosnia and Herzegovina
51,129
3,843,126
75.2
Sarajevo
Bosna i Hercegovina/Боснa и Херцеговина




Bulgaria
110,910
7,621,337
68.7
Sofia
България (Bǎlgariya)




Croatia
56,542
4,437,460
77.7
Zagreb
Hrvatska




Cyprus [d]
9,251
788,457
85
Nicosia
Kýpros/Kıbrıs




Czech Republic
78,866
10,256,760
130.1
Prague
Česko




Denmark
43,094
5,564,219
129
Copenhagen
Danmark




Estonia
45,226
1,340,194
29
Tallinn
Eesti




Finland
336,593
5,157,537
15.3
Helsinki
Suomi/Finland




France [g]
547,030
66,104,000
115.5
Paris
France




Georgia [l]
69,700
4,661,473
64
Tbilisi
Sakartvelo




Germany
357,021
80,716,000
233.2
Berlin
Deutschland




Greece
131,957
11,123,034
80.7
Athens
Elláda




Hungary
93,030
10,075,034
108.3
Budapest
Magyarország




Iceland
103,000
307,261
2.7
Reykjavík
Ísland




Ireland
70,280
4,234,925
60.3
Dublin
Éire/Ireland




Italy
301,230
60,655,464
197.7
Rome
Italia




Kazakhstan [i]
2,724,900
15,217,711
5.6
Astana
Қазақстан (Qazaqstan)




Latvia
64,589
2,067,900
34.2
Riga
Latvija




Liechtenstein
160
32,842
205.3
Vaduz
Liechtenstein




Lithuania
65,300
2,988,400
45.8
Vilnius
Lietuva




Luxembourg
2,586
448,569
173.5
Luxembourg
Lëtzebuerg/Luxemburg/Luxembourg




Macedonia
25,713
2,054,800
81.1
Skopje
Македонија (Makedonija)




Malta
316
397,499
1,257.9
Valletta
Malta




Moldova [a]
33,843
4,434,547
131.0
Chișinău
Moldova




Monaco
1.95
31,987
16,403.6
Monaco
Monaco




Montenegro
13,812
616,258
44.6
Podgorica
Crna Gora/Црна Гора




Netherlands [h]
41,526
16,902,103
393.0
Amsterdam
Nederland




Norway
385,178
5,018,836
15.5
Oslo
Norge/Noreg/Norga




Poland
312,685
38,625,478
123.5
Warsaw
Polska




Portugal [e]
91,568
10,409,995
110.1
Lisbon
Portugal




Romania
238,391
21,698,181
91.0
Bucharest
România




Russia [b]
17,075,400
143,975,923
8.3
Moscow
Россия (Rossiya)




San Marino
61
27,730
454.6
San Marino
San Marino




Serbia [f]
88,361
7,120,666
91.9
Belgrade
Srbija/Србија




Slovakia
48,845
5,422,366
111.0
Bratislava
Slovensko




Slovenia
20,273
2,050,189
101
Ljubljana
Slovenija




Spain
504,851
47,059,533
93.2
Madrid
España




Sweden
449,964
9,090,113
19.7
Stockholm
Sverige




Switzerland
41,290
7,507,000
176.8
Bern
Schweiz/Suisse/Svizzera/Svizra




Turkey [m]
783,562
77,695,904
101
Ankara
Türkiye




Ukraine
603,700
45,360,000
75.1
Kiev
Україна (Ukraina)




United Kingdom
244,820
65,110,000
244.2
London
United Kingdom




Vatican City
0.44
900
2,045.5
Vatican City
Città del Vaticano/Civitas Vaticana


Total
50
10,180,000[n]
742,000,000[n]
73




Within the above-mentioned states are several de facto independent countries with limited to no international recognition. None of them are members of the UN:


Flag
Symbol
Name
Area
(km²)
Population
(1 July 2002 est.)
Population density
(per km²)
Capital




Abkhazia [p]
8,432
216,000
29
Sukhumi




Kosovo [o]
10,887
1,804,838[191]
220
Pristina




Artsakh [q]
11,458
138,800
12
Stepanakert




Northern Cyprus [d]
3,355
265,100
78
Nicosia




South Ossetia [p]
3,900
70,000
18
Tskhinvali




Transnistria [a]
4,163
537,000
133
Tiraspol


Several dependencies and similar territories with broad autonomy are also found within or in close proximity to Europe. This includes Åland (a region of Finland), two constituent countries of the Kingdom Denmark (other than Denmark itself), three Crown dependencies, and two British Overseas Territories. Svalbard is also included due to its unique status within Norway, although it is not autonomous. Not included are the three countries of the United Kingdom with devolved powers and the two Autonomous Regions of Portugal, which despite having a unique degree of autonomy, are not largely self-governing in matters other than international affairs. Areas with little more than a unique tax status, such as Heligoland and the Canary Islands, are also not included for this reason.


Flag
Symbol
Name
Area
(km²)
Population
(1 July 2002 est.)
Population density
(per km²)
Capital




Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK)
254
15,000
59.1
Episkopi Cantonment




Åland (Finland)
13,517
26,008
16.8
Mariehamn




Bailiwick of Guernsey [c] (UK)
78
64,587
828.0
St. Peter Port




Bailiwick of Jersey [c] (UK)
116
89,775
773.9
Saint Helier




Faroe Islands (Denmark)
1,399
46,011
32.9
Tórshavn




Gibraltar (UK)
5.9
27,714
4,697.3
Gibraltar




Greenland (Denmark) [r]
2,166,086
55,847
0.0028
Nuuk




Isle of Man [c] (UK)
572
73,873
129.1
Douglas




Svalbard (Norway)
61,022
2,655
0.04
Longyearbyen


Economy




European and bordering nations by GDP (PPP) per capita


Main article: Economy of Europe
As a continent, the economy of Europe is currently the largest on Earth and it is the richest region as measured by assets under management with over $32.7 trillion compared to North America's $27.1 trillion in 2008.[192] In 2009 Europe remained the wealthiest region. Its $37.1 trillion in assets under management represented one-third of the world's wealth. It was one of several regions where wealth surpassed its precrisis year-end peak.[193] As with other continents, Europe has a large variation of wealth among its countries. The richer states tend to be in the West; some of the Central and Eastern European economies are still emerging from the collapse of the Soviet Union and the breakup of Yugoslavia.
The European Union, a political entity composed of 28 European states, comprises the largest single economic area in the world. 19 EU countries share the euro as a common currency. Five European countries rank in the top ten of the world's largest national economies in GDP (PPP). This includes (ranks according to the CIA): Germany (5), the UK (6), Russia (7), France (8), and Italy (10).[194]
There is huge disparity between many European countries in terms of their income. The richest in terms of GDP per capita is Monaco with its US$172,676 per capita (2009) and the poorest is Moldova with its GDP per capita of US$1,631 (2010).[195] Monaco is the richest country in terms of GDP per capita in the world according to the World Bank report.
As a whole, Europe's GDP per capita is US$21,767 according to a 2016 International Monetary Fund assessment.[196]


Rank
Country
GDP (nominal, Peak Year)
millions of USD
Peak Year



 European Union
19,202,993
2008


1
 Germany
3,896,788
2014


2
 United Kingdom
3,064,351
2007


3
 France
2,937,321
2008


4
 Italy
2,402,062
2008


5
 Russia
2,297,125
2013


6
 Spain
1,642,738
2008


7
 Turkey
950,328
2013


8
 Netherlands
940,665
2008


9
  Switzerland
709,259
2014


10
 Sweden
578,742
2013




Rank
Country
GDP (PPP, Peak Year)
millions of USD
Peak Year



 European Union
20,854,818
2017


1
 Germany
4,149,573
2017


2
 Russia
4,000,096
2017


3
 United Kingdom
2,880,254
2017


4
 France
2,826,456
2017


5
 Italy
2,307,073
2017


6
 Turkey
2,132,717
2017


7
 Spain
1,768,574
2017


8
 Poland
1,110,735
2017


9
 Netherlands
915,175
2017


10
 Belgium
526,434
2017



Economic history

Industrial growth (1760–1945)

Capitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of feudalism.[197] From Britain, it gradually spread throughout Europe.[198] The Industrial Revolution started in Europe, specifically the United Kingdom in the late 18th century,[199] and the 19th century saw Western Europe industrialise. Economies were disrupted by World War I but by the beginning of World War II they had recovered and were having to compete with the growing economic strength of the United States. World War II, again, damaged much of Europe's industries.

Cold War (1945–1991)





Fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.


After World War II the economy of the UK was in a state of ruin,[200] and continued to suffer relative economic decline in the following decades.[201] Italy was also in a poor economic condition but regained a high level of growth by the 1950s. West Germany recovered quickly and had doubled production from pre-war levels by the 1950s.[202] France also staged a remarkable comeback enjoying rapid growth and modernisation; later on Spain, under the leadership of Franco, also recovered, and the nation recorded huge unprecedented economic growth beginning in the 1960s in what is called the Spanish miracle.[203] The majority of Central and Eastern European states came under the control of the Soviet Union and thus were members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON).[204]
The states which retained a free-market system were given a large amount of aid by the United States under the Marshall Plan. [205] The western states moved to link their economies together, providing the basis for the EU and increasing cross border trade. This helped them to enjoy rapidly improving economies, while those states in COMECON were struggling in a large part due to the cost of the Cold War. Until 1990, the European Community was expanded from 6 founding members to 12. The emphasis placed on resurrecting the West German economy led to it overtaking the UK as Europe's largest economy.

Reunification (1991–present)





Eurozone (blue colour)


With the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe in 1991, the post-socialist states began free market reforms: Poland, Hungary, and Slovenia adopted them reasonably quickly, while Ukraine and Russia are still in the process of doing so.
After East and West Germany were reunited in 1990, the economy of West Germany struggled as it had to support and largely rebuild the infrastructure of East Germany.
By the millennium change, the EU dominated the economy of Europe comprising the five largest European economies of the time namely Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, and Spain. In 1999, 12 of the 15 members of the EU joined the Eurozone replacing their former national currencies by the common euro. The three who chose to remain outside the Eurozone were: the United Kingdom, Denmark, and Sweden. The European Union is now the largest economy in the world.[206]
Figures released by Eurostat in 2009 confirmed that the Eurozone had gone into recession in 2008.[207] It impacted much of the region.[208] In 2010, fears of a sovereign debt crisis[209] developed concerning some countries in Europe, especially Greece, Ireland, Spain, and Portugal.[210] As a result, measures were taken, especially for Greece, by the leading countries of the Eurozone.[211] The EU-27 unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2012.[212] For those aged 15–24 it was 22.4%.[212]
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Europe
See also: List of European countries by population and Ageing of Europe




Population growth in and around Europe in 2010[213]


In 2016, the population of Europe was estimated to be 741 million according to the 2017 revision of the World Population Prospects[1], which is slightly more than one-ninth of the world's population. A century ago, Europe had nearly a quarter of the world's population.[214] The population of Europe has grown in the past century, but in other areas of the world (in particular Africa and Asia) the population has grown far more quickly.[215] Among the continents, Europe has a relatively high population density, second only to Asia. The most densely populated country in Europe (and in the world) is the microstate of Monaco.
Ethnic groups
Main article: Ethnic groups in Europe
Further information: Genetic history of Europe
Pan and Pfeil (2004) count 87 distinct "peoples of Europe", of which 33 form the majority population in at least one sovereign state, while the remaining 54 constitute ethnic minorities.[216] According to UN population projection, Europe's population may fall to about 7% of world population by 2050, or 653 million people (medium variant, 556 to 777 million in low and high variants, respectively).[215] Within this context, significant disparities exist between regions in relation to fertility rates. The average number of children per female of child bearing age is 1.52.[217] According to some sources,[218] this rate is higher among Muslims in Europe. The UN predicts a steady population decline in Central and Eastern Europe as a result of emigration and low birth rates.[219]




Galician bagpipers or gaiteiros in Spain


Migration
Main articles: Immigration to Europe and European diaspora
Europe is home to the highest number of migrants of all global regions at 70.6 million people, the IOM's report said.[220] In 2005, the EU had an overall net gain from immigration of 1.8 million people. This accounted for almost 85% of Europe's total population growth.[221] The European Union plans to open the job centres for legal migrant workers from Africa.[222][223][needs update] In 2008, 696,000 persons were given citizenship of an EU27 member state, a decrease from 707,000 the previous year.[224]
Emigration from Europe began[dubious – discuss] with Spanish and Portuguese settlers in the 16th century,[225][226] and French and English settlers in the 17th century.[227] But numbers remained relatively small until waves of mass emigration in the 19th century, when millions of poor families left Europe.[228]
Today, large populations of European descent are found on every continent. European ancestry predominates in North America, and to a lesser degree in South America (particularly in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile and Brazil, while most of the other Latin American countries also have a considerable population of European origins). Australia and New Zealand have large European derived populations. Africa has no countries with European-derived majorities (or with the exception of Cape Verde and probably São Tomé and Príncipe, depending on context), but there are significant minorities, such as the White South Africans. In Asia, European-derived populations predominate in Northern Asia (specifically Russians), some parts of Northern Kazakhstan and Israel.[229]
Languages
Main article: Languages of Europe




Overview map of the distribution of major European languages


European languages mostly fall within three Indo-European language groups: the Romance languages, derived from the Latin of the Roman Empire; the Germanic languages, whose ancestor language came from southern Scandinavia; and the Slavic languages.[182]
Slavic languages are most spoken by the number of native speakers in Europe, they are spoken in Central, Eastern, and Southeastern Europe. Romance languages are spoken primarily in south-western Europe as well as in Romania and Moldova, in Eastern Europe. Germanic languages are spoken in Northern Europe, the British Isles and some parts of Central Europe.[182]
Many other languages outside the three main groups exist in Europe. Other Indo-European languages include the Baltic group (that is, Latvian and Lithuanian), the Celtic group (that is, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish, and Breton[182]), Greek, Armenian, and Albanian. In addition, a distinct non-Indo-European family of Uralic languages (Estonian, Finnish, and Hungarian) is spoken mainly in Estonia, Finland, and Hungary, while Kartvelian languages (Georgian, Mingrelian, and Svan), are spoken primarily in Georgia, and two other language families reside in the North Caucasus (termed Northeast Caucasian, most notably including Chechen, Avar and Lezgin and Northwest Caucasian, notably including Adyghe). Maltese is the only Semitic language that is official within the EU, while Basque is the only European language isolate. Turkic languages include Azerbaijani and Turkish, in addition to the languages of minority nations in Russia.
Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Europe today. The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.
Culture




Dance at Le Moulin de la Galette, 1876, by Pierre-Auguste Renoir


Main article: Culture of Europe
Further information: European folklore and European art
"Europe" as a cultural concept is substantially derived from the shared heritage of the Roman Empire and its culture. The boundaries of Europe were historically understood as those of Christendom (or more specifically Latin Christendom), as established or defended throughout the medieval and early modern history of Europe, especially against Islam, as in the Reconquista and the Ottoman wars in Europe.[230]
This shared cultural heritage is combined by overlapping indigenous national cultures and folklores, roughly divided into Slavic, Latin (Romance) and Germanic, but with several components not part of either of these group (notably Greek and Celtic). Cultural contact and mixtures characterise much of European regional cultures; Kaplan (2014) describes Europe as "embracing maximum cultural diversity at minimal geographical distances".[clarification needed][231]
Religion





Percentage of popular belief
in God per European country
according to the
Eurobarometer (2005).


Main article: Religion in Europe
Historically, religion in Europe has been a major influence on European art, culture, philosophy and law.
The largest religion in Europe is Christianity, with 76.2% of Europeans considering themselves Christians,[232] including Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and various Protestant denominations. Among Protestants, the most popular are historically state-supported European denominations such as Lutheranism, Anglicanism and the Reformed faith. Other Protestant denominations such as historically significant ones like Anabaptists were never supported by any state and thus are not so widespread, as well as these newly arriving from the United States such as Pentecostalism, Adventism, Methodism, Baptists and various Evangelical Protestants; although Methodism and Baptists both have European origins. The notion of "Europe" and the "Western World" has been intimately connected with the concept of "Christianity and Christendom"; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.[233]




St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City, the largest church in Europe


Christianity, including the Roman Catholic Church,[234][235] has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization since at least the 4th century,[236][237][238][239] and for at least a millennium and a half, Europe has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, even though the religion was inherited from the Middle East. Christian culture was the predominant force in western civilization, guiding the course of philosophy, art, and science.[240][241]
The second most popular religion is Islam (6%)[242] concentrated mainly in the Balkans and eastern Europe (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, Kosovo, Kazakhstan, North Cyprus, Turkey, Azerbaijan, North Caucasus, and the Volga-Ural region). Other religions, including Judaism, Hinduism, and Buddhism are minority religions (though Tibetan Buddhism is the majority religion of Russia's Republic of Kalmykia). The 20th century saw the revival of Neopaganism through movements such as Wicca and Druidry.
Europe has become a relatively secular continent, with an increasing number and proportion of irreligious, atheist and agnostic people, who make up about 18.2% of Europe's population,[243] actually the largest secular population in the Western world. There are a particularly high number of self-described non-religious people in the Czech Republic, Estonia, Sweden, former East Germany, and France.[244]
See also
Main articles: List of Europe-related articles and Outline of Europe





Politics


Eurodistrict
Euroregion
Flags of Europe
List of sovereign states by date of formation
Names of European cities in different languages
OSCE countries statistics
European Union as a potential superpower




Demographics


Area and population of European countries
European Union statistics
Largest cities of the EU
Largest urban areas of the European Union
List of cities in Europe
List of metropolitan areas in Europe
List of villages in Europe
Pan-European identity




Economics


Economy of the European Union
Financial and social rankings of European countries
Healthcare in Europe
Telecommunications in Europe
List of European television stations
List of European countries by GDP (nominal)







Europe portal
Geography portal


Notes



^ a b Transnistria, internationally recognised as being a legal part of the Republic of Moldova, although de facto control is exercised by its internationally unrecognised government which declared independence from Moldova in 1990.
^ Russia is considered a transcontinental country in both Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The vast majority of its population (78%) lives in European Russia.[245] However only the population figure includes the entire state.
^ a b c Guernsey, the Isle of Man and Jersey are Crown Dependencies of the United Kingdom. Other Channel Islands legislated by the Bailiwick of Guernsey include Alderney and Sark.
^ a b Cyprus can be considered part of Europe or Southwest Asia; it has strong historical and sociopolitical connections with Europe. The population and area figures refer to the entire state, including the de facto independent part Northern Cyprus which is not recognised as a sovereign nation by the vast majority of sovereign nations, nor the UN.
^ Figures for Portugal include the Azores and Madeira archipelagos, both in Northern Atlantic.
^ Area figure for Serbia includes Kosovo, a province that unilaterally declared its independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, and whose sovereign status is unclear. Population and density figures are from the first results of 2011 census and are given without the disputed territory of Kosovo.
^ Figures for France include only metropolitan France: some politically integral parts of France are geographically located outside Europe.
^ Netherlands population for November 2014. Population and area details include European portion only: Netherlands and three entities outside Europe (Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, in the Caribbean) constitute the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Amsterdam is the official capital, while The Hague is the administrative seat.
^ Kazakhstan is physiographically considered a transcontinental country, mostly in Central Asia (UN region), partly in Eastern Europe, with European territory west of the Ural Mountains and Ural River. However, only the population figure refers to the entire country.
^ Armenia can be considered part of Eastern Europe and/or Western Asia; it has strong historical and sociopolitical connections with Europe. The population and area figures include the entire state respectively.
^ Azerbaijan can be considered part of Europe and/or Western Asia.[246] However the population and area figures are for the entire state. This includes the exclave of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic and the region Nagorno-Karabakh that has declared, and de facto achieved, independence. Nevertheless, it is not recognised de jure by sovereign states.
^ Georgia can be considered part of Eastern Europe and/or West Asia; it has strong historical and sociopolitical connections with Europe.[247] The population and area figures include Georgian estimates for Abkhazia and South Ossetia, two regions that have declared and de facto achieved independence. International recognition, however, is limited.
^ Turkey is physiographically considered a transcontinental country, mostly in Western Asia (the Middle East) and Southeast Europe. Turkey has a small part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace.[248] However only the population figure includes the entire state.
^ a b c d The total figures for area and population include only European portions of transcontinental countries. The precision of these figures is compromised by the ambiguous geographical extent of Europe and the lack of references for European portions of transcontinental countries.
^ Kosovo unilaterally declared its independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008. Its sovereign status is unclear. Its population is July 2009 CIA estimate.
^ a b Abkhazia and South Ossetia, both of which can be considered part of Eastern Europe and/or West Asia[249] unilaterally declared their independence from Georgia on 25 August 1990 and 28 November 1991 respectively. Their status as sovereign nations is not recognised by a vast majority of sovereign nations, nor the UN. Population figures stated as of 2003 census and 2000 estimates respectively.
^ Nagorno-Karabakh, which can be considered part of Eastern Europe and/or West Asia, unilaterally declared its independence from Azerbaijan on 6 January 1992. Its status as a sovereign nation is not recognised by any sovereign nation, nor the UN. Population figures stated as of 2003 census and 2000 estimates respectively.
^ Greenland, an autonomous constituent country within the Danish Realm, is geographically a part of the continent of North America, but has been politically and culturally associated with Europe.


References


^ a b c "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September 2017. 
^ "IMF (WEO April 2017 Edition) GDP nominal per capita - international dollar". 
^ http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2011/
^ Annual Population of Urban Agglomerations with 300,000 Inhabitants or More in 2014, by Country, 1950-2030 (thousands), World Urbanization Prospects, the 2014 revision, Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Retrieved 21 August 2015. Note: List based on estimates for 2015, from 2014.
^ National Geographic Atlas of the World (7th ed.). Washington, DC: National Geographic. 1999. ISBN 0-7922-7528-4.  "Europe" (pp. 68–9); "Asia" (pp. 90–1): "A commonly accepted division between Asia and Europe ... is formed by the Ural Mountains, Ural River, Caspian Sea, Caucasus Mountains, and the Black Sea with its outlets, the Bosporus and Dardanelles."
^ Lewis & Wigen 1997, p. 226
^ Kim Covert (1 July 2011). Ancient Greece: Birthplace of Democracy. Capstone. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-4296-6831-6. Ancient Greece is often called the cradle of western civilization. ... Ideas from literature and science also have their roots in ancient Greece. 
^ Ricardo Duchesne (7 February 2011). The Uniqueness of Western Civilization. BRILL. p. 297. ISBN 90-04-19248-4. The list of books which have celebrated Greece as the “cradle” of the West is endless; two more examples are Charles Freeman's The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World (1999) and Bruce Thornton's Greek Ways: How the Greeks Created Western Civilization (2000) 
^ a b National Geographic, 534.
^ The European union—a federation or a confederation?
^ εὐρύς, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus.
^ ὤψ, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus.
^ M. L. West (2007). Indo-European poetry and myth. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 178–179. ISBN 0-19-928075-4. 
^ "Europe" in the Online Etymology Dictionary.
^ Michael A. Barry: "L’Europe et son mythe : à la poursuite du couchant". In: Revue des deux Mondes (November/December 1999) p. 110. ISBN 978-2-7103-0937-6.
^ M. L. West (1997). The east face of Helicon: west Asiatic elements in Greek poetry and myth. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 451. ISBN 0-19-815221-3. .
^ Davidson, Roderic H. (1960). "Where is the Middle East?". Foreign Affairs. 38 (4): 665–675. doi:10.2307/20029452. JSTOR 20029452. 
^ The map shows one of the most commonly accepted delineations of the geographical boundaries of Europe, as used by National Geographic and Encyclopædia Britannica. Whether countries are considered in Europe or Asia can vary in sources, for example in the classification of the CIA World Factbook or that of the BBC. Note also that certain countries in Europe, such as France, have territories lying geographically outside Europe, but which are nevertheless considered integral parts of that country.
^ a b Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopaedia 2007. Europe. Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. Retrieved 27 December 2007. 
^ Falconer, William; Falconer, Thomas. Dissertation on St. Paul's Voyage, BiblioLife (BiblioBazaar), 1872. (1817.), p 50, ISBN 1-113-68809-2 These islands Pliny, as well as Strabo and Ptolemy, included in the African sea
^ "Europe — Noun". Princeton University. Retrieved 9 June 2008. 
^ Histories 4.38. C.f. James Rennell, The geographical system of Herodotus examined and explained, Volume 1, Rivington 1830, p. 244
^ Herodotus, 4:45
^ Strabo Geography 11.1
^ Franxman, Thomas W. (1979). Genesis and the Jewish antiquities of Flavius Josephus. Pontificium Institutum Biblicum. pp. 101–102. ISBN 88-7653-335-4. 
^ W. Theiler, Posidonios. Die Fragmente, vol. 1. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1982, fragm. 47a.
^ I. G. Kidd (ed.), Posidonius: The commentary, Cambridge University Press, 2004, ISBN 978-0-521-60443-7, p. 738.
^ Geographia 7.5.6 (ed. Nobbe 1845, vol. 2, p. 178) Καὶ τῇ Εὐρώπῃ δὲ συνάπτει διὰ τοῦ μεταξὺ αὐχένος τῆς τε Μαιώτιδος λίμνης καὶ τοῦ Σαρματικοῦ Ὠκεανοῦ ἐπὶ τῆς διαβάσεως τοῦ Τανάϊδος ποταμοῦ. "And [Asia] is connected to Europe by the land-strait between Lake Maiotis and the Sarmatian Ocean where the river Tanais crosses through."
^ Norman F. Cantor, The Civilization of the Middle Ages, 1993, ""Culture and Society in the First Europe", pp185ff.
^ Noted by Cantor, 1993:181.
^ Philipp Johann von Strahlenberg (1730). Das Nord-und Ostliche Theil von Europa und Asia (in German). p. 106. 
^ Davies, Norman (1996). Europe: A History, by Norman Davies, p. 8. ISBN 978-0-19-820171-7. Retrieved 23 August 2010. 
^ "Boundary of Europe and Asia along Urals" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. 
^ Peter Simon Pallas, Journey through various provinces of the Russian Empire, vol. 3 (1773)
^ Douglas W. Freshfield, "Journey in the Caucasus", Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society, Volumes 13-14, 1869. Cited as de facto convention by Baron von Haxthausen, Transcaucasia (1854); review Dublin University Magazine
^ "Europe"[dead link], Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary, 1906
^ "Do we live in Europe or in Asia?" (in Russian). 
^ Orlenok V. (1998). "Physical Geography" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 16 October 2011. 
^ E. M. Moores, R. W. Fairbridge, Encyclopedia of European and Asian regional geology, Springer, 1997, ISBN 978-0-412-74040-4, p. 34: "most Soviet geographers took the watershed of the Main Range of the Greater Caucasus as the boundary between Europe and Asia."
^ A. Vekua; D. Lordkipanidze; G. P. Rightmire; J. Agusti; R. Ferring; G. Maisuradze; et al. (2002). "A new skull of early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia". Science. 297 (5578): 85–9. doi:10.1126/science.1072953. PMID 12098694. 
^ The million year old tooth from Atapuerca, Spain, found in June 2007
^ National Geographic, 21.
^ Borza, EN (1992), In the Shadow of Olympus: The Emergence of Macedon, Princeton University Press, p. 58 
^ Scarre, Chris (1996). Fagan, Brian M., ed. "The Oxford Companion to Archaeology". Oxford University Press: 215–216. ISBN 0-19-507618-4. 
^ Atkinson, R J C, Stonehenge (Penguin Books, 1956)
^ Peregrine, Peter Neal; Ember, Melvin, eds. (2001). "European Megalithic". Encyclopedia of Prehistory. 4 : Europe. Springer. pp. 157–184. ISBN 0-306-46258-3. 
^ "Ancient Greece". British Museum. Archived from the original on 15 June 2012. 
^ "Periods – School of Archaeology". University of Oxford. 
^ Short, John R (1987), An Introduction to Urban Geography, Routledge, p. 10 
^ a b c Jonathan Daly (19 December 2013). The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization. A&C Black. pp. 7–9. ISBN 978-1-4411-1851-6. 
^ Dunn, John (1994), Democracy: the unfinished journey 508 BC – 1993 AD, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-827934-5 
^ National Geographic, 76.
^ Heath, Thomas Little (1981). A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume I. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-24073-8. 
^ Heath, Thomas Little (1981). A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume II. Dover publications. ISBN 0-486-24074-6. 
^ Pedersen, Olaf. Early Physics and Astronomy: A Historical Introduction. 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
^ Barry Strauss (16 August 2005). The Battle of Salamis: The Naval Encounter That Saved Greece -- and Western Civilization. Simon and Schuster. pp. 1–11. ISBN 978-0-7432-7453-1. 
^ a b McEvedy, Colin (1961). The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History. Penguin Books. 
^ National Geographic, 123.
^ Foster, Sally M., Picts, Gaels, and Scots: Early Historic Scotland. Batsford, London, 2004. ISBN 0-7134-8874-3
^ Gerard Friell; Peabody Professor of North American Archaeology and Ethnography Emeritus Stephen Williams; Stephen Williams (8 August 2005). Theodosius: The Empire at Bay. Routledge. p. 105. ISBN 978-1-135-78262-7. 
^ Hadas, Moses (1950). A History of Greek Literature. Columbia University Press. pp. 273, 327. ISBN 0-231-01767-7. 
^ Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 4, No. 1. (Jan. 1943), pp. 69–74.
^ Norman F. Cantor, The Medieval World 300 to 1300.
^ National Geographic, 135.
^ Hunter, Shireen; et al. (2004). Islam in Russia: The Politics of Identity and Security. M.E. Sharpe. p. 3. (..) It is difficult to establish exactly when Islam first appeared in Russia because the lands that Islam penetrated early in its expansion were not part of Russia at the time, but were later incorporated into the expanding Russian Empire. Islam reached the Caucasus region in the middle of the seventh century as part of the Arab conquest of the Iranian Sassanian Empire.  
^ Kennedy, Hugh (1995). "The Muslims in Europe". In McKitterick, Rosamund, The New Cambridge Medieval History: c.500-c.700, pp. 249–272. Cambridge University Press. 052136292X.
^ National Geographic, 143–145.
^ National Geographic, 162.
^ National Geographic, 166.
^ Bulliet et al. 2011, p. 250.
^ Brown, Anatolios & Palmer 2009, p. 66.
^ Gerald Mako, "The Islamization of the Volga Bulghars: A Question Reconsidered", Archivum Eurasiae Medii Aevi 18, 2011, 199–223.
^ a b National Geographic, 158.
^ National Geographic, 186.
^ National Geographic, 192.
^ National Geographic, 199.
^ Laiou & Morisson 2007, pp. 130–131; Pounds 1979, p. 124.
^ William J. Duiker; Jackson J. Spielvogel (1 February 2010). The Essential World History. Cengage Learning. p. 330. ISBN 978-0-495-90227-0. Retrieved 20 January 2013. The Byzantine Empire also interacted with the world of Islam to its east and the new European civilization of the west. Both interactions proved costly and ultimately fatal. 
^ Ronald Findlay (2006). Eli Heckscher, International Trade, And Economic History. MIT Press. pp. 178–179. ISBN 978-0-262-06251-0. Retrieved 20 January 2013. These Christian allies did not accept the authority of Byzantium, and the Fourth Crusade that sacked Constantinople and established the so-called Latin Empire that lasted until 1261 was a fatal wound from which the empire never recovered until its fall at the hands of the Ottoman Turks in 1453 (Queller and Madden 1997). 
^ Robert Browning (1 October 1992). The Byzantine Empire (Revised Edition). CUA Press. p. 253. ISBN 978-0-8132-0754-4. Retrieved 20 January 2013. And though the final blow was struck by the Ottoman Turks, it can plausibly be argued that the fatal injury was inflicted by the Latin crusaders in 1204. 
^ Ted Byfield (September 2008). A Glorious Disaster: A.D. 1100 to 1300: The Crusades: Blood, Valor, Iniquity, Reason, Faith. Christian History Project. p. 136. ISBN 978-0-9689873-7-7. Retrieved 20 January 2013. continue to stand for another 250 before ultimately falling to the Muslim Turks, but it had been irrevocably weakened by the Fourth Crusade. 
^ Cornelia Golna (2004). City of Man's Desire: A Novel of Constantinople. Go-Bos Press. p. 424. ISBN 978-90-804114-4-9. Retrieved 20 January 2013. 1204 The Fourth Crusade sacks Constantinople, destroying and pillaging many of its treasures, fatally weakening the empire both economically and militarily 
^ John Powell (2001). Magill's Guide to Military History: A-Cor. Salem Press. ISBN 978-0-89356-015-7. Retrieved 20 January 2013. However, the fifty-seven years of plunder that followed made the Byzantine Empire, even when it retook the capital in 1261, genuinely weak. Beginning in 1222, the empire was further weakened by a civil war that lasted until 1355. ... When the Ottomans overran their lands and besieged Constantinople in 1453, sheer poverty and weakness were the causes of the capital city's final fall. 
^ Dale T. Irvin (10 January 2002). History of the World Christian Movement: Volume 1: Earliest Christianity To 1453. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 405. ISBN 978-0-567-08866-6. Retrieved 20 January 2013. Not only did the fourth crusade further harden the resentments Greek-speaking Christians felt toward the Latin West, but it further weakened the empire of Constantinople, many say fatally so. After the restoration of Greek imperial rule the city survived as the capital of Byzantium for another two centuries, but it never fully recovered. 
^ Richard C. Frucht (31 December 2004). Eastern Europe: An Introduction to the People, Lands, and Culture. ABC-CLIO. p. 856. ISBN 978-1-57607-800-6. Retrieved 20 January 2013. Although the empire was revived, the events of 1204 had so weakened Byzantium that it was no longer a great power. 
^ William J. Duiker; Jackson J. Spielvogel (1 February 2010). The Essential World History. Cengage Learning. p. 386. ISBN 978-0-495-90227-0. Retrieved 20 January 2013. Later they established themselves in the Anatolian peninsula at the expense of the Byzantine Empire. ... The Byzantines, however, had been severely weakened by the sack of Constantinople in the Fourth Crusade (in 1204) and the Western occupation of much of the empire for the next half century. 
^ National Geographic, 211.
^ Ralph Peters (29 August 2006). New Glory: Expanding America's Global Supremacy. Sentinel. ISBN 978-1-59523-030-0. Retrieved 20 January 2013. Western Christians, not Muslims, fatally crippled Byzantine power and opened Islam's path into the West. 
^ Chronicles. Rockford Institute. 2005. Retrieved 20 January 2013. ... two-and-a-half centuries to recover from the Fourth Crusade before the Ottomans finally took Constantinople in 1453, ... They fatally wounded Byzantium, which was the main cause of its weakened condition when the Muslim onslaught came. Even on the eve of its final collapse, the precondition for any Western help was submission in Florence. 
^ Klyuchevsky, Vasily (1987). The course of the Russian history. v.1: "Myslʹ. ISBN 5-244-00072-1. 
^ "The Destruction of Kiev". University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ "Golden Horde", in Encyclopædia Britannica, 2007.
^ "Khanate of the Golden Horde (Kipchak)". Alamo Community Colleges. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ Spinei, Victor. The Romanians and the Turkic Nomads North of the Danube Delta from the Tenth to the Mid-Thirteenth Century, Brill, 2009, ISBN 9789004175365
^ The Late Middle Ages Archived 2 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.. Oglethorpe University.
^ Baumgartner, Frederic J. France in the Sixteenth Century. London: MacMillan Publishers, 1995. ISBN 0-333-62088-7.
^ Don O'Reilly. "Hundred Years' War: Joan of Arc and the Siege of Orléans". TheHistoryNet.com. Archived 9 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Poor studies will always be with us. By James Bartholomew. Telegraph. 7 August. 2004.
^ Famine. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ "Plague: The Black Death". National Geographic. Retrieved 1 April 2012. 
^ National Geographic, 223.
^ "Epidemics of the Past: Bubonic Plague — Infoplease.com". Infoplease.com. Retrieved 3 November 2008. 
^ Jo Revill (16 May 2004). "Black Death blamed on man, not rats | UK news | The Observer". London: The Observer. Retrieved 3 November 2008. 
^ a b Peter Barrett (2004), Science and Theology Since Copernicus: The Search for Understanding, pp. 14–18, Continuum International Publishing Group, ISBN 0-567-08969-X
^ Weiss, Roberto (1969) The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity, ISBN 1-59740-150-1
^ Jacob Burckhardt (1990) [1878]. The Civilisation of the Renaissance in Italy (translation by S.G.C Middlemore ed.). London, England: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-044534-X. 
^ National Geographic, 254.
^ Jensen, De Lamar (1992), Renaissance Europe, ISBN 0-395-88947-2
^ Levey, Michael (1967). Early Renaissance. Penguin Books. 
^ National Geographic, 292.
^ Levey, Michael (1971). High Renaissance. Penguin Books. 
^ National Geographic, 193.
^ National Geographic, 256–257.
^ History of Europe – Demographics. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ National Geographic, 269.
^ "The Seventeenth-Century Decline". The Library of Iberian resources online. Retrieved 13 August 2008. 
^ "Food, Famine And Fertilisers". Seshadri Kannan (2009). APH Publishing. p.51. ISBN 81-313-0356-X
^ W. G. Clarence-Smith (2006). "Islam And The Abolition Of Slavery". Oxford University Press. p.13. ISBN 0-19-522151-6 — "Lands to the north of the Black Sea probably yielded the most slaves to the Ottomans from 1450. A compilation of estimates indicates that Crimean Tartars seized about 1,750,000 Ukrainians, Poles, and Russians from 1468 to 1694."
^ Hunt, Shelby D. (2003). Controversy in marketing theory: for reason, realism, truth, and objectivity. M.E. Sharpe. p. 18. ISBN 0-7656-0932-0. 
^ "Scientific Revolution: Chronological Timeline: Copernicus to Newton". Retrieved 23 June 2012.
^ John Morris Roberts (1997). Penguin History of Europe. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-026561-9. 
^ National Geographic, 296.
^ National Geographic, 338.
^ Goldie, Mark; Wokler, Robert (2006). The Cambridge History of Eighteenth-Century Political Thought. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37422-7. 
^ Cassirer, Ernst (1979). The Philosophy of the Enlightenment. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-01963-0. 
^ National Geographic, 255.
^ Schama, Simon (1989). Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution. Knopf. ISBN 0-394-55948-7. 
^ National Geographic, 360.
^ McEvedy, Colin (1972). The Penguin Atlas of Modern History. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-051153-9. 
^ Lyons, Martyn (1994). Napoleon Bonaparte and the legacy of the French Revolution. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-12123-7. 
^ Grab, Alexander (2003). Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (European History in Perspective). Palgrave MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-333-68275-3. 
^ National Geographic, 350.
^ National Geographic, 367.
^ National Geographic, 371–373.
^ Davies, Norman (1996). Europe: A History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-820171-0. 
^ [1], Ottoman Empire – 19th century, Historyworld
^ Trevelyan, George Macaulay (1988). A shortened history of England. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-010241-8. 
^ Webb, Sidney (1976). History of Trade Unionism. AMS Press. ISBN 0-404-06885-5. 
^ Slavery, Historical survey – Ways of ending slavery, Encyclopædia Britannica
^ Trevelyan, George Macaulay (1942). English Social History. Longmans, Green. 
^ Modernisation – Population Change. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ "The Irish Famine". BBC – History.
^ The Atlantic: Can the US afford immigration?. Migration News. December 1996.
^ PoPulation – Global Mapping International Archived 2 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Assassin Gavrilo Princip gets a statue in Sarajevo". Prague Post. Retrieved 11 July 2014. 
^ National Geographic, 407.
^ National Geographic, 440.
^ "The Treaty of Versailles and its Consequences". James Atkinson. Archived from the original on 12 May 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ "Los Angeles Times: Archives - FOURTH OF SERBIA'S POPULATION DEAD". pqarchiver.com. 
^ "ASSERTS SERBIANS FACE EXTINCTION; Their Plight in Occupied Districts Worse Than Belgians', Says Labor Envoy". Retrieved 19 January 2017. 
^ "SERBIA RESTORED". Retrieved 19 January 2017. 
^ "Serbia and Austria" (PDF). New York Times. 28 July 1918. 
^ "Appeals to Americans to pray for Serbians" (PDF). New York Times. 27 July 1918. 
^ National Geographic, 480.
^ National Geographic, 443.
^ Mark Harrison (18 July 2002). Accounting for War: Soviet Production, Employment, and the Defence Burden, 1940–1945. Cambridge University Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-521-89424-1. 
^ "Legacy of famine divides Ukraine". BBC News. 24 November 2006.
^ Abbott Gleason (2009). A companion to Russian history. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN 978-1-4051-3560-3. 
^ Geoffrey A. Hosking (2001). Russia and the Russians: a history. Harvard University Press. p. 469. ISBN 978-0-674-00473-3. 
^ a b Hobsbawm, Eric (1995). The Age of Extremes: A history of the world, 1914–1991. Vintage. ISBN 978-0-679-73005-7. 
^ National Geographic, 438.
^ National Geographic, 465.
^ Taylor, A. J. P. (1996). The Origins of the Second World War. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-82947-9. 
^ National Geographic, 510.
^ National Geographic, 532.
^ National Geographic, 511.
^ National Geographic, 519.
^ National Geographic, 439.
^ "Europe honours war dead on VE Day". BBC News. 9 May 2005.
^ Niewyk, Donald L. and Nicosia, Francis R. The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust, Columbia University Press, 2000, pp. 45–52.
^ "Leaders mourn Soviet wartime dead". BBC News. 9 May 2005. Retrieved 4 January 2010. 
^ "Refugees: Save Us! Save Us!". Time. 9 July 1979.
^ Postwar Population Transfers in Europe: A Survey, by Joseph B. Schechtman
^ National Geographic, 530.
^ The European flag, Council of Europe. Retrieved 27 October 2016.
^ National Geographic, 536.
^ National Geographic, 537.
^ National Geographic, 535.
^ Cuper, Simon (23 May 2014). "Why Europe works". ft.com. Retrieved 28 May 2014. 
^ Europe. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ a b "European Climate". World Book. World Book, Inc. Archived from the original on 9 November 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2008. 
^ a b c d "Europe". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ "Geology map of Europe". University of Southampton. 1967. Retrieved 9 June 2008. 
^ "History and geography". Save America's Forest Funds. Retrieved 9 June 2008. 
^ "State of Europe's Forests 2007: The MCPFE report on sustainable forest management in Europe" (PDF). EFI Euroforest Portal. p. 182. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2008. 
^ "European bison, Wisent". Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2017. 
^ Walker, Matt (4 August 2009). "European bison on 'genetic brink'". BBC News. 
^ BRYANT, S., THOMAS, C. and BALE, J. (1997), Nettle-feeding nymphalid butterflies: temperature, development and distribution. Ecological Entomology, 22: 390–398. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2311.1997.00082.x
^ Savona-Ventura, C.; Mifsud, A. (9 April 1997). "Paleolithic Man and his Environment in Malta". Archived from the original on 25 October 2009. Retrieved 19 July 2014. 
^ not counting the microstate of Vatican City
^ "CIA – The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ Fineman, Josh (15 September 2009). "Bloomberg.com". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2010. 
^ "Global Wealth Stages a Strong Comeback". Pr-inside.com. 10 June 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 23 August 2010. 
^ "The CIA World Factbook – GDP (PPP)". CIA. 15 July 2008. Retrieved 19 July 2008. 
^ "The World Bank DataBank - Explore . Create . Share". worldbank.org. 
^ Some data refers to IMF staff estimates but some are actual figures for the year 2017, made in 12 April 2017. World Economic Outlook Database-April 2017, International Monetary Fund. Accessed on 18 April 2017.
^ Capitalism Archived 17 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine.. Encyclopædia Britannica.
^ Scott, John (2005). Industrialism: A Dictionary of Sociology. Oxford University Press. 
^ Steven Kreis (11 October 2006). "The Origins of the Industrial Revolution in England". The History Guide. Retrieved 1 January 2007. 
^ Dornbusch, Rudiger; Nölling, Wilhelm P.; Layard, Richard G. Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today, pg. 117
^ Emadi-Coffin, Barbara (2002). Rethinking International Organisation: Deregulation and Global Governance. Routledge. p. 64. ISBN 0-415-19540-3. 
^ Dornbusch, Rudiger; Nölling, Wilhelm P.; Layard, Richard G. Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today, pg. 29
^ Harrop, Martin. Power and Policy in Liberal Democracies, pg. 23
^ "Germany (East)", Library of Congress Country Study, Appendix B: The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
^ "Marshall Plan". US DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the historian. 
^ [2][permanent dead link][better source needed]
^ "EU data confirms eurozone's first recession". EUbusiness.com. 8 January 2009. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010. 
^ Thanks to the Bank it's a crisis; in the eurozone it's a total catastrophe. Telegraph. 8 March 2009.
^ Stefan Schultz (11 February 2010). "Five Threats to the Common Currency". Spiegel Online. Retrieved 28 April 2010. 
^ Brian Blackstone; Tom Lauricella; Neil Shah (5 February 2010). "Global Markets Shudder: Doubts About U.S. Economy and a Debt Crunch in Europe Jolt Hopes for a Recovery". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 10 May 2010. 
^ Lauren Frayer Contributor. "European Leaders Try to Calm Fears Over Greek Debt Crisis and Protect Euro". AOL News. Archived from the original on 9 May 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2010. 
^ a b Unemployment statistics Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine.. Eurostat. April 2012.
^ CIA.gov CIA population growth rankings, CIA World Factbook
^ World Population Growth, 1950–2050. Population Reference Bureau. Archived 22 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b "World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision Population Database". UN — Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ Christoph Pan, Beate Sibylle Pfeil, Minderheitenrechte in Europa. Handbuch der europäischen Volksgruppen (2002). Living-Diversity.eu Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine., English translation 2004.
^ "White Europeans: An endangered species?". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on 19 May 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ "Brookings Institution Report". Archived from the original on 11 October 2007.  See also: "Muslims in Europe: Country guide". BBC news. 23 December 2005. Retrieved 4 January 2010. 
^ UN predicts huge migration to rich countries. Telegraph. 15 March 2007.
^ "Rich world needs more foreign workers: report Archived 20 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.", FOXNews.com. 2 December 2008.
^ "Europe: Population and Migration in 2005". Migration Information Source. Archived from the original on 9 June 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2008. 
^ "EU job centres to target Africans". BBC News, 8 February 2007.
^ "50 million invited to Europe". Daily Express, 3 January 2009.
^ "EU27 Member States granted citizenship to 696 000 persons in 2008 Archived 6 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine." (PDF). Eurostat. 6 July 2010.
^ "A pena do degredo nas Ordenações do Reino". Retrieved 18 August 2010. [permanent dead link]
^ "Ensaio sobre a imigração portuguesa e os padrões de miscigenação no Brasil" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 18 August 2010. 
^ Axtell, James (September–October 1991). "The Columbian Mosaic in Colonial America". Humanities. 12 (5): 12–18. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 8 October 2008. 
^ Evans, N. J. (2001). "Work in progress: Indirect passage from Europe Transmigration via the UK, 1836–1914". Journal for Maritime Research. 3: 70–84. doi:10.1080/21533369.2001.9668313. 
^ Robert Greenall, Russians left behind in Central Asia, BBC News, 23 November 2005
^ Hilarie Belloc, Europe and the Faith, Chapter I
^ "Andreas M. Kaplan: European Management and European Business Schools: Insights from the History of Business Schools". European Management Journal. 32: 529–534. doi:10.1016/j.emj.2014.03.006. 
^ "Regional Distribution of Christians: Christianity in Europe". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 18 December 2011. Retrieved 22 February 2015. 
^ Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961). Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). p. 108. ISBN 9780813216836. 
^ J. Spielvogel, Jackson (2016). Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 (Cengage Learning ed.). p. 156. ISBN 9781305633476. 
^ Neill, Thomas Patrick (1957). Readings in the History of Western Civilization, Volume 2 (Newman Press ed.). p. 224. 
^ "Roman Catholicism". Retrieved 19 January 2017. 
^ Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p.2: That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization — the civilization of western Europe and of America— have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic and Protestant.
^ Jose Orlandis, 1993, "A Short History of the Catholic Church," 2nd edn. (Michael Adams, Trans.), Dublin:Four Courts Press, ISBN 1851821252, preface, see [3], accessed 8 December 2014.
^ Thomas E. Woods and Antonio Canizares, 2012, "How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization," Reprint edn., Washington, D.C.:Regnery History, ISBN 1596983280, PG. NOS., see accessed 8 December 2014. p.1: "Western civilization owes far more to Catholic Church than most people - Catholic included - often realize. The Church in fact built Western civilization."
^ Koch, Carl (1994). The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission. Early Middle Ages: St. Mary's Press. ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4. 
^ Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961). Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6. 
^ "THE GLOBAL RELIGIOUS LANDSCAPE: Muslims". pewforum. Retrieved 18 December 2012. 
^ "Religiously Unaffiliated". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 18 December 2012. Retrieved 22 February 2015. 
^ Dogan, Mattei (1998). "The Decline of Traditional Values in Western Europe". International Journal of Comparative Sociology. Sage. 39: 77–90. doi:10.1177/002071529803900106. 
^ Vishnevsky, Anatoly (15 August 2000). "Replacement Migration: Is it a solution for Russia?" (PDF). EXPERT GROUP MEETING ON POLICY RESPONSES TO POPULATION AGEING AND POPULATION DECLINE /UN/POP/PRA/2000/14. United Nations Population Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. pp. 6, 10. Retrieved 14 January 2008. 
^ The UN Statistics Department [4] places Azerbaijan in Western Asia for statistical convenience [5]: "The assignment of countries or areas to specific groupings is for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding political or other affiliation of countries or territories." The CIA World Factbook [6] places Azerbaijan in South Western Asia, with a small portion north of the Caucasus range in Europe. National Geographic and Encyclopædia Britannica also place Georgia in Asia.
^ Council of Europe "47 countries, one Europe". Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2011. , British Foreign and Commonwealth Office "Country profiles › Europe › Georgia". Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2011. , World Health Organization [7], World Tourism Organization [8], UNESCO [9], UNICEF [10], UNHCR [11], European Civil Aviation Conference "Member States". Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 9 January 2011. , Euronews [12], BBC [13], NATO [14], Russian Foreign Ministry [15], the World Bank "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2011. .
^ FAO. "Inland fisheries of Europe". FAO. Retrieved 26 March 2011. 
^ The UN Statistics Department [16] places Georgia in Western Asia for statistical convenience [17]: "The assignment of countries or areas to specific groupings is for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding political or other affiliation of countries or territories." The CIA World Factbook [18], National Geographic, and Encyclopædia Britannica also place Georgia in Asia.


Sources

National Geographic Society (2005). National Geographic Visual History of the World. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society. ISBN 0-7922-3695-5.
Bulliet, Richard; Crossley, Pamela; Headrick, Daniel; Hirsch, Steven; Johnson, Lyman (2011). The Earth and Its Peoples, Brief Edition. 1. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0495913115. 
Brown, Stephen F.; Anatolios, Khaled; Palmer, Martin (2009). O'Brien, Joanne, ed. Catholicism & Orthodox Christianity. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1604131062. 

External links

Find more aboutEuropeat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity



Council of Europe
European Union
The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online Columbia University Press
"Introducing Europe" from Lonely Planet Travel Guides and Information

Historical Maps

Borders in Europe 3000BC to the present Geacron Historical atlas
Online history of Europe in 21 maps





Articles related to Europe











v
t
e


Europe articles



History




Chronology



Prehistory
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early modernity
World War I & II
Pax Europaea
Crisis situations and unrest since 2000





By topic



Military
Sovereignty

predecessor states










Geography







Areas and populations
Countries by area
Largest metropolitan areas
Cities
Extreme points
Geology
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Sovereign states and dependent territories

by population


Villages








Politics











Eurosphere
International organisations
Integration
Law
Politics
Post-Soviet Europe
Transatlantic relations





Intergovernmental



Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Council of Europe (CoE)
Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO)
GUAM Organization
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)

statistics







European Union



Economy

relations
free trade agreements


Education
European Economic Area (EEA)
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)
European Union Customs Union (EUCU)
Eurozone
Foreign relations
Members

enlargement


Politics
Schengen Area
Statistics
Visa policy











Economy











History
Financial (and social) rankings
Free trade areas
Energy
Telecommunications
Transport





Intergovernmental



Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA)
Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia (CUBKR)
Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC)
European Free Trade Association (EFTA)





Sovereign states by



Average wage
Budget revenues

per capita


Corruption index
GDP (nominal)

per capita


GDP (PPP)

per capita


GNI (nominal) per capita
GNI (PPP) per capita
HDI
Internet users (%)
Minimum wage
Press Freedom Index
Unemployment rate (%)
Health expense per capita
Military spending (%)
Childhood population (%)
Urban population (%)
Life expectancy
Electricity use per capita











Society







Etiquette
Social (and financial) rankings
Languages

endangered


Universities

Bologna Process
Erasmus







Culture



Art

painting
sculpture


Architecture
Capital of Culture
Cinema

film festivals


Classical music
Cuisine
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
Religion

Christianity
Islam
Judaism


Sport
Symbols





Demographics



Ageing
Ethnic groups

genetic history


Immigration
Life expectancy
Retirement












Outline
Index



Category
Portal
Maps












v
t
e


Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe



Sovereign states



Albania
Andorra
Armenia2
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus2
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland1
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City









States with limited
recognition




Abkhazia2
Artsakh2
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus2
South Ossetia2
Transnistria






Dependencies





Denmark



Faroe Islands1

autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark







United Kingdom



Akrotiri and Dhekelia2

Sovereign Base Areas


Gibraltar

British Overseas Territory


Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey

Crown dependencies











Special areas of
internal sovereignty





Finland



Åland Islands

autonomous region subject to the Åland Convention of 1921







Norway



Svalbard

unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty







United Kingdom



Northern Ireland

country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement














1 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.
2 Some countries completely outside the conventional geographical boundaries of Europe are commonly associated with the continent due to ethnological links.













v
t
e


Continents of the World











   



Africa





Antarctica





Asia





Australia





Europe





North America





South America



















   



Afro-Eurasia





America





Eurasia





Oceania



















   



Former supercontinents
Gondwana
Laurasia
Pangaea
Pannotia
Rodinia
Columbia
Kenorland
Nena
Sclavia
Ur
Vaalbara






Historical continents
Amazonia
Arctica
Asiamerica
Atlantica
Avalonia
Baltica
Cimmeria
Congo craton
Euramerica
Kalaharia
Kazakhstania
Laurentia
North China
Siberia
South China
East Antarctica
India




















   



Submerged continents
Kerguelen Plateau
Zealandia






Possible future supercontinents
Pangaea Ultima
Amasia
Novopangaea






Mythical and hypothesised continents
Atlantis
Kumari Kandam
Lemuria
Meropis
Mu
Hyperborea
Terra Australis
















See also Regions of the world
Continental fragment



 Book
 Category












v
t
e


Regions of the world











v
t
e


Regions of Africa



Central Africa



Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Cape Lopez
Mayombe
Igboland

Mbaise


Maputaland
Pool Malebo
Congo Basin
Chad Basin
Congolese rainforests
Ouaddaï highlands
Ennedi Plateau





East Africa



African Great Lakes

Albertine Rift
East African Rift
Great Rift Valley
Gregory Rift
Rift Valley lakes
Swahili coast
Virunga Mountains
Zanj


Horn of Africa

Afar Triangle
Al-Habash
Barbara
Danakil Alps
Danakil Desert
Ethiopian Highlands
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Tadjoura


Indian Ocean islands

Comoros Islands







North Africa



Maghreb

Barbary Coast
Bashmur
Ancient Libya
Atlas Mountains


Nile Valley

Cataracts of the Nile
Darfur
Gulf of Aqaba
Lower Egypt
Lower Nubia
Middle Egypt
Nile Delta
Nuba Mountains
Nubia
The Sudans
Upper Egypt


Western Sahara





West Africa



Pepper Coast
Gold Coast
Slave Coast
Ivory Coast
Cape Palmas
Cape Mesurado
Guinea region

Gulf of Guinea


Niger Basin
Guinean Forests of West Africa
Niger Delta
Inner Niger Delta





Southern Africa



Madagascar

Central Highlands (Madagascar)
Northern Highlands


Rhodesia

North
South


Thembuland
Succulent Karoo
Nama Karoo
Bushveld
Highveld
Fynbos
Cape Floristic Region
Kalahari Desert
Okavango Delta
False Bay
Hydra Bay





Macro-regions



Aethiopia
Arab world
Commonwealth realm
East African montane forests
Eastern Desert
Equatorial Africa
Françafrique
Gibraltar Arc
Greater Middle East
Islands of Africa
List of countries where Arabic is an official language
Mediterranean Basin
MENA
MENASA
Middle East
Mittelafrika
Negroland
Northeast Africa
Portuguese-speaking African countries
Sahara
Sahel
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sudan (region)
Sudanian Savanna
Tibesti Mountains
Tropical Africa












v
t
e


Regions of Asia



Central



Greater Middle East
Aral Sea

Aralkum Desert
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Sea of Galilee


Transoxiana

Turan


Greater Khorasan
Ariana
Khwarezm
Sistan
Kazakhstania
Eurasian Steppe

Asian Steppe
Kazakh Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe


Mongolian-Manchurian grassland
Wild Fields

Yedisan
Muravsky Trail


Ural

Ural Mountains


Volga region
Idel-Ural
Kolyma
Transbaikal
Pryazovia
Bjarmaland
Kuban
Zalesye
Ingria
Novorossiya
Gornaya Shoriya
Tulgas
Iranian Plateau
Altai Mountains
Pamir Mountains
Tian Shan
Badakhshan
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Mount Imeon
Mongolian Plateau
Western Regions
Taklamakan Desert
Karakoram

Trans-Karakoram Tract


Siachen Glacier





North



Inner Asia
Northeast
Far East

Russian Far East
Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga


Extreme North
Siberia

Baikalia (Lake Baikal)
Transbaikal
Khatanga Gulf
Baraba steppe


Kamchatka Peninsula
Amur Basin
Yenisei Gulf
Yenisei Basin
Beringia
Sikhote-Alin





East



Japanese archipelago

Northeastern Japan Arc
Sakhalin Island Arc


Korean Peninsula
Gobi Desert
Taklamakan Desert
Greater Khingan
Mongolian Plateau
Inner Asia
Inner Mongolia
Outer Mongolia
China proper
Manchuria

Outer Manchuria
Inner Manchuria
Northeast China Plain
Mongolian-Manchurian grassland


North China Plain

Yan Mountains


Kunlun Mountains
Liaodong Peninsula
Himalayas
Tibetan Plateau

Tibet


Tarim Basin
Northern Silk Road
Hexi Corridor
Nanzhong
Lingnan
Liangguang
Jiangnan
Jianghuai
Guanzhong
Huizhou
Wu
Jiaozhou
Zhongyuan
Shaannan
Ordos Loop

Loess Plateau
Shaanbei


Hamgyong Mountains
Central Mountain Range
Japanese Alps
Suzuka Mountains
Leizhou Peninsula
Gulf of Tonkin
Yangtze River Delta
Pearl River Delta
Yenisei Basin
Altai Mountains
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass





West



Greater Middle East

MENA
MENASA
Middle East


Red Sea
Caspian Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Zagros Mountains
Persian Gulf

Pirate Coast
Strait of Hormuz
Greater and Lesser Tunbs


Al-Faw Peninsula
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Aden
Balochistan
Arabian Peninsula

Najd
Hejaz
Tihamah
Eastern Arabia
South Arabia

Hadhramaut
Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert




Tigris–Euphrates
Mesopotamia

Upper Mesopotamia
Lower Mesopotamia
Sawad
Nineveh plains
Akkad (region)
Babylonia


Canaan
Aram
Eber-Nari
Suhum
Eastern Mediterranean
Mashriq
Kurdistan
Levant

Southern Levant
Transjordan
Jordan Rift Valley


Levantine Sea
Golan Heights
Hula Valley
Gaza Strip
West Bank
Galilee
Gilead
Judea
Samaria
Arabah
Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Sinai Peninsula
Arabian Desert
Syrian Desert
Fertile Crescent
Azerbaijan
Syria
Palestine
Iranian Plateau
Armenian Highlands
Caucasus

Caucasus Mountains

Greater Caucasus
Lesser Caucasus


North Caucasus
South Caucasus

Kur-Araz Lowland
Lankaran Lowland
Alborz
Absheron Peninsula




Anatolia
Cilicia
Cappadocia
Alpide belt





South



Greater India
Indian subcontinent
Himalayas
Hindu Kush
Western Ghats
Eastern Ghats
Ganges Basin
Ganges Delta
Pashtunistan
Punjab
Balochistan
Kashmir

Kashmir Valley
Pir Panjal Range


Thar Desert
Indus Valley
Indus River Delta
Indus Valley Desert
Indo-Gangetic Plain
Eastern coastal plains
Western Coastal Plains
Meghalaya subtropical forests
MENASA
Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests
Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows
Doab
Bagar tract
Great Rann of Kutch
Little Rann of Kutch
Deccan Plateau
Coromandel Coast
Konkan
False Divi Point
Hindi Belt
Ladakh
Aksai Chin
Gilgit-Baltistan

Baltistan
Shigar Valley


Karakoram

Saltoro Mountains


Siachen Glacier
Bay of Bengal
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Mannar
Trans-Karakoram Tract
Wakhan Corridor
Wakhjir Pass
Lakshadweep
Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Andaman Islands
Nicobar Islands


Maldive Islands
Alpide belt





Southeast



Mainland

Indochina
Malay Peninsula


Maritime

Peninsular Malaysia
Sunda Islands
Greater Sunda Islands
Lesser Sunda Islands


Indonesian Archipelago
Timor
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


Philippine Archipelago

Luzon
Visayas
Mindanao


Leyte Gulf
Gulf of Thailand
East Indies
Nanyang
Alpide belt








Asia-Pacific
Tropical Asia
Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of Europe



North



Nordic
Northwestern
Scandinavia
Scandinavian Peninsula
Fennoscandia
Baltoscandia
Sápmi
West Nordic
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Iceland
Faroe Islands





East



Danubian countries
Prussia
Galicia
Volhynia
Donbass
Sloboda Ukraine
Sambia Peninsula

Amber Coast


Curonian Spit
Izyum Trail
Lithuania Minor
Nemunas Delta
Baltic
Baltic Sea
Vyborg Bay
Karelia

East Karelia
Karelian Isthmus


Lokhaniemi
Southeastern

Balkans
Aegean Islands
Gulf of Chania
North Caucasus
Greater Caucasus
Kabardia
European Russia

Southern Russia









Central



Baltic
Baltic Sea
Alpine states
Alpide belt
Mitteleuropa
Visegrád Group





West



Benelux
Low Countries
Northwest
British Isles
English Channel
Channel Islands
Cotentin Peninsula
Normandy
Brittany
Gulf of Lion
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Pyrenees
Alpide belt





South



Italian Peninsula
Insular Italy
Tuscan Archipelago
Aegadian Islands
Iberia

Al-Andalus
Baetic System


Gibraltar Arc
Southeastern
Mediterranean
Crimea
Alpide belt








Germanic
Celtic
Slavic countries
Uralic
European Plain
Eurasian Steppe
Pontic–Caspian steppe
Wild Fields
Pannonian Basin

Great Hungarian Plain
Little Hungarian Plain
Eastern Slovak Lowland














v
t
e


Regions of North America



Canada



Eastern Canada
Western Canada
Canadian Prairies
Central Canada
Northern Canada
Atlantic Canada
The Maritimes
French Canada
English Canada
Acadia

Acadian Peninsula


Quebec City–Windsor Corridor
Peace River Country
Cypress Hills
Palliser's Triangle
Canadian Shield
Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Newfoundland (island)
Vancouver island
Gulf Islands
Strait of Georgia
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Labrador Peninsula
Gaspé Peninsula
Avalon Peninsula

Bay de Verde Peninsula


Brodeur Peninsula
Melville Peninsula
Bruce Peninsula
Banks Peninsula (Nunavut)
Cook Peninsula
Gulf of Boothia
Georgian Bay
Hudson Bay
James Bay
Greenland





United States



Pacific Northwest
Inland Northwest
Northeast

New England
Mid-Atlantic
Commonwealth


West

Midwest
Upper Midwest
Mountain States
Intermountain West
Basin and Range Province


Oregon Trail
Mormon Corridor
Calumet Region
Southwest

Old Southwest


Llano Estacado
Central United States

Tallgrass prairie


South

South Central
Deep South
Upland South


Four Corners
East Coast
West Coast
Gulf Coast
Third Coast
Coastal states
Eastern United States

Appalachia


Trans-Mississippi
Great North Woods
Great Plains
Interior Plains
Great Lakes
Great Basin

Great Basin Desert


Acadia
Ozarks
Ark-La-Tex
Waxhaws
Siouxland
Twin Tiers
Driftless Area
Palouse
Piedmont
Atlantic coastal plain
Outer Lands
Black Dirt Region
Blackstone Valley
Piney Woods
Rocky Mountains
Mojave Desert
The Dakotas
The Carolinas
Shawnee Hills
San Fernando Valley
Tornado Alley
North Coast
Lost Coast
Emerald Triangle
San Francisco Bay Area

San Francisco Bay
North Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
East Bay (San Francisco Bay Area)
Silicon Valley


Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga
Gulf of Mexico
Lower Colorado River Valley
Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta
Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta
Colville Delta
Arkansas Delta
Mobile–Tensaw River Delta
Mississippi Delta
Mississippi River Delta
Columbia River Estuary
Great Basin
High Desert
Monterey Peninsula
Upper Peninsula of Michigan
Lower Peninsula of Michigan
Virginia Peninsula
Keweenaw Peninsula
Middle Peninsula
Delmarva Peninsula
Alaska Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Niagara Peninsula
Beringia
Belt regions

Bible Belt
Black Belt
Corn Belt
Cotton Belt
Frost Belt
Rice Belt
Rust Belt
Sun Belt
Snow Belt







Mexico



Northern Mexico
Baja California Peninsula
Gulf of California

Colorado River Delta


Gulf of Mexico
Soconusco
Tierra Caliente
La Mixteca
La Huasteca
Bajío
Valley of Mexico
Mezquital Valley
Sierra Madre de Oaxaca
Yucatán Peninsula
Basin and Range Province





Central



Western Caribbean Zone
Isthmus of Panama
Gulf of Panama

Pearl Islands


Azuero Peninsula
Mosquito Coast





Caribbean



West Indies
Antilles

Greater Antilles
Lesser Antilles

Leeward
Leeward Antilles
Windward




Lucayan Archipelago
Southern Caribbean








Aridoamerica
Mesoamerica
Oasisamerica
Northern
Middle
Anglo
Latin

French
Hispanic


American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Regions of Oceania



Australasia



Gulf of Carpentaria
New Guinea

Bonis Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
Huon Peninsula
Huon Gulf
Bird's Head Peninsula
Gazelle Peninsula


New Zealand

South Island
North Island

Coromandel Peninsula




Zealandia
New Caledonia
Solomon Islands (archipelago)
Vanuatu

Kula Gulf


Australia
Capital Country
Eastern Australia
Lake Eyre basin
Murray–Darling basin
Northern Australia
Nullarbor Plain
Outback
Southern Australia

Maralinga


Sunraysia
Great Victoria Desert
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf St Vincent
Lefevre Peninsula
Fleurieu Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula
Eyre Peninsula
Mornington Peninsula
Bellarine Peninsula
Mount Henry Peninsula





Melanesia



Islands Region

Bismarck Archipelago
Solomon Islands Archipelago


Fiji
New Caledonia
Papua New Guinea
Vanuatu





Micronesia



Caroline Islands

Federated States of Micronesia
Palau


Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Northern Mariana Islands
Wake Island





Polynesia



Easter Island
Hawaiian Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

Austral Islands
Gambier Islands
Marquesas Islands
Society Islands
Tuamotu


Kermadec Islands
Mangareva Islands
Samoa
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu








Ring of Fire












v
t
e


Regions of South America



East



Amazon basin
Atlantic Forest
Caatinga
Cerrado





North



Caribbean South America
West Indies
Los Llanos
The Guianas
Amazon basin

Amazon rainforest


Gulf of Paria
Paria Peninsula
Paraguaná Peninsula
Orinoco Delta





South



Tierra del Fuego
Patagonia
Pampas
Pantanal
Gran Chaco
Chiquitano dry forests
Valdes Peninsula





West



Andes

Tropical Andes
Wet Andes
Dry Andes
Pariacaca mountain range


Altiplano
Atacama Desert








Latin
Hispanic
American Cordillera
Ring of Fire
LAC












v
t
e


Polar regions



Antarctic



Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Eklund Islands
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands





Arctic



Arctic Alaska
British Arctic Territories
Canadian Arctic Archipelago
Finnmark
Greenland
Northern Canada
Northwest Territories
Nunavik
Nunavut
Russian Arctic
Sakha
Sápmi
Yukon
North American Arctic












v
t
e


Earth's oceans and seas



Arctic Ocean



Amundsen Gulf
Barents Sea
Beaufort Sea
Chukchi Sea
East Siberian Sea
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Boothia
Kara Sea
Laptev Sea
Lincoln Sea
Prince Gustav Adolf Sea
Pechora Sea
Queen Victoria Sea
Wandel Sea
White Sea





Atlantic Ocean



Adriatic Sea
Aegean Sea
Alboran Sea
Archipelago Sea
Argentine Sea
Baffin Bay
Balearic Sea
Baltic Sea
Bay of Biscay
Bay of Bothnia
Bay of Campeche
Bay of Fundy
Black Sea
Bothnian Sea
Caribbean Sea
Celtic Sea
English Channel
Foxe Basin
Greenland Sea
Gulf of Bothnia
Gulf of Finland
Gulf of Lion
Gulf of Guinea
Gulf of Maine
Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Gulf of Sidra
Gulf of Venezuela
Hudson Bay
Ionian Sea
Irish Sea
Irminger Sea
James Bay
Labrador Sea
Levantine Sea
Libyan Sea
Ligurian Sea
Marmara Sea
Mediterranean Sea
Myrtoan Sea
North Sea
Norwegian Sea
Sargasso Sea
Sea of Åland
Sea of Azov
Sea of Crete
Sea of the Hebrides
Thracian Sea
Tyrrhenian Sea
Wadden Sea





Indian Ocean



Andaman Sea
Arabian Sea
Bali Sea
Bay of Bengal
Flores Sea
Great Australian Bight
Gulf of Aden
Gulf of Aqaba
Gulf of Khambhat
Gulf of Kutch
Gulf of Oman
Gulf of Suez
Java Sea
Laccadive Sea
Mozambique Channel
Persian Gulf
Red Sea
Timor Sea





Pacific Ocean



Arafura Sea
Banda Sea
Bering Sea
Bismarck Sea
Bohai Sea
Bohol Sea
Camotes Sea
Celebes Sea
Ceram Sea
Chilean Sea
Coral Sea
East China Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Anadyr
Gulf of California
Gulf of Carpentaria
Gulf of Fonseca
Gulf of Panama
Gulf of Thailand
Gulf of Tonkin
Halmahera Sea
Koro Sea
Mar de Grau
Molucca Sea
Moro Gulf
Philippine Sea
Salish Sea
Savu Sea
Sea of Japan
Sea of Okhotsk
Seto Inland Sea
Shantar Sea
Sibuyan Sea
Solomon Sea
South China Sea
Sulu Sea
Tasman Sea
Visayan Sea
Yellow Sea





Southern Ocean



Amundsen Sea
Bellingshausen Sea
Cooperation Sea
Cosmonauts Sea
Davis Sea
D'Urville Sea
King Haakon VII Sea
Lazarev Sea
Mawson Sea
Riiser-Larsen Sea
Ross Sea
Scotia Sea
Somov Sea
Weddell Sea





Landlocked seas



Aral Sea
Caspian Sea
Dead Sea
Salton Sea








  Book
  Category

















v
t
e


 European diasporas



Central Europe



Czechs
Germans
Hungarians
Poles

Kashubians


Slovaks
Slovenes
Swiss





Eastern Europe



Armenians5
Azerbaijanis3
Belarusians
Georgians3
Kazakhs4
Russians1
Ukrainians

Crimean Tatars







Northern Europe



British

English
Scottish
Welsh
Cornish


Danes
Estonians
Finns
Icelanders
Irish
Latvian
Lithuanians
Norwegians
Swedes





Southeast Europe



Albanians

Kosovar


Bosnians
Bulgarians
Croats
Cypriots

Greek Cypriots5
Turkish Cypriots5


Greeks
Macedonians
Romanians

Moldovans


Serbian
Turkish2





Southern Europe



Italians

Calabrians


Maltese
Portuguese
Spaniards

Basques
Isleños







Western Europe



Belgians

Flanders


Dutch
French

Basques









1 Russia is a transcontinental country in Eastern Europe and Northern Asia. The vast majority of its population (80%) lives in European Russia, therefore Russia as a whole is included as a European country here.
2 Turkey is a transcontinental country in the Middle East and Southeast Europe. It has a small part of its territory (3%) in Southeast Europe called Turkish Thrace.
3 Azerbaijan and Georgia are transcontinental countries. Both have a small part of their territories in the European part of the Caucasus.
4 Kazakhstan is a transcontinental country. It has a small part of its territories located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe.
5 Armenia and Cyprus are entirely in Southwest Asia, but have socio-political and historical connections with Europe.













Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 252680782
LCCN: sh85045631
GND: 4015701-5
HDS: 7147
NDL: 00574313











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Europe&oldid=818136297"					Categories: EuropeContinentsHidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek-language textCS1 German-language sources (de)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2016Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from April 2016Articles with dead external links from July 2017Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesUse dmy dates from May 2017EngvarB from February 2016Pages using deprecated image syntaxArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2016All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing Japanese-language textAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from October 2016Articles to be split from October 2016All articles to be splitWikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2016Articles containing Belarusian-language textArticles containing Bosnian-language textArticles containing Bulgarian-language textArticles containing Kazakh-language textArticles containing Macedonian-language textArticles containing Uncoded languages-language textArticles containing Russian-language textArticles containing Serbian-language textArticles containing Ukrainian-language textWikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2016Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers