





Parts of this article (those related to renminbi acceptance) need to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (August 2017)



For other uses, see ECB.

European Central Bank





Emblem

Seat





Headquarters
Frankfurt, Germany


Coordinates
50°06′32″N 8°42′12″E﻿ / ﻿50.1089°N 8.7034°E﻿ / 50.1089; 8.7034


Established
1 June 1998


President
Mario Draghi


Central bank of


Eurozone

 Austria
 Belgium
 Cyprus
 Estonia
 France
 Finland
 Germany
 Greece
 Ireland
 Italy
 Latvia
 Lithuania
 Luxembourg
 Malta
 Netherlands
 Portugal
 Slovakia
 Slovenia
 Spain





Currency
Euro
EUR (ISO 4217)


Reserves


0.526 trillion euro in total

0.04 trillion euro directly
0.34 trillion euro (Eurosystem incl. gold)
0.15 trillion euro (forex reserves)





Bank rate
0.00% (Main refinancing operations)[1]
0.25% (Marginal lending facility)[1]


Interest on reserves
-0.40% (Deposit facility)[1]


Preceded by


19 national banks

National Bank of Austria
National Bank of Belgium
Central Bank of Cyprus
Bank of Estonia
Bank of Finland
Banque de France
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bank of Greece
Central Bank of Ireland
Banca d'Italia
Latvijas Banka
Bank of Lithuania
Central Bank of Luxembourg
Central Bank of Malta
De Nederlandsche Bank
Banco de Portugal
Banka Slovenije
Národná banka Slovenska
Banco de España





Website
www.ecb.europa.eu






Frankfurt am Main, the European Central Bank from Alte Mainbrücke






Seat of the European Central Bank


The European Central Bank (ECB; German: Europäische Zentralbank (EZB), French: Banque centrale européenne (BCE)) is the central bank for the euro and administers monetary policy of the eurozone, which consists of 19 EU member states and is one of the largest currency areas in the world. It is one of the world's most important central banks and is one of the seven institutions of the European Union (EU) listed in the Treaty on European Union (TEU). The capital stock of the bank is owned by the central banks of all 28 EU member states.[2] The Treaty of Amsterdam established the bank in 1998, and it is headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany. As of 2015[update] the President of the ECB is Mario Draghi, former governor of the Bank of Italy, former member of the World Bank,[3] and former managing director of the Goldman Sachs international division (2002–2005).[3][4] The bank primarily occupied the Eurotower prior to, and during, the construction of the new headquarters.
The primary objective of the ECB, mandated in Article 2 of the Statute of the ECB,[5] is to maintain price stability within the Eurozone. Its basic tasks, set out in Article 3 of the Statute,[5] are to set and implement the monetary policy for the Eurozone, to conduct foreign exchange operations, to take care of the foreign reserves of the European System of Central Banks and operation of the financial market infrastructure under the TARGET2 payments system and the technical platform (currently being developed) for settlement of securities in Europe (TARGET2 Securities). The ECB has, under Article 16 of its Statute,[5] the exclusive right to authorise the issuance of euro banknotes. Member states can issue euro coins, but the amount must be authorised by the ECB beforehand.
The ECB is governed by European law directly, but its set-up resembles that of a corporation in the sense that the ECB has shareholders and stock capital. Its capital is €11 billion held by the national central banks of the member states as shareholders.[2] The initial capital allocation key was determined in 1998 on the basis of the states' population and GDP, but the capital key has been adjusted.[2] Shares in the ECB are not transferable and cannot be used as collateral.



Contents


1 History
2 Powers and objectives

2.1 Objective
2.2 Basic tasks
2.3 Considerations on ECB's monetary policy


3 Organization

3.1 Decision-making bodies of the ECB

3.1.1 The Executive Board
3.1.2 The Governing Council
3.1.3 The General Council
3.1.4 The Supervisory Board


3.2 Capital subscription
3.3 Reserves
3.4 Languages


4 ECB independence framework

4.1 ECB Independence
4.2 ECB transparency
4.3 ECB's democratic accountability


5 European debt crisis

5.1 Reforms due to fiscal bailouts
5.2 The ECB's response to the euro crisis

5.2.1 Bond purchase
5.2.2 Long-term refinancing operation


5.3 Powers and objectives during the European banking crisis

5.3.1 European financial stability facility


5.4 Monetary policy tools

5.4.1 Regulatory reliance on credit ratings




6 Location
7 See also
8 Notes
9 References
10 External links



History[edit]
Further information: History of the euro




Wim Duisenberg, first President of the ECB


The European Central Bank is the de facto successor of the European Monetary Institute (EMI).[6] The EMI was established at the start of the second stage of the EU's Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) to handle the transitional issues of states adopting the euro and prepare for the creation of the ECB and European System of Central Banks (ESCB).[6] The EMI itself took over from the earlier European Monetary Co-operation Fund (EMCF).[7]
The ECB formally replaced the EMI on 1 June 1998 by virtue of the Treaty on European Union (TEU, Treaty of Maastricht), however it did not exercise its full powers until the introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999, signalling the third stage of EMU.[6] The bank was the final institution needed for EMU, as outlined by the EMU reports of Pierre Werner and President Jacques Delors. It was established on 1 June 1998.[8]
The first President of the Bank was Wim Duisenberg, the former president of the Dutch central bank and the European Monetary Institute.[8] While Duisenberg had been the head of the EMI (taking over from Alexandre Lamfalussy of Belgium) just before the ECB came into existence,[8] the French government wanted Jean-Claude Trichet, former head of the French central bank, to be the ECB's first president.[8] The French argued that since the ECB was to be located in Germany, its president should be French. This was opposed by the German, Dutch and Belgian governments who saw Duisenberg as a guarantor of a strong euro.[9] Tensions were abated by a gentleman's agreement in which Duisenberg would stand down before the end of his mandate, to be replaced by Trichet.[10]
Trichet replaced Duisenberg as President in November 2003.




Mario Draghi, the current President of the ECB


There had also been tension over the ECB's Executive Board, with the United Kingdom demanding a seat even though it had not joined the Single Currency.[9] Under pressure from France, three seats were assigned to the largest members, France, Germany, and Italy; Spain also demanded and obtained a seat. Despite such a system of appointment the board asserted its independence early on in resisting calls for interest rates and future candidates to it.[9]
When the ECB was created, it covered a Eurozone of eleven members. Since then, Greece joined in January 2001, Slovenia in January 2007, Cyprus and Malta in January 2008, Slovakia in January 2009, Estonia in January 2011, Latvia in January 2014 and Lithuania in January 2015, enlarging the bank's scope and the membership of its Governing Council.[7]
On 1 December 2009, the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force, ECB according to the article 13 of TEU, gained official status of an EU institution.
In September 2011, when German appointee to the Governing Council and Executive board, Jürgen Stark, resigned in protest of the ECB's bond buying programme, Financial Times Deutschland called it "the end of the ECB as we know it" referring to its perceived "hawkish" stance on inflation and its historical Bundesbank influence.[11]
On 1 November 2011, Mario Draghi replaced Jean-Claude Trichet as President of the ECB.
In April 2011, the ECB raised interest rates for the first time since 2008 from 1% to 1.25%,[12] with a further increase to 1.50% in July 2011.[13] However, in 2012–2013 the ECB sharply lowered interest rates to encourage economic growth, reaching the historically low 0.25% in November 2013.[1] Soon after the rates were cut to 0.15%, then on 4 September 2014 the central bank reduced the rates by two thirds from 0.15% to 0.05%, the lowest rates on record.[14]
In November 2014, the bank moved into its new premises.
Powers and objectives[edit]
Objective[edit]




Euro banknotes


The primary objective of the European Central Bank, set out in Article 127(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, is to maintain price stability within the Eurozone.[15] The Governing Council in October 1998[16] defined price stability as inflation of under 2%, “a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%” and added that price stability ”was to be maintained over the medium term”. (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices)[17] Unlike for example the United States Federal Reserve Bank, the ECB has only one primary objective but this objective has never been defined in statutory law, and the HICP target can be termed ad-hoc.
The Governing Council confirmed this definition in May 2003 following a thorough evaluation of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. On that occasion, the Governing Council clarified that “in the pursuit of price stability, it aims to maintain inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”.[16] All lending to credit institutions must be collateralised as required by Article 18 of the Statute of the ESCB.[18] The Governing Council clarification has little force in law.
Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the Treaty also states that "the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in the Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Union".[19]
Basic tasks[edit]






This section relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. (December 2015)



The basic tasks of the ECB are to define and implement the monetary policy for the Eurozone, to conduct foreign exchange operations, to take care of the foreign reserves of the European System of Central Banks and to promote smooth operation of the financial market infrastructure under the TARGET2 payments system[20] and being currently developed technical platform for settlement of securities in Europe (TARGET2 Securities).
Further tasks, among others, include the exclusive right to authorise the issuance of euro banknotes. Member states can issue euro coins, but the amount must be authorised by the ECB beforehand (upon the introduction of the euro, the ECB also had exclusive right to issue coins).[20] The ECB shall also collect statistical information to fulfil the tasks of the European System of Central Banks, and contribute to financial stability and supervision.
Considerations on ECB's monetary policy[edit]
In U.S.-style central banking, the Federal Reserve System purchases Treasury securities in order to inject liquidity into the economy; the Eurosystem, on the other hand, uses a different method. There are about 1,500 eligible banks which may bid for short-term repo contracts of two weeks to three months duration.[21]
The banks in effect borrow cash and must pay it back; the short durations allow interest rates to be adjusted continually. When the repo notes come due the participating banks bid again. An increase in the quantity of notes offered at auction allows an increase in liquidity in the economy. A decrease has the contrary effect. The contracts are carried on the asset side of the European Central Bank's balance sheet and the resulting deposits in member banks are carried as a liability. In layman terms, the liability of the central bank is money, and an increase in deposits in member banks, carried as a liability by the central bank, means that more money has been put into the economy.[a]
To qualify for participation in the auctions, banks must be able to offer proof of appropriate collateral in the form of loans to other entities. These can be the public debt of member states, but a fairly wide range of private banking securities are also accepted.[22] The fairly stringent membership requirements for the European Union, especially with regard to sovereign debt as a percentage of each member state's gross domestic product, are designed to insure that assets offered to the bank as collateral are, at least in theory, all equally good, and all equally protected from the risk of inflation.[22]
Organization[edit]
The ECB has four decision-making bodies, that take all the decisions with the objective of fulfilling the ECB's mandate:

the Executive Board,
the Governing Council,
the General Council, and
the Supervisory Board.

Decision-making bodies of the ECB[edit]
The Executive Board[edit]




Jean-Claude Trichet, the second President of the European Central Bank


The Executive Board is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy (defined by the Governing Council) and the day-to-day running of the bank.[23] It can issue decisions to national central banks and may also exercise powers delegated to it by the Governing Council.[23] It is composed of the President of the Bank (currently Mario Draghi), the Vice-President (currently Vitor Constâncio) and four other members.[23] They are all appointed for non-renewable terms of eight years.[23] They are appointed "from among persons of recognised standing and professional experience in monetary or banking matters by common accord of the governments of the Member States at the level of Heads of State or Government, on a recommendation from the Council, after it has consulted the European Parliament and the Governing Council of the ECB".[24] The Executive Board normally meets every Tuesday.
José Manuel González-Páramo, a Spanish member of the Executive Board since June 2004, was due to leave the board in early June 2012 and no replacement had been named as of late May 2012.[25] The Spanish had nominated Barcelona-born Antonio Sáinz de Vicuña, an ECB veteran who heads its legal department, as González-Páramo's replacement as early as January 2012 but alternatives from Luxembourg, Finland, and Slovenia were put forward and no decision made by May.[26] After a long political battle, Luxembourg's Yves Mersch, was appointed as González-Páramo's replacement.[27]
The Governing Council[edit]
The Governing Council is the main decision-making body of the Eurosystem.[28] It comprises the members of the Executive Board (six in total) and the governors of the National Central Banks of the euro area countries (19 as of 2015). Since January 2015 council minutes of the Council are published on internet,[29] before 2015 the fact that the Council's minutes were not published had raised controversy in some financial circles.

Members of the Governing Council (as of April 2017)[30]

Mario Draghi, President of the ECB
Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB
Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB


Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB
Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB (Chief Economist of the ECB)


Jan Smets (Belgium)
Jens Weidmann (Germany)
Philip R. Lane (Ireland)


Yannis Stournaras (Greece)
Luis María Linde (Spain)
Ardo Hansson (Estonia)


François Villeroy de Galhau (France)
Ignazio Visco (Italy)
Chrystalla Georghadji (Cyprus)


Gaston Reinesch[de] (Luxembourg)
Mario Vella (Malta)
Klaas Knot (Netherlands)


Ewald Nowotny (Austria)
Carlos Costa (Portugal)
Boštjan Jazbec (Slovenia)


Jozef Makúch (Slovakia)
Erkki Liikanen (Finland)
Ilmārs Rimšēvičs[lv] (Latvia)


Vitas Vasiliauskas[de] (Lithuania)




The General Council[edit]
The General Council is a body dealing with transitional issues of euro adoption, for example, fixing the exchange rates of currencies being replaced by the euro (continuing the tasks of the former EMI).[23] It will continue to exist until all EU member states adopt the euro, at which point it will be dissolved.[23] It is composed of the President and vice-president together with the governors of all of the EU's national central banks.[31][32]
The Supervisory Board[edit]
The Supervisory Board meets twice a month to discuss, plan and carry out the ECB’s supervisory tasks.[33] It proposes draft decisions to the Governing Council under the non-objection procedure. It is composed of Chair (appointed for a non-renewable term of five years), Vice-Chair (chosen from among the members of the ECB's Executive Board) four ECB representatives and representatives of national supervisors. If the national supervisory authority designated by a Member State is not a national central bank (NCB), the representative of the competent authority can be accompanied by a representative from their NCB. In such cases, the representatives are together considered as one member for the purposes of the voting procedure.[33]
It also includes the Steering Committee, which supports the activities of the Supervisory Board and prepares the Board’s meetings. It is composed by the Chair of the Supervisory Board, Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board, one ECB representative and five representatives of national supervisors. The five representatives of national supervisors are appointed by the Supervisory Board for one year based on a rotation system that ensures a fair representation of countries.[33]
Current composition:[34]

Chair: Danièle Nouy
Vice-Chair: Sabine Lautenschläger
ECB representative: Ignazio Angeloni (es)
ECB representative: Luc Coene
ECB representative: Julie Dickson
ECB representative: Sirkka Hämäläinen

Capital subscription[edit]



European Union






This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
European Union




Executive


Juncker Commission
President Juncker (EPP)
Vice Presidents
College
Civil Service
Secretary-General Italianer








Legislature
President Tajani (EPP)

Largest groups

EPP (Manfred Weber)
S&D (Gianni Pittella)


8th session (2014–19)

751 MEPs


Bureau

Vice Presidents
Quaestor


Conference
Legislative procedure

Council of the EU
Presidency

Configurations

General
Foreign
Justice and Home
Economic

Euro




Legislative procedure
Voting
Secretariat

Secretary-General

Uwe Corsepius


Directorates-general
COREPER










Judiciary


Court of Justice

Members
Rulings


General Court








Central Bank


President Draghi

ESCB
Euro
EMU
Eurozone













Court of Auditors


Budget
OLAF








Other bodies


Agencies
Investment Bank
CoR
EESC
Ombudsman
National parliaments








Policies and issues


Foreign relations

High Representative

Federica Mogherini


Ext. Action Service
Foreign Policy
Defence Policy
Customs Union
Enlargement


Budget
Four Freedoms

Economic Area
Area of FS&J
Schengen Area


Policies

Agricultural
Energy
Fisheries
Regional


Citizenship

Identity
Pro-Europeanism
Euroscepticism


Integration

Supranationalism
Federalism
United States of Europe
Multi-speed
Opt-outs
Enhanced co-op
Withdrawal










Elections


1979, 1984, 1989
1994, 1999, 2004, 2009
2014 (last election)
Political parties
Constituencies





Referendums








Law


Treaty on European Union
Acquis

Primacy
Subsidiarity


Treaties

Rome
Single European Act
Maastricht
Amsterdam
Nice
Lisbon

Article 50




Fundamental Rights
Membership
Treaties of Accession

1972, 1979, 1985, 1994, 2003, 2005, 2011










European Council


President Tusk (EPP)

Parties
List of meetings











Other countries
Atlas








v
t
e





The ECB is governed by European law directly, but its set-up resembles that of a corporation in the sense that the ECB has shareholders and stock capital. Its initial capital was supposed to be €5 billion[35] and the initial capital allocation key was determined in 1998 on the basis of the member states' populations and GDP,[2][36] but the key is adjustable.[37] The euro area NCBs were required to pay their respective subscriptions to the ECB's capital in full. The NCBs of the non-participating countries have had to pay 7% of their respective subscriptions to the ECB's capital as a contribution to the operational costs of the ECB. As a result, the ECB was endowed with an initial capital of just under €4 billion.[citation needed] The capital is held by the national central banks of the member states as shareholders. Shares in the ECB are not transferable and cannot be used as collateral.[38] The NCBs are the sole subscribers to and holders of the capital of the ECB.
Today, ECB capital is about €11 billion, which is held by the national central banks of the member states as shareholders.[2] The NCBs’ shares in this capital are calculated using a capital key which reflects the respective member’s share in the total population and gross domestic product of the EU. The ECB adjusts the shares every five years and whenever a new country joins the EU. The adjustment is made on the basis of data provided by the European Commission.
All national central banks (NCBs) that own a share of the ECB capital stock as of 1 January 2015 are listed below. Non-Euro area NCBs are required to pay up only a very small percentage of their subscribed capital, which accounts for the different magnitudes of Euro area and Non-Euro area total paid-up capital.[2]


NCB
Capital Key (%)
Paid-up Capital (€)


National Bank of Belgium
2.4778
268,222,025.17


German Federal Bank
17.9973
1,948,208,997.34


Bank of Estonia
0.1928
20,870,613.63


Central Bank of Ireland
1.1607
125,645,857.06


Bank of Greece
2.0332
220,094,043.74


Bank of Spain
8.8409
957,028,050.02


Bank of France
14.1792
1,534,899,402.41


Bank of Italy
12.3108
1,332,644,970.33


Central Bank of Cyprus
0.1513
16,378,235.70


Bank of Latvia
0.2821
30,537,344.94


Bank of Lithuania
0.4132
44,728,929.21


Central Bank of Luxembourg
0.2030
21,974,764.35


Central Bank of Malta
0.0648
7,014,604.58


The Dutch Bank
4.0035
433,379,158.03


National Bank of Austria
1.9631
212,505,713.78


Bank of Portugal
1.7434
188,723,173.25


Bank of Slovenia
0.3455
37,400,399.43


National Bank of Slovakia
0.7725
83,623,179.61


Bank of Finland
1.2564
136,005,388.82


Total
70.3915
7,619,884,851.40


Non-Euro area:




Bulgarian National Bank
0.8590
3,487,005.40


Czech National Bank
1.6075
6,525,449.57


National Bank of Denmark
1.4873
6,037,512.38


Croatian National Bank
0.6023
2,444,963.16


Hungarian National Bank
1.3798
5,601,129.28


National Bank of Poland
5.1230
20,796,191.71


National Bank of Romania
2.6024
10,564,124.40


Swedish National Bank
2.2729
9,226,559.46


Bank of England
13.6743
55,509,147.81


Total
29.6085
120,192,083.17


Reserves[edit]
In addition to capital subscriptions, the NCBs of the member states participating in the euro area provided the ECB with foreign reserve assets equivalent to around €40 billion. The contributions of each NCB is in proportion to its share in the ECB's subscribed capital, while in return each NCB is credited by the ECB with a claim in euro equivalent to its contribution. 15% of the contributions was made in gold, and the remaining 85% in US dollars and Japanese yen.[citation needed]
Languages[edit]
The internal working language of the ECB is generally English, and press conferences are usually held in English. External communications are handled flexibly: English is preferred (though not exclusively) for communication within the ESCB (i.e. with other central banks) and with financial markets; communication with other national bodies and with EU citizens is normally in their respective language, but the ECB website is predominantly English; official documents such as the Annual Report are in the official languages of the EU.[39][40]
ECB independence framework[edit]
The European Central Bank (and by extension, the Eurosystem) is often considered as the "most independent central bank in the world"[41][42][43][44]. In general terms, this means that the Eurosystem tasks and policies can be discussed, designed, decided and implemented in full autonomy, without pressure, or need for instructions from any external body. The main justification for the ECB independence is that such institutional setup helps maintaining price stability[45][46].
ECB Independence[edit]
In practice, the ECB's independence is pinned by four key principles[47]:

Political independence: The Community institutions and bodies and the governments of the member states may not seek to influence the members of the decision-making bodies of the ECB or of the NCBs in the performance of their tasks. Symmetrically, EU institutions and national governments are bound by the treaties to respect the ECB's independence.
Operational and legal independence: the ECB has all required competences to achieve its price stability mandate and thereby can steer monetary policy in full autonomy and by means of high level of discretion. The ECB's governing council deliberates with a high degree of secrecy, since individual voting records are not disclosed to the public (leading to suspicions that Governing Council members are voting along national lines.[48][49]) In addition to monetary policy decisions, the ECB has the right to issue legally binding regulations, within its competence and if the conditions laid down in Union law are fulfilled, it can sanction non-compliant actors if they violate legal requirements laid down in directly applicable Union regulations. The ECB's own legal personality also allows the ECB to enter into international legal agreements independently from other EU institutions, and be party of legal proceedings. Finally, the ECB can organise its internal structure as it sees fit.
Personal independence: the mandate of ECB board members is purposefully very long (8 years) and Governors of national central banks have a minimum renewable term of office of five years.[45] In addition, ECB board members and are vastly immune from judicial proceedings[50]. Indeed, removals from office can only be decided by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), under the request of the ECB's Governing Council or the Executive Board (ie. the ECB itself). Such decision is only possible in the event of incapacity or serious misconduct. National governors of the Eurosystem' national central banks can be dismissed under national law (with possibility to appeal) in case they can no longer fulfil their functions or are guilty of serious misconduct.
Financial independence: the ECB is the only body within the EU whose statute guarantees budgetary independence through its own resources and income. The ECB uses its own profits generated by its monetary policy operations and cannot be technically insolvent. The ECB's financial independence reinforces its political independence. Because the ECB does not require external financing and symmetrically is prohibited from direct financing to public institutions, this shields it from potential pressure from public authorities.

ECB transparency[edit]
In addition to its independence, the ECB is subject to limited transparency obligations in contrast to EU Institutions standards and other major central banks. Indeed, as pointed out by Transparency International, "The Treaties establish transparency and openness as principles of the EU and its institutions. They do, however, grant the ECB a partial exemption from these principles. According to Art. 15(3) TFEU, the ECB is bound by the EU’s transparency principles “only when exercising [its] administrative tasks” (the exemption – which leaves the term “administrative tasks” undefined – equally applies to the Court of Justice of the European Union and to the European Investment Bank)."[51]
In practice, there are several concrete examples where the ECB is less transparent than other institutions:

Voting secrecy: while other central banks publish the voting record of its decision makers, the ECB's Governing Council decisions are made in full discretion. Since 2014 however, the ECB publishes "accounts" of its monetary policy meetings[52], but those remain rather vague and do not include individual votes.
Access to documents: The obligation for EU bodies to make documents freely accessible after a 30-year embargo applies to the ECB. However, under the ECB’s Rules of Procedure the Governing Council may decide to keep individual documents classified beyond the 30-year period.
Disclosure of securities: The ECB is less transparent than the Fed when it comes to disclosing the list of securities being held in its balance sheet under monetary policy operations such as QE[53].

ECB's democratic accountability[edit]
In return to its high degree of independence and discretion, the ECB is accountable to the European Parliament (and to a lesser extent to the European Court of Auditors, the European Ombudsman and the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU). In practice, this accountability involves five main mechanisms:

Annual report: the ECB is bound to publish reports on its activities and has to address its annual report to the European Parliament, the European Commission, the Council of the European Union and the European Council.[54] . In return, the European Parliament evaluates the past activities to the ECB via its annual report on the European Central Bank (which is essentially a non legally-binding list of resolutions).
Quarterly hearings: the Economic and Monetary affairs Committee of the European Parliament organises a hearing (the "Monetary Dialogue") with the ECB every quarter[55], allowing members of parliament to address oral questions to the ECB president.
Parliamentary questions: all Members of the European Parliament have the right to address written questions[56] to the ECB president. The ECB president provides a written answer in about 6 weeks.
Appointments: The European Parliament is consulted during the appointment process of executive board members of the ECB.[57]
Legal proceedings: the ECB' own legal personality allows civil society or public institutions to file complains against the ECB to the Court of Justice of the EU.

European debt crisis[edit]
Main article: European debt crisis






This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



From late 2009 a handful of mainly southern eurozone member states started being unable to repay their national Euro-denominated government debt or to finance the bail-out of troubled financial sectors under their national supervision without the assistance of third parties. This so-called European debt crisis began after Greece's new elected government stopped masking its true indebtedness and budget deficit and openly communicated the imminent danger of a Greek sovereign default. Seeing a sovereign default in the eurozone as a shock, the general public, international and European institutions, and the financial community started to intensively reassess the economic situation and creditworthiness of eurozone states. Those eurozone states being assessed as not financially sustainable enough on their current path, faced waves of credit rating downgrades and rising borrowing costs including increasing interest rate spreads. As a consequence, the ability of these states to borrow new money to further finance their budget deficits or to refinance existing unsustainable debt levels was strongly reduced.[58][59][60][61][62][63][64]
Reforms due to fiscal bailouts[edit]
The ECB has pronounced that the EU and its member states are in the main responsible for solving the fiscal crisis of some member states.[citation needed] Until 2009 there had not been sufficient instruments in place on the eurozone level to prevent or solve a debt crisis in a member state.[citation needed]
Several systems have been put into place since then to fill this gap:

In 2010, two temporary rescue programmes have been started, the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM) and the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). Together with massive financial support of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), these facilities have provided funds to Greece, Ireland, and Portugal in 2010 and 2011.
In 2012 the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) with a lending capacity of €500 billion, has been established to replace the previous temporary rescue programmes. The ESM is intended as a permanent firewall for the eurozone to safeguard and provide instant access to financial assistance programmes for member states in financial difficulty. Spain and Cyprus have drawn funds from the ESM programme in 2012 and 2013, with a focus on recapitalization (bail-out) of their financial sectors.
In 2013 the European Fiscal Compact became valid as a contract that obliges the EU member states to introduce domestic self-correcting mechanisms on member state level to ensure balanced public budgets and sustainable public debt levels.
In 2014 the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was introduced. It grants the European Central Bank (ECB) a supervisory role to monitor the financial stability of banks in the eurozone states (full members) and other EU states. This supervision is intended as a first step to prevent bank bailout needs in EU states that could induce or contribute to a debt crisis in the respective state.

Article 125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU prohibits the financial bailout of other eurozone countries having problems to service their financial obligations.[65] The emergency set-up of the various eurozone rescue funds to help the crisis states to fulfill their obligations was to a certain degree a violation of the non-bailout clause, but it is documented that there were no alternatives that the eurozone states could agree on in this unforeseen debt crisis situation.[citation needed]
There is also a widespread view[vague][who?] that giving much more financial support to continuously cover the debt crisis or allow even higher budget deficits or debt levels would discourage the crisis states to implement necessary reforms to regain their competitiveness.[citation needed] There has also been a reluctance[citation needed] of financially stable eurozone states like Germany[citation needed] to further circumvent the no-bailout clause in the EU contracts and to generally take on the burden of financing or guaranteeing the debts of financially unstable or defaulting eurozone countries.[citation needed]
This has led to public discussions if Greece, Portugal, and even Italy would be better off leaving the eurozone to regain economical and financial stability if they would not implement reforms to strengthen their competitiveness as part of the eurozone in time. Greece had the greatest need for reforms but also most problems to implement those, so the Greek exit, also called "Grexit", has been widely discussed. Germany, as a large and financially stable state being in the focus to be asked to guarantee or repay other states debt, has never pushed those exits. Their position is to keep Greece within the eurozone, but not at any cost. If the worst comes to the worst, priority should be given to the euro's stability.[66][67][68]
The ECB's response to the euro crisis[edit]
There are a variety of possible responses to the problem of bad debts in a banking system. One is to induce debtors to make a greater effort to make good on their debt.[69] With public debt this usually means getting governments to maintain debt payments while cutting back on other forms of expenditure.[69] Such policies often involve cutting back on popular social programmes.[70]
Stringent policies with regard to social expenditures and employment in the state sector have led to riots and political protests in Greece.[71] Another response is to shift losses from the central bank to private investors who are asked to "share the pain" of partial defaults that take the form of rescheduling debt payments.[69]
However, if the debt rescheduling causes losses on loans held by European banks, it weakens the private banking system, which then puts pressure on the central bank to come to the aid of those banks. Private-sector bond holders are an integral part of the public and private banking system. Another possible response is for wealthy member countries to guarantee or purchase the debt of countries that have defaulted or are likely to default.[69] This alternative requires that the tax revenues and credit of the wealthy member countries be used to refinance the previous borrowing of the weaker member countries, and is politically controversial.[72]
Bond purchase[edit]




ECB Securities Markets Programme (SMP) covering bond purchases since May 2010


In contrast to the Fed, the ECB normally does not buy bonds outright.[73] The normal procedure used by the ECB for manipulating the money supply has been via the so-called refinancing facilities. In these facilities, bonds are not purchased but used in reverse transactions: repurchase agreements, or collateralised loans. These two transactions are similar, i.e. bonds are used as collaterals for loans, the difference being of legal nature. In the repos the ownership of the collateral changes to the ECB until the loan is repaid.
This changed with the recent sovereign-debt crisis. The ECB always could, and through the late summer of 2011 did, purchase bonds issued by the weaker states even though it assumes, in doing so, the risk of a deteriorating balance sheet. ECB buying focused primarily on Spanish and Italian debt.[74] Certain techniques can minimise the impact. Purchases of Italian bonds by the central bank, for example, were intended to dampen international speculation and strengthen portfolios in the private sector and also the central bank.[75]
The assumption is that speculative activity will decrease over time and the value of the assets increase. Such a move is similar to what the US federal reserve did in buying subprime mortgages in the crisis of 2008, except in the European crisis, the purchases are of member state debt. The risk of such a move is that it could diminish the value of the currency.[76]
On the other hand, certain financial techniques can reduce the impact of such purchases on the currency.[76] One is sterilisation, in which highly valued assets are sold at the same time that the weaker assets are purchased, which keeps the money supply neutral.[76] Another technique is simply to accept the bad assets as long-term collateral (as opposed to short-term repo swaps) to be held until their market value stabilises. This would imply, as a quid pro quo, adjustments in taxation and expenditure in the economies of the weaker states to improve the perceived value of the assets.[76]
When the ECB buys bonds from other creditors such as European banks, the ECB does not disclose the transaction prices. Creditors profit of bargains with bonds sold at prices that exceed market's quotes.
As of 18 June 2012, the ECB in total had spent €212.1bn (equal to 2.2% of the Eurozone GDP) for bond purchases covering outright debt, as part of its Securities Markets Programme (SMP) running since May 2010.[77] On 6 September 2012, the ECB announced a new plan for buying bonds from eurozone countries.[78] The duration of the previous SMP was temporary,[79] while the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme has no ex-ante time or size limit.[80] On 4 September 2014, the bank went further by announcing it would buy bonds and other debt instruments primarily from banks in a bid to boost the availability of credit for businesses.[14]
The Emergency Lending Assistance (ELA) programme was designed for financial institutions in a liquidity crisis, such as the Greek banks in the course of the 2015 Greek financial snafu, when the banks experienced massive deposit flight.[81][82]
On 9 March 2015 the ECB started its quantitative easing programme, which was designed to ease sovereign stress in its member states. Purchases are initially €60bn per month and subsequently increased to €80bn per month. The program is expected to last until at least end of 2018.[83]
Long-term refinancing operation[edit]
Though the ECB's main refinancing operations (MRO) are from repo auctions with a (bi)weekly maturity and monthly maturation, the ECB now conducts long-term refinancing operations (LTROs), maturing after three months, six months, 12 months and 36 months. In 2003, refinancing via LTROs amounted to 45 bln euro which is about 20% of overall liquidity provided by the ECB.[84]
The ECB's first supplementary longer-term refinancing operation (LTRO) with a six-month maturity was announced March 2008.[85] Previously the longest tender offered was three months.[86] It announced two 3-month and one 6-month full allotment of Long Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs). The first tender was settled 3 April, and was more than four times oversubscribed. The €25 billion auction drew bids amounting to €103.1 billion, from 177 banks. Another six-month tender was allotted on 9 July, again to the amount of €25 billion. The first 12-month LTRO in June 2009 had close to 1100 bidders.[87]
On 21 December 2011 the bank instituted a programme of making low-interest loans with a term of three years (36 months) and 1% interest to European banks accepting loans from the portfolio of the banks as collateral. Loans totalling €489.2 bn (US$640 bn) were announced. The loans were not offered to European states, but government securities issued by European states would be acceptable collateral as would mortgage-backed securities and other commercial paper that can be demonstrated to be secure. The programme was announced on 8 December 2011 but observers were surprised by the volume of the loans made when it was implemented.[88][89][90] Under its LTRO it loaned €489bn to 523 banks for an exceptionally long period of three years at a rate of just one percent.[91] The by far biggest amount of €325bn was tapped by banks in Greece, Ireland, Italy and Spain.[92] This way the ECB tried to make sure that banks have enough cash to pay off €200bn of their own maturing debts in the first three months of 2012, and at the same time keep operating and loaning to businesses so that a credit crunch does not choke off economic growth. It also hoped that banks would use some of the money to buy government bonds, effectively easing the debt crisis.[93]
On 29 February 2012, the ECB held a second 36-month auction, LTRO2, providing eurozone banks with further €529.5 billion in low-interest loans.[94] This second long term refinancing operation auction saw 800 banks take part. This can be compared with the 523 banks that took part in the first auction on 21 December 2011.[95] Net new borrowing under the February auction was around €313 billion – out of a total of €256bn existing ECB lending €215bn was rolled into LTRO2.[95]
Powers and objectives during the European banking crisis[edit]
The European debt crisis has revealed some relative weaknesses in the sovereign debt of such member countries as Portugal, Ireland, Greece and Spain.[96]
Rescue operations involving sovereign debt have included temporarily moving bad or weak assets off the balance sheets of the weak member banks into the balance sheets of the European Central Bank.[97] Such action is viewed as monetisation and can be seen as an inflationary threat, whereby the strong member countries of the ECB shoulder the burden of monetary expansion (and potential inflation) to save the weak member countries.[97] Most central banks prefer to move weak assets off their balance sheets with some kind of agreement as to how the debt will continue to be serviced.[97] This preference has typically led the ECB to argue that the weaker member countries must:

Allocate considerable national income to servicing debts.[97]
Scale back a wide range of national expenditures (such as education, infrastructure, and welfare transfer payments) to make their payments.[97]





ECB balance sheet






ECB deposit facility






Current accounts at the ECB


The European Central Bank had stepped up the buying of member nations debt.[98] In response to the crisis of 2010, some proposals have surfaced for a collective European bond issue that would allow the central bank to purchase a European version of US Treasury bills.[99][100] To make European sovereign debt assets more similar to a US Treasury, a collective guarantee of the member states' solvency would be necessary.[b] But the German government has resisted this proposal, and other analyses indicate that "the sickness of the euro" is due to the linkage between sovereign debt and failing national banking systems. If the European central bank were to deal directly with failing banking systems sovereign debt would not look as leveraged relative to national income in the financially weaker member states.[100]
On 17 December 2010, the ECB announced that it was going to double its capitalisation.[101] (The ECB's most recent balance sheet before the announcement listed capital and reserves at €2.03 trillion.)[102] The 16 central banks of the member states would transfer assets to the ledger of the ECB.
In 2011, the European member states may need to raise as much as US$2 trillion in debt.[101] Some of this will be new debt and some will be previous debt that is "rolled over" as older loans reach maturity. In either case, the ability to raise this money depends on the confidence of investors in the European financial system.[102] The ability of the European Union to guarantee its members' sovereign debt obligations have direct implications for the core assets of the banking system that support the Euro.[101]
The bank must also co-operate within the EU and internationally with third bodies and entities. Finally, it contributes to maintaining a stable financial system and monitoring the banking sector.[103] The latter can be seen, for example, in the bank's intervention during the subprime mortgage crisis when it loaned billions of euros to banks to stabilise the financial system.[104] In December 2007, the ECB decided in conjunction with the Federal Reserve System under a programme called Term auction facility to improve dollar liquidity in the eurozone and to stabilise the money market.[105]
In late May 2012, looking ahead to further challenges with Greece, Bundesbank chief and ECB council member Jens Weidmann pointed out that the council could veto "emergency liquidity assistance" (ELA) to, for instance, Greece through a two–third majority of the council. If Greece chose to default on its debts yet wanted to stay in the Euro, the ELA would be one of the ways to accommodate the country's and its banks' liquidity needs or, alternatively, to precipitate departure.[25]
On 31 October 2012, the ECB announced it had phased out as planned the Covered Bond Purchase programme, which was one of the crisis measures aimed at supporting the shaky banking system of the 17-country eurozone.[106][107]
On Wednesday, February 24, 2016, as part of the Bundesbank's annual news conference, Bundesbank president and European Central Bank Governing Council member, Jens Weidmann, dismissed deflation in light of the ECB's current stimulus program, pointing out the healthy condition of the German economy and that the euro area isn't that bad off, on the eve of the March 9–10, 2016 meetings.[108]
European financial stability facility[edit]
Main article: European Financial Stability Facility
On 9 May 2010, the 27 member states of the European Union agreed to incorporate the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).[109] The EFSF's mandate is to safeguard financial stability in Europe by providing financial assistance to Eurozone Member States.[109]
The EFSF is authorised to use the following instruments linked to appropriate conditionality:

To provide loans to countries in financial difficulties (e.g. Greek bailout).[109]
To intervene in the primary and secondary debt markets. Intervention in the secondary debt market will be only on the basis of an ECB analysis recognising the existence of exceptional financial market circumstances and risks to financial stability.[109]
Act on the basis of a precautionary programme.[109]
Finance recapitalisations of financial institutions through loans to governments[109]

The EFSF is backed by guarantee commitments from the Eurozone member states for a total of €780bn and has a lending capacity of €440bn.[109] In 2011, it was assigned the best possible credit rating (AAA by Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings, Aaa by Moody's)[109]
Monetary policy tools[edit]




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2016)



The principal monetary policy tool of the European central bank is collateralised borrowing or repo agreements.[69] These tools are also used by the United States Federal Reserve Bank, but the Fed does more direct purchasing of financial assets than its European counterpart.[110] The collateral used by the ECB is typically high quality public and private sector debt.[69]
The criteria for determining "high quality" for public debt have been preconditions for membership in the European Union: total debt must not be too large in relation to gross domestic product, for example, and deficits in any given year must not become too large.[76] Though these criteria are fairly simple, a number of accounting techniques may hide the underlying reality of fiscal solvency—or the lack of same.[76]
In central banking, the privileged status of the central bank is that it can make as much money as it deems needed.[111] In the United States Federal Reserve Bank, the Federal Reserve buys assets: typically, bonds issued by the Federal government.[111] There is no limit on the bonds that it can buy and one of the tools at its disposal in a financial crisis is to take such extraordinary measures as the purchase of large amounts of assets such as commercial paper.[111] The purpose of such operations is to ensure that adequate liquidity is available for functioning of the financial system.[111]
Regulatory reliance on credit ratings[edit]
Think-tanks such as the World Pensions Council have also argued that European legislators have pushed somewhat dogmatically for the adoption of the Basel II recommendations, adopted in 2005, transposed in European Union law through the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD), effective since 2008. In essence, they forced European banks, and, more importantly, the European Central Bank itself e.g. when gauging the solvency of financial institutions, to rely more than ever on standardised assessments of credit risk marketed by two non-European private agencies: Moody's and S&P.
Location[edit]
Main article: Seat of the European Central Bank




The new ECB headquarters, which opened in 2014.


The bank is based in Ostend (East End), Frankfurt am Main. The city is the largest financial centre in the Eurozone and the bank's location in it is fixed by the Amsterdam Treaty.[112] The bank moved to new purpose-built headquarters in 2014 that were designed a Vienna-based architectural office, Coop Himmelbau.[113] The building is approximately 180 metres (591 ft) tall and will be accompanied with other secondary buildings on a landscaped site on the site of the former wholesale market in the eastern part of Frankfurt am Main. The main construction began in October 2008,[113][114] and it was expected that the building will become an architectural symbol for Europe. While it was designed to accommodate double the number of staff who operate in the former Eurotower,[115] that building has been retained since the ECB took responsibility for banking supervision and more space was hence required.[116]
See also[edit]





Book: European Union





Economics
European Banking Authority
European Systemic Risk Board
Open market operation

Notes[edit]



^ The process is similar, though on a grand scale, to an individual who every month charges $10,000 on his or her credit card, pays it off every month, but also withdraws (and pays off) an additional $10,000 each succeeding month for transaction purposes. Such a person is operating "net borrowed" on a continual basis, and even though the borrowing from the credit card is short term, the effect is a stable increase in the money supply. If the person borrows less, less money circulates in the economy. If he or she borrows more, the money supply increases. An individual's ability to borrow from his or her credit card company is determined by the credit card company: it reflects the company's overall judgment of its ability to lend to all borrowers, and also its appraisal of the financial condition of that one particular borrower. The ability of member banks to borrow from the central bank is fundamentally similar.[citation needed]
^ The European dilemma may be imagined as follows. In the US, if tax collections from California are weak, the total federal debt is financed through tax collections in other states, through federal taxes. California may default on its state debt, but the federal government bypasses California in directly taxing California citizens to finance the federal debt. There is only one legal authority taxing, paying for, and backing the federal debt. Federal expenditures are determined by the federal government. Therefore California cannot leverage more money out of the federal system other than by means of the normal constitutional procedures in the House and Senate. If the federal government transfers additional money to California it is because of federal policy, not because California's state debt is threatening the backing of the US dollar. Consider this hypothetical: If the US federal reserve carried state debts on its balance sheets the system would be more similar to the ECB. If California stated to default on its debt a hole would appear on the Fed's balance sheets where it carried California bonds. To make good this loss, the Fed would have to raise capital from the more solvent states, giving rise to the political issue that California's "lack of responsibility" was forcing other states to jump in and save California's public debt. This, one might worry, could turn into a license to California to ignore fiscal restraints and in effect transfer money from the "more responsible states" to the "least responsible states." Even though California's state finances are faltering in 2010, this is not an issue for the Federal Reserve, because of the federal system of taxation and unified backing of the federal debt. In Europe, the ECB could push for greater political and fiscal integration, which would make the member states more explicitly responsible for backing each other's debts and potentially lead to greater political integration. Speculative attacks on the sovereign debt that backs the euro have in effect revealed the weaknesses in the EU's political and fiscal structure.[citation needed]



References[edit]



^ a b c d "ECB: Key interest rates". Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ a b c d e f "Capital Subscription". European Central Bank. Retrieved 1 January 2015. 
^ a b Foley, Stephen (18 November 2011). "What price the new democracy? Goldman Sachs conquers Europe". London: The Independent. 
^ Robert Reich (July 17, 2015). "How Goldman Sachs Profited from the Greek Debt Crisis". The Huffington Post. 
^ a b c Statute of the ECB
^ a b c "ECB: Economic and Monetary Union". ECB. Retrieved 15 October 2007. 
^ a b "European Central Bank". CVCE. Retrieved 18 February 2014. 
^ a b c d "ECB: Economic and Monetary Union". Ecb.int. Retrieved 26 June 2011. 
^ a b c "The third stage of Economic and Monetary Union". CVCE. Retrieved 18 February 2014. 
^ "The powerful European Central Bank [E C B] in the heart of Frankfurt/Main – Germany – The Europower in Mainhattan – Enjoy the glances of euro and europe....03/2010....travel round the world....:)". UggBoy♥UggGirl [PHOTO // WORLD // TRAVEL]. Flickr. 6 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2011. 
^ Proissl, von Wolfgang (9 September 2011). "Das Ende der EZB, wie wir sie kannten" [The end of the ECB, as we knew it]. Kommentar. Financial Times Deutschland (in German). Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. 
^ "ECB Raises Interest Rates – MarketWatch". marketwatch.com. 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2011. 
^ "ECB: Key interest rates". 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011. 
^ a b "Draghi slashes interest rates, unveils bond buying plan". Europe News.Net. 4 September 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014. 
^ wikisource consolidation
^ a b THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK HISTORY, ROLE AND FUNCTIONS BY HANSPETER K. SCHELLER SECOND REVISED EDITION 2006, ISBN 92-899-0022-9 (print) ISBN 92-899-0027-X (online) page 81 at the pdf online version
^ "Powers and responsibilities of the European Central Bank". European Central Bank. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2009. 
^ THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK HISTORY, ROLE AND FUNCTIONS BY HANSPETER K. SCHELLER SECOND REVISED EDITION 2006, ISBN 92-899-0022-9 (print) ISBN 92-899-0027-X (online) page 87 at the pdf online version
^ "ECB: Monetary Policy". Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ a b Fairlamb, David; Rossant, John (12 February 2003). "The powers of the European Central Bank". BBC News. Retrieved 16 October 2007. 
^ In practice, 400–500 banks participate regularly.
Samuel Cheun; Isabel von Köppen-Mertes; Benedict Weller (December 2009), The collateral frameworks of the Eurosystem, the Federal Reserve System and the Bank of England and the financial market turmoil (PDF), ECB, retrieved 24 August 2011 
^ a b Bertaut, Carol C. (2002). "The European Central Bank and the Eurosystem" (PDF). New England Economic Review (2nd quarter): 25–28. 
^ a b c d e f "ECB: Governing Council". ECB. ecb.int. 1 January 2002. Retrieved 28 October 2011. 
^ Article 11.2 of the ESCB Statute
^ a b Marsh, David, "Cameron irritates as euro’s High Noon approaches", MarketWatch, 28 May 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2012.
^ "Tag: José Manuel González-Páramo". Financial Times Money Supply blog entries. 18–23 January 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ "Mersch Named to ECB After Longest Euro Appointment Battle". Bloomberg. 23 November 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ "ECB: Decision-making bodies". Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/accounts/2016/html/index.en.html
^ "Members of the Governing Council". Retrieved 22 April 2017. 
^ "Composition of the European Central Bank". CVCE. Retrieved 18 February 2014. 
^ "ECB: General Council". European Central Bank. Retrieved 4 January 2015. 
^ a b c "Supervisory Board". European Central Bank. Retrieved 3 December 2015. 
^ "ECB Text: SSM Supervisory Board Members Appointed". Frankfurt: MNI Deutsche Börse. 7 March 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2016. 
^ Article 28.1 of the ESCB Statute
^ Article 29 of the ESCB Statute
^ Article 28.5 of the ESCB Statute
^ Article 28.4 of the ESCB Statute
^ Buell, Todd (29 October 2014). "Translation Adds Complexity to European Central Bank's Supervisory Role: ECB Wants Communication in English, But EU Rules Allow Use of Any Official Language". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 October 2015. 
^ Athanassiou, Phoebus (February 2006). "The Application of multilingualism in the European Union Context" (PDF). ECB. p. 26. Retrieved 11 October 2015. 
^ Bank, European Central. "The European Central Bank: independent and accountable". European Central Bank. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ Bank, European Central. "The role of the Central Bank in the United Europe". European Central Bank. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ Papadia, Francesco; Ruggiero, Gian Paolo (1999-02-01). "Central Bank Independence and Budget Constraints for a Stable Euro". Open Economies Review. 10 (1): 63–90. doi:10.1023/A:1008305128157. ISSN 0923-7992. 
^ Wood, Geoffrey. "Is the ECB Too Independent?". WSJ. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ a b "Independence". European Central Bank. Retrieved 1 December 2012. 
^ Bank, European Central. "Why is the ECB independent?". European Central Bank. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ EU, Transparency International. "Transparency International EU - The global coalition against corruption in Brussels". transparency.eu. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ Friedrich Heinemann and Felix Huefner (2004) 'Is the view from the Eurotower purely European? National divergence and ECB interest rate policy', Scottish Journal of Political Economy 51(4):544-558.
^ Jose Ramon Cancelo, Diego Varela and Jose Manuel Sanchez-Santos (2011) 'Interest rate setting at the ECB: Individual preferences and collective decision making', Journal of Policy Modeling 33(6): 804-820. DOI.
^ "PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK" (PDF). European Central Bank. 2007. 
^ EU, Transparency International. "Transparency International EU - The global coalition against corruption in Brussels". transparency.eu. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ Bank, European Central. "ECB to adjust schedule of meetings and to publish regular accounts of monetary policy discussions in 2015". European Central Bank. Retrieved 2017-11-05. 
^ "The Eurosystem – Too opaque and costly? | Bruegel". bruegel.org. Retrieved 2017-11-07. 
^ "Accountability". European Central Bank. Retrieved 15 October 2007. 
^ "Monetary dialogue | ECON Policies | ECON | Committees | European Parliament". www.europarl.europa.eu. Retrieved 2017-10-06. 
^ "Questions to the ECB | Documents | ECON | Committees | European Parliament". www.europarl.europa.eu. Retrieved 2017-10-06. 
^ "Executive Board" (PDF). Banque de France. 2005. Retrieved 23 July 2012. 
^ George Matlock (16 February 2010). "Peripheral euro zone government bond spreads widen". Reuters. Retrieved 28 April 2010. 
^ "Acropolis now". The Economist. 29 April 2010. Retrieved 22 June 2011. 
^ Brian Blackstone; Tom Lauricella; Neil Shah (5 February 2010). "Global Markets Shudder: Doubts About U.S. Economy and a Debt Crunch in Europe Jolt Hopes for a Recovery". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 10 May 2010. 
^ "Former Iceland Leader Tried Over Financial Crisis of 2008", The New York Times, 5 March 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2012.
^ "Greek/German bond yield spread more than 1,000 bps". Financialmirror.com. 28 April 2010.  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ "Gilt yields rise amid UK debt concerns". Financial Times. 18 February 2010. Retrieved 15 April 2011. (registration required)
^ "The politics of the Maastricht convergence criteria | vox – Research-based policy analysis and commentary from leading economists". Voxeu.org. 15 April 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2011. 
^ Praet, Peter. "The role of the central bank and euro area governments in times of crisis". European Central Bank. Retrieved 3 February 2017. 
^ Ewing, Jack; Alderman, Liz (10 August 2011). "Some in Germany Want Greece to Temporarily Exit the Euro Zone". New York Times. 
^ Walker, Marcus; Bisserbe, Noemie (14 September 2011). "Merkel Lessens Fears Over Greece: German Leader Rejects Suggestions Athens Be Allowed to Default or Leave Currency Bloc, Reassuring Nervous Markets". Wall Street Journal. 
^ "Stabiler Euro geht vor" [Stable euro comes first] (in German). Bundesregierung. 3 November 2011. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. 
^ a b c d e f "All about the European debt crisis: In SIMPLE terms". rediff business. rediff.com. 19 August 2011. Retrieved 28 October 2011. 
^ Cohen, Sabrina (14 August 2011). "Italian Unions Criticize Austerity Plan". Wall Street Journal. 
^ CNN Wire Staff (28 June 2011). "Greek austerity protests turn ugly as strike begins". 
^ Castle, Stephen (15 July 2011). "Euro Zone Seeks Deal on Greece". New York Times. 
^ Bagus, The Tragedy of the Euro, 2010, p.75.
^ McManus, John; O'Brien, Dan (5 August 2011). "Market rout as Berlin rejects call for more EU action". Irish Times. 
^ Walker, Marcus; Paletta, Damian; Blacksone, Brian (13 August 2011). "Global Crisis of Confidence World Policy Makers' Inability to Agree on Fixes Led Markets on Wild Ride". Wall Street Journal. 
^ a b c d e f "WOrking paper 2011 / 1 A Comprehensive approach to the EUro-area debt crisis" (PDF). Zsolt Darvas. Corvinus University of Budapest. February 2011. Retrieved 28 October 2011. 
^ "The ECB's Securities Market Programme (SMP) – about to restart bond purchases?" (PDF). Global Markets Research – International Economics. Commonwealth Bank. 18 June 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2013. 
^ Ewing, Jack; Erlanger, Steven (6 September 2012). "Europe's Central Bank Moves Aggressively to Ease Euro Crisis". The New York Times. 
^ European Central Bank Decision of the ECB of 14 May 2010.
^ "ECB press conference, 6 September 2012". Retrieved 14 September 2014. 
^ reuters.com: "ECB promises 'firm' roll-out of money printing", 15 Apr 2015
^ reuters.com: "ECB's Draghi says extending ELA for Greek banks is in Athens' hands", 15 Apr 2015
^ "Draghi fends off German critics and keeps stimulus untouched". Financial Times. 27 April 2017. 
^ "The Longer Term Refinancing Operations of the ECB" (PDF). May 2004. 
^ "ECB offers longer-term finance via six-month LTROs". May 2008. 
^ Erica Jeffery (4 April 2013). "International banking, finance, capital markets news & analysis | Euromoney magazine". Euromoney. Retrieved 17 August 2013. 
^ "Markets live transcript 29 February 2012". February 2012. (registration required)
^ Mario Draghi; President of the ECB; Vítor Constâncio; Vice-President of the ECB (8 December 2011). "Introductory statement to the press conference (with Q&A)" (Press conference). Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank. Retrieved 22 December 2011. 
^ Nelson D. Schwartz; David Jolly (21 December 2011). "European Bank in Strong Move to Loosen Credit". The New York Times. Retrieved 22 December 2011. the move, by the European Central Bank, could be a turning point in the Continent's debt crisis 
^ Floyd Norris (21 December 2011). "A Central Bank Doing What It Should" (Analysis). The New York Times. Retrieved 22 December 2011. 
^ "ECB Lends 489 Billion Euros for 3 Years, Exceeding Forecast". Business Week. 21 December 2011. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2012. 
^ Wearden, Graeme; Fletcher, Nick (29 February 2012). "Eurozone crisis live: ECB to launch massive cash injection". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 29 February 2012. 
^ Ewing, Jack; Jolly, David (21 December 2011). "Banks in the euro zone must raise more than 200bn euros in the first three months of 2012". New York Times. Retrieved 21 December 2011. 
^ Wearden, Graeme; Fletcher, Nick (29 February 2012). "Eurozone crisis live: ECB to launch massive cash injection". Guardian. London. Retrieved 29 February 2012. 
^ a b "€529 billion LTRO 2 tapped by record 800 banks". Euromoney. 29 February 2012. Retrieved 29 February 2012. 
^ Minder, Raphel (24 November 2010). "Fears Mount Over Spain and Risks to the Euro". New York Times. Retrieved 24 November 2010. 
^ a b c d e Buite, Willem (7 September 2010). "Greece and the fiscal crisis in the EMU" (PDF). NBER. Retrieved 30 October 2011. 
^ "Euro zone bonds rally after ECB debt buying". Irish Times. 2 December 2010. (subscription required)
^ Walker, Marcus (17 December 2010). "Closer Fiscal Union: A Collective Guarantee". Wall Street Journal. 
^ a b Nixon, Simon (7 December 2010). "A Way Around European Bonds". Wall Street Journal. 
^ a b c Walker, Marcus & Forelle, Charles (17 December 2010). "Bailout Deal Fails to Quell EU rifts". Wall Street Journal. 
^ a b "Aggregated balance sheet of euro area monetary financial institutions, excluding the Eurosystem". ECB.int. 
^ "The European Central Bank (ECB)". Europa (web portal). Retrieved 16 October 2007. 
^ Lander, Mark (14 August 2007). "Credit Squeeze Puts Europe's Bank in Spotlight". New York Times. Retrieved 16 October 2007. 
^ "ECB press release on dollar liquidity". ECB. 
^ "ECB Phases Out Bond-Market Crisis Measure". The New York Times. 
^ washingtonexaminer.com: "ECB Phases Out Bond-Market Crisis Measure", 31 Oct 2012
^ "Bundesbank President Dismisses Deflation, Increases Tension At ECB". Fast Company. 24 February 2016. 
^ a b c d e f g h "About EFSF". EFSF. 9 May 2010. Retrieved 19 October 2011. 
^ "Open Market Operation – Fedpoints – Federal Reserve Bank of New York". Federal Reserve Bank of New York. newyorkfed.org. August 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. 
^ a b c d Ben S. Bernanke (1 December 2008). "Federal Reserve Policies in the Financial Crisis" (Speech). Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Texas: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Retrieved 23 October 2011. To ensure that adequate liquidity is available, consistent with the central bank's traditional role as the liquidity provider of last resort, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of extraordinary steps. 
^ "Treaty of Amsterdam amending the Treaty on European Union, the Treaties establishing the European Communities and certain related acts" (published 23 December 2014). 11 October 1997. Protocol on the institutions with the prospect of enlargement of the European Union, Article 2, sole article, (i). Retrieved 4 January 2015. 
^ a b "Winning design by Coop Himmelb(l)au for the ECB's new headquarters in Frankfurt/Main". European Central Bank. Archived from the original on 24 September 2007. Retrieved 2 August 2007. 
^ "Launch of a public tender for a general contractor to construct the new ECB premises". European Central Bank. Retrieved 2 August 2007. 
^ Dougherty, Carter. "In ECB future, a new home to reflect all of Europe". Int. Her. Trib. Archived from the original on 19 September 2008. Retrieved 2 August 2007. 
^ European Central Bank. "Overview". Ecb.europa.eu. Retrieved September 2015.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to European Central Bank.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Protocol on the statute of the ESCB and ECB




European Central Bank, official website.
The origins and development of the European organisations: The European Central Bank, CVCE.eu website.
European Central Bank: history, role and functions, ECB website.
Statute of the European Central Bank (2012)





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Executive Board of the European Central Bank






Mario Draghi (current president 2012- )
Vítor Constâncio (current vice president)


Yves Mersch
Benoît Cœuré
Peter Praet
Sabine Lautenschläger


Former members
Wim Duisenberg (first president)
Sirkka Hämäläinen
Otmar Issing
Christian Noyer
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa
Lucas Papademos
José Manuel González Paramo
Lorenzo Bini Smaghi
Eugenio Domingo Solans
Jürgen Stark
Jean-Claude Trichet (second president -2012)
Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell
Jörg Asmussen















v
t
e


Central banks of the European Union 



Within Eurozone



National Bank of Belgium
Central Bank of Cyprus
Bank of Estonia
Bank of Finland
Banque de France
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bank of Greece
Central Bank of Ireland
Bank of Italy
National Bank of Latvia
Bank of Lithuania
Central Bank of Luxembourg
Central Bank of Malta
De Nederlandsche Bank
Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Banco de Portugal
National Bank of Slovakia
Bank of Slovenia
Bank of Spain





Outside Eurozone



Bulgarian National Bank
Croatian National Bank
Czech National Bank
Danmarks Nationalbank
Hungarian National Bank
National Bank of Poland
National Bank of Romania
Sveriges Riksbank
Bank of England





Banking-related
EU institutions



European Central Bank
European System of Central Banks
European Investment Bank








 Central banks
 European Union












v
t
e


Central banks



Global



Bank for International Settlements
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Financial Stability Board





Policies



Capital requirement
Contractionary monetary policy
Expansionary monetary policy
Basel II
Basel III
Basel 4





Implementation



Capital control
Discount rate
Interest rates
Money creation
Open market operation
Sovereign wealth fund





Bretton Woods system



International Monetary Fund
World Bank Group

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency







Lists



List of central banks
Central banks and currencies of Africa
Central banks and currencies of Asia-Pacific
Central banks and currencies of the Caribbean
Central banks and currencies of Europe
Central banks and currencies of Central America and South America












v
t
e


Economies of the dependencies of European Union states 



Denmark



Faroe Islands
Greenland








France



French Polynesia
New Caledonia
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Wallis and Futuna






Netherlands



Aruba
Curaçao
Sint Maarten





United Kingdom



Crown dependencies: Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey


Overseas territories: Anguilla
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Falkland Islands
Gibraltar
Montserrat
Pitcairn Islands
Saint Helena
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Turks and Caicos Islands













v
t
e


Euro topics



General



Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union
Euro sign
Eurozone
Linguistic issues





Administration



European Central Bank
ECB President
European System of Central Banks
Eurosystem
Ecofin
Eurogroup
Euro summit





Fiscal provisions



Stability and Growth Pact
European Financial Stability Facility
European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism
European Stability Mechanism
Euro Plus Pact
Six pack
European Fiscal Compact





History



"Snake in the tunnel"
European Monetary System

I ECU
II ERM
III EMU


European Monetary Cooperation Fund
European Monetary Institute
Enlargement
Black Wednesday





Economy



Economy of Europe
Economy of the European Union
Eonia
Euro calculator
Euro Interbank Offered Rate (Euribor)
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA)





International status



Proposed eurobonds
Reserve currency
Petroeuro
World currency





Denominations




coins



1c
2c
5c
10c
20c
50c
€1
€2
€2 commemorative coins
Other commemorative coins
Identifying marks
Starter kits
Europa coin programme
Euro mint





banknotes



€5
€10
€20
€50
€100
€200
€500








Coins by issuing country




EU



Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
Portugal
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain





Non-EU



Andorra
Monaco
San Marino
Vatican









Potential adoption by
other countries





EU



Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Sweden
United Kingdom





Non-EU



Kosovo
Montenegro








Currencies yielded



European Currency Unit
Austrian schilling
Belgian franc
Cypriot pound
Dutch guilder
Estonian kroon
Finnish markka
French franc
German mark
Greek drachma
Irish pound
Italian lira
Latvian lats
Lithuanian litas
Luxembourgish franc
Maltese lira
Monégasque franc
Portuguese escudo
Sammarinese lira
Slovak koruna
Slovenian tolar
Spanish peseta
Vatican lira






Currencies
remaining





ERM II



Danish krone





other (EU)



British pound sterling (incl. Gibraltar pound)
Bulgarian lev
Croatian kuna
Czech koruna
Hungarian forint
Polish złoty
Romanian leu
Swedish krona











 European Union portal
 Numismatics portal












v
t
e


European Union articles



History




Timeline



Pre-1945
1945–57
1958–72
1973–93
1993–2004
Since 2004





Predecessors



Timeline
Founders
European Coal and Steel Community (1951–2002)
European Economic Community (1958–1993/2009)
Euratom (1958–present)
European Communities (1967–1993/2009)
Justice and Home Affairs (1993–2009)








Geography







Extreme points
Geographic centre
Largest municipalities
Urban areas
Larger urban zones
Member states
Regions (first-level NUTS)
Special territories








Politics








Institutions



European Council
European Commission
European Parliament
Council of the European Union
Court of Justice of the European Union
European Central Bank
European Court of Auditors





Agencies



Banking
Border and coast security (Frontex)
Disease prevention and control
Environment
Foreign affairs (External Action Service)
Judicial cooperation (Eurojust)
Law enforcement cooperation (Europol)
Maritime safety
Reconstruction





Law



Acquis
Charter of Fundamental Rights
Competition law
Copyright law
Directive

Citizens’ Rights Directive


Enhanced cooperation
Environmental policy
Four freedoms

labour mobility


Government procurement
Journal
Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification
Legislative procedure
Citizens' Initiative
Regulation
Rural Development Policy
Schengen Area
Treaties

opt-outs


LGBT rights





Politics



Elections

parliamentary constituencies


Enlargement

1973
1981
1986
1995
2004
2007
2013
Future


Euromyths
Political parties (National parties by affiliation)
Euroscepticism
Foreign relations
Integration
Parliamentary groups
Pro-Europeanism
Withdrawal (Brexit)
2012 Nobel Peace Prize











Economy







Budget
Central bank
Agricultural policy
Fisheries policy
Currencies
Energy policy
Euro
Eurozone
Free trade agreements
Investment bank
Investment fund
Regional development
Single market
Societas Europaea
Solidarity Fund
Transport

Galileo navigation system


minimum wage
average wage
unemployment rate
health expense per person
Healthcare
Health Insurance Card
Driving licence
European Common Aviation Area








Culture







Citizenship

passports
identity cards


Cultural policies
Demographics
Douzelage
Driving licence
Education
House of European History
Institute of Innovation and Technology
Laissez-passer
Languages
Media freedom
Public holidays
Religion
Sport
Telephone numbers
Statistics
Symbols








Lists



Concepts, acronyms, & jargon
Agencies
Books
Companies
Cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants
Largest cities by population within city limits
Directives
Tallest buildings
Terrorist incidents
Vehicle registration plates





Theory



Eurosphere
Intergovernmentalism
Multi-speed
Neofunctionalism
Optimum currency area
Supranational union









Outline



Book
Category
Portal













European Union portal
Economy portal





Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 129891942
LCCN: n95055518
ISNI: 0000 0004 0555 7916
GND: 5287962-8
SUDOC: 035582480
BNF: cb13324493d (data)
NDL: 00885724
NKC: kn20021216004











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Central_Bank&oldid=817505825"					Categories: European Central Bank1998 establishments in the European UnionBanks established in 1998Central banksEconomy of FrankfurtEuropean System of Central BanksEurozoneInstitutions of the European UnionOrganisations based in FrankfurtHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2015CS1 German-language sources (de)Pages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLPages with login required references or sourcesPages containing links to subscription-only contentCS1 errors: datesWikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2017All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingUse British English from March 2013Use dmy dates from March 2013Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles needing additional references from December 2015All articles needing additional referencesInterlanguage link template link numberArticles with unsourced statements from July 2016Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015All Wikipedia articles needing clarificationWikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2015All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2015Articles to be expanded from January 2016All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiers