For the textbook, see Evolutionary Biology (textbook).


Part of a series on


Evolutionary biology



Diagrammatic representation of the divergence of modern taxonomic groups from their common ancestor





Key topics


Introduction to evolution
Common descent
Evidence of common descent








Processes and outcomes



Population genetics
Variation
Diversity
Mutation
Natural selection
Adaptation
Polymorphism
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Speciation
Adaptive radiation
Co-operation
Coevolution
Divergence
Convergence
Parallel evolution
Extinction









Natural history



Origin of life
History of life
Timeline of evolution
Human evolution
Phylogeny
Biodiversity
Biogeography
Classification
Evolutionary taxonomy
Cladistics
Transitional fossil
Extinction event









History of evolutionary theory



Overview
Renaissance
Before Darwin
Darwin
Origin of Species
Before synthesis
Modern synthesis
Molecular evolution
Evo-devo
Current research
History of paleontology (timeline)









Fields and applications


Applications of evolution
Biosocial criminology
Ecological genetics
Evolutionary aesthetics
Evolutionary anthropology
Evolutionary computation
Evolutionary ecology
Evolutionary economics
Evolutionary epistemology
Evolutionary ethics
Evolutionary game theory
Evolutionary linguistics
Evolutionary medicine
Evolutionary neuroscience
Evolutionary physiology
Evolutionary psychology
Experimental evolution
Phylogenetics
Paleontology
Selective breeding
Sociobiology
Systematics
Universal Darwinism








Social implications


Evolution as fact and theory
Social effects
Creation–evolution controversy
Objections to evolution
Level of support








 Evolutionary biology portal
 Category
 Book
Related topics







v
t
e





Evolutionary biology is the subfield of biology that studies the evolutionary processes that produced the diversity of life on Earth, starting from a single common ancestor. These processes include natural selection, common descent, and speciation.
The discipline emerged through what Julian Huxley called the modern synthesis (of the 1930s) of understanding from several previously unrelated fields of biological research, including genetics, ecology, systematics and paleontology.
Current research has widened to cover the genetic architecture of adaptation, molecular evolution, and the different forces that contribute to evolution including sexual selection, genetic drift and biogeography. The newer field of evolutionary developmental biology ("evo-devo") investigates how embryonic development is controlled, thus creating a wider synthesis that integrates developmental biology with the fields covered by the earlier evolutionary synthesis.



Contents


1 Subfields
2 History
3 Current research topics
4 Journals
5 See also
6 References



Subfields[edit]
Evolution is the central unifying concept in biology. Biology can be divided in various ways. One way is by the level of biological organisation, from molecular to cell, organism to population. An earlier way is by perceived taxonomic group, with fields such as zoology, botany, and microbiology, reflecting what were once seen as the major divisions of life. A third way is by approach, such as field biology, theoretical biology, experimental evolution, and paleontology. These alternative ways of dividing up the subject can be combined with evolutionary biology to create subfields like evolutionary ecology and evolutionary developmental biology.
More recently, the merge between the biological science and applied sciences gave birth to new fields that are extensions of evolutionary biology, such as evolutionary robotics, engineering,[1] algorithms,[2] economics,[3] and architecture.[4] The basic mechanisms of evolution are applied directly or indirectly to come up with novel designs or solve problems that are difficult to solve otherwise. The research generated in these applied fields in turn contribute to progress, especially thanks to work on evolution in computer science and engineering fields such as mechanical engineering.[5]
History[edit]
Main article: History of evolutionary thought




The statistician Ronald Fisher (1890 – 1962) helped to form the modern evolutionary synthesis of Mendelian genetics and natural selection.


The idea of evolution by natural selection was proposed by Charles Darwin in 1859, but evolutionary biology, as an academic discipline in its own right, emerged during the period of the modern synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s.[6] It was not until the 1980s that many universities had departments of evolutionary biology. In the United States, many universities have created departments of molecular and cell biology or ecology and evolutionary biology, in place of the older departments of botany and zoology. Palaeontology is often grouped with earth science.




J. B. S. Haldane (1892 – 1964) helped to create the field of population genetics.


Microbiology too is becoming an evolutionary discipline, now that microbial physiology and genomics are better understood. The quick generation time of bacteria and viruses such as bacteriophages makes it possible to explore evolutionary questions.
Many biologists have contributed to shaping the modern discipline of evolutionary biology. Theodosius Dobzhansky and E. B. Ford established an empirical research programme. Ronald Fisher, Sewall Wright and J. S. Haldane created a sound theoretical framework. Ernst Mayr in systematics, George Gaylord Simpson in paleontology and G. Ledyard Stebbins in botany helped to form the modern synthesis. James Crow,[7] Richard Lewontin,[8] Dan Hartl,[9] Marcus Feldman,[10][11] and Brian Charlesworth[12] trained a generation of evolutionary biologists.
Current research topics[edit]
Current research in evolutionary biology covers diverse topics and incorporates ideas from diverse areas, such as molecular genetics and computer science.
First, some fields of evolutionary research try to explain phenomena that were poorly accounted for in the modern evolutionary synthesis. These include speciation,[13] the evolution of sexual reproduction,[14] the evolution of cooperation, the evolution of ageing, and evolvability.[15]
Second, biologists ask the most straightforward evolutionary question: "what happened and when?". This includes fields such as paleobiology, as well as systematics and phylogenetics.
Third, the modern evolutionary synthesis was devised at a time when nobody understood the molecular basis of genes. Today, evolutionary biologists try to determine the genetic architecture of interesting evolutionary phenomena such as adaptation and speciation. They seek answers to questions such as how many genes are involved, how large are the effects of each gene, how interdependent are the effects of different genes, what do the genes do, and what changes happen to them (e.g., point mutations vs. gene duplication or even genome duplication). They try to reconcile the high heritability seen in twin studies with the difficulty in finding which genes are responsible for this heritability using genome-wide association studies.[16]
One challenge in studying genetic architecture is that the classical population genetics that catalysed the modern evolutionary synthesis must be updated to take into account modern molecular knowledge. This requires a great deal of mathematical development to relate DNA sequence data to evolutionary theory as part of a theory of molecular evolution. For example, biologists try to infer which genes have been under strong selection by detecting selective sweeps.[17]
Fourth, the modern evolutionary synthesis involved agreement about which forces contribute to evolution, but not about their relative importance.[18] Current research seeks to determine this. Evolutionary forces include natural selection, sexual selection, genetic drift, genetic draft, developmental constraints, mutation bias and biogeography.
An evolutionary approach is key to much current research in organismal biology and ecology, such as in life history theory. Annotation of genes and their function relies heavily on comparative, i.e., evolutionary, approaches. The field of evolutionary developmental biology ("evo-devo") investigates how developmental processes work, and compares them in different organisms to determine how they evolved.
Journals[edit]
Some scientific journals specialise exclusively in evolutionary biology as a whole, including the journals Evolution, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, and BMC Evolutionary Biology. Some journals cover sub-specialties within evolutionary biology, such as the journals Systematic Biology, Molecular Biology and Evolution and its sister journal Genome Biology and Evolution, and Cladistics.
Other journals combine aspects of evolutionary biology with other related fields. For example, Molecular Ecology, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B, The American Naturalist and Theoretical Population Biology have overlap with ecology and other aspects of organismal biology. Overlap with ecology is also prominent in the review journals Trends in Ecology and Evolution and Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. The journals Genetics and PLoS Genetics overlap with molecular genetics questions that are not obviously evolutionary in nature.
See also[edit]


Artificial selection
Comparative anatomy
Computational phylogenetics
Evolutionary computation
Evolutionary dynamics
Evolutionary neuroscience
Evolutionary physiology
Genetics
On the Origin of Species
Phylogenetic comparative methods
Quantitative genetics
Selective breeding


References[edit]


^ "Evolutionary engineering". 
^ "What is an Evolutionary Algorithm?" (PDF). 
^ "What economists can learn from evolutionary theorists". 
^ "Investigating architecture and design". 
^ "Introduction to Evolutionary Computing: A.E. Eiben". 
^ Smocovitis, Vassiliki Betty (1996). Unifying Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03343-9. 
^ "The Academic Genealogy of Evolutionary Biology: James F. Crow". 
^ "The Academic Genealogy of Evolutionary Biology:Richard Lewontin". 
^ "The Academic Genealogy of Evolutionary Biology: Daniel Hartl". 
^ "Feldman lab alumni & collaborators". 
^ "The Academic Genealogy of Evolutionary Biology: Marcus Feldman". 
^ "The Academic Genealogy of Evolutionary Biology: Brian Charlesworth". 
^ Wiens JJ (2004). "What is speciation and how should we study it?". American Naturalist. 163 (6): 914–923. doi:10.1086/386552. JSTOR 10.1086/386552. PMID 15266388. 
^ Otto SP (2009). "The evolutionary enigma of sex". American Naturalist. 174 (s1): S1–S14. doi:10.1086/599084. PMID 19441962. 
^ Jesse Love Hendrikse; Trish Elizabeth Parsons; Benedikt Hallgrímsson (2007). "Evolvability as the proper focus of evolutionary developmental biology". Evolution & Development. 9 (4): 393–401. doi:10.1111/j.1525-142X.2007.00176.x. 
^ Manolio TA; Collins FS; Cox NJ; Goldstein DB; Hindorff LA; Hunter DJ; McCarthy MI; Ramos EM; Cardon LR; Chakravarti A; Cho JH; Guttmacher AE; Kong A; Kruglyak L; Mardis E; Rotimi CN; Slatkin M; Valle D; Whittemore AS; Boehnke M; Clark AG; Eichler EE; Gibson G; Haines JL; Mackay TFC; McCarroll SA; Visscher PM (2009). "Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases". Nature. 461 (7265): 747–753. Bibcode:2009Natur.461..747M. doi:10.1038/nature08494. PMC 2831613 . PMID 19812666. 
^ Sabeti PC; Reich DE; Higgins JM; Levine HZP; Richter DJ; Schaffner SF; Gabriel SB; Platko JV; Patterson NJ; McDonald GJ; Ackerman HC; Campbell SJ; Altshuler D; Cooper R; Kwiatkowski D; Ward R; Lander ES (2002). "Detecting recent positive selection in the human genome from haplotype structure". Nature. 419 (6909): 832–837. Bibcode:2002Natur.419..832S. doi:10.1038/nature01140. PMID 12397357. 
^ Provine WB (1988). "Progress in evolution and meaning in life". Evolutionary progress. University of Chicago Press. pp. 49–79. 








v
t
e


Evolutionary biology






Evolutionary history of life
Index of evolutionary biology articles
Introduction
Outline of evolution
Timeline of evolution





Evolution



Abiogenesis
Adaptation
Adaptive radiation
Cladistics
Coevolution
Common descent
Cospeciation
Convergence
Divergence
Earliest known life forms
Evidence of common descent
Extinction

Event


Gene-centered view
Homology
Last universal common ancestor
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Origin of life
Panspermia
Parallel evolution
Prehistoric Autopsy
Speciation
Taxonomy





Population genetics



Biodiversity
Gene flow
Genetic drift
Mutation
Natural selection
Variation





Development



Canalisation
Evolutionary developmental biology
Inversion
Modularity
Phenotypic plasticity





Of taxa



Birds

origin


Brachiopods
Cephalopods
Dinosaurs
Fish
Fungi
Insects

butterflies


Life
Mammals

cats
dogs
dolphins and whales
horses
primates

humans
lemurs


sea cows
wolves


Molluscs
Plants
Reptiles
Spiders
Tetrapods
Viruses

influenza







Of organs



Cell
DNA
Flagella
Eukaryotes

symbiogenesis
chromosome
endomembrane system
mitochondria
nucleus
plastids


In animals

eye
hair
auditory ossicle
nervous system
brain







Of processes



Aging

Death
Programmed cell death


Avian flight
Biological complexity
Cooperation
Color vision

in primates


Emotion
Empathy
Ethics
Eusociality
Immune system
Metabolism
Monogamy
Morality
Mosaic evolution
Multicellularity
Sexual reproduction

Gamete differentiation/sexes
Life cycles/nuclear phases
Mating types
Sex-determination


Snake venom





Tempo and modes



Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism
Micromutation/Macromutation
Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism





Speciation



Allopatric
Anagenesis
Catagenesis
Cladogenesis
Ecological
Hybrid
Parapatric
Peripatric
Reinforcement
Sympatric





History



Renaissance and Enlightenment
Transmutation of species
Charles Darwin

On the Origin of Species


History of paleontology
Transitional fossil
Blending inheritance
Mendelian inheritance
The eclipse of Darwinism
Modern synthesis
History of molecular evolution
Extended evolutionary synthesis





Philosophy



Darwinism
Alternatives to evolution by natural selection

Catastrophism
Lamarckism
Orthogenesis
Mutationism
Saltationism
Structuralism

Spandrel


Theistic
Vitalism







Related



Biogeography
Ecological genetics
Molecular evolution
Phylogenetics

Tree


Polymorphism
Protocell
Systematics








 Category
 Commons
 Portal
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Biology



Subdisciplines



Anatomy
Astrobiology
Biochemistry
Biogeography
Biological anthropology
Biological classification
Biomechanics
Biophysics
Bioinformatics
Biostatistics
Biopsychology
Botany
Cell biology
Cellular microbiology
Chemical biology
Chronobiology
Cognitive biology
Computational biology
Conservation biology
Developmental biology
Ecology
Epidemiology
Epigenetics
Evolutionary biology
Evolutionary developmental biology
Genetics
Genomics
Histology
Human biology
Immunology
Lipidology
Marine biology
Mathematical biology
Microbiology
Molecular biology
Mycology
Nanobiotechnology
Neuroscience
Nutrition
Origin of life
Paleontology
Parasitology
Pathology
Pharmacology
Physiology
Quantum biology
Reproductive biology
Sociobiology
Structural biology
Systematics
Systems biology
Toxicology
Virology
Virophysics
Zoology








Hierarchy of life



Biosphere >  Ecosystem > Community (Biocoenosis) > Population >  Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Molecule (Macromolecule, Biomolecule) > Atom





Foundations



Cell theory
Ecology
Energy Transformation
Evolution
Genetics
Homeostasis
Synthetic biology
Taxonomy





Principles




Evolution



Adaptation
Earliest known life forms
Function
Genetic drift
Gene flow
Macroevolution
Microevolution
Mutation
Natural selection
Speciation





Ecology



Biodiversity
Biological interaction
Community
Ecosystem
Habitat
Niche
Population dynamics
Resources





Molecular
biology



Cell signaling
Development
Epigenetics
Gene regulation
Meiosis
Mitosis
Post-transcriptional modification





Biochemistry



Carbohydrates
Lipids
Metabolism
Nucleic acids
Photosynthesis
Proteins








Glossaries



Botanical terms
Ecological terms
Plant morphology terms








Category
 Commons
Portal
 WikiProject









Authority control



LCCN: sh90004042
GND: 4153283-1








Biology portal
Evolutionary biology portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionary_biology&oldid=818300741"					Categories: Evolutionary biologyPhilosophy of biologyHidden categories: Use dmy dates from March 2014Use British English from March 2015Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers