Executive producer (EP) is a position in the making of a commercial entertainment product. Depending on the medium, the executive producer may be concerned with management accounting or with associated legal issues (like copyrights or royalties).[1] In films, the executive producer generally contributes to the film's budget and usually does not work on set, in contrast to most other producers.[2]



Contents


1 Motion pictures
2 Television
3 Music
4 Video games
5 See also
6 References
7 External links



Motion pictures[edit]
Main article: Film producer
In films, an executive producer finances the film or participates in the creative effort, but does not work on the set. His/her responsibilities vary from funding or attracting investors into the movie project to legal, scripting, marketing, advisory and supervising capacities.[3]
The crediting of executive producers in the film industry has risen over time. In the mid-to-late 1990s, there were an average of just under two executive producers per film. In 2000, the number jumped to 2.5 (more than the number of standard 'producers'). In 2013, there were an average of 4.4 executive producers per film, compared with 3.2 producers.[4]
Television[edit]
Main article: Television producer
In television, an executive producer usually supervises the creative content and the financial aspects of a production. Some writers (for example Stephen J. Cannell, Tina Fey and Ryan Murphy) have worked as both the creator and the producer of the same TV show.[5] In case of multiple executive producers on a TV show, the one outranking the others is called the showrunner,[6] or the leading executive producer.
Music[edit]
See also: Music executive
In recorded music, record labels distinguish between an executive producer and a record producer. The executive producer is responsible for business decisions and more recently, organizing the recordings along with the music producer, whereas the record producer produces the music. Sometimes the executive producer organises the recording and selects sound engineers, session musicians, et al.[7]
Video games[edit]
Main article: Video game producer
In the video game industry, the title "executive producer" is not well-defined. It may refer to an external producer working for the publisher, who works with the developers.
For example in 2012, Jay-Z was announced as executive producer for NBA 2K13. His role consisted of appearing in an introduction, picking songs for the game's soundtrack and contributing to the design of its in-game menus "and other visual elements".[8][9]
See also[edit]

Line producer
Studio executive
Creative executive
Development executive
Unit production manager
Showrunner

References[edit]



^ "Typically an executive producer may handle business and legal issues". Retrieved March 10, 2013. 
^ "What is an Executive Producer?". WiseGEEK. Retrieved 2014-01-21. 
^ "Executive Producer (aka Executive in Charge of Production)". Retrieved January 12, 2017. 
^ "How many movie producers does a film need?". Retrieved 2016-05-04. 
^ "In television, an Executive Producer may also be the Creator/Writer of a series". Retrieved March 12, 2013. 
^ "There can be multiple executive producers on a series, but the one in charge is called the showrunner". Retrieved March 10, 2013. 
^ "The executive producer usually chooses the musicians and technicians for a record, decides where and when to record, and the production budget and timetable". Archived from the original on 10 April 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013. 
^ "Argent said Jay-Z's influence would be felt immediately in the game, starting during its video introduction. Jay-Z also handpicked the game's soundtrack". CNN. 1 August 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2012. 
^ "Jay-Z NBA 2K13: Rapper Announced As 'Executive Producer'". Retrieved August 2, 2012. 



External links[edit]

"What is the point of executive producers?" BBC News. 19 October 2007.







v
t
e


Film crew (filmmaking)








Above the line






Actor

Leading actor
Movie star
Superstar
Character actor
Cameo actors


Film director
Screenwriter
Film producer

Executive producer
Line producer















Below the line







Pre-production



Unit production manager
Production coordinator
Production accountant
Assistant director
Script supervisor
Script coordinator
Casting director
Production assistant
Location manager




Storyboard



Storyboard artist








Production design



Production designer

Art director


Costume designer
Hairdresser
Make-up artist
Set decorator
Property master / mistress ("props")




Visual Art



Matte painter
Illustrator
Scenic design








Photography



Cinematographer / Director of photography
Camera operator

Focus puller
Clapper loader
Steadicam


Gaffer

Best boy (electrical)
Lighting technician


Key grip

Best boy (grip)
Grip
Dolly grip







Sound



Director of audiography
Production sound mixer
Boom operator
Utility sound technician
Dialogue editor
Re-recording mixer
Foley artist
Composer
Music supervisor
Music editor





Special effects



Special effects supervisor
Visual effects supervisor





Animation



Animator
Visual effects
Modeling
Rigging
Layout artist





Talent



Movement director
Choreographer
Extra
Talent agent
Actor (voice)
Cast member
Stand-in
Acting instructor
Stunt double
Stunt performer





Post-production



Film editor
Sound editor
Colorist
Animator
Technical director




Visual effects



Visual effects editor
Compositor
Computer-generated imagery
Rendering




















						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Executive_producer&oldid=818260220"					Categories: Filmmaking occupationsMedia occupationsEntertainment occupationsBroadcasting occupationsProducersHidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2011