"Banish" and "Banishment" redirect here. For other uses, see Banish (disambiguation).
For other uses, see Exile (disambiguation).
Not to be confused with Exhile.






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Napoleon's Exile on Saint Helena by Franz Josef Sandmann (de) (1820)






The First Night in Exile - This painting comes from a celebrated series illustrating one of Hinduism's great epics, the Ramayana. It tells the story of prince Rama, who is wrongly exiled from his father’s kingdom, accompanied only by his wife and brother.






Dante in Exile by Domenico Petarlini (es)


To be in exile means to be away from one's home (i.e. city, state, or country), while either being explicitly refused permission to return or being threatened with imprisonment or death upon return. It can be a form of punishment and solitude.[1] It is common to distinguish between "internal exile", i.e., forced resettlement within the country of residence, and "external exile", which is deportation outside the country of residence.[2] Although most commonly used to describe an individual situation, the term is also used for groups (especially ethnic or national groups), or for an entire government. Terms such as "diaspora" and "refugee" describe group exile, both voluntary and forced, and "government in exile" describes a government of a country that has been forced to relocate and argue its legitimacy from outside that country. Exile can also be a self-imposed departure from one's homeland. Self-exile is often depicted as a form of protest by the person who claims it, to avoid persecution or legal matters (such as tax or criminal allegations), an act of shame or repentance, or isolating oneself to be able to devote time to a particular pursuit. Article 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile."



Contents


1 For individuals

1.1 Exiled heads of state
1.2 Avoiding tax or legal matters
1.3 Avoiding violence or persecution, or in the aftermath of war


2 For groups, nations and governments

2.1 Nation in exile
2.2 Government in exile


3 Exile in drama, literature, movie, and the arts

3.1 Drama
3.2 Art
3.3 Literature


4 See also
5 References
6 External links



For individuals[edit]
Exiled heads of state[edit]
Main article: List of heads of state or government who have been in exile
In some cases the deposed head of state is allowed to go into exile following a coup or other change of government, allowing a more peaceful transition to take place or to escape justice.[3]
Avoiding tax or legal matters[edit]
Main articles: Tax exile and Fugitive
A wealthy citizen who moves to a jurisdiction with lower taxes is termed a tax exile. Creative people such as authors and musicians who achieve sudden wealth sometimes choose this solution. Examples include the British-Canadian writer Arthur Hailey, who moved to the Bahamas to avoid taxes following the runaway success of his novels Hotel and Airport,[4] and the English rock band the Rolling Stones who, in the spring of 1971, owed more in taxes than they could pay and left Britain before the government could seize their assets. Members of the band all moved to France for a period of time where they recorded music for the album that came to be called Exile on Main Street, the Main Street of the title referring to the French Riviera.[5] In 2012, Eduardo Saverin, one of the founders of Facebook, made headlines by renouncing his U.S. citizenship before his company's IPO.[6] The dual Brazilian/U.S. citizen's decision to move to Singapore and renounce his citizenship spurred a bill in the U.S. Senate, the Ex-PATRIOT Act, which would have forced such wealthy tax exiles to pay a special tax in order to re-enter the United States.[7]
In some cases a person voluntarily lives in exile to avoid legal issues, such as litigation or criminal prosecution. An example of this is Asil Nadir, who fled to the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus for 17 years rather than face prosecution in connection with the failed £1.7 bn company Polly Peck in the United Kingdom.
Avoiding violence or persecution, or in the aftermath of war[edit]
Examples include:



Iraqi academics asked to return home "from exile" to help rebuild Iraq in 2009[8]
Jews who fled persecution from Nazi Germany[9]
People undertaking a religious or civil liberties role in society may be forced into exile due to threat of persecution. For example, nuns were exiled following the Communist coup d'état of 1948 in Czechoslovakia.[10]



For groups, nations and governments[edit]
Nation in exile[edit]
Main articles: Diaspora and Refugee
When a large group, or occasionally a whole people or nation is exiled, it can be said that this nation is in exile, or "diaspora". Nations that have been in exile for substantial periods include the Jews, who were deported by Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II in 586 BC and again following the destruction of the second Temple in Jerusalem in AD 70. Many Jewish prayers include a yearning to return to Jerusalem and the Jewish homeland.
After the partitions of Poland in the late 18th century, and following the uprisings (like Kościuszko Uprising, November Uprising and January Uprising) against the partitioning powers (Russian Empire, Prussia and Austro-Hungary), many Poles have chosen – or been forced – to go into exile, forming large diasporas (known as Polonia), especially in France and the United States. The entire population of Crimean Tatars (200,000) that remained in their homeland Crimea was exiled on 18 May 1944 to Central Asia as a form of ethnic cleansing and collective punishment on false accusations. At Diego Garcia, between 1967 and 1973 the British Government forcibly removed some 2,000 Chagossian resident islanders to make way for a military base today jointly operated by the US and UK.
Since the Cuban Revolution over one million Cubans have left Cuba. Most of these self-identify as exiles as their motivation for leaving the island is political in nature. It is to be noted that at the time of the Cuban Revolution, Cuba only had a population of 6.5 million, and was not a country that had a history of significant emigration, it being the sixth largest recipient of immigrants in the world as of 1958. Most of the exiles' children also consider themselves to be Cuban exiles. It is to be noted that under Cuban law, children of Cubans born abroad are considered Cuban citizens.
Government in exile[edit]
Main article: Government in exile
During a foreign occupation or after a coup d'état, a government in exile of a such afflicted country may be established abroad. One of the most well-known instances of this is the Polish government-in-exile, a government in exile that commanded Polish armed forces operating outside Poland after German occupation during World War II. Other examples include the Free French Forces government of Charles De Gaulle of the same time, and the Central Tibetan Administration, commonly known as the Tibetan government-in-exile, and headed by the 14th Dalai Lama.
Exile in drama, literature, movie, and the arts[edit]
Drama[edit]




Jason and Medea, by John William Waterhouse, 1907






Rama on the way


Exile is an early motif in ancient Greek tragedy. In the ancient Greek world, this was seen as a fate worse than death. The motif reaches its peak on the play Medea, written by Euripides in the fifth century BC, and rooted in the very old oral traditions of Greek mythology. Euripides’ Medea has remained the most frequently performed Greek tragedy through the 20th century.[11]
Art[edit]




Exiled Klaus Mann as Staff Sergeant of the 5th US Army, Italy 1944






Cover of Anna Seghers’ Das siebte Kreuz


After Medea was abandoned by Jason and had become a murderer out of revenge, she fled to Athens and married king Aigeus there, and became the stepmother of the hero Theseus. Due to a conflict with him, she must leave the Polis and go away into exile. John William Waterhouse (1849–1917), the English Pre-Raphaelite painter’s famous picture Jason and Medea shows a key moment before, when Medea tries to poison Theseus.[12]
Literature[edit]
In ancient Rome, the Roman Senate had the power to declare the exile to individuals, families or even entire regions. One of the Roman victims was the poet Ovid, who lived during the reign of Augustus. He was forced to leave Rome and move away to the city of Tomis on the Black Sea, now Constanta. There he wrote his famous work Tristia (Sorrows) about his bitter feelings in exile.[13] Another, at least in a temporary exile, was Dante.
The German language writer of novels, Franz Kafka, called "the Dante of the twentieth century"[14] by the poet W. H. Auden, describes the exile of Karl Rossmann in the posthumously published novel Amerika.[15]
During the period of National Socialism in the first few years after 1933, many Jews, as well as a significant number of German artists and intellectuals fled into exile; for instance, the authors Klaus Mann and Anna Seghers. So Germany’s own exile literature emerged and received worldwide credit.[16] Klaus Mann finished his novel Der Vulkan (de) (The Volcano. A Novel Among Emigrants) in 1939[17] describing the German exile scene, "to bring the rich, scattered and murky experience of exile into epic form",[18] as he wrote in his literary balance sheet. At the same place and in the same year, Anna Seghers published her famous novel Das siebte Kreuz (The Seventh Cross, published in the United States in 1942). Her painful story was produced as a movie in 1944 by MGM starring Spencer Tracy. The Seventh Cross is one of the very few depictions of Nazi concentration camps, in either literature or cinema.
See also[edit]

Outlawry
Ban
Defection
Deportation
Exiles by nationality
Ostracism - procedure under the Athenian democracy
Penal transportation - penal colony
Petalism
Porcian Laws, the Roman laws granting citizens the right to voluntary exile in place of capital punishment
Refugee
Right of asylum (political asylum)
Scouts-in-Exile
Shimanagashi

References[edit]



^ Hobbes, Thomas (1886). Leviathan; Or, The Matter, Form and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil. George Routledge and Sons. p. 145. 
^ [1] Archived February 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Geoghegan, Tom (2011-04-14). "BBC News - What happens to deposed leaders?". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 2014-05-12. 
^ Stevie Cameron, Blue Trust: The Author, The Lawyer, His Wife, And Her Money, 1998
^ Robert Greenfield, Exile on Main Street: A Season in Hell with the Rolling Stones, 2008.
^ Kucera, Danielle. "Facebook Co-Founder Saverin Gives Up U.S. Citizenship Before IPO". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 2 November 2012. 
^ Drawbaugh, Kevin (May 17, 2012). "Facebook's Saverin fires back at tax-dodge critics". Reuters. Retrieved 2 November 2012. 
^ Mills, Andrew (2009-06-23). "Iraq Appeals Anew to Exiled Academics to Return Home". Reuters via chronicle.com. Retrieved 2011-04-17. 
^ Rocker, Simon (2011-03-10). "Libyan exile plan for UK's frozen assets". The Jewish Chronicle. Retrieved 2011-04-17. 
^ Fisher, Dan (1990-01-20). "For Exiled Nuns, It's Too Late : Banished by the Communist regime, Czechoslovakia's sisters of Bila Voda were symbols of persecution. Now most are too old or weak to benefit from the revolution". articles.latimes.com. Retrieved 2011-04-17. 
^ Cf. Helene P. Foley: Reimagining Greek Tragedy on the American Stage. University of California Press, 2012, p. 190
^ Cf. Elisabeth Prettejohn: Art of the Pre-Raphaelites. Princeton University Press, London 2000, pp. 165-207. ISBN 0-691-07057-1
^ "Tristia by Ovid – high drama and hoax". theguardian.com. 
^ Quoted after Harold Bloom: Genius. A Mosaic of One Hundred Exemplary Creative Minds. Warner Books. New York 2002, p. 206. ISBN 978-0-446-52717-0
^ Cf. an unabridged reading by Sven Regener: Amerika, Roof Music, Bochum 2014.
^ For further insights cf. Martin Mauthner: German Writers in French Exile, 1933–1940, Vallentine Mitchell, London 2007, ISBN 978-0-85303-540-4.
^ which he started in September 1936, when he came to New York. Cf. Jan Patocka in: Escape to Life. German Intellectuals in New York. A Compendium on Exile after 1933, ed. by Eckart Goebel/Sigrid Weigel. De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston 2012, p 354. ISBN 978-3-11-025867-7
^ Cf. Klaus Mann: Der Wendepunkt. Ein Lebensbericht. (1949), Frankfurt am Main 2006, p. 514.



External links[edit]



Look up exile in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.


 Media related to Exiles at Wikimedia Commons

Without a Country Varied experiences of American and British exiles in the 20th century.
The Seventh Cross at the TCM Movie Database
The Seventh Cross on IMDb





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Capital punishment



Retentionist countries



Afghanistan
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Belarus
Botswana
China
Cuba
Egypt
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Lebanon
Malaysia
Nigeria
North Korea
Pakistan
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Somalia
Syria
Taiwan
Thailand
United Arab Emirates
United States
Vietnam
Yemen





Abolitionist in practice
countries



Kenya
Laos
Maldives
Russia
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Tajikistan
Tonga





Abolitionist for
ordinary crimes only



Brazil
Guatemala
Israel





Abolitionist countries



Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bhutan
Bulgaria
Canada
Croatia
Cyprus
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Mongolia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
San Marino
Serbia
South Africa
Spain
Suriname
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uzbekistan
Venezuela





Current methods



Hanging
Shooting/Firing squad
Lethal injection
Electrocution
Gas inhalation
Beheading





Ancient methods



Bestiarii

Damnatio ad bestias


Blood eagle
Blowing from a gun
Brazen bull
Boiling
Breaking wheel
Burial
Burning
Crushing
Disembowelment
Dismemberment
Drowning

Republican marriage


Elephant
Falling
Flaying
Garrote
Hanged, drawn and quartered
Immurement
Impalement
Ishikozume
Mazzatello
Sawing
Scaphism
Slow slicing
Stoning
Suffocation in ash
Upright jerker
Waist chop





Related topics



Use by country
Most recent executions by country
Crime
Death row
Final statement
Last meal
Penology
Religion and capital punishment
Wrongful execution
Capital punishment for drug trafficking












v
t
e


Substantive human rights




Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.



Civil and political



Cannabis rights
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom from exile
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
Liberty
LGBT rights
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right of self-defense
Security of person
Universal suffrage






Economic, social
and cultural




Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Trade union membership





Sexual and
reproductive



Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Reproductive health
Right to sexuality





Violations



Corporal punishment





War and conflict



Civilian
Combatant
Freedom from genocide
Prisoner of war
War rape














Authority control



GND: 4015959-0
NDL: 00560847











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exile&oldid=793627967"					Categories: ExilePunishmentsRight of asylumHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles needing additional references from May 2007All articles needing additional referencesInterlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with GND identifiers