ExPASy is a bioinformatics resource portal operated by the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB) and in particular the SIB Web Team. It is an extensible and integrative portal accessing many scientific resources, databases and software tools in different areas of life sciences. Scientists can access a wide range of resources in many different domains, such as proteomics, genomics, phylogeny/evolution, systems biology, population genetics, and transcriptomics. The individual resources (databases, web-based and downloadable software tools) are hosted in a decentralised way by different groups of the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics and partner institutions. Specifically, a single web portal provides a common entry point to a wide range of resources developed and operated by many different SIB groups and external institutions. The portal features a search function across selected resources. Internally, the availability and usage of resources are monitored. The portal is aimed for both expert users and for people who are not familiar with a specific domain in life sciences: in particular, the new web interface provides visual guidance for newcomers to ExPASy.
History[edit]
Originally, ExPASy was called ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) and acted as a proteomics server to analyze protein sequences and structures and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-D Page electrophoresis).[1] Among others, ExPASy hosted the protein sequence knowledgebase, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, and its computer annotated supplement, UniProtKB/TrEMBL, before these moved to the UniProt website.[citation needed]
ExPASy was the first website of the life sciences.
As of 5 April 2007[update], ExPASy had been consulted 1 billion times since its installation on 1 August 1993.[2]
Notes and references[edit]


^ Gasteiger, E.; Gattiker, A; Hoogland, C; Ivanyi, I; Appel, RD; Bairoch, A (2003). "ExPASy: The proteomics server for in-depth protein knowledge and analysis". Nucleic Acids Research. 31 (13): 3784–8. doi:10.1093/nar/gkg563. PMC 168970 . PMID 12824418. 
^ ExPASy: SIB Bioinformatics Resource Portal


External links[edit]

Official website







v
t
e


Bioinformatics



Databases



Sequence databases: GenBank, European Nucleotide Archive and DNA Data Bank of Japan
Secondary databases: UniProt, database of protein sequences grouping together Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL and Protein Information Resource
Other databases: Protein Data Bank, Ensembl and InterPro
Specialised genomic databases: BOLD, Saccharomyces Genome Database, FlyBase, VectorBase, WormBase, PHI-base, Arabidopsis Information Resource and Zebrafish Information Network





Software



BLAST
Bowtie
Clustal
HMMER
MUSCLE
SAMtools
TopHat





Other



Server: ExPASy
Ontology: Gene Ontology





Institutions



European Bioinformatics Institute
US National Center for Biotechnology Information
Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics
Japanese Institute of Genetics
Broad Institute
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute





Organizations



International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB)
European Molecular Biology network (EMBnet)
African Society for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (ASBCB)
Japanese Society for Bioinformatics (JSBi)





Meetings



Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology (ISMB)
Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB)
European Conference on Computational Biology (ECCB)
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB)
ISCB Africa ASBCB Conference on Bioinformatics
Basel Computational Biology Conference‎ ([BC2])
International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB)








Computational biology
List of biological databases
Sequencing
Sequence database
Sequence alignment
Molecular phylogenetics









This biochemistry article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ExPASy&oldid=815399638"					Categories: BioinformaticsScience and technology in SwitzerlandBiochemistry stubsHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2011Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2007All articles containing potentially dated statementsUse dmy dates from August 2011All stub articles