





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



The facility ID number, also called a FIN or facility identifier, is a unique integer number[1] of one to six digits,[2] assigned by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission's (FCC) Media Bureau[1] to each broadcast station in the FCC's Consolidated Database System (CDBS).
Because CDBS includes information about foreign stations which are notified to the U.S. under the terms of international frequency coordination agreements, FINs are also assigned to affected foreign stations. However, this has no legal significance, and the numbers are not used by the regulatory authorities in those other countries.
Current FCC practice is to assign facility ID numbers sequentially, but this is not an official requirement, so third-party users must not rely on it. Unlike call signs, however, the FIN associated with a particular station never changes; thus, the FCC staff and interested parties can be certain to which station an application pertains, even if it has changed its call sign since the application was originally filed. (The FCC's previous database system, the Broadcast Application Processing System or BAPS, did not have such an identifier.)
References[edit]



^ a b "CDBS Public Access Help". Washington, D.C.: Federal Communications Commission. 2010-07-09. Retrieved 2015-02-21. 
^ "CDBS FRN Manager User's Guide". Washington, D.C.: Federal Communications Commission. 2011-03-09. Retrieved 2015-02-21. 







This article related to radio communications is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e








This article about television in the United States is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Facility_ID&oldid=707897311"					Categories: Broadcasting in the United StatesFederal Communications CommissionIdentifiersRadio communications stubsUnited States television stubsHidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2009All articles needing additional referencesAll stub articles