This article is about the group of people such as a mother and a father. For the family in biology, see Family (biology). For other uses, see Family (disambiguation).



Two parents and a child: the statue Family in the garden of the Palace of Nations, Geneva, Switzerland



Part of a series on the


Anthropology of kinship




Basic concepts





Affinity
Consanguinity
Marriage
Incest taboo
Endogamy
Exogamy
Moiety
Monogamy
Polygyny
Polygamy
Concubinage
Polyandry
Bride price
Bride service
Dowry
Parallel / cross cousins
Cousin marriage
Levirate
Ghost marriage
Joking relationship
Family
Lineage
Clan
Cohabitation
Fictive / Milk / Nurture kinship




Descent







Cognatic / Bilateral
Matrilateral
House society
Avunculate




Linealities




Ambilineality
Unilineality
Matrilineality
Patrilineality







Household forms and residence




Extended
Matrifocal
Matrilocal

Nuclear
Patrilocal











Terminology





Kinship terminology
Classificatory terminologies




By group





Iroquois
Crow
Omaha
Eskimo
Hawaiian
Sudanese
Dravidian












Case studies






Australian Aboriginal
Burmese
Chinese
Philippine
Polyandry in Tibet / in India





Feminist





Chambri
Mosuo





Sexuality




Coming of Age in Samoa











Major theorists



Diane Bell
Tom Boellstorff
Jack Goody
Gilbert Herdt
Don Kulick
Roger Lancaster
Louise Lamphere
Eleanor Leacock
Claude Lévi-Strauss
Bronisław Malinowski
Margaret Mead
Henrietta Moore
Lewis H. Morgan
Stephen O. Murray
Michelle Rosaldo
David M. Schneider
Marilyn Strathern









Related articles


Alliance theory
Matrilineal / matrilocal societies
Feminist anthropology

Sex and Repression in Savage Society


Social Bonding and Nurture Kinship







Social anthropology
Cultural anthropology





v
t
e







Relationships




Types



Genetic




Kinship
Family
Sibling
Cousin




By marriage





Husband
Wife
Open marriage




Polyandry
Polygamy
Polygyny





Partner · Partners







Significant other
Boyfriend
Girlfriend
Cohabitation
Same-sex
Life partner
Friendship (romantic)




Sexual





Casual
Monogamy
Non-monogamy
Mutual monogamy
Polyamory
Polyfidelity




Cicisbeo
Concubinage
Courtesan
Mistress















Activities


Bonding
Courtship
Dating
Engagement
Mating
Meet market
Romance
Singles event
Wedding








Endings


Breakup
Separation
Annulment
Divorce
Widowhood








Emotions and feelings


Affinity
Attachment
Intimacy
Jealousy
Limerence
Love

Platonic
unconditional


Passion
Sexuality








Practices


Bride price

dower
dowry
service


Hypergamy
Infidelity
Sexual activity
Transgression
Repression








Abuse


Child
Dating
Disengaging from an abuser
Domestic
Elderly
Narcissistic parent
Power and control









v
t
e





In the context of human society, a family (from Latin: familia) is a group of people affiliated either by consanguinity (by recognized birth), affinity (by marriage or other relationship), or co-residence (as implied by the etymology of the English word "family"[1]) or some combination of these. Members of the immediate family may include spouses, parents, brothers, sisters, sons, and daughters. Members of the extended family may include grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, nephews, nieces, and siblings-in-law. Sometimes these are also considered members of the immediate family, depending on an individual's specific relationship with them.
In most societies, the family is the principal institution for the socialization of children. As the basic unit for raising children, anthropologists generally classify most family organizations as matrifocal (a mother and her children); conjugal (a wife, her husband, and children, also called the nuclear family); avuncular (for example, a grandparent, a brother, his sister, and her children); or extended (parents and children co-reside with other members of one parent's family). Sexual relations among the members are regulated by rules concerning incest such as the incest taboo.
The word "family" can be used metaphorically to create more inclusive categories such as community, nationhood, global village, and humanism.
The field of genealogy aims to trace family lineages through history.
The family is also an important economic unit studied in family economics.



Contents


1 Social

1.1 Size


2 Types of family

2.1 Conjugal (nuclear or single) family
2.2 Matrifocal family
2.3 Extended family
2.4 Family of choice
2.5 Blended family
2.6 Monogamous family
2.7 Polygamous family


3 Kinship terminology

3.1 Degrees of kinship
3.2 Terminologies


4 Roles
5 Types of kinship

5.1 Patrilineal
5.2 Matrilineal
5.3 Bilateral descent


6 History of theories

6.1 Social Darwinists
6.2 The nuclear family in industrial society
6.3 The postmodern family
6.4 Oedipal family model and fascism


7 Domestic violence

7.1 Family violence

7.1.1 Parental abuse of children (child abuse)
7.1.2 Parental abuse by children
7.1.3 Elder abuse


7.2 Forced and child marriage


8 The concept of family honor
9 Economic issues

9.1 Dowry, bride price and dower
9.2 Property regimes and taxation


10 Rights and laws

10.1 Reproductive rights
10.2 Parents' rights
10.3 Children's rights
10.4 Marriage rights
10.5 Legal reforms


11 Health

11.1 Family medicine
11.2 Maternal mortality
11.3 Infant and child mortality


12 Politics
13 Work-family balance

13.1 Protection of private and family life


14 Criticism
15 The family and social justice
16 Global trends in family composition
17 See also
18 References

18.1 Citations
18.2 Sources


19 Bibliography
20 External links



Social[edit]




Detail of a gold glass medallion with a portrait of a family, from Alexandria (Roman Egypt), 3rd-4th century (Brescia, Museo di Santa Giulia)[2]






Sauk family of photographed by Frank Rinehart in 1899


One of the primary functions of the family involves providing a framework for the production and reproduction of persons biologically and socially. This can occur through the sharing of material substances (such as food); the giving and receiving of care and nurture (nurture kinship); jural rights and obligations; and moral and sentimental ties.[3][4] Thus, one's experience of one's family shifts over time. From the perspective of children, the family is a "family of orientation": the family serves to locate children socially and plays a major role in their enculturation and socialization.[5] From the point of view of the parent(s), the family is a "family of procreation", the goal of which is to produce and enculturate and socialize children.[6][7] However, producing children is not the only function of the family; in societies with a sexual division of labor, marriage, and the resulting relationship between two people, it is necessary for the formation of an economically productive household.[8][9][10]
Christopher Harris notes that the western conception of family is ambiguous and confused with the household, as revealed in the different contexts in which the word is used.[11] Olivia Harris states this confusion is not accidental, but indicative of the familial ideology of capitalist, western countries that pass social legislation that insists members of a nuclear family should live together, and that those not so related should not live together; despite the ideological and legal pressures, a large percentage of families do not conform to the ideal nuclear family type.[12]
Size[edit]
Further information: Fertility factor (demography)




Mennonite siblings, Montana 1937


The total fertility rate of women varies from country to country, from a high of 6.76 children born/woman in Niger to a low of 0.81 in Singapore (as of 2015).[13] Fertility is low in most Eastern European and Southern European countries; and high in most Sub-Saharan African countries.[13]
In some cultures, the mother's preference of family size influences that of the children through early adulthood.[14] A parent's number of children strongly correlates with the number of children that they will eventually have.[15]
Types of family[edit]




A mother with her children, Berlin, Germany, 1962






A miner with his children


Although early western cultural anthropologists and sociologists considered family and kinship to be universally associated with relations by "blood" (based on ideas common in their own cultures) later research[3] has shown that many societies instead understand family through ideas of living together, the sharing of food (e.g. milk kinship) and sharing care and nurture. Sociologists have a special interest in the function and status of family forms in stratified (especially capitalist) societies.[citation needed]
According to the work of scholars Max Weber, Alan Macfarlane, Steven Ozment, Jack Goody and Peter Laslett, the huge transformation that led to modern marriage in Western democracies was "fueled by the religio-cultural value system provided by elements of Judaism, early Christianity, Roman Catholic canon law and the Protestant Reformation".[16]
Much sociological, historical and anthropological research dedicates itself to the understanding of this variation, and of changes in the family that form over time. Levitan claims:

"Times have changed; it is more acceptable and encouraged for mothers to work and fathers to spend more time at home with the children. The way roles are balanced between the parents will help children grow and learn valuable life lessons. There is [the] great importance of communication and equality in families, in order to avoid role strain."[17]

Conjugal (nuclear or single) family[edit]
The term "nuclear family" is commonly used, especially in the United States of America, to refer to conjugal families. A "conjugal" family includes only the husband, the wife, and unmarried children who are not of age.[18] Sociologists distinguish between conjugal families (relatively independent of the kindred of the parents and of other families in general) and nuclear families (which maintain relatively close ties with their kindred).[citation needed] Other family structures, such as blended parents, single parents, and domestic partnerships have begun to challenge the normality of the nuclear family.[19][20][21]
Matrifocal family[edit]
Main article: Matrifocal family
A "matrifocal" family consists of a mother and her children. Generally, these children are her biological offspring, although adoption of children is a practice in nearly every society. This kind of family occurs commonly where women have the resources to rear their children by themselves, or where men are more mobile than women. As a definition, "a family or domestic group is matrifocal when it is centred on a woman and her children. In this case, the father(s) of these children are intermittently present in the life of the group and occupy a secondary place. The children's mother is not necessarily the wife of one of the children's fathers."[22]
Extended family[edit]




Settled Sami (Lapplander) family of farmers in Stensele, Västerbotten, Sweden, early 20th century






A family from Basankusu, Democratic Republic of the Congo.


The term "extended family" is also common, especially in the United States. This term has two distinct meanings:

First, it serves as a synonym of "consanguinal family" (consanguine means "of the same blood").
Second, in societies dominated by the conjugal family, it refers to "kindred" (an egocentric network of relatives that extends beyond the domestic group) who do not belong to the conjugal family.

These types refer to ideal or normative structures found in particular societies. Any society will exhibit some variation in the actual composition and conception of families.
Family of choice[edit]
The term "family of choice," also sometimes referred to as "chosen family," is common within the LGBT community, both in academic literature and in colloquial vocabulary. It refers to the group of people in an individual's life that satisfies the typical role of family as a support system. The term differentiates between the "family of origin" (the biological family or that in which people are raised) and those that actively assume that ideal role.[23] The family of choice may or may not include some or all of the members of the family of origin. This terminology stems from the fact that many LGBT individuals, upon coming out, face rejection or shame from the families they were raised in. The term family of choice is also used by individuals in the 12 step communities, who create close-knit "family" ties through the recovery process.
Blended family[edit]
The term blended family or stepfamily describes families with mixed parents: one or both parents remarried, bringing children of the former family into the new family.[24] Also in sociology, particularly in the works of social psychologist Michael Lamb,[25] traditional family refers to "a middle-class family with a bread-winning father and a stay-at-home mother, married to each other and raising their biological children," and nontraditional to exceptions from this rule. Most of the US households are now non-traditional under this definition.[26]
In terms of communication patterns in families, there are a certain set of beliefs within the family that reflect how its members should communicate and interact. These family communication patterns arise from two underlying sets of beliefs. One being conversation orientation (the degree to which the importance of communication is valued) and two, conformity orientation (the degree to which families should emphasize similarities or differences regarding attitudes, beliefs, and values).[27]
Monogamous family[edit]
A monogamous family is based on a legal or social monogamy. In this case, an individual has only one (official) partner during their lifetime or at any one time (i.e. serial monogamy).[28] This means that a person may not have several different legal spouses at the same time, as this is usually prohibited by bigamy laws, in jurisdictions that require monogamous marriages.
Polygamous family[edit]
Polygamy is a marriage that includes more than two partners.[29][30] When a man is married to more than one wife at a time, the relationship is called polygyny; and when a woman is married to more than one husband at a time, it is called polyandry. If a marriage includes multiple husbands and wives, it can be called polyamory,[31] group or conjoint marriage.[30]
Polygyny is a form of plural marriage, in which a man is allowed more than one wife .[32] In modern countries that permit polygamy, polygyny is typically the only form permitted. Polygyny is practiced primarily (but not only) in parts of the Middle East and Africa; and is often associated with Islam, however, there are certain conditions in Islam that must be met to perform polygyny.
Polyandry is a form of marriage whereby a woman takes two or more husbands at the same time.[33] Fraternal polyandry, where two or more brothers are married to the same wife, is a common form of polyandry. Polyandry was traditionally practiced in areas of the Himalayan mountains, among Tibetans in Nepal, in parts of China and in parts of northern India. Polyandry is most common in societies marked by high male mortality or where males will often be apart from the rest of the family for a considerable period of time.[33]
Kinship terminology[edit]
Degrees of kinship[edit]
Main article: Coefficient of relationship




Family in India, 1870s






Family in a wagon, Lee County, Mississippi, August 1935.


A first-degree relative is one who shares 50% of your DNA through direct inheritance, such as a full sibling, parent or progeny.


Kinship
Degree of
relationship by coefficient
Coefficient of
relationship
Degree of relationship by counting up generations to common ancestor and back down to target individual (used for various genealogical and legal purposes)


Identical twins
0
100%[34]
second-degree


Full sibling
first-degree
50% (2×2−2)
second-degree


Parent-offspring[35]
first-degree
50% (2−1)
first-degree


Half-sibling
second-degree
25% (2−2)
second-degree


Grandmother/grandfather
second-degree
25% (2−2)
second-degree


Niece/nephew/aunt/uncle
second-degree
25% (2×2−3)
third-degree


Half Niece/nephew/aunt/uncle
third-degree
12.5% (2−3)
third-degree


First cousin
third-degree
12.5% (2×2−4)
fourth-degree


Half first cousin
fourth-degree
6.25% (2−4)
fourth-degree


Great grandparent
third-degree
12.5% (2−3)
third-degree


First cousin once removed
fifth-degree
6.25% (2⋅2−5)
fifth-degree


Second cousin
sixth-degree
3.125% (2−6+2−6)
sixth-degree






Typical example of an American family, consisting of a father and a mother, and children including sisters and a brother


Terminologies[edit]




Family tree showing the relationship of each person to the blue person.






Swedish family eating, 1902


Main article: Kinship terminology
In his book Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family, anthropologist Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–1881) performed the first survey of kinship terminologies in use around the world. Although much of his work is now considered dated, he argued that kinship terminologies reflect different sets of distinctions. For example, most kinship terminologies distinguish between sexes (the difference between a brother and a sister) and between generations (the difference between a child and a parent). Moreover, he argued, kinship terminologies distinguish between relatives by blood and marriage (although recently some anthropologists have argued that many societies define kinship in terms other than "blood").
Morgan made a distinction between kinship systems that use classificatory terminology and those that use descriptive terminology. Classificatory systems are generally and erroneously understood to be those that "class together" with a single term relatives who actually do not have the same type of relationship to ego. (What defines "same type of relationship" under such definitions seems to be genealogical relationship. This is problematic given that any genealogical description, no matter how standardized, employs words originating in a folk understanding of kinship.) What Morgan's terminology actually differentiates are those (classificatory) kinship systems that do not distinguish lineal and collateral relationships and those (descriptive) kinship systems that do. Morgan, a lawyer, came to make this distinction in an effort to understand Seneca inheritance practices. A Seneca man's effects were inherited by his sisters' children rather than by his own children.[36] Morgan identified six basic patterns of kinship terminologies:

Hawaiian: only distinguishes relatives based upon sex and generation.
Sudanese: no two relatives share the same term.
Eskimo: in addition to distinguishing relatives based upon sex and generation, also distinguishes between lineal relatives and collateral relatives.
Iroquois: in addition to sex and generation, also distinguishes between siblings of opposite sexes in the parental generation.
Crow: a matrilineal system with some features of an Iroquois system, but with a "skewing" feature in which generation is "frozen" for some relatives.
Omaha: like a Crow system but patrilineal.

Roles[edit]




Group photograph of a Norwegian family by Gustav Borgen ca. 1900: Father, mother, three sons and two daughters.






Extended family with roots in Cape Town, Kimberley and Pretoria, South Africa






Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson with grandchild, 1900






An infant, his mother, his maternal grandmother, and his great-grandmother






Queen Victoria, with her eldest daughter






Father and child, Dhaka, Bangladesh


Most Western societies employ Eskimo kinship terminology.[citation needed] This kinship terminology commonly occurs in societies based on conjugal (or nuclear) families, where nuclear families have a degree of relative mobility. Members of the nuclear use descriptive kinship terms:

Father: a male parent
Mother: a female parent
Son: a male child of the parent(s)
Daughter: a female child of the parent(s)
Brother: a male sibling
Sister: a female sibling
Husband: a male spouse
Wife: a female spouse
Grandfather: the father of a parent
Grandmother: the mother of a parent
Cousins: two people who share at least one grandparent in common, but none of the same parents.
(In some language there is a difference between a grandfather/grandmother from the father's side and one from the mother's side)

Such systems generally assume that the mother's husband is also the biological father. In some families, a woman may have children with more than one man or a man may have children with more than one woman. The system refers to a child who shares only one parent with another child as a "half-brother" or "half-sister". For children who do not share biological or adoptive parents in common, English-speakers use the term "stepbrother" or "stepsister" to refer to their new relationship with each other when one of their biological parents marries one of the other child's biological parents. Any person (other than the biological parent of a child) who marries the parent of that child becomes the "stepparent" of the child, either the "stepmother" or "stepfather". The same terms generally apply to children adopted into a family as to children born into the family. In the United States, one in five mothers have children by different fathers; among mothers with two or more children the figure is higher, with 28% having children with at least two different men. Such families are more common among Blacks and Hispanics, and among the lower socioeconomic class.[37]
Typically, societies with conjugal families also favor neolocal residence; thus upon marriage, a person separates from the nuclear family of their childhood (family of orientation) and forms a new nuclear family (family of procreation). However, in western society, the single parent family has been growing more accepted and has begun to make an impact on culture. Single parent families are more commonly single mother families than single father. These families sometimes face difficult issues besides the fact that they have to rear their children on their own, for example, low income making it difficult to pay for rent, child care, and other necessities for a healthy and safe home. Members of the nuclear families of members of one's own (former) nuclear family may class as lineal or as collateral. Kin who regard them as lineal refer to them in terms that build on the terms used within the nuclear family:

Grandparent

Grandfather: a parent's father
Grandmother: a parent's mother


Grandchild

Grandson: a child's son
Granddaughter: a child's daughter



For collateral relatives, more classificatory terms come into play, terms that do not build on the terms used within the nuclear family:

Uncle: parent's brother, or male spouse of parent's sibling
Aunt: parent's sister, or female spouse of parent's sibling
Nephew: sibling's son, or spouse's sibling's son
Niece: sibling's daughter, or spouse's sibling's daughter

When additional generations intervene (in other words, when one's collateral relatives belong to the same generation as one's grandparents or grandchildren), the prefixes "great-" or "grand-" modifies these terms. Also, as with grandparents and grandchildren, as more generations intervene the prefix becomes "great-grand-," adding another "great-" for each additional generation. Most collateral relatives have never had membership of the nuclear family of the members of one's own nuclear family.

Cousin: the most classificatory term; the children of uncles or aunts. One can further distinguish cousins by degrees of collaterality and by generation. Two persons of the same generation who share a grandparent count as "first cousins" (one degree of collaterality); if they share a great-grandparent they count as "second cousins" (two degrees of collaterality) and so on. If two persons share an ancestor, one as a grandchild and the other as a great-grandchild of that individual, then the two descendants class as "first cousins once removed" (removed by one generation); if they shared ancestor figures as the grandparent of one individual and the great-great-grandparent of the other, the individuals class as "first cousins twice removed" (removed by two generations), and so on. Similarly, if they shared ancestor figures as the great-grandparent of one person and the great-great-grandparent of the other, the individuals class as "second cousins once removed". Hence one can refer to a "third cousin once removed upwards."

Cousins of an older generation (in other words, one's parents' first cousins), although technically first cousins once removed, are often classified with "aunts" and "uncles." Similarly, a person may refer to close friends of one's parents as "aunt" or "uncle," or may refer to close friends as "brother" or "sister," using the practice of fictive kinship. English-speakers mark relationships by marriage (except for wife/husband) with the tag "-in-law." The mother and father of one's spouse become one's mother-in-law and father-in-law; the female spouse of one's child becomes one's daughter-in-law and the male spouse of one's child becomes one's son-in-law. The term "sister-in-law" refers to three essentially different relationships, either the wife of one's sibling, or the sister of one's spouse, or, in some uses, the wife of one's spouse's sibling. "Brother-in-law" expresses a similar ambiguity. The terms "half-brother" and "half-sister" indicate siblings who share only one biological or adoptive parent.
Types of kinship[edit]
Patrilineal[edit]
Patrilineality, also known as the male line or agnatic kinship, is a form of kinship system in which an individual's family membership derives from and is traced through his or her father's lineage.[38] It generally involves the inheritance of property, rights, names, or titles by persons related through male kin.
A patriline ("father line") is a person's father, and additional ancestors that are traced only through males. One's patriline is thus a record of descent from a man in which the individuals in all intervening generations are male. In cultural anthropology, a patrilineage is a consanguineal male and female kinship group, each of whose members is descended from the common ancestor through male forebears.
Matrilineal[edit]
Matrilineality is a form of kinship system in which an individual's family membership derives from and is traced through his or her mother's lineage.
It may also correlate with a societal system in which each person is identified with their matriline—their mother's lineage—and which can involve the inheritance of property and titles. A matriline is a line of descent from a female ancestor to a descendant in which the individuals in all intervening generations are mothers – in other words, a "mother line".
In a matrilineal descent system, an individual is considered to belong to the same descent group as her or his mother. This matrilineal descent pattern is in contrasts to the more common pattern of patrilineal descent pattern.
Bilateral descent[edit]
Bilateral descent is a form of kinship system in which an individual's family membership derives from and is traced through both the paternal and maternal sides. The relatives on the mother's side and father's side are equally important for emotional ties or for transfer of property or wealth. It is a family arrangement where descent and inheritance are passed equally through both parents.[39] Families who use this system trace descent through both parents simultaneously and recognize multiple ancestors, but unlike with cognatic descent it is not used to form descent groups.[40]
Traditionally, this is found among some groups in West Africa, India, Australia, Indonesia, Melanesia, Malaysia and Polynesia. Anthropologists believe that a tribal structure based on bilateral descent helps members live in extreme environments because it allows individuals to rely on two sets of families dispersed over a wide area.[41]
History of theories[edit]
Main article: History of the family
Social Darwinists[edit]
Early scholars of family history applied Darwin's biological theory of evolution in their theory of evolution of family systems.[42] American anthropologist Lewis H. Morgan published Ancient Society in 1877 based on his theory of the three stages of human progress from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization.[43] Morgan's book was the "inspiration for Friedrich Engels' book" The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State published in 1884.[44]
Engels expanded Morgan's hypothesis that economical factors caused the transformation of primitive community into a class-divided society.[45] Engels' theory of resource control, and later that of Karl Marx, was used to explain the cause and effect of change in family structure and function. The popularity of this theory was largely unmatched until the 1980s, when other sociological theories, most notably structural functionalism, gained acceptance.
The nuclear family in industrial society[edit]




Family arrangements in the United States have become more diverse with no particular household arrangement representing half of the United States population.[46]


Contemporary society generally views the family as a haven from the world, supplying absolute fulfillment. Zinn and Eitzen discuss the image of the "family as haven [...] a place of intimacy, love and trust where individuals may escape the competition of dehumanizing forces in modern society".[47] During industrialization, "[t]he family as a repository of warmth and tenderness (embodied by the mother) stands in opposition to the competitive and aggressive world of commerce (embodied by the father). The family's task was to protect against the outside world."[48] However, Zinn and Eitzen note, "The protective image of the family has waned in recent years as the ideals of family fulfillment have taken shape. Today, the family is more compensatory than protective. It supplies what is vitally needed but missing in other social arrangements."[49]
"The popular wisdom", according to Zinn and Eitzen, sees the family structures of the past as superior to those today, and families as more stable and happier at a time when they did not have to contend with problems such as illegitimate children and divorce. They respond to this, saying, "there is no golden age of the family gleaming at us in the far back historical past."[50] "Desertion by spouses, illegitimate children, and other conditions that are considered characteristics of modern times existed in the past as well."[51]
The postmodern family[edit]




Percentage of births to unmarried women, selected countries, 1980 and 2007[52]


Others argue that whether or not one views the family as "declining" depends on one's definition of "family". "Married couples have dropped below half of all American households. This drop is shocking from traditional forms of the family system. Only a fifth of households were following traditional ways of having married couples raising a family together."[53] In the Western World, marriages are no longer arranged for economic, social or political gain, and children are no longer expected to contribute to family income. Instead, people choose mates based on love. This increased role of love indicates a societal shift toward favoring emotional fulfilment and relationships within a family, and this shift necessarily weakens the institution of the family.[54]
Margaret Mead considers the family as a main safeguard to continuing human progress. Observing, "Human beings have learned, laboriously, to be human", she adds: "we hold our present form of humanity on trust, [and] it is possible to lose it" ... "It is not without significance that the most successful large-scale abrogations of the family have occurred not among simple savages, living close to the subsistence edge, but among great nations and strong empires, the resources of which were ample, the populations huge, and the power almost unlimited"[55]
Many countries (particularly Western) have, in recent years, changed their family laws in order to accommodate diverse family models. For instance, in the United Kingdom, in Scotland, the Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006 provides cohabitants with some limited rights.[56] In 2010, Ireland enacted the Civil Partnership and Certain Rights and Obligations of Cohabitants Act 2010. There have also been moves at an international level, most notably, the Council of Europe European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born out of Wedlock[57] which came into force in 1978. Countries which ratify it must ensure that children born outside marriage are provided with legal rights as stipulated in the text of this Convention. The Convention was ratified by the UK in 1981 and by Ireland in 1988.[58]
Oedipal family model and fascism[edit]
The model, common in the western societies, of the family triangle, husband-wife-children isolated from the outside, is also called the oedipal model of the family, and it is a form of patriarchal family. Many philosophers and psychiatrists have analyzed such a model. In such a family, they argue, the young develop in a perverse relationship, wherein they learn to love the same person who beats and oppresses them. They believe that young children grow up and develop loving a person who is oppressing them physically or mentally, and that these children are not taught in a way that will raise affectionate children.[59] Such philosophers claim that the family therefore constitutes the first cell of the fascist society, as the children will carry this attitude of love for oppressive figures in their adult life.[60][61] They claim that fathers torment their sons.[62][63] Deleuze and Guattari, in their analysis of the dynamics at work within a family, "track down all varieties of fascism, from the enormous ones that surround and crush us to the petty ones that constitute the tyrannical bitterness of our everyday lives".[60]
As it has been explained by Deleuze, Guattari and Foucault, as well as other philosophers and psychiatrists such as Laing and Reich, the patriarchal-family conceived in the West tradition serves the purpose of perpetuating a propertarian and authoritarian society.[64] The child grows according to the oedipal model, which is typical of the structure of capitalist societies,[65][66] and he becomes in turn owner of submissive children and protector of the woman.[63][67][68][69][70]
As the young undergoes physical and psychological repression from someone for whom they develop love, they develop a loving attitude towards authority figures. They will bring such attitude in their adult life, when they will desire social repression and will form docile subjects for society.[64] Michel Foucault, in his systematic study of sexuality, argued that rather than being merely repressed, the desires of the individual are efficiently mobilized and used,[60] to control the individual, alter interpersonal relationships and control the masses. Foucault believed organized religion, through moral prohibitions, and economic powers, through advertising, make use of unconscious sex drives. Dominating desire, they dominate individuals.[71] According to the analysis of Michel Foucault, in the west:

the [conjugal] family organization, precisely to the extent that it was insular and heteromorphous with respect to the other power mechanisms, was used to support the great "maneuvers" employed for the Malthusian control of the birthrate, for the populationist incitements, for the medicalization of sex and the psychiatrization of its nongenital forms.
— Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality vol I, chap. IV, sect. Method, rule 3, p. 99

Domestic violence[edit]
Main article: Domestic violence
Domestic violence (DV) is violence that happens within the family. The legal and social understanding of the concept of DV differs by culture. The definition of the term "domestic violence" varies, depending on the context in which it is used.[72] It may be defined differently in medical, legal, political or social contexts. The definitions have varied over time, and vary in different parts of the world.
The Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence states that:[73]

" “domestic violence” shall mean all acts of physical, sexual, psychological or economic violence that occur within the family or domestic unit or between former or current spouses or partners, whether or not the perpetrator shares or has shared the same residence with the victim".

In 1993, the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women identified domestic violence as one of three contexts in which violence against women occurs, describing it as:[74]

"Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring in the family, including battering, sexual abuse of female children in the household, dowry-related violence, marital rape, female genital mutilation and other traditional practices harmful to women, non-spousal violence and violence related to exploitation".

Family violence[edit]
Family violence is a broader definition, often used to include child abuse, elder abuse, and other violent acts between family members.[75]
Child abuse is defined by the WHO as:[76]

"Child maltreatment, sometimes referred to as child abuse and neglect, includes all forms of physical and emotional ill-treatment, sexual abuse, neglect, and exploitation that results in actual or potential harm to the child’s health, development or dignity. Within this broad definition, five subtypes can be distinguished – physical abuse; sexual abuse; neglect and negligent treatment; emotional abuse; and exploitation." There exists legislation to prevent and punish the occurrence of these offences. There are laws regarding familial sexual activity, which states that it is a criminal offence to have any kind of sexual relationship between one's grandparent, parent, sibling, aunt or uncle.[77][78]

Elder abuse is, according to the WHO: "a single, or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust which causes harm or distress to an older person".[79]
Parental abuse of children (child abuse)[edit]
Main article: Parental abuse of children
Child abuse is the physical, sexual or emotional maltreatment or neglect of a child or children.[80] In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Department for Children and Families (DCF) define child maltreatment as any act or series of acts of commission or omission by a parent or other caregiver that results in harm, potential for harm, or threat of harm to a child.[81] Child abuse can occur in a child's home, or in the organizations, schools or communities the child interacts with. There are four major categories of child abuse: neglect, physical abuse, psychological or emotional abuse, and sexual abuse.
Parental abuse by children[edit]
Main article: Parental abuse by children
Abuse of parents by their children is a common but under reported and under researched subject. Parents are quite often subject to levels of childhood aggression in excess of normal childhood aggressive outbursts, typically in the form of verbal or physical abuse. Parents feel a sense of shame and humiliation to have that problem, so they rarely seek help and there is usually little or no help available anyway.[82][83]
Elder abuse[edit]
Main article: Elder abuse
Elder abuse is "a single, or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust, which causes harm or distress to an older person."[84] This definition has been adopted by the World Health Organization from a definition put forward by Action on Elder Abuse in the UK. Laws protecting the elderly from abuse are similar to, and related to, laws protecting dependent adults from abuse.
The core element to the harm of elder abuse is the "expectation of trust" of the older person toward their abuser. Thus, it includes harms by people the older person knows or with whom they have a relationship, such as a spouse, partner or family member, a friend or neighbor, or people that the older person relies on for services. Many forms of elder abuse are recognized as types of domestic violence or family violence.
Forced and child marriage[edit]
Main articles: Forced marriage and Child marriage
Forced and child marriages are practiced in certain regions of the world, particularly in Asia and Africa, and these types of marriages are associated with a high rate of domestic violence.[85][86][87][88]
A forced marriage is a marriage where one or both participants are married without their freely given consent.[89] The line between forced marriage and consensual marriage may become blurred, because the social norms of many cultures dictate that one should never oppose the desire of one's parents/relatives in regard to the choice of a spouse; in such cultures it is not necessary for violence, threats, intimidation etc. to occur, the person simply "consents" to the marriage even if he/she doesn't want it, out of the implied social pressure and duty. The customs of bride price and dowry, that exist in parts of the world, can lead to buying and selling people into marriage.[90][91]
A child marriage is a marriage where one or both spouses are under 18.[92][85] Child marriage was common throughout history but is today condemned by international human rights organizations.[93][94][95] Child marriages are often arranged between the families of the future bride and groom, sometimes as soon as the girl is born.[93] Child marriages can also occur in the context of marriage by abduction.[93]
The concept of family honor[edit]
Main article: Family honor
Further information: Culture of honor and Honor killing
Family honor is an abstract concept involving the perceived quality of worthiness and respectability that affects the social standing and the self-evaluation of a group of related people, both corporately and individually.[96][97] The family is viewed as the main source of honor and the community highly values the relationship between honor and the family.[98] The conduct of family members reflects upon family honor and the way the family perceives itself, and is perceived by others.[97] In cultures of honor maintaining the family honor is often perceived as more important than either individual freedom, or individual achievement.[99] In extreme cases, engaging in acts that are deemed to tarnish the honor of the family results in honor killings. An honor killing is the homicide of a member of a family or social group by other members, due to the perpetrators' belief that the victim has brought shame or dishonor upon the family or community, usually for reasons such as refusing to enter an arranged marriage, being in a relationship that is disapproved by their relatives, having sex outside marriage, becoming the victim of rape, dressing in ways which are deemed inappropriate, or engaging in homosexual relations.[100][101][102][103][104]
Economic issues[edit]
A family is often part of a sharing economy with common ownership.
Dowry, bride price and dower[edit]
Further information: Dowry, Bride price, and Dower




A traditional, formal presentation of the bride price at a Thai engagement ceremony.


Dowry is property (money, goods, or estate) that a wife or wife's family gives to her husband when the wife and husband marry.[105] Offering dowry was common in many cultures historically (including in Europe and North America), but this practice today is mostly restricted to some areas primarily in South Asia (India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh).
Bride price, (also bridewealth or bride token), is property paid by the groom or his family to the parents of a woman upon the marriage of their daughter to the groom. It is practiced mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of South-East Asia (Thailand, Cambodia), and parts of Central Asia.
Dower is property given to the bride herself by the groom at the time of marriage, and which remains under her ownership and control.[106]
Property regimes and taxation[edit]
In some countries married couples benefit from various taxation advantages not available to a single person or to unmarried couples. For example, spouses may be allowed to average their combined incomes. Some jurisdictions recognize common law marriage or de facto relations for this purposes. In some jurisdictions there is also an option of civil partnership or domestic partnership.
Different property regimes exist for spouses. In many countries, each marriage partner has the choice of keeping their property separate or combining properties. In the latter case, called community property, when the marriage ends by divorce each owns half. In lieu of a will or trust, property owned by the deceased generally is inherited by the surviving spouse.
Rights and laws[edit]
Reproductive rights[edit]
Main article: Reproductive rights
Further information: Forced sterilization, Forced pregnancy, and Forced abortion
Reproductive rights are legal rights and freedoms relating to reproduction and reproductive health. These include the right to decide on issues regarding the number of children born, family planning, contraception, and private life, free from coercion and discrimination; as well as the right to access health services and adequate information.[107][108][109][110] According to UNFPA, reproductive rights "include the right to decide the number, timing and spacing of children, the right to voluntarily marry and establish a family, and the right to the highest attainable standard of health, among others".[111] Family planning refers to the factors that may be considered by individuals and couples in order for them to control their fertility, anticipate and attain the desired number of children and the spacing and timing of their births.[112][113]
The state and church have been, and still are in some countries, involved in controlling the size of families, often using coercive methods, such as bans on contraception or abortion (where the policy is a natalist one - for example through tax on childlessness) or conversely, discriminatory policies against large families or even forced abortions (e.g., China's one-child policy in place from 1978 to 2015). Forced sterilization has often targeted ethnic minority groups, such as Roma women in Eastern Europe,[114][115] or indigenous women in Peru (during the 1990s).[116]
Parents' rights[edit]
The parents' rights movement is a movement whose members are primarily interested in issues affecting parents and children related to family law, specifically parental rights and obligations. Mothers' rights movements focus on maternal health, workplace issues such as labor rights, breastfeeding, and rights in family law. The fathers' rights movement is a movement whose members are primarily interested in issues related to family law, including child custody and child support, that affect fathers and their children.[117]
Children's rights[edit]
Main article: Children's rights
Children's rights are the human rights of children, with particular attention to the rights of special protection and care afforded to minors, including their right to association with both parents, their right to human identity, their right to be provided in regard to their other basic needs, and their right to be free from violence and abuse.[118][119][120]
Marriage rights[edit]
Main article: Marriage laws
Each jurisdiction has its own marriage laws. These laws differ significantly from country to country; and these laws are often controversial. Areas of controversy include women's rights as well as same-sex marriage.
Legal reforms[edit]
Legal reforms to family laws have taken place in many countries during the past few decades. These dealt primarily with gender equality within marriage and with divorce laws. Women have been given equal rights in marriage in many countries, reversing older family laws based on the dominant legal role of the husband. Coverture, which was enshrined in the common law of England and the US for several centuries and throughout most of the 19th century, was abolished. In some European countries the changes that lead to gender equality were slower. The period of 1975-1979 saw a major overhaul of family laws in countries such as Italy,[121][122] Spain,[123] Austria,[124][124] West Germany,[125][126] and Portugal.[127] In 1978, the Council of Europe passed the Resolution (78) 37 on equality of spouses in civil law.[128] Among the last European countries to establish full gender equality in marriage were Switzerland. In 1985, a referendum guaranteed women legal equality with men within marriage.[129][130] The new reforms came into force in January 1988.[131] In Greece, in 1983, legislation was passed guaranteeing equality between spouses, abolishing dowry, and ending legal discrimination against illegitimate children.[132][133] In 1981, Spain abolished the requirement that married women must have their husbands’ permission to initiate judicial proceedings[134] the Netherlands,[135][136] and France [137] in the 1980s. In recent decades, the marital power has also been abolished in African countries that had this doctrine, but many African countries that were former French colonies still have discriminatory laws in their marriages regulations, such regulations originating in the Napoleonic Code that has inspired these laws.[134] In some countries (predominantly Roman Catholic) divorce was legalized only recently (e.g. Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011)) although annulment and legal separation were options. Philippines still does not allow divorce. (see Divorce law by country). The laws pertaining to the situation of children born outside marriage have also been revised in many countries (see Legitimacy (family law)).
Health[edit]




Global maternal mortality rate per 100 000 live births, (2010)[138]


Family medicine[edit]
Main article: Family medicine
Family medicine is a medical specialty devoted to comprehensive health care for people of all ages; it is based on knowledge of the patient in the context of the family and the community, emphasizing disease prevention and health promotion.[139] The importance of family medicine is being increasingly recognized.[140]




World infant mortality rates in 2012[141]


Maternal mortality[edit]
Main article: Maternal mortality
Maternal mortality or maternal death is defined by WHO as "the death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management but not from accidental or incidental causes."[142] Historically, maternal mortality was a major cause of women's death. In recent decades, advances in healthcare have resulted in rates of maternal mortality having dropped dramatically, especially in Western countries. Maternal mortality however remains a serious problem in many African and Asian counties.[142][143]
Infant and child mortality[edit]
Main articles: Infant mortality and Child mortality
Infant mortality is the death of a child less than one year of age. Child mortality is the death of a child before the child's fifth birthday. Like maternal mortality, infant and child mortality were common throughout history, but have decreased significantly in modern times.[144][145]
Politics[edit]




Parents with child statue, Hrobákova street, Petržalka, Bratislava






The Family, a sculpture by Robert Thomas, in Cardiff


Family policies differ significantly between countries. Depending on jurisdiction, family policy may have a multiplicity of functions: horizontal redistribution, the enhancement of individual choices, increasing fertility rates, supporting economic growth and productivity, as well as reducing gender inequalities (Ferragina and Seeleib-Kaiser 2015).[146] From a societal perspective, family policies can contribute to "horizontal redistribution" between generations, as well as between households with and without children; to favour individual choices by supporting the reconciliation between care and paid work; and to reduce the costs of having children and child poverty. From an economic perspective, employment-oriented family policy is part of an overall redesign of welfare states geared to foster "active citizenship", also among mothers who were formerly not employed, through the development of an "enabling state". More generous family policies are said to lead to higher employment rates for women, mitigate the risk of unemployment for mothers after a substantial period of leave, support a social investment strategy, and offset some of the costs of raising children. From many feminist perspectives, family policies should aim at equalising opportunities between men and women through de-familialising care, encouraging men's involvement in care work, and facilitating employment opportunities for women. Profound social, economic, and cultural changes have led in many societies to the decline of the "male breadwinner model" and the move towards a variety of "adult worker models" (Daly 2011). Nevertheless, family policy expansion has not always fundamentally challenged gender inequalities: overall men have not increased their contribution to care work sufficiently to "compensate" for women's increased labour force participation and slightly reduced participation in care.
In an era of perceived permanent austerity and overall welfare state retrenchment, rich OECD countries have not been prevented from expanding family policies (Ferragina and Seeleib-Kaiser 2015).[146] In fact, in many of these countries there has been an expansion of family policies, leading to a socialisation of family care responsibilities, traditionally disproportionately performed by women (Daly and Lewis 2000). Although at the institutional policy level, the expansion of family policy might be characterised as a "silent revolution", relevant for gender equality, a cautious interpretation might be necessary: gender inequalities in income, opportunities, leisure and other significant outcomes remain and are sometimes sustained by policy, even if there is an observed shift in their character towards support for women's employment (Ferragina and Seeleib-Kaiser 2015).
The policy shift has been particularly significant in countries that had previously emphasised more conservative approaches to family policies, such as Germany, Ireland, Japan, and Norway. Hence, it can no longer be assumed that in the majority of rich OECD countries care for young children will be mainly provided through unpaid work within the family. Nevertheless, a certain number of countries still fail to provide adequate childcare arrangements, constituting a barrier for full-time maternal employment. Furthermore, in some countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, gender discrimination continues to strongly intersect with class; high childcare costs constitute a disincentive to labour force participation, especially among less educated and unskilled women (Esping-Andersen 2009). This means that higher-class and more educated women tend to have better opportunities than women belonging to a lower social class.
Partisanship and women's political agency have been the main drivers for family policy change during the 1980s and 1990s in many countries. For the 2000s, however, the importance of these drivers has significantly declined. As societal preferences have undergone profound changes — to some extent driven by the activities of women's equality movements, as well as by the experience of women's employment — the policy preferences of voters have also changed. Electorates in western democracies increasingly want policies supporting "modern" family lifestyles which depend on women's employment (Ferragina and Seeleib-Kaiser 2015). As political parties react to these changed policy preferences, the traditional differences in family policy positions between political parties decline. The extent to which this translates into support for gender equality, and how such equality might be defined, is as yet not decided. However, societal policy preferences, long believed to be set in stone, are undergoing profound changes; and public opinion increasingly matters for changing policies. The changed policy preferences are also mirrored in new political discourses that prioritise social investment and the preservation of the human capital of women, especially of those who are highly skilled. The expansion of family policies geared to supporting women's employment and investment in children is very likely to continue in western democracies.(Ferragina and Seeleib-Kaiser 2015).[146]
While in many parts of the world family policies seek to promote a gender-equal organization of the family life, in others the male-dominated family continues to be the official policy of the authorities, which is also supported by law. For instance, the Civil Code of Iran states at Article 1105: "In relations between husband and wife; the position of the head of the family is the exclusive right of the husband".[147]
In some parts of the world, some governments promote a specific form of family, such as that based on traditional family values. The term 'family values' is often used in political discourse in some countries, its general meaning being that of traditional or cultural values that pertain to the family's structure, function, roles, beliefs, attitudes, and ideals, usually involving the "traditional family" - a middle-class family with a breadwinner father and a homemaker mother, raising their biological children. Any deviation from this family model is considered a "nontraditional family".[148] These family ideals are often advanced through policies such as marriage promotion. Some jurisdictions outlaw practices which they deem as socially or religiously unacceptable, such as fornication, cohabitation or adultery.
Work-family balance[edit]
Further information: Work–life balance and Work–family balance in the United States
Work-family balance is a concept involving proper prioritizing between work/career and family life. It includes issues relating to the way how work and families intersect and influence each other. At a political level, it is reflected through policies such maternity leave and paternity leave. Since the 1950s, social scientists as well as feminists have increasingly criticized gendered arrangements of work and care, and the male breadwinner role, and policies are increasingly targeting men as fathers, as a tool of changing gender relations.[149]
Protection of private and family life[edit]
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides a right to respect for one's "private and family life, his home and his correspondence", subject to certain restrictions that are "in accordance with law" and "necessary in a democratic society".[150]


“
Article 8 – Right to respect for private and family life
1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

”


Criticism[edit]
Certain social scientists have advocated the abolition of the family. An early opponent of the family was Socrates whose position was outlined by Plato in The Republic.[151] In Book 5 of The Republic, Socrates tells his interlocutors that a just city is one in which citizens have no family ties.[152][153]
The family being such a deep-rooted and much-venerated institution, few intellectuals have ventured to speak against it. Familialism has been atypically defined as a “social structure where … a family's values are held in higher esteem than the values of the individual members of the family.”[154] Favoritism granted to relatives regardless of merit is called nepotism.
The Russian-American rationalist and individualist philosopher, novelist and playwright Ayn Rand compared partiality towards consanguinity with racism, as a small-scale manifestation of the latter.[155] “The worship of the family is merely racism, like a crudely primitive first installment on the worship of the tribe. It places the accident of birth above a man's values and duty to the tribe above a man's right to his own life.”[156] Additionally, she spoke in favor of childfree lifestyle, while following it herself.[155]
The British social critic, poet, mountaineer and occultist Aleister Crowley censured the institution of family in his works: “Horrid word, family! Its very etymology accuses it of servility and stagnation. / Latin, famulus, a servant; Oscan, Faamat, he dwells. … [T]hink what horrid images it evokes from the mind. Not only Victorian; wherever the family has been strong, it has always been an engine of tyranny. Weak members or weak neighbours: it is the mob spirit crushing genius, or overwhelming opposition by brute arithmetic. … In every Magical, or similar system, it is invariably the first condition which the Aspirant must fulfill: he must once and for all and for ever put his family outside his magical circle.”[157]
The American journalist Marty Nemko considers family to be overrated. “Politicians, clerics, and just plain folks extol family as our most important institution. / I believe family is overrated. So many people suffer inordinately from family. … / Millions of people don't even speak with a family member. Millions more spend years and fortunes on therapists, trying to undo the ills that family perpetrated on them. / All this shouldn’t be surprising. After all, unlike with friends, we are placed in our family of origin at random, with no say in the matter.”[158]
The family and social justice[edit]
One of the controversies regarding the family is the application of the concept of social justice to the private sphere of family relations, in particular with regard to the rights of women and children. Throughout much of the history, most philosophers who advocated for social justice focused on the public political arena, not on the family structures; with the family often being seen as a separate entity which needed to be protected from outside state intrusion. One notable exception was John Stuart Mill, who, in his work The Subjection of Women, advocated for greater rights for women within marriage and family.[159] Second wave feminists argued that the personal is political, stating that there are strong connections between personal experiences and the larger social and political structures. In the context of the feminist movement of the 1960s and 1970s, this was a challenge to the nuclear family and family values, as they were understood then.[160] Feminists focused on domestic violence, arguing that the reluctance - in law or in practice - of the state to intervene and offer protection to women who have been abused within the family, is in violation of women's human rights, and is the result of an ideology which places family relations outside the conceptual framework of human rights.[161]
Global trends in family composition[edit]
In 2015, Nicholas Eberstadt, political economist at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, described a "global flight from family" in an opinion piece in the Wall Street Journal.[162] Statistics from an infographic by Olivier Ballou showed that,[163]

In 2013, just over 40% of US babies were born outside marriage. The Census bureau estimated that 27% of all children lived in a fatherless home. Europe has seen a surge in child-free adults. One in five 40-something women are childless in Sweden and in Switzerland, in Italy one in four, in Berlin one in three. So-called traditional societies are seeing the same trend. About one-sixth of Japanese women in their forties have never married and about 30% of all woman that age are childless.
— Infographic Olivier Ballou (AEI)

However, Swedish statisticians reported in 2013 that, in contrast to many countries, since the 2000s, fewer children have experienced their parents' separation, childlessness had decreased in Sweden and marriages had increased. It had also become more common for couples to have a third child suggesting that the nuclear family was no longer in decline in Sweden.[164]:10
See also[edit]

Childfree
Childlessness
Familialism
Family economics
Household
Nepotism
Parent
Stepfamily

References[edit]
Citations[edit]



^ [...] from Latin familia 'family servants, domestics collectively, the servants in a household,' thus also 'members of a household, the estate, property; the household, including relatives and servants,' abstract noun formed from famulus 'servant, slave [...]' . Harper, Douglas. "family". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2015-10-24. 
^ Jás Elsner (2007). "The Changing Nature of Roman Art and the Art Historical Problem of Style," in Eva R. Hoffman (ed), Late Antique and Medieval Art of the Medieval World, 11-18. Oxford, Malden & Carlton: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-2071-5, p. 17, Figure 1.3 on p. 18.
^ a b Schneider, David 1984 A Critique of the Study of Kinship. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. p. 182
^ Deleuze-Guattari (1972). Part 2, ch. 3, p. 80
^ Russon, John, (2003) Human Experience: Philosophy, Neurosis, and the Elements of Everyday Life, Albany: State University of New York Press. pp. 61–68.
^ George Peter Murdoch Social Structure p. 13
^ Shyam, Radhey (2009). Clinical Child Psychology. Delhi: Gyan Books. pp. 113–115. ISBN 9788178357614. 
^ Wolf, Eric. 1982 Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California Press. 92
^ Harner, Michael 1975 "Scarcity, the Factors of Production, and Social Evolution," in Population, Ecology, and Social Evolution, Steven Polgar, ed. Mouton Publishers: the Hague.
^ Rivière, Peter 1987 "Of Women, Men, and Manioc", Etnologiska Studier (38).
^ "We have seen that people can refer to their relatives as 'the family.' 'All the family turned up for the funeral.... But of course, my brother didn't bring his family along - they're much too young.' Here the reference is to the offspring (as distinct from 'all' the family). The neighbors were very good, too. 'The Jones came, and their two children. It was nice, the whole family turning up like that.' Here the usage is more restricted than 'relatives' or 'his relatives,' but includes just both parents and offspring. 'Of course, the children will be leaving home soon. It's always sad to see the family break up like that.' Here the reference is not only to parents and children but to their co-residence, that is, to the household.The Family and Industrial Society, 1983, George Allen Unwin, London, page 30
^ Olivia Harris. Kate Young; Carol Wolkowitz; Roslyn McCullagh, eds. Of Marriage and the Market: Women's Subordination Internationally and its Lessons. London: Routeledge. p. 138. 
^ a b "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency". Cia.gov. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Axinn, William G.; Clarkberg, Marin E.; Thornton, Arland (1994). "Family Influences on Family Size Preferences". Demography. 31 (1): 65. doi:10.2307/2061908. ISSN 0070-3370. 
^ Murphy, Michael (2013). "Cross-National Patterns of Intergenerational Continuities in Childbearing in Developed Countries". Biodemography and Social Biology. 59 (2): 101–126. doi:10.1080/19485565.2013.833779. ISSN 1948-5565. 
^ "The Collapse of Marriage by Don Browning – The Christian Century". Religion-online.org. February 7, 2006. pp. 24–28. Retrieved 2007-07-10. 
^ Levitan, Sara (2010). "Working wives and mothers: what happens to family life?" (PDF). Retrieved January 8, 2014. 
^ Smith, Court. "Definitions of Anthropological Terms". Oregonstate.edu. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Fewer than half of U.S. kids today live in a 'traditional' family". Pewresearch.org. 22 December 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Staff writers (March 2014). "The Kids will be alright, even without the Nuclear Family". Pacific Standard magazine. Retrieved 22 April 2017. 
^ Bryant, L. E. (March 2016). The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Family Studies. pp. 1–3. 
^ Godelier, Maurice, trans. Nora Scott, The Metamorphoses of Kinship (London: Verso, 2011 (ISBN 978-1-84467-746-7)), p. 568 (Glossary, entry matrifocal) (trans. from Métamorphoses de la parenté (Librarie Arthème Fayard (apparently), 2004)) (author prof. anthropology, École des hautes études en sciences sociales, Paris).
^ "ALGBTICAL LGBT Glossary of Terminology". ALGBTICAL Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Issues in Counseling of Alabama. 2005–2006. Retrieved May 4, 2016. 
^ Blended and Blessed – Encouraging Step-Families, blendedandblessed.com
^ "Department of Social and Developmental Psychology: PPSIS Faculty, Academic Profile". Sdp.cam.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 2011-11-25. Retrieved 2011-03-26. 
^ Civil Action No. 1:09-cv-10309 Archived 2010-12-25 at the Wayback Machine. paragraph 17
^ McCornack, Steven (2010). Reflect & Relate an introduction to interpersonal communication. Boston/NY: Bedford/St. Martin's. pp. 369–370. 
^ Cf. "Monogamy" in Britannica World Language Dictionary, R.C. Preble (ed.), Oxford-London 1962, p. 1275:1. The practice or principle of marrying only once. opp. to digamy now rare 2. The condition, rule or custom of being married to only one person at a time (opp. to polygamy or bigamy) 1708. 3. Zool. The habit of living in pairs, or having only one mate; The same text repeats The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, W. Little, H.W. Fowler, J. Coulson (ed.), C.T. Onions (rev. & ed.,) Oxford 1969, 3rd edition, vol.1, p.1275; OED Online. March 2010. Oxford University Press. 23 Jun. 2010 Cf. Monogamy in Merriam-Webster Dictionary
^ "Opening Up: Challenging Myths about Consensual Non-Monogamy - - - Science of Relationships". Scienceofrelationships.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ a b Zeitzen, Miriam Koktvedgaard (2008). Polygamy: a cross-cultural analysis. Berg. p. 3. ISBN 1-84520-220-1. 
^ McCullough, Derek. "Polyamory". Ejhs.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Zeitzen, Miriam K. (2008). Polygamy: A Cross-Cultural Analysis. Oxford: Berg. p. 9. 
^ a b Starkweather, Katherine; Hames, Raymond (2012). "A Survey of Non-Classical Polyandry". 23 (2): 149–150. 
^ By replacement in the definition of the notion of "generation" by meiosis". Since identical twins are not separated by meiosis, there are no "generations" between them, hence n=0 and r=1. See genetic-genealogy.co.uk.
^ "Kin Selection". Benjamin/Cummings. Retrieved 2007-11-25. 
^ Tooker, Elisabeth. "Another View of Morgan on Kinship." Current Anthropology 20, no. 1 (March 1979): 131–134.
^ "1 in 5 US moms have kids with multiple dads, study says". Nbcnews.com. 1 April 2011. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Benokraitis, N. V. Marriages and Families. 7th Edition, Pearson Education, Inc., 2011
^ Shepard, Jon; Greene, Robert W. (2003). Sociology and You. Ohio: Glencoe McGraw-Hill. pp. A–22. ISBN 0-07-828576-3. 
^ Stone, Linda (2006). Kinship and Gender: An Introduction. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. pp. 168–169. ISBN 978-0-8133-4302-0. 
^ Ezzell, Carol (June 2001). "The Himba and the Dam". Scientific American. 284 (6): 80–90. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0601-80. PMID 11396346. 
^ "Sociology/Founding the discipline". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2009-07-26. 
^ Morgan 1877
^ "Cultural Anthropology". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2009-07-22. 
^ "The Marxists Internet Archive". Retrieved 2009-07-17. 
^ Williams, Brian; Sawyer, Stacey C.; Wahlstrom, Carl M. (2005). Marriages, Families & Intimate Relationships. Boston, MA: Pearson. 0-205-36674-0. 
^ Zinn, Maxine Baca; Eitzen, D. Stanley (2002). Diversity in families (6 ed.). Allyn and Bacon. p. 557. ISBN 978-0-205-33522-0. Retrieved 2012-01-06. This 'family as haven' image of a refuge from an impersonal world characterizes the family as a place of intimacy, love, and trust in which individuals may escape the competition of dehumanizing forces in modern society. Christopher Lasch (1977:8) has named this image a 'haven in a heartless world' and described it as a glorification of private life made necessary by the deprivations experienced in the public world. 
^ Zinn and Eitzen (1987) Diversity in American families, p. 3
^ Zinn and Eitzen (1987) Diversity in American families, p. 3
^ Zinn and Eitzen (1987) Diversity in American families, p. 8
^ Zinn and Eitzen (1987) Diversity in American families, p. 8
^ "Changing Patterns of Nonmarital Childbearing in the United States". CDC/National Center for Health Statistics. May 13, 2009. Retrieved September 24, 2011. 
^ Tavernise, Sabrina (2011). "Married Couples Are No Longer a Majority, Census Finds". Retrieved January 8, 2014. 
^ Coontz, Stephanie. 2005. Marriage, A History: How Love Conquered Marriage. New York: Viking/Penguin Books.
^ Male and Female, New York, 1949. pp. 193-194
^ ceu@scotland.gsi.gov.uk, Scottish Government, St. Andrew's House, Regent Road, Edinburgh EH1 3DG Tel:0131 556 8400 (27 April 2006). "Family Matters - Couples - Cohabitation". Scotland.gov.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Full list". Coe.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Full list". Coe.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "About Family". Word Press. 31 March 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2014. 
^ a b c Foucault (1984) Preface to the American edition of Anti-Œdipus pp. xiii–xvi.
^ Wilhelm Reich (1933) The Mass Psychology of Fascism, Chapter V, The Sex-Economic Presuppositions of the Authoritarian Family
^ John Phillips Structural Linguistics and Anthropology, courses.nus.edu.sg
^ a b Wilhelm Reich [1936] The Sexual Revolution, Chapter V, The compulsive family as educational apparatus, pp. 71–77
^ a b Deleuze-Guattari (1972). Part 2, ch. 7, pp. 129–31
^ Lacan 1938–2001, pp. 24–25, 56
^ Fugier Pascal, 2007, p.226-8
^ Vattimo, Gianni (October 15, 2004). "Tutto in famiglia". Il Manifesto (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2007-10-11. 
^ (in Italian) Luttazzi, Daniele Bollito misto con mostarda (2005) p. 262, books.google.com
^ Theodor W. Adorno and Stephen Crook Adorno ISBN 0-415-27099-5, p. 9-10, books.google.com
^ E. James Anthony, The Family and the Psychoanalytic Process in Children (1980). Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 35:3–34, pep-web.org
^ Foucault, The History of Sexuality
^ "Definitions of Domestic Violence - Child Welfare Information Gateway". Childwelfare.gov. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Full list". Coe.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "A/RES/48/104. Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women". United Nations. 20 December 1993. 
^ Wallace, p. 2
^ "Child maltreatment". World Health Organization. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Roffee, James (2015). When Yes Actually Means Yes in Rape Justice. 72 - 91". Archived from the original on 2017-02-02. 
^ "Roffee, J. A. (2014). No Consensus on Incest? Criminalisation and Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights". doi:10.1093/hrlr/ngu023].  Missing or empty |url= (help)
^ "Elder abuse". World Health Organization. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Child abuse – definition of child abuse by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia". Thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 15 September 2010. 
^ Leeb, R.T.; Paulozzi, L.J.; Melanson, C.; Simon, T.R.; Arias, I. (1 January 2008). "Child Maltreatment Surveillance: Uniform Definitions for Public Health and Recommended Data Elements". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 20 October 2008. 
^ "Parenting and Family Support - Family Lives (Parentline Plus)". Parentlineplus.org.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ WHEN FAMILY LIFE HURTS: Family experience of aggression in children - Parentline plus 31 October 2010 Archived June 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.
^ elderabus.org.uk, accessed October 12, 2007.
^ a b "Q & A: Child Marriage and Violations of Girls' Rights". Hrw.org. 14 June 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "WHO - Child marriages: 39 000 every day". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "I have a right to - BBC World Service". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ End early and forced marriage - Because I am a Girl - Plan UK Archived March 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "BBC - Ethics - Forced Marriages: Introduction". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "BBC - Ethics - Slavery: Modern slavery". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Gulnara Shahinian. "Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences" (PDF). Ohchr.org. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Child marriage". Unicef.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ a b c "I have a right to - BBC World Service". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 7 October 2014. 
^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-09-09. Retrieved 2014-07-20. 
^ "WHO - Child marriages: 39 000 every day". Who.int. Retrieved 7 October 2014. 
^ Malina, Bruce J. (15 February 2001). The New Testament world: insights from cultural anthropology. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-0-664-22295-6. Retrieved 7 November 2011. 
^ a b Mosquera, Patricia M. R.; Manstead, Antony S. R.; Fischer, Agneta H. (January 2002). "Honor in the Mediterranean and Northern Europe". Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 33 (1): 16–36. doi:10.1177/0022022102033001002. Retrieved 17 October 2011. 
^ Berns, Roberta (2007). Child, family, school, community: socialization and support. Thompson Learning. p. 139. ISBN 0495007587. 
^ McGoldrick, Monica; Giordano, Joseph; Garcia-Preto, Nydia (18 August 2005). Ethnicity and family therapy. Guilford Press. p. 445. ISBN 978-1-59385-020-3. Retrieved 24 October 2011. 
^ "Ethics: Honour Crimes". BBC. 1 January 1970. Retrieved 23 December 2013. 
^ "Honor killing: Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 31 August 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2013. 
^ "Honor killing definition". Dictionary.reference.com. Retrieved 23 December 2013. 
^ "Shocking gay honor killing inspires movie - CNN.com". Edition.cnn.com. Retrieved 16 August 2013. 
^ "Iraqi immigrant convicted in Arizona 'honor killing' awaits sentence - CNN.com". Edition.cnn.com. 23 February 2011. Retrieved 16 August 2013. 
^ "Definition of DOWRY". Merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Goody, Jack (1976). Production and Reproduction: A Comparative Study of the Domestic Domain. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 8. 
^ "Gender, equity, human rights". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "State of World Population 2005 - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". Unfpa.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "WHO - Gender and human rights". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Get Involved". Amnesty.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Supporting the Constellation of Reproductive Rights - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". Unfpa.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Family planning". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Family planning - UNFPA - United Nations Population Fund". Unfpa.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Forced/Coerced Sterilization". Stopvaw.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "BBC News - Czech regret over sterilisation". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Cabitza, Mattia (6 December 2011). "Peru women fight for justice over forced sterilisation". Bbc.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Collier & Sheldon, 2006, p. 1–26.
^ "Protecting children's rights". Unicef.org. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Children's Rights". Hrw.org. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Children and human rights". Amnesty International. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "The Policy on Gender Equality in Italy" (PDF). Europarl.europa.eu. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Rashida Manjoo. "Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences" (PDF). Ohchr.org. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Solsten, Eric; Meditz, Sandra W., eds. (1988). "Social Values and Attitudes". Spain: A Country Study. Washington: Government Printing Office for the Library of Congress. 
^ a b Contemporary Western European Feminism, by Gisela Kaplan, pp. 133
^ Reconciliation Policy in Germany 1998–2008, Construing the ’Problem’ of the Incompatibility of Paid Employment and Care Work, by Cornelius Grebe; pg 92: "However, the 1977 reform of marriage and family law by Social Democrats and Liberals formally gave women the right to take up employment without their spouses' permission. This marked the legal end of the 'housewife marriage' and a transition to the ideal of 'marriage in partnership'."[1]
^ Further reforms to parental rights law in 1979 gave equal legal rights to the mother and the father. Comparative Law: Historical Development of the Civil Law Tradition in Europe, Latin America, and East Asia, by John Henry Merryman, David Scott Clark, John Owen Haley, pp. 542
^ Women in Portugal, by Commission of the European Communities, Directorate-General Information, p. 32
^ "ON EQUALITY OF SPOUSES IN CIVIL LAW" (PDF). Wcd.coe.int. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "Switzerland profile". Bbc.com. 24 July 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Switzerland, Markus G. Jud, Lucerne,. "The Long Way to Women's Right to Vote in Switzerland: a Chronology". History-switzerland.geschichte-schweiz.ch. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Women's movements of the world: an international directory and reference guide, edited by Sally Shreir, p. 254
^ Reuters (23 October 1983). "AROUND THE WORLD; Greece Approves Family Law Changes". Nytimes.com. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Demos, Vasilikie. (2007) “The Intersection of Gender, Class and Nationality and the Agency of Kytherian Greek Women.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association. August 11
^ a b "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-08-24. Retrieved 2014-08-25. 
^ "Dutch gender and LGBT-equality policy : 2013 - 2016" (PDF). Rm.coe.int. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "2015 Review Report of the Netherlands Government in the context of the twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action" (PDF). Unece.org. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ Although married women in France obtained the right to work without their husbands' permission in 1965,"Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2016-04-03.  and the paternal authority of a man over his family was ended in 1970 (before that parental responsibilities belonged solely to the father who made all legal decisions concerning the children), it was only in 1985 that a legal reform abolished the stipulation that the husband had the sole power to administer the children's property. [2]
^ Country Comparison: Maternal Mortality Rate in The CIA World Factbook.
^ "What is Family Medicine? - Department of Family Medicine". Uchicago.edu. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "WHO - The rising importance of family medicine". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Infant Mortality Rates in 2012 Archived July 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine., UNICEF, 2013.
^ a b "WHO - Maternal mortality ratio (per 100 000 live births)". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Maternal mortality". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "WHO - Infant mortality". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "Children: reducing mortality". Who.int. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ a b c Ferragina, Emanuele; Seeleib-Kaiser, Martin (1 March 2015). "Determinants of a Silent (R)evolution: Understanding the Expansion of Family Policy in Rich OECD Countries". Soc Polit. 22 (1): 1–37. doi:10.1093/sp/jxu027. Retrieved 12 April 2017 – via sp.oxfordjournals.org. 
^ "Wayback Machine" (PDF). Web.archive.org. 11 March 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ N, Panasenko, (2013). "Czech and Slovak Family Patterns and Family Values in Historical, Social and Cultural Context". Journal of Comparative Family Studies. 44 (1): 79–98.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Bjørnholt, M. (2014). "Changing men, changing times; fathers and sons from an experimental gender equality study" (PDF). The Sociological Review. 62 (2): 295–315. doi:10.1111/1467-954X.12156. 
^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2014-10-21. Retrieved 2014-10-20. 
^ "Abolition of the Family for the Guardians and the Use of War (457b-471c)" (PDF). Homepages.gac.edu. Retrieved 23 October 2017. 
^ "SparkNotes: The Republic: Book V". Sparknotes.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ "The Republic Book 5 Summary & Analysis from LitCharts - The creators of SparkNotes". Litcharts.com. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ “Your Dictionary (the Dictionary You Can Understand)”. Dictionary definitions. familialism.
^ a b Heller, Anne C. (2009). Ayn Rand and the World She Made. New York: Doubleday. pp. 320–321. ISBN 978-0-385-51399-9. OCLC 2290274371.  Said in one of the lectures Ayn Rand delivered.
^ Said in one of the public lectures Ayn Rand delivered
^ Crowley, Aleister. Magick Without Tears. Chapter LII “Family: Public Enemy No. 1”. Falcon Press, 1982. ISBN 0-941404-17-X
^ Nemko, Marty. "Family is Overrated. September 12, 2008
^ Satz, Debra (1 January 2017). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 12 April 2017 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
^ Angela Harutyunyan, Kathrin Hörschelmann, Malcolm Miles (2009) Public Spheres After Socialism pp.50-1
^ Patel, Vibhuti. "Domestic Violence: A Violation of Human Rights of Women by Dr. Vibhuti Patel, Director, P.G. S. R". Academia.edu. Retrieved 12 April 2017. 
^ Nicholas Eberstadt (February 21, 2015), The Global Flight From the Family: It’s not only in the West or prosperous nations—the decline in marriage and drop in birth rates is rampant, with potentially dire fallout, Wall Street Journal, retrieved February 26, 2017, ‘They’re getting divorced, and they’ll do anything NOT to get custody of the kids.” So reads the promotional poster, in French, for a new movie, “Papa ou Maman" 
^ Nicholas Eberstadt (February 23, 2015), The global flight from the family, Washington: American Enterprise Institute, retrieved February 26, 2017, keywords Economic Development, Foreign and Defense Policy, International Economics, Infographic by Olivier Ballou global trends in family composition 
^ Johan Tollebrant and Lotta Persson (October 2013). Assumptions on future fertility New family values and increased childbearing in Sweden? (PDF). United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (Report). Joint Eurostat/UNECE Work Session on Demographic Projections. Rome, Italy. Retrieved February 26, 2017. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)



Sources[edit]


Race, Class, & Gender: An Anthology, 9th edition. Editors: Margaret L. Anderson and Patricia Hill Collins. Cengage Learning.


Bibliography[edit]


Monica McGoldrick; Nydia A. Garcia Preto; Betty A. Carter (12 June 2015). The Expanding Family Life Cycle: Individual, Family, and Social Perspectives. Pearson Education. ISBN 978-0-205-96806-0. 
Daly, Mary (2011) What adult worker model? A critical look at recent social policy reform in Europe from a gender and family perspective. Social Politics,18(1):1-23.
Daly, Mary and Lewis, Jane (2000). The concept of social care and the analysis of contemporary welfare states. British Journal of Sociology, 51(2):281-98.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta (2009). The incomplete revolution: Adapting welfare states to women's new roles. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Ferragina, Emanuele and Seeleib-Kaiser, Martin (2015) "Determinants of a Silent (R)evolution:Understanding the Expansion of Family Policy in Rich OECD Countries", Social politics 22 (1), 1-37.
Forbes, Scott, A Natural History of Families, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005), ISBN 0-691-09482-9
Foucault, Michel (1978). The History of Sexuality: Volume I: An Introduction. (New York: Vintage Books). ISBN 978-0-679-72469-8
Gilroy, Paul Identity Belonging and the Critique of Pure Sameness in Gilroy, Paul (2000) Against Race: Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Color Line, (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press), Ch. I.3, pp. 97–133
Goody, Jack The Development of the Family and Marriage in Europe (Cambridge University Press, 1980); translated into Spanish, French, Italian, Portuguese.
Mock, Douglas W., More Than Kin and Less Than Kind, (Belknap Press, 2004), ISBN 0-674-01285-2
Schneider, David M., American Kinship: a cultural approach (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980).
Tabak, I.; Mazur, J.; Granado, M.C.; Örkenyi, Á.; Zaborskis, A.; Aasvee, K.; Moreno, C. (2012). "Examining trends in parent-child communication in Europe over 12 years". The Journal of Early Adolescence. 32 (1): 26–54. doi:10.1177/0272431611419509. Retrieved January 8, 2014. 
Chevallier, Denis. "Famille et parenté: une bibliographie". Terrain.revues.org (in French). Retrieved January 8, 2014. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Families.





Look up family in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Family



 "Family". Encyclopædia Britannica. 10 (11th ed.). 1911. 
Family database, OECD,
Family Research Laboratory, unh.edu
"Family evolution and contemporary social transformations" (PDF). Seres.fcs.ucr.ac.cr. Estación de Economía Política. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-10-29. 
Family Facts: Social Science Research on Family, Society & Religion (a Heritage Foundation site). familyfacts.org
Families Australia – independent peak not-for-profit organisation. familiesaustralia.org.au
FamilyPlatform – A consortium of 12 organisations providing input into the European Union's Socio-Economic and Humanities Research Agenda on Family Research and Family Policies.
Unitedfamilies.org, International organisation
UN.org, Families and Development
Family, marriage and "de facto" unions, Vatican.va







v
t
e


Family






History
Household
Nuclear family
Extended family
Conjugal family
Immediate family
Matrifocal family
Blended family
Dysfunctional family
Polyfidelitous families





First-degree relatives



Parent

Father
Mother


Child

Daughter
Son


Sibling

Brother
Sister







Second-degree relatives



Grandparent
Grandchild
Aunt
Uncle
Nephew and niece





Third-degree relatives



Great-grandparent
Great-grandchild
Grand-nephew and grand-niece
Cousin





Family-in-law



Spouse

Wife
Husband


Parents-in-law
Siblings-in-law





Stepfamily



Stepfather
Stepmother
Stepchild
Stepsibling





Kinship



Adoption
Affinity
Consanguinity
Disownment
Divorce
Estrangement
Fictive kinship
Marriage
Nurture kinship





Lineage



Bilateral descent
Common ancestor
Family name
Family tree
Genealogy
Heirloom
Heredity
Inheritance
Matrilineality
Patrilineality
Pedigree chart
Progenitor





Relationships



Agape (parental love)
Eros (marital love)
Filial piety
Philia (friendly love)
Storge (familial love)





Holidays



Mother's Day

U.S.


Father's Day
Father-Daughter Day
Siblings Day
National Grandparents Day
Parents' Day
Wedding anniversary





Related



Sociology of the family
Museum of Motherhood












v
t
e


Family rights



Elements



Fetal rights
Children's rights
Matrimonial rights
Mothers' rights
Youth rights
Reproductive rights





Rights movements



Children's
Fathers'
Parents'





See also



Family law
Parental responsibility
Parental liability












v
t
e


Parenting



Types



Adoptive
Alloparenting
Complex family
Coparenting
Foster care
Kommune 1
Noncustodial
Nuclear family
Orphaned
Shared
Single parent
Blended family
Surrogacy
In loco parentis





Theories · Areas



Attachment theory
Applied behavior analysis
Behaviorism
Child development
Cognitive development
Developmental psychology
Human development
Love
Maternal bond
Nature versus nurture
Parental investment
Paternal bond
Pediatrics
Social psychology





Styles



Attachment parenting
Concerted cultivation
Gatekeeper parent
Helicopter parent
Nurturant parenting
Slow parenting
Soccer mom
Strict father model
Taking Children Seriously
Work at home parent





Techniques



After-school activity
Allowance
Bedtime
Child care
Co-sleeping
Homeschooling
Latchkey kid
Parent Management Training
Play (date)
Role model
Spoiled child
Television
Toy (educational)





Discipline



Blanket training
Corporal punishment in the home
Curfew
Grounding
Tactical ignoring
Time-out





Abuse



Child abandonment
Child abuse
Child labour
Child neglect
Cinderella effect
Incest
Narcissistic parent
Parental abuse by children
Parental alienation





Legal and social
aspects



Child support
Cost of raising a child
Marriage
Parental responsibility
Deadbeat parent
Paternity
Disownment





Experts



T. Berry Brazelton
Tanya Byron
Bryan Caplan
Rudolf Dreikurs
David Elkind
Jo Frost
Haim Ginott
Thomas Gordon
Alan E. Kazdin
Truby King
Annette Lareau
Penelope Leach
Madeline Levine
William Sears
B. F. Skinner
Benjamin Spock

Baby and Child Care














v
t
e


Substantive human rights




Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.



Civil and political



Cannabis rights
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom from exile
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
Liberty
LGBT rights
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right of self-defense
Security of person
Universal suffrage






Economic, social
and cultural




Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Trade union membership





Sexual and
reproductive



Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Reproductive health
Right to sexuality





Violations



Corporal punishment





War and conflict



Civilian
Combatant
Freedom from genocide
Prisoner of war
War rape









Authority control



GND: 4016397-0
NDL: 00565280











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Family&oldid=818019157"					Categories: FamilyHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 Italian-language sources (it)Articles with Italian-language external linksPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterArticles containing Latin-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2016Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012CS1 French-language sources (fr)Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceWikipedia articles with GND identifiers