



Combined oral contraceptives. Introduced in 1960, "the Pill" has played an instrumental role in family planning for decades.


Family planning is the practice of controlling the number of children in a family and the intervals between their births. Contemporary notions of family planning, however, tend to place a woman and her childbearing decisions at the center of the discussion, as notions of women's empowerment and reproductive autonomy have gained traction in many parts of the world. Family planning may involve consideration of the number of children a woman wishes to have, including the choice to have no children, as well as the age at which she wishes to have them. These matters are influenced by external factors such as marital situation, career considerations, financial position, any disabilities that may affect their ability to have children and raise them, besides many other considerations. If sexually active, family planning may involve the use of contraception[1][2] and other techniques to control the timing of reproduction. Other techniques commonly used include sexuality education,[2][3] prevention and management of sexually transmitted infections,[2] pre-conception counseling[2] and management, and infertility management.[1]
Family planning is sometimes used as a synonym or euphemism for access to and the use of contraception. However, it often involves methods and practices in addition to contraception. Additionally, there are many who might wish to use contraception but are not, necessarily, planning a family (e.g., unmarried adolescents, young married couples delaying childbearing while building a career); family planning has become a catch-all phrase for much of the work undertaken in this realm. It is most usually applied to a female-male couple who wish to limit the number of children they have and/or to control the timing of pregnancy (also known as spacing children). Family planning may encompass sterilization, as well as abortion.[4]
Family planning services are defined as "educational, comprehensive medical or social activities which enable individuals, including minors, to determine freely the number and spacing of their children and to select the means by which this may be achieved".[3]



Contents


1 Purposes

1.1 Health


2 Modern methods

2.1 Contraception
2.2 Assisted reproductive technology
2.3 Finances
2.4 Fertility Awareness


3 International oversight
4 Coercive interfering with family planning

4.1 Forced sterilization
4.2 Sexual violence


5 Family planning, human rights & development
6 Regional variations

6.1 Africa
6.2 China
6.3 Hong Kong
6.4 India
6.5 Iran
6.6 Ireland
6.7 Pakistan
6.8 Russia
6.9 Philippines
6.10 Thailand
6.11 Singapore
6.12 United Kingdom
6.13 United States
6.14 Uzbekistan


7 Obstacles to family planning
8 World Contraception Day
9 See also
10 Footnotes
11 External links



Purposes[edit]
"Raising" a child requires significant amounts of resources: time,[5] social, financial,[6] and environmental. Planning can help assure that resources are available. The purpose of family planning is to make sure that any couple, man, or woman who has a child has the resources that are needed in order to complete this goal.[7][dubious – discuss] With these resources a couple, man or women can explore the options of natural birth, surrogacy, artificial insemination, or adoption. In the other case, if the person does not wish to have a child at the specific time, they can investigate the resources that are needed to prevent pregnancy, such as birth control, contraceptives, or physical protection and prevention.
Health[edit]
See also: Maternal health, Maternal death, and teenage pregnancy
The WHO states about maternal health that:

"Maternal health refers to the health of women during pregnancy, childbirth and the postpartum period. While motherhood is often a positive and fulfilling experience, for too many women it is associated with suffering, ill-health and even death."

About 99% of maternal deaths occur in less developed countries; less than one half occur in sub-Saharan Africa and almost a third in South Asia.[8]
Both early and late motherhood have increased risks. Young teenagers face a higher risk of complications and death as a result of pregnancy.[8] Waiting until the mother is at least 18 years old before trying to have children improves maternal and child health.[9]
Also, if additional children are desired after a child is born, it is healthier for the mother and the child to wait at least 2 years after the previous birth before attempting to conceive (but not more than 5 years).[9] After a miscarriage or abortion, it is healthier to wait at least 6 months.[9]
When planning a family, women should be aware that reproductive risks increase with the age of the woman. Like older men, older women have a higher chance of having a child with autism or Down syndrome, the chances of having multiple births increases, which cause further late-pregnancy risks, they have an increased chance of developing gestational diabetes, the need for a Caesarian section is greater, older women's bodies are not as well-suited for delivering a baby. The risk of prolonged labor is higher. Older mothers have a higher risk of a long labor, putting the baby in distress.
"Family planning benefits the health and well-being of women and families throughout the world. Using contraception can help to avoid unwanted pregnancies and space births; protect against STDs, including HIV/AIDS; and provide other health benefits."[10]




Placard showing negative effects of lack of family planning and having too many children and infants (Ethiopia)


Modern methods[edit]
Modern methods of family planning include birth control, assisted reproductive technology and family planning programs.
In regard to the use of modern methods of contraception, The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) says that, “Contraceptives prevent unintended pregnancies, reduce the number of abortions, and lower the incidence of death and disability related to complications of pregnancy and childbirth.” [11] UNFPA states that, “If all women with an unmet need for contraceptives were able to use modern methods, an additional 24 million abortions (14 million of which would be unsafe), 6 million miscarriages, 70,000 maternal deaths and 500,000 infant deaths would be prevented.” [11]
In cases where couples may not want to have children just yet, family planning programs help a lot. Federal family planning programs reduced childbearing among poor women by as much as 29 percent, according to a University of Michigan study.[12]
Adoption is another option used to build a family. There are seven steps that one must make towards adoption. You must decide to pursue an adoption, apply to adopt, complete an adoption home study, get approved to adopt, be matched with a child, receive an adoptive placement, and then legalize the adoption.[13]
Contraception[edit]
Main article: Birth control




Placard showing positive effects of family planning (Ethiopia)


A number of contraceptive methods are available to prevent unwanted pregnancy. There are natural methods and various chemical based methods. range of contraceptive methods, each with particular advantages and disadvantages. Behavioral methods to avoid pregnancy that involve vaginal intercourse include the withdrawal and calendar-based methods, which have little up front cost and are readily available.. Long-acting reversible contraceptive methods, such as intrauterine device (IUD) and implant are highly effective and convenient, requiring little user action, but do come with risks. When cost of failure is included, IUDs and vasectomy are much less costly than other methods. In addition to providing birth control, male and/or female condoms protect against sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Condoms may be used alone, or in addition to other methods, as backup or to prevent STD. Surgical methods (tubal ligation, vasectomy) provide long-term contraception for those who have completed their families.[14]
Assisted reproductive technology[edit]
Main article: Assisted reproductive technology
When, for any reason, a woman is unable to conceive by natural means, she may seek assisted conception. For example, some families or women seek assistance through surrogacy, in which a woman agrees to become pregnant and deliver a child for another couple or person.
There are two types of surrogacy: traditional and gestational. In traditional surrogacy, the surrogate uses her own eggs and carries the child for her intended parents. This procedure is done in a doctor's office through IUI. This type of surrogacy obviously includes a genetic connection between the surrogate and the child. Legally, the surrogate will have to disclaim any interest in the child to complete the transfer to the intended parents. A gestational surrogacy occurs when the intended mother's or a donor egg is fertilized outside the body and then the embryos are transferred into the uterus. The woman who carries the child is often referred to as a gestational carrier. The legal steps to confirm parentage with the intended parents are generally easier than in a traditional because there is no genetic connection between child and carrier.[15]
Sperm donation is another form of assisted conception. It involves donated sperm being used to fertilise a woman's ova by artificial insemination (either by intracervical insemination or intrauterine insemination) and less commonly by invitro fertilization (IVF), but insemination may also be achieved by a donor having sexual intercourse with a woman for the purpose of achieving conception. This method is known as natural insemination (NI).
Mapping of a woman's ovarian reserve, follicular dynamics and associated biomarkers can give an individual prognosis about future chances of pregnancy, facilitating an informed choice of when to have children.[16]
Finances[edit]
See also: Family economics and Cost of raising a child
Family planning is among the most cost-effective of all health interventions.[17] "The cost savings stem from a reduction in unintended pregnancy, as well as a reduction in transmission of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV".[17]
Childbirth and prenatal health care cost averaged $7,090 for normal delivery in the United States in 1996.[18] U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that for a child born in 2007, a U.S. family will spend an average of $11,000 to $23,000 per year for the first 17 years of child's life.[5] (Total inflation-adjusted estimated expenditure: $196,000 to $393,000, depending on household income.)[5] Breaks down cost by age, type of expense, region of country. Adjustments for number of children (one child — spend 24% more, 3 or more spend less on each child.)
Investing in family planning has clear economic benefits and can also help countries to achieve their “demographic dividend,” which means that countries productivity is able to increase when there are more people in the workforce and less dependents.[11] UNFPA says that, “For every dollar invested in contraception, the cost of pregnancy-related care is reduced by $1.47.”[11]
UNFPA states that,
“The lifetime opportunity cost related to adolescent pregnancy – a measure of the annual income a young mother misses out on over her lifetime – ranges from 1 per cent of annual gross domestic product in a large country such as China to 30 per cent of annual GDP in a small economy such as Uganda. If adolescent girls in Brazil and India were able to wait until their early twenties to have children, the increased economic productivity would equal more than $3.5 billion and $7.7 billion, respectively.”[11]
Fertility Awareness[edit]
Main article: Fertility awareness
Fertility awareness refers to a set of practices used to determine the fertile and infertile phases of a woman's menstrual cycle. Fertility awareness methods may be used to avoid pregnancy, to achieve pregnancy, or as a way to monitor gynecological health. Methods of identifying infertile days have been known since antiquity, but scientific knowledge gained during the past century has increased the number and variety of methods. Various methods can be used and the Symptothermal method has achieved a success rates over 99% if used properly.[19]
These methods are used for various reasons: There are no drug-related side effects,[20] it is free to use and only has a small upfront cost, it works both ways, or for religious reasons (the Catholic Church promotes this as the only acceptable form of family planning calling it Natural Family Planning). Its disadvantages are that either abstinence or backup method is required on fertile days, typical use is often less effective than other methods,[21] and it does not protect against sexually transmitted disease.[22]
International oversight[edit]
See also: International Planned Parenthood Federation, Marie Stopes International, and United States Agency for International Development
The world's largest international source of funding for population and reproductive health programs is the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). In 1994, the International Conference on Population and Development set the main goals of its Program of Action as:

Universal access to reproductive health services by 2015
Universal primary education and ending the gender gap in education by 2015
Reducing maternal mortality by 75% by 2015
Reducing infant mortality
Increasing life expectancy at birth
Reducing HIV infection rates in persons aged 15–24 years by 25% in the most-affected countries by 2005, and by 25% globally by 2010

The World Health Organization (WHO) and World Bank estimate that $3 per person per year would provide basic family planning, maternal and neonatal health care to women in developing countries. This would include contraception, prenatal, delivery, and post-natal care in addition to postpartum family planning and the promotion of condoms to prevent sexually transmitted infections.[23]
Coercive interfering with family planning[edit]
Forced sterilization[edit]
Main article: Forced sterilization
Compulsory or forced sterilization programs or government policy attempt to force people to undergo surgical sterilization without their freely given consent. People from marginalized communities are at most risk of forced sterilization.[24] Forced sterilization has occurred in recent years in Eastern Europe (against Roma women),[24][25] and in Peru (during the 1990s against indigenous women).[26] China's one-child policy was intended to limit the rise in population numbers, but in some situations involved forced sterilisation.
Sexual violence[edit]
Main article: Pregnancy from rape
Rape can result in a pregnancy. Rape can occur in a variety of situations, including war rape, forced prostitution and marital rape
In Rwanda, the National Population Office has estimated that between 2,000 and 5,000 children were born as a result of sexual violence perpetrated during the genocide, but victims' groups gave a higher estimated number of over 10,000 children.[27]
Family planning, human rights & development[edit]
Access to safe, voluntary family planning is a human right and is central to gender equality, women’s empowerment and poverty reduction. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) says that, “Some 225 million women who want to avoid pregnancy are not using safe and effective family planning methods, for reasons ranging from lack access to information or services to lack of support from their partners or communities.” [28] UNFPA says that, “Most of these women with an unmet need for contraceptives live in 69 of the poorest countries on earth.” [28]
Over the past 50 years, right-based family planning has enabled the cycle of poverty to be broken resulting in millions of women and children’s lives being saved.[28]
UNFPA says that, “Global consensus that family planning is a human right was secured at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development, in Principle 8 of the Programme of Action: All couples and individuals have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education and means to do so.” [28]
As part of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) universal access to family planning is one of the key factors contributing to development and reducing poverty. Family planning creates benefits in areas such as, gender quality and women's health, access to sexual education and higher education, and improvements in maternal and child health.[28]
UNFPA and the Guttmacher Institute say that,
"Serving all women in developing countries that currently have an unmet need for modern contraceptives would prevent an additional 54 million unintended pregnancies, including 21 million unplanned births, 26 million abortions and seven million miscarriages; this would also prevent 79,000 maternal deaths and 1.1 million infant deaths."[29]
Regional variations[edit]




A family planning facility in Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia


Africa[edit]
Main article: Birth control in Africa
Most of the countries with lowest rates of contraceptive use, highest maternal, infant, and child mortality rates, and highest fertility rates are in Africa.[30][31][32][33][34] Only about 30% of all women use birth control, although over half of all African women would like to use birth control if it was available to them.[35][36] The main problems that preventing access to and use of birth control are unavailability, poor health care services, spousal disapproval, religious concerns, and misinformation about the effects of birth control.[35] The most available type of birth control is condoms.[37] A rapidly growing population coupled with an increase in preventable diseases means countries in Sub-Saharan Africa face an increasingly younger population.
China[edit]






This article needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (June 2016)



Main article: Family planning policy
China's Family planning policy forced couples to have no more than one child. Beginning in 1979 and being officially phased out in 2015,[38] the policy was instated to control the rapid population growth that was occurring in the nation at that time. With the rapid change in population, China was facing many impacts, including poverty and homelessness. As a developing nation, the Chinese government was concerned that a continuation of the rapid population growth that had been occurring would hinder their development as a nation. The process of family planning varied throughout China, as people differed in their responsiveness to the one-child policy, based on location and socioeconomic status. For example, many families in the cities accepted the policy more readily based on the lack of space, money, and resources that often occurs in the cities. Another example can be found in the enforcement of this rule; people living in rural areas of China were, in some cases, permitted to have more than one child, but had to wait several years after the birth of the first one.[39] However, the people in rural areas of China were more hesitant in accepting this policy. China's population policy has been credited with a very significant slowing of China's population growth which had been higher before the policy was implemented. However, the policy has come under criticism that it has resulted in the abuse of women. Often implementation of the policy has involved forced abortions, forced sterilization, and infanticides. That families desired a male child had a part to play in the number of infanticides. The number of girls that die within their first year of birth is twice that of boys.[40] Another drawback of the policy is that China’s elderly population is now increasing rapidly.[41] However, while the punishment of "unplanned" pregnancy is a large fine, both forced abortion and forced sterilization can be charged with intentional assault, which is punished with up to ten years' imprisonment. Another issue that is raised in the one-child policy in China is the information in regards to naturally giving birth to twins or triplets. If this situation arises, the family is allowed to keep the children because of the natural causes of this impregnation.[citation needed]
Family planning in China had its benefits, and its drawbacks. For example, it helped reduce the population by about 300 million people in its first 20 years.[42] A drawback is that there are now millions of sibling-less people, and in China siblings are very important. Once the parent generation gets older, the children help take care of them, and the work is usually equally split among the siblings.[43] Another benefit of the implementation of the one-child law is that it reduced the fertility rate from about 2.75 children born per woman, to about 1.8 children born per woman in the 1979.[44]
Hong Kong[edit]
Main article: The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong
See also: Two-child policy
In Hong Kong, the Eugenics League was found in 1936, which became The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong in 1950.[45] The organisation provides family planning advice, sex education, birth control services to the general public of Hong Kong. In the 1970s, due to the rapidly rising population, it launched the "Two Is Enough" campaign, which reduced the general birth rate through educational means.[45]
The Family Planning Association of Hong Kong, Hong Kong's national family planning association,[46] founded the International Planned Parenthood Federation with its counterparts in seven other countries.[46]
India[edit]
Main article: Family planning in India
Family planning in India is based on efforts largely sponsored by the Indian government. In the 1965-2009 period, contraceptive usage has more than tripled (from 13% of married women in 1970 to 48% in 2009) and the fertility rate has more than halved (from 5.7 in 1966 to 2.6 in 2009), but the national fertility rate is still high enough to cause long-term population growth. India adds up to 1,000,000 people to its population every 15 days.[47][48][49][50][51]
Iran[edit]
Main article: Family planning in Iran
While Iran's population grew at a rate of more than 3% per year between 1956 and 1986, the growth rate began to decline in the late 1980s and early 1990s after the government initiated a major population control program. By 2007 the growth rate had declined to 0.7 percent per year, with a birth rate of 17 per 1,000 persons and a death rate of 6 per 1,000.[52] Reports by the UN show birth control policies in Iran to be effective with the country topping the list of greatest fertility decreases. UN's Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs says that between 1975 and 1980, the total fertility number was 6.5. The projected level for Iran's 2005 to 2010 birth rate is fewer than two.[53]
In late July 2012, Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei described Iran's contraceptive services as "wrong," and Iranian authorities are slashing birth-control programs in what one Western newspaper (USA Today) describes as a "major reversal" of its long standing policy. Whether program cuts and high-level appeals for bigger families will be successful is still unclear.[54]
Ireland[edit]
Main article: Contraception in the Republic of Ireland
The sale of contraceptives was illegal in Ireland from 1935 until 1980, when it was legalized with strong restrictions, later loosened. It has been argued that the resulting demographic dividend played a role in the economic boom in Ireland that began in the 1990s and ended abruptly in 2008 (the Celtic tiger) was in part due to the legalisation of contraception in 1979 and subsequent decline in the fertility rate.[55] In Ireland the ratio of workers to dependents increased due to lower fertility — the reality of which has been questioned[56] — but was raised further by increased female labor market participation.[citation needed]
Pakistan[edit]
Main article: Family planning in Pakistan
In agreement with the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, Pakistan pledged that by 2010 it would provide universal access to family planning. Additionally, Pakistan’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper has set specific national goals for increases in family planning and contraceptive use.[57] In 2011 just one in five Pakistani women ages 15 to 49 uses modern birth control.[58] Contraception is shunned under traditional social mores that are fiercely defended as fundamentalist Islam gains strength.[58]
Russia[edit]
See also: Demographics of Russia
According to a 2004 study, current pregnancies were termed "desired and timely" by 58% of respondents, while 23% described them as "desired, but untimely", and 19% said they were "undesired". As of 2004, the share of women of reproductive age using hormonal or intrauterine birth control methods was about 46% (29% intrauterine, 17% hormonal).[59] During the soviet era high quality contraceptives were difficult to obtain, and abortion became the most common way of preventing unwanted births. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union abortion rates have fallen considerably, but they are still higher than rates in many developed countries.
Philippines[edit]
In the Philippines, the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012 guarantees universal access to methods on contraception, fertility control, sexual education, and maternal care. While there is general agreement about its provisions on maternal and child health, there is great debate on its mandate that the Philippine government and the private sector will fund and undertake widespread distribution of family planning devices such as condoms, birth control pills, and IUDs, as the government continues to disseminate information on their use through all health care centers.
Thailand[edit]
In 1970, Thailand's government declared a population policy that would battle the country's rapid population growth rate. This policy set a 5-year goal to reduce Thailand's population growth rate from 3 percent to 2.5 percent through methods such as spreading family planning awareness to rural families, or integrating family planning activities into maternal and child healthcare education.[60] Public figures such as Mechai Viravaidya helped spread family planning awareness through public speakings and charitable activities.
Singapore[edit]




In the 1970s the Singaporean government encouraged much smaller families.


Main article: Family planning in Singapore
Population control in Singapore spans two distinct phases: first to slow and reverse the boom in births that started after World War II; and then, from the 1980s onwards, to encourage parents to have more children because birth numbers had fallen below replacement levels.
United Kingdom[edit]
Contraception has been available for free under the National Health Service since 1974, and 74% of reproductive-age women use some form of contraception.[61] The levonorgestrel intrauterine system has been massively popular.[61] Sterilization is popular in older age groups, among those 45–49, 29% of men and 21% of women have been sterilized.[61] Female sterilization has been declining since 1996, when the intrauterine system was introduced.[61] Emergency contraception has been available since the 1970s, a product was specifically licensed for emergency contraception in 1984, and emergency contraceptives became available over the counter in 2001.[61] Since becoming available over the counter it has not reduced the use of other forms of contraception, as some moralists feared it might.[61] In any year only 5% of women of childbearing age use emergency hormonal contraception.[61]
Despite widespread availability of contraceptives, almost half of pregnancies were unintended in 2005.[61] Abortion was legalized in 1967.[61]
United States[edit]
Main article: Birth control in the United States
Despite the availability of highly effective contraceptives, about half of U.S. pregnancies are unintended.[21] Highly effective contraceptives, such as IUD, are underused in the United States.[36] Increasing use of highly effective contraceptives could help meet the goal set forward in Healthy People 2020 to decrease unintended pregnancy by 10%.[36] Cost to the user is one factor preventing many American women from using more effective contraceptives.[36] Making contraceptives available without a copay increases use of highly effective methods, reduces unintended pregnancies, and may be instrumental in achieving the Healthy People 2020 goal.[36]
In the United States, contraceptive use saves about $19 billion in direct medical costs each year.[21] Title X of the Public Health Service Act,[62] is a U.S. government program dedicated to providing family planning services for those in need. But funding for Title X as a percentage of total public funding to family planning client services has steadily declined from 44% of total expenditures in 1980 to 12% in 2006. Medicaid has increased from 20% to 71% in the same time. In 2006, Medicaid contributed $1.3 billion to public family planning.[63] The 1.9 billion spent on publicly funded family planning in 2008 saved an estimated $7 billion in short-term Medicaid costs.[36] Such services helped women prevent an estimated 1.94 million unintended pregnancies and 810,000 abortions.[36]
About 3 out of 10 women in the United States have an abortion by the time they are 45 years old.[64]
A 2017 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that parents' access to family planning programs had a positive economic impact on their subsequent children: " Using the county-level introduction of U.S. family planning programs between 1964 and 1973, we find that children born after programs began had 2.8% higher household incomes. They were also 7% less likely to live in poverty and 12% less likely to live in households receiving public assistance. After accounting for selection, the direct effects of family planning programs on parents’ incomes account for roughly two thirds of these gains."[65]
Uzbekistan[edit]
Main article: Compulsory sterilization in Uzbekistan
In Uzbekistan the government has pushed for uteruses to be removed from women in order to forcibly sterilize them.[66][67]
Obstacles to family planning[edit]
There are many reasons as to why women do not use contraceptives. These reasons include logistical problems, scientific and religious concerns, limited access to transportation in order to access health clinics, lack of education and knowledge and opposition by partners, families or communities plus the fact that no one is able to control their fertility beyond basic behavior involving conception.
UNFPA says that “efforts to increase access must be sensitive to cultural and national contexts, and must consider economic, geographic and age disparities within countries.” [11]
UNFPA states that, “Poorer women and those in rural areas often have less access to family planning services. Certain groups — including adolescents, unmarried people, the urban poor, rural populations, sex workers and people living with HIV also face a variety of barriers to family planning. This can lead to higher rates of unintended pregnancy, increased risk of HIV and other STIs, limited choice of contraceptive methods, and higher levels of unmet need for family planning.” [11]
World Contraception Day[edit]
September 26 is designated as World Contraception Day, devoted to raising awareness of contraception and improving education about sexual and reproductive health, with a vision of "a world where every pregnancy is wanted".[68] It is supported by a group of international NGOs, including:
Asian Pacific Council on Contraception, Centro Latinamericano Salud y Mujer, European Society of Contraception and Reproductive Health, German Foundation for World Population, International Federation of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, International Planned Parenthood Federation, Marie Stopes International, Population Services International, The Population Council, The USAID, Women Deliver.[68]
See also[edit]


Life planning
Natural family planning
natalism and antinatalism
Parental leave
POPLINE (World's largest reproductive health database)
Sex selection
Human overpopulation
Birth in Sri Lanka
Women in Bolivia
Birth in Benin
Abortion in Panama
Opata people
Pledge two or fewer (campaign for smaller families)
Reproductive coercion

International organizations

International Planned Parenthood Federation
Marie Stopes International
Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition

National organizations

British Pregnancy Advisory Service
Family Planning Association (UK)
Family Planning Association India
Family Planning Association of Hong Kong
German Foundation for World Population (DSW)
National Alliance for Optional Parenthood (USA)
Planned Parenthood (USA)


Footnotes[edit]


^ a b Family planning — WHO
^ a b c d What services do family planning clinics provide? — Health Questions — NHS Direct
^ a b US Dept. of Health, Administration for children and families
^ See, e.g., Mischell, D. R. "Family planning: contraception, sterilization, and pregnancy termination." In: Katz, V. L., Lentz, G. M., Lobo, R. A., Gershenson, D. M., eds. Comprehensive Gynecology. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby Elsevier; 2007:chap 14.
^ a b c "Expenditures on Children by Families, 2007; Miscellaneous Publication Number 1528-2007". United States Department of Agriculture, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion. 
^ MsMoney.com — Marriage, Kids & College — Family Planning Archived 2008-07-24 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Office of Family Planning". California Department of Public Health. Archived from the original on 2012-03-08. 
^ a b http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/
^ a b c "Healthy Timing and Spacing of Pregnancy: HTSP Messages". USAID. Retrieved 2008-05-13. 
^ Reproline Family Planning
^ a b c d e f g http://www.unfpa.org/family-planning
^ "Family planning: Federal program reduced births to poor women by nearly 30 percent". Archived from the original on 2011-10-08. Retrieved 2012-03-19. 
^ "How to Adopt". Adoption Exchange Association. Retrieved 21 April 2012. 
^ "Birth control methods fact sheet". Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. 
^ "What is a Surrogate Mother or Gestational Carrier?". Retrieved 21 April 2012. 
^ Nelson, S. M.; Telfer, E. E.; Anderson, R. A. (2012). "The ageing ovary and uterus: New biological insights". Human Reproduction Update. 19 (1): 67–83. doi:10.1093/humupd/dms043. PMC 3508627 . PMID 23103636. 
^ a b Tsui, A. O.; McDonald-Mosley, R.; Burke, A. E. (April 2010). "Family planning and the burden of unintended pregnancies". Epidemiology Review. 32 (1): 152–74. doi:10.1093/epirev/mxq012. PMC 3115338 . PMID 20570955. 
^ Mushinski, M. (1998). "Average charges for uncomplicated vaginal, cesarean, and VBAC deliveries: Regional variations, United States, 1996". Statistical Bulletin. 79 (3): 17–28. PMID 9691358. 
^ Trussell, James (2011). "Contraceptive efficacy". In Hatcher, Robert A.; Trussell, James; Nelson, Anita L.; Cates, Willard Jr.; Kowal, Deborah; Policar, Michael S. (eds.). Contraceptive technology (20th revised ed.). New York: Ardent Media. pp. 779–863. ISBN 978-1-59708-004-0. ISSN 0091-9721. OCLC 781956734. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link) Table 26–1 = Table 3–2 Percentage of women experiencing an unintended pregnancy during the first year of typical use and the first year of perfect use of contraception, and the percentage continuing use at the end of the first year. United States.
^ Manhart, MD; Daune, M; Lind, A; Sinai, I; Golden-Tevald, J (January–February 2013). "Fertility awareness-based methods of family planning: A review of effectiveness for avoiding pregnancy using SORT". Osteopathic Family Physician. 5 (1): 2–8. doi:10.1016/j.osfp.2012.09.002. 
^ a b c James Trussell; Anjana Lalla; Quan Doan; Eileen Reyes; Lionel Pinto; Joseph Gricar (2009). "Cost effectiveness of contraceptives in the United States". Contraception. 79 (1): 5–14. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2008.08.003. PMC 3638200 . PMID 19041435. 
^ "Fertility Awareness Method". Brown University Health Education Website. Brown University. 2012. Retrieved 2012-12-11. 
^ "Promises to Keep: The Toll of Unintended Pregnancies on Women's Lives in the Developing World". Archived from the original on 2008-12-06. Retrieved 2009-02-03. 
^ a b http://www.stopvaw.org/forced_coerced_sterilization
^ http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8375960.stm
^ Peru women fight for justice over forced sterilisation
^ http://people.umass.edu/charli/childrenbornofwar/Mukangendo%20Working%20Paper.pdf
^ a b c d e Choices not chance UNFPA
^ Family planning, health and development UNFPA
^ "Birth Rate". World Bank. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ "Contraceptive prevalence". World Bank. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ "Maternal mortality ratio". World Bank. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ "Fertility rate". World Bank. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ "Mortality rate, under-5". World Bank. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ a b "Family planning". World Health Organization. 2012. 
^ a b c d e f g Cleland, K.; Peipert, J. F.; Westhoff, C.; Spear, S.; Trussell, J. (May 2011). "Family Planning as a Cost-Saving Preventive Health Service". New England Journal of Medicine. 364 (18): e37. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1104373. PMID 21506736. 
^ DeRose, Laurie; F. Nii-Amoo Dodoo; Alex C. Ezeh; Tom O. Owuor (June 2004). "Does Discussion of Family Planning Improve Knowledge of Partner's Attitude Toward Contraceptives?". Guttmacher Institute. 
^ Kane, Penny; Choi, CY (1999). "China's one child family policy". BMJ: British Medical Journal. 319 (7215): 992–994. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7215.992. PMC 1116810 . PMID 10514169. 
^ Chan, Elaine (2005). Cultures of the World China. Marshall Cavendish International. 
^ "Infanticides in China". All Girls Allowed. Retrieved March 27, 2014. 
^ "Today's Research on Aging" (PDF). prb.org/. Population Reference Bureau. Retrieved July 2010.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ FlorCruz, Jaime (27 September 2010). "China copes with promise and perils of one child policy". CNN. Retrieved 20 March 2012. 
^ Rosseberg, Matt. "China's One Child Policy". About.com. Retrieved Feb 4, 2014. 
^ Lin, Zhimin (2006). China Under Reform. Philadelphia: Mason Crest Publishers. 
^ a b History of the Family Planning Association of Hong Kong
^ a b History of International Planned Parenthood Federation Archived 2009-08-13 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Rabindra Nath Pati (2003). Socio-cultural dimensions of reproductive child health. APH Publishing. p. 51. ISBN 978-81-7648-510-4. 
^ Marian Rengel (2000), Encyclopedia of birth control, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 1-57356-255-6, ... In 1997, 36% of married women used modern contraceptives; in 1970, only 13% of married women had ... 
^ India and Family Planning: An Overview (PDF), Department of Family and Community Health, World Health Organization, archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-12-21, retrieved 2009-11-25 
^ G.N. Ramu (2006), Brothers and sisters in India: a study of urban adult siblings, University of Toronto Press, ISBN 0-8020-9077-X 
^ Arjun Adlakha (April 1997), Population Trends: India (PDF), U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census, retrieved 2009-12-05 
^ MSN Encarta Encyclopedia entry on Iran - People and Society Archived 2009-10-31 at WebCite, CIA World factbook 2007 Archived 2012-02-03 at the Wayback Machine.. Archived 2009-10-31.
^ Iran tops world in birth control, payvand.com 04/17/09, accessdate = 2010-03-23
^ Iran urges baby boom, slashes birth-control programs usatoday.com 30 July 2012
^ Bloom, David E.; Canning, David (2003). "Contraception and the Celtic Tiger" (PDF). Economic and Social Review. 34: 229–247. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-11-17. 
^ ESRI says fertility rate is greatly underestimated
^ Hardee, Karen; Leahy, Elizabeth (2007). "Population, Fertility and Family Planning in Pakistan: A Program in Stagnation". Population Action International. 4 (1): 1–12. Archived from the original on 2013-04-26. 
^ a b Brulliard, Karin (15 December 2011). "As Pakistan's population soars, contraceptives remain a hard sell". The Washington Post. Retrieved 19 April 2012. 
^ National Human Development Report Russian Federation 2008, UNDP,pages 47–49, Retrieved on 10 October 2009
^ United Nations. Department of International Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division; International Union for the Scientific Study of Population. Committee for the Analysis of Family Planning Programmes (1982). "Application of Methods of Measuring the Impact of Family Planning Programmes on Fertility: The Case of Thailand". Evaluation of the impact of family planning programmes on fertility : sources of variance. New York : United Nations. p. 183.  |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ a b c d e f g h i Rowlands S (October 2007). "Contraception and abortion". J R Soc Med. 100 (10): 465–8. doi:10.1258/jrsm.100.10.465. PMC 1997258 . PMID 17911129. 
^ U.S. Office of Population Affairs — Legislation Archived 2008-09-20 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Sonfield, A.; Alrich, C.; Gold, R. B. (2008). Public funding for family planning, sterilization and abortion services, FY 1980–2006 (PDF). Occasional Report. 38. New York: Guttmacher Institute. 
^ "Abortion". Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. Retrieved 11 November 2015. 
^ Bailey, Martha J.; Malkova, Olga; McLaren, Zoë M. (October 2017). "Does Parents' Access to Family Planning Increase Children's Opportunities? Evidence from the War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X". 
^ Antelava, Natalia (12 April 2012). "Uzbekistan's policy of secretly sterilising women". BBC World Service. 
^ Antelava, Natalia (12 April 2012). "Uzbekistan's policy of secretly sterilising women". BBC World Service. 
^ a b "World Contraception Day". Archived from the original on 2014-08-18. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Family planning.



Siedlecky, Stefania; Wyndham, Diana (1990). Populate and perish : Australian women's fight for birth control |. Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-0-04-442220-4  [1]
The Environmental Politics of Population and Overpopulation A University of California, Berkeley summary of historical, contemporary and environmental concerns involving women's health, population, and family planning
A World too Full of People by Mary Fitzgerald, NewStatesman, August 30, 2010
Reproline-Family Planning JHPIEGO affiliate of Johns Hopkins University








v
t
e


Reproductive health



Rights



Compulsory sterilization
Contraceptive security
Genital integrity

Circumcision controversies
Genital modification and mutilation
Intersex







Education



Genetic counseling
Pre-conception counseling
Sex education





Planning



Assisted reproductive technology
Birth control
Childfree/Childlessness
Parenting

Adoption
Childbirth
Foster care


Reproductive life plan
Safe sex





Health



Men's
Women's

Vulvovaginal


Research

Self-report sexual risk behaviors







Pregnancy



Abortion
Maternal health
Obstetrics
Options counseling
Pregnancy from rape
Pregnant patients' rights
Prenatal care
Teenage pregnancy
Preteen pregnancy
Unintended pregnancy





Medicine



Andrology
Genitourinary medicine
Gynaecology
Obstetrics and gynaecology
Reproductive endocrinology and infertility
Sexual medicine





Disorder



Disorders of sex development
Infertility
Reproductive system disease
Sexual dysfunction
Sexually transmitted infection

Clinic







By country



China
India
Iran
Ireland
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
United Kingdom

Teen


United States

Teen pregnancy
Birth control







History



Birth control movement in the United States
History of condoms
Social hygiene movement
Timeline of reproductive rights legislation





Policy



One-child policy
Two-child policy
Financial

Baby bonus
Bachelor tax
Birth credit
Child benefit
Tax on childlessness














v
t
e


Public health



General



Auxology
Biological hazard
Chief Medical Officer
Cultural competence
Deviance
Environmental health
Euthenics
Genomics
Globalization and disease
Health economics
Health literacy
Health policy

Health system
Health care reform
Public health law


Maternal health
Medical anthropology
Medical sociology
Mental health
Pharmaceutical policy
Public health laboratory
Reproductive health
Social psychology
Sociology of health and illness





Preventive healthcare



Behavior change

Theories


Family planning
Health promotion
Human nutrition
Preventive nutrition
Hygiene

Food safety
Hand washing
Infection control
Oral hygiene


Occupational safety and health

Human factors and ergonomics
Hygiene
Injury prevention
Medicine
Nursing


Patient safety

Organization


Pharmacovigilance
Safe sex
Sanitation

Emergency
Fecal–oral transmission
Open defecation
Sanitary sewer
Waterborne diseases


Smoking cessation
Vaccination
Vector control





Population health



Biostatistics
Child mortality
Community health
Epidemiology
Global health
Health impact assessment
Health system
Infant mortality
Open-source healthcare software
Public health informatics
Social determinants of health

Health equity
Race and health


Social medicine





Biological and
epidemiological statistics



Case-control study
Randomized controlled trial
Relative risk
Statistical hypothesis testing

Analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Regression analysis
ROC curve
Student's t-test
Z-test


Statistical software





Infectious and epidemic
disease prevention



Asymptomatic carrier
Epidemics

List


Notifiable diseases

List


Public health surveillance

Disease surveillance


Quarantine
Sexually transmitted infection
Tropical disease
Vaccine trial





Food hygiene and
safety management



Food

Additive
Chemistry
Engineering
Microbiology
Processing
Safety
Safety scandals


Genetically modified food
Good agricultural practice
Good manufacturing practice

HACCP
ISO 22000







Health behavioral
sciences



Diffusion of innovations
Health belief model
Health communication
Health psychology
Positive deviance
PRECEDE-PROCEED model
Social cognitive theory
Social norms approach
Theory of planned behavior
Transtheoretical model





Organizations,
education
and history




Organizations



Europe

Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety


India

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare


U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
City and county health departments
Council on Education for Public Health
Public Health Service


World Health Organization
World Toilet Organization





Education



Health education
Higher education

Bachelor of Science in Public Health
Doctor of Public Health
Professional degrees of public health
Schools of public health







History



Sara Josephine Baker
Samuel Jay Crumbine
Carl Rogers Darnall
Joseph Lister
Margaret Sanger
John Snow
Typhoid Mary
Germ theory of disease
Social hygiene movement











 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Substantive human rights




Note: What is considered a human right is controversial and not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights.



Civil and political



Cannabis rights
Equality before the law
Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention
Freedom of assembly
Freedom of association
Freedom from cruel and unusual punishment
Freedom from discrimination
Freedom from exile
Freedom of information
Freedom of movement
Freedom of religion
Freedom from slavery
Freedom of speech
Freedom of thought
Freedom from torture
Legal aid
Liberty
LGBT rights
Nationality
Personhood
Presumption of innocence
Right of asylum
Right to die
Right to a fair trial
Right to family life
Right to keep and bear arms
Right to life
Right to petition
Right to privacy
Right to protest
Right to refuse medical treatment
Right of self-defense
Security of person
Universal suffrage






Economic, social
and cultural




Digital rights
Equal pay for equal work
Fair remuneration
Labor rights
Right to an adequate standard of living
Right to clothing
Right to development
Right to education
Right to food
Right to health
Right to housing
Right to Internet access
Right to property
Right to public participation
Right of reply
Right of return
Right to science and culture
Right to social security
Right to water
Right to work
Trade union membership





Sexual and
reproductive



Abortion
Family planning
Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation
Intersex human rights
LGBT rights
Reproductive health
Right to sexuality





Violations



Corporal punishment





War and conflict



Civilian
Combatant
Freedom from genocide
Prisoner of war
War rape












v
t
e


Sustainability



Principles



Anthropocene
Earth system governance
Ecological modernization
Environmental governance
Environmentalism
Global catastrophic risk
Human impact on the environment
Planetary boundaries
Social sustainability
Stewardship
Sustainable development





Consumption



Anthropization
Anti-consumerism
Earth Overshoot Day
Ecological footprint
Ethical
Over-consumption
Simple living
Sustainability advertising
Sustainability brand
Sustainability marketing myopia
Sustainable
Systemic change resistance
Tragedy of the commons





Population



Birth control
Family planning
Control
Overpopulation
Zero growth





Technology



Appropriate
Environmental
Sustainable





Biodiversity



Biosecurity
Biosphere
Conservation biology
Deep ecology
Endangered species
Holocene extinction
Invasive species





Energy



Carbon footprint
Climate change mitigation
Conservation
Descent
Efficiency
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out
Peak oil
Renewable
Energy poverty





Food



Forest gardening
Local
Permaculture
Security
Sustainable agriculture
Sustainable fishery
Urban horticulture





Water



Conservation
Crisis
Efficiency
Footprint
Reclaimed





Accountability



Sustainability accounting
Sustainability measurement
Sustainability metrics and indices
Sustainability reporting
Standards and certification
Sustainable yield





Applications



Advertising
Architecture
Art
Business
City
College programs
Community
Design
Ecovillage
Education for Sustainable Development
Fashion
Gardening
Geopark
Green marketing
Industries
Landscape architecture
Living
Low-impact development
Sustainable market
Organizations
Packaging
Practices
Procurement
Tourism
Transport
Urban drainage systems
Urban infrastructure
Urbanism





Management



Environmental
Fisheries
Forest
Materials
Natural resource
Planetary
Waste





Agreements



UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972)
Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983)
Our Common Future (1987)
Earth Summit (1992)
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
Agenda 21 (1992)
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)
ICPD Programme of Action (1994)
Earth Charter
Lisbon Principles
UN Millennium Declaration (2000)
Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg)
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012)
Sustainable Development Goals








Category
Lists
Outline
Portal
Science
Studies
Degrees












v
t
e


Outline of human sexuality



Physiology and biology



Erection
Insemination
Intersex
Libido
Orgasm

Female and male ejaculation


Pre-ejaculate
Pregnancy
Sexual arousal





Health and
education



Birth control
Condom
Masters and Johnson
Reproductive medicine

Andrology
Gynaecology
Urology


Safe sex
Sex education
Sex therapy
Sexology
Sexual dysfunction

Erectile dysfunction
Hypersexuality
Hyposexuality


Sexual medicine
Sexual surrogate
Sexually transmitted infection





Identity and diversity



Gender binary
Gender identity
Men who have sex with men
Sexual identity
Sexual orientation
Women who have sex with women





Law



Age of consent
Criminal transmission of HIV
Child sexual abuse
Incest
Indecent exposure
Obscenity
Sexual abuse

Rape
Sexual assault
Sexual harassment
Sexual misconduct
Sexual violence







History



Blue Movie
Counterculture of the 1960s
Feminist sex wars
Golden Age of Porn
History of erotic depictions
"Porno chic"
Sexual revolution





Relationships
and society



Anarchism and love/sex
Extramarital sex
Family planning
Flirting
Marriage
Modesty
Paraphilia
Polyamory
Premarital sex
Promiscuity
Romance
Sexual abstinence
Sexual addiction
Sexual attraction
Sexual capital
Sexual ethics
Sexual objectification
Sexual slang





By country



Ancient Rome
China
India
Japan
Philippines
South Korea
United States





Sexual
activities



Anal sex
Bareback
BDSM
Child sex
Coprophilia
Creampie
Gang bang
Emetophilia
Fetishism
Fingering
Fisting
Group sex
Masturbation
Mechanics of sex
Nipple stimulation
Non-penetrative sex

Facial
Foot fetishism
Footjob
Frot
Handjob
Mammary intercourse
Sumata


Oral sex

69
Anilingus
Cunnilingus
Fellatio
Irrumatio


Orgasm control
Paraphilia
Pompoir
Quickie
Sex positions
Sexual fantasy
Sexual fetishism
Sexual intercourse

Foreplay


Sexual penetration
Sexual sublimation
Swinging
Tribadism
Urethral intercourse
Urolagnia
Virtual sex

Cybersex
Dirty talk


Wet T-shirt contest
Zoophilia





Sex industry



Red-light district
Adult video games
Erotica
Pornography

Film actor


Prostitution

Survival sex


Sex museum
Sex shop
Sex tourism

Child
Female


Sex worker
Sex toy

doll


Strip club
Webcam model





Religion and
sexuality



Buddhism
Christian demonology
Daoism
Islam
Mormonism
Sex magic








 Sex portal
 Biology portal












v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration












v
t
e


Lists of countries by population statistics



World population



Current population
Current population (United Nations)





Continental



Africa
Americas
Asia
Europe
Oceania





Regional



Arab world
Caribbean
Commonwealth of Nations
Eurasia
European Union
Islands
Latin America
North America
Middle East
South America





Cities



National capitals
Cities proper
Metropolitan areas
Urban areas
Megacities
Megalopolises





Past and future
population



Past population (United Nations)
Past and future population
1
1000
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
1907
1939
1989
2000
2005
2010
Future population





Population density



Current density
Current real density based on food growing capacity





Growth indicators



Population growth rate
Natural increase
Birth rate
Mortality rate
Fertility rate





Other
demographics



Age at first marriage
Divorce rate
Domestic citizens
Ethnic and cultural diversity level
Foreign-born population
Immigrant population
Linguistic diversity
Median age
Net migration rate
Number of households
Sex ratio
Urban population
Urbanization





Health



Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza
HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate
Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy
Percentage suffering from undernourishment
Health expenditure covered by government
Suicide rate
Total health expenditure (PPP) per capita
Body Mass Index (BMI)





Education
and innovation



Bloomberg Innovation Index
Education Index
International Innovation Index
Innovation Union Scoreboard
Literacy rate
Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
Student skills
Tertiary education attainment
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
Women's average years in school
World Intellectual Property Indicators





Economic



Development aid given

Official Development Assistance received


Employment rate
Irrigated land area
Human Development Index

by country
inequality-adjusted


Human Poverty Index
Imports
Income equality
Job security
Labour force
Number of millionaires (US dollars)
Number of billionaires (US dollars)
Percentage living in poverty
Public sector
Sen social welfare function
Unemployment rate









List of international rankings
List of top international rankings by country
Lists by country










Authority control



GND: 4113510-6
NDL: 00565282











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Family_planning&oldid=815299525"					Categories: Family planningParentingHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Extra text: editors listCS1 errors: datesWebarchive template webcite linksPages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from March 2012Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2016All Wikipedia articles in need of updatingAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from July 2014Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012Articles with inconsistent citation formatsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers