"FBI" redirects here. For other uses, see FBI (disambiguation).

Federal Bureau of Investigation


Seal of the Federal Bureau of Investigation




Flag of the Federal Bureau of Investigation




Badge of an FBI Special Agent


Agency overview


Formed
July 26, 1908; 109 years ago (1908-07-26) as the Bureau of Investigation


Jurisdiction
U.S. Government


Headquarters
J. Edgar Hoover Building
Northwest, Washington, D.C., U.S.


Motto
Fidelity, Bravery, Integrity


Employees
35,104[1] (October 31, 2014)


Annual budget
8.7 billion USD (FY 2016)[2]


Agency executives



Christopher A. Wray, Director
Andrew McCabe, Deputy Director





Parent agency
Department of Justice
Office of the Director of National Intelligence


Website
fbi.gov


The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), formerly the Bureau of Investigation (BOI), is the domestic intelligence and security service of the United States, and its principal federal law enforcement agency. Operating under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Justice, the FBI is also a member of the U.S. Intelligence Community and reports to both the Attorney General and the Director of National Intelligence.[3] A leading U.S. counter-terrorism, counterintelligence, and criminal investigative organization, the FBI has jurisdiction over violations of more than 200 categories of federal crimes.[4][5]
Although many of the FBI's functions are unique, its activities in support of national security are comparable to those of the British MI5 and the Russian FSB. Unlike the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which has no law enforcement authority and is focused on intelligence collection overseas, the FBI is primarily a domestic agency, maintaining 56 field offices in major cities throughout the United States, and more than 400 resident agencies in lesser cities and areas across the nation. At an FBI field office, a senior-level FBI officer concurrently serves as the representative of the Director of National Intelligence.[6][7]
Despite its domestic focus, the FBI also maintains a significant international footprint, operating 60 Legal Attache (LEGAT) offices and 15 sub-offices in U.S. embassies and consulates across the globe. These overseas offices exist primarily for the purpose of coordination with foreign security services and do not usually conduct unilateral operations in the host countries.[8] The FBI can and does at times carry out secret activities overseas,[9] just as the CIA has a limited domestic function; these activities generally require coordination across government agencies.
The FBI was established in 1908 as the Bureau of Investigation, the BOI or BI for short. Its name was changed to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 1935. The FBI headquarters is the J. Edgar Hoover Building, located in Washington, D.C.



Contents


1 Budget, mission, and priorities
2 History

2.1 Background
2.2 Creation
2.3 J. Edgar Hoover as FBI Director

2.3.1 National security
2.3.2 Japanese American internment
2.3.3 Sex Deviates Program
2.3.4 Civil Rights Movement
2.3.5 Kennedy's assassination


2.4 Organized crime
2.5 Special FBI teams
2.6 Notable efforts in the 1990s
2.7 September 11 attacks
2.8 Faulty bullet analysis


3 Organization

3.1 Organizational structure
3.2 Rank structure


4 Legal authority

4.1 Indian reservations


5 Infrastructure
6 Personnel

6.1 Hiring process
6.2 BOI and FBI directors


7 Firearms
8 Publications

8.1 Crime statistics

8.1.1 Uniform Crime Reports
8.1.2 National Incident-Based Reporting System




9 eGuardian
10 Controversies

10.1 Files on US citizens
10.2 Covert operations on political groups
10.3 Files on Puerto Rican independence advocates
10.4 Activities in Latin America
10.5 Internal investigations of shootings
10.6 The Whitey Bulger case
10.7 Robert Hanssen
10.8 Death of Filiberto Ojeda Rios
10.9 Associated Press impersonation case
10.10 Wikipedia edits
10.11 Hillary Clinton email investigation
10.12 2017 dismissal of Director Comey


11 Media portrayal
12 Notable FBI personnel
13 See also
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Budget, mission, and priorities




FBI Domestic Investigations and Operations Guide


In the fiscal year 2016, the Bureau's total budget was approximately $8.7 billion.[2]
The FBI's main goal is to protect and defend the United States, to uphold and enforce the criminal laws of the United States, and to provide leadership and criminal justice services to federal, state, municipal, and international agencies and partners.[5]
Currently, the FBI's top priorities are:[10]

Protect the United States from terrorist attacks,
Protect the United States against foreign intelligence operations and espionage,
Protect the United States against cyber-based attacks and high-technology crimes,
Combat public corruption at all levels,
Protect civil rights,
Combat transnational/national criminal organizations and enterprises,
Combat major white-collar crime,
Combat significant violent crime,
Support federal, state, local and international partners, and
Upgrade technology to enable, and further, the successful performances of its missions as stated above.

History
Background
In 1896, the National Bureau of Criminal Identification was founded, which provided agencies across the country with information to identify known criminals. The 1901 assassination of President William McKinley created a perception that America was under threat from anarchists. The Departments of Justice and Labor had been keeping records on anarchists for years, but President Theodore Roosevelt wanted more power to monitor them.[11]
The Justice Department had been tasked with the regulation of interstate commerce since 1887, though it lacked the staff to do so. It had made little effort to relieve its staff shortage until the Oregon land fraud scandal at the turn of the 20th Century. President Roosevelt instructed Attorney General Charles Bonaparte to organize an autonomous investigative service that would report only to the Attorney General.[12]
Bonaparte reached out to other agencies, including the U.S. Secret Service, for personnel, investigators in particular. On May 27, 1908, the Congress forbade this use of Treasury employees by the Justice Department, citing fears that the new agency would serve as a secret police department.[13] Again at Roosevelt's urging, Bonaparte moved to organize a formal Bureau of Investigation, which would then have its own staff of special agents.[11]
Creation
The Bureau of Investigation (BOI) was created on July 26, 1908, after the Congress had adjourned for the summer.[11] Attorney General Bonaparte, using Department of Justice expense funds,[11] hired thirty-four people, including some veterans of the Secret Service,[14][15] to work for a new investigative agency. Its first "Chief" (the title is now known as "Director") was Stanley Finch. Bonaparte notified the Congress of these actions in December 1908.[11]
The bureau's first official task was visiting and making surveys of the houses of prostitution in preparation for enforcing the "White Slave Traffic Act," or Mann Act, passed on June 25, 1910. In 1932, the bureau was renamed the United States Bureau of Investigation. The following year it was linked to the Bureau of Prohibition and rechristened the Division of Investigation (DOI) before finally becoming an independent service within the Department of Justice in 1935.[14] In the same year, its name was officially changed from the Division of Investigation to the present-day Federal Bureau of Investigation, or FBI.
J. Edgar Hoover as FBI Director




J. Edgar Hoover, FBI Director from 1924 to 1972


J. Edgar Hoover served as FBI Director from 1924 to 1972, a combined 48 years with the BOI, DOI, and FBI. He was chiefly responsible for creating the Scientific Crime Detection Laboratory, or the FBI Laboratory, which officially opened in 1932, as part of his work to professionalize investigations by the government. Hoover was substantially involved in most major cases and projects that the FBI handled during his tenure. But as detailed below, his proved to be a highly controversial tenure as Bureau Director, especially in its later years. After Hoover's death, the Congress passed legislation that limited the tenure of future FBI Directors to ten years.
Early homicide investigations of the new agency included the Osage Indian murders. During the "War on Crime" of the 1930s, FBI agents apprehended or killed a number of notorious criminals who carried out kidnappings, robberies, and murders throughout the nation, including John Dillinger, "Baby Face" Nelson, Kate "Ma" Barker, Alvin "Creepy" Karpis, and George "Machine Gun" Kelly.
Other activities of its early decades included a decisive role in reducing the scope and influence of the Ku Klux Klan. Additionally, through the work of Edwin Atherton, the BOI claimed success in apprehending an entire army of Mexican neo-revolutionaries under the leadership of General Enrique Estrada in the mid-1920s, east of San Diego, California.
Hoover began using wiretapping in the 1920s during Prohibition to arrest bootleggers.[16] In the 1927 case Olmstead v. United States, in which a bootlegger was caught through telephone tapping, the United States Supreme Court ruled that FBI wiretaps did not violate the Fourth Amendment as unlawful search and seizure, as long as the FBI did not break into a person's home to complete the tapping.[16] After Prohibition's repeal, Congress passed the Communications Act of 1934, which outlawed non-consensual phone tapping, but did allow bugging.[16] In the 1939 case Nardone v. United States, the court ruled that due to the 1934 law, evidence the FBI obtained by phone tapping was inadmissible in court.[16] After the 1967 case Katz v. United States overturned the 1927 case that had allowed bugging, Congress passed the Omnibus Crime Control Act, allowing public authorities to tap telephones during investigations, as long as they obtained warrants beforehand.[16]
National security
Beginning in the 1940s and continuing into the 1970s, the bureau investigated cases of espionage against the United States and its allies. Eight Nazi agents who had planned sabotage operations against American targets were arrested, and six were executed (Ex parte Quirin) under their sentences. Also during this time, a joint US/UK code-breaking effort called "The Venona Project"—with which the FBI was heavily involved—broke Soviet diplomatic and intelligence communications codes, allowing the US and British governments to read Soviet communications. This effort confirmed the existence of Americans working in the United States for Soviet intelligence.[17] Hoover was administering this project, but he failed to notify the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of it until 1952. Another notable case was the arrest of Soviet spy Rudolf Abel in 1957.[18] The discovery of Soviet spies operating in the US allowed Hoover to pursue his longstanding obsession with the threat he perceived from the American Left, ranging from Communist Party of the United States of America (CPUSA) union organizers to American liberals.
Japanese American internment
In 1939, the Bureau began compiling a custodial detention list with the names of those who would be taken into custody in the event of war with Axis nations. The majority of the names on the list belonged to Issei community leaders, as the FBI investigation built on an existing Naval Intelligence index that had focused on Japanese Americans in Hawaii and the West Coast, but many German and Italian nationals also found their way onto the secret list.[19] Robert Shivers, head of the Honolulu office, obtained permission from Hoover to start detaining those on the list on December 7, 1941, while bombs were still falling over Pearl Harbor.[20] Mass arrests and searches of homes (in most cases conducted without warrants) began a few hours after the attack, and over the next several weeks more than 5,500 Issei men were taken into FBI custody.[21] On February 19, 1942, President Franklin Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066, authorizing the removal of Japanese Americans from the West Coast. FBI Director Hoover opposed the subsequent mass removal and confinement of Japanese Americans authorized under Executive Order 9066, but Roosevelt prevailed.[22] The vast majority went along with the subsequent exclusion orders, but in a handful of cases where Japanese Americans refused to obey the new military regulations, FBI agents handled their arrests.[20] The Bureau continued surveillance on Japanese Americans throughout the war, conducting background checks on applicants for resettlement outside camp, and entering the camps (usually without the permission of War Relocation Authority officials) and grooming informants to monitor dissidents and "troublemakers." After the war, the FBI was assigned to protect returning Japanese Americans from attacks by hostile white communities.[20]
Sex Deviates Program
According to Douglas M. Charles, the FBI's Sex Deviates Program began on April 10, 1950 when J. Edgar Hoover forwarded the White House, U.S. Civil Service Commission, and branches of the armed services a list of 393 alleged federal employees who were allegedly arrested in Washington D.C., since 1947, on charges of "sexual irregularities". On June 20, 1951, Hoover expands the program by issuing a memo establishing a "uniform policy for the handling of the increasing number of reports and allegations concerning present and past employees of the United State Government who assertedly [sic] are sex deviates." The program was expanded to include non-government jobs. According to Athan Theoharis, "In 1951 he [Hoover] had unilaterally instituted a Sex Deviates program to purge alleged homosexuals from any position in the federal government, from the lowliest clerk to the more powerful position of White house aide." On May 27, 1953, Executive Order 10450 goes into effect. The program is expanded further by this executive order by making all federal employment of homosexuals illegal. On July 8, 1953, the FBI forwarded to the U.S. Civil Service Commission information from the Sex Deviates Program. In 1977–1978, 300,000 pages, collected between 1930 to the mid-1970s, in the Sex Deviate Program were destroyed by FBI officals.[23][24][25]
Civil Rights Movement
During the 1950s and 1960s, FBI officials became increasingly concerned about the influence of civil rights leaders, whom they believed either had communist ties or were unduly influenced by communists or "fellow travellers." In 1956, for example, Hoover sent an open letter denouncing Dr. T.R.M. Howard, a civil rights leader, surgeon, and wealthy entrepreneur in Mississippi who had criticized FBI inaction in solving recent murders of George W. Lee, Emmett Till, and other blacks in the South.[26] The FBI carried out controversial domestic surveillance in an operation it called the COINTELPRO, a portmanteau derived from "COunter-INTELligence PROgram."[27] It was to investigate and disrupt the activities of dissident political organizations within the United States, including both militant and non-violent organizations. Among its targets was the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, a leading civil rights organization whose clergy leadership included the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who is addressed in more detail below.[28]




The so-called "suicide letter",[29] mailed anonymously to King by the FBI


The FBI frequently investigated Martin Luther King, Jr. In the mid-1960s, King began publicly criticizing the Bureau for giving insufficient attention to the use of terrorism by white supremacists. Hoover responded by publicly calling King the most "notorious liar" in the United States.[30] In his 1991 memoir, Washington Post journalist Carl Rowan asserted that the FBI had sent at least one anonymous letter to King encouraging him to commit suicide.[31] Historian Taylor Branch documents an anonymous November 1964 "suicide package" sent by the Bureau that combined a letter to the civil rights leader telling him "You are done. There is only one way out for you..." with audio recordings of King's sexual indiscretions.[32]
In March 1971, the residential office of an FBI agent in Media, Pennsylvania was burgled by a group calling itself the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI. Numerous files were taken and distributed to a range of newspapers, including The Harvard Crimson.[33] The files detailed the FBI's extensive COINTELPRO program, which included investigations into lives of ordinary citizens—including a black student group at a Pennsylvania military college and the daughter of Congressman Henry Reuss of Wisconsin.[33] The country was "jolted" by the revelations, which included assassinations of political activists, and the actions were denounced by members of the Congress, including House Majority Leader Hale Boggs.[33] The phones of some members of the Congress, including Boggs, had allegedly been tapped.[33]
Kennedy's assassination
When President John F. Kennedy was shot and killed, the jurisdiction fell to the local police departments until President Lyndon B. Johnson directed the FBI to take over the investigation.[34] To ensure clarity about the responsibility for investigation of homicides of federal officials, the Congress passed a law that included investigations of such deaths of federal officials, especially by homicide, within FBI jurisdiction. This new law was passed in 1965.[35][36][37]
Organized crime




An FBI surveillance photograph of Joseph D. Pistone (aka Donnie Brasco), Benjamin "Lefty" Ruggiero and Edgar Robb (aka Tony Rossi), 1980s


In response to organized crime, on August 25, 1953, the FBI created the Top Hoodlum Program. The national office directed field offices to gather information on mobsters in their territories and to report it regularly to Washington for a centralized collection of intelligence on racketeers.[38] After the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO Act, took effect, the FBI began investigating the former Prohibition-organized groups, which had become fronts for crime in major cities and small towns. All of the FBI work was done undercover and from within these organizations, using the provisions provided in the RICO Act. Gradually the agency dismantled many of the groups. Although Hoover initially denied the existence of a National Crime Syndicate in the United States, the Bureau later conducted operations against known organized crime syndicates and families, including those headed by Sam Giancana and John Gotti. The RICO Act is still used today for all organized crime and any individuals who may fall under the Act's provisions.
In 2003 a congressional committee called the FBI's organized crime informant program "one of the greatest failures in the history of federal law enforcement."[39] The FBI allowed four innocent men to be convicted of the March 1965 gangland murder of Edward "Teddy" Deegan in order to protect Vincent Flemmi, an FBI informant. Three of the men were sentenced to death (which was later reduced to life in prison), and the fourth defendant was sentenced to life in prison.[39] Two of the four men died in prison after serving almost 30 years, and two others were released after serving 32 and 36 years. In July 2007, U.S. District Judge Nancy Gertner in Boston found that the Bureau had helped convict the four men using false witness accounts given by mobster Joseph Barboza. The U.S. Government was ordered to pay $100 million in damages to the four defendants.[40]
Special FBI teams




FBI SWAT agents in a training exercise


In 1982, the FBI formed an elite unit[41] to help with problems that might arise at the 1984 Summer Olympics to be held in Los Angeles, particularly terrorism and major-crime. This was a result of the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Germany, when terrorists murdered the Israeli athletes. Named the Hostage Rescue Team, or HRT, it acts as the FBI lead for a national SWAT team in related procedures and all counter-terrorism cases. Also formed in 1984 was the Computer Analysis and Response Team, or CART.[42]
From the end of the 1980s to the early 1990s, the FBI reassigned more than 300 agents from foreign counter-intelligence duties to violent crime, and made violent crime the sixth national priority. With reduced cuts to other well-established departments, and because terrorism was no longer considered a threat after the end of the Cold War,[42] the FBI assisted local and state police forces in tracking fugitives who had crossed state lines, which is a federal offense. The FBI Laboratory helped develop DNA testing, continuing its pioneering role in identification that began with its fingerprinting system in 1924.
Notable efforts in the 1990s




An FBI agent tags the cockpit voice recorder from EgyptAir Flight 990 on the deck of the USS Grapple (ARS 53) at the crash site on November 13, 1999.


Between 1993 and 1996, the FBI increased its counter-terrorism role in the wake of the first 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City, New York; the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and the arrest of the Unabomber in 1996. Technological innovation and the skills of FBI Laboratory analysts helped ensure that the three cases were successfully prosecuted.[43] But Justice Department investigations into the FBI's roles in the Ruby Ridge and Waco incidents were found to have been obstructed by agents within the Bureau. During the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, the FBI was criticized for its investigation of the Centennial Olympic Park bombing. It has settled a dispute with Richard Jewell, who was a private security guard at the venue, along with some media organizations,[44] in regard to the leaking of his name during the investigation; this had briefly led to his being wrongly suspected of the bombing.
After Congress passed the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA, 1994), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, 1996), and the Economic Espionage Act (EEA, 1996), the FBI followed suit and underwent a technological upgrade in 1998, just as it did with its CART team in 1991. Computer Investigations and Infrastructure Threat Assessment Center (CITAC) and the National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC) were created to deal with the increase in Internet-related problems, such as computer viruses, worms, and other malicious programs that threatened US operations. With these developments, the FBI increased its electronic surveillance in public safety and national security investigations, adapting to the telecommunications advancements that changed the nature of such problems.
September 11 attacks




September 11 attacks at the Pentagon


During the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World Trade Center, FBI agent Leonard W. Hatton Jr. was killed during the rescue effort while helping the rescue personnel evacuate the occupants of the South Tower, and he stayed when it collapsed. Within months after the attacks, FBI Director Robert Mueller, who had been sworn in a week before the attacks, called for a re-engineering of FBI structure and operations. He made countering every federal crime a top priority, including the prevention of terrorism, countering foreign intelligence operations, addressing cyber security threats, other high-tech crimes, protecting civil rights, combating public corruption, organized crime, white-collar crime, and major acts of violent crime.[45]
In February 2001, Robert Hanssen was caught selling information to the Russian government. It was later learned that Hanssen, who had reached a high position within the FBI, had been selling intelligence since as early as 1979. He pleaded guilty to treason and received a life sentence in 2002, but the incident led many to question the security practices employed by the FBI. There was also a claim that Hanssen might have contributed information that led to the September 11, 2001, attacks.[46]
The 9/11 Commission's final report on July 22, 2004, stated that the FBI and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) were both partially to blame for not pursuing intelligence reports that could have prevented the September 11, 2001, attacks. In its most damning assessment, the report concluded that the country had "not been well served" by either agency and listed numerous recommendations for changes within the FBI.[47] While the FBI did accede to most of the recommendations, including oversight by the new Director of National Intelligence, some former members of the 9/11 Commission publicly criticized the FBI in October 2005, claiming it was resisting any meaningful changes.[48]
On July 8, 2007, The Washington Post published excerpts from UCLA Professor Amy Zegart's book Spying Blind: The CIA, the FBI, and the Origins of 9/11.[49] The Post reported, from Zegart's book, that government documents showed that both the CIA and the FBI had missed 23 potential chances to disrupt the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. The primary reasons for the failures included: agency cultures resistant to change and new ideas; inappropriate incentives for promotion; and a lack of cooperation between the FBI, CIA and the rest of the United States Intelligence Community. The book blamed the FBI's decentralized structure, which prevented effective communication and cooperation among different FBI offices. The book suggested that the FBI had not evolved into an effective counter-terrorism or counter-intelligence agency, due in large part to deeply ingrained agency cultural resistance to change. For example, FBI personnel practices continued to treat all staff other than special agents as support staff, classifying intelligence analysts alongside the FBI's auto mechanics and janitors.[50]
Faulty bullet analysis
For over 40 years, the FBI crime lab in Quantico had believed that lead alloys used in bullets had unique chemical signatures. It was analyzing the bullets with the goal of matching them chemically, not only to a single batch of ammunition coming out of a factory, but also to a single box of bullets. The National Academy of Sciences conducted an 18-month independent review of comparative bullet-lead analysis. In 2003, its National Research Council published a report whose conclusions called into question 30 years of FBI testimony. It found the analytic model used by the FBI for interpreting results was deeply flawed, and the conclusion, that bullet fragments could be matched to a box of ammunition, was so overstated that it was misleading under the rules of evidence. One year later, the FBI decided to stop conducting bullet lead analyses.[51]
After a 60 Minutes/Washington Post investigation in November 2007, two years later, the Bureau agreed to identify, review, and release all pertinent cases, and notify prosecutors about cases in which faulty testimony was given.[52]
Organization
Organizational structure




FBI field divisions map






Organization chart for the FBI as of July 15, 2014






Redacted policy guide for the Counterterrorism Division (part of the FBI National Security Branch)


The FBI is organized into functional branches and the Office of the Director, which contains most administrative offices. An executive assistant director manages each branch. Each branch is then divided into offices and divisions, each headed by an assistant director. The various divisions are further divided into sub-branches, led by deputy assistant directors. Within these sub-branches there are various sections headed by section chiefs. Section chiefs are ranked analogous to special agents in charge.
Four of the branches report to the deputy director while two report to the associate director. The functions branches of the FBI are:

FBI Intelligence Branch
FBI National Security Branch
FBI Criminal, Cyber, Response, and Services Branch
FBI Science and Technology Branch
FBI Information and Technology Branch
FBI Human Resources Branch

The Office of the Director serves as the central administrative organ of the FBI. The office provides staff support functions (such as finance and facilities management) to the five function branches and the various field divisions. The office is managed by the FBI associate director, who also oversees the operations of both the Information and Technology and Human Resources Branches.

Office of the Director

Immediate Office of the Director
Office of the Deputy Director
Office of the Associate Director
Office of Congressional Affairs
Office of Equal Employment Opportunity Affairs
Office of the General Counsel
Office of Integrity and Compliance
Office of the Ombudsman
Office of Professional Responsibility
Office of Public Affairs
Inspection Division
Facilities and Logistics Services Division
Finance Division
Records Management Division
Resource Planning Office
Security Division







An FBI agent at a crime scene


Rank structure
The following is a listing of the rank structure found within the FBI (in ascending order):[53]

Field Agents

Probationary Agent
Special Agent
Senior Special Agent
Supervisory Special Agent
Assistant Special Agent-in-Charge (ASAC)
Special Agent-in-Charge (SAC)




James Comey speaks at the White House following his nomination by President Barack Obama to be the next director of the FBI, 21 June 2013





FBI Management

Deputy Assistant Director
Assistant Director
Associate Executive Assistant Director
Executive Assistant Director
Associate Deputy Director
Deputy Chief of Staff
Chief of Staff and Special Counsel to the Director
Deputy Director
Director



Legal authority




FBI badge and service pistol, a Glock Model 22, .40 S&W caliber


The FBI's mandate is established in Title 28 of the United States Code (U.S. Code), Section 533, which authorizes the Attorney General to "appoint officials to detect and prosecute crimes against the United States."[54] Other federal statutes give the FBI the authority and responsibility to investigate specific crimes.
The FBI's chief tool against organized crime is the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act. The FBI is also charged with the responsibility of enforcing compliance of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964 and investigating violations of the act in addition to prosecuting such violations with the United States Department of Justice (DOJ). The FBI also shares concurrent jurisdiction with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in the enforcement of the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.
The USA PATRIOT Act increased the powers allotted to the FBI, especially in wiretapping and monitoring of Internet activity. One of the most controversial provisions of the act is the so-called sneak and peek provision, granting the FBI powers to search a house while the residents are away, and not requiring them to notify the residents for several weeks afterwards. Under the PATRIOT Act's provisions, the FBI also resumed inquiring into the library records[55] of those who are suspected of terrorism (something it had supposedly not done since the 1970s).
In the early 1980s, Senate hearings were held to examine FBI undercover operations in the wake of the Abscam controversy, which had allegations of entrapment of elected officials. As a result, in following years a number of guidelines were issued to constrain FBI activities.
A March 2007 report by the inspector general of the Justice Department described the FBI's "widespread and serious misuse" of national security letters, a form of administrative subpoena used to demand records and data pertaining to individuals. The report said that between 2003 and 2005, the FBI had issued more than 140,000 national security letters, many involving people with no obvious connections to terrorism.[56]
Information obtained through an FBI investigation is presented to the appropriate U.S. Attorney or Department of Justice official, who decides if prosecution or other action is warranted.
The FBI often works in conjunction with other federal agencies, including the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in seaport and airport security,[57] and the National Transportation Safety Board in investigating airplane crashes and other critical incidents. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations (ICE-HSI) has nearly the same amount of investigative manpower as the FBI, and investigates the largest range of crimes. In the wake of the September 11 attacks, then-Attorney General Ashcroft assigned the FBI as the designated lead organization in terrorism investigations after the creation of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. ICE-HSI and the FBI are both integral members of the Joint Terrorism Task Force.
Indian reservations




FBI Director visits the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation in North Dakota


The federal government has the primary responsibility for investigating[58] and prosecuting serious crime on Indian reservations.[59]


There are 565 federally recognized American Indian Tribes in the United States, and the FBI has federal law enforcement responsibility on nearly 200 Indian reservations. This federal jurisdiction is shared concurrently with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Justice Services (BIA-OJS).

Located within the FBI's Criminal Investigative Division, the Indian Country Crimes Unit (ICCU) is responsible for developing and implementing strategies, programs, and policies to address identified crime problems in Indian Country (IC) for which the FBI has responsibility.

— Overview, Indian Country Crime[60]

The FBI does not specifically list crimes in Native American land as one of its priorities.[61] Often serious crimes have been either poorly investigated or prosecution has been declined. Tribal courts can impose sentences of up to three years, under certain restrictions.[62][63]
Infrastructure




J. Edgar Hoover Building, FBI Headquarters






FBI Mobile Command Center, Washington Field Office


The FBI is headquartered at the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington, D.C., with 56 field offices[64] in major cities across the United States. The FBI also maintains over 400 resident agencies across the United States, as well as over 50 legal attachés at United States embassies and consulates. Many specialized FBI functions are located at facilities in Quantico, Virginia, as well as a "data campus" in Clarksburg, West Virginia, where 96 million sets of fingerprints "from across the United States are stored, along with others collected by American authorities from prisoners in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, Iraq and Afghanistan."[65] The FBI is in process of moving its Records Management Division, which processes Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, to Winchester, Virginia.[66]
According to The Washington Post, the FBI "is building a vast repository controlled by people who work in a top-secret vault on the fourth floor of the J. Edgar Hoover Building in Washington. This one stores the profiles of tens of thousands of Americans and legal residents who are not accused of any crime. What they have done is appear to be acting suspiciously to a town sheriff, a traffic cop or even a neighbor."[65]
The FBI Laboratory, established with the formation of the BOI,[67] did not appear in the J. Edgar Hoover Building until its completion in 1974. The lab serves as the primary lab for most DNA, biological, and physical work. Public tours of FBI headquarters ran through the FBI laboratory workspace before the move to the J. Edgar Hoover Building. The services the lab conducts include Chemistry, Combined DNA Index System (CODIS), Computer Analysis and Response, DNA Analysis, Evidence Response, Explosives, Firearms and Tool marks, Forensic Audio, Forensic Video, Image Analysis, Forensic Science Research, Forensic Science Training, Hazardous Materials Response, Investigative and Prospective Graphics, Latent Prints, Materials Analysis, Questioned Documents, Racketeering Records, Special Photographic Analysis, Structural Design, and Trace Evidence.[68] The services of the FBI Laboratory are used by many state, local, and international agencies free of charge. The lab also maintains a second lab at the FBI Academy.
The FBI Academy, located in Quantico, Virginia, is home to the communications and computer laboratory the FBI utilizes. It is also where new agents are sent for training to become FBI Special Agents. Going through the 21-week course is required for every Special Agent.[69] First opened for use in 1972, the facility located on 385 acres (1.6 km2) of woodland. The Academy trains state and local law enforcement agencies, which are invited to the law enforcement training center. The FBI units that reside at Quantico are the Field and Police Training Unit, Firearms Training Unit, Forensic Science Research and Training Center, Technology Services Unit (TSU), Investigative Training Unit, Law Enforcement Communication Unit, Leadership and Management Science Units (LSMU), Physical Training Unit, New Agents' Training Unit (NATU), Practical Applications Unit (PAU), the Investigative Computer Training Unit and the "College of Analytical Studies."




The FBI Academy, located in Quantico, Virginia


In 2000, the FBI began the Trilogy project to upgrade its outdated information technology (IT) infrastructure. This project, originally scheduled to take three years and cost around $380 million, ended up over budget and behind schedule.[70] Efforts to deploy modern computers and networking equipment were generally successful, but attempts to develop new investigation software, outsourced to Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), were not. Virtual Case File, or VCF, as the software was known, was plagued by poorly defined goals, and repeated changes in management.[71] In January 2005, more than two years after the software was originally planned for completion, the FBI officially abandoned the project. At least $100 million (and much more by some estimates) was spent on the project, which never became operational. The FBI has been forced to continue using its decade-old Automated Case Support system, which IT experts consider woefully inadequate. In March 2005, the FBI announced it was beginning a new, more ambitious software project, code-named Sentinel, which they expected to complete by 2009.[72]




The FBI Field Office in Chelsea, Massachusetts.


Carnivore was an electronic eavesdropping software system implemented by the FBI during the Clinton administration; it was designed to monitor email and electronic communications. After prolonged negative coverage in the press, the FBI changed the name of its system from "Carnivore" to "DCS1000." DCS is reported to stand for "Digital Collection System"; the system has the same functions as before. The Associated Press reported in mid-January 2005 that the FBI essentially abandoned the use of Carnivore in 2001, in favor of commercially available software, such as NarusInsight.
The Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division[73] is located in Clarksburg, West Virginia. Organized beginning in 1991, the office opened in 1995 as the youngest agency division. The complex is the length of three football fields. It provides a main repository for information in various data systems. Under the roof of the CJIS are the programs for the National Crime Information Center (NCIC), Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR), Fingerprint Identification, Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS), NCIC 2000, and the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). Many state and local agencies use these data systems as a source for their own investigations and contribute to the database using secure communications. FBI provides these tools of sophisticated identification and information services to local, state, federal, and international law enforcement agencies.
FBI is in charge of National Virtual Translation Center, which provides "timely and accurate translations of foreign intelligence for all elements of the Intelligence Community."[74]
Personnel




An FBI Evidence Response Team






Agents in training on the FBI Academy firing range


As of December 31, 2009, the FBI had a total of 33,852 employees. That includes 13,412 special agents and 20,420 support professionals, such as intelligence analysts, language specialists, scientists, information technology specialists, and other professionals.[75]
The Officer Down Memorial Page provides the biographies of 69 FBI agents who have died in the line of duty from 1925 to July 2017.[76]
Hiring process
To apply to become an FBI agent, one must be between the ages of 23 and 37. Due to the decision in Robert P. Isabella v. Department of State and Office of Personnel Management, 2008 M.S.P.B. 146, preference-eligible veterans may apply after age 37. In 2009, the Office of Personnel Management issued implementation guidance on the Isabella decision.[77] The applicant must also hold American citizenship, be of high moral character, have a clean record, and hold at least a four-year bachelor's degree. At least three years of professional work experience prior to application is also required. All FBI employees require a Top Secret (TS) security clearance, and in many instances, employees need a TS/SCI (Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information) clearance.[78] To obtain a security clearance, all potential FBI personnel must pass a series of Single Scope Background Investigations (SSBI), which are conducted by the Office of Personnel Management.[79] Special Agents candidates also have to pass a Physical Fitness Test (PFT), which includes a 300-meter run, one-minute sit-ups, maximum push-ups, and a 1.5-mile (2.4 km) run. Personnel must pass a polygraph test with questions including possible drug use.[80] Applicants who fail polygraphs may not gain employment with the FBI.[81]
BOI and FBI directors
Main article: Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
FBI Directors are appointed (nominated) by the President of the United States and must be confirmed by the United States Senate to serve a term of office of ten years, subject to resignation or removal by the President at his/her discretion before their term ends . Additional terms are allowed following the same procedure
J. Edgar Hoover, appointed by President Calvin Coolidge in 1924, was by far the longest-serving director, serving until his death in 1972. In 1968, Congress passed legislation, as part of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, requiring Senate confirmation of appointments of future Directors.[82] As the incumbent, this legislation did not apply to Hoover. The last FBI Director was James B. Comey, who was appointed in 2013 by President Barack Obama. In 2017 he was fired by President Donald J. Trump.[83]
The FBI director is responsible for the day-to-day operations at the FBI. Along with the Deputy Director, the director makes sure cases and operations are handled correctly. The director also is in charge of making sure the leadership in any one of the FBI field offices is manned with qualified agents. Before the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act was passed in the wake of the September 11 attacks, the FBI director would directly brief the President of the United States on any issues that arise from within the FBI. Since then, the director now reports to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI), who in turn reports to the President.
Firearms




A Glock 22 pistol in .40 S&W caliber


Upon qualification, an FBI special agent is issued a full-size Glock 22 or compact Glock 23 semi-automatic pistol, both of which are chambered in the .40 S&W cartridge. In May 1997, the FBI officially adopted the Glock, in .40 S&W, for general agent use, and first issued it to New Agent Class 98-1 in October 1997. At present, the Glock 23 "FG&R" (finger groove and rail; either 3rd generation or "Gen4") is the issue sidearm.[84] New agents are issued firearms, on which they must qualify, on successful completion of their training at the FBI Academy. The Glock 26 (subcompact 9mm Parabellum), Glock 23 and Glock 27 (.40 S&W compact and subcompact, respectively) are authorized as secondary weapons. Special agents are also authorized to purchase and qualify with the Glock 21 in .45 ACP.[85]
Special agents of the FBI Hostage Rescue Team (HRT) and regional SWAT teams are issued the Springfield Armory Professional Model 1911 pistol in .45 ACP.[86][87][88]
In June 2016, the FBI awarded Glock a contract for new handguns. Unlike the currently issued .40 S&W chambered Glock pistols, the new Glocks will be chambered for 9mm Parabellum. The contract is for the full-size Glock 17M and the compact Glock 19M. The "M" means the Glocks have been modified to meet government standards specified by a 2015 government request for proposal.[89][90][91][92]
Publications
The FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin is published monthly by the FBI Law Enforcement Communication Unit,[93] with articles of interest to state and local law enforcement personnel. First published in 1932 as Fugitives Wanted by Police,[94] the FBI Law Bulletin covers topics including law enforcement technology and issues, such as crime mapping and use of force, as well as recent criminal justice research, and Vi-CAP alerts, on wanted suspects and key cases.
The FBI also publishes some reports for both law enforcement personnel as well as regular citizens covering topics including law enforcement, terrorism, cybercrime, white-collar crime, violent crime, and statistics.[95] However, the vast majority of federal government publications covering these topics are published by the Office of Justice Programs agencies of the United States Department of Justice, and disseminated through the National Criminal Justice Reference Service.
Crime statistics
In the 1920s, the FBI began issuing crime reports by gathering numbers from local police departments.[96] Due to limitations of this system found during the 1960s and 1970s—victims often simply did not report crimes to the police in the first place—the Department of Justice developed an alternate method of tallying crime, the victimization survey.[96]
Uniform Crime Reports
Main article: Uniform Crime Reports
The Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) compile data from over 17,000 law enforcement agencies across the country. They provide detailed data regarding the volume of crimes to include arrest, clearance (or closing a case), and law enforcement officer information. The UCR focuses its data collection on violent crimes, hate crimes, and property crimes.[95] Created in the 1920s, the UCR system has not proven to be as uniform as its name implies. The UCR data only reflect the most serious offense in the case of connected crimes and has a very restrictive definition of rape. Since about 93% of the data submitted to the FBI is in this format, the UCR stands out as the publication of choice as most states require law enforcement agencies to submit this data.
Preliminary Annual Uniform Crime Report for 2006 was released on June 4, 2006. The report shows violent crime offenses rose 1.3%, but the number of property crime offenses decreased 2.9% compared to 2005.[97]
National Incident-Based Reporting System
Main article: National Incident-Based Reporting System
The National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) crime statistics system aims to address limitations inherent in UCR data. The system is used by law enforcement agencies in the United States for collecting and reporting data on crimes. Local, state, and federal agencies generate NIBRS data from their records management systems. Data is collected on every incident and arrest in the Group A offense category. The Group A offenses are 46 specific crimes grouped in 22 offense categories. Specific facts about these offenses are gathered and reported in the NIBRS system. In addition to the Group A offenses, eleven Group B offenses are reported with only the arrest information. The NIBRS system is in greater detail than the summary-based UCR system. As of 2004, 5,271 law enforcement agencies submitted NIBRS data. That amount represents 20% of the United States population and 16% of the crime statistics data collected by the FBI.
eGuardian
eGuardian is the name of an FBI system, launched in January 2009, to share tips about possible terror threats with local police agencies. The program aims to get law enforcement at all levels sharing data quickly about suspicious activity and people.[98]
eGuardian enables near real-time sharing and tracking of terror information and suspicious activities with local, state, tribal, and federal agencies. The eGuardian system is a spin-off of a similar but classified tool called Guardian that has been used inside the FBI, and shared with vetted partners since 2005.[99]
Controversies
Throughout its history, the bureau has been the subject of a number of controversial cases, both at home and abroad.
Files on US citizens
The FBI has maintained files on numerous people, including celebrities such as Elvis Presley, Frank Sinatra, John Denver, John Lennon, Jane Fonda, Groucho Marx, Charlie Chaplin, the band MC5, Lou Costello, Sonny Bono, Bob Dylan, Michael Jackson, and Mickey Mantle. The files were collected for various reasons. Some of the subjects were investigated for alleged ties to the Communist party (Charlie Chaplin and Groucho Marx), or in connection with antiwar activities during the Vietnam War (John Denver, John Lennon, and Jane Fonda). Numerous celebrity files concern threats or extortion attempts against them (Sonny Bono, John Denver, John Lennon, Elvis Presley, Michael Jackson, Mickey Mantle, Groucho Marx, and Frank Sinatra).[100]
Covert operations on political groups




Image from the FBI monograph of the Nation of Islam (1965): Elijah Muhammad


COINTELPRO tactics have been alleged to include discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media; harassment; wrongful imprisonment; and illegal violence.[101][102] The FBI's stated motivation was "protecting national security, preventing violence, and maintaining the existing social and political order."[103]
FBI records show that 85% of COINTELPRO resources targeted groups and individuals that the FBI deemed "subversive",[104] including communist and socialist organizations; organizations and individuals associated with the Civil Rights Movement, including Martin Luther King, Jr. and others associated with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and the Congress of Racial Equality and other civil rights organizations; black nationalist groups (e.g., Nation of Islam and the Black Panther Party); the American Indian Movement; a broad range of organizations labeled "New Left", including Students for a Democratic Society and the Weathermen; almost all groups protesting the Vietnam War, as well as individual student demonstrators with no group affiliation; the National Lawyers Guild; organizations and individuals associated with the women's rights movement; nationalist groups such as those seeking independence for Puerto Rico, United Ireland, and Cuban exile movements including Orlando Bosch's Cuban Power and the Cuban Nationalist Movement. The remaining 15% of COINTELPRO resources were expended to marginalize and subvert white hate groups, including the Ku Klux Klan and the National States' Rights Party.[105][106][107][108][109][110][111][112][113][114][115]
Files on Puerto Rican independence advocates
The FBI also spied upon and collected information on Puerto Rican independence leader Pedro Albizu Campos and his Nationalist political party in the 1930s. Abizu Campos was convicted three times in connection with deadly attacks on US government officials: in 1937 (Conspiracy to overthrow the government of the United States), in 1950 (attempted murder), and in 1954 (after an armed assault on the US House of Representatives while in session; although not present, Abizu Campos was considered the mastermind).[116] The FBI operation was covert and did not become known until U.S. Congressman Luis Gutierrez had it made public via the Freedom of Information Act in the 1980s.[117]
In the 2000s, researchers obtained files released by the FBI under the Freedom of Information Act revealing that the San Juan FBI office had coordinated with FBI offices in New York, Chicago and other cities, in a decades-long surveillance of Albizu Campos and Puerto Ricans who had contact or communication with him. The documents available are as recent as 1965.[118][119]
Activities in Latin America
From the 1950s to the 1980s, the governments of many Latin American and Caribbean countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico and others were infiltrated by the FBI.[120] These operations began in World War II as 700 agents were assigned to monitor Nazi activity, but soon expanded to monitoring communist activity in places like Ecuador. [121]
Internal investigations of shootings
During the period from 1993 to 2011, FBI agents fired their weapons on 289 occasions; FBI internal reviews found the shots justified in all but 5 cases, in none of the 5 cases were people wounded. Samuel Walker, a professor of criminal justice at the University of Nebraska Omaha said the number of shots found to be unjustified was "suspiciously low." In the same time period, the FBI wounded 150 people, 70 of whom died; the FBI found all 150 shootings to be justified. Likewise, during the period from 2011 to the present, all shootings by FBI agents have been found to be justified by internal investigation. In a 2002 case in Maryland, an innocent man was shot, and later paid $1.3 million by the FBI after agents mistook him for a bank robber; the internal investigation found that the shooting was justified, based on the man's actions.[122]
The Whitey Bulger case
The FBI has been criticized for its handling of Boston organized crime figure Whitey Bulger.[123][124][125] Beginning in 1975, Bulger served as an informant for the FBI.[126] As a result, the Bureau largely ignored his organization in exchange for information about the inner workings of the Italian American Patriarca crime family.[127][128][129]
In December 1994, after being tipped off by his former FBI handler about a pending indictment under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, Bulger fled Boston and went into hiding. For 16 years, he remained at large. For 12 of those years, Bulger was prominently listed on the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives list.[130] Beginning in 1997, the New England media exposed criminal actions by federal, state, and local law enforcement officials tied to Bulger. The revelation caused great embarrassment to the FBI.[131][132][133] In 2002, Special Agent John J Connolly was convicted of federal racketeering charges for helping Bulger avoid arrest. In 2008, Special Agent Connolly completed his term on the federal charges and was transferred to Florida where he was convicted of helping plan the murder of John B Callahan, a Bulger rival. In 2014, that conviction was overturned on a technicality. Connolly was the agent leading the investigation of Bulger.[134]
In June 2011, the 81-year-old Bulger was arrested in Santa Monica, California.[135][136][137][138][139] Bulger was tried on 32 counts of racketeering, money laundering, extortion, and weapons charges; including complicity in 19 murders.[140] In August 2013, the jury found him guilty on 31 counts, and having been involved in 11 murders.[141] Bulger was sentenced to two consecutive life terms plus five years.[142]
Robert Hanssen
On 20 February 2001, the bureau announced that a special agent, Robert Hanssen (born 1944) had been arrested for spying for the Soviet Union and then Russia from 1979 to 2001. He is serving 15 consecutive life sentences without the possibility of parole at ADX Florence, a federal supermax prison near Florence, Colorado. Hanssen was arrested on February 18, 2001, at Foxstone Park[143] near his home in Vienna, Virginia, and was charged with selling US secrets to the USSR and subsequently Russia for more than US$1.4 million in cash and diamonds over a 22-year period.[144] On July 6, 2001, he pleaded guilty to 15 counts of espionage in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.[145][146] His spying activities have been described by the US Department of Justice's Commission for the Review of FBI Security Programs as "possibly the worst intelligence disaster in U.S. history".[147]
Death of Filiberto Ojeda Rios




Puerto Rican Nationalist leader Filiberto Ojeda Ríos died in a gun battle with FBI agents in 2005.


In 2005, fugitive Puerto Rican Nationalist leader Filiberto Ojeda Ríos died in a gun battle with FBI agents that some charged was an assassination.[citation needed] Puerto Rico Governor Aníbal Acevedo Vilá criticized the FBI assault as "improper" and "highly irregular" and demanded to know why his government was not informed of it.[148] The FBI refused to release information beyond the official press release, citing security and agent privacy issues. The Puerto Rico Justice Department filed suit in federal court against the FBI and the US Attorney General, demanding information crucial to the Commonwealth's own investigation of the incident. The case was dismissed by the U.S Supreme Court.[149] Ojeda Rios' funeral was attended by a long list of dignitaries, including the highest authority of the Roman Catholic Church in Puerto Rico, Archbishop Roberto Octavio González Nieves, ex-Governor Rafael Hernández Colón, and numerous other personalities.[150]
In the aftermath of his death, the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization approved a draft resolution urging a "probe of [the] pro-independence killing, human rights abuses", after "Petitioner after petitioner condemned the assassination of Mr. Ojeda Rios by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)".[151]
Associated Press impersonation case
In 2007, an agent working in Seattle, Washington for the FBI falsely impersonated an Associated Press (AP) journalist and unwittingly infected a 15-year-old suspect's computer with a malicious surveillance software.[152][153] The incident sparked a strongly-worded statement from the AP demanding the bureau from ever impersonating a member of the news media again.[154] Moreover, in September 2016, the incident resulted in a condemnation by the Justice Department.[155]
In December 2017, following a US court appearance, a judge ruled in favor of the AP in a lawsuit against the FBI for frauduently impersonating a member of the news media.[156][157]
Wikipedia edits
In August 2007 Virgil Griffith, a Caltech computation and neural-systems graduate student, created WikiScanner, a searchable database that linked changes made by anonymous Wikipedia editors to companies and organizations from which the changes were made. The database cross-referenced logs of Wikipedia edits with publicly available records pertaining to the Internet IP addresses edits were made from.[158] Griffith was motivated by the edits from the United States Congress,[159][160][161][162] and wanted to see if others were similarly promoting themselves. The tool was designed to detect conflict of interest edits.[163] Among his findings were that FBI computers were used to edit the FBI article on Wikipedia.[164] Although the edits correlated with known FBI IP addresses, there was no proof that the changes actually came from a member or employee of the FBI, only that someone who had access to their network had edited the FBI article on Wikipedia.[160] Wikipedia spokespersons received Griffith's "WikiScanner" positively, noting that it helped prevent conflicts of interest from influencing articles[164] as well as increasing transparency[160][165] and mitigating attempts to remove or distort relevant facts.[166]
Hillary Clinton email investigation
Main article: Hillary Clinton email controversy
On July 5, 2016, FBI Director Comey announced the bureau's recommendation that the United States Department of Justice file no criminal charges relating to the Hillary Clinton email controversy.[167] During an unusual 15 minute press conference in the J. Edgar Hoover Building, Comey called Secretary Clinton's and her top aides' behavior "extremely careless", but concluded that "no reasonable prosecutor would bring such a case".[167] Comey's public comments came after Attorney General Loretta Lynch announced that she would "fully" accept the recommendation of the FBI regarding the probe. It was the first time the FBI disclosed its prosecutorial recommendation to the Department of Justice publicly.[167] On July 7, 2016, Comey was questioned by a Republican-led House committee during a hearing regarding the FBI's recommendation.[168][169]
On October 28, 2016, less than two weeks before the presidential election, Director Comey, a long-time Republican, announced in a letter to Congress that additional emails potentially related to the Clinton email controversy had been found and that the FBI will investigate "to determine whether they contain classified information as well as to assess their importance to our investigation."[170] At the time Comey sent his letter to Congress, the FBI had still not obtained a warrant to review any of the e-mails in question and was not aware of the content of any of the e-mails in question.[171] Comey's announcement was inconsistent with Justice Department policy and he was warned by lawyers at the Department of Justice against proceeding with his letter to Congress. Both Republican and Democrat lawmakers, as well as both the Clinton and Trump campaigns have called on Comey to provide additional details.[172]
After Comey's letter to Congress, commentator Paul Callan of CNN and Niall O'Dowd of Irish Central compared Comey to J. Edgar Hoover in attempting to influence and manipulate elections.[173][174] On October 30, 2016, Richard Painter, chief White House ethics lawyer in the George W. Bush Administration, published an op-ed piece in the NY Times, stating that he had filed a complaint against the FBI with the Office of Special Counsel, which investigates possible violations of the Hatch Act of 1939, and with the Office of Government Ethics with respect to the sending of the letter. In the days after the FBI intervention, Rudy Giuliani indicated that the Trump campaign was briefed by the FBI days before Comey's letter was sent to Congress.[175][176]
On November 6, 2016, in the face of constant pressure from both Republicans and Democrats, Comey conceded in a second letter to Congress that through the FBI's review of the new e-mails, there was no wrongdoing by Clinton. Comey conceded, "Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusions that we expressed in July." While the e-mail matter is resolved, legal questions on Comey's actions remain.[177][178] Comey and the FBI have been broadly criticized on the editorial pages from both the right and the left, with headlines reading: "James Comey should be fired" (Chicago Tribune);[179] "FBI chief James Comey should resign" (The Washington Times);[180] and "FBI Director James Comey is Unfit for Public Service" (Newsweek).[181] On November 12, 2016, unsuccessful presidential candidate Hillary Clinton directly attributed her election loss to FBI Director James Comey.[182]
On January 12, 2017, the Department of Justice's Office of Inspector General announced a formal investigation into whether the FBI followed proper procedures in its investigation of Clinton or whether "improper considerations" were made by FBI personnel.[183]
2017 dismissal of Director Comey
Main article: Dismissal of James Comey
On May 9, 2017, President Trump dismissed FBI Director Comey after Comey had misstated several key findings of the email investigation in his testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee.[184] Some[who?] question whether the dismissal was in response to Comey's request for more resources to expand the probe into Russian interference into the Presidential election.[185] Following Comey's dismissal, Deputy Director Andrew G. McCabe became Acting Director.[186] On August 1, 2017, President Trump's nominee for FBI director Christopher A. Wray was officially confirmed by the Senate in a 92–5 vote and was sworn in as Director the next day.[187]
Media portrayal
Main article: FBI portrayal in media




The popular 1993–2002 TV series The X-Files depicted the fictional FBI Special Agents Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) and Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) who investigated paranormal phenomena.


The FBI has been frequently depicted in popular media since the 1930s. The bureau has participated to varying degrees, which has ranged from direct involvement in the creative process of film or TV series development, to providing consultation on operations and closed cases.[188] A few of the notable portrayals of the FBI on television are the 1993–2002 series The X-Files, which concerned investigations into paranormal phenomena by five fictional Special Agents, and the fictional Counter Terrorist Unit (CTU) agency in the TV drama 24, which is patterned after the FBI Counterterrorism Division. The 1991 movie Point Break is based on the true story of an undercover FBI agent who infiltrated a gang of bank robbers. The 1997 movie Donnie Brasco is based on the true story of undercover FBI agent Joseph D. Pistone infiltrating the Mafia. The 2015 TV series Quantico, titled after the location of the Bureau's training facility, deals with Probationary and Special Agents, not all of whom, within the show's format, may be fully reliable or even trustworthy.
Notable FBI personnel


Edwin Atherton
Ed Bethune
Alaska P. Davidson
Sibel Edmonds
James R. Fitzgerald
W. Mark Felt
J. Edgar Hoover
Robert Hanssen
Lon Horiuchi
Richard Miller
Robert Mueller
Eric O'Neill
John P. O'Neill
Joseph D. Pistone
Melvin Purvis
Coleen Rowley
Ali Soufan
Sue Thomas
Clyde Tolson
Loy F. Weaver
Frederic Whitehurst


See also


Government of the United States portal
Law enforcement/Law enforcement topics portal




Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)
Diplomatic Security Service (DSS)
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
FBI Honorary Medals
FBI Victims Identification Project
Federal law enforcement in the United States
Inspector
Law enforcement in the United States
Society of Former Special Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
State bureau of investigation
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE/HSI)
United States Marshals Service (USMS)
United States Secret Service (USSS)


References



^ "Quick Facts". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2014-12-06. Retrieved 2014-12-17. 
^ a b "Mission & Priorities". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved 2017-11-02. 
^ "Our Strength Lies in Who We Are". intelligence.gov. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014. 
^ "How does the FBI differ from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)?". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved 2017-11-02. 
^ a b "Federal Bureau of Investigation – Quick Facts". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2011-10-17. 
^ Statement Before the House Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, Federal Bureau of Investigation, March 26, 2014
^ FBI gets a broader role in coordinating domestic intelligence activities, Washington Post, June 19, 2012
^ Overview of the Legal Attaché Program Archived March 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., Federal Bureau of Investigation, Retrieved: March 25, 2015
^ Spies Clash as FBI Joins CIA Overseas: Sources Talk of Communication Problem in Terrorism Role, Associated Press via NBC News, February 15, 2005
^ "FBI- Quick Facts". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 12 April 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. 
^ a b c d e Weiner, Tim (2012). "Revolution". Enemies a history of the FBI (1 ed.). New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-64389-0. 
^ Findlay, James G. (19 November 1943). "Memorandum for the Director: Re: Early History of the Bureau of Investigation, United States Department of Justice". Historical Documents from the Bureau's Founding. Los Angeles, CA: Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2012. 
^ Bonaparte, Charles Joseph. "Annual Report of the Attorney General of the United States, 1908, p.7". Historical Documents from the Bureau's Founding. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2012. In my last annual report I called attention to the fact that this department was obliged to call upon the Treasury Department for detective service, and had, in fact, no permanent executive force directly under its orders. Through the prohibition of its further use of the Secret Service force, contained in the Sundry Civil Appropriation Act, approved May 27, 1908, it became necessary for the department to organize a small force of special agents of its own. Although such action was involuntary on the part of this department, the consequences of the innovation have been, on the whole, moderately satisfactory. The Special Agents, placed as they are under the direct orders of the Chief Examiner, who receives from them daily reports and summarizes these each day to the Attorney General, are directly controlled by this department, and the Attorney General knows or ought to know, at all times what they are doing and at what cost. 
^ a b "Timeline of FBI History". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2015. 
^ Langeluttig, Albert (1927). The Department of Justice of the United States. Johns Hopkins Press. pp. 9–14. 
^ a b c d e Greenberg, David (2001-10-22). "Civil Rights: Let 'Em Wiretap!". History News Network. Retrieved 2011-02-15. 
^ Benson, Robert L. "The Venona Story". National Security Agency. Archived from the original on 2006-06-14. Retrieved 2006-06-18. 
^ Romerstein, Herbert, Eric Breindel (2001). The Venona Secrets, Exposing Soviet Espionage and America's Traitors. Regnery Publishing, Inc. p. 209. ISBN 0-89526-225-8. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Kashima, Tetsuden. "Custodial detention / A-B-C list". Densho Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2014-08-21. 
^ a b c Niiya, Brian. "Federal Bureau of Investigation". Densho Encyclopledia. Retrieved 2014-08-21. 
^ "About the Incarceration". Densho Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2014-08-21. 
^ "J. Edgar Hoover". 
^ FBI and Homosexuality: 1950-1959
^ FBI and Homosexuality: 1970-1979
^ FBI and Homosexuality: 2010-2019
^ David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito, Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009), 148, 154–59.
^ Cassidy, Mike M. (1999-05-26). "A Short History of FBI COINTELPRO". Monitor.net. Archived from the original on 2000-01-18. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Jalon, Allan M. (2006-04-08). "A Break-In to End All Break-Ins". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2006-06-20. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Gage, Beverly (2014-11-11). "What an Uncensored Letter to M.L.K. Reveals". The New York Times. Retrieved 2015-01-09. 
^ Taylor Branch, Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years 1963-1965 (Simon and Shuster, 1999), p. 524-529
^ Adams, Cecil M. (2003-05-02). "Was Martin Luther King, Jr. a plagiarist?". Washington Post. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Taylor Branch, Pillar of Fire: America in the King Years 1963-1965 (Simon and Shuster, 1999) p. 527-529. 
^ a b c d Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 40. ISBN 0-465-04195-7. 
^ "Postwar America: 1945–1960s". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ "5 things you might not know about JFK's assassination". CNN.com. Retrieved 2015-11-11. 
^ "Public Law 89-141 - Chapter 84.– PRESIDENTIAL ASSASSINATION, KIDNAPPING, AND ASSAULT" (PDF). Retrieved September 20, 2017. 
^ "18 U.S. Code Chapter 84 – PRESIDENTIAL AND PRESIDENTIAL STAFF ASSASSINATION, KIDNAPPING, AND ASSAULT". 
^ "Using Intel to Stop the Mob, Part 2" Archived June 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved 2010-02-12.
^ a b Shelley Murphy (2007-07-27). "Evidence Of Injustice". Boston Globe. Retrieved 2007-11-22. 
^ "U.S. Must Pay Out $100 Million for Wrongful FBI Conviction". Reuters. 2007-07-27. Archived from the original on 2008-07-05. Retrieved 2007-11-22. 
^ "Rise in International Crime". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ a b "End of the Cold War". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ "Rise of a Wired World". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ "Richard Jewell v. NBC, and other Richard Jewell cases". Media Libel. Archived from the original on 2006-05-27. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ "Change of Mandate". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ Seper, Jerry. "Osama access to state secrets helped 9/11". Computer Crime Research Center. Archived from the original on 2003-01-08. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Shovelan, John (2004-06-23). "9/11 Commission finds 'deep institutional failings'". ABC Au. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ "Ex-FBI Chief On Clinton's Scandals". CBS News. 2004-10-06. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Zegart, Amy (2007-09-01). "Spying Blind". Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 2007-10-13. Retrieved 2007-07-08. 
^ Zegart, Amy (2007-07-08). "Our Clueless Intelligence System". Washington Post. Retrieved 2007-07-08. 
^ "FBI Laboratory Announces Discontinuation of Bullet Lead Examinations". fbi.gov. FBI National Press Office. Retrieved 6 December 2014. 
^ "Evidence Of Injustice". CBS News. 2007-11-18. Retrieved 2007-11-22. 
^ "fbi.gov". fbi.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-03. 
^ "US CODE: Title 28,533. Investigative and other officials; appointment". Cornell Law School. Retrieved 2011-02-15. 
^ Egelko, Bob; Maria Alicia Gaura (March 10, 2003). "Libraries post Patriot Act warnings: Santa Cruz branches tell patrons that FBI may spy on them". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 2011-02-15. 
^ Jeffrey Rosen (April 15, 2007). "Who's Watching the F.B.I.?". The New York Times. Retrieved 2011-02-15. 
^ "The Federal Bureau of Investigation's Efforts to Protect the Nation's Seaports" (PDF). U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General. March 2006. Retrieved 2011-02-15. 
^ "Indian Country Crime" Archived August 8, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. FBI website, accessed August 10, 2010
^ "Native Americans in South Dakota: An Erosion of Confidence in the Justice System". Usccr.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-03. 
^ "Overview, Indian Country Crime". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2012. 
^ FBI "Facts and Figures" Archived September 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. See prominently displayed list of priorities, accessed August 10, 2010
^ Michael Riley, "Expansion of tribal courts' authority passes Senate" Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., The Denver Post Posted: 25 June 2010 01:00:00 am MDT Updated: 25 June 2010 02:13:47 am MDT Accessed June 25, 2010
^ Michael Riley, "President Obama signs tribal-justice changes" Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine., The Denver Post, Posted: 30 July 2010 01:00:00 am MDT, Updated: 30 July 2010 06:00:20 am MDT, accessed July 30, 2010
^ "Federal Bureau of Investigation – Field Divisions". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2009-08-15. 
^ a b Priest, Dana and Arkin, William (December 2010) Monitoring America Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine., Washington Post
^ Reid, Sarah A. (2006-07-26). "One of the biggest things the FBI has ever done". The Winchester Star. Archived from the original on 2007-02-23. 
^ "FBI Laboratory History". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-03. 
^ "FBI Laboratory Services". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2007-10-16. 
^ "Special Agent Career Path Program". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2007-07-02. 
^ Sherman, Mark. "Lawmakers criticize FBI director's expensive project". Newszine. Archived from the original on 2006-08-30. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Gerin, Roseanne (2005-01-14). "SAIC rejects Trilogy criticism". Washington Technology. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ Arnone, Michael (2005-06-25). "Senators seek to fast track FBI's Sentinel". FCW.Com. Archived from the original on 2006-10-25. Retrieved 2006-06-06. 
^ "The CJIS Mission". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2008-09-16. 
^ "Lost in Translation? Not at the National Virtual Translation Center". Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
^ "Federal Bureau of Investigation – About Us – Quick Facts". Archived from the original on 2011-10-17. 
^ The Officer Down Memorial Page. "United States Department of Justice – Federal Bureau of Investigation Washington, DC". 
^ CHCOC. Chcoc.gov. Retrieved on 2013-07-23.
^ "Federal Bureau of Investigation Jobs". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2007-07-02. 
^ "Review of the Security and Emergency Planning Staff's Management of Background Investigations". U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General. September 2005. 
^ "FAQ-FBI Jobs". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2012-10-18. 
^ Taylor, Marisa. "FBI turns away many applicants who fail lie-detector tests." The McClatchy Company. May 20, 2013. Retrieved on July 25, 2013.
^ Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act Pub.L. 90–351, June 19, 1968, 82 Stat. 197, sec.1101
^ Trump fires FBI director Comey, raising questions over Russia investigation | US news. The Guardian. Retrieved on 2017-05-26.
^ Vanderpool, Bill (August 22, 2011). "A History of FBI Handguns". American Rifleman. National Rifle Association. 
^ Vanderpool, Bill (August 22, 2011). "A History of FBI Handguns". American Rifleman. National Rifle Association. The only personally owned handguns now on the approved list are the Glock 21 (full-size .45 ACP), the Glock 26 (sub-compact 9 mm) and the 27 (sub-compact .40 S&W). 
^ Vanderpool, Bill (August 22, 2011). "A History of FBI Handguns". American Rifleman. National Rifle Association. Also in the ’80s, HRT adopted the Browning Hi-Power. The first Hi-Powers were customized by Wayne Novak and later ones by the FBI gunsmiths at Quantico. They were popular with the “super SWAT” guys, and several hesitated to give them up when they were replaced by .45 ACP single-action pistols, the first ones built by Les Baer, which used high-capacity Para Ordnance frames. Later, Springfield Armory’s “Bureau Model” replaced the Baer guns. Field SWAT teams were also issued .45s, and most still use them. 
^ "OPERATOR®, TACTICAL GRAY CONFIGURATION ADDS NEW COLOR AND ADJUSTABLE COMBAT SIGHTS". Springfield Armory. 19 January 2017. Originally developed as a consumer-friendly option for the FBI contract Professional Model 1911, the TRP™ family provides high-end custom shop features in a production class pistol. 
^ "RO® ELITE SERIES". Springfield Armory. Every new RO Elite series pistol is clad in the same Black-T® treatment specified on Springfield Armory 1911s built for the FBI’s regional SWAT and Hostage Rescue Teams. 
^ Smith, Aaron (30 June 2016). "Glock wins $85 million FBI contract". CNN. 
^ "F.B.I. Awards Glock New Duty Pistol Contract!". Blue Sheepdog. 30 June 2016. 
^ Terrill, Daniel (30 June 2016). "FBI goes back to 9mm with Glock". Guns.com. 
^ "FBI Chooses 9mm Glocks for New Service Pistols". Outdoor Hub. 
^ "Law Enforcement Communication Unit". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-17. 
^ "History of the FBI, The New Deal: 1933 – Late 1930s". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2015-01-06. 
^ a b "Federal Bureau of Investigation – Reports & Publications". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2016-03-26. 
^ a b Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 12. ISBN 0-465-04195-7. 
^ "Preliminary Crime Statistics for 2006". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2010-04-11. 
^ "FBI Launches Tip-Sharing For Inauguration". CBS News. 2009-01-13. Retrieved 2009-01-13. 
^ "eGuardian – FBI Shares Threat Info With Local Police Agencies". National Terror Alert Response Center. 2009-01-13. Retrieved 2009-01-13. 
^ "Reading Room Index". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved 2012-02-22. 
^ The FBI'S Covert Action Program to Destroy the Black Panther Party Archived January 13, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
^ FBI Secrets: An Agent's Expose. M. Wesley Swearingen. Boston. South End Press. 1995. Special Agent Gregg York: "We expected about twenty Panthers to be in the apartment when the police raided the place. Only two of those black nigger fuckers were killed, Fred Hampton and Mark Clark."
^ "Final Report, S. Rep. No. 94-755 (1976), Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Book III, Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans". Intelligence.senate.gov. 
^ Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri. THE FBI, Yale University Press, 2008, p. 189
^ "Final Report, 2A". ICDC. Archived from the original on October 19, 2006. Retrieved October 25, 2006. 
^ "Final Report,2Cb". ICDC. 
^ "Final Report, 3A". ICDC. 
^ "Final Report, 3G". ICDC. 
^ "CPUSA". ICDC. 
^ "SWP". ICDC. 
^ "Black Nationalist". ICDC. 
^ "White Hate". ICDC. 
^ "New Left". ICDC. 
^ "Puerto Rico". ICDC. 
^ "Archived copy". 2006. Archived from the original on October 19, 2006. Retrieved October 25, 2006. 
^ American National Biography, Pedro Abizu Campos, accessed 19 Apr. 2015.
^ FBI Files on Puerto Ricans. The New York Times. Retrieved 13 December 2013.
^ "FBI Files on Pedro Albizu Campos". Archived from the original on 6 August 2014. 
^ "FBI Files on Surveillance of Puerto Ricans in general". Archived from the original on 6 August 2014. 
^ Che Guevara and the FBI: U.S. Political Police Dossier on the Latin American Revolutionary. Michael Ratner. 1997. Retrieved 13 December 2103.
^ https://www.dukeupress.edu/the-fbi-in-latin-america
^ "The F.B.I. Deemed Agents Faultless in 150 Shootings," by Charlie Savage and Michael Schmidt, 18 June 2013, New York Times.
^ The Feds Let 'Whitey' Get Away With Murder: FBI agents and other officials protected James "Whitey" Bulger as he roamed free for decades. Is there a statute of limitations on corrupting the system? Mike Barnicle. TIME. 12 August 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013.
^ Nagorney, Adam; Lovett, Ian (June 23, 2011). "Whitey Bulger Is Arrested in California". The New York Times. 
^ Zezima, Katie (June 23, 2011). "In South Boston, Mixed Memories of Whitey Bulger". The New York Times. 
^ "law.com". law.com. February 13, 2011. Retrieved 2012-01-02. 
^ "FBI helped Bulger evade detection, ex-cop says". CBS News. Retrieved 2011-06-27. 
^ "Whitey Bulger arrest may revive old scandals". CBS News. Retrieved 2011-06-27. 
^ "FBI corruption and Whitey Bulger". necn.com. June 23, 2011. Archived from the original on September 19, 2012. Retrieved 2011-06-27. 
^ "James J. Bulger". fbi.gov. September 3, 1929. Retrieved 2011-06-27. 
^ Rudolf, John (June 24, 2011). "Nabbed Gangster 'Whitey' Bulger Could Spill FBI Corruption Secrets". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 2016-01-19. 
^ Sonmez, Felicia (June 25, 2011). "James 'Whitey' Bulger's capture could cause trouble inside the FBI". The Washington Post. 
^ "Capture Of Boston Gangster Could Mean More Scandal"[dead link] NPR.
^ Florida Court Overturns Murder Conviction of FBI Agent, by Timothy Williams, 29 May 2014, New York Times
^ "Famed crime boss James 'Whitey' Bulger arrested in Santa Monica". Los Angeles Times. June 22, 2011. 
^ "Whitey Bulger Is Arrested in California". The New York Times. 23 June 2011. 
^ Johnson, Kevin (June 23, 2011). "Mobster Whitey Bulger arrested in California". USA Today. Retrieved 2011-06-27. 
^ "One of America's Top Fugitives James "Whitey" Bulger: Caught in Santa Monica" International Business Times
^ "Mass. Mobster Bulger Reportedly Taken to Hospital". Boston.com. AP. November 5, 2012. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. 
^ Shelley Murphy; Milton J. Valencia; Brian Ballou; John R. Ellement; Martin Finucane (June 12, 2013). "'Whitey' Bulger defense claims he was no informant, questions credibility of prosecution witnesses". The Boston Globe. Retrieved August 12, 2013. 
^ Shelley Murphy; Milton J. Valencia; Martin Finucane (August 12, 2013). "Whitey Bulger, notorious Boston gangster, convicted in sweeping racketeering case; jury finds he participated in 11 murders". The Boston Globe. Retrieved August 12, 2013. 
^ "Topic Galleries". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 2013-11-17. 
^ Adrian Havill, crimelibrary.com. His fate is sealed Archived 2007-09-07 at the Wayback Machine.. Retrieved September 10, 2007
^ Wise 2003, p. 8
^ Transcript of Hanssen Guilty Plea, July 6, 2001. Retrieved February 22, 2007.
^ United States Department of Justice Thompson Statement Regarding Hanssen Guilty Plea July 6, 2001. Retrieved February 22, 2007.
^ "A Review of FBI Security Programs (Webster Report) (March 2002). Commission for Review of FBI Security Programs, United States Department of Justice.
^ "Fugitive is killed in FBI stakeout". The Boston Globe. September 25, 2005. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 2009-05-05. 
^ "Revés para Puerto Rico en caso de independentista muerto por FBI" (in Spanish). Azcentral. 2008-03-31. Archived from the original on 2013-01-18. Retrieved 2009-05-05. 
^ Funeral Service for Filiberto Ojeda Ríos Retrieved July 20, 2009.
^ "Request for Condemnation of Ojeda-Rios' assassination by the United States". 
^ Miller, Mary Ann (August 27, 2015). "Associated Press sues after FBI impersonates journalist in sting operation". Los Angeles Times. 
^ Reilly, Ryan (September 15, 2016). "An FBI Agent Did A Pretty Terrible Job Of Pretending To Be A Journalist". HuffPost. 
^ Tucker, Eric (November 10, 2014). "AP demands FBI never again impersonate journalist". Associated Press. 
^ Tucker, Eric (September 15, 2016). "Justice Department report 'effectively condone[s]' FBI impersonation incident". The Washington Post. 
^ Cohen, Kelly (December 15, 2017). "Appeals Court sides with Associated Press in lawsuit against FBI". Washington Examiner. 
^ Gresko, Jessica (November 15, 2017). "US court hears case involving impersonation of AP journalist". Chicago Tribune. 
^ Borland, John (November 17, 2005). "See Who's Editing Wikipedia – Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign". Wired. 
^ "Congressional staffers edit boss's bio on Wikipedia". Ars Technica. 
^ a b c Fildes, Jonathan (August 15, 2007). "Technology | Wikipedia 'shows CIA page edits'". BBC News. Retrieved February 13, 2012. 
^ Bobbie Johnson, technology correspondent (August 14, 2007). "Companies and party aides cast censorious eye over Wikipedia". The Guardian. London. Retrieved February 12, 2012. 
^ Susan Duclos (August 12, 2008). "McCain Accused Of Plagiarism, Campaign Releases Internal Memo And Denies Claim". Digital Journal. Retrieved April 17, 2013. 
^ Poulsen, Kevin (August 13, 2007). "Vote On the Most Shameful Wikipedia Spin Jobs – UPDATED | Threat Level". Wired. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ a b Mikkelsen, Randall (August 16, 2007). "CIA, FBI computers used for Wikipedia edits". Reuters. Retrieved February 12, 2012. 
^ "CIA caught rewriting Wikipedia biographies". Daily Mail. London. August 15, 2007. Retrieved February 13, 2012. 
^ "Wikipedia and the art of censorship". Belfast Telegraph. August 18, 2007. Retrieved March 14, 2012. 
^ a b c Landler, Mark; Lichtblau, Eric (6 July 2016). "STERN REBUKE, BUT NO CHARGES FOR CLINTON: F.B.I. Calls Email Use 'Extremely Careless'". The New York Times. p. A1. Retrieved 6 July 2016. 
^ Johnson, Kevin (7 July 2016). "Comey faces grilling by House panel over Clinton emails". Retrieved 7 July 2016. 
^ Wilber, Del Quentin Wilber (7 July 2016). "Comey says FBI did not 'give a hoot about politics' in Clinton email probe". latimes.com. Retrieved 7 July 2016. 
^ Jacobs, Ben; et al. (28 October 2016). "Newly discovered emails relating to Hillary Clinton case under review by FBI". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 October 2016. CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al. (link)
^ Isikoff, Michael (29 October 2016). "Exclusive: FBI still does not have warrant to review new Abedin emails linked to Clinton probe". Yahoo. Retrieved 30 October 2016. 
^ Horwitz, Sari (29 October 2016). "Justice officials warned FBI that Comey's decision to update Congress was not consistent with department policy". Washington Post. Retrieved 30 October 2016. 
^ Callan, Paul (30 October 2016). "Time for FBI director Comey to go". CNN. Retrieved 30 October 2016. 
^ O'Dowd, Niall (30 October 2016). "FBI's James Comey worse than Hoover when it comes to election interference". Irish Central. Retrieved 30 October 2016. 
^ Tesfaye, Sophia (4 November 2016). "Rudy Giuliani is now openly boasting that the Trump campaign got advance notice of James Comey's letter". Salon.com. Retrieved 5 November 2016. 
^ Pierce, Charles P. (November 3, 2016). "The FBI. Giuliani. Of Course". Esquire. Retrieved 3 November 2016. 
^ Bradner, Eric (6 November 2016). "FBI: Review of new emails doesn't change conclusion on Clinton". CNN. Retrieved 6 November 2016. 
^ Hamburger, Tom (6 November 2016). "FBI Director Comey says agency won't recommend charges over Clinton email". Washington Post. Retrieved 6 November 2016. 
^ Rubin, Jennifer (November 7, 2016). "James Comey should be fired". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 8 November 2016. 
^ Constantine, Tim (November 7, 2016). "FBI chief James Comey should resign". The Washington Times. Retrieved 8 November 2016. 
^ Eichenwald, Kurt (November 7, 2016). "FBI Director James Comey Is Unfit for Public Service". Newsweek. Retrieved 8 November 2016. 
^ "US election: Hillary Clinton blames loss on FBI's James Comey in call with top donors". The Daily Telegraph. 13 November 2016.
^ Ahmann, Timothy. "DOJ watchdog investigating FBI decisions in Clinton email probe". Reuters. Retrieved 12 January 2017. 
^ "President Trump dismisses FBI Director Comey". Washington Post. Retrieved 2017-05-09. 
^ Rosenberg, Matthew; Apuzzo, Matt (2017-05-10). "Days Before Firing, Comey Asked for More Resources for Russia Inquiry". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2017-05-10. 
^ New York Times, May 9, 2017, F.B.I. Director James Comey Is Fired by Trump
^ Manchester, Julia (2 August 2017). "Wray officially sworn in as FBI director". 
^ Powers, Richard Gid (1983). G-Men: Hoover's FBI in American Popular Culture. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 0-8093-1096-1. 



Further reading

HSI BOOK Government HSI Files
Charles, Douglas M. (2007). J. Edgar Hoover and the Anti-interventionists: FBI Political Surveillance and the Rise of the Domestic Security State, 1939–1945. Columbus, Ohio: The Ohio State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8142-1061-1. 
Kessler, Ronald (1993). The FBI: Inside the World's Most Powerful Law Enforcement Agency. Pocket Books Publications. ISBN 978-0-671-78657-1. 
Powers, Richard Gid (1983). G-Men, Hoover's FBI in American Popular Culture. Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-1096-8. 
Sullivan, William (1979). The Bureau: My Thirty Years in Hoover's FBI. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-01236-1. 
Theoharis, Athan G.; John Stuart Cox (1988). The Boss: J. Edgar Hoover and the Great American Inquisition. Temple University Press. ISBN 978-0-87722-532-4. 
Theoharis, Athan G.; Tony G. Poveda; Susan Rosenfeld; Richard Gid Powers (2000). The FBI: A Comprehensive Reference Guide. Checkmark Books. ISBN 978-0-8160-4228-9. 
Theoharis, Athan G. (2004). The FBI and American Democracy: A Brief Critical History. Kansas: University Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-1345-8. 
Thomas, William H., Jr. (2008). Unsafe for Democracy: World War I and the U.S. Justice Department's Covert Campaign to Suppress Dissent. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-22890-3. 
Tonry, Michael (ed.) (2000). The Handbook of Crime & Punishment. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514060-6. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
Trahair, Richard C. S. (2004). Encyclopedia of Cold War Espionage, Spies, and Secret Operations. Ballentine: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-31955-6. 
Vanderpool, Bill (August 22, 2011). "A History of FBI Handguns". American Rifleman. Retrieved April 3, 2014. 
Weiner, Tim (2012). Enemies. A History of the FBI. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6748-0. 
Williams, David (1981). "The Bureau of Investigation and its Critics, 1919–1921: the Origins of Federal Political Surveillance". Journal of American History. Organization of American Historians. 68 (3): 560–579. doi:10.2307/1901939. JSTOR 1901939. 
FBI — The Year in Review, Part 1, Part 2 (2013)
Church Committee Report, Vol. 6, "Federal Bureau of Investigation." 1975 congressional inquiry into American intelligence operations.

External links



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Federal Bureau of Investigation.



Federal Bureau of Investigation from the Federation of American Scientists
The Vault, FBI electronic reading room (launched April 2011)
Works by Federal Bureau of Investigation at Project Gutenberg
Works by Federal Bureau of Investigation at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
FBI Collection at Internet Archive, files on over 1,100 subjects







v
t
e


Federal Bureau of Investigation



Field offices



Atlanta
Buffalo
Cleveland
Tampa








Organization



Criminal, Cyber, Response, and Services Branch
Human Resources Branch
Information and Technology Branch
National Security Branch
Science and Technology Branch
Academy
Behavioral Analysis Unit
Behavioral Science Unit
Communications Exploitation Section
Criminal Justice Information Services Division
Counterterrorism Division
Criminal Investigative Division
Crisis Negotiation Unit
Critical Incident Response Group
FBI Police
FBI Special Weapons and Tactics Teams (SWAT)
Hostage Rescue Team (HRT)
Joint Terrorism Task Force
Laboratory Division
National Academy
National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime
National Crime Information Center
Office of Professional Responsibility
Scientific Working Group (Imaging Technology
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis)
Violent Criminal Apprehension Program





Technology



Airtel
Bureaupedia
Carnivore
Combined DNA Index System (CODIS)
Computer and Internet Protocol Address Verifier
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System (IAFIS)
Law Enforcement National Data Exchange (N-DEx)
National Incident-Based Reporting System





Ranks



Deputy Director
Special agent






Methods and
activities




Abscam
Bridgman Convention
COINTELPRO
FBI method of profiling
Rod Blagojevich corruption charges
FBI Files on Elvis Presley
FBI Miami shootout
FBI Silvermaster File
FBI Special Advisor Program
FBI Victims Identification Project
Guardian
High-Value Interrogation Group
Lindbergh kidnapping
Ruby Ridge
Special Intelligence Service
U.S. v. Scheinberg et al. (10 Cr. 336)
Waco siege





Directors1




Bureau of Investigation



Stanley Finch
A. Bruce Bielaski
William E. Allen
William J. Flynn
William J. Burns
J. Edgar Hoover





FBI



J. Edgar Hoover
L. Patrick Gray
William Ruckelshaus
Clarence M. Kelley
James B. Adams
William H. Webster
John E. Otto
William S. Sessions
Floyd I. Clarke
Louis Freeh
Thomas J. Pickard
Robert Mueller
James Comey
Andrew McCabe
Christopher A. Wray








People



Harry "Skip" Brandon
Sibel Edmonds
Mark Felt

"Deep Throat"


Helen Gandy
Joseph L. Gormley
Wesley Grapp
David Icove





Buildings



FBI Headquarters
Child Abduction and Serial Murder Center





Related



FBI portrayal in media
G-Man
Junior G-Men
FBI–Apple encryption dispute
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin






1 In order of service. Italics indicate Acting Directors.










v
t
e


Agencies under the United States Department of Justice






Headquarters: Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building


Jeff Sessions, Attorney General
Rod Rosenstein, Deputy Attorney General





Deputy
Attorney
General



Justice Management Division
Criminal Division
National Security Division
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
Drug Enforcement Administration
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Federal Bureau of Prisons
National Institute of Corrections
United States Marshals Service
Executive Office for Immigration Review
Office of Attorney Recruitment and Management
Office of the Federal Detention Trustee
Office of the Pardon Attorney
Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties
Office of Professional Responsibility
Office on Sexual Violence and Crimes against Children
Office of Tribal Justice
Professional Responsibility Advisory Office
United States Attorneys
INTERPOL, U.S. National Central Bureau
United States Parole Commission
Office of Legal Counsel








Associate
Attorney
General



Office of Justice Programs
Office of Dispute Resolution
Office on Violence Against Women
Community Oriented Policing Services
Office of Information Policy
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission
Antitrust Division
Civil Division
Civil Rights Division
Environment and Natural Resources Division
Tax Division
United States Trustee Program
Community Relations Service
Office of Legal Policy





Assistant
Attorneys
General



Antitrust Division
Civil Division
Civil Rights Division
Criminal Division
National Security Division
Environmental and Natural Resources Division
Justice Management Division
Tax Division
Office of Legal Counsel
Office of Legal Policy
Office of Legislative Affairs
Office of Justice Programs






Solicitor General










v
t
e


Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States



Department of Commerce



Office of Export Enforcement
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office for Law Enforcement





Department of Defense







Defense Criminal Investigative Service
Department of Defense police
Defense Logistics Agency Police
Pentagon Force Protection Agency (Pentagon Police)
National Security Agency Police





Army Department



Intelligence and Security Command
Criminal Investigation Command
US Army Military Police Corps
Department of the Army Police|Army Department Police
Corrections Command





Navy Department



Naval Criminal Investigative Service
Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division
Master-at-Arms
Marine Corps Police
Naval Academy Police





Air Force Department



Office of Special Investigations
Security Forces
Air Force Police








Department of
Health and Human Services



United States Food and Drug Administration (Office of Criminal Investigations)
National Institutes of Health Police





Department of
Homeland Security



Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
United States Coast Guard

Investigative Service
Coast Guard Police


Customs and Border Protection
Federal Protective Service
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
United States Secret Service
Transportation Security Administration

Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service







Department of
the Interior



Bureau of Indian Affairs Police
Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement
Hoover Dam Police
National Park Service

Rangers
United States Park Police


Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement
National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement





Department of Justice



Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
Drug Enforcement Administration
Federal Bureau of Investigation

FBI Police


Federal Bureau of Prisons
United States Marshals Service





Department of State



Bureau of Diplomatic Security

Diplomatic Security Service
Office of Foreign Missions







Department of Transportation



United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety





Department of the Treasury



Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
Bureau of Engraving and Printing Police
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigation Division
United States Mint Police








U.S. Forest Service: Law Enforcement and Investigations

USDA


Department of Veterans Affairs Police
Office of Secure Transportation

DOE







United States Congress



Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives
Sergeant at Arms of the Senate
United States Capitol Police
Government Printing Office Police





Judicial branch



U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System
Marshal of the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court Police)





Other federal law
enforcement agencies



Amtrak Police
Central Intelligence Agency Security Protective Service
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance
Federal Reserve Police
National Zoological Park Police
Postal Inspection Service (U.S. Postal Police)
Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services












v
t
e


United States Intelligence Community



Intelligence
Community




Defense



Defense Intelligence Agency (Defense Clandestine Service • Defense Attaché System • National Intelligence University • Missile and Space Intelligence Center • National Center for Medical Intelligence • Joint Functional Component Command for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance)
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency (Central Security Service, Special Collection Service)




Armed Forces



Army Intelligence and Security Command
Marine Corps Intelligence
Office of Naval Intelligence
Twenty-Fifth Air Force
Coast Guard Intelligence (Homeland Security)








Civilian



Bureau of Intelligence and Research (State)
Central Intelligence Agency (Directorate of Operations • Special Activities Division • Open Source Center • Directorate of Science and Technology • CIA University)
Drug Enforcement Administration (Justice)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Justice)
Office of Intelligence and Analysis (Homeland Security)
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence (Treasury)
Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence (Energy)











Director of
National
Intelligence



Director of National Intelligence
National Counterterrorism Center
National Counterproliferation Center
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive
National Intelligence Council
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
Joint Intelligence Community Council
Chief Information Officer





Executive Office
of the President



National Security Advisor
National Security Council
President's Intelligence Advisory Board
Homeland Security Council
Homeland Security Advisor
President's Daily Brief





Other



Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence
Army Intelligence Support Activity
Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System
Intellipedia





Oversight



United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
United States House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence
United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
Office of Management and Budget





Defunct



Contingency Fund for Foreign Intercourse
Counterintelligence Field Activity
Military Information Division
Military Intelligence Division
Military Intelligence Service
Office of Strategic Services
Office of Special Plans
Strategic Support Branch












v
t
e


Patriot Act




Titles I – II – III – IV – V – VI – VII – VIII – IX – X



Statute legislative and judicial history



History of the Patriot Act





Acts modified



Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
Money Laundering Control Act
Bank Secrecy Act
Right to Financial Privacy Act
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952
Victims of Crime Act of 1984
Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act





People



George W. Bush
John Ashcroft
Alberto Gonzales
Patrick Leahy
Orrin Hatch
Jon Kyl
Dianne Feinstein
Viet D. Dinh
Joe Biden
Michael Chertoff
Barack Obama
Eric Holder
Jim Dempsey
Chuck Schumer
Lamar Smith
Bob Graham
Jay Rockefeller
Arlen Specter
Mike Oxley
Dick Armey
Paul Sarbanes
Trent Lott
Tom Daschle
Russ Feingold
Ellen Huvelle
Ron Paul
Lisa Murkowski
Ron Wyden
Dennis Kucinich
Larry Craig
John E. Sununu
Richard Durbin
Bernie Sanders
Jerrold Nadler
John Conyers, Jr.
Butch Otter





Government organizations



Federal Bureau of Investigation
Department of Justice
Select Committee on Intelligence
Department of the Treasury
FinCEN
Department of State
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Customs Service
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement





Non-government organizations



American Civil Liberties Union
American Library Association
Center for Democracy and Technology
Center for Public Integrity
Electronic Frontier Foundation
Electronic Privacy Information Center
Humanitarian Law Project












v
t
e


United States articles



History




By event



Timeline of U.S. history
Pre-Columbian era
Colonial era

Thirteen Colonies
military history
Continental Congress


American Revolution

War


American frontier
America's Critical Period
Drafting and ratification of Constitution
Federalist Era
War of 1812
Territorial acquisitions
Territorial evolution
Mexican–American War
Civil War
Reconstruction Era
Indian Wars
Gilded Age
Progressive Era
African-American Civil Rights Movement 1865–1895 / 1896–1954
Spanish–American War
Imperialism
World War I
Roaring Twenties
Great Depression
World War II

home front
Nazism in the United States


American Century
Cold War
Korean War
Space Race
Civil Rights Movement
Feminist Movement
Vietnam War
Post-Cold War (1991–2008)
War on Terror

War in Afghanistan
Iraq War


Recent events (2008–present)





By topic



Outline of U.S. history
Demographic
Discoveries
Economic

debt ceiling


Inventions

before 1890
1890–1945
1946–91
after 1991


Military
Postal
Technological and industrial








Geography







Territory

counties
federal district
federal enclaves
Indian reservations
insular zones
minor outlying islands
populated places
states


Earthquakes
Extreme points
Islands
Mountains

peaks
ranges
Appalachian
Rocky


National Park Service

National Parks


Regions

East Coast
West Coast
Great Plains
Gulf
Mid-Atlantic
Midwestern
New England
Pacific
Central
Eastern
Northern
Northeastern
Northwestern
Southern
Southeastern
Southwestern
Western


Rivers

Colorado
Columbia
Mississippi
Missouri
Ohio
Rio Grande
Yukon


Time
Water supply and sanitation








Politics








Federal




Executive



Cabinet
Civil service
Executive departments
Executive Office
Independent agencies
Law enforcement
President of the United States
Public policy





Legislative



House of Representatives

current members
Speaker


Senate

current members
President pro tempore
Vice President







Judicial



Courts of appeals
District courts
Supreme Court





Law



Bill of Rights

civil liberties


Code of Federal Regulations
Constitution

federalism
preemption
separation of powers


Federal Reporter
United States Code
United States Reports





Intelligence



Central Intelligence Agency
Defense Intelligence Agency
Federal Bureau of Investigation
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
National Reconnaissance Office
National Security Agency
Office of the Director of National Intelligence





Uniformed



Armed Forces

Army
Marine Corps
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard


National Guard
NOAA Corps
Public Health Service Corps











51st state

political status of Puerto Rico
District of Columbia statehood movement


Elections

Electoral College


Foreign relations

Foreign policy


Ideologies

anti-Americanism
exceptionalism
nationalism


Local government
Parties

Democratic
Republican
Third parties


Red states and blue states

Purple America


Scandals
State government

governor
state legislature
state court


Uncle Sam











Economy







By sector

Agriculture
Banking
Communications
Energy
Insurance
Manufacturing
Mining
Tourism
Trade
Transportation


Companies

by state


Currency
Exports
Federal budget
Federal Reserve System
Financial position
Labor unions
Public debt
Social welfare programs
Taxation
Unemployment
Wall Street








Society








Culture



Americana
Architecture
Cinema
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Education
Family structure
Fashion
Flag
Folklore
Languages

American English
Indigenous languages
ASL

Black American Sign Language


HSL
Plains Sign Talk
Arabic
Chinese
French
German
Italian
Russian
Spanish


Literature
Media

Journalism
Internet
Newspapers
Radio
Television


Music
Names
People
Philosophy
Public holidays
Religion
Sexuality
Sports
Theater
Visual art





Social class



Affluence
American Dream
Educational attainment
Homelessness
Home-ownership
Household income
Income inequality
Middle class
Personal income
Poverty
Professional and working class conflict
Standard of living
Wealth





Issues



Ages of consent
Capital punishment
Crime

incarceration


Criticism of government
Discrimination

affirmative action
antisemitism
intersex rights
islamophobia
LGBT rights
racism
same-sex marriage


Drug policy
Energy policy
Environmental movement
Gun politics
Health care

abortion
health insurance
hunger
obesity
smoking


Human rights
Immigration

illegal


International rankings
National security

Mass surveillance
Terrorism


Separation of church and state















Outline
Index



Book
Category
Portal












v
t
e


National intelligence agencies



Foreign
intelligence



Afghanistan: NDS
Albania: SHISH
Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Armenia: SNB
Australia: ASIS
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bahrain: NSA
Bangladesh: NSI
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Bosnia and Herzegovina: OSA-OBA
Brazil: ABIN
Brunei: BRD
Bulgaria: NRS
Cameroon: BMM
Canada: CSIS
Chad: ANS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Cuba: DI
Czech Republic: ÚZSI
Denmark: FE
Djibouti: BSRG
Ecuador: SENAIN
Egypt: Mukhabarat
Estonia: EFIS
France: DGSE
Gambia: SIS
Georgia: GIS
Germany: BND
Ghana: BNI, BGU, RDU
Greece: EYP
Hungary: IH
India: RAW
Indonesia: BIN
Iran: VAJA
Iraq: GSD
Ireland: G2
Israel: Mossad
Italy: AISE
Ivory Coast: NSC
Japan: NPA
CIRO
Jordan: GID
Kazakhstan: Syrbar
Kenya: NIS
Kyrgyzstan: SNB
Kuwait: KSS
Latvia: SAB
Lithuania: VSD
Lebanon: GDGS
Libya: MJ
Republic of Macedonia: UBK
Malaysia: MEIO
Maldives: NSS
Mexico: CISEN
Mongolia: GIA
Montenegro: ANB
Morocco: DGST
Mozambique: SISE
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: NIA
North Korea: RGB
Norway: E-tjenesten
Oman: Palace Office
Pakistan: ISI
Papua New Guinea: NIO
Philippines: NICA
Poland: AW
Portugal: SIED
Qatar: QSS
Romania: SIE
Russia: SVR
Saudi Arabia: Al Mukhabarat Al A'amah
Serbia: BIA
Sierra Leone: CISU
Singapore: SID
Slovakia: SIS
Slovenia: SOVA
Somalia: NISA
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: NIS
Spain: CNI
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sudan: JAWM
Sweden: KSI
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: NSB
Tajikistan: MoS
Thailand: NIA
Togo: NIA
Tunisia: TIA
Turkey: MİT
Turkmenistan: KNB
Uganda: ISO
Ukraine: SZRU
United Arab Emirates: UAEI
United Kingdom: SIS (MI6)
United States: CIA
Uzbekistan: SNB
Vietnam: TC2





Domestic
intelligence



Algeria: DRS
Argentina: AFI
Australia: ASIO
Azerbaijan: MTN
Bangladesh: SB
Belarus: KGB RB
Belgium: VS/SE
Bosnia and Herzegovina: SIPA
Brazil: PF
Brunei: IRD
Canada: CSIS
Chile: ANI
China: MSS
Croatia: SOA
Czech Republic: BIS
Denmark: PET
Egypt: EHS
Estonia: KAPO
Finland: Supo
France: DGSI
Germany: BfV
Ghana: GPS, CID
Greece: EYP
Hungary: AH
India: IB, CBI, NSC, AIRMS
Iran: VAJA, IRGC, PAVA
Ireland: CSB, SDU, NSU
Israel: Shin Bet
Italy: AISI
Kazakhstan: NSC
Kenya: NIS
Latvia: DP
Lithuania: STT
Republic of Macedonia: IA
Malaysia: SB
Japan: NPA, PSIA
Netherlands: NCTb
New Zealand: NZSIS
Nigeria: SSS
Norway: PST
North Korea: SSD
Oman: ISS
Pakistan: IB, FIA
Philippines: NBI
Poland: ABW
Portugal: SIS
Romania: SRI
Russia: FSB
Saudi Arabia: Mabahith
Serbia: BIA
Singapore: ISD
South Africa: SSA
South Korea: SPO
Spain: CITCO
Sri Lanka: SIS
Sweden: SÄPO
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: GSD
Taiwan: MJIB
Thailand: ISOC, SB
Turkey: KDGM
Ukraine: SBU
United Kingdom: Security Service (MI5), NDEDIU, NCA, NBIS
United States: FBI
Uzbekistan: SNB
Venezuela: SEBIN
Vietnam: TC5
Zimbabwe: CIO





Military
intelligence



Australia: DIO
Bangladesh: DGFI
Belgium: ADIV/SGRS
Brazil: DIE
Canada: Int Branch
China: MID
Croatia: VSOA
Czech Republic: VZ
Denmark: FE
Egypt: DMISR
Finland: PE TIEDOS
France: DRM, DGSE
Germany: MAD
Ghana: MIU
Hungary: KNBSZ
Iran: General Staff, SAHEFAJA, SAHEFASA, SAHEFAVEDJA
India: DMI, DIA
Indonesia: BAIS
Ireland: G2
Israel: Aman
Italy: CII
Japan: MIC
Kazakhstan: NSC
Lithuania: AOTD
Republic of Macedonia: MSSI
Malaysia: DSID
Morocco: DGED
Netherlands: MIVD
New Zealand: DDIS
Norway: E-tjenesten
Pakistan: MI, NI, AI
Philippines: ISAFP
Poland: SKW, SWW
Portugal: CISMIL
Romania: DGIA
Russia: GRU
Serbia: VOA, VBA
Singapore: MIO
Slovakia: VSS
Slovenia: OVS
South Africa: SANDF-ID
South Korea: DSC
Spain: Armed Forces Intelligence Center
Sri Lanka: DMI
Sweden: MUST
Switzerland: MND
Syria: MI, AFID
Taiwan: MND
Thailand: AFSC
Turkey: GENKUR İ.D.B., JİTEM
Ukraine: HUR MO
United Kingdom: DI
United States: DIA
Venezuela: DGCIM
Vietnam: TC2





Signals
intelligence



Australia: ASD
Brazil: 2ª Sch/EMD
Canada: CSE
China: SIGINT
Croatia: OTC
Finland: PVTIEDL
France: DGSE
Germany: BND
Ghana: RDU
India: JCB,NTRO
Indonesia: LEMSANEG
Ireland: CIS
Israel: 8200
Japan: DIH
Kazakhstan: NSC
Netherlands: AIVD
New Zealand: GCSB
Pakistan: JSIB
Russia: Spetssvyaz
South Africa: SSA
Sweden: FRA
Switzerland: NDB
Syria: MI
Turkey: MİT-ETİB, MİT-SİB
Ukraine: Derzhspetszviazok
United Kingdom: GCHQ
United States: NSA





Imagery
intelligence



Australia: AGO
Finland: PVTIEDL
India: DAI
Israel: Air Intelligence Group
New Zealand: GEOINT NZ
Portugal: CIGeoE
Russia: TsVTI GRU
United Kingdom: DGIFC
United States: NGA





Related
topics



Espionage
Global surveillance disclosures

Chelsea Manning
Snowden leaks
WikiLeaks


Great Firewall of China

Mass surveillance in China


Law enforcement
Surveillance

Big Brother
Call detail record
Carnivore
Dishfire
ECHELON
PRISM
Stone Ghost
Turbulence (NSA programme)


National security
Surveillance issues in smart cities












v
t
e


Law enforcement in North America



Sovereign states



Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Trinidad and Tobago
United States






Dependencies and
other territories




Anguilla
Aruba
Bermuda
Bonaire
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Curaçao
Greenland
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Montserrat
Puerto Rico
Saint Barthélemy
Saint Martin
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saba
Sint Eustatius
Sint Maarten
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 136624868
LCCN: n78095617
ISNI: 0000 0004 0481 0043
GND: 35632-3
SELIBR: 133942
SUDOC: 027521052
BNF: cb120073677 (data)
NLA: 35567597
NKC: kn20030825006
BNE: XX150939






Coordinates: 38°53′43″N 77°01′30″W﻿ / ﻿38.8952°N 77.0251°W﻿ / 38.8952; -77.0251





						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Federal_Bureau_of_Investigation&oldid=818113526"					Categories: Federal Bureau of InvestigationEspionage in the United StatesFederal law enforcement agencies of the United StatesLaw enforcement in the United StatesUnited States Department of Justice agenciesUnited States intelligence agenciesGovernment agencies established in 19081908 establishments in Washington, D.C.1908 establishments in the United StatesHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2016CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)CS1 maint: Explicit use of et al.Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2015All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listArticles with Project Gutenberg linksArticles with LibriVox linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiersCoordinates not on Wikidata