This article is about fiddle playing. For the instrument itself, see Violin. For the Indian film, see Fiddle (film).
"Fiddler" redirects here. For other uses, see Fiddler (disambiguation).

Fiddle


A fiddle being played.



String instrument


Hornbostel–Sachs classification
321.322-71
(Composite chordophone sounded by a bow)


Developed
Early 16th century


Playing range









Related instruments




Violin family (viola, cello)
Viol family (includes double bass)




Musicians




List of fiddlers




Builders




Luthiers









Part of a series on


Fiddle and Violin


Basic physics


Fiddlers


History of the violin


Luthiers


Musical styles



Violin making and
maintenance



Violin technique


Violin construction


Violin family


Violinists





v
t
e





A fiddle is a bowed string musical instrument, most often a violin.[1] It is also a colloquial term for the violin, used by players in all genres including classical music. Fiddle playing, or fiddling, refers to various styles of music. The fiddle is part of many traditional (folk) styles of music which are aural traditions, taught 'by ear' rather than via written music.[2]
There are few real distinctions between violins and fiddles, though more primitively constructed and smaller violins are more likely to be considered fiddles. Due to the style of the music played, fiddles may optionally be set up with a bridge with a flatter arch to reduce the range of right-arm motion needed for techniques such as the double shuffle, a form of bariolage involving rapid alternation between pairs of adjacent strings.
In order to produce a "brighter" tone, compared to the deeper tones of gut or synthetic core strings, fiddlers often prefer to use steel strings on their instruments. Among musical styles, fiddling tends to produce rhythms focused on dancing, with associated quick note changes, whereas classical music tends to contain more vibrato and sustained notes. It is less common for a classically trained violinist to play folk music, but today, many fiddlers have classical training.



Contents


1 History
2 Etymology
3 Ensembles

3.1 Scottish fiddle with cello
3.2 Balkan fiddle with kontra


4 Styles

4.1 Europe

4.1.1 Great Britain
4.1.2 Ireland
4.1.3 Nordic countries
4.1.4 Continental Europe


4.2 Americas

4.2.1 North America

4.2.1.1 Traditional
4.2.1.2 Modern
4.2.1.3 Canadian


4.2.2 Latin America


4.3 Other areas


5 Related instruments

5.1 Variants
5.2 Near relations
5.3 Distant relations


6 See also
7 References
8 External links



History[edit]
The medieval fiddle emerged in 10th-century Europe, deriving from the Byzantine lira (Greek: λύρα, Latin: lira, English: lyre), a bowed string instrument of the Byzantine Empire and ancestor of most European bowed instruments.[3][4] The first recorded reference to the bowed lira was in the 9th century by the Persian geographer Ibn Khurradadhbih (d. 911); in his lexicographical discussion of instruments he cited the lira (lūrā) as a typical instrument of the Byzantines and equivalent to the rabāb played in the Islamic Empires.[5] Lira spread widely westward to Europe; in the 11th and 12th centuries European writers use the terms fiddle and lira interchangeably when referring to bowed instruments (Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009).
Over the centuries, Europe continued to have two distinct types of fiddles: one, relatively square-shaped, held in the arms, became known as the viola da braccio (arm viol) family and evolved into the violin; the other, with sloping shoulders and held between the knees, was the viola da gamba (leg viol) group. During the Renaissance the gambas were important and elegant instruments; they eventually lost ground to the louder (and originally less aristocratic) viola da braccio family.[6]
Etymology[edit]
The etymology of fiddle is uncertain: the Germanic fiddle may derive from the same early Romance word as does violin, or it may be natively Germanic.[7] The name seems however to be related to Icelandic Fiðla and also Old English fiðele.[8] A native Germanic ancestor of fiddle may even be the ancestor of the early Romance form of violin.[9] Historically, fiddle also referred to a predecessor of today's violin. Like the violin, it tended to have four strings, but came in a variety of shapes and sizes. Another family of instruments that contributed to the development of the modern fiddle are the viols, which are held between the legs and played vertically, and have fretted fingerboards.
Ensembles[edit]




Fiddlers participating in a session at a pub in Ireland


In performance, a solo fiddler, or one or two with a group of other instrumentalists, is the norm, though twin fiddling is represented in some North American, Scandinavian, Scottish and Irish styles. Following the folk revivals of the second half of the 20th century, however, it has become common for less formal situations to find large groups of fiddlers playing together—see for example the Calgary Fiddlers, and Swedish Spelmanslag folk-musician clubs, and the worldwide[10] phenomenon of Irish sessions.
Orchestral violins, on the other hand, are commonly grouped in sections, or "chairs". These contrasting traditions may be vestiges of historical performance settings: large concert halls where violins were played required more instruments, before electronic amplification, than did more intimate dance halls and houses that fiddlers played in.
The difference was likely compounded by the different sounds expected of violin music and fiddle music. Historically, the majority of fiddle music was dance music,[2] while violin music had either grown out of dance music or was something else entirely. Violin music came to value a smoothness that fiddling, with its dance-driven clear beat, did not always follow. In situations that required greater volume, a fiddler (as long as they kept the beat) could push their instrument harder than could a violinist.[citation needed] Various fiddle traditions have differing values.
Scottish fiddle with cello[edit]
In the very late 20th century, a few artists have successfully attempted a reconstruction of the Scottish tradition of violin and "big fiddle," or cello. Notable recorded examples include Iain Fraser and Christine Hanson, Amelia Kaminski and Christine Hanson's Bonnie Lasses[11] and Alasdair Fraser and Natalie Haas' Fire and Grace.[12]
Balkan fiddle with kontra[edit]
Hungarian, Slovenian, and Romanian fiddle players are often accompanied by a three-stringed variant of the viola—known as the kontra—and by double bass, with cimbalom and clarinet being less standard yet still common additions to a band. In Hungary, a three stringed viola variant with a flat bridge, called the kontra or háromhúros brácsa makes up part of a traditional rhythm section in Hungarian folk music. The flat bridge allows for three string chords to be played. A three stringed double bass variant is also used.
Styles[edit]
To a greater extent than classical violin playing, fiddle playing is characterized by a huge variety of ethnic or folk music traditions, each of which has its own distinctive sound.
Europe[edit]
Great Britain[edit]

English folk music fiddling, including

The Northumbrian fiddle style, which features "seconding", an improvised harmony part played by a second fiddler.


Scottish fiddling, including:

Shetland fiddling, which includes trowie tunes said to come from peerie folk. The style is characterized by "ringing strings" and syncopated rhythms.
A Lowland Scots tradition strongly influenced by baroque violin technique with staccato and Scotch snap bowing techniques in addition to the use of double stops.
A Scottish Borders tradition with a repertoire heavy in hornpipes and with heavy use of double stops.
A Highland tradition, highly influenced by the ornamentation and mixolydian scale of the Great Highland Bagpipe, as well as smoother bowing than other Scottish fiddle styles and a swinging of the 6/8 jig rhythm.
An Orkney tradition with simpler bowing and ornamentation but with tunes featuring accidentals.[13]


Welsh fiddling (Welsh Ffidil; see Ar Log), a recently revived tradition.

Ireland[edit]

Irish folk music fiddling including:

Donegal fiddling from the northwest in Ulster, which features mazurkas and a Scottish-influenced repertoire including Strathspey and Highland Fling dances. Fiddlers tend to play fast and make heavy use of staccato bowing and may from time to time "play the bass," meaning a second fiddler may play a melody an octave below where a first fiddler is playing it.
Sligo fiddling from northern Connacht, which like Donegal fiddling tends to be fast, but with a bouncier feel to the bowing.
Galway fiddling southern Connacht, which is slower than Sligo or Donegal traditions, with a heavier emphasis on ornamentation. Additionally, tunes are occasionally played in Eb or Bb to match the tonality of flat pipes.
Clare fiddling from northern Munster, which tends to be played near the slower Galway tempo yet with a greater emphasis on the melody itself rather than ornamentation.
Sliabh Luachra fiddling from the southwest in Munster, characterized by a unique repertoire of polkas and slides, the use of double stops and drones, as well as playing the melody in two octaves as in Donegal.[14]



Nordic countries[edit]

Norwegian fiddling (including Hardanger fiddling; see also Bygdedans and Gammaldans), including traditions from:

Røros and Nord-Noreg styles, both using the standard fiddle.
Finnskogen, using the standard fiddle, but featuring some flatted notes influenced by Finnish folk music.
Voss and Telemark styles, both using the Hardanger fiddle.
Setesdal, which uses both standard and Hardanger fiddles.


Swedish fiddling (including Låtfiol playing; see also Spelmanslag and Gammaldans), including traditions from:

Jämtland
Dalarna


Finnish fiddling, including the regional styles of:

Kaustinen
Ostrobothnia, heavily influenced by Swedish fiddling.



Continental Europe[edit]




Klezmer fiddlers at a wedding, Ukraine, ca. 1925



Austrian fiddling
French fiddling, including an old tradition from Corrèze and a revived one from Brittany
Hungarian folk music traditions
Italian fiddling[15]
Klezmer fiddling[16]
Polish fiddling
Mainland Portuguese and Azorean fiddling
Romanian fiddling[17]

Americas[edit]
North America[edit]




Peter Stampfel from The Holy Modal Rounders


American fiddling, a broad category including traditional and modern styles
Traditional[edit]

Blues fiddling
Cajun and Zydeco fiddling
Native American fiddling, including:

Cherokee[2]
Creek[2]
Tohono O'odham, a style heavily influenced by Mexican fiddling[18] and featuring irregular counts and harmonies in thirds, fourths, and sixths.[citation needed]


Old-time fiddling, including:

Fiddling from Appalachia, the most well-known style today, featuring heavy use of droning and double-stops as well as syncopated bowing patterns.
Athabaskan fiddling of the Interior Alaska.
Midwestern fiddling, highly influenced by Scandinavian music.
Ozarks fiddling, faster and crisper bowing than Appalachia.
Texas fiddling, with influences from Mexican fiddling and an emphasis on competitive playing.




Bluegrass fiddler Kenny Baker



New England fiddling, with strong influences from Québécois/French Canadian and British repertoires.
Northwest fiddling, with influences from both Ozark and Midwestern fiddle styles, though with a strong emphasis on competitive playing like Texas fiddling.



Modern[edit]

Bluegrass fiddling
Country fiddling
Western swing style fiddling[19]

Canadian[edit]
Fiddling remains popular in Canada, and the various homegrown styles of Canadian fiddling are seen as an important part of the country's cultural identity, as celebrated during the opening ceremony of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics.

Cape Breton fiddling, with a distinct Scottish influence
French Canadian fiddling including "crooked tunes," that is, tunes with irregular beat patterns.
Métis fiddling, of central and western Canada featuring strong French Canadian influence, but with even more "crooked" tunes.[20]
Newfoundland and Labrador fiddling
Maritimes, Acadian or Downeast style of fiddling, which has many similarities to Cape Breton fiddling
English Canadian fiddling or Anglo-Canadian fiddling

Latin America[edit]

Forró, a type of music from Brazil, including the rabeca fiddle tradition
Mexican fiddling, including mariachi, son planeco, son arribeño, son huasteco, son calentano, violín-tambora and danza indígena.
Peruvian violin

Other areas[edit]

African fiddle
Australian folk music traditions
Morna fiddling from Cape Verde
Indian fiddle
Indian classical music

Related instruments[edit]
Variants[edit]

Hardanger fiddle
Stroh violin or phonofiddle, known in Romanian as Vioara cu goarnă.

Near relations[edit]

Cello
Double bass
Kontra
Låtfiol
Rebec
Rabeca
Viola

Distant relations[edit]




A nyckelharpa being played



Apache fiddle
Byzantine lyra, the medieval bowed instrument of the Byzantine Empire
Cretan Lyra
Crwth
Gadulka
Gudok
Gusle
Huqin
Hurdy-gurdy also known as the wheel fiddle
Kamancheh
Lijerica
Nyckelharpa
Rebab

See also[edit]


Music portal



Old-time music
List of All-Ireland Champions
List of fiddlers
Jazz violin


References[edit]


^ Gyles, Mary Francis (January 1947). "Nero Fiddled While Rome Burned". The Classical Journal. 42 (4): 211–17. doi:10.2307/3291751. 
^ a b c d Harris, Rodger (2009). "Fiddling". okhistory.org. The Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture. Retrieved 7 April 2017. 
^ "fiddle." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 6 March 2009.
^ Anthony Baines: The Oxford Companion to Musical Instruments. Oxford University Press, USA (November 12, 1992).
^ Margaret J. Kartomi: On Concepts and Classifications of Musical Instruments. Chicago Studies in Ethnomusicology, University of Chicago Press, 1990 p. 124.
^ stringed instrument. (2009). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March 14, 2009, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online (Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009).
^ "fiddle, n.". Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press. 1989. Retrieved 2008-03-28. 

(as access to the OED online is not free, the relevant excerpt is provided) "The ultimate origin is obscure. The [Teutonic] word bears a singular resemblance in sound to its [medieval Latin] synonym vitula, vidula, whence [Old French] viole, Pr. viula, and (by adoption from these [languages]) [Italian], [Spanish], [Portuguese] viola: see [viol]. The supposition that the early [Romance] vidula was adopted independently in more than one [Teutonic language] would account adequately for all the [Teutonic] forms; on the other hand, *fiÞulôn- may be an [Old Teutonic] word of native etymology, though no satisfactory [Teutonic] derivation has been found."


^ "Bosworth and Toller". Web.ff.cuni.cz. Retrieved 2012-04-30. 
^ Mario Pei, The Story of the English Language (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1967), p. 109.
^ "The Session: Sessions". Retrieved 28 August 2006. 
^ "Amelia Kaminski Productions". Willockandsaxgallery.com. Archived from the original on 2011-11-12. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Fire & Grace". Culburnie.com. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ Joseph Lyons. "Scottish Fiddle Music". Scotlandsmusic.com. Archived from the original on 2012-04-19. Retrieved 2012-04-30. 
^ "Regional Irish Fiddle Styles". Irishfiddle.com. Archived from the original on 2012-04-23. Retrieved 2012-04-30. 
^ "Middle Eastern and Mediterranean Fiddle". Fiddlingaround.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Klezmer Fiddle". Fiddlingaround.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "East European and Gypsy Fiddle". Fiddlingaround.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Gu-Achi Fiddlers - Old Time O'odham Fiddle Music (CR-8082)". Store.canyonrecords.com. Archived from the original on 2012-08-03. Retrieved 2012-08-03. 
^ "Western Swing Fiddle". Fiddlingaround.co.uk. Retrieved 2011-11-14. 
^ "Jackson School of International Studies - Canadian Studies Center". Jsis.washington.edu. Retrieved 2012-08-03. 


Sources:

The Fiddle Book, by Marion Thede, (1970), Oak Publications. ISBN 0-8256-0145-2.
The Fiddler's Fakebook, by David Brody, (1983), Oak Publications. US ISBN 0-8256-0238-6; UK ISBN 0-7119-0309-3.
Oldtime Fiddling Across America, by David Reiner and Peter Anick (1989), Mel Bay Publications. ISBN 0-87166-766-5. Has transcriptions (standard notation) and analysis of tunes from multiple regional and ethnic styles.
The Portland Collection, by Susan Songer, (1997), ISBN 0-9657476-0-3 (Vol. 2 ISBN 0-9657476-1-1)
North American Fiddle Music: a research and information guide by Drew Beisswenger (2011) Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-99454-5

External links[edit]






This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)




Find more aboutFiddleat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Data from Wikidata



Faroese fiddling
Voyager records, with clips of many North American styles
The Fiddler's Companion, an encyclopedia of historical notes on tunes from British, Celtic, and American traditions
Map of regions in Ireland and traditional Irish fiddle players
Differences between fiddle and violin
Polish Fiddles - mazanki, złóbcoki
Złóbcoki (fiddles) - “Instruments with Soul” documentary







v
t
e


Bluegrass music



Typical instruments



Acoustic guitar
Banjo
Dobro
Fiddle

technique


Mandolin

technique


Upright bass








Stylistic origins



Blues
Country music
Folk music
Old-time music





Sub- and fusion genres



Traditional bluegrass
Progressive bluegrass
Bluegrass gospel
Czech bluegrass





Notable festivals



High Sierra Music Festival
Festival of the Bluegrass
Merlefest
Podunk Bluegrass Festival
Telluride Bluegrass Festival
Tottenham Bluegrass Festival
List of bluegrass music festivals





Notable performers



List of bluegrass musicians
List of bluegrass bands
List of bluegrass mandolinists





Other



International Bluegrass Music Museum
International Bluegrass Music Association
International Bluegrass Music Hall of Fame
Bluegrass Unlimited magazine
Central Canadian Bluegrass Awards
International Bluegrass Music Awards








Category
Portal












v
t
e


Irish music



General



Céilidh
Folk music of Ireland
Irish dance
Music of Ireland
Sean-nós dance
Set dance





Folk song



Sean-nós song
Traditional Irish singing
Lilting





Instruments



Accordion
Bodhrán
Bones
Bouzouki
Concertina
Fiddle
Flute
Hammered dulcimer
Harp
Lambeg
Melodeon
Tenor banjo
Tin whistle
Uilleann pipes





Tune Types



2
4 dances
Polka


2
2 and 4
4 dances
Barndance
Fling
Highland
Hornpipe
Reel
Strathspey
Schottische


3
4 dances
Mazurka
Waltz


6
8 dances
Single and Double Jigs


9
8 dances
Hop and Slip jigs


12
8 dances
Slide


Non-dance tunes
Marches and Airs which exist in various meters.





Scales



Aeolian mode
Dorian mode
Ionian mode
Mixolydian mode
Pentatonic scale





Relations



Cape Breton fiddling
Folk music of England
Folk music of Scotland
Folk music of Wales











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiddle&oldid=815881133"					Categories: ViolinsBowed instrumentsCajun musical instrumentsEnglish musical instrumentsCzech musical instrumentsIrish musical instrumentsScottish musical instrumentsFaroese musical instrumentsCeltic musical instrumentsWelsh musical instrumentsNecked box lutesHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013Wikipedia external links cleanup from November 2017Wikipedia spam cleanup from November 2017