For other uses, see Field marshal (disambiguation).



Common military ranks in English



Navies
Armies
Air forces


Commissioned officers


Admiral of
the fleet
Field marshal or
General of the Army
Marshal of
the air force


Admiral
General
Air chief marshal


Vice admiral
Lieutenant general
Air marshal


Rear admiral
Major general
Air vice-marshal


Commodore
Brigadier or
Brigadier general
Air commodore


Captain
Colonel
Group captain


Commander
Lieutenant colonel
Wing commander


Lieutenant
commander
Major or
Commandant
Squadron leader


Lieutenant
Captain
Flight lieutenant


Sub-lieutenant
Lieutenant or
First lieutenant
Flying officer


Ensign
Second lieutenant
Pilot officer


Midshipman
Officer cadet
Officer cadet


Enlisted grades


Warrant officer or
Chief petty officer
Warrant officer or
Sergeant major
Warrant officer


Petty officer
Sergeant
Sergeant


Leading seaman
Corporal or
Bombardier
Corporal


Seaman
Private or
Gunner or
Trooper
Aircraftman


Talk·View


Field marshal (or field-marshal, abbreviated as FM) (UK: /fiːldˈmɑːʃəl/ ( listen), US: /fildˈmɑːrʃəl/ ( listen)) is a very senior military rank, ordinarily senior to the general officer ranks. Usually it is the highest rank in an army, and when it is, few (if any) persons are appointed to it. It is considered as a five-star rank (OF-10) in modern-day armed forces in many countries. Promotion to the rank of field marshal in many countries historically required extraordinary military achievement by a general (a wartime victory). However, the rank has also been used as a divisional command rank and also as a brigade command rank. Examples of the different uses of the rank include Austria-Hungary, Prussia and Germany for an extraordinary achievement; Spain and Mexico for a divisional command (Spanish: mariscal de campo); and France, Portugal and Brazil for a brigade command (French: maréchal de camp, Portuguese: marechal de campo).
The origin of the term dates to the early Middle Ages, originally meaning the keeper of the king's horses (from Old German Marh-scalc = "horse-servant"), from the time of the early Frankish kings. The exact wording of the titles used by field marshals varies: examples include "marshal" and "field marshal general". The air force equivalent in Commonwealth and many Middle Eastern air forces is marshal of the air force (not to be confused with air marshal). Navies, which usually do not use the nomenclature employed by armies or air forces, use titles such as "fleet admiral," "grand admiral" or "admiral of the fleet" for the equivalent rank. The traditional attribute distinguishing a field marshal is a baton. The baton nowadays is purely ornamental, and as such may be richly decorated. That said, it is not necessary for the insignia to be a baton (Such is the case in Russia post-1991 and the former Soviet Union, which use a jewelled star referred to as a Marshal's Star).



Contents


1 Regional examples

1.1 Afghanistan
1.2 Australia
1.3 Brazil
1.4 China
1.5 Egypt
1.6 Finland
1.7 France
1.8 Germany
1.9 Greece
1.10 India
1.11 Libya
1.12 Pakistan
1.13 Philippines
1.14 Portugal
1.15 Serbia
1.16 Sri Lanka
1.17 Thailand
1.18 Turkey
1.19 Uganda
1.20 United Kingdom
1.21 United States


2 Other nations
3 See also
4 Notes
5 References



Regional examples[edit]
Afghanistan[edit]




Afghan National Army (ANA) insignia


Field Marshal Mohammad Qasim Fahim was a politician in Afghanistan who served as Vice President from June 2002 until December 2004 and from November 2009 until his death. Between September 2001 and December 2004, he also served as Defense Minister under the Afghan Transitional Administration.
Australia[edit]
Main article: Field marshal (Australia)
The first appointment to the rank was Sir William Birdwood, who received the honour in March 1925. Sir Thomas Blamey was the second appointment to the rank, and was the first and so far only Australian-born field marshal. He was promoted to the rank on the insistence of the Australian prime minister, Sir Robert Menzies, in June 1950. His field marshal's baton is on display in the Second World War galleries at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra. The third appointment, and the only living Australian field marshal, is HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, who was promoted to the rank on 1 April 1954.
Brazil[edit]
Main article: Marshal (Brazil)
When Brazil became independent from Portugal in 1822, the Portuguese system of ranks was maintained by the Brazilian Army, including the rank of marechal de campo. In the second half of the 19th century, the rank of marechal de campo was replaced, both in Portugal and Brazil, by the rank of general de brigada (brigade general). This last rank still exists today in the Brazilian Army, but corresponds to the present rank of major-general (major-general) in the Portuguese Army.
China[edit]
During Imperial rule in China, different dynasties gave different titles to generals. A very similar title is "司馬" (sima) in the Eastern Han dynasty, which literally means "master of horse", and later became a two-character surname too. "司馬" is one of the Three Excellencies in Eastern Han, who is in charge of the country's military affairs. Later, a more common title for a field marshal or a commandant was (元帥 Yuan Shuai) or grand field marshal (大元帥 da yuan shuai). One of the most famous of these generals was Yue Fei from the Song Dynasty. Since the People's Republic of China was established in 1949, it has promoted 10 military commanders to the rank of marshal, all in 1955 and abolished in 1965. Since then, the rank has remained defunct.
Egypt[edit]
Main article: Mushir (Egypt)
The Republic of Egypt has had 8 field marshals. Currently there are two living field marshals; ex military chief Mohamed Hussein Tantawi and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. Previous field marshals are Abdel Hakim Amer, Mohamed Abdel Ghani el-Gamasy, Ahmad Ismail Ali, Ahmed Badawi, Mohammed Aly Fahmy and Abd al-Halim Abu Ghazala.
Finland[edit]
Main article: Field marshal (Finland)
Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim was promoted to Field Marshal in 1933. In 1942 he was promoted to Marshal of Finland, which really is not a distinctive military rank but an honour.
France[edit]
Main article: Maréchal de camp
In the French army of the Ancien Régime, the normal brigade command rank was field marshal (maréchal de camp). In 1793, during the French Revolution, the rank of field marshal was replaced by the rank of brigade general. The rank insignia of field marshal was two stars (one-star being used for a senior colonel rank). The French field marshal rank was below lieutenant-general, which in 1793 became divisional-general. In the title maréchal de camp and the English "field marshal", there is an etymological confusion in the French camp between the English words "camp" and "field". The French rank of field marshal should not be confused with the rank of Marshal of France, which has been the highest rank of the French Army since the higher dignity of Marshal General of France was abolished in 1848 (although in theory it is not an actual rank but a "state dignity").
Germany[edit]




Generalfeldmarschall


Main article: Generalfeldmarschall
Generalfeldmarschall (general field marshal, field marshal general, or field marshal /  listen (help·info), abbreviated to Feldmarschall) was the most senior general officer rank in the armies of several German states. In the Habsburg Monarchy, the Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary, the rank Feldmarschall was used.
Greece[edit]
Stratarches (Greek: στρατάρχης, pl. στρατάρχαι (archaic) or στρατάρχες (modern)), means ruler of the army in Greek, and is a title associated with successful generals. In modern Greek usage, it corresponds to the rank of Field Marshal.
India[edit]




Indian insignia


Main article: Field marshal (India)
Field marshal is the highest attainable rank in the Indian Army. It is a ceremonial / war time rank. There have been two Indian field marshals to date: Sam Manekshaw, the 8th chief of staff of the Indian Army in 1969, and Kodandera Madappa Cariappa in 1986. [1]
Libya[edit]
Khalifa Haftar was the first to receive this rank in Libya from the House of Representatives (Libya) in 2016 after the liberation of oil ports in the Operation Swift Lightning.[2]
Pakistan[edit]




Pakistani insignia


Muhammad Ayub Khan is the only field marshal in the history of Pakistan. He appointed himself when he was the second president of Pakistan and commander in chief of the army.
Philippines[edit]
Main article: Field marshal (Philippines)
US Army General Douglas MacArthur was the first and only field marshal in the history of the Philippine Army, a position he held while also acting as the Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines with a rank of major general. President Quezon conferred the rank of field marshal on 24 August 1936 and MacArthur's duty included the supervision of the creation of the Philippines nation-state.
Portugal[edit]
Main article: List of Marshals of Portugal
In the Portuguese Army, the rank of marechal de campo was created in 1762, as the most junior general officer rank. Hierarchically, it was between the rank of tenente-general (lieutenant-general) and the rank of brigadeiro (brigadier), this last one not being considered a general rank, but a kind of senior colonel.
In Portugal, the ranks of marechal-general (marshal-general) and marechal do Exército (marechal of the Army) or simply marechal also existed. Distinctively from the rank of marechal de campo, the ranks of marechal-general and marechal were the highest in the Portuguese Army, usually being reserved for the commanders-in-chief of the Army. Latter, the rank of marechal-general became reserved for the Monarch, as a mere honorary dignity.
Serbia[edit]




Serbian voivode


Main articles: Field marshal (Serbia and Yugoslavia) and Voivode
In Serbian, field marshal can be translated as vojvoda (Serbian: Бојни Војвода). It was the highest rank in the army of the Kingdom of Serbia and Kingdom of Yugoslavia until the Second World War. It was created with the passing of the law on the Organization of the Army of the Kingdom of Serbia in 1901. The law was passed on the suggestion of Lieutenant Colonel (later Divisional General) Miloš Vasić who was minister of defense at the time. The rank was awarded only during the war for particular military contributions of top generals.
In the Balkan Wars and World War I this title was used to designate the highest military rank in the Serbian Army (above general – the equalent of field marshal in other armies). The first vojvoda was promoted by a great military decree of the Kingdom of Serbia on 20 October 1912. Only four people ever officially held that military rank: Radomir Putnik (attained the rank in 1912), Stepa Stepanović (1914), Živojin Mišić (1914) and Petar Bojović (1918). The Montenegrin General Janko Vukotić (1915) and the French General Louis Franchet d'Espérey (1921) held the rank as an honorary title. During the World War I for a time, general Petar Bojović held the position of Chief of Staff of the Supreme Command (the highest military position in the Serbian Army) and was a superior to two army commanders who were field marshals (Stepa Stepanović and Živojin Mišić).
Before this rank was introduced, the highest rank in the Kingdom of Serbia was army general. After Second World War, the newly formed Yugoslav People's Army stopped using the royal ranking system, so this rank ceased to exist.
Sri Lanka[edit]




Sri Lankan ෆීල්ඩ් මාර්ෂල්


Main article: Field marshal (Sri Lanka)
Field Marshal is the highest rank in the Sri Lanka Army. It is a ceremonial rank. Sarath Fonseka is the first and, to date, only Sri Lankan officer to hold the rank. He was promoted to the position on 22 March 2015.[3]
Thailand[edit]




Thai Chom Phon (จอมพล)


Main articles: Field marshal (Thailand) and Chom Phon
In the Royal Thai Army the rank of Chom Phon (Thai: จอมพล, จอมพลทหารบก) was created in 1888, together with all other military ranks along western lines, by King Chulalongkorn. Until the first appointment in 1910, the rank was reserved solely for the reigning monarch. Currently the rank is in abeyance.
Turkey[edit]
Main article: Mareşal (Turkey)
In the Turkish Armed Forces, the corresponding rank is mareşal. Its origins can be traced to the Ottoman Empire and to the military of Persia, where it was called "مشير" (müşir)[4] and bestowed upon senior commanders upon order of the ruling sultan. The rank of mareşal can only be bestowed by the National Assembly, and only given to a general who leads an army, navy or air force successfully in three battles or at various front lines at the same time, gaining a victory over the enemy. Only two persons have been bestowed the rank: Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey, and his Chief of Staff Fevzi Çakmak, both for their successes in the Turkish War of Independence.
Uganda[edit]
Main article: Field marshal (Uganda)
Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada was the military dictator and third president of Uganda from 1971 to 1979. Amin joined the British colonial regiment, the King's African Rifles in 1946, serving in Somalia and Kenya. Eventually, Amin held the rank of major general in the post-colonial Ugandan Army and became its commander before seizing power in the military coup of January 1971, deposing Milton Obote. He later promoted himself to field marshal while he was the head of state.
United Kingdom[edit]




United Kingdom insignia


Main article: Field marshal (United Kingdom)
Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, held the rank of a field marshal, or equivalent rank, in eight armies. Nine of his field marshal batons are on display in Apsley House (see Batons of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington).
United States[edit]
The United States has never used the rank of field marshal; however, General Douglas MacArthur was field marshal of the Philippine Army from 24 August 1936, until 31 December 1937. On 14 December 1944, Congress created the rank of "general of the army", a five-star rank equivalent to that of field marshal in other countries. Two days later, George Marshall was promoted to this rank, becoming the first five-star general in American history. A Washington columnist suggested (with tongue in cheek) that Marshall disliked the plan because five stars was the rank of field marshal and the Chief of Staff could then be addressed as "Marshal Marshall."[5]
Other nations[edit]




Replica of the marshal's baton of Generalfeldmarschall von Richthofen



Feldmarschall (Austro-Hungarian monarchy)
Stožerni general (Croatia)
Marshal of Italy
Rav-Aluf (Israel)
Wonsu (DPRK, ROK)
Fil Marsyal (Malaysia)
Field marshal (New Zealand)
Marshal of Peru
Marshal of Poland
Mareşal (Romania)
General field marshal (Imperial Russia)
Marshal of the Russian Federation
Marshal of the Soviet Union
Fältmarskalk (Sweden)

See also[edit]

Admiralissimo
Generalissimo
Grand marshal
List of field marshals
List of German field marshals
General of the Army
Admiral of the Navy
General of the Air Force

Notes[edit]

References[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Field marshals.





^ "Did You Know That Only 3 People Have Been Given The Highest Ranks In The Indian Armed Forces?". 
^ http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-27492354
^ http://www.news.lk/news/sri-lanka/item/6744-sarath-fonseka-promoted-sri-lanka-s-first-ever-field-marshal
^ "Great Turkish Dictionary". Turkish Language Association. Retrieved 1 August 2009. [permanent dead link]
^ "Eisenhower Memorial Commission – The Story Behind Ike's Fifth Star". Eisenhowermemorial.org. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. 









v
t
e


Star officer grades






General officer
Flag officer
Air officer





By star ranks



 Six-star rank (proposed)
 Five-star rank
 Four-star rank
 Three-star rank
 Two-star rank
 One-star rank





By titles



Generalissimo
Generalissimus of the Soviet Union
Supreme Allied Commander
Admiral of the Navy
General of the Armies
Generalfeldmarschall
Field marshal
Mareşal
Marshal of the air force
Marshal of the Russian Federation
Marshal of the Soviet Union
Mushir
Caudillo
Magister militum
Spahbed
Ispahsalar
Beylerbey
Constable of France
Grand Domestic
Dux bellorum
Grand marshal
Hetman
Jenderal besar
Reichsmarschall
Sardar
Serasker
Strategos autokrator
First marshal of the empire
Dai-gensui
Taewonsu
Voivoda
Wonsu
Yuan Shuai
Da yuan shuai
Marshal of Yugoslavia











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Field_marshal&oldid=804302916"					Categories: Field marshalsMilitary ranksHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from September 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksUse dmy dates from March 2017Articles with hAudio microformatsArticles including recorded pronunciations (UK English)Articles including recorded pronunciations (US English)Articles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Portuguese-language textArticles containing Greek-language textArticles containing Serbian-language textArticles containing Thai-language textCommons category with local link different than on Wikidata