This article is about the area in Scotland. For the musical instrument, see Fife (instrument). For other uses, see Fife (disambiguation).
See also: Fifeshire (disambiguation)


Fife
Fìobha









Coat of arms





Coordinates: 56°15′00″N 3°12′00″W﻿ / ﻿56.25000°N 3.20000°W﻿ / 56.25000; -3.20000Coordinates: 56°15′00″N 3°12′00″W﻿ / ﻿56.25000°N 3.20000°W﻿ / 56.25000; -3.20000


Admin HQ
Glenrothes
(formerly Cupar)[1]


Government


 • Body
Fife Council


 • Control
SNP + Lab (council NOC)


 • MPs
Douglas Chapman
Stephen Gethins
Peter Grant
Lesley Laird


 • MSPs
Annabelle Ewing
Jenny Gilruth
Willie Rennie
Shirley-Anne Somerville
David Torrance


Area


 • Total
512 sq mi (1,325 km2)


Area rank
Ranked 13th


Population (mid-2016 est.)


 • Total
370,300


 • Rank
Ranked 3rd


 • Density
720/sq mi (279/km2)


ONS code
S12000015


ISO 3166 code
GB-FIF


Website
www.fife.gov.uk


Fife ([ˈfəif]; Scottish Gaelic: Fìobha) is a council area and historic county of Scotland. It is situated between the Firth of Tay and the Firth of Forth, with inland boundaries to Perth and Kinross and Clackmannanshire. By custom it is widely held to have been one of the major Pictish kingdoms, known as Fib, and is still commonly known as the Kingdom of Fife within Scotland.
It is a lieutenancy area, and was a county of Scotland until 1975. It was very occasionally known by the anglicisation Fifeshire in old documents and maps compiled by English cartographers and authors. A person from Fife is known as a Fifer.
Fife was a local government region divided into three districts: Dunfermline, Kirkcaldy and North-East Fife. Since 1996 the functions of the district councils have been exercised by the unitary Fife Council.
Fife is Scotland's third largest local authority area by population. It has a resident population of just under 367,000, over a third of whom live in the three principal towns of Dunfermline, Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes.
The historic town of St Andrews is located on the northeast coast of Fife. It is well known for the University of St Andrews, one of the most ancient universities in the world and is renowned as the home of golf.



Contents


1 History
2 Governance
3 Geography
4 Towns and villages
5 Culture
6 Notable Fifers
7 Sports
8 Media
9 See also
10 References
11 External links



History[edit]




The historical headquarters of Fife County Council, in Cupar


Fife, bounded to the north by the Firth of Tay and to the south by the Firth of Forth, is a natural peninsula whose political boundaries have changed little over the ages. The Pictish king list and De Situ Albanie documents of the Poppleton manuscript mention the division of the Pictish realm into seven sub-kingdoms or provinces, one being Fife, though this is now regarded as a medieval invention.[2]:70–72 The earliest known reference to the common epithet The Kingdom of Fife dates from only 1678, in a proposition that the term derives from the quasi-regal privileges of the Earl of Fife.[2]:132 The notion of a kingdom may derive from a misintrepretation of an extract from Wyntoun.[2]:133 The name is recorded as Fib in A.D. 1150 and Fif in 1165. It was often associated with Fothriff.
The hill-fort of Clatchard Craig, near Newburgh, was occupied as an important Pictish stronghold between the sixth and eighth centuries AD.[3][4]
Fife was an important royal and political centre from the reign of King Malcolm III onwards, as the leaders of Scotland gradually moved southwards away from their ancient strongholds around Scone. Malcolm had his principal home in Dunfermline and his wife Margaret was the main benefactor of Dunfermline Abbey. The Abbey replaced Iona as the final resting place of Scotland's royal elite, with Robert I amongst those to be buried there.
The Earl of Fife was until the 15th century considered the principal peer of the Scottish realm, and was reserved the right of crowning the nation's monarchs, reflecting the prestige of the area.
A new royal palace was gradually constructed at Falkland, formerly the stronghold of Clan MacDuff, and was used by successive monarchs of the House of Stuart, who favoured Fife for its rich hunting grounds.
King James VI of Scotland described Fife as a "beggar's mantle fringed wi gowd",[5] the golden fringe being the coast and its chain of little ports with their thriving fishing fleets and rich trading links with the Low Countries. Wool, linen, coal and salt were all traded. Salt pans heated by local coal were a feature of the Fife coast in the past. The distinctive red clay pan tiles seen on many old buildings in Fife arrived as ballast on trading boats and replaced the previously thatched roofs.
In 1598, King James VI employed a group of 12 men from Fife, who became known as the Fife adventurers, to colonise the Isle of Lewis in an attempt to begin the "civilisation" and de-gaelicisation of the region. This endeavour lasted until 1609 when the colonists, having been opposed by the native population, were bought out by Kenneth Mackenzie, the clan chief of the Mackenzies.
Fife became a centre of heavy industry in the 19th century. Coal had been mined in the area since at least the 12th century, but the number of pits increased ten-fold as demand for coal grew in the Victorian period. Previously rural villages such as Cowdenbeath rapidly swelled into towns as thousands moved to Fife to find work in its mines. The opening of the Forth and Tay rail bridges linked Fife with Dundee and Edinburgh and allowed the rapid transport of goods. Modern ports were constructed at Methil, Burntisland and Rosyth. Kirkcaldy became the world centre for the production of linoleum. Postwar Fife saw the development of Scotland's second new town, Glenrothes. Originally to be based around a coal mine, the town eventually attracted a high number of modern Silicon Glen companies to the region. Fife Council and Fife Constabulary also centre their operations in Glenrothes.
There are numerous notable historical buildings in Fife, some of which are managed by the National Trust for Scotland or Historic Scotland. They include Dunfermline Abbey (the last resting place of Scottish royalty), the palace in Culross, Ravenscraig Castle in Kirkcaldy, Dysart Harbour area, Balgonie Castle near Coaltown of Balgonie, Falkland Palace (hunting palace of the Scottish Kings), Kellie Castle near Pittenweem, Hill of Tarvit (a historical house), St. Andrews Castle, St. Andrews Cathedral and St. Rule's Tower.
Governance[edit]




Fife House, seat of Fife Council






Fifeshire & Kinross-shire Civil Parish map. https://archive.org/stream/imperialgazettee01wils#page/n778/mode/1up Parishes outlined in red


Fife is represented by five constituency members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs) and four members of the United Kingdom parliament (MPs) who are sent to Holyrood and the British Parliament respectively. Since the 2015 General Election, all four of the MPs constituencies have been held by the Scottish National Party.[6] Three of the Scottish Parliament constituencies are held by the Scottish National Party: Cowdenbeath, Dunfermline, Fife Mid and Glenrothes . One is held by the Scottish Liberal Democrats: North East Fife.[7]
Fife Council's administrative headquarters and Police Scotland's P Division (formerly Fife Constabulary) are based in Glenrothes. The Council meetings take place in Fife House (formerly known as Glenrothes House) in the town centre. The west wing of the building was built by the Glenrothes Development Corporation (GDC) as their offices in 1969, which was later used as the headquarters of Fife Regional Council.[8] The former administrative seat was Cupar.[1] Since the last Scottish election in 2012, Fife Council has been run as a minority by the Labour party, with a total of 35 seats, with support of Tory and independent councillors. Alex Rowley was elected leader of Fife Council but demitted office following his election as an MSP. David Ross succeeded as leader in February 2014. The SNP and the other parties form the opposition.
Geography[edit]
Fife is a peninsula in eastern Scotland bordered on the north by the Firth of Tay, on the east by the North Sea and by the Firth of Forth to the south. The route to the west is partially blocked by the mass of the Ochil Hills. Almost all road traffic into and out of Fife has to pass over one of four bridges, south on the Forth Road Bridge (public transport and cyclists only) and Queensferry Crossing, west on the Kincardine Bridge or north-east via the Tay Road Bridge, the exception being traffic headed north on the M90. Tolls were abolished on the Tay Road Bridge and Forth Road Bridge on 11 February 2008.
There are extinct volcanic features, such as the Lomond Hills which rise above rolling farmland, and Largo Law, a volcanic plug in the east. At 522 metres (1,713 ft), the West Lomond is the highest point in Fife. The coast has fine but small harbours, from the industrial docks in Burntisland and Rosyth to the fishing villages of the East Neuk such as Anstruther and Pittenweem. The large area of flat land to the north of the Lomond Hills, through which the River Eden flows, is known as the Howe of Fife.




Looking across the farmland of North East Fife to the distant Lomond Hills


North of the Lomond Hills can be found villages and small towns in a primarily agricultural landscape. The areas in the south and west of Fife, including the towns of Dunfermline, Glenrothes, Kirkcaldy and the Levenmouth region are lightly industrial and more densely populated. The only areas which could claim to be heavily industrial are Rosyth, around the naval dockyard and perhaps the Mossmorran Natural Gas Liquids fractionation plant on the outskirts of Cowdenbeath.
The east corner of Fife, generally that east of a line between Leven and St Andrews is recognised throughout Scotland as the East Neuk (or corner) of Fife, small settlements around sheltered harbours, with distinctive vernacular "Dutch" or corbie (crow) stepped gabled and stone-built architecture – an area much sought after as second homes of the Edinburgh professional classes since the Forth Road Bridge was built[citation needed]. The fishing industry on which the East Neuk settlements were built has declined in recent years with the main fishing fleet now operating from Pittenweem and the harbour in Anstruther being used as a marina for pleasure craft.
Towns and villages[edit]
Cupar took over as county town from Crail in the early 13th century. Glenrothes is now the administrative centre, after the decision to locate the headquarters of the newly established Fife Regional Council there in 1975. Fife's three major towns are Kirkcaldy, Dunfermline and Glenrothes. According to the 2012 estimate, Dunfermline is the largest settlement by population,[9] followed by Kirkcaldy then Glenrothes. The next most sizeable towns by population are St Andrews, Cowdenbeath, Rosyth, Methil and Dalgety Bay. The rest of Fife includes smaller towns such as Inverkeithing, Kincardine, Anstruther, Lochgelly, Burntisland, Leven, Newburgh, Tayport and Cupar, and villages such as Springfield, Kinglassie, Kinghorn, Elie, Auchtertool, Crossgates, Ballingry and Auchtermuchty.
The county was formerly divided into parishes, often but not always based on a town or village:


Abbotshall
Abdie
Aberdour
Anstruther Easter
Anstruther Wester
Arngask (Perthshire)
Auchterderran
Auchtermuchty
Auchtertool
Ballingry
Balmerino
Beath
Buckhaven
Burntisland
Cameron
Carnbee
Carnock
Cellardyke
Ceres
Collessie
Cowdenbeath
Crail
Creich
Crossgates
Culross (Perthshire)
Cults
Cupar
Dairsie
Dalgety
Dunbog
Dunfermline
Dunino
Dysart
Elie
Falkland
Ferry Port on Craig
Flisk
Forgan
Freuchie
Glenrothes
Inverkeithing & Rosyth
Kelty
Kemback
Kennoway
Kilconquhar
Kilmany
Kilrenny
Kinghorn
Kinglassie
Kingsbarns
Kingskettle
Kirkcaldy
Ladybank
Largo
Leslie
Leuchars
Leven
Lochgelly
Logie
Lumphinnans
Markinch
Methil
Monimail
Moonzie
Newburgh
Newburn
Pitlessie
Pittenweem
Saline
Scoonie
St Andrews & St Leonards
St Monance (and Abercrombie)
Strathmiglo
Thornton
Torryburn
Wellwood
Wemyss



Culture[edit]




Falkland Palace






Scottish Lowlands farm. Detail from Slezer's Prospect of Dunfermline, 1693






A closer view of the Lomond Hills, seen from Auchtermuchty


Fife contains 4,961 listed buildings and 48 conservation areas.[10] Domestic sites of importance include Falkland Palace, Kellie Castle, Dunfermline Palace, St Andrews Castle, Culross Palace and Kirkcaldy's Ravenscraig Castle. Fife has a number of ecclesiastical sites of historical interest. St Andrews Cathedral was home to the powerful Archbishopric of St Andrews, and later became a centre of the Scottish Reformation, while Dunfermline Abbey was the last resting place of a number of Scottish kings. Balmerino and Culross abbeys were both founded in the 13th century by the Cistercians, while a century before Lindores Abbey was founded by the Tironensians outside Newburgh; all were highly important sites.
The Stanza Poetry Festival, East Neuk Festival, Pittenweem Arts Festival are events of national cultural importance. Smaller festivals like Cupar Arts Festival also take place. The Byre Theatre in St Andrews and Adam Smith Theatre in Kirkcaldy were both highly regarded as touring venues, the latter also being the base of the grand opera company Fife Opera. The Byre has re-opened in Autumn, 2014[11] following its going into administration in 2012.[12]
Notable Fifers[edit]

Robert Adam, architect
Stuart Adamson, musician (Big Country, The Skids)
Robert Hope Moncrieff Aitken (1826–1887), Lieutenant in the 13th, Bengal Native Infantry, awarded the Victoria Cross
Ian Anderson, musician, frontman of Jethro Tull
Iain Banks, writer
Lady Anne Barnard, travel writer, artist and socialite of the period
Andrew Whyte Barclay, (1817–1884), physician, Lumleian lecturer, and Harveian orator
Jim Baxter, footballer
Guy Berryman, bassist from the band Coldplay
Sir James Black, pharmacologist and nobel prize winner
Sir Ernley Blackwell, lawyer and civil servant
Martin Grehan, Footballer
Edith Bowman, BBC Radio 1/6 DJ
Gordon Brown, former British Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer and former MP for Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath
Scott Brown, Scotland and Celtic F.C. footballer
Gregory Burke, playwright
Alexander Buchanan Campbell, architect
Andrew Carnegie, industrialist and philanthropist
Henry Chisholm (1822-1881), steel industry executive
Jim Clark, two-times Formula One World Drivers' Champion
James Clephan, Lieutenant on board HMS Spartiate during the Battle of Trafalgar
Archibald Constable (1774–1827), publisher, bookseller and stationer
Kenneth Cranham, actor
King Creosote, musician
David Danskin, principal founding member of Arsenal FC
Barbara Dickson, singer and actress
Thomas Millie Dow (1848–1919), artist, a member of the Glasgow School
Philip Charles Durham, sailor and captain of HMS Defiance at Trafalgar
Marjorie Fleming (1803–1811), child writer and poet
Sir Sandford Fleming, (1827–1915), engineer, who proposed worldwide standard time zones, engineered on the Intercolonial Railway and the Canadian Pacific Railway
Valentine Fleming (1882–1917), member of parliament and father of the author Ian Fleming
John Forbes, named the city of Pittsburgh
Chris Fusaro, rugby player
Thomas Lomar Gray (1850–1908), engineer noted for his pioneering work in seismology
Thomas Hardy, (1747–1798), minister of religion, Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and Professor of Ecclesiastical History at Edinburgh University
Alexander Henderson (c.1583–1646), theologian, and an important ecclesiastical statesman
Shirley Henderson, actress
Peter Horne, rugby player
Bob Howie and Dave Howie, rugby players
Henrietta Keddie (1827–1914), novelist who wrote under the pseudonym Sarah Tytler
Deborah Knox, Olympic gold medallist in curling
Craig Levein, Scottish former professional footballer and manager
Jackie Leven, singer-songwriter
Wallace Lindsay, classical scholars, palaeographer, Professor of Humanity at St Andrews University
Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie, 16th-century writer
Anne Macaulay musicologist, archaeologist, author and lecturer
Douglas Mackinnon, director
Val McDermid, writer
Ken McNaught, footballer, Aston Villa F.C. centre back, 1982 European Cup Winner
Willie McNaught, footballer, Raith Rovers F.C. defender
Tom Nairn (born 1932), political theorist of nationalism
Rab Noakes (born 1947) singer, songwriter, record producer
Aileen Paterson, author/illustrator
Dr John Philip (1775–1851), missionary in South Africa
David Pitcairn (1749–1809), physician
John Pitcairn (1722–1775), British Marine officer killed at the Battle of Bunker Hill
William Pitcairn (1712–1791), physician
Ian Rankin, writer
David Rollo, rugby player
Craig Russell (British author), writer
Dougray Scott, actor
John Scrimgeour of Myres (fl. 16th century) Master of Work for royal buildings for James V and Mary, Queen of Scots
Alexander Selkirk, seafarer and inspiration for Robinson Crusoe
Sir Jimmy Shand, accordion player
Adam Smith, philosopher and economist
Jordan Smith, actor
Mary Fairfax Somerville (1780–1872), science writer and polymath
Catherine Steele (1903–1995), plant biochemist [13]
Lawrence Storione, miner and anarchist organiser
Sir John Struthers (1823–1899) first Regius Professor of Anatomy at the University of Aberdeen
John McDouall Stuart (1815–1866), explorer of Australia's interior
Michaela Tabb, first female snooker referee to appear at the Crucible
William Tennant, scholar and poet
John Thomson, former Celtic F.C. goalkeeper
KT Tunstall, musician
Jack Vettriano, artist
William Montgomery Watt (1909–2006), historian, Emeritus Professor in Arabic and Islamic Studies at the University of Edinburgh
Sir David Wilkie, painter
Alexander Wilson (1714–1786), surgeon, type-founder, astronomer, mathematician and meteorologist
James Wilson, signer of US Declaration of Independence, appointed by George Washington to first Supreme Court
Jocky Wilson, darts player
James Yorkston, musician
Douglas Young (1913–1973), poet, scholar, translator, and leader of the Scottish National Party

Sports[edit]
St Andrews in Fife is the home of golf, being the town in which the sport was invented, and the Royal and Ancient Golf Club still has responsibility for overseeing the rules of the game today.
Fife has four senior football clubs: Cowdenbeath, Raith Rovers, Dunfermline Athletic and East Fife.
Fife Flyers are the UK's oldest ice hockey club and play in Britain's top flight, the Elite Ice Hockey League.
Fife is also home to eight rugby union clubs. Dunfermline RFC, Fife Southern RFC based in Rosyth, Glenrothes RFC, Howe of Fife RFC based in Cupar, Kirkcaldy RFC, Madras RFC, Waid Academy RFC and University of St Andrews RFC - the oldest rugby club in Fife. Fife Lions are the sole rugby league club.
Kingdom Kangaroos are Fife's only Australian Rules Football team, with training held in Rosyth and Kirkcaldy.
Aberdour Shinty Club have two men's teams, two women's teams and multiple youth squads.
Media[edit]
Locally published newspapers include the Fife Free Press in Kirkcaldy; the Dunfermline Press in Dunfermline; the Glenrothes Gazette in Glenrothes, the East Fife Mail in Leven, the Fife Herald in Cupar / Howe of Fife and the St Andrews Citizen in St Andrews. DC Thompson publishes Fife and West Fife editions of the Dundee Courier & Advertiser,[14] and the Counties Edition of the Evening Telegraph is sold in Fife.
The only Fife-based radio station is Kingdom FM. There is also a community radio station that broadcasts each evening and is run solely by youths, called Fife Youth Radio. Other local radio stations, Radio Tay and Edinburgh's 97.3 Forth One, broadcast to the northern and southern parts of the region respectively.
See also[edit]

Abbeys and priories in Scotland
Castles in Scotland
Duke of Fife
Earl of Fife
Fire and Rescue Authority (Scotland)
Historic houses in Scotland
Kingdom Housing Association
List of places in Fife
Museums in Scotland

References[edit]


^ a b Complete Atlas of the British Isles. Readers' Digest. 1965. p. 218. 
^ a b c Taylor, Simon; Gilbert Márkus (2012). The Place-Names of Fife, Volume 5. Donington, Lincs.: Shaun Tyas. ISBN 9781907730085. 
^ "The site record for Clatchard Craig at RCAHMS". Canmore.rcahms.gov.uk. 
^ "Excavation Summary by the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland" (PDF). 
^ "A Dictionary of Scottish Phrase and Fable". google.co.uk. 
^ "MPs of Fife". Parliament UK. Retrieved 1 August 2015. 
^ "Scotland Election 2016". BBC News. 
^ Ferguson A History of Glenrothes p.91.
^ "Mid 2012 population estimates of settlements" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 October 2014. 
^ "Fife's listed buildings". Historic Scotland. Retrieved 25 August 2009. 
^ "Byre Theatre to reopen after University of St Andrews agree rescue package". Herald Scotland. 
^ "Byre Theatre in St Andrews board 'deeply regrets' closure". BBC News. 26 January 2013. Retrieved 21 October 2013. 
^ "Steele biography". www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk. Retrieved 2017-03-28. 
^ "The Courier - British Newspapers Online". 





Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Fife (Scotland).





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fife.





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Fife.


External links[edit]


Fife at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Knowfife Dataset
Fife Direct
Fife Today
Kingdom of Fife Tourist Board
The Fife Post
Fife Coastal Path
Fife Youth Radio
Kingdom FM
Pupils in Fife report on issues that are important to them for Radiowaves
Fife Community Portal
FifeLink – an online community for Fife
National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (selection of archive films relating to Fife)








v
t
e


Traditional provinces and districts of Scotland








Major districts (former counties, provincial lordships and rural deaneries)






The Aird
Annandale
Angus
Argyll
Atholl
Boyne
Buchan
Badenoch
Breadalbane
Caithness
Carrick
Clydesdale (or Strathclyde)
Cowal
Cunningham
Desnes
Eskdale
Farines
Fife
Fothriff
Galloway
Garioch
Garmoran
The Glenkens
Gowrie
Kintyre
Knapdale
Kyle
Lauderdale
Lennox
Liddesdale
Lochaber
Lorn
Lothian
Mar
Mearns
Menteith
Merse
Moray
Nithsdale
The Rhinns
Ross (Easter and Wester)
Stormont
Strathavon
Strathbogie
Strathearn
Strathgryfe
Strathnaver
Strathspey
Sutherland
Teviotdale
Tweeddale













Minor districts






Applecross
Appin
Ardgour
Ardmeanach
Ardnamurchan
Assynt
Avondale
Balquhidder
Benderloch
The Black Isle
Braemar
Coigach
Cromar
Cromdale
Douglasdale
Durness
Dùthaich MhicAoidh
Eddrachilles
Enzie
Ettrickdale
Ewesdale
Formartine
Gairloch
Glen Albyn
Glen Almond
Glen Cassley
Glen Clova
Glen Dochart
Glenelg
Glen Esk
Glengarry
Glen Lethnot
Glen Lyon
Glen Moriston
Glen Orchy
Glen Prosen
Glenshee
Glen Spean
Glen Urquhart
Gruinard
Howe of Fife
Howe of the Mearns
Kintail
Kintyre
Knoydart
Lochalsh
Loch Broom
Locheil
The Machars
Midmar
Moidart
Morar
Morven
Muir of Ord
Rannoch Moor
Rhinns of Kells
Strathallan
Strathardle
Strathbran
Strathbraan
Strathcarron (Forth)
Strathcarron (Oykel)
Strathconon
Strathdearn
Strathdeveron
Strathdee (Deeside)
Strathdon
Strathfarrar
Strath Gartney
Strathglass
Strathisla
Strathmore
Strath of Kildonan
Strath Oykel
Strath Tay
Strathyre
Sunart
Trossachs













Insular districts
For smaller islands, usually districts in their own right, see List of Scottish islands







Islands of the Clyde



Arran
Cumbrae





Islay



The Oa
Rinns of Islay





Mull



Aros
Ross of Mull





Skye



Duirinish
Minginish
Sleat
Trotternish
Waternish





Outer Hebrides



Harris (North Harris, South Harris)
Lewis (The Lochs, West Side, Point, Back)





Orkney



Pomona
Hoy and Walls
Rousay
Shapinsay
South Ronaldsay
Westray





Shetland



Mainland (Central Mainland, North Mainland, South Mainland, West Mainland)
Fetlar
Unst
Whalsay
Yell
North Isles
















Border areas






Debatable Lands
East March
Middle March
West March















v
t
e


Council areas of Scotland






Aberdeen
Aberdeenshire
Angus
Argyll and Bute
Clackmannanshire
Dumfries and Galloway
Dundee
East Ayrshire
East Dunbartonshire
East Lothian
East Renfrewshire
Edinburgh
Falkirk
Fife
Glasgow
Highland
Inverclyde
Midlothian
Moray
Na h-Eileanan Siar (Western Isles)
North Ayrshire
North Lanarkshire
Orkney
Perth and Kinross
Renfrewshire
Scottish Borders
Shetland
South Ayrshire
South Lanarkshire
Stirling
West Dunbartonshire
West Lothian






List by area, population, density










v
t
e


Former local government regions of Scotland






Borders
Central
Dumfries and Galloway
Fife
Grampian
Highland
Lothian
Strathclyde
Tayside












v
t
e


Former local government counties of Scotland








Subdivisions created by the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889 and abolished by the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973






Aberdeenshire
Angus
Argyll
Ayrshire
Banffshire
Berwickshire
Bute
Caithness
Clackmannanshire
Dumfriesshire
Dunbartonshire
East Lothian
Fife
Inverness-shire
Kincardineshire
Kinross-shire
Kirkcudbrightshire
Lanarkshire
Midlothian
Moray
Nairnshire
Orkney
Peeblesshire
Perthshire
Renfrewshire
Ross and Cromarty
Roxburghshire
Selkirkshire
Shetland
Stirlingshire
Sutherland
West Lothian
Wigtownshire













Subdivisions abolished by the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889






Cromartyshire
Ross-shire












Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 151207259
ISNI: 0000 0000 9146 3465
GND: 4217066-7











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fife&oldid=813974713"					Categories: FifePeninsulas of ScotlandLieutenancy areas of ScotlandCouncil areas of ScotlandCounties of ScotlandRegions of ScotlandHidden categories: EngvarB from June 2013Use dmy dates from June 2013Articles containing Scottish Gaelic-language textPages using deprecated image syntaxCoordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2012Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers