



The main competition jury at the Cannes Film Festival. Left to right : Gael García Bernal, Jia Zhangke, Sofia Coppola, Jane Campion, Jeon Do-yeon, Nicolas Winding Refn, Leila Hatami, Carole Bouquet and Willem Dafoe






American director Steven Spielberg with Sri Lankan filmmaker Chandran Rutnam in Sri Lanka


A film director is a person who directs the making of a film. A film director controls a film's artistic and dramatic aspects and visualizes the screenplay (or script) while guiding the technical crew and actors in the fulfillment of that vision. The director has a key role in choosing the cast members, production design, and the creative aspects of filmmaking.[1] Under European Union law, the director is viewed as the author of the film.[2]
The film director gives direction to the cast and crew and creates an overall vision through which a film eventually becomes realized, or noticed. Directors need to be able to mediate differences in creative visions and stay within the boundaries of the film's budget.
There are many pathways to becoming a film director. [3] Some film directors started as screenwriters, cinematographers, film editors or actors. Other film directors have attended a film school. Directors use different approaches. Some outline a general plotline and let the actors improvise dialogue, while others control every aspect, and demand that the actors and crew follow instructions precisely. Some directors also write their own screenplays or collaborate on screenplays with long-standing writing partners. Some directors edit or appear in their films, or compose the music score for their films.[4]



Contents


1 Responsibility
2 Career pathways
3 Professional organizations
4 See also
5 References
6 Bibliography



Responsibility[edit]




The film director gives last minute direction to the cast and crew, while filming a costume drama on location in London.


Film directors create an overall vision through which a film eventually becomes realized/noticed.[5] Realizing this vision includes overseeing the artistic and technical elements of film production, as well as directing the shooting timetable and meeting deadlines.[4][6] This entails organizing the film crew in such a way to achieve their vision of the film.[7][8] This requires skills of group leadership, as well as the ability to maintain a singular focus even in the stressful, fast-paced environment of a film set.[9] Moreover, it is necessary to have an artistic eye to frame shots and to give precise feedback to cast and crew,[10] thus, excellent communication skills are a must.[11]
Since the film director depends on the successful cooperation of many different creative individuals with possibly strongly contradicting artistic ideals and visions, he or she also needs to possess conflict resolution skills in order to mediate whenever necessary.[12] Thus the director ensures that all individuals involved in the film production are working towards an identical vision for the completed film.[7] The set of varying challenges he or she has to tackle has been described as "a multi-dimensional jigsaw puzzle with egos and weather thrown in for good measure".[13] It adds to the pressure that the success of a film can influence when and how they will work again.[14] Omnipresent are the boundaries of the films budget.[15] Additionally, the director may also have to ensure an intended age rating.[16] Theoretically the sole superior of a director is the studio that is financing the film,[5][17] however a poor working relationship between a film director and an actor could possibly result in the director being replaced if the actor is a major film star.[18] Even so, it is arguable that the director spends more time on a project than anyone else, considering that the director is one of the few positions that requires intimate involvement during every stage of film production. Thus, the position of film director is widely considered to be a highly stressful and demanding one.[19] It has been said that "20-hour days are not unusual".[5]
Under European Union law, the film director is considered the "author" or one of the authors of a film, largely as a result of the influence of auteur theory.[2] Auteur theory is a film criticism concept that holds that a film director's film reflects the director's personal creative vision, as if they were the primary "auteur" (the French word for "author"). In spite of—and sometimes even because of—the production of the film as part of an industrial process, the auteur's creative voice is distinct enough to shine through studio interference and the collective process.
Career pathways[edit]




Director Pedro Almodóvar and actress Penélope Cruz


Some film directors started as screenwriters, film editors or actors.[20] Several American cinematographers have become directors, including Barry Sonnenfeld, originally the Coen brothers' DP; Jan de Bont, cinematographer on films as Die Hard and Basic Instinct, directed Speed and Twister. Recently Wally Pfister, cinematographer on Christopher Nolan's three Batman films made his directorial debut with Transcendence. Other film directors have attended a film school to "get formal training and education in their craft".[21] Film students generally study the basic skills used in making a film.[22] This includes, for example, preparation, shot lists and storyboards, blocking, protocols of dealing with professional actors, and reading scripts.[23] Some film schools are equipped with sound stages and post-production facilities.[24] Besides basic technical and logistical skills, students also receive education on the nature of professional relationships that occur during film production.[25] A full degree course can be designed for up to five years of studying.[26] Future directors usually complete short films during their enrollment.[19] The National Film School of Denmark has the student's final projects presented on national TV.[27] Some film schools retain the rights for their students' works.[28] Many directors successfully prepared for making feature films by working in television.[29] The German Film and Television Academy Berlin consequently cooperates with the Berlin/Brandenburg TV station RBB (Berlin-Brandenburg Broadcasting) and ARTE.[30]
A handful of top directors made from $13 million to $257 million in 2011, such as James Cameron and Steven Spielberg.[31] In May 2011, the average United States film director made $122,220.[32]
Professional organizations[edit]
In the United States, directors usually belong to the Directors Guild of America. The Canadian equivalent is the Directors Guild of Canada. In the UK, directors usually belong to Directors UK or the Directors Guild of Great Britain.
In Europe, FERA, the Federation of European Film Directors, represents 37 national directors' guilds in 30 countries.
See also[edit]


Film portal



Outline of film
Alan Smithee (pseudonym for anonymous directors)
Filmmaking
Auteur theory

References[edit]


^ "The Average Film Director Salary Per Movie". Retrieved March 22, 2014. 
^ a b Google Books
^ "How To Become A Film Director". www.wishmachinery.com. Retrieved 2017-11-04. 
^ a b "TV or film director". National Careers Service. United Kingdom: British Government. April 2017. Retrieved May 10, 2017. 
^ a b c "Career Profile Film Director". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Employment Film Director". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ a b "Career snapshot". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "They must work with producers, writers, cast members, crew members, designers and other professionals in order to implement that vision". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "A film director needs.." Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Film Director Career". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Job Profile". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ McRae, Alex (June 1, 2006). "You have to be a diplomat. You have to marshal a whole load of creative people, who often don't get on with each other, and your job is to stop things turning into a bun-fight". The Independent. London. Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "What is a Director?". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "directors work under a lot of pressure, and most are under constant stress to find their next job". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "The director is bound by financial conditions, which however should not hinder him from developing his own artistic signature". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ Hornaday, Ann (May 16, 1993). "Realizing that an NC-17 rating could hurt business (some theaters and newspapers won't show or advertise NC-17 movies), Mr. Verhoeven cut 47 seconds of the most graphic sex and violence". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2015. 
^ "Career as a film director". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ Brennan, Judy (March 13, 1997). "The Fight Over 'Broadway Brawler'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 26, 2015. 
^ a b "Princeton review". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Many are experienced actors, editors or writers". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Many directors get formal training and education in their craft at a film school". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "In the Fiction Film bachelor studio students learn the basic principles, techniques and procedures of film direction and production". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Classes supporting this area discuss and rehearse: preparation, shot lists and storyboards, blocking, protocols of dealing with professional actors, reading scripts, the construction of film sequence". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "We operate from a purpose-built studio facility in Harrow, with two sound stages, a set construction workshop, and extensive post-production facilities". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "An intrinsic element of the education, alongside the transfer of organizational and technical skills, is to provide the students with insights into social contexts and relationships". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "The directing studies 5 years of study : a first cycle of 3 years and a second cycle of 2 years". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "The students' final project is a film produced on a professional level and presented to the public on national TV". Retrieved March 15, 2013. 
^ "If you're a student and making your film within a film school then you should be aware that some film schools will retain the copyright in the films that you make during your enrollment". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Many successful film directors, including Oscar-winning Best Director of 'The King's Speech', Tom Hooper, began their careers in television, which provided the platform to progress through the industry". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "The DFFB cooperates with the Berlin/Brandenburg TV station RBB and ARTE and produces 3 short films of 30minutes lengths for RBB and 10 short films of 5 minutes lengths for ARTE". Retrieved March 3, 2013. 
^ "Stephen Chow earns $100 million". 2016-02-22. Retrieved 2016-02-25. 
^ Chron.com


Bibliography[edit]

Spencer Moon: Reel Black Talk: A Sourcebook of 50 American Filmmakers, Greenwood Press 1997
The St. James Women Filmmakers Encyclopedia: Women on the Other Side of the Camera, Visible Ink Press, 1999
International dictionary of films and filmmakers, ed. by Tom Pendergast, 4 volumes, Detroit [etc.]: St. James Press, 4th edition 2000, vol. 2: Directors
Contemporary North American Film Directors: A Wallflower Critical Guide (Wallflower Critical Guides to Contemporary Directors), ed. by Yoram Allon Del Cullen and Hannah Patterson, Second Edition, Columbia Univ Press 2002
Alexander Jacoby, Donald Richie: A Critical Handbook of Japanese Film Directors: From the Silent Era to the Present Day, Stone Bridge Press, 2008, ISBN 1-933330-53-8
Rebecca Hillauer: Encyclopedia of Arab Women Filmmakers, American University in Cairo Press, 2005, ISBN 977-424-943-7
Roy Armes: Dictionary of African Filmmakers, Indiana University Press, 2008, ISBN 0-253-35116-2
Philippe Rege: Encyclopedia of French Film Directors, Scarecrow Press, 2009




Wikimedia Commons has media related to Film directors.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Film director









v
t
e


Filmmaking



Development



Film treatment
Producer

scriptment


Step outline
Screenplay

process
spec script
film adaptation
Hook
Option


Film budgeting
Film finance

pitch


Green-light





Pre-production



Script breakdown

process


Shooting script
Storyboard
Casting

Scenography
Rehearsal


Production board
Day Out of Days
Production schedule
Shooting schedule

one-liner







Production



Film crew
Cinematic techniques
Principal photography

Cinematography
Videography


Daily call sheet
Dailies (rushes)




Daily reports



Film inventory
Production
Daily Production
Progress
Sound
Cost
Editor log








Post-production



Film editing
Re-recording
Sync sound
Soundtrack
Music
Special effects

sound
visual


Negative cost





Distribution



Film distributor

list


Film release

wide
limited
delayed


Roadshow
Streaming media





Related



Box office
Guerrilla filmmaking
Development hell
Film
Filmography
Film industry
Film rights
Turnaround












v
t
e


Film crew (filmmaking)








Above the line






Actor

Leading actor
Movie star
Superstar
Character actor
Cameo actors


Film director
Screenwriter
Film producer

Executive producer
Line producer















Below the line







Pre-production



Unit production manager
Production coordinator
Production accountant
Assistant director
Script supervisor
Script coordinator
Casting director
Production assistant
Location manager




Storyboard



Storyboard artist








Production design



Production designer

Art director


Costume designer
Hairdresser
Make-up artist
Set decorator
Property master / mistress ("props")




Visual Art



Matte painter
Illustrator
Scenic design








Photography



Cinematographer / Director of photography
Camera operator

Focus puller
Clapper loader
Steadicam


Gaffer

Best boy (electrical)
Lighting technician


Key grip

Best boy (grip)
Grip
Dolly grip







Sound



Director of audiography
Production sound mixer
Boom operator
Utility sound technician
Dialogue editor
Re-recording mixer
Foley artist
Composer
Music supervisor
Music editor





Special effects



Special effects supervisor
Visual effects supervisor





Animation



Animator
Visual effects
Modeling
Rigging
Layout artist





Talent



Movement director
Choreographer
Extra
Talent agent
Actor (voice)
Cast member
Stand-in
Acting instructor
Stunt double
Stunt performer





Post-production



Film editor
Sound editor
Colorist
Animator
Technical director




Visual effects



Visual effects editor
Compositor
Computer-generated imagery
Rendering


















Authority control



GND: 4154375-0
NDL: 00561781











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Film_director&oldid=817249728"					Categories: Film directorsFilmmaking occupationsEntertainment occupationsMedia occupationsDirectorsHidden categories: Articles prone to spam from December 2014Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers