

Finance







Markets





Bond
Commodity
Derivatives
Foreign exchange
Money
Over-the-counter
Private equity
Real estate
Spot
Stock




Participants




Investor

institutional


Retail
Speculator











Instruments



Cash
Credit line
Deposit
Derivative
Futures contract
Loan



Option (call
exotic
put)



Security
Stock

Time deposit
(certificate of deposit)








Corporate





Accounting
Audit
Capital budgeting



Credit rating agency



Risk management
Financial statement



Leveraged buyout
Mergers and acquisitions



Structured finance
Venture capital











Personal


Credit / Debt
Employment contract
Financial planning



Retirement
Student loan











Public



Government spending




Final consumption expenditure



Operations
Redistribution



Transfer payment




Government revenue







Taxation
Deficit spending






Budget (balance)
Debt



Non-tax revenue
Warrant of payment











Banks and banking



Central bank
Deposit account
Fractional-reserve banking
Loan
Money supply



Lists of banks








Regulation · Standards





Bank regulation
Basel Accords
International Financial Reporting Standards
ISO 31000
Professional certification
Fund governance
Accounting scandals











Economic history


Private equity and venture capital
Recession
Stock market bubble
Stock market crash









v
t
e





Financial services are the economic services provided by the finance industry, which encompasses a broad range of businesses that manage money, including credit unions, banks, credit-card companies, insurance companies, accountancy companies, consumer-finance companies, stock brokerages, investment funds, individual managers and some government-sponsored enterprises.[1] Financial services companies are present in all economically developed geographic locations and tend to cluster in local, national, regional and international financial centers such as London, New York City, and Tokyo.



Contents


1 History
2 Banks

2.1 Commercial banking services
2.2 Investment banking services


3 Foreign exchange services
4 Investment services
5 Insurance
6 Other financial services
7 Financial exports
8 Financial crime
9 Market share

9.1 US


10 See also
11 References
12 Further reading
13 External links



History[edit]
See also: Global financial system § History of international financial architecture
The term "financial services" became more prevalent in the United States partly as a result of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of the late 1990s, which enabled different types of companies operating in the U.S. financial services industry at that time to merge.[2]
Companies usually have two distinct approaches to this new type of business. One approach would be a bank which simply buys an insurance company or an investment bank, keeps the original brands of the acquired firm, and adds the acquisition to its holding company simply to diversify its earnings. Outside the U.S. (e.g. Japan), non-financial services companies are permitted within the holding company. In this scenario, each company still looks independent, and has its own customers, etc. In the other style, a bank would simply create its own brokerage division or insurance division and attempt to sell those products to its own existing customers, with incentives for combining all things with one company.
Banks[edit]
Main article: Bank
Commercial banking services[edit]
Main article: Commercial bank
A commercial bank is what is commonly referred to as simply a bank. The term "commercial" is used to distinguish it from an investment bank, a type of financial services entity which instead of lending money directly to a business, helps businesses raise money from other firms in the form of bonds (debt) or stock (equity).
The primary operations of banks include:

Keeping money safe while also allowing withdrawals when needed
Issuance of chequebooks so that bills can be paid and other kinds of payments can be delivered by the post
Provide personal loans, commercial loans, and mortgage loans (typically loans to purchase a home, property or business)
Issuance of credit cards and processing of credit card transactions and billing
Issuance of debit cards for use as a substitute for cheques
Allow financial transactions at branches or by using Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs)
Provide wire transfers of funds and Electronic fund transfers between banks
Facilitation of standing orders and direct debits, so payments for bills can be made automatically
Provide overdraft agreements for the temporary advancement of the bank's own money to meet monthly spending commitments of a customer in their current account.
Provide internet banking system to facilitate the customers to view and operate their respective accounts through internet.
Provide charge card advances of the bank's own money for customers wishing to settle credit advances monthly.
Provide a check guaranteed by the bank itself and prepaid by the customer, such as a cashier's check or certified check.
Notary service for financial and other documents
Accepting the deposits from customer and provide the credit facilities to them.
Sell investment products like mutual funds Etc.

Investment banking services[edit]
Main article: Investment banking

Capital markets services - underwriting debt and equity, assist company deals (advisory services, underwriting, mergers and acquisitions and advisory fees), and restructure debt into structured finance products.
Private banking - Private banks provide banking services exclusively to high-net-worth individuals. Many financial services firms require a person or family to have a certain minimum net worth to qualify for private banking service.[3] Private banks often provide more personal services, such as wealth management and tax planning, than normal retail banks.[4]
Brokerage services - facilitating the buying and selling of financial securities between a buyer and a seller. In today's (2014) stock brokers, brokerages services are offered online to self trading investors throughout the world who have the option of trading with 'tied' online trading platforms offered by a banking institution or with online trading platforms sometimes offered in a group by so-called online trading portals.

Foreign exchange services[edit]
Foreign exchange services are provided by many banks and specialist foreign exchange brokers around the world. Foreign exchange services include:

Currency exchange - where clients can purchase and sell foreign currency banknotes.
Wire transfer - where clients can send funds to international banks abroad.
Remittance - where clients that are migrant workers send money back to their home country.

Investment services[edit]

Investment management - the term usually given to describe companies which run collective investment funds. Also refers to services provided by others, generally registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission as Registered Investment Advisors. Investment banking financial services focus on creating capital through client investments.
Hedge fund management - Hedge funds often employ the services of "prime brokerage" divisions at major investment banks to execute their trades.
Custody services - the safe-keeping and processing of the world's securities trades and servicing the associated portfolios. Assets under custody in the world are approximately US$100 trillion.[5]

Insurance[edit]
Main article: Insurance

Insurance brokerage - Insurance brokers shop for insurance (generally corporate property and casualty insurance) on behalf of customers. Recently a number of websites have been created to give consumers basic price comparisons for services such as insurance, causing controversy within the industry.[6]
Insurance underwriting - Personal lines insurance underwriters actually underwrite insurance for individuals, a service still offered primarily through agents, insurance brokers, and stock brokers. Underwriters may also offer similar commercial lines of coverage for businesses. Activities include insurance and annuities, life insurance, retirement insurance, health insurance, and property insurance and casualty insurance.
Finance & Insurance - a service still offered primarily at asset dealerships. The F&I manager encompasses the financing and insuring of the asset which is sold by the dealer. F&I is often called "the second gross" in dealerships who have adopted the model
Reinsurance - Reinsurance is insurance sold to insurers themselves, to protect them from catastrophic losses.

Other financial services[edit]

Bank cards - include both credit cards and debit cards. According to the Nilson Report, JP Morgan Chase is the largest issuer of bank cards.[7]
Credit card machine services and networks - Companies which provide credit card machine and payment networks call themselves "merchant card providers".
Intermediation or advisory services - These services involve stock brokers (private client services) and discount brokers. Stock brokers assist investors in buying or selling shares. Primarily internet-based companies are often referred to as discount brokerages, although many now have branch offices to assist clients. These brokerages primarily target individual investors. Full service and private client firms primarily assist and execute trades for clients with large amounts of capital to invest, such as large companies, wealthy individuals, and investment management funds.
Private equity - Private equity funds are typically closed-end funds, which usually take controlling equity stakes in businesses that are either private, or taken private once acquired. Private equity funds often use leveraged buyouts (LBOs) to acquire the firms in which they invest. The most successful private equity funds can generate returns significantly higher than provided by the equity markets
Venture capital is a type of private equity capital typically provided by professional, outside investors to new, high-growth-potential companies in the interest of taking the company to an IPO or trade sale of the business.
Angel investment - An angel investor or angel (known as a business angel or informal investor in Europe), is an affluent individual who provides capital for a business start-up, usually in exchange for convertible debt or ownership equity. A small but increasing number of angel investors organize themselves into angel groups or angel networks to share resources and pool their investment capital.
Conglomerates - A financial services company, such as a universal bank, that is active in more than one sector of the financial services market e.g. life insurance, general insurance, health insurance, asset management, retail banking, wholesale banking, investment banking, etc. A key rationale for the existence of such businesses is the existence of diversification benefits that are present when different types of businesses are aggregated i.e. bad things don't always happen at the same time. As a consequence, economic capital for a conglomerate is usually substantially less than economic capital is for the sum of its parts.
Financial market utilities - Organisations that are part of the infrastructure of financial services, such as stock exchanges, clearing houses, derivative and commodity exchanges and payment systems such as real-time gross settlement systems or interbank networks.
Debt resolution is a consumer service that assists individuals that have too much debt to pay off as requested, but do not want to file bankruptcy and wish to pay off their debts owed. This debt can be accrued in various ways including but not limited to personal loans, credit cards or in some cases merchant accounts.

Financial exports[edit]
 A financial export is a financial service provided by a domestic firm (regardless of ownership) to a foreign firm or individual. While financial services such as banking, insurance and investment management are often seen as a domestic service, an increasing proportion of financial services are now being handled abroad, in other financial centres, for a variety of reasons. Some smaller financial centres, such as Bermuda, Luxembourg, and the Cayman Islands, lack sufficient size for a domestic financial services sector and have developed a role providing services to non-residents as offshore financial centres. The increasing competitiveness of financial services has meant that some countries, such as Japan, which were self-sufficient have increasingly imported financial services.
The leading financial exporter, in terms of exports less imports, is the United Kingdom, which had $95 billion of financial exports in 2014.[8] The UK's position is helped by both unique institutions (such as Lloyd's of London for insurance, the Baltic Exchange for shipping etc.)[9] and an environment that attracts foreign firms;[10] many international corporations have global or regional headquarters in the London and are listed on the London Stock Exchange, and many banks and other financial institutions operate there or in Edinburgh.[11][12]
Financial crime[edit]
Fraud within the financial industry costs the UK (regulated by the FCA) an estimated £14bn a year and it is believed a further £25bn is laundered by British institutions.[13]
Market share[edit]
US[edit]
As of 2004[update] the financial services industry (finance industry) represented 20% of the market capitalization of the S&P 500 in the United States.[citation needed]
The U.S. finance industry comprised only 10% of total non-farm business profits in 1947, but it grew to 50% by 2010. Over the same period, finance industry income as a proportion of GDP rose from 2.5% to 7.5%, and the finance industry's proportion of all corporate income rose from 10% to 20%. The mean earnings per employee hour in finance relative to all other sectors has closely mirrored the share of total U.S. income earned by the top 1% income earners since 1930. The mean salary in New York City's finance industry rose from $80,000 in 1981 to $360,000 in 2011, while average New York City salaries rose from $40,000 to $70,000. In 1988, there were about 12,500 U.S. banks with less than $300 million in deposits, and about 900 with more deposits, but by 2012, there were only 4,200 banks with less than $300 million in deposits in the U.S., and over 1,801 with more.
The financial services industry constitutes the largest group of companies in the world in terms of earnings and equity market capitalization. However it is not the largest category in terms of revenue or number of employees. It is also a slow growing and extremely fragmented industry, with the largest company (Citigroup), only having a 3% US market share.[14] In contrast, the largest home improvement store in the US, Home Depot, has a 30% market share, and the largest coffee house Starbucks has a market share of 32%.
See also[edit]





Book: Finance






Alternative financial services
Financial analyst
Financial data vendors
Financial markets
Financial technology
Financialization
Insider threat
International Monetary Fund
List of banks
List of investment banks
List of largest financial services companies by revenue


References[edit]



^ "Financial Services: Getting the Goods". IMF. 28 March 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2015. 
^ "Bill Summary & Status 106th Congress (1999 - 2000) S.900 CRS Summary - Thomas (Library of Congress)". Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ "Private Banking definition". Investor Words.com. Retrieved 2009-02-06. 
^ "How Swiss Bank Accounts Work". How Stuff Works. Retrieved 2009-02-06. 
^ "Prudential: Securities Processing Primer" (PDF). cm1.prusec.com. 
^ "Price comparison sites face probe". BBC News. 2008-01-22. Retrieved 2009-02-06. 
^ "The Nilson Report - News and Statistics for Card and Mobile Payment Executives". 
^ "UK trade surplus in financial services highest ever". TheCityUK. 21 July 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. 
^ Clark, David (2003). Urban world/global city. Routledge. pp. 174–176. ISBN 0415320976 ; Shubik, Martin (1999). The theory of money and financial institutions. MIT Press. p. 8. ISBN 0262693119. 
^ Roberts, Richard (2008). The City: A Guide to London's Global Financial Centre. Economist. pp. 1–22. 
^ "UK's financial services trade surplus biggest in the world, dwarfing its nearest rivals". TheCityUK. 3 July 2014. Retrieved 5 June 2015. 
^ "Special report on services exports" (PDF). EY Item Club. June 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2015. 
^ "Watchdog warns of criminal gangs inside banks". The Guardian. London. 2005-11-16. Retrieved 2007-11-30. 
^ The Opportunity: Small Global Market Share, Page 11, from the Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. Strategic Decisions Conference – 6/02/04



Further reading[edit]

Porteous, Bruce T.; Pradip Tapadar (December 2005). Economic Capital and Financial Risk Management for Financial Services Firms and Conglomerates. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 1-4039-3608-0. 

External links[edit]

The role of the financial Services Sector in Expanding Economic Opportunity | A report by Christopher N. Sutton and Beth Jenkins | John F. Kennedy School of Government | Harvard University







v
t
e


Major industries






Heavy
Light








Activism
Advertising
Aerospace

Space


Aircraft

Aircraft tire


Agriculture

Flowers
Horticulture
Coffee


Audiovisual
Alcohol
Anime
Arms
Automotive
Bicycle
Biotechnology
Chemical
Computer
Construction

Dredging


Content
Creative
Cultural
Education
Electric power
Electronics

Semiconductor


Energy

Renewable energy


Engineering
Entertainment
Fashion
Film
Financial services

Insurance industry


Fishing
Food

Bushfood


Fur
Gaming

Online gambling


Health care
Hospitality
Information
Language
Leisure
Manufacturing
Meat industry

Meat packing


Mineral
Motorsport
Music
Naval stores
Payment card
Personal care
Petroleum

Oil shale


Pharmaceutical
Plastics
Poverty
Professional services
Pulp and paper
Radio
Real estate

Housing


Online service
Security
Sex
Shipbuilding
Software
Sport
Textile
Tobacco
Tourism
Video game
Water











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Financial_services&oldid=812374422"					Categories: Financial marketsFinancial servicesHidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2004All articles containing potentially dated statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2015