

Part of a series on financial services


Financial regulation




Types of regulations


Money Laundering
Capital requirements
Bank regulations
Basel accords
International Financial Reporting Standards
Fund governance
Reserve requirement








Concepts


Bank run
accounting scandals
Too big to fail
Securities fraud
Ponzi scheme








Regulatory agencies


Central banks
Securities commissions
List of financial regulatory authorities by country
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
Bank for International Settlements
World Bank








Regulatory terms


Fractional reserve banking
Offshore banking
Tax haven
Money service business
Global financial system
Financial integration
Systemically important financial institution








Related topics
Financial market (participants)

Corporate finance
Personal finance
Public finance
Banking
List of banks









v
t
e







Finance







Markets





Bond
Commodity
Derivatives
Foreign exchange
Money
Over-the-counter
Private equity
Real estate
Spot
Stock




Participants




Investor

institutional


Retail
Speculator











Instruments



Cash
Credit line
Deposit
Derivative
Futures contract
Loan



Option (call
exotic
put)



Security
Stock

Time deposit
(certificate of deposit)








Corporate





Accounting
Audit
Capital budgeting



Credit rating agency



Risk management
Financial statement



Leveraged buyout
Mergers and acquisitions



Structured finance
Venture capital











Personal


Credit / Debt
Employment contract
Financial planning



Retirement
Student loan











Public



Government spending




Final consumption expenditure



Operations
Redistribution



Transfer payment




Government revenue







Taxation
Deficit spending






Budget (balance)
Debt



Non-tax revenue
Warrant of payment











Banks and banking



Central bank
Deposit account
Fractional-reserve banking
Loan
Money supply



Lists of banks








Regulation · Standards





Bank regulation
Basel Accords
International Financial Reporting Standards
ISO 31000
Professional certification
Fund governance
Accounting scandals











Economic history


Private equity and venture capital
Recession
Stock market bubble
Stock market crash









v
t
e






Financial regulation is a form of regulation or supervision, which subjects financial institutions to certain requirements, restrictions and guidelines, aiming to maintain the integrity of the financial system. This may be handled by either a government or non-government organization. Financial regulation has also influenced the structure of banking sectors by increasing the variety of financial products available.



Contents


1 History
2 Aims of regulation
3 Structure of supervision

3.1 Supervision of stock exchanges
3.2 Supervision of listed companies
3.3 Supervision of investment management
3.4 Supervision of banks and financial services providers


4 Authority by country

4.1 Unique jurisdictions


5 Regulatory reliance on credit rating agencies
6 See also
7 References
8 Further reading
9 External links



History[edit]
Further information: Financial history of the Dutch Republic
In the early modern period, the Dutch were the pioneers in financial regulation.[1] The first recorded ban (regulation) on short selling was enacted by the Dutch authorities as early as 1610.
Aims of regulation[edit]
The objectives of financial regulators are usually:[2]

market confidence – to maintain confidence in the financial system
financial stability – contributing to the protection and enhancement of stability of the financial system
consumer protection – securing the appropriate degree of protection for consumers.

Structure of supervision[edit]
Acts empower organizations, government or non-government, to monitor activities and enforce actions.[3] There are various setups and combinations in place for the financial regulatory structure around the global.[4][5]
Supervision of stock exchanges[edit]
Main article: Securities commission
Exchange acts ensure that trading on the exchanges is conducted in a proper manner. Most prominent the pricing process, execution and settlement of trades, direct and efficient trade monitoring.[6][7]
Supervision of listed companies[edit]
Financial regulators ensure that listed companies and market participants comply with various regulations under the trading acts. The trading acts demands that listed companies publish regular financial reports, ad hoc notifications or directors' dealings. Whereas market participants are required to publish major shareholder notifications. The objective of monitoring compliance by listed companies with their disclosure requirements is to ensure that investors have access to essential and adequate information for making an informed assessment of listed companies and their securities.[8][9][10]
Supervision of investment management[edit]
Asset management supervision or investment acts ensures the frictionless operation of those vehicles.[11]
Supervision of banks and financial services providers[edit]
Main article: Bank regulation
Banking acts lay down rules for banks which they have to observe when they are being established and when they are carrying on their business. These rules are designed to prevent unwelcome developments that might disrupt the smooth functioning of the banking system. Thus ensuring a strong and efficient banking system.[12][13]
Authority by country[edit]
Main article: List of financial regulatory authorities by country




Number of countries having a banking crisis in each year since 1800. This is based on This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly [14] which covers only 70 countries. The general upward trend might be attributed to many factors. One of these is a gradual increase in the percent of people who receive money for their labor. The dramatic feature of this graph is the virtual absence of banking crises during the period of the Bretton Woods agreement, 1945 to 1971. This analysis is similar to Figure 10.1 in Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). For more details see the help file for "bankingCrises" in the Ecdat package available from the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN).






U.S. Trade Balance and Trade Policies (1895–2015)


The following is a short listing of regulatory authorities in various jurisdictions, for a more complete listing, please see list of financial regulatory authorities by country.

United States

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA)
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
Federal Reserve System ("Fed")
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)
Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) (dissolved in 2011)
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB)


United Kingdom

Bank of England (BoE)
Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA)
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)


Financial Services Agency (FSA), Japan
Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), Germany
Autorité des marchés financiers (France) (AMF), France
Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), Singapore
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA), Switzerland
People's Republic of China

China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC)
China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC)
China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC)


Republic of India

Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)



Unique jurisdictions[edit]
In most cases, financial regulatory authorities regulate all financial activities. But in some cases, there are specific authorities to regulate each sector of the finance industry, mainly banking, securities, insurance and pensions markets, but in some cases also commodities, futures, forwards, etc. For example, in Australia, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) supervises banks and insurers, while the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) is responsible for enforcing financial services and corporations laws.
Sometimes more than one institution regulates and supervises the banking market, normally because, apart from regulatory authorities, central banks also regulate the banking industry. For example, in the USA banking is regulated by a lot of regulators, such as the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of Thrift Supervision, as well as regulators at the state level.[15]
In the European Union, the European System of Financial Supervision consists of the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) as well as the European Systemic Risk Board. The Eurozone countries are forming a Single Supervisory Mechanism under the European Central Bank as a prelude to Banking union.
There are also associations of financial regulatory authorities. At the international level, there is the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Joint Forum, and the Financial Stability Board, where national authorities set standards through consensus-based decision-making processes.[16]
The structure of financial regulation has changed significantly in the past two decades,[when?] as the legal and geographic boundaries between markets in banking, securities, and insurance have become increasingly "blurred" and globalized.[citation needed]
Regulatory reliance on credit rating agencies[edit]
Think-tanks such as the World Pensions Council (WPC) have argued that most European governments pushed dogmatically for the adoption of the Basel II recommendations, adopted in 2005, transposed in European Union law through the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD), effective since 2008. In essence, they forced European banks, and, more importantly, the European Central Bank itself e.g. when gauging the solvency of EU-based financial institutions, to rely more than ever on the standardized assessments of credit risk marketed by two private US agencies- Moody’s and S&P, thus using public policy and ultimately taxpayers’ money to strengthen an anti-competitive duopolistic industry.
See also[edit]

Bank regulation
Finance
Financial repression
Global financial system
Group of Thirty
Insurance law
International Organization of Securities Commissions
International Centre for Financial Regulation
LabEx ReFi - European Laboratory on Financial Regulation
Macroprudential regulation
Microprudential regulation
Regulatory capture
Regulatory economics
Securities Commission
Regulation of commodity markets
Virtual currency law in the United States

References[edit]


^ Clement, Piet; James, Harold; Van der Wee, Herman (eds.): Financial Innovation, Regulation and Crises in History. (Routledge, 2014. xiii + 176 pp. ISBN 9781848935044)
^ UK FSA statutory objectives 
^ What is Financial Regulation Trying to Achieve?, Riccardo De Caria, SSRN 1994472  
^ Luxembourg CSSF structure and organisation 
^ German BAFin supervision organisation, archived from the original on 2012-08-04 
^ Suisse finma stock exchange supervision 
^ German BAFin stock exchange supervision, archived from the original on 2012-07-22 
^ Finland FSA supervion of listed companies 
^ Saudi Arabia market supervision 
^ Borsa Italiana listed stock supervision [permanent dead link]
^ US SEC Division of Investment Management 
^ Reserve Bank of India, Department of Banking Supervision 
^ Luxembourg CSSF Supervision of Banks 
^ Works, Anchor Media. "This Time is Different - A Book by Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff". reinhartandrogoff.com. 
^ "list of state banking authorities". State Banking Authorities. Consumer Action Website. Retrieved August 5, 2011. 
^ Prabhakar, Rahul (1 June 2013). "Varieties of Regulation: How States Pursue and Set International Financial Standards". Oxford University GEG. SSRN 2383445 .  Missing or empty |url= (help); |access-date= requires |url= (help)


Further reading[edit]

Labonte, Marc. (2017). Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory Framework. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
Reinhart, Carmen; Rogoff, Rogoff (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton U. Pr., ISBN 978-0-691-15264-6 
Simpson, D., Meeks, G., Klumpes, P., & Andrews, P. (2000). Some cost-benefit issues in financial regulation. London: Financial Services Authority.

External links[edit]

Securities Lawyer's Deskbook from the University of Cincinnati College of Law
Ana Carvajal, Jennifer Elliott: IMF Study Points to Gaps in Securities Market Regulation
IOSCO: Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation (PDF-Datei 67 Seiten)







v
t
e


Financial markets



Types of markets



Primary market
Secondary market
Third market
Fourth market





Types of stocks



Common stock
Golden share
Preferred stock
Restricted stock
Tracking stock





Share capital



Authorised capital
Issued shares
Shares outstanding
Treasury stock





Participants



Broker-dealer
Day trader
Floor broker
Floor trader
Investor
Market maker
Proprietary trader
Quantitative analyst
Regulator
Stock trader





Exchanges



Electronic communication network
List of stock exchanges

Opening times


Multilateral trading facility
Over-the-counter





Stock valuation



Alpha
Arbitrage pricing theory
Beta
Bid–ask spread
Book value
Capital asset pricing model
Capital market line
Dividend discount model
Dividend yield
Earnings per share
Earnings yield
Net asset value
Security characteristic line
Security market line
T-model





Trading theories
and strategies



Algorithmic trading
Buy and hold
Contrarian investing
Day trading
Dollar cost averaging
Efficient-market hypothesis
Fundamental analysis
Growth stock
Market timing
Modern portfolio theory
Momentum investing
Mosaic theory
Pairs trade
Post-modern portfolio theory
Random walk hypothesis
Sector rotation
Style investing
Swing trading
Technical analysis
Trend following
Value investing





Related terms



Block trade
Cross listing
Dark liquidity
Dividend
Dual-listed company
DuPont analysis
Efficient frontier
Flight-to-quality
Haircut
Initial public offering
Margin
Market anomaly
Market capitalization
Market depth
Market manipulation
Market trend
Mean reversion
Momentum
Open outcry
Public float
Public offering
Rally
Returns-based style analysis
Reverse stock split
Share repurchase
Short selling
Slippage
Speculation
Stock dilution
Stock market index
Stock split
Trade
Uptick rule
Volatility
Voting interest
Yield









Authority control



GND: 4741959-3











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Financial_regulation&oldid=817012515"					Categories: Financial regulationSystemic riskHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksPages using web citations with no URLPages using citations with accessdate and no URLAll articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from February 2017All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2017Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers