"Empire of the French" and "Napoleonic Empire" redirect here. For the empire led by Napoleon III from 1852–1870, see Second French Empire.







This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Insert Inline Citations, Grammar and Spelling Errors Please help improve this article if you can. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)





French Empire[1]


Empire Français






1804–1814, 1815










Flag



Imperial Coat of arms





Anthem
"Veillons au salut de l'Empire"'
"Chant du départ" (de facto)[2][3]
(English: "Song of the Departure")
"Marche consulaire"[citation needed]
(English: "March of the Consulate")






A map of the First French Empire in 1812.
  Directly administered
  Client states




Capital
Paris


Languages
French (official)
Breton, Basque, Occitan, Picard, Polish, Franco-Provençal, Dutch, Croatian, Catalan, German, Italian, Slovene


Religion
Roman Catholicism
Calvinism
Lutheranism
Judaism


Government
Constitutionally absolute monarchy


Emperor



 • 
1804–1814/1815
Napoleon I


 • 
1815
Napoleon IINote 2


Legislature
Parliament


 • 
Upper house
Senate


 • 
Lower house
Corps législatif


Historical era
Napoleonic Wars
French Revolutionary Wars



 • 
Constitution adopted
18 May 1804


 • 
Coronation of Napoleon I
2 December 1804


 • 
Treaty of Tilsit
7 July 1807


 • 
Invasion of Russia
24 June 1812


 • 
Treaty of Fontainebleau
11 April 1814


 • 
Hundred Days
20 March – 7 July 1815


Area


 • 
1813 [4]
2,100,000 km2 (810,000 sq mi)


Population


 • 
1812 est.
44,000,000 


Currency
French franc







Preceded by
Succeeded by






French First Republic



Kingdom of Holland



Ligurian Republic



Andorra






Kingdom of France



Principality of the Netherlands



Moresnet



Luxembourg



Tuscany



Andorra



Monaco









The First French Empire[1] (French: Empire Français),Note 1 was the empire of Napoleon Bonaparte of France and the dominant power in much of continental Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. Although France had already established an overseas colonial empire beginning in the 17th century, historians refer to Napoleon's regime as the First Empire because he was the first ruler of France since the days of the Franks to take an imperial title.
On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was granted the title Emperor of the French (L'Empereur des Français, pronounced [lɑ̃.pʁœʁ dɛ fʁɑ̃.sɛ]) by the French Sénat and was crowned on 2 December 1804,[5] ending the period of the French Consulate and of the French First Republic. The French Empire won early military victories in the War of the Third Coalition against Austria, Prussia, Russia, Portugal, and allied nations, notably at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805[6] and, during the War of the Fourth Coalition, at the Battle of Friedland[7] in 1807.
A series of wars, known collectively as the Napoleonic Wars, extended French influence over much of Western Europe and into Poland. At its height in 1812, the French Empire had 130 departments, ruled over 70 million subjects, maintained an extensive military presence in Germany, Italy, Spain, and the Duchy of Warsaw, and could count Prussia and Austria as nominal allies.[8] Early French victories exported many ideological features of the French Revolution throughout Europe: the introduction of the Napoleonic Code throughout the continent increased legal equality, established jury systems and legalised divorce, and seigneurial dues and seigneurial justice were abolished, as were aristocratic privileges in all places with the exception of Poland.[9]



Contents


1 Origin
2 Early victories
3 Height of the Empire
4 Intrigues and unrest
5 The Fall
6 Nature of Bonaparte's rule
7 Maps
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Further reading

11.1 Surveys
11.2 Napoleon
11.3 Military


12 External links



Origin[edit]
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and French Consulate
In 1799, Napoleon Bonaparte was confronted by Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès – one of five Directors constituting the executive branch of the French government—who sought his support for a coup d'état to overthrow the Constitution of the Year III. The plot included Bonaparte's brother Lucien, then serving as speaker of the Council of Five Hundred, Roger Ducos, another Director, and Talleyrand. On 9 November 1799 (18 Brumaire (VIII under the French Republican Calendar)) and the following day, troops led by Bonaparte seized control[clarification needed]. They dispersed the legislative councils, leaving a rump legislature to name Bonaparte, Sieyès and Ducos as provisional Consuls to administer the government. Although Sieyès expected to dominate the new regime, the Consulate, he was outmaneuvered by Bonaparte, who drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul. He thus became the most powerful person in France, a power that was increased by the Constitution of the Year X, which made him First Consul for life.
The Battle of Marengo (14 June 1800) inaugurated the political idea that was to continue its development until Napoleon's Moscow campaign. Napoleon planned only to keep the Duchy of Milan for France, setting aside Austria, and was thought[by whom?] to prepare a new campaign in the East. The Peace of Amiens, which cost him control of Egypt, was a temporary truce. He gradually extended his authority in Italy by annexing the Piedmont and by acquiring Genoa, Parma, Tuscany and Naples, and added this Italian territory to his Cisalpine Republic. Then he laid siege to the Roman state and initiated the Concordat of 1801 to control the material claims of the pope. When he recognised his error of raising the authority of the pope from that of a figurehead, Napoleon produced the Articles Organiques (1802) wanting, like Charlemagne, to be the legal protector of the papacy. To conceal his plans before their actual execution, he aroused French colonial aspirations against Britain and the memory of the 1763 Treaty of Paris, exacerbating British envy of France, whose borders now extended to the Rhine and beyond, to Hanover, Hamburg and Cuxhaven. Napoleon would have ruling elites from a fusion of the new bourgeoisie and the old aristocracy.[10]
On 12 May 1802, the French Tribunat voted unanimously, with exception of Carnot, in favour of the Life Consulship for the leader of France.[11][12] This action was confirmed by the Corps Législatif. A general plebiscite followed thereafter resulting in 3,653,600 votes aye and 8,272 votes nay.[13] On 2 August 1802 (14 Thermidor, An X), Napoleon Bonaparte was proclaimed Consul for life.
Pro-revolutionary sentiment swept through Germany aided by the "Recess of 1803", which brought Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden to France's side. William Pitt the Younger, back in power over Britain, appealed once more for an Anglo-Austro-Russian coalition against Napoleon to stop the ideals of revolutionary France from spreading.




Napoleon I on his Imperial Throne by Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, 1806


On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was given the title of emperor by the Senate; finally, on 2 December 1804, he was solemnly crowned, after receiving the Iron Crown of the Lombard kings, and was consecrated by Pope Pius VII in Notre-Dame de Paris.Note 3
In four campaigns, the Emperor transformed his "Carolingian" feudal and federal empire into one modelled on the Roman Empire. The memories of imperial Rome were for a third time, after Julius Caesar and Charlemagne, used to modify the historical evolution of France. Though the vague plan for an invasion of Great Britain was never executed, the Battle of Ulm and the Battle of Austerlitz overshadowed the defeat of Trafalgar, and the camp at Boulogne put at Napoleon's disposal the best military resources he had commanded, in the form of La Grande Armée.




The Battle of Austerlitz


Early victories[edit]
In the War of the Third Coalition, Napoleon swept away the remnants of the old Holy Roman Empire and created in southern Germany the vassal states of Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, Hesse-Darmstadt and Saxony, which were reorganized into the Confederation of the Rhine. The Treaty of Pressburg, signed on 26 December 1805, did little other than create a more unified Germany to threaten France.[citation needed] On the other hand, Napoleon's creation of the Kingdom of Italy, the occupation of Ancona, and his annexation of Venetia and its former Adriatic territories marked a new stage in his Empire's progress.
To create satellite states, Napoleon installed his relatives as rulers of many European states. The Bonapartes began to marry into old European monarchies, gaining sovereignty over many nations. Joseph Bonaparte replaced the dispossessed Bourbons in Naples; Louis Bonaparte was installed on the throne of the Kingdom of Holland, formed from the Batavian Republic; Joachim Murat became Grand-Duke of Berg; Jérôme Bonaparte was made son-in-law to the King of Württemberg; and Eugène de Beauharnais was appointed to be the King of Bavaria while Stéphanie de Beauharnais married the son of the Grand Duke of Baden. In addition to the vassal titles, Napoleon's closest relatives were also granted the title of French Prince and formed the Imperial House of France.
Met with opposition, Napoleon would not tolerate any neutral power. On 6 August 1806 the Habsburgs abdicated their title of Holy Roman Emperor in order to prevent Napoleon from becoming the next Emperor, ending a political power which had endured for over a thousand years. Prussia had been offered the territory of Hanover to stay out of the Third Coalition. With the diplomatic situation changing, Napoleon offered Great Britain the province as part of a peace proposal. This, combined with growing tensions in Germany over French hegemony, Prussia responded by forming an alliance with Russia and sending troops into Bavaria on 1 October 1806. In this War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon destroyed the armies of Frederick William at Jena-Auerstedt. Successive victories at Eylau and Friedland against the Russians finally ruined Frederick the Great's formerly mighty kingdom, obliging Russia and Prussia to make peace with France at Tilsit.
Height of the Empire[edit]




The Arc de Triomphe, ordered by Napoleon in honour of his Grande Armée, is one of the several landmarks whose construction was started in Paris during the First French Empire.


The Treaties of Tilsit ended the war between Russia and the French Empire and began an alliance between the two empires that held power of much of the rest of Europe. The two empires secretly agreed to aid each other in disputes. France pledged to aid Russia against Ottoman Turkey, while Russia agreed to join the Continental System against the British Empire. Napoleon also forced Alexander to enter the Anglo-Russian War and to instigate the Finnish War against Sweden in order to force Sweden to join the Continental System.
More specifically, the Tsar agreed to evacuate Wallachia and Moldavia, which had been occupied by Russian forces as part of the Russo-Turkish War of 1806–1812. The Ionian Islands and Cattaro, which had been captured by Russian admirals Ushakov and Senyavin, were to be handed over to the French. In recompense, Napoleon guaranteed the sovereignty of the Duchy of Oldenburg and several other small states ruled by the Tsar's German relatives.
The treaty removed about half of Prussia's territory: Kottbus passed to Saxony, the left bank of the Elbe was awarded to the newly created Kingdom of Westphalia, Białystok was given to Russia, and the rest of Polish lands in the Prussian possession were set up as the Duchy of Warsaw. Prussia was ordered to reduce their army to 40,000 and to pay an indemnity of 100,000,000 francs. Observers in Prussia viewed the treaty as unfair and as a national humiliation.




Napoleon reviews the Imperial Guard before the Battle of Jena, 1806


Talleyrand had advised Napoleon to pursue milder terms; the treaties marked an important stage in his estrangement from the emperor. After the Treaties of Tilsit, instead of trying to reconcile Europe, as Talleyrand had advised, Napoleon wanted to defeat Britain and complete his Italian dominion. To the coalition of the northern powers, he added the league of the Baltic and Mediterranean ports, and to the bombardment of Copenhagen by a Royal Navy fleet he responded by a second decree of blockade, dated from Milan on 17 December 1807.
The application of the Concordat and the taking of Naples led to the first struggles with the Pope, centered around Pius VII renewing the theocratic affirmations of Pope Gregory VII. The Emperor's Roman ambition was made more visible by the occupation of the Kingdom of Naples and of the Marches, and by the entry of Miollis into Rome; while Junot invaded Portugal, Joachim Murat took control of formerly Roman Spain, whither Joseph Bonaparte transferred afterwards.
Napoleon tried to succeed in the Iberian Peninsula as he had done in Italy, in the Netherlands, and in Hesse. However, the exile of the Royal Family to Bayonne, together with the enthroning of Joseph Bonaparte, turned the Spanish against Napoleon. After the Dos de Mayo riots and subsequent reprisals, The Spanish government began an effective guerrilla campaign, under the oversight of a local Juntas. The Peninsula became a war zone from the Pyrenees to the Straits of Gibraltar and saw Imperial Armies facing the remnants of the Spanish Army, as well as British and Portuguese Forces. Dupont capitulated at Bailén to General Castaños, and Junot at Sintra, Portugal to General Wellesley.




Aftermath of the Battle of Eylau, 1807


Spain used up the soldiers needed for Napoleon's other fields of battle, and they had to be replaced by conscripts. Spanish resistance affected Austria, and indicated the potential of national resistance. The provocations of Talleyrand and Britain strengthened the idea that Austrians could emulate the Spaniards. On April 10, 1809, Austria invaded France's ally, Bavaria. The campaign of 1809, however, would not be nearly as long and troublesome for France as the Spanish one. After a short and decisive action in Bavaria, Napoleon opened up the road to Vienna for a second time. At Aspern-Essling, Napoleon suffered his first serious tactical defeat, along with the death of Jean Lannes, an able Marshall and dear friend of the Emperor. The victory at Wagram, however, forced Austria to sue for peace. The Treaty of Schönbrunn, 14 December 1809, annexed the Illyrian Provinces and recognized past French conquests.
The Pope was forcibly deported to Savona, and his domains were incorporated into the Empire. The Senate's decision on 17 February 1810 created the title of King of Rome, and made Rome the capital of Italy. Between 1810 and 1812 Napoleon's divorce of Joséphine, and his marriage with Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria, followed by the birth of the king of Rome, shed light upon his future policy. He gradually withdrew power from his siblings and concentrated his affection and ambition on his son, the guarantee of the continuance of his dynasty. This was the high point of the empire.
Intrigues and unrest[edit]
Undermining forces, however, had already begun to impinge on the faults inherent in Napoleon’s achievements. Britain, protected by the English Channel and its navy, was persistently active, and rebellion of both the governing and of the governed broke out everywhere. Napoleon, though he underrated it, soon felt his failure in coping with the Spanish uprising. Men like Baron von Stein, August von Hardenberg and Johann von Scharnhorst had secretly started preparing Prussia's retaliation.




Napoleon demanded that Alexander I of Russia and Frederick William III of Prussia meet him at Tilsit in July 1807


The alliance arranged at Tilsit was seriously shaken by the Austrian marriage, the threat of Polish restoration to Russia, and the Continental System. The very persons whom he had placed in power were counteracting his plans. With many of his siblings and relations performing unsuccessfully or even betraying him, Napoleon found himself obliged to revoke their power. Caroline Bonaparte conspired against her brother and against her husband Murat; the hypochondriac Louis, now Dutch in his sympathies, found the supervision of the blockade taken from him, and also the defense of the Scheldt, which he had refused to ensure. Jérôme Bonaparte lost control of the blockade on North Sea shores. The very nature of things was against the new dynasties, as it had been against the old.
After national insurrections and family recriminations came treachery from Napoleon's ministers. Talleyrand betrayed his designs to Metternich and suffered dismissal. Joseph Fouché, corresponding with Austria in 1809 and 1810, entered into an understanding with Louis and also with Britain, while Bourrienne was convicted of speculation. By consequence of the spirit of conquest Napoleon had aroused, many of his marshals and officials, having tasted victory, dreamed of sovereign power: Bernadotte, who had helped him to the Consulate, played Napoleon false to win the crown of Sweden. Soult, like Murat, coveted the Spanish throne after that of Portugal, thus anticipating the treason of 1812.
The country itself, though flattered by conquests, was tired of self-sacrifice. The unpopularity of conscription policies gradually turned many of Napoleon’s subjects against him. Amidst profound silence from the press and the assemblies, a protest was raised against imperial power by the literary world, against the excommunicated sovereign by Catholicism, and against the author of the continental blockade by the discontented bourgeoisie, ruined by the crisis of 1811. Even as he lost his military principles, Napoleon maintained his gift for brilliance. His Six Days Campaign, which took place at the very end of the Sixth Coalition, is often regarded as his greatest display of leadership and military prowess. But by then it was the end (or "the finish"), and it was during the years before when the nations of Europe conspired against France. While the Emperor and his holdings idled and worsened, the rest of Europe agreed to avenge the revolutionary events of 1792.
The Fall[edit]
Main articles: Napoleon's Invasion of Russia, Sixth Coalition, and Hundred Days




Napoleon and his staff during the War of the Sixth Coalition, 1812–14.


Napoleon had hardly succeeded in putting down the revolt in Germany when the Tsar of Russia himself headed a European insurrection against Napoleon. To put a stop to this, to ensure his own access to the Mediterranean and exclude his chief rival, Napoleon made an effort in 1812 against Russia. Despite his victorious advance, the taking of Smolensk, the victory on the Moskva, and the entry into Moscow, he was defeated by the country and the climate, and by Alexander's refusal to make terms. After this came the terrible retreat in the harsh Russian winter, while all Europe was concentrating against him. Pushed back, as he had been in Spain, from bastion to bastion, after the action on the Berezina, Napoleon had to fall back upon the frontiers of 1809, and then—having refused the peace offered to him by Austria at the Congress of Prague (4 June–10 August 1813), from a dread of losing Italy, where each of his victories had marked a stage in the accomplishment of his dream—on those of 1805, despite Lützen and Bautzen, and on those of 1802 after his defeat at Leipzig, when Bernadotte – now Crown Prince of Sweden – turned upon him, General Moreau also joined the Allies, and longstanding allied nations, such as Saxony and Bavaria, forsook him as well.
Following his retreat from Russia, Napoleon continued to retreat, this time from Germany. After the loss of Spain, reconquered by an allied army led by Wellington, the rising in the Netherlands preliminary to the invasion and the manifesto of Frankfort (1 December 1813)[14] which proclaimed it, he had to fall back upon the frontiers of 1795; and then later was driven yet farther back upon those of 1792—despite the brilliant campaign of 1814 against the invaders. Paris capitulated on 30 March 1814, and the Delenda Carthago, pronounced against Britain, was spoken of Napoleon. The Empire briefly fell with Napoleon's abdication at Fontainebleau on 11 April 1814.
After a brief exile at the island of Elba, Napoleon escaped, with a ship, a few men, and four cannons. The King sent Marshal Ney to arrest him. Upon meeting Ney's army, Napoleon dismounted and walked into firing range, saying "If one of you wishes to kill his emperor, here I am!" But instead of firing, they went to join Napoleon's side shouting "Vive l'Empereur!" Napoleon recaptured the throne temporarily in 1815, reviving the Empire in what is known as the Hundred Days. However, he was defeated by the Seventh Coalition at the Battle of Waterloo. He surrendered himself to the Coalition and was exiled to Saint Helena, a remote island in the South Atlantic, where he remained until his death in 1821. After the Hundred Days (just less than a third of a year), the Bourbon monarchy was restored, with Louis XVIII regaining the throne of France, while the rest of Napoleon's conquests were disposed of in the Congress of Vienna.
Nature of Bonaparte's rule[edit]





Organigramme of the Consulate and later the Empire







The Napoleonic Code.


Napoleon gained support by appealing to some common concerns of French people. These included dislike of the emigrant nobility who had escaped persecution, fear by some of a restoration of the Ancien Régime, a dislike and suspicion of foreign countries that had tried to reverse the Revolution – and a wish by Jacobins to extend France's revolutionary ideals.
Napoleon attracted power and imperial status and gathered support for his changes of French institutions, such as the Concordat of 1801 which confirmed the Catholic Church as the majority church of France and restored some of its civil status. Napoleon by this time however was not a democrat, nor a republican. He was, he liked to think, an enlightened despot, the sort of man Voltaire might have found appealing. He preserved numerous social gains of the Revolution while suppressing political liberty. He admired efficiency and strength and hated feudalism, religious intolerance, and civil inequality. Enlightened despotism meant political stability. He knew his Roman history well, as after 500 years of republicanism, Rome became an empire under Augustus Caesar.
Although a supporter of the radical Jacobins during the early days of the Revolution (more out of pragmatism than any real ideology), Napoleon became increasingly autocratic as his political career progressed and once in power embraced certain aspects of both liberalism and authoritarianism – for example, public education, a generally liberal restructuring of the French legal system, and the emancipation of the Jews – while rejecting electoral democracy and freedom of the press.[citation needed]

Maps[edit]







French départements in 1801 during the Consulate









French départements in 1812.









Map of the "First French Empire in 1812, divided into 133 départements, with the kingdoms of Spain, Portugal, Italy and Naples and the Confederation of the Rhine, Illyria and Dalmatia"




See also[edit]


Napoleonic Wars portal



French revolution
History of France
List of Napoleonic battles
Military career of Napoleon Bonaparte
Paris under Napoleon


Notes[edit]

^ Domestically styled as French Republic until 1808: compare the French franc minted in 1808 [15] and in 1809,[16] as well as Article 1 of the Constitution of the Year XII,[17] which reads in English The Government of the' Republic is vested in an Emperor, who takes the title of Emperor of the French.
^ According to his father's will only. Between 23 June and 7 July France was held by a Commission of Government of five members, which never summoned Napoleon II as emperor in any official act, and no regent was ever appointed while waiting the return of the king.[18]
^ Claims Napoleon seized the crown out of the hands of Pope Pius VII during the ceremony – to avoid subjecting himself to the authority of the pontiff – are apocryphal; the coronation procedure had been agreed in advance. See also: Napoleon Tiara.

References[edit]



^ a b The official bulletin of laws of the French Empire
^ Le Chant du Départ, Fondation Napoléon, 2008, retrieved 16 May 2012 
^ Words and Music, Fondation Napoléon, 2008, retrieved 6 July 2014 
^ Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 501. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ Thierry, Lentz. "The Proclamation of Empire by the Sénat Conservateur". napoleon.org. Fondation Napoléon. Retrieved 15 August 2014. 
^ "Battle of Austerlitz". Britannica.com. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 15 August 2014. 
^ Hickman, Kennedy. "Napoleonic Wars: Battle of Friedland". militaryhistory.about.com. about.com. Retrieved 15 August 2014. 
^ Martyn Lyons, Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution. p. 232
^ Martyn Lyons p. 234–36
^ Haine, Scott. The History of France (1st ed.). Greenwood Press. p. 92. ISBN 0-313-30328-2. 
^ Fremont-Barnes, Gregory (2006). The encyclopedia of the French revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: a political, social, and military history, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. p. 211. ISBN 978-1851096466. Elected to the Tribunate in 1802, he [Carnot] showed himself increasingly alienated by Napoleon's personal ambition and voted against both the Consul for Life and the proclamation of the Empire. Unlike many former Revolutionaries, Carnot had little (...) 
^ Chandler, David G. (2000). Napoleon. Pen and Sword. p. 57. ISBN 978-1473816565. 
^ Bulletin des Lois
^ The Frankfort Declaration, 1 December 1813: http://www.napoleon-series.org/research/government/diplomatic/c_frankfort.html
^ http://www.lesfrancs.com/francais/1f1808rh.jpg
^ http://www.lesfrancs.com/francais/1f1809rh.jpg
^ http://www.conseil-constitutionnel.fr/conseil-constitutionnel/francais/la-constitution/les-constitutions-de-la-france/constitution-de-l-an-xii-empire-28-floreal-an-xii.5090.html
^ http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k486114j.pleinepage.f281.langFR




Further reading[edit]
Surveys[edit]

Bruun, Geoffrey. Europe and the French Imperium, 1799-1814 (1938) online.
Bryant, Arthur. Years of Endurance 1793–1802 (1942); and Years of Victory, 1802–1812 (1944) well-written surveys of the British story
Colton, Joel and Palmer, R.R. A History of the Modern World. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1992. ISBN 0-07-040826-2
Esdaile, Charles. Napoleon's Wars: An International History, 1803–1815 (2008); 645pp excerpt and text search a standard scholarly history
Fisher, Todd & Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Oxford: Osprey Publishing Ltd., 2004. ISBN 1-84176-831-6
Godechot, Jacques; et al. (1971). The Napoleonic era in Europe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Grab, Alexander. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (Macmillan, 2003), country by country analysis
Hazen, Charles Downer. The French Revolution and Napoleon (1917) online free
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit, 1799-1807. Columbia University Press.  influential wide-ranging history

Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon; from Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807-1815. Columbia University Press. 


Lyons, Martyn. Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution. (St. Martin's Press, 1994)
Muir, Rory. Britain and the Defeat of Napoleon: 1807–1815 (1996)
Lieven, Dominic (2009). Russia Against Napoleon: The Battle for Europe, 1807 to 1814. Allen Lane/The Penguin Press. p. 617. [1]
Schroeder, Paul W. (1996). The Transformation of European Politics 1763-1848. Oxford U.P. pp. 177–560. ISBN 9780198206545.  advanced diplomatic history of Napoleon and his era
Pope, Stephen (1999). The Cassel Dictionary of the Napoleonic Wars. Cassel. ISBN 0-304-35229-2. 
Rapport, Mike. The Napoleonic Wars: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford UP, 2013)
Ross, Steven T. European Diplomatic History, 1789–1815: France Against Europe (1969)
Rothenberg, Gunther E. (1988). "The Origins, Causes, and Extension of the Wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon". Journal of Interdisciplinary History. 18 (4): 771–793. JSTOR 204824. 
Schroeder, Paul W. The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (1994) 920pp; online; advanced analysis of diplomacy

Napoleon[edit]

Dwyer, Philip. Napoleon: The Path to Power (2008) excerpt vol 1; Citizen Emperor: Napoleon in Power (2013) excerpt and text search v 2; most recent scholarly biography
Englund, Steven (2010). Napoleon: A Political Life. Scribner. ISBN 0674018036. 
McLynn, Frank. Napoleon: A Biography. New York: Arcade Publishing Inc., 1997. ISBN 1-55970-631-7
Johnson, Paul (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-670-03078-3. ; 200pp; quite hostile
Markham, Felix (1963). Napoleon. Mentor. ; 303pp; short biography by an Oxford scholar
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN 0-7126-6247-2. ASIN 0712662472. ; well-written popular history
Mowat, R. B. (1924) The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) 350pp online
Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life (2014)
Thompson, J.M. (1951). Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall. Oxford U.P. , 412pp; by an Oxford scholar

Military[edit]

Bell, David A. The First Total War: Napoleon's Europe and the Birth of Warfare as We Know It (2008) excerpt and text search
Broers, Michael, et al. eds. The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture (2012) excerpt and text search
Chandler, David G. The Campaigns of Napoleon. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. ISBN 0-02-523660-1
Elting, John R. Swords Around a Throne: Napoleon's Grande Armée. New York: Da Capo Press Inc., 1988. ISBN 0-306-80757-2
Gates, David. The Napoleonic Wars 1803-1815 (NY: Random House, 2011)
Haythornthwaite, Philip J. Napoleon's Military Machine (1995) excerpt and text search
Uffindell, Andrew. Great Generals of the Napoleonic Wars. Kent: Spellmount, 2003. ISBN 1-86227-177-1
Rothenberg, E. Gunther. The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon (1977)
Smith, Digby George. The Greenhill Napoleonic Wars Data Book: Actions and Losses in Personnel, Colours, Standards and Artillery (1998)


External links[edit]

Napoleon, His Armies and Battles







v
t
e


Client states of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815)



Sister
republics




Germany



Cisrhenia
Mainz





Greece

Septinsular



Ireland

Connacht



Italy



Alba
Ancona
Bergamo
Bologna
Brescia
Cisalpinia
Cispadania
Crema
Italy
Liguria
Lucca
Parthenopea
Piedmont
Rome
Subalpinia
Tiberinia
Transpadania





Netherlands



Batavia
Bouillon
Liège





Poland



Danzig





Switzerland



Helvetia
Lemania
Rauracia
Rhodania
Swiss Confederation








Europe at the height of Napoleon's Empire




Napoleonic
creations




Germany



Aschaffenburg
Confederation of the Rhine
Baden
Bavaria
Berg
Erfurt
Frankfurt
Hesse
Leyen
Regensburg
Salm
Salm-Horstmar
Salm-Reifferscheid-Dyck
Saxony
Westphalia
Wetzlar
Württemberg
Würzburg





Italy



Benevento
Etruria
Guastalla
Italy
Lucca and Piombino
Massa and Carrara
Naples
Pontecorvo
Tuscany





Malta

Gozo



Netherlands

Holland



Poland



Warsaw





Spain

Spain













v
t
e


Territories annexed to the First French Empire (1804–1814)




Former French departments (now parts of Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland) created from annexed territories






Apennins
Arno
Bouches-de-l'Èbre / Bouches-de-l'Èbre-Montserrat
Bouches-de-l'Elbe
Bouches-de-l'Escaut
Bouches-de-l'Yssel
Bouches-de-la-Meuse
Bouches-du-Rhin
Bouches-du-Weser
Deux-Nèthes
Doire
Dyle
Ems-Occidental
Ems-Oriental
Ems-Supérieur
Escaut
Forêts
Frise
Gênes
Jemmape
Léman
Lippe
Lys
Marengo
Méditerranée
Meuse-Inférieure
Mont-Blanc
Montserrat
Mont-Terrible
Mont-Tonnerre
Montenotte
Ombrone
Ourthe
Pô
Rhin-et-Moselle
Roer
Rome
Sambre-et-Meuse
Sarre
Sègre / Sègre-Ter
Sésia
Simplon
Stura
Tanaro
Taro
Ter
Tibre
Trasimène
Yssel-Supérieur
Zuyderzée












v
t
e


France topics



History




Periods



Timeline
Prehistory
Celtic Gaul
Roman Gaul
Kingdom of the Visigoths
Francia

West Francia


Middle Ages
Early modern era
Long nineteenth century

Revolutionary era
Napoleonic era
Belle Époque


Twentieth century





Regimes



Absolute monarchy

Ancien Régime


First Republic
First Empire
Constitutional monarchy

Bourbon Restoration
July Monarchy


Second Republic
Second Empire
Third Republic
France during the Second World War

Free France
Vichy France
Provisional Republic


Fourth Republic
Fifth Republic








Geography







Administrative divisions
Cities
Climate
Extreme points
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers








Politics







Constitution
Elections

presidential


Foreign relations
Government
Human rights

Intersex
LGBT


Judiciary
Law

enforcement


Military
Parliament
Political parties








Economy







Agriculture
Banking

Central bank


Economic history
Energy
Euro
Exports
Franc (former currency)
French subdivisions by GDP
Stock exchange
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Trade unions
Transport








Society







Crime
Demographics
Education
Health care
People
Poverty
Religion
Social class
Welfare





Culture



Architecture
Art
Cinema (comedy)
Cuisine
Fashion
Gardens
Language
Literature
Media
Music
Philosophy
Public holidays
Sport
Symbols
Theatre












Outline




Book
Category
Portal
WikiProject













v
t
e


Empires



Ancient



Akkadian
Egyptian
Assyrian
Babylonian
Carthaginian
Chinese

Qin
Han
Jin
Northern Wei


Hellenistic

Macedonian
Seleucid


Hittite
Indian

Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha


Iranian

Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian


Kushan
Mongol

Xianbei
Xiongnu


Roman

Western
Eastern


Teotihuacan





Post-classical



Arab

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Córdoba


Aragonese
Angevin
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian

First
Second


Byzantine

Nicaea
Trebizond


Carolingian
Chinese

Sui
Tang
Song
Yuan


Ethiopian

Zagwe
Solomonic


Georgian
Hunnic
Inca
Indian

Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Delhi
Vijayanagara


Iranian

Tahirid
Samanid
Buyid
Sallarid
Ziyarid


Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mongol

Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate


Moroccan

Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid


North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Serbian
Somali

Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Warsangali


Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Turko-Persian

Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid


Vietnamese

Ly
Tran
Le


Wagadou





Modern



Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Central African
Chinese

Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo


Ethiopian
French

First
Second


German

First/Old Reich
Second Reich
Third Reich


Haitian

First
Second


Indian

Maratha
Sikh
Mughal
British Raj


Iranian

Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi


Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mexican

First
Second


Moroccan

Saadi
Alaouite


Russian
USSR
Somali

Gobroon
Majeerteen
Hobyo
Dervish


Swedish
Tongan
Turkish

Ottoman
Karaman
Ramazan


Vietnamese

Tay Son
Nguyen
Vietnam







Colonial



American
Belgian
British

English


Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Norwegian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish





Lists



Empires

largest


ancient great powers
medieval great powers
modern great powers






Coordinates: 48°49′N 2°29′E﻿ / ﻿48.817°N 2.483°E﻿ / 48.817; 2.483



Authority control



GND: 7503302-1











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_French_Empire&oldid=816319078"					Categories: Former countries in EuropeStates and territories established in 1804States and territories disestablished in 1815First French EmpireFormer countries in French historyFormer empires in EuropeModern history of FranceFrench RevolutionFormer monarchies of EuropeGovernment of France1800s in France1810s in France1804 establishments in France1815 disestablishments in FranceHidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesArticles needing cleanup from October 2012All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from October 2012Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from October 2012Articles needing additional references from October 2012All articles needing additional referencesArticles with multiple maintenance issuesArticles containing French-language textArticles containing explicitly cited English-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Former country articles requiring maintenancePages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parametersWikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2016Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2016Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012Use dmy dates from May 2011Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers