"Indochina War" redirects here. For other uses, see Indochina Wars.





First Indochina War


Part of the Indochina Wars and the Cold War



Clockwise from top: After the fall of Dien Bien Phu supporting Laotian troops fall back across the Mekong River into Laos; French Marine commandos wade ashore off the Annam coast in July 1950; M24 Chaffee American light tank used by French in Vietnam; Geneva Conference in 21 July 1954; A Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat from Escadrille 1F prepares to land on the French carrier Arromanches (R95) operating in the Gulf of Tonkin.





Date
19 December 1946 (1946-12-19) – 1 August 1954 (1954-08-01)
(7 years, 7 months, 1 week and 6 days)


Location
French Indochina, mainly North Vietnam


Result

Viet Minh victory[10][11][12][13]

Vietnam is partitioned between North (controlled by the Viet Minh) and South (controlled by the State of Vietnam)
Geneva Conference
Departure of the French from Indochina
State of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia achieve independence




Territorial
changes
Provisional division of Vietnam





Belligerents



 Viet Minh
 Lao Issara (1945–1949)

 Pathet Lao (1949–1954)[1]

 Khmer Issarak[2]

 United Issarak Front (1950–1954)[3]

 Japanese volunteers

Supported by:[4]
 Soviet Union[5]
 China (1949–1954)[5]
 East Germany[6][7]
 Poland[8]

 France

 French Indochina (1945–1954)

 Cambodia
(1953–1954)
 Laos
(1953–1954)
 State of Vietnam (1949–1954)

Supported by:
 United States[9] (1950–1954)


Commanders and leaders



 Hồ Chí Minh
 Võ Nguyên Giáp
 Phạm Văn Đồng
 Trường Chinh
 Souphanouvong
 Son Ngoc Minh

French Expeditionary Corps

 Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque (1945–1946)
 Jean-Étienne Valluy (1946–1948)
 Roger Blaizot (1948–1949)
 Marcel Carpentier (1949–1950)
 Jean de Lattre de Tassigny (1950–1951)
 Raoul Salan (1952–1953)
 Henri Navarre (1953–1954)

State of Vietnam

 Ngô Đình Diệm
 Bảo Đại




Strength


Viet Minh:
Regulars: 125,000
Regional: 75,000
Popular Forces/Irregulars: 250,000[14]
Former Imperial Japanese Army volunteers: ~5,000[15]
Total: ~450,000
France:
Expeditionary Corps: 190,000
Local Auxiliary: 55,000
State of Vietnam:
150,000[16]
Total: ~450,000


Casualties and losses


Viet Minh:
175,000-300,000 killed[17][18][19][20]
191,605 dead or missing (Vietnamese Government's figure)[21]
French Union:
75,581 dead (20,524 being French)[22][23]
64,127 wounded,
40,000 captured
State of Vietnam:
58,877 dead or missing[24]
Total: ~134,500 dead or missing


400,000-842,707 total killed[25][26][27]
125,000–400,000 civilians killed[28][29][30][31]












v
t
e


Indochina Wars






Masterdom
First
Second

Laotian Civil War
Cambodian Civil War


Third

Cambodian-Vietnamese

Cambodian-Thai border


Sino-Vietnamese

border conflicts




Hmong insurgency
FULRO insurgency against Vietnam












v
t
e


First Indochina War






Masterdom
Haiphong
Hanoi
Cao Bằng
Papillon
Léa
Ceinture
Đông Khê
RC4
Vĩnh Yên
Mạo Khê
Đáy River
1st Nghĩa Lộ
Hòa Bình
2nd Nghĩa Lộ
Lorraine
Nà Sản
Bretagne
Adolphe
Muong Khoua
Hirondelle
Camargue
Brochet
Mouette
Castor
Pollux
Atlante
Điện Biên Phủ
Condor
Mang Yang Pass









The First Indochina War (generally known as the Indochina War in France, and as the Anti-French Resistance War in Vietnam) began in French Indochina on 19 December 1946, and lasted until 1 August 1954. Fighting between French forces and their Viet Minh opponents in the south dated from September 1945. The conflict pitted a range of forces, including the French Union's French Far East Expeditionary Corps, led by France and supported by Emperor Bảo Đại's Vietnamese National Army against the Viet Minh, led by Ho Chi Minh and the People's Army of Vietnam led by Vo Nguyen Giap. Most of the fighting took place in Tonkin in northern Vietnam, although the conflict engulfed the entire country and also extended into the neighboring French Indochina protectorates of Laos and Cambodia.
At the Potsdam Conference in July 1945, the Combined Chiefs of Staff decided that Indochina south of latitude 16° north was to be included in the Southeast Asia Command under British Admiral Mountbatten. Japanese forces located south of that line surrendered to him and those to the north surrendered to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. In September 1945, Chinese forces entered Tonkin and a small British task force landed at Saigon. The Chinese accepted the Vietnamese government under Ho Chi Minh, then in power in Hanoi. The British refused to do likewise in Saigon, and deferred to the French there from the outset, against the ostensible support of the Viet Minh authorities by American OSS representatives. On V-J Day, September 2, Ho Chi Minh had proclaimed in Hanoi the establishment of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). The DRV ruled as the only civil government in all of Vietnam for a period of about 20 days, after the abdication of Emperor Bảo Đại, who had governed under Japanese rule and thus was considered a "Japanese puppet" by the Viet Minh. On 23 September 1945, with the knowledge of the British commander in Saigon, French forces overthrew the local DRV government, and declared French authority restored in Cochinchina. Guerrilla warfare began around Saigon immediately.[32]
The first few years of the war involved a low-level rural insurgency against the French. However, after the Chinese communists reached the northern border of Vietnam in 1949, the conflict turned into a conventional war between two armies equipped with modern weapons supplied by the United States and the Soviet Union.[33] French Union forces included colonial troops from the whole former empire (Moroccan, Algerian, Tunisian, Laotian, Cambodian, and Vietnamese ethnic minorities), French professional troops and units of the French Foreign Legion. The use of metropolitan recruits was forbidden by the government to prevent the war from becoming even more unpopular at home. It was called the "dirty war" (la sale guerre) by leftists in France.[34]
The strategy of pushing the Viet Minh into attacking well-defended bases in remote parts of the country at the end of their logistical trails was validated at the Battle of Nà Sản. However, this base was relatively weak because of a lack of concrete and steel. French efforts were made more difficult due to the limited usefulness of armored tanks in a jungle environment, lack of strong air forces for air cover and carpet bombing, and use of foreign recruits from other French colonies (mainly from Algeria, Morocco and even Vietnam). Võ Nguyên Giáp, however, used efficient and novel tactics of direct fire artillery, convoy ambushes and massed anti-aircraft guns to impede land and air supply deliveries together with a strategy based on recruiting a sizable regular army facilitated by wide popular support, a guerrilla warfare doctrine and instruction developed in China, and the use of simple and reliable war material provided by the Soviet Union. This combination proved fatal for the bases' defenses, culminating in a decisive French defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu.[35]
At the International Geneva Conference on July 21, 1954, the new socialist French government and the Viet Minh made an agreement that was denounced by the State of Vietnam and by the United States, but which effectively gave the Viet Minh control of North Vietnam above the 17th parallel. The south continued under Emperor Bảo Đại. A year later, Bảo Đại would be deposed by his prime minister, Ngô Đình Diệm, creating the Republic of Vietnam. Soon an insurgency, backed by the north, developed against Diệm's government. The conflict gradually escalated into the Vietnam War.



Contents


1 Background

1.1 After the surrender of Japan


2 Rival sides
3 Timeline

3.1 1946
3.2 1947
3.3 1948
3.4 1949
3.5 1950
3.6 1951
3.7 1952
3.8 1953
3.9 1954


4 Geneva Conference and Partition
5 French domestic situation
6 War crimes and re-education camps
7 French Union involvement
8 Foreign involvement

8.1 Japanese volunteers
8.2 China
8.3 Soviet Union
8.4 United States

8.4.1 Mutual Defense Assistance Act (1950–1954)
8.4.2 US Navy assistance (1951–1954)
8.4.3 US Air Force assistance (1952–1954)
8.4.4 Central Intelligence Agency covert operations (1954)
8.4.5 Operation Passage to Freedom (1954)




9 Popular culture
10 See also
11 Notes
12 References
13 Further reading
14 External links



Background[edit]






This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Further information: Vietnam Expedition, Franco-Thai War, Second French Indochina Campaign, Empire of Vietnam, August Revolution, Vietnamese Famine of 1945, Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, French Far East Expeditionary Corps, War in Vietnam (1945–46), 1940–46 in the Vietnam War, and 1947–50 in the Vietnam War




French Indochina (1913)


Vietnam was absorbed into French Indochina in stages between 1858 and 1887. Nationalism grew until World War II provided a break in French control. Early Vietnamese resistance centered on the intellectual Phan Bội Châu. Châu looked to Japan, which had modernized and was one of the few Asian nations to successfully resist European colonization. With Prince Cường Để, Châu started two organizations in Japan, the Duy Tân hội (Modernistic Association) and Vietnam Cong Hien Hoi.
Due to French pressure, Japan deported Phan Bội Châu to China. Witnessing Sun Yat-sen's 1911 nationalist revolution, Châu was inspired to commence the Viet Nam Quang Phục Hội movement in Guangzhou. From 1914 to 1917, he was imprisoned by Yuan Shikai's counterrevolutionary government. In 1925, he was captured by French agents in Shanghai and spirited to Vietnam. Due to his popularity, Châu was spared from execution and placed under house arrest until his death in 1940.
In September 1940, shortly after Phan Bội Châu's death, Japan launched its invasion of French Indochina, mirroring its ally Germany's conquest of metropolitan France. Keeping the French colonial administration, the Japanese ruled from behind the scenes in a parallel of Vichy France. As far as Vietnamese nationalists were concerned, this was a double-puppet government. Emperor Bảo Đại collaborated with the Japanese, just as he had with the French, ensuring his lifestyle could continue.
From October 1940 to May 1941, during the Franco-Thai War, the Vichy French in Indochina were involved with defending their colony in a border conflict which saw the forces of Thailand invade, while the Japanese sat on the sidelines. Thai military successes were limited to the Cambodian border area, and in January 1941 Vichy France's modern naval forces soundly defeated the inferior Thai naval forces in the Battle of Ko Chang. The war ended in May, with the French agreeing to minor territorial revisions which restored formerly Thai areas to Thailand.




Võ Nguyên Giáp and Ho Chi Minh (1945)


In 1941, Ho Chi Minh, seeing communist revolution as the path to freedom, returned to Vietnam and formed the Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh Hoi (League for the Independence of Vietnam), better known as the Viet Minh. Ho created the Viet Minh as an umbrella organization for all the nationalist resistance movements, de-emphasizing his communist social revolutionary background.[citation needed]
During the Vietnamese Famine of 1945, Ho Chi Minh blamed ruthless Japanese exploitation and poor weather for up to two million Vietnamese deaths. The Viet Minh arranged a relief effort in the north, winning wide support there as a result.[citation needed]
In March 1945, Japan launched the Second French Indochina Campaign and ousted the Vichy French and formally installed Emperor Bảo Đại as head of the nominally independent Empire of Vietnam. The Japanese arrested and imprisoned most of the French officials and military officers remaining in the country.
American President Franklin D. Roosevelt and General Joseph Stilwell privately made it clear that France was not to reacquire French Indochina after the war was over. Roosevelt suggested that Chiang Kai-shek place Indochina under Chinese rule; Chiang Kai-shek supposedly replied: "Under no circumstances!"[36] Following Roosevelt's death in April 1945, U.S. resistance to French rule weakened.[37]
After the surrender of Japan[edit]




Japanese troops lay down their arms to British troops in a ceremony in Saigon (1945).






Commander of the C.L.I. (Corps Léger d'Intervention) in Indochina after the surrender of Japan


An armistice was signed between Japan and the United States on August 20, 1945. The Provisional Government of the French Republic wanted to restore its colonial rule in French Indochina as the final step of the Liberation of France.
On August 22, 1945, OSS agents Archimedes Patti and Carleton B. Swift Jr. arrived in Hanoi on a mercy mission to liberate Allied POWs, and were accompanied by French government official Jean Sainteny.[38] The Imperial Japanese Army, being the only force capable of maintaining law and order, remained in power while keeping French colonial troops and Sainteny detained.[39]
Japanese forces allowed the Viet Minh and other nationalist groups to take over public buildings and weapons without resistance, which began the August Revolution. On August 25, Ho Chi Minh was able to persuade Emperor Bảo Đại to abdicate. Bảo Đại was appointed "supreme advisor" to the new Vietminh-led government in Hanoi.
On September 2, aboard the USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay, CEFEO Expeditionary Corps leader General Leclerc signed the armistice with Japan on behalf of France.[citation needed] The same day, Ho Chi Minh declared Vietnam's independence from France. Deliberately borrowing from the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed:

"We hold the truth that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, among them life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."[40]

After their surrender, the Japanese Army gave weapons to the Viet Minh.[citation needed] In order to further help the nationalists, the Japanese kept Vichy French officials and military officers imprisoned for a month after the surrender. OSS officers met repeatedly with Ho Chi Minh and other Viet Minh officers during this period.[41] The Viet Minh had recruited more than 600 Japanese soldiers and given them roles to train or command Vietnamese soldiers.[42][43]
On September 13, 1945, a Franco-British task force landed in Java, main island of the Dutch East Indies (for which independence was being sought by Sukarno), and Saigon, capital of Cochinchina (southern part of French Indochina), both being occupied by the Japanese and ruled by Field Marshal Hisaichi Terauchi, Commander-in-Chief of Japan's Southern Expeditionary Army Group based in Saigon.[44] Allied troops in Saigon were an airborne detachment, two British companies of the Indian 20th Infantry Division and the French 5th Colonial Infantry Regiment, with British General Sir Douglas Gracey as supreme commander. The latter proclaimed martial law on September 21. The following night the Franco-British troops took control of Saigon.[45]
Almost immediately afterward, as agreed to at the Potsdam Conference (and under Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers' "General Order no. One".[46][47]), 200,000 troops of the Chinese 1st Army occupied Indochina as far south as the 16th parallel. They had been sent by Chiang Kai-shek under General Lu Han to accept the surrender of Japanese forces occupying that area, then to supervise the disarming and repatriation of the Japanese Army. This effectively ended Ho Chi Minh's nominal government in Hanoi.[citation needed] Initially, the Chinese kept the French Colonial soldiers interned, with the acquiescence of the Americans.[39] The Chinese used the VNQDĐ, the Vietnamese branch of the Chinese Kuomintang, to increase their influence in Indochina and put pressure on their opponents.[48]




Telegram from Ho Chi Minh to U.S. President Harry S. Truman requesting support for independence (Hanoi, February 28, 1946)


On October 9, 1945, General Leclerc arrived in Saigon, accompanied by French Colonel Massu's March Group (Groupement de marche). Leclerc's primary objectives were to restore public order in south Vietnam and to militarize Tonkin (north Vietnam). Secondary objectives were to wait for French backup in view to take back Chinese-occupied Hanoi, then to negotiate with the Viet Minh officials.[45]
Chiang Kai-shek threatened the French with war in response to manoeuvering by the French and Ho Chi Minh against each other, forcing them to come to a peace agreement. In February 1946, he also forced the French to surrender and renounce all of their concessions and ports in China, such as Shanghai, in exchange for withdrawing from northern Indochina and allowing French troops to reoccupy the region starting in March 1946.[49][50][51][52] Following this agreement, VNQDĐ forces became vulnerable due to the withdrawal of Chinese forces and were attacked by Viet Minh and French troops. The Viet Minh massacred thousands of VNQDD members and other nationalists in a large scale purge.[53][54]
Rival sides[edit]
The British supported the French in fighting the Viet Minh, armed militias from the religious Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo sects and the Bình Xuyên organized crime groups, which were all individually seeking power in the country and fought the Viet Ming as well. The Viet Minh were militarily ineffective in the first few years of the war and could do little more than harass the French in remote areas of Indochina.
The French were backed by the Nung minority while Viet Minh were backed by the Tay minority.[55]
Timeline[edit]
1946[edit]




Ho Chi Minh and Marius Moutet shaking hands after signing modus vivendi 1946 after Fontainebleau Agreements


In early 1946, the French landed a military force at Haiphong. Negotiations took place about the future for Vietnam as a state within the French Union.[citation needed]
Fighting broke out in Haiphong about a conflict of interest in import duty at the port between the Viet Minh government and the French.[56] On November 23, 1946, the French fleet began a naval bombardment of the Vietnamese sections of the city that killed over 6,000 Vietnamese civilians in one afternoon.[57][58][59] The Viet Minh quickly agreed to a cease-fire and left the cities. This is known as the Haiphong incident.
There was never any intention among the Vietnamese to give up, as General Võ Nguyên Giáp soon brought up 30,000 men to attack the city. Although the French were outnumbered, their superior weaponry and naval support made any Viet Minh attack unsuccessful. In December, hostilities between the Viet Minh and the French broke out in Hanoi, and Ho Chi Minh was forced to evacuate the capital in favor of remote mountain areas. Guerrilla warfare ensued, with the French controlling most of the country except far-flung areas.


Play media


"Envoys probe Indo-China rebellion" (January 16, 1947), Universal Newsreel


1947[edit]
In 1947, General Võ Nguyên Giáp retreated his command to Tan Trao deep in the hills of Tuyên Quang Province. The French sent military expeditions to attack his bases, but Giap refused to meet them head-on in battle. Wherever the French troops went, the Viet Minh disappeared. Late in the year the French launched Operation Lea to take out the Viet Minh communications center at Bắc Kạn. They failed to capture Ho Chi Minh and his key lieutenants as intended. The French claimed 9,000 Viet Minh soldiers KIA during the campaign which, if true, would represent a major blow for the insurgency.
1948[edit]
In 1948, France started looking for means of opposing the Viet Minh politically, with an alternative government in Saigon. They began negotiations with the former emperor Bảo Đại to lead an "autonomous" government within the French Union of nations, the State of Vietnam. Two years before, the French had refused Ho's proposal of a similar status, albeit with some restrictions on French power and the latter's eventual withdrawal from Vietnam.
However, they were willing to give it to Bảo Đại as he had freely collaborated with French rule of Vietnam in the past and was in no position to seriously negotiate or impose demands (Bảo Đại had no military of his own, but soon he would have one).
1949[edit]




French Marine commandos wade ashore off the Annam coast


In 1949, France officially recognized the nominal "independence" of the State of Vietnam as an associated state within the French Union under Bảo Đại. However, France still controlled all foreign relations and every defense issue. The Viet Minh quickly denounced the government and stated that they wanted "real independence, not Bảo Đại independence". Within the framework of the French Union, France also granted independence to the other nations in Indochina, the Kingdoms of Laos and Cambodia.
Later, as a concession to the new government and a way to increase their numbers, France agreed to the formation of the Vietnamese National Army commanded by Vietnamese officers. These troops were used mostly to garrison quiet sectors, so French forces would be available for combat. Private armies from the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo religious sects and the Bình Xuyên crime syndicate were used in the same way.
With the triumph of the communists in China's civil war, the Vietnamese communists gained a major political ally on their northern border, supporting them with weapons and supplies. Giap re-organized his local irregular forces into five full conventional infantry divisions, the 304th, 308th, 312th, 316th and the 320th. The war began to intensify when Giap went on the offensive, attacking isolated French bases along the Chinese border.
The United States began to give military aid to France in the form of weaponry and military observers.
1950[edit]




A map of dissident activities in Indochina in 1950


By January 1950, Ho's government gained recognition from China and the Soviet Union. In the same year, the government of Bao Dai gained recognition by the United States and the United Kingdom.
In February, Giap seized the vulnerable 150-strong French garrison at Lai Khê in Tonkin just south of the border with China.
In June, the Korean War broke out between communist North Korea (DPRK) supported by China and the Soviet Union, and South Korea (ROK) supported by the United States and its allies in the UN. The Cold War was turning 'hot' in East Asia, and the American government feared communist domination of the entire region would have deep implications for American interests. The US became strongly opposed to the government of Ho Chi Minh, in part, because it was supported and supplied by China.
Major general Thái attacked Đông Khê on September 15.[60] Đông Khê fell on September 18.
Cao Bằng garrison was then evacuated south, together with the relief force coming from That Khe, were attacked all the way by ambushing Viet Minh forces, which result in a stunning French defeat in the Battle of Route Coloniale 4. The French air-dropped a paratroop battalion south of Cao Bằng to act as diversion only to see it quickly surrounded and destroyed. After that, Lạng Sơn, is evacuted in panic while it wasn't menaced.
By the time the remains of the garrisons reached the safety of the Red River Delta, 4,800 French troops had been killed, captured or missing in action and 2,000 wounded out of a total garrison force of over 10,000. Also lost were 13 artillery pieces, 125 mortars, 450 trucks, 940 machine guns, 1,200 submachine guns and 8,000 rifles destroyed or captured during the fighting. China and the Soviet Union recognized Ho Chi Minh as the legitimate ruler of Vietnam and sent him more and more supplies and material aid. The year 1950 also marked the first time that napalm was ever used in Vietnam (this type of weapon was supplied by the U.S. for the use of the French Aéronavale at the time).
The military situation improved for France when its new commander, General Jean Marie de Lattre de Tassigny, built a fortified line from Hanoi to the Gulf of Tonkin, across the Red River Delta, to hold the Viet Minh in place and use his troops to smash them against this barricade, which became known as the De Lattre Line. This led to a period of success for the French.
1951[edit]




General Trình Minh Thế


On January 13, 1951, Giáp moved the 308th and 312th Divisions, made up of over 20,000 men, to attack Vĩnh Yên, 20 miles (32 km) northwest of Hanoi, which was manned by the 6,000-strong 9th Foreign Legion Brigade. The Viet Minh entered a trap. Caught for the first time in the open and actually forced to fight the French head-on, without the ability to quickly hide and retreat, they were mown down by concentrated French artillery and machine gun fire. By January 16, the Battle of Vĩnh Yên ended as Giáp was forced to withdraw, with over 6,000 of his troops killed, 8,000 wounded and 500 captured.[citation needed]
On March 23, Giáp tried again, launching an attack against Mạo Khê, 20 miles (32 km) north of Haiphong. The 316th Division, composed of 11,000 men, with the partly rebuilt 308th and 312th Divisions in reserve, went forward and were beaten in bitter hand-to-hand fighting against French troops. Giap, having lost over 3,000 (French estimation) / ~500 (Viet Minh information) dead and wounded by March 28, withdrew.
Giáp launched yet another attack, the Battle of the Day River, on May 29 with the 304th Division at Phủ Lý, the 308th Division at Ninh Bình, and the main attack delivered by the 320th Division at Phat Diem south of Hanoi. The attacks fared no better and the three divisions lost heavily. Taking advantage of this, de Lattre mounted his counteroffensive against the demoralized Viet Minh, driving them back into the jungle and eliminating the enemy pockets in the Red River Delta by June 18, costing the Viet Minh over 10,000 killed.[61]
Every effort by Võ Nguyên Giáp to break the De Lattre Line failed, and every attack he made was answered by a French counter-attack that destroyed his forces. Viet Minh casualties rose alarmingly during this period, leading some to question the leadership of the Communist government, even within the party. However, any benefit this may have reaped for France was negated by the increasing domestic opposition to the war in France.
On July 31, French General Charles Chanson was assassinated during a propaganda suicide attack at Sa Đéc in South Vietnam that was blamed on the Viet Minh although it was argued in some quarters that Cao Đài nationalist Trình Minh Thế could have been involved in its planning.
On November 14, 1951, the French seized Hòa Bình, 25 miles (40 km) west of the De Lattre Line, by a parachute drop and extended their perimeter.
1952[edit]




French foreign airborne 1st BEP firing with a FM 24/29 light machine gun during an ambush (1952)


In January, General de Lattre fell ill from cancer and had to return to France for treatment. He died there shortly thereafter and was replaced by General Raoul Salan as the overall commander of French forces in Indochina. Viet Minh launched attacks on Hòa Bình, forcing the French to withdraw back to their main positions on the De Lattre line by February 22, 1952. Each side lost nearly 5,000 men in this campaign, and it showed that the war was far from over.
Throughout the war theater, the Viet Minh cut French supply lines and began to seriously wear down the resolve of the French forces. There were continued raids, skirmishes and guerrilla attacks, but through most of the rest of the year each side withdrew to prepare itself for larger operations. Starting on October 2, the Battle of Nà Sản saw the first use of the French commanders’ "hedgehog" tactics, consisting in setting up well-defended outposts to get the Viet Minh out of the jungle and force them to fight conventional battles instead of using guerrilla tactics.
On October 17, 1952, Giáp launched attacks against the French garrisons along Nghĩa Lộ, northwest of Hanoi, and overran much of the Black River valley, except for the airfield of Nà Sản where a strong French garrison entrenched. Giáp by now had control over most of Tonkin beyond the De Lattre line. Raoul Salan, seeing the situation as critical, launched Operation Lorraine along the Clear River to force Giáp to relieve pressure on the Nghĩa Lộ outposts.
On October 29, 1952, in the largest operation in Indochina to date, 30,000 French Union soldiers moved out from the De Lattre line to attack the Viet Minh supply dumps at Phú Yên. Salan took Phú Thọ on November 5, and Phu Doan on November 9 by a parachute drop, and finally Phú Yên on November 13. Giáp at first did not react to the French offensive. He planned to wait until their supply lines were overextended and then cut them off from the Red River Delta.
Salan correctly guessed what the Viet Minh were up to and cancelled the operation on November 14, beginning to withdraw back to the De Lattre Line. The only major fighting during the operation came during the withdrawal, when the Viet Minh ambushed the French column at Chan Muong on November 17. The road was cleared after a bayonet charge by the Indochinese March Battalion, and the withdrawal could continue. The French lost around 1,200 men during the whole operation, most of them during the Chan Muong ambush. The operation was partially successful, proving that the French could strike out at targets outside the De Lattre Line. However, it failed to divert the Viet Minh offensive or seriously damage its logistical network.
1953[edit]




A Bearcat naval fighter aircraft of the Aéronavale drops napalm on Viet Minh Division 320th's artillery during Operation Mouette (November 1953)


On April 9, 1953, Giáp, after having failed repeatedly in direct attacks on French positions in Vietnam, changed strategy and began to pressure the French by invading Laos, surrounding and defeating several French outposts such as Muong Khoua. In May, General Henri Navarre replaced Salan as supreme commander of French forces in Indochina. He reported to the French government "... that there was no possibility of winning the war in Indo-China," saying that the best the French could hope for was a stalemate.
Navarre, in response to the Viet Minh attacking Laos, concluded that "hedgehog" centers of defense were the best plan. Looking at a map of the area, Navarre chose the small town of Điện Biên Phủ, located about 10 miles (16 km) north of the Lao border and 175 miles (282 km) west of Hanoi as a target to block the Viet Minh from invading Laos. Điện Biên Phủ had a number of advantages: it was on a Viet Minh supply route into Laos on the Nam Yum River, it had an old airstrip for supply, and it was situated in the Tai hills where the Tai tribesmen, still loyal to the French, operated.
Operation Castor was launched on November 20, 1953, with 1,800 men of the French 1st and 2nd Airborne Battalions dropping into the valley of Điện Biên Phủ and sweeping aside the local Viet Minh garrison. The paratroopers gained control of a heart-shaped valley 12 miles (19 km) long and 8 miles (13 km) wide surrounded by heavily wooded hills. Encountering little opposition, the French and Tai units operating from Lai Châu to the north patrolled the hills.
The operation was a tactical success for the French. However, Giáp, seeing the weakness of the French position, started moving most of his forces from the De Lattre line to Điện Biên Phủ. By mid-December, most of the French and Tai patrols in the hills around the town were wiped out by Viet Minh ambushes.[citation needed] The fight for control of this position would be the longest and hardest battle for the French Far East Expeditionary Corps and would be remembered by the veterans as "57 Days of Hell".
1954[edit]




Map of the war in 1954. Orange = Areas under Viet Minh control. Purple = Areas under French control. White-dotted hatch = Areas of Viet Minh guerilla encampment and fighting.






Franco-Vietnamese medics treating a wounded Viet Minh POW at Hưng Yên (1954)


By 1954, despite official propaganda presenting the war as a "crusade against communism",[62][63] the war in Indochina was still growing unpopular with the French public. The political stagnation of the Fourth Republic meant that France was unable to extract itself from the conflict.
The Battle of Dien Bien Phu occurred in 1954 between Viet Minh forces under Võ Nguyên Giáp, supported by China and the Soviet Union, and the French Union's French Far East Expeditionary Corps, supported by US financing and Indochinese allies. The battle was fought near the village of Điện Biên Phủ in northern Vietnam and became the last major battle between the French and the Vietnamese in the First Indochina War.
The battle began on March 13 when a preemptive Viet Minh attack surprised the French with heavy artillery. The artillery damaged both the main and secondary airfields that the French were using to fly in supplies. The only road into Điện Biên Phủ, already difficult to traverse, was also knocked out by Viet Minh forces.[citation needed] With French supply lines interrupted, the French position became untenable, particularly when the advent of the monsoon season made dropping supplies and reinforcements by parachute difficult. With defeat imminent, the French sought to hold on until the opening of the Geneva peace meeting on April 26. The last French offensive took place on May 4, but it was ineffective. The Viet Minh then began to hammer the outpost with newly supplied Soviet Katyusha rockets and other weaponry provided by communist allies.[citation needed]
The final fall took two days, May 6 and 7, during which the French fought on but were eventually overrun by a huge frontal assault. General Cogny, based in Hanoi, ordered General de Castries, who was commanding the outpost, to cease fire at 5:30 pm and to destroy all materiél (weapons, transmissions, etc.) to deny their use to the enemy. A formal order was given to not use the white flag so that the action would be considered a ceasefire instead of a surrender. Much of the fighting ended on May 7; however, the ceasefire was not respected on Isabelle, the isolated southern position, where the battle lasted until May 8, 1:00 am.[64]
At least 2,200 members of the 20,000-strong French forces died, and another 1,729 were reported missing after the battle, and 11,721 were captured. Of the 50,000 or so Vietnamese soldiers thought to be involved, there were an estimated 4,800 to 8,000 killed and another 9,000–15,000 wounded.[citation needed] The prisoners taken at Điện Biên Phủ were the greatest number the Viet Minh had ever captured: one-third of the total captured during the entire war.
One month after Điện Biên Phủ, the composite Groupe Mobile 100 (GM100) of the French Union forces evacuated the An Khê outpost and was ambushed by a larger Viet Minh force at the Battle of Mang Yang Pass from June 24 to July 17. At the same time, Giap launched some offensives against the delta, but they all failed.[citation needed] The Viet Minh victory at Điện Biên Phủ heavily influenced the outcome of the 1954 Geneva accords that took place on July 21. In August Operation Passage to Freedom began, consisting of the evacuation of Catholic and loyalist Vietnamese civilians from communist North Vietnamese persecution.
Geneva Conference and Partition[edit]
Further information: Geneva Conference (1954) and Partition of Vietnam




The 1954 Geneva Conference


Negotiations between France and the Viet Minh started in Geneva in April 1954 at the Geneva Conference, during which time the French Union and the Viet Minh were fighting a battle at Điện Biên Phủ. In France, Pierre Mendès France, opponent of the war since 1950, had been invested as Prime Minister on June 17, 1954, on a promise to put an end to the war, reaching a ceasefire in four months:

"Today it seems we can be reunited in a will for peace that may express the aspirations of our country ... Since already several years, a compromise peace, a peace negotiated with the opponent seemed to me commanded by the facts, while it commanded, in return, to put back in order our finances, the recovery of our economy and its expansion. Because this war placed on our country an unbearable burden. And here appears today a new and formidable threat: if the Indochina conflict is not resolved — and settled very fast — it is the risk of war, of international war and maybe atomic, that we must foresee. It is because I wanted a better peace that I wanted it earlier, when we had more assets. But even now there is some renouncings or abandons that the situation does not comprise. France does not have to accept and will not accept settlement which would be incompatible with its more vital interests [applauding on certain seats of the Assembly on the left and at the extreme right]. France will remain present in Far-Orient. Neither our allies, nor our opponents must conserve the least doubt on the signification of our determination. A negotiation has been engaged in Geneva ... I have longly studied the report ... consulted the most qualified military and diplomatic experts. My conviction that a pacific settlement of the conflict is possible has been confirmed. A "cease-fire" must henceforth intervene quickly. The government which I will form will fix itself — and will fix to its opponents — a delay of 4 weeks to reach it. We are today on 17th of June. I will present myself before you before the 20th of July ... If no satisfying solution has been reached at this date, you will be freed from the contract which would have tied us together, and my government will give its dismissal to the President of the Republic."[65]

The Geneva Conference on July 21, 1954, recognized the 17th parallel north as a "provisional military demarcation line," temporarily dividing the country into two zones, communist North Vietnam and pro-Western South Vietnam.




Student demonstration in Saigon, July 1964, observing the tenth anniversary of the July 1954 Geneva Agreements


The Geneva Accords promised elections in 1956 to determine a national government for a united Vietnam. Neither the United States government nor Ngo Dinh Diem's State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference. With respect to the question of reunification, the non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost out when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Pham Van Dong,[66] who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of "local commissions".[67] The United States countered with what became known as the "American Plan", with the support of South Vietnam and the United Kingdom.[68] It provided for unification elections under the supervision of the United Nations, but was rejected by the Soviet delegation.[68] From his home in France, Emperor Bảo Đại appointed Ngô Đình Diệm as Prime Minister of South Vietnam. With American support, in 1955 Diem used a referendum to remove the former Emperor and declare himself the president of the Republic of Vietnam.
When the elections failed to occur, Viet Minh cadres who stayed behind in South Vietnam were activated and started to fight the government. North Vietnam also invaded and occupied portions of Laos to assist in supplying the National Liberation Front guerillas fighting in South Vietnam. The war gradually escalated into the Second Indochina War, more commonly known as the Vietnam War in the West and the American War in Vietnam.
French domestic situation[edit]
The 1946 Constitution creating the Fourth Republic (1946–1958) made France a Parliamentary republic. Because of the political context, it could find stability only by an alliance between the three dominant parties: the Christian Democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP), the French Communist Party (PCF) and the socialist French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO). Known as tripartisme, this alliance briefly lasted until the May 1947 crisis, with the expulsion from Paul Ramadier's SFIO government of the PCF ministers, marking the official start of the Cold War in France. This had the effect of weakening the regime, with the two most significant movements of this period, Communism and Gaullism, in opposition.
Unlikely alliances had to be made between left- and right-wing parties in order to form a government invested by the National Assembly, resulting in parliamentary instability, with fourteen prime ministers in succession between 1947 and 1954's Battle of Dien Bien Phu. The rapid turnover of governments (there were 17 different governments during the war) left France unable to prosecute the war with any consistent policy, according to veteran General René de Biré (who was a lieutenant at Dien Bien Phu).[69] France was increasingly unable to afford the costly conflict in Indochina and, by 1954, the United States was paying 80% of France's war effort, which was $3,000,000 per day in 1952.[70][71]
A strong anti-war movement came into existence in France driven mostly by the then-powerful French Communist Party (outpowering the socialists) and its young militant associations, major trade unions such as the General Confederation of Labour, and notable leftist intellectuals.[72][73] The first occurrence was probably at the National Assembly on March 21, 1947, when the communist deputees refused to back the military credits for Indochina. The following year a pacifist event was organized, the "1st Worldwide Congress of Peace Partisans" (1er Congrès Mondial des Partisans de la Paix, the World Peace Council's predecessor), which took place March 25–28, 1948, in Paris, with the French communist Nobel laureate atomic physicist Frédéric Joliot-Curie as president. Later, on April 28, 1950, Joliot-Curie would be dismissed from the military and civilian Atomic Energy Commission for political reasons.[74]
Young communist militants (UJRF) were also accused of sabotage actions like the famous Henri Martin affair and the case of Raymonde Dien, who was jailed one year for having blocked an ammunition train, with the help of other militants, in order to prevent the supply of French forces in Indochina in February 1950.[69][72] Similar actions against trains occurred in Roanne, Charleville, Marseille, and Paris. Even ammunition sabotage by PCF agents has been reported, such as grenades exploding in the hands of legionaries.[69] These actions became such a cause for concern by 1950 that the French Assembly voted a law against sabotage between March 2–8. At this session tension was so high between politicians that fighting ensued in the assembly following communist deputees’ speeches against the Indochinese policy.[74] This month saw the French navy mariner and communist militant Henri Martin arrested by military police and jailed for five years for sabotage and propaganda operations in Toulon's arsenal. On May 5 communist Ministers were dismissed from the government, marking the end of Tripartism.[74] A few months later on November 11, 1950, the French Communist Party leader Maurice Thorez went to Moscow.
Some military officers involved in the Revers Report scandal (Rapport Revers) such as Salan were pessimistic about the way the war was being conducted,[75] with multiple political-military scandals all happening during the war, starting with the Generals' Affair (Affaire des Généraux) from September 1949 to November 1950. As a result, General Georges Revers was dismissed in December 1949 and socialist Defense Ministry Jules Moch (SFIO) was brought on court by the National Assembly on November 28, 1950. Emerging media played their role.[clarification needed] The scandal started the commercial success of the first French news magazine, L'Express, created in 1953.[76] The third scandal was financial-political, concerning military corruption, money and arms trading involving both the French Union army and the Viet Minh, known as the Piastres affair. The war ended in 1954 but its sequel started in French Algeria where the French Communist Party played an even stronger role by supplying the National Liberation Front (FLN) rebels with intelligence documents and financial aid. They were called "the suitcase carriers" (les porteurs de valises).
In the French news, the Indochina War was presented as a direct continuation of the Korean War, where France had fought: a UN French battalion, incorporated in a U.S. unit in Korea, was later involved in the Battle of Mang Yang Pass of June and July 1954.[62] In an interview taped in May 2004, General Marcel Bigeard (6th BPC) argues that "one of the deepest mistakes done by the French during the war was the propaganda telling you are fighting for Freedom, you are fighting against Communism",[63] hence the sacrifice of volunteers during the climactic battle of Dien Bien Phu. In the latest days of the siege, 652 non-paratrooper soldiers from all army corps from cavalry to infantry to artillery dropped for the first and last time of their life to support their comrades. The Cold War excuse was later used by General Maurice Challe through his famous "Do you want Mers El Kébir and Algiers to become Soviet bases as soon as tomorrow?", during the Generals' putsch (Algerian War) of 1961, with limited effect though.[77]
A few hours after the French Union defeat at Dien Bien Phu in May 1954, United States Secretary of State John Foster Dulles made an official speech depicting the "tragic event" and "its defense for fifty seven days and nights will remain in History as one of the most heroic of all time." Later on, he denounced Chinese aid to the Viet Minh, explained that the United States could not act openly because of international pressure, and concluded with the call to "all concerned nations" concerning the necessity of "a collective defense" against "the communist aggression".[4]
War crimes and re-education camps[edit]

The Boudarel Affair. Georges Boudarel was a French communist militant who used brainwashing and torture against French Union POWs in Viet Minh reeducation camps.[78] The French national association of POWs brought Boudarel to court for a war crime charge. Most of the French Union prisoners died in the Viet Minh camps and many POWs from the Vietnamese National Army were missing.
Passage to Freedom was a Franco-American operation to evacuate refugees. Loyal Indochinese evacuated to metropolitan France were kept in detention camps.[79]
In 1957, the French Chief of Staff with Raoul Salan would use the POWs’ experience with the Viet Minh reeducation camps to create two "Instruction Center for Pacification and Counter-Insurgency" (Centre d'Instruction à la Pacification et à la Contre-Guérilla aka CIPCG) and train thousands of officers during the Algerian War.
According to Arthur J. Dommen, the Viet Minh assassinated between 100,000 and 150,000 civilians during the war; total civilian deaths are estimated at 400,000.[31][80]
The French Army tortured Viet Minh prisoners[81]
Cat Bay Massacre, 311 Vietnamese civilians were killed by the French Army[82]
Cau Hoa Massacre, 286 Vietnamese civilians were killed by the French Army[83]

French Union involvement[edit]
Further information: French Union
By 1946, France headed the French Union. As successive governments had forbidden the sending of metropolitan troops, the French Far East Expeditionary Corps (CEFEO) was created in March 1945. The Union gathered combatants from almost all French territories made of colonies, protectorates and associated states (Madagascar, Senegal, Tunisia, etc.) to fight in French Indochina, which was then occupied by the Japanese. About 325,000 of the 500,000 French troops were Indochinese, almost all of whom were used in conventional units.[84]
French West Africa (Afrique Occidentale Française, AOF) was a federation of African colonies. Senegalese and other African troops were sent to fight in Indochina. Some African alumni were trained in the Infantry Instruction Center no.2 (Centre d'Instruction de l'Infanterie no.2) located in southern Vietnam. Senegalese of the Colonial Artillery fought at the siege of Dien Bien Phu. As a French colony (later a full province), French Algeria sent local troops to Indochina including several RTA (Régiment de Tirailleurs Algériens) light infantry battalions. Morocco was a French protectorate and sent troops to support the French effort in Indochina. Moroccan troops were part of light infantry RTMs (Régiment de Tirailleurs Marocains) for the "Moroccan Sharpshooters Regiment".




French Foreign Legion patrol question a suspected member of the Viet Minh.


As a French protectorate, Bizerte, Tunisia, was a major French base. Tunisian troops, mostly RTT (Régiment de Tirailleurs Tunisiens), were sent to Indochina. Part of French Indochina, then part of the French Union and later an associated state, Laos fought the communists along with French forces. The role played by Laotian troops in the conflict was depicted by veteran Pierre Schoendoerffer's famous 317th Platoon released in 1964.[85] The French Indochina state of Cambodia played a significant role during the Indochina War through its infantrymen and paratroopers.[citation needed]
While Bảo Đại's State of Vietnam (formerly Annam, Tonkin, Cochinchina) had the Vietnamese National Army supporting the French forces, some minorities were trained and organized as regular battalions (mostly infantry tirailleurs) that fought with French forces against the Viet Minh. The Tai Battalion 2 (BT2, 2e Bataillon Thai) is infamous for its desertion during the siege of Dien Bien Phu. Propaganda leaflets written in Tai and French sent by the Viet Minh were found in the deserted positions and trenches. Such deserters were called the Nam Yum rats by Bigeard during the siege, as they hid close to the Nam Yum river during the day and searched at night for supply drops.[86] Another allied minority was the Muong people (Mường). The 1st Muong Battalion (1er Bataillon Muong) was awarded the Croix de guerre des théâtres d'opérations extérieures after the victorious Battle of Vinh Yen in 1951.[87]
In the 1950s, the French established secret commando groups based on loyal Montagnard ethnic minorities referred to as "partisans" or "maquisards", called the Groupement de Commandos Mixtes Aéroportés (Composite Airborne Commando Group or GCMA), later renamed Groupement Mixte d'Intervention (GMI, or Mixed Intervention Group), directed by the SDECE counter-intelligence service. The SDECE's "Service Action" GCMA used both commando and guerrilla techniques and operated in intelligence and secret missions from 1950 to 1955.[88][89] Declassified information about the GCMA includes the name of its commander, famous Colonel Roger Trinquier, and a mission on April 30, 1954, when Jedburgh veteran Captain Sassi led the Meo partisans of the GCMA Malo-Servan in Operation Condor during the siege of Dien Bien Phu.[90]
In 1951, Adjutant-Chief Vandenberghe from the 6th Colonial Infantry Regiment (6e RIC) created the "Commando Vanden" (aka "Black Tigers", aka "North Vietnam Commando #24") based in Nam Định. Recruits were volunteers from the Thổ people, Nùng people and Miao people. This commando unit wore Viet Minh black uniforms to confuse the enemy and used techniques of the experienced Bo doi (Bộ đội, regular army) and Du Kich (guerrilla unit). Viet Minh prisoners were recruited in POW camps. The commando was awarded the Croix de guerre des TOE with palm in July 1951; however, Vandenberghe was betrayed by a Viet Minh recruit, commander Nguien Tinh Khoi (308th Division's 56th Regiment), who assassinated him (and his Vietnamese fiancée) with external help on the night of January 5, 1952.[91][92][93] Coolies and POWs known as PIM (Prisonniers Internés Militaires, which is basically the same as POW) were civilians used by the army as logistical support personnel. During the battle of Dien Bien Phu, coolies were in charge of burying the corpses—during the first days only, after they were abandoned, hence giving off a terrible smell, according to veterans—and they had the dangerous job of gathering supply packets delivered in drop zones while the Viet Minh artillery was firing hard to destroy the crates. The Viet Minh also used thousands of coolies to carry the Chu-Luc (regional units) supplies and ammunition during assaults. The PIM were civilian males old enough to join Bảo Đại's army. They were captured in enemy-controlled villages, and those who refused to join the State of Vietnam's army were considered prisoners or used as coolies to support a given regiment.[94]
Foreign involvement[edit]
Japanese volunteers[edit]
Further information: Japanese holdout
Many former Imperial Japanese Army soldiers fought with the Viet Minh - perhaps as many as 5,000 volunteered their services throughout the war. These Japanese stayed behind in Indochina soon after World War II concluded in 1945 out of a peak number of 50,000 - the majority of which were repatriated to Japan by the then occupying British.[95] For those that stayed behind, fighting with the Viet Minh became a more attractive idea than returning to a defeated and occupied homeland. In addition the Viet Minh had very little experience in warfare or government so the advice of the Japanese was welcome. Some of the Japanese were ex-Kenpeitai who were wanted for questioning by Allied authorities. Giap arranged for them all to receive Vietnamese citizenship and false identification papers.[95] Some Japanese were captured by the Viet Minh during the last months of the war and were recruited in to their ranks.
Most of the Japanese officers who stayed served as military instructors for the Viet Minh forces, most notably at the Quang Ngai Army Academy.[96] There were necessary conventional military knowledge such as how to conduct assaults, night attacks, company/battalion level exercises, commanding, tactics, navigation, communications and movements. A few, however, actively led Vietnamese forces into combat.[96] The French also identified eleven Japanese nurses and two doctors working for the Viet Minh in northern Vietnam in 1951. A number of Japanese are remembered at the Yasukuni Shrine as a result of the First Indochina War.[97]
China[edit]




China supplied the Viet Minh with hundreds of Soviet-built GAZ-51 trucks in the 1950s.


One point that the French had a major problem with was the concept of sanctuary. As long as the revolutionaries who are fighting a guerilla war have a sanctuary, in which they can hide out, recoup after losses, and store supplies, it is almost impossible for any foreign enemy to ever destroy them.[citation needed] In the early 1950s, southern China was used as a sanctuary by Viet Minh guerrillas. Several hit and run ambushes were successfully operated against French Union convoys along the neighboring Route Coloniale 4 (RC 4), which was a major supply way in Tonkin (northern Vietnam). One of the most famous attacks of this kind was the battle of Cao Bằng.
China supplied the Viet Minh guerrillas with food (thousands of tons of rice), money, medics, arms, ammunition, artillery (24 guns were used at Dien Bien Phu) and other military equipment, including a large part of materials captured from Chiang Kai-shek's National Revolutionary Army during the Chinese Civil War. Evidences of the Chinese secret aid were found in caves during Operation Hirondelle in July 1953.[98][99] 2,000 Chinese and Soviet Union military advisors trained the Viet Minh guerrilla force to turn it into a full range army.[69] On top of this China, sent two artillery battalions at the siege of Dien Bien Phu on May 6, 1954. One operated 12 x 6 Katyusha rockets[100]
China and the Soviet Union were the first nations to recognize Ho Chi Minh government.
Soviet Union[edit]
The Soviet Union was the other ally of the Viet Minh, supplying GAZ trucks, truck engines, fuel, tires, arms (thousands of Skoda light machine guns), all kind of ammunitions, anti-aircraft guns (4 x 37 mm type) and cigarettes. During Operation Hirondelle, the French Union paratroopers captured and destroyed tons of Soviet supplies in the Ky Lua area.[98][101] According to General Giap, the Viet Minh used 400 GAZ-51 soviet-built trucks at the battle of Dien Bien Phu. Because the trucks were using highly effective camouflage, the French Union reconnaissance planes were not able to notice them. On May 6, 1954, during the siege, Katyusha were successfully used against the outpost. Together with China, the Soviet Union sent 2,000 military advisors to train the Viet Minh and turn it into a fully organized army.[69]
United States[edit]
Mutual Defense Assistance Act (1950–1954)[edit]




Anti-communist Vietnamese refugees moving from a French LSM landing ship to the USS Montague during Operation Passage to Freedom in 1954


At the beginning of the war, the U.S. was neutral in the conflict because of opposition to European colonialism, because the Viet Minh had recently been their allies, and because most of its attention was focused on Europe where Winston Churchill argued an Iron Curtain had fallen.
Then the U.S. government gradually began supporting the French in their war effort, primarily through the Mutual Defense Assistance Act, as a means of stabilizing the French Fourth Republic in which the French Communist Party was a significant political force. A dramatic shift occurred in American policy after the victory of Mao Zedong's Communist Party of China in the Chinese Civil War. By 1949, however, the United States became concerned about the spread of communism in Asia, particularly following the end of the Chinese Civil War, and began to strongly support the French as the two countries were bound by the Cold War Mutual Defense Programme.[102]
After the Moch–Marshall meeting of September 23, 1950, in Washington, the United States started to support the French Union effort politically, logistically and financially. Officially, US involvement did not include use of armed force. However, recently it has been discovered that undercover (CAT)—or not—US Air Force pilots flew to support the French during Operation Castor in November 1953. Two US pilots were killed in action during the siege at Dien Bien Phu the following year. These facts were declassified and made public more than 50 years after the events, in 2005 during the Légion d'honneur award ceremony by the French ambassador in Washington.[103]
In May 1950, after the capture of Hainan island by Chinese communist forces, U.S. President Harry S. Truman began covertly authorizing direct financial assistance to the French, and on June 27, 1950, after the outbreak of the Korean War, announced publicly that the U.S. was doing so. It was feared in Washington that if Ho were to win the war, with his ties to the Soviet Union, he would establish a puppet state with Moscow with the Soviets ultimately controlling Vietnamese affairs. The prospect of a communist-dominated Southeast Asia was enough to spur the U.S. to support France, so that the spread of Soviet-allied communism could be contained.
On June 30, 1950, the first U.S. supplies for Indochina were delivered. In September, Truman sent the Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) to Indochina to assist the French. Later, in 1954, U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower explained the escalation risk, introducing what he referred to as the "domino principle", which eventually became the concept of domino theory. During the Korean War, the conflict in Vietnam was also seen as part of a broader proxy war with China and the USSR in Asia.
US Navy assistance (1951–1954)[edit]




Bois Belleau (aka USS Belleau Wood) transferred to France in 1953


The USS Windham Bay delivered Grumman F8F Bearcat fighter aircraft to Saigon on January 26, 1951.[104]
On March 2 of that year, the United States Navy transferred the USS Agenor (ARL-3) (LST 490) to the French Navy in Indochina in accordance with the MAAG-led MAP. Renamed RFS Vulcain (A-656), she was used in Operation Hirondelle in 1953. The USS Sitkoh Bay carrier delivered Grumman F8F Bearcat aircraft to Saigon on March 26, 1951. During September 1953, the USS Belleau Wood (renamed Bois Belleau) was lent to France and sent to French Indochina to replace the Arromanches. She was used to support delta defenders in the Hạ Long Bay operation in May 1954. In August, she joined the Franco-American evacuation operation called "Passage to Freedom".
The same month, the United States delivered additional aircraft, again using the USS Windham Bay.[105] On April 18, 1954, during the siege of Dien Bien Phu, the USS Saipan delivered 25 Korean War AU-1 Corsair aircraft for use by the French Aeronavale in supporting the besieged garrison.
US Air Force assistance (1952–1954)[edit]




A 1952 F4U-7 Corsair of the 14.F flotilla who fought at Dien Bien Phu


A total of 94 F4U-7s were built for the Aéronavale in 1952, with the last of the batch, the final Corsair built, rolled out in December 1952. The F4U-7s were actually purchased by the U.S. Navy and passed on to the Aéronavale through the U.S. Military Assistance Program (MAP). They were supplemented by 25 ex-U.S.MC AU-1s (previously used in the Korean War) and moved from Yokosuka, Japan, to Tourane Air Base (Da Nang), Vietnam, in April 1952. US Air Force assistance followed in November 1953 when the French commander in Indochina, General Henri Navarre, asked General Chester E. McCarty, commander of the Combat Cargo Division, for 12 Fairchild C-119s for Operation Castor at Dien Bien Phu. The USAF also provided C-124 Globemasters to transport French paratroop reinforcements to Indochina.
Under the codename Project Swivel Chair,[106] on March 3, 1954, twelve C-119s of the 483rd Troop Carrier Wing ("Packet Rats") based at Ashiya, Japan, were painted with France's insignia and loaned to France with 24 CIA pilots for short-term use. Maintenance was carried out by the US Air Force and airlift operations were commanded by McCarty.[103]
Central Intelligence Agency covert operations (1954)[edit]




French-marked USAF C-119 flown by CIA pilots over Dien Bien Phu in 1954


Twenty four Central Intelligence Agency (Civil Air Transport) pilots supplied the French Union garrison during the siege of Dien Bien Phu by airlifting paratroopers, ammunition, artillery pieces, tons of barbed wire, medics and other military materiel. With the reducing Drop zone areas, night operations and anti-aircraft artillery assaults, many of the "packets" fell into Viet Minh hands. The 37 CIA pilots completed 682 airdrops under anti-aircraft fire between March 13 and May 6. Two CAT pilots, Wallace Bufford and James B. McGovern, Jr. were killed in action when their Fairchild C-119 Flying Boxcar was shot down on May 6, 1954.[103] On February 25, 2005, the French ambassador to the United States, Jean-David Levitte, awarded the seven remaining CIA pilots the Légion d'honneur.[103]
Operation Passage to Freedom (1954)[edit]
Main article: Operation Passage to Freedom
In August 1954, in support to the French navy and the merchant navy, the U.S. Navy launched Operation Passage to Freedom and sent hundreds of ships, including USS Montague, in order to evacuate non-communist—especially Catholic—Vietnamese refugees from North Vietnam following the July 20, 1954, armistice and partition of Vietnam. Up to 1 million Vietnamese civilians were transported from North to South during this period,[107] with around one tenth of that number moving in the opposite direction.
Popular culture[edit]




French Indochina medal, law of August 1, 1953


Although a kind of taboo in France, "the dirty war" has been featured in various films, books and songs. Since its declassification in the 2000s, television documentaries have been released using new perspectives about the U.S. covert involvement and open critics about the French propaganda used during wartime.
The famous Communist propagandist Roman Karmen was in charge of the media exploitation of the battle of Dien Bien Phu. In his documentary, Vietnam (Вьетнам, 1955), he staged the famous scene with the raising of the Viet Minh flag over de Castries' bunker which is similar to the one he staged over the Berlin Reichstag roof during World War II (Берлин, 1945) and the "S"-shaped POW column marching after the battle, where he used the same optical technique he experimented with before when he staged the German prisoners after the Siege of Leningrad (Ленинград в борьбе, 1942) and the Battle of Moscow (Разгром немецких войск под Москвой, 1942).[108][109]
Hollywood made a film about Dien Bien Phu in 1955, Jump into Hell, directed by David Butler and scripted by Irving Wallace, before his fame as a bestselling novelist. Hollywood also made several films about the war, Robert Florey's Rogues' Regiment (1948). Samuel Fuller's China Gate (1957). and James Clavell's Five Gates to Hell (1959).
The first French movie about the war, Shock Patrol (Patrouille de Choc) aka Patrol Without Hope (Patrouille Sans Espoir) by Claude Bernard-Aubert, came out in 1956. The French censor cut some violent scenes and made the director change the end of his movie which was seen as "too pessismistic".[110] Léo Joannon's film Fort du Fou (Fort of the Mad) /Outpost in Indochina was released in 1963. Another film was The 317th Platoon (La 317ème Section) was released in 1964, it was directed by Indochina War (and siege of Dien Bien Phu) veteran Pierre Schoendoerffer. Schoendoerffer has since become a media specialist about the Indochina War and has focused his production on realistic war movies. He was cameraman for the army ("Cinematographic Service of the Armies", SCA) during his duty time; moreover, as he had covered the Vietnam War he released The Anderson Platoon, which won the Academy Award for Documentary Feature.
Graham Greene's novel The Quiet American takes place during this war.
A Vietnamese software developer made a videogame called 7554 after the date of Battle of Dien Bien Phu to commemorate the First Indochina War from the Vietnamese point of view.
See also[edit]

Hélie Denoix de Saint Marc
Japanese invasion of French Indochina
Franco-Thai War
Japanese coup d'état in French Indochina
Indochina Wars
North Vietnamese invasion of Laos
Second Indochina War
Third Indochina War
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Pathet Lao
United Issarak Front

Notes[edit]






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





^ Jacques Dalloz, La Guerre d'Indochine 1945–1954, Seuil, Paris, 1987, pp. 129–130, 206
^ Jacques Dalloz (1987). La Guerre d'Indochine 1945–1954. Paris: Seuil. pp. 129–130. 
^ Kiernan, Ben. How Pol Pot Came to Power. London: Verso, 1985. p. 80
^ a b henrisalvador. "John Foster Dulles on the fall of Dien Bien Phu". Dailymotion. Retrieved August 19, 2015. 
^ a b "Viện trợ của Trung Quốc đối với cuộc kháng chiến chống Pháp của Việt Nam". Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved August 19, 2015. 
^ http://geb.uni-giessen.de/geb/volltexte/2013/9311/pdf/DaoDucThuan_2013_02_05.pdf
^ "East Germany – The National People's Army and the Third World". 
^ Radvanyi, Janos (1980). "Vietnam War Diplomacy: Reflections of a Former Iron Curtain Official" (PDF). Paramaters: Journal of the US Army War College. Carlise Barracks, Pennsylvania. 10 (3): 8–15.
^ "CNN.com – France honors CIA pilots – Feb 28, 2005". Retrieved August 19, 2015. 
^ Lee Lanning, Michael (2008). Inside the VC and the NVA. : Texas A&M University Press. p. 119. ISBN 978-1-60344-059-2. 
^ Crozier, Brian (2005). Political Victory: The Elusive Prize Of Military Wars. Transaction. p. 47. ISBN 978-0-7658-0290-3. 
^ Fall, Street Without Joy, p. 63.
^ Logevall, Fredrik (2012). Embers of War: the fall of an empire and the making of America's Vietnam. Random House. pp. 596–9. ISBN 978-0-375-75647-4. 
^ Windrow 1998, p. 23
^ Ford, Dan. "Japanese soldiers with the Viet Minh". 
^ Windrow, Martin (1998). The French Indochina War 1946–1954 (Men-At-Arms, 322). London: Osprey Publishing. p. 11. ISBN 1-85532-789-9. 
^ Fall, Bernard, The Two Vietnams (1963)
^ Eckhardt, William, in World Military and Social Expenditures 1987-88 (12th ed., 1987) by Ruth Leger Sivard.
^ Clodfelter, Michael, Vietnam in Military Statistics (1995)
^ Stanley Kutler: Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War (1996)
^ Chuyên đề 4 CÔNG TÁC TÌM KIẾM, QUY TẬP HÀI CỐT LIỆT SĨ TỪ NAY ĐẾN NĂM 2020 VÀ NHỮNG NĂM TIẾP THEO, datafile.chinhsachquandoi.gov.vn/Quản%20lý%20chỉ%20đạo/Chuyên%20đề%204.doc
^ Pierre Vermeren (2015). Le Choc des décolonisations: De la guerre d’Algérie aux printemps arabes. Éditions Odile Jacob. p. 16. ISBN 978-2-7381-6477-3. 
^ [1]
^ Dommen, Arthur J. (2001), The Indochinese Experience of the French and the Americans, Indiana University Press, pg. 252
^ T. Lomperis, From People's War to People's Rule (1996)
^ Clodfelter, Michael, Vietnam in Military Statistics (1995)
^ S. Karnow, Vietnam : a History (1983)
^ Clodfelter, Michael, Vietnam in Military Statistics (1995)
^ Smedberg, M (2008), Vietnamkrigen: 1880–1980. Historiska Media, p. 88
^ Eckhardt, William, in World Military and Social Expenditures 1987–88 (12th ed., 1987) by Ruth Leger Sivard.
^ a b Dommen, Arthur J. (2001), The Indochinese Experience of the French and the Americans, Indiana University Press, pg. 252.
^ s:Page:Pentagon-Papers-Part I.djvu/30
^ Fall, Street Without Joy, p. 17.
^ Edward Rice-Maximin, Accommodation and Resistance: The French Left, Indochina, and the Cold War, 1944–1954 (Greenwood, 1986).
^ Flitton, Dave. "Battlefield Vietnam – Dien Bien Phu, the legacy". Public Broadcasting System PBS. Retrieved 29 July 2015. 
^ Barbara Wertheim Tuchman (1985). The march of folly: from Troy to Vietnam. Random House, Inc. p. 235. ISBN 0-345-30823-9. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ Tuchman 1985, p. 237
^ "Interview with Carleton Swift, 1981". Open Vault. Retrieved October 15, 2016. 
^ a b Stuart-Fox, Martin (1997). A History of Laos. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
^ Stanley Karnow, Vietnam: A History, (New York: Penguin Books Ltd., 1997), 146
^ "WGBH Open Vault – Interview with Archimedes L. A. Patti, 1981". Retrieved 2015-08-19. 
^ "ベトナム独立戦争参加日本人の事跡に基づく日越のあり方に関する研究" (PDF). 井川 一久. Tokyo foundation. October 2005. Retrieved 2010-06-10. 
^ "日越関係発展の方途を探る研究 ヴェトナム独立戦争参加日本人―その実態と日越両国にとっての歴史的意味―" (PDF). 井川 一久. Tokyo foundation. May 2006. Retrieved 2010-06-10. 
^ Allies Reinforce Java and Saigon, British Paramount News rushes, 1945
^ a b Philipe Leclerc de Hauteloque (1902–1947), La légende d'un héro, Christine Levisse-Touzé, Tallandier/Paris Musées, 2002
^ Text of Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers General Order no. One, Taiwan Documents Project, http://www.taiwandocuments.org/surrender05.htm[permanent dead link]
^ Hugh Dyson Walker (November 2012). East Asia: A New History. AuthorHouse. pp. 621–. ISBN 978-1-4772-6516-1. 
^ Peter Neville (2007). Britain in Vietnam: prelude to disaster, 1945-6. Psychology Press. p. 119. ISBN 0-415-35848-5. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ Van Nguyen Duong (2008). The tragedy of the Vietnam War: a South Vietnamese officer's analysis. McFarland. p. 21. ISBN 0-7864-3285-3. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ Stein Tønnesson (2010). Vietnam 1946: how the war began. University of California Press. p. 41. ISBN 0-520-25602-6. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ Elizabeth Jane Errington (1990). Elizabeth Jane Errington; B. J. C. McKercher, eds. The Vietnam War as history. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 63. ISBN 0-275-93560-4. Retrieved 2010-11-28. 
^ "The Vietnam War Seeds of Conflict 1945–1960". The History Place. 1999. Retrieved 2010-12-28. 
^ Tucker, Spencer C. (2000). Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social and Military History. Santa Barbara, Californiap. p 443.
^ Currey, Cecil B. (1999). Victory at Any Cost: the genius of Viet Nam's Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap. Washington D.C.: Brassey. p 120.
^ Michael C. Howard; Kim Be Howard (2002). Textiles of the Daic Peoples of Vietnam. White Lotus Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-974-7534-97-9. 
^ Windrow 2004, p. 90
^ Barnet, Richard J. (1968). Intervention and Revolution: The United States in the Third World. World Publishing. p. 185. ISBN 0-529-02014-9. 
^ Sheehan, Neil (1988). A Bright Shining Lie. New York: Random House. p. 155. ISBN 0-394-48447-9. 
^ Cirillo, Roger (2015). The Shape of Battles to Come. Louisville: University Press of Kentucky. p. 187. ISBN 978-0813165752. 
^ Trận then chốt Đông Khê Archived November 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.. 02 November, 2014.
^ Gras, Yves (1979). Histoire de la Guerre d'Indochine. Paris. p. 408. ISBN 2-259-00478-4. 
^ a b "La Guerre En Indochine" (video). newsreel. October 26, 1950. Retrieved May 20, 2007. 
^ a b "Bigeard et Dien Bien Phu" (video). TV news. Channel 2 (France). May 3, 2004. Retrieved May 20, 2007. 
^ "dienbienphu.org". Archived from the original on October 24, 2003. 
^ Assemblée Nationale. "Le Gouvernement provisoire et la Quatrième République (1944–1958)". 
^ The Pentagon Papers (1971), Beacon Press, vol. 3, p. 134.
^ The Pentagon Papers (1971), Beacon Press, vol. 3, p. 119.
^ a b The Pentagon Papers (1971), Beacon Press, vol. 3, p. 140.
^ a b c d e Hercombe, Peter (2004). "Dien Bien Phu, Chronicles of a Forgotten Battle". documentary. Transparences Productions/Channel 2 (France). Archived from the original on March 21, 2007. 
^ "France's war against Communists rages on" (video). newsreel. News Magazine of the Screen/Warner Bros. May 1952. Retrieved May 20, 2007. 
^ A Bernard Fall Retrospective, presentation of Bernard B. Fall, Vietnam Witness 1953–56, New York, Praeger, 1966, by the Ludwig von Mises Institute
^ a b Ruscio, Alain (August 2, 2003). "Guerre d'Indochine: Libérez Henri Martin" (in French). l'Humanité. Archived from the original on August 4, 2003. Retrieved May 20, 2007. 
^ Nhu Tang, Truong (March 12, 1986). "A Vietcong Memoir: An Inside Account of the Vietnam War and Its Aftermath". Vintage. Retrieved June 27, 2007. 
^ a b c "France History, IV Republic (1946–1958)" (in French). Quid Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on August 30, 2007. Retrieved May 20, 2007. 
^ Patrick Pesnot, Rendez-vous Avec X – Dien Bien Phu Archived October 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine., France Inter, December 4, 2004 (Rendez-vous With X broadcast on public station France Inter)
^ "We wanted a newspaper to tell what we wanted" interview by Denis Jeambar & Roland Mihail Archived October 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ General Challe's appeal (April 22, 1961)
^ "Accueil". Retrieved August 19, 2015. 
^ "USS Skagit and Operation Passage To Freedom". self-published. Archived from the original on October 27, 2009. Retrieved May 20, 2007. CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
^ https://books.google.com.vn/books?id=MauWlUjuWNsC&pg=PA252&dq=The+Indochinese+Experience+of+the+French+and+the+Americans+100,000+to+150,000&hl=vi&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjt-L-o-9bQAhXFqo8KHZq-A58Q6AEIGTAA#v=onepage&q=The%20Indochinese%20Experience%20of%20the%20French%20and%20the%20Americans%20100%2C000%20to%20150%2C000&f=false
^ http://indochine.uqam.ca/en/historical-dictionary/1420-torture-french.html
^ http://www.nguoiduatin.vn/nhan-chung-song-sot-ke-chuyen-vu-tham-sat-cat-bay-kinh-hoang-a78313.html
^ http://www.bentre.gov.vn/Pages/GioiThieu.aspx?ID=1837&CategoryId=Di+t%u00edch&InitialTabId=Ribbon.Read
^ Alf Andrew Heggoy and Insurgency and Counterinsurgency in Algeria, Bloomington, Indiana, Indiana University Press, 1972, p.175
^ The 317th Platoons script Archived June 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Original audio recordings of General de Castries (Dien Bien Phu) and General Cogny (Hanoi) transmissions on May 7, 1954, during the battle of Dien Bien Phu (from the European Navigator based in Luxembourg)
^ French Defense Ministry archives, ECPAD Archived September 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Raymond Muelle; Éric Deroo (1992). Services spéciaux, armes, techniques, missions: GCMA, Indochine, 1950–1954 .. Editions Crépin-Leblond. ISBN 978-2-7030-0100-3. 
^ Michel David (2002). Guerre secrète en Indochine: Les maquis autochtones face au Viêt-Minh (1950–1955). ISBN 978-2-7025-0636-3. 
^ Dien Bien Phu – Le Rapport Secret, Patrick Jeudy, TF1 Video, 2005
^ French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Dr. Jacques Cheneau in In Vietnam, 1954. Eight episode
^ a b Goscha, pp. 46–49
^ a b Goscha, pp. 50–55
^ Igawa, Sei (2005-10-10). "Japan-Vietnam relations, were based on the performance of Japanese volunteers in Vietnam Independence War" (PDF). Tokyo Foundation (in Japanese). Retrieved 2009-09-06. 
^ a b French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Chinese General Hoang Minh Thao and Colonel Hoang Minh Phuong quoted by Pierre Journoud researcher at the Defense History Studies (CHED), Paris University Pantheon-Sorbonne, in Paris Hanoi Beijing published in Communisme magazine and the Pierre Renouvin Institute of Paris, July 20, 2004.
^ French Defense Ministry archives Archived September 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Replacing France: The Origins of American Intervention in Vietnam" (PDF). book. University Press of Kentucky. July 2007. Retrieved June 28, 2007. 
^ a b c d "U.S. Pilots Honored For Indochina Service" (PDF). Embassy of France in the U.S. February 24, 2005. Retrieved March 30, 2010. 
^ French Defense Ministry archives[permanent dead link]
^ "Indochina War: The "good offices" of the Americans". National Audiovisual Institute. 
^ Conboy, Morrison, p. 6.
^ Lindholm, Richard (1959). Viet-nam, the first five years: an international symposium. Michigan State University Press
^ Pierre Schoendoerffer interview with Jean Guisnel in Some edited pictures Archived September 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Roman Karmen, un cinéaste au service de la révolution, Dominique Chapuis & Patrick Barbéris, Kuiv Productions / Arte France, 2001
^ "La Cinémathèque de Toulouse". 


References[edit]


Buttinger, Joseph (1972). A Dragon Defiant: A Short History of Vietnam. New York: Praeger. OCLC 583077932. 
Chaliand, Gérard (1982). Guerrilla Strategies: An Historical Anthology from the Long March to Afghanistan. California: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-04443-6. 
Jian, Chen (1993). "China and the First Indo-China War, 1950–54". The China Quarterly. London: School of Oriental and African Studies. 133 (March): 85–110. doi:10.1017/s0305741000018208. ISSN 0305-7410. 
Cogan, Charles G. (2000). "L'attitude des États-Unis à l'égard de la guerre d'Indochine". In Vaïsse, Maurice. Armée française dans la guerre d'Indochine (1946–1954). Bruxelles: Complexe. pp. 51–88. ISBN 2-87027-810-1. 
Conboy, Kenneth; Morrison, James (1995). Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. Boulder, CO: Paladin Press. ISBN 978-1-58160-535-8. 
Devillers, Philippe; Lacouture, Jean (1969). End of a War: Indochina, 1954. New York: Praeger. OCLC 575650635. 
Dunstan, Simon (2004). Vietnam Tracks: Armor in Battle 1945–75. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 1-84176-833-2. 
Fall, Bernard B. (1967). Hell in a Very Small Place: The Siege of Dien Bien Phu. Philadelphia: Lippincott. OCLC 551565485. 
Fall, Bernard B (1994). Street Without Joy. Stackpole Books. ISBN 0-8117-1700-3. 
Fall, Bernard B. (1963). The Two Viet-Nams: A Political and Military Analysis. New York: Praeger. OCLC 582302330. 
Giap, Vo Nguyen (1971). The Military Art of People's War. New York: Modern Reader. ISBN 0-85345-193-1. 
Goscha, Christopher E (2008). "Chapter 3 Belated Asian Allies: The Technical and Military Contributions of Japanese Deserters, (1945–50)". In Young, Marilyn B; Buzzanco, Robert. A Companion to the Vietnam War. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9781405172042. 
Hammer, Ellen Joy (1954). The Struggle for Indochina. Stanford: Stanford University Press. OCLC 575892787. 
Humphries, James. F (1999). Through the Valley: Vietnam, 1967–1968. Lynne Rienner Publishers. ISBN 1-55587-821-0. 
Perkins, Mandaley (2006). Hanoi, Adieu: A Bittersweet Memoir of French Indochina. Sydney: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-7322-8197-7. 
Roy, Jules (1963). The Battle of Dienbienphu. New York: Pyramid Books. OCLC 613204239. 
Summers, Harry G. (1995). Historical Atlas of the Vietnam War. New York: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-72223-3. 
Thi, Lam Quang (2002). The Twenty-Five Year Century: A South Vietnamese General Remembers the Indochina War to the Fall of Saigon. University of North Texas. ISBN 1-57441-143-8. 
Vaïsse; editor (2000). L'Armée française dans la guerre d'Indochine (1946–1954). Paris: Editions Complexe. ISBN 978-2-87027-810-9. 
Wiest, Andrew; editor (2006). Rolling Thunder in a Gentle Land. Oxford: Osphrey. ISBN 978-1-84603-020-8. 
Windrow, Martin (1998). The French Indochina War, 1946–1954. Osprey. ISBN 1-85532-789-9. 
Windrow, Martin (2004). The Last Valley. Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 0-306-81386-6. 


Further reading[edit]


Pescali, Piergiorgio (2010). Indocina. Bologna: Emil. ISBN 978-88-96026-42-7. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to First Indochina War.



Pentagon Papers, Chapter 2
Vietnam: The Impossible War
Fall, Bernard B. Street Without Joy: The French Debacle In Indochina
ANAPI's official website (National Association of Former POWs in Indochina)
Hanoi upon the army's return in victory (bicycles demystified) Viet Nam Portal
Photos about the First War of Indochina (French Defense Archives) (ECPAD) (in French)







v
t
e


World War II






Asia and the Pacific

China
South-East Asia
North and Central Pacific
South-West Pacific


Europe

Western
Eastern


Mediterranean and Middle East

North Africa
East Africa
Italy


West Africa
Atlantic
North America
South America


Casualties
Military engagements
Conferences
Commanders





Participants





Allies
(leaders)




Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
China
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
France
Free France (from June 1940)
Greece
India
Italy (from September 1943)
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Philippines (Commonwealth)
Poland
South Africa
Southern Rhodesia
Soviet Union
United Kingdom
United States

Puerto Rico


Yugoslavia






Axis and
Axis-aligned
(leaders)




Albania
Bulgaria
Reorganized National Government of the Republic of China
Independent State of Croatia
Finland
Germany
Hungary
Free India
Iraq
Italy (until September 1943)
Italian Social Republic
Japan
Manchukuo
Philippines (Second Republic)
Romania
Slovakia
Thailand
Vichy France

Armed neutrality







Resistance



Albania
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Czech lands
Denmark
Estonia
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Italy
Japan
Jewish
Korea
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malaya
Netherlands
Northeast China
Norway
Philippines
Poland

Anti-communist


Romania
Thailand
Soviet Union
Slovakia
Western Ukraine
Vietnam
Yugoslavia

Monarchists










Timeline




Prelude



Africa
Asia
Europe





1939



Poland
Phoney War
Winter War
Atlantic
Changsha
China





1940



Weserübung
Netherlands
Belgium
France

Armistice of 22 June 1940


Britain
North Africa
West Africa
British Somaliland
North China
Baltic States
Moldova
Indochina
Greece
Compass





1941



East Africa
Yugoslavia
Shanggao
Greece
Crete
Iraq
Soviet Union (Barbarossa)
Finland
Lithuania
Syria and Lebanon
Kiev
Iran
Leningrad
Gorky
Moscow
Sevastopol
Pearl Harbor

The outbreak of the Pacific War


Hong Kong
Philippines
Changsha
Malaya
Borneo (1941–42)





1942



Burma
Changsha
Java Sea
Coral Sea
Gazala
Dutch Harbor
Attu (occupation)
Kiska
Zhejiang-Jiangxi
Midway
Rzhev
Blue
Stalingrad
Singapore
Dieppe
El Alamein
Guadalcanal
Torch





1943



Tunisia
Kursk
Smolensk
Gorky
Solomon Islands
Attu
Sicily
Cottage
Lower Dnieper
Italy

Armistice of Cassibile


Gilbert and Marshall Islands
Burma
Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
Changde





1944



Monte Cassino / Shingle
Narva
Korsun–Cherkassy
Tempest
Ichi-Go
Overlord
Neptune
Normandy
Mariana and Palau
Bagration
Western Ukraine
Tannenberg Line
Warsaw
Eastern Romania
Belgrade
Paris
Dragoon
Gothic Line
Market Garden
Estonia
Crossbow
Pointblank
Lapland
Hungary
Leyte
Ardennes

Bodenplatte


Philippines (1944–1945)
Burma (1944–45)





1945



Vistula–Oder
Iwo Jima
Western invasion of Germany
Okinawa
Italy (Spring 1945)
Borneo
Syrmian Front
Berlin
Czechoslovakia
Budapest
West Hunan
Guangxi
Surrender of Germany
Project Hula
Manchuria
Manila
Borneo
Taipei
Atomic bombings

Debate


Kuril Islands

Shumshu


Surrender of Japan

End of World War II in Asia










Aspects




General




Famines



Bengal famine of 1943
Chinese famine of 1942–43
Greek Famine of 1941-1944
Dutch famine of 1944–45
Vietnamese Famine of 1945








Air warfare of World War II
Blitzkrieg
Comparative military ranks
Cryptography
Diplomacy
Home front

United States
Australian
United Kingdom


Lend-Lease
Manhattan Project
Military awards
Military equipment
Military production
Nazi plunder
Opposition
Technology

Allied cooperation


Total war
Strategic bombing
Puppet states
Women
Art and World War II








Aftermath



Expulsion of Germans
Operation Paperclip
Operation Osoaviakhim
Operation Keelhaul
Occupation of Germany
Territorial changes of Germany
Soviet occupations

Romania
Poland
Hungary
Baltic States


Occupation of Japan
First Indochina War
Indonesian National Revolution
Cold War
Decolonization
Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany
Popular culture





War crimes



Allied war crimes

Soviet war crimes
British war crimes
United States war crimes


German (Forced labour) / Wehrmacht war crimes

Holocaust
Aftermath
Response
Prosecution


Italian war crimes
Japanese war crimes

Unit 731
Prosecution


Croatian war crimes

against the Serbs
against the Jews


Romanian war crimes





Wartime
sexual violence



German military brothels
Camp brothels
Rape during the occupation of Japan
Sook Ching
Comfort women
Rape of Nanking
Rape of Manila
Rape during the occupation of Germany
Rape during the liberation of France
Rape during the liberation of Poland





Prisoners



Finnish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
German prisoners of war in the United States
Italian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Japanese prisoners of war in World War II
German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war
Polish prisoners of war in the Soviet Union
Romanian prisoners of war in the Soviet Union











Bibliography
Category
Portal












v
t
e


 French Indochina



Background



France–Asia relations
French colonial empire
France–Vietnam relations
France–Thailand relations
France–China relations





Constituent territories



Cochinchina
Tonkin
Annam
Cambodia
Laos
Guangzhouwan
Provisional Central Government of Vietnam
State of Vietnam





Events



French assistance to Nguyễn Ánh (1777–1820)
Lê Văn Khôi revolt (1833–35)
Bombardment of Tourane (1847)
Siege of Tourane (1858)
Cochinchina campaign (1858–62)
Tonkin Campaign (1883–1886)
Sino-French War (1884–1885)
Pacification of Tonkin
Franco-Siamese War (1893)
Holy Man's Rebellion (1901-1936)
World War I
1916 Cochinchina uprising
Thái Nguyên uprising
War of the Insane
Bazin assassination
Yên Bái mutiny
World War II
French–Thai War (1940–1941)
Japanese invasion of French Indochina
Japanese coup d'état in French Indochina
August Revolution
Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
First Indochina War
Battle of Dien Bien Phu
Partition of Vietnam





Treaties



Treaty of Versailles (1787)
Treaty of Saigon (1862)
Treaty of Huế (1863)
Second Treaty of Saigon (1874)
Treaty of Huế (1883)
Geneva Conference (1954)






French
personalities




Alexandre de Rhodes
Pierre Pigneau de Behaine
Jean-Baptiste Chaigneau
Jean-Baptiste Cécille
Charles de Montigny
Charles Rigault de Genouilly
Amédée Courbet
Henri Rivière
Francis Garnier
Ernest Doudart de Lagrée
Auguste Pavie
Albert Sarraut





Organisations



Paris Foreign Missions Society
Tirailleurs indochinois
Tonkin Expeditionary Corps
Tonkinese Rifles
Governor-General of French Indochina












v
t
e


French colonial conflicts



16th–17th centuries



Brazil (1557–60)
Florida (1562–65)
Brazil (1612–15)
Morocco (1629)
Beaver Wars (1641–1701)
French colonization of Texas (1685–89)
Siam (1688)
King William's War (1689–97)





18th century



Queen Anne's War (1702–13)
Chickasaw Wars (1721–52)
Dummer's War (1721–25)
Burma–France relations (1729–56)
King George's War (1744–48)
First Carnatic War (1746–48)
Second Carnatic War (1749–54)
Nova Scotia (1749–55)
French and Indian War (1754–60)
East Indies (1757–63)
Larache expedition 1765
Vietnam (1777–1820)
North America (1778–83)
Caribbean and East Indies (1778–83)
Haitian Revolution (1791–1804)
Siege of Pondicherry (1793)
French acquisition of Santo Domingo (1795–1809)
French campaign in Egypt and Syria (1798–1801)





19th century



West Indies (1804–10)
Indian Ocean (1809–11)
Java (1811)
Algeria (1830–47)
Algeria (1835–1903)
Río de la Plata (1838–40)
Mexico (1838–39)
Argentina–Uruguay (1845–50)
Morocco (1844)
Philippines (1844–45)
Bombardment of Tourane Vietnam (1847)
Franco-Tahitian War (1844–47)
French conquest of Senegal (1854)
Cochinchina Campaign (1858–62)
Second Opium War (1860)
Intervention in Mexico (1861–67)
Japan (1863–64)
Korea (1866)
North Vietnam (1873–74)
Tunisia (1881)
Madagascar (1883)
Ivory Coast (1883–98)
Tonkin Campaign (1883–86)
Sino-French War (1884–85)
North Vietnam (1886–96)
Leewards War (1888–97)
First Franco-Dahomean War (1890)
Second Franco-Dahomean War (1892–94)
Franco-Siamese War (1893)
Second Madagascar expedition (1895)
Voulet–Chanoine Mission (1898)





20th century



Boxer Rebellion (1901)
Holy Man's Rebellion (1901-36)
Ouaddai War (1909–11)
Morocco (1911)
Zaian War (1914-1921)
Volta-Bani War (1915-1916)
Kaocen Revolt (1916-1917)
Syria (1919–21)
Cilicia (1920–21)
Rif War (1920–26)
Kongo-Wara rebellion (1928–31)
Franco-Thai War (1940–41)
Indochina (1945)
South Vietnam (1945–46)
First Indochina War (1946–54)
Malagasy Uprising (1947–48)
Tunisian independence (1952–56)
Algerian War (1954–62)
Suez Crisis (1956)
Ifni War (1957–58)
Cameroonian Independence War (1955-1960)
Bizerte crisis (1961)
Ouvéa cave hostage taking (1988)












v
t
e


Vietnamese independence movement



Events



Bombardment of Tourane
Siege of Saigon
Capture of the Citadel of Saigon
Conquest of Cochinchina
Ba Dinh uprising / Cần Vương
Pacification of Tonkin
Hanoi Poison Plot
World War I
1916 Cochinchina uprising
Thái Nguyên uprising
Bazin assassination
Yên Bái mutiny
Nghệ-Tĩnh Soviets
World War II
1940 Cochinchina uprising
Japanese coup d'état in French Indochina
August Revolution
Proclamation of Independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
First Indochina War
Battle of Dien Bien Phu
Geneva Conference












Organisations



Cần Vương
Đông Du
Duy Tân hội
Empire of Vietnam
Nguyễn dynasty
Tonkin Free School
Việt Nam Quang Phục Hội
Vietnamese Revolutionary Youth League
Việt Nam Quốc Dân Đảng
Viet Minh
Communist Party of Vietnam





Revolutionaries



Cường Để
Đinh Công Tráng
Ho Chi Minh
Huỳnh Thúc Kháng
Lương Văn Can
Ngô Đức Kế
Nguyễn An Ninh
Nguyễn Quang Bích
Nguyễn Quyền
Nguyễn Thái Học
Nguyễn Thần Hiến
Nguyễn Thành
Nguyễn Thiện Thuật
Nguyễn Thượng Hiền
Nguyễn Trung Trực
Nguyen Xuan On
Phạm Bành
Phan Bội Châu
Phan Chu Trinh
Phan Đình Phùng
Phan Thanh Giản
Phan Xích Long
Tạ Thu Thâu
Tôn Thất Thuyết
Trần Cao Vân
Trương Định
Vũ Hồng Khanh





Emperors



Tự Đức
Hàm Nghi
Thành Thái
Duy Tân
Bảo Đại





French rulers



Albert Sarraut
Jean Decoux
French Indochina

Governor-General







Collaborators



Hoàng Cao Khải
Trần Bá Lộc












v
t
e


20th century in Vietnam










World War I






Interwar






World War II






First Indochina War






Vietnam War






Subsidy phase






Đổi Mới
















v
t
e


Cold War






USA
USSR
ANZUS
NATO
Non-Aligned Movement
SEATO
Warsaw Pact





1940s



Morgenthau Plan
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Dekemvriana
Percentages Agreement
Yalta Conference
Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Forest Brothers
Operation Priboi
Operation Jungle
Occupation of the Baltic states


Cursed soldiers
Operation Unthinkable
Potsdam Conference
Gouzenko Affair
Division of Korea
Operation Masterdom
Operation Beleaguer
Operation Blacklist Forty
Iran crisis of 1946
Greek Civil War
Baruch Plan
Corfu Channel incident
Turkish Straits crisis
Restatement of Policy on Germany
First Indochina War
Truman Doctrine
Asian Relations Conference
May 1947 Crises
Marshall Plan
1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état
Tito–Stalin Split
Berlin Blockade
Western betrayal
Iron Curtain
Eastern Bloc
Western Bloc
Chinese Civil War (Second round)
Malayan Emergency
Albanian Subversion





1950s



Bamboo Curtain
Korean War
McCarthyism
1953 Iranian coup d'état
Uprising of 1953 in East Germany
Dirty War (Mexico)
Bricker Amendment
1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
Partition of Vietnam
First Taiwan Strait Crisis
Geneva Summit (1955)
Bandung Conference
Poznań 1956 protests
Hungarian Revolution of 1956
Suez Crisis
"We will bury you"
Operation Gladio
Arab Cold War

Syrian Crisis of 1957
1958 Lebanon crisis
Iraqi 14 July Revolution


Sputnik crisis
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis
Cuban Revolution
Kitchen Debate
Sino-Soviet split





1960s



Congo Crisis
1960 U-2 incident
Bay of Pigs Invasion
1960 Turkish coup d'état
Soviet–Albanian split
Berlin Wall
Portuguese Colonial War

Angolan War of Independence
Guinea-Bissau War of Independence
Mozambican War of Independence


Cuban Missile Crisis
Sino-Indian War
Communist insurgency in Sarawak
Iraqi Ramadan Revolution
Sand War
1963 Syrian coup d'état
Vietnam War
1964 Brazilian coup d'état
United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)
South African Border War
Transition to the New Order
Domino theory
ASEAN Declaration
Laotian Civil War
1966 Syrian coup d'état
Argentine Revolution
Korean DMZ Conflict
Greek military junta of 1967–74
USS Pueblo incident
Six-Day War
War of Attrition
Dhofar Rebellion
Protests of 1968
French May
Cultural Revolution
Prague Spring
Communist insurgency in Malaysia
Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Iraqi Ba'athist Revolution
Goulash Communism
Sino-Soviet border conflict
CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion
Corrective Move





1970s



Détente
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Black September in Jordan
Corrective Movement (Syria)
Cambodian Civil War
Realpolitik
Ping-pong diplomacy
1971 Turkish military memorandum
Corrective Revolution (Egypt)
Four Power Agreement on Berlin
Bangladesh Liberation War
1972 Nixon visit to China
North Yemen-South Yemen Border Conflict
1973 Chilean coup d'état
Yom Kippur War
Carnation Revolution
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
Rhodesian Bush War
Angolan Civil War
Mozambican Civil War
Ogaden War
Ethiopian Civil War
Lebanese Civil War
Sino-Albanian split
Cambodian–Vietnamese War
Sino-Vietnamese War
Iranian Revolution
Operation Condor
Dirty War
Korean Air Lines Flight 902
Saur Revolution
New Jewel Movement
1979 Herat uprising
Seven Days to the River Rhine
Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union





1980s



Soviet–Afghan War
1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts
1980 Turkish coup d'état
Invasion of Grenada
1986 Black Sea incident
1988 Black Sea bumping incident
Solidarity

Soviet reaction


Contras
Central American crisis
RYAN
Korean Air Lines Flight 007
Able Archer 83
Star Wars
People Power Revolution
Glasnost
Perestroika
Nagorno-Karabakh War
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
Revolutions of 1989
Fall of the Berlin Wall





1990s



Mongolian Revolution of 1990
German reunification
Yemeni unification
Fall of communism in Albania
Breakup of Yugoslavia
Dissolution of the Soviet Union
Dissolution of Czechoslovakia





Frozen conflicts



Abkhazia
China-Taiwan
Korea
Nagorno-Karabakh
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Sino-Indian border dispute
North Borneo dispute





Foreign policy



Truman Doctrine
Containment
Eisenhower Doctrine
Domino theory
Hallstein Doctrine
Kennedy Doctrine
Peaceful coexistence
Ostpolitik
Johnson Doctrine
Brezhnev Doctrine
Nixon Doctrine
Ulbricht Doctrine
Carter Doctrine
Reagan Doctrine
Rollback
Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War





Ideologies




Capitalism



Chicago school
Keynesianism
Monetarism
Neoclassical economics
Reaganomics
Supply-side economics
Thatcherism





Communism



Marxism–Leninism
Castroism
Eurocommunism
Guevarism
Hoxhaism
Juche
Maoism
Naxalism
Stalinism
Titoism





Other



Islamism
Liberal democracy
Social democracy
Third-Worldism
White supremacy








Organizations



ASEAN
CIA
Comecon
EEC
KGB
MI6
Non-Aligned Movement
SAARC
Safari Club
Stasi





Propaganda



Active measures
Crusade for Freedom
Izvestia
Pravda
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
Red Scare
TASS
Voice of America
Voice of Russia





Races



Arms race
Nuclear arms race
Space Race





See also



Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War
Soviet espionage in the United States
Soviet Union–United States relations
Soviet–US summits
Russian espionage in the United States
American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation
NATO–Russia relations
Brinkmanship
CIA and the Cultural Cold War
Cold War II








Category
Commons
Portal
Timeline
List of conflicts











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_Indochina_War&oldid=818244777"					Categories: First Indochina WarFrench IndochinaIndochina WarsVietnamese independence movementWars of independence1940s conflicts1950s conflictsWars involving VietnamWars involving FranceInsurgencies in AsiaGuerrilla warsViet MinhFrench Fourth RepublicResistance to the French colonial empire1940s in French Indochina1950s in French Indochina1940s in Vietnam1950s in VietnamInvasions by FranceInvasions of VietnamWars involving CambodiaWars involving LaosWars involving the People's Republic of ChinaWars involving the Soviet UnionWars involving the United StatesChina–Vietnam relationsFrance–Vietnam relationsSoviet Union–Vietnam relations20th-century conflicts20th century in France20th century in VietnamProxy warsHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 maint: Unfit urlCS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)Use mdy dates from June 2011Articles needing additional references from December 2012All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2017Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from May 2007Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013Articles with unsourced statements from June 2007Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from July 2007Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009Articles needing additional references from June 2011Articles with French-language external linksArticles containing video clips