"FAO" redirects here. For other uses, see FAO (disambiguation).

Food and Agriculture Organization





FAO emblem with its Latin motto, Fiat panis ("Let there be bread")



Abbreviation
FAO, ONUAA


Formation
16 October 1945, in
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada


Type
Specialized Agency


Legal status
Active


Headquarters
Palazzo FAO, Rome, Italy



Head

José Graziano da Silva (current)



Parent organization

UN Economic and Social Council


Website
FAO.org


The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO; French: Organisation des Nations unies pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture, Italian: Organizzazione delle Nazioni Unite per l'Alimentazione e l'Agricoltura) is a specialised agency of the United Nations that leads international efforts to defeat hunger. Serving both developed and developing countries, FAO acts as a neutral forum where all nations meet as equals to negotiate arguments and debate policy.
FAO is also a source of knowledge and information, and helps developing countries in transition modernize and improve agriculture, forestry and fisheries practices, ensuring good nutrition and food security for all. Its Latin motto, fiat panis, translates as "let there be bread". As of May 2017[update], FAO has 194 member states, along with the European Union (a "member organization"), and the Faroe Islands and Tokelau, which are associate members.[1]


100 lire (FAO's celebration.)





Obverse: Young woman with braid facing left and Repubblica Italiana (Republic of Italy) written in Italian.
Reverse: Cow nursing calf, face value & date. FAO at bottom and Nutrire il Mondo (E: Feed the world) at top.


Coin minted by Italy in 1970s to celebrate and promote Food and Agriculture Organization.





Contents


1 History
2 Structure and finance

2.1 Budget
2.2 Directors-General
2.3 Deputy Directors-General


3 Offices

3.1 FAO World headquarters
3.2 Regional offices
3.3 Sub-regional offices
3.4 Liaison offices


4 Priority work areas
5 Programmes and achievements

5.1 Food

5.1.1 Codex Alimentarius
5.1.2 World Food Summit
5.1.3 TeleFood
5.1.4 FAO Goodwill Ambassadors
5.1.5 Right to Food Guidelines
5.1.6 Response to food crisis
5.1.7 FAO–EU partnership
5.1.8 Food security programmes
5.1.9 Online campaign against hunger


5.2 Agriculture

5.2.1 International Plant Protection Convention
5.2.2 Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition
5.2.3 Integrated pest management
5.2.4 Transboundary pests and diseases
5.2.5 Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building
5.2.6 Investment in agriculture
5.2.7 Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS)
5.2.8 Animal Genetic Resources


5.3 Forestry
5.4 Fisheries
5.5 Statistics


6 Flagship Publications
7 Membership
8 Criticism

8.1 1970s, 80s, 90s
8.2 2000s
8.3 World food crisis


9 FAO renewal
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



History[edit]
The idea of an international organization for food and agriculture emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century advanced primarily by the US agriculturalist and activist David Lubin. In May–June 1905, an international conference was held in Rome, Italy, which led to the creation of the International Institute of Agriculture.[2]
Later in 1943, the United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt called a United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture. Representatives from forty four governments gathered at The Homestead Resort in Hot Springs, Virginia from 18 May to 3 June. They committed themselves to founding a permanent organization for food and agriculture, which happened in Quebec City, Canada on 16 October 1945 with the conclusion of the Constitution of the Food and Agriculture Organization.[3] The First Session of the FAO Conference was held in the Chateau frontenac at Quebec, Canada, from 16 October to 1 November 1945.
World War II effectively ended the International Agricultural Institute, though it was only officially dissolved by resolution of its Permanent Committee on 27 February 1948. Its functions were then transferred to the recently established FAO.[4]
Structure and finance[edit]






This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Lester Bowles Pearson presiding at a plenary session of the founding conference of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. October 1945






FAO headquarters in Rome.


In 1951, FAO's headquarters were moved from Washington, D.C., [United States], to Rome, Italy. The agency is directed by the Conference of Member Nations, which meets every two years to review the work carried out by the organization and to Work and Budget for the next two-year period. The Conference elects a council of 49 member states (serve three-year rotating terms) that acts as an interim governing body, and the Director-General, that heads the agency.
FAO is composed of six departments: Agriculture and Consumer Protection, Economic and Social Development, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Forestry, Corporate Services and Technical Cooperation and Programme Management.[5]
Beginning in 1994, FAO underwent the most significant restructuring since its founding, to decentralize operations, streamline procedures and reduce costs. As a result, savings of about US$50 million, €35 million a year were realized.[citation needed]
Budget[edit]
FAO's Regular Programme budget is funded by its members, through contributions set at the FAO Conference. This budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships including the Technical Cooperation Programme, knowledge exchange, policy and advocacy, direction and administration, governance and security.
The total FAO Budget planned for 2016-17 is USD 2.6 billion. The voluntary contributions provided by members and other partners support mechanical and emergency (including rehabilitation) assistance to governments for clearly defined purposes linked to the results framework, as well as direct support to FAO's core work. The voluntary contributions are expected to reach approximately US$1.6 billion in 2016-17.
This overall budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships, leading to Food and Agriculture Outcomes at 71%; Core Functions at 11%; the Country Office Network – 5%; Capital and Security Expenditure – 2%; Administration – 6%; and Technical and Cooperation Program – 5%.
Directors-General[edit]




José Graziano da Silva, FAO Director General




Nr
Director
Country
Term


9
José Graziano da Silva
 Brazil
January 2012 – July 2019


8
Jacques Diouf
 Senegal
January 1994 – December 2011


7
Edouard Saouma
 Lebanon
January 1976 – December 1993


6
Addeke Hendrik Boerma
 Netherlands
January 1968 – December 1975


5
Binay Ranjan Sen
 India
November 1956 – December 1967


4
Sir Herbert Broadley
 United Kingdom
acting April 1956 – November 1956


3
Philip V. Cardon
 United States
January 1954 – April 1956


2
Norris E. Dodd
 United States
April 1948 – December 1953


1
John Boyd Orr
 United Kingdom
October 1945 – April 1948


Deputy Directors-General[edit]




William Nobel Clark (US): 1948
Sir Herbert Broadley (UK): 1948–1958
Friedrich Traugott Wahlen (Switzerland): 1958–1959
Norman C. Wright (UK): 1959–1963
Oris V. Wells (US): 1963–1971
Roy I. Jackson (US): 1971–1978
Ralph W. Phillips (US): 1978–1981
Edward M. West (UK): 1981–1985
Declan J. Walton (Ireland): 1986–1987
Howard Hjort (US): 1992–1997
Vikram J. Shah (ad personam) (UK): 1992–1995
David A. Harcharik (US): 1998–2007
James G. Butler (US): 2008–2010
Changchui He (China) (Operations): 2009–2011
Ann Tutwiler (US) (Knowledge): 2011–2012
Manoj Juneja (India) (Operations): 2011–2012
Dan Gustafson (US) (Programmes): 2012–present
Maria Helena Semedo (Cape Verde) (Climate and Natural Resources): 2013–present
Laurent Thomas (France) (Operations): 2017-present




Offices[edit]
FAO World headquarters[edit]
The world headquarters are located in Rome, in the former seat of the Department of Italian East Africa. One of the most notable features of the building was the Axum Obelisk which stood in front of the agency seat, although just outside the territory allocated to FAO by the Italian Government. It was taken from Ethiopia by Benito Mussolini's troops in 1937 as a war chest, and returned on 18 April 2005.
Regional offices[edit]

Regional Office for Africa, in Accra, Ghana
Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand
Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia, in Budapest, Hungary
Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, in Santiago, Chile
Regional Office for the Near East, in Cairo, Egypt

Sub-regional offices[edit]




Liaison Office for North America in Washington, D.C.



Sub-regional Office for Central Africa (SFC), in Libreville, Gabon
Sub-regional Office for Central Asia, in Ankara, Turkey
Sub-regional Office for Eastern Africa (SFE), in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Sub-regional Office for Mesoamerica (SLM), in Panama City, Panama
Sub-regional Office for North Africa, in Tunis, Tunisia
Sub-regional Office for Southern Africa and East Africa, in Harare, Zimbabwe
Sub-regional Office for the Caribbean, in Bridgetown, Barbados
Sub-regional Office for the Gulf Cooperation Council States and Yemen, Abu Dhabi
Sub-regional Office for the Pacific Islands, in Apia, Samoa

Liaison offices[edit]

Liaison Office for North America, in Washington, D.C.
Liaison Office with Japan, in Yokohama
Liaison Office with the European Union and Belgium, in Brussels
Liaison Office with the Russian Federation, in Moscow
Liaison Office with the United Nations, in Geneva
Liaison Office with the United Nations, in New York

Priority work areas[edit]
FAO has outlined the following priorities in its fight against hunger.[6]

Help eliminate hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition – contribute to the eradication of hunger by facilitating policies and political commitments to support food security and by making sure that up-to-date information about hunger and nutrition challenges and solutions is available and accessible.
Make agriculture, forestry and fisheries more productive and sustainable – promote evidence-based policies and practices to support highly productive agricultural sectors (crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries), while ensuring that the natural resource base does not suffer in the process.
Reduce rural poverty – help the rural poor gain access to the resources and services they need – including rural employment and social protection – to forge a path out of poverty.
Enable inclusive and efficient agricultural and food systems – help to build safe and efficient food systems that support smallholder agriculture and reduce poverty and hunger in rural areas.
Increase the resilience of livelihoods to threats and crises – help countries to prepare for natural and human-caused disasters by reducing their risk and enhancing the resilience of their food and agricultural systems.

Two fundamental areas of work – gender and governance - are fully integrated in the above strategic objective action plans.
Programmes and achievements[edit]
Food[edit]
Codex Alimentarius[edit]
FAO and the World Health Organization created the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 1961 to develop food standards, guidelines and texts such as codes of practice under the Joint FAO/ WHO Food Standards Programme. The main aims of the programme are protecting consumer health, ensuring fair trade and promoting co-ordination of all food standards work undertaken by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.
World Food Summit[edit]
Main article: World Food Summit
In 1996, FAO organised the World Food Summit, attended by 112 Heads or Deputy Heads of State and Government. The Summit concluded with the signing of the Rome Declaration, which established the goal of halving the number of people who suffer from hunger by the year 2015.[7] At the same time, 1,200 Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) from 80 countries participated in an NGO forum. The forum was critical of the growing industrialisation of agriculture and called upon governments – and FAO – to do more to protect the 'Right to Food' of the poor.[8]
TeleFood[edit]
Raising awareness about the problem of hunger mobilizes energy to find a solution[citation needed]. In 1997, FAO launched TeleFood, a campaign of concerts, sporting events and other activities to harness the power of media, celebrities and concerned citizens to help fight hunger. Since its start, the campaign has generated close to US$28 million, €15 million in donations. Money raised through TeleFood pays for small, sustainable projects that help small-scale farmers produce more food for their families and communities.[9]
The projects provide tangible resources, such as fishing equipment, seeds and agricultural implements. They vary enormously, from helping families raise pigs in Venezuela, through creating school gardens in Cape Verde and Mauritania or providing school lunches in Uganda and teaching children to grow food, to raising fish in a leper community in India.
FAO Goodwill Ambassadors[edit]
The FAO Goodwill Ambassadors Programme was initiated in 1999. The main purpose of the programme is to attract public and media attention to the unacceptable situation that some 1 billion people continue to suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition in a time of unprecedented plenty. These people lead a life of misery and are denied the most basic of human rights: the right to food.
Governments alone cannot end hunger and undernourishment. Mobilization of the public and private sectors, the involvement of civil society and the pooling of collective and individual resources are all needed if people are to break out of the vicious circle of chronic hunger and undernourishment.
Each of FAO's Goodwill Ambassadors – celebrities from the arts, entertainment, sport and academia such as Nobel Prize winner Rita Levi Montalcini, actress Gong Li, the late singer Miriam Makeba, International Singers Ronan Keating,[10] and Anggun.[11] And soccer players Roberto Baggio and Raúl, to name a few – has made a personal and professional commitment to FAO's vision: a food-secure world for present and future generations. Using their talents and influence, the Goodwill Ambassadors draw the old and the young, the rich and the poor into the campaign against world hunger. They aim to make Food for All a reality in the 21st century and beyond.[citation needed]
Right to Food Guidelines[edit]
In 2004 the Right to Food Guidelines were adopted, offering guidance to states on how to implement their obligations on the right to food.[12]
Response to food crisis[edit]
In December 2007, FAO launched its Initiative on Soaring Food Prices to help small producers raise their output and earn more. Under the initiative, FAO contributed to the work of the UN High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis, which produced the Comprehensive Framework for Action. FAO has carried out projects in over 25 countries and inter-agency missions in nearly 60, scaled up its monitoring through the Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture, provided policy advice to governments while supporting their efforts to increase food production, and advocated for more investment in agriculture. It has also worked hand-in-hand with the European Union. One example of its work is a US$10.2 million, €7.5 billion scheme to distribute and multiply quality seeds in Haiti,[13] which has significantly increased food production, thereby providing cheaper food and boosting farmers' incomes.
FAO–EU partnership[edit]
In May 2009, FAO and the European Union signed an initial aid package worth €125 million to support small farmers in countries hit hard by rising food prices. The aid package falls under the EU's €1 billion Food Facility, set up with the UN Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on the Global Food Crisis and FAO to focus on programmes that will have a quick but lasting impact on food security.[14] FAO is receiving a total of around €200 million for work in 25 countries, of which €15.4 million goes to Zimbabwe.[15]
Food security programmes[edit]
The Special Programme for Food Security is FAO's flagship initiative for reaching the goal of halving the number of hungry in the world by 2015 (currently estimated at close to 1 billion people), as part of its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals. Through projects in over 100 countries worldwide, the programme promotes effective, tangible solutions to the elimination of hunger, undernourishment and poverty. Currently 102 countries are engaged in the programme and of these approximately 30 have begun shifting from pilot to national programmes. To maximize the impact of its work, FAO strongly promotes national ownership and local empowerment in the countries in which it operates.[citation needed]
Online campaign against hunger[edit]
The 1billionhungry project became the EndingHunger campaign in April 2011. Spearheaded by FAO in partnership with other UN agencies and private nonprofit groups, the EndingHunger movement pushes the boundaries of conventional public advocacy. It builds on the success in 2010 of The 1billonhungry project and the subsequent chain of public events that led to the collection of over three million signatures on a global petition to end hunger (www.EndingHunger.org). The petition was originally presented to representatives of world governments at a ceremony in Rome on 30 November 2010.[16]
The web and partnerships are two pivotal and dynamic aspects of EndingHunger. The campaign relies on the assistance of organizations and institutions that can facilitate the project's diffusion, by placing banners on their own websites or organizing events aimed to raise awareness of the project. In its 2011 season, the campaign expanded its multimedia content, pursued mutual visibility arrangements with partner organizations, and sharpened its focus on 14- to 25-year-olds, who were encouraged to understand their potential as a social movement to push for the end of hunger.
Moreover, the EndingHunger project is a viral communication campaign, renewing and expanding its efforts to build the movement through Facebook, Twitter and other social networks. Those who sign the petition can spread the link of the EndingHunger website to their friends, via social media or mail, in order to gain awareness and signatures for the petition. The next interim objective is to grow the EndingHunger movement's Facebook community to 1 million members. As with the petition, the more people who get involved, the more powerful the message to governments: "We are no longer willing to accept the fact that hundreds of millions live in chronic hunger."[17] Groups and individuals can also decide on their own to organize an event about the project, simply by gathering friends, whistles, T-shirts and banners (whistles and T-shirts can be ordered, and petition sign sheets downloaded, on the endinghunger.org website) and thereby alert people about chronic hunger by using the yellow whistle.
The original 1billionhungry campaign borrowed as its slogan the line "I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!", used by Peter Finch in the 1976 film, Network.[18] Meanwhile, the yellow whistle has been the campaign symbol from the start, from 1billionhungry to Ending Hunger. (The creative concept was provided by the McCann Erickson Italy Communication Agency.) It symbolizes the fact that we are "blowing the whistle" on the silent disaster of hunger. It is both a symbol and – at many live events taking place around the world – a physical means of expressing frustration and making some noise about the hunger situation.[19]
Both The 1billionhungry and the EndingHunger campaigns have continued to attract UN Goodwill Ambassadors from the worlds of music and cinema, literature, sport, activism and government. Some of the well known individuals who have become involved include former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, former presidents of Chile Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet, actress Susan Sarandon, actors Jeremy Irons and Raul Bova, singers Céline Dion and Anggun, authors Isabelle Allende and Andrea Camilleri, musician Chucho Valdés and Olympic track-and-field legend Carl Lewis.[20]
Agriculture[edit]
International Plant Protection Convention[edit]
FAO created the International Plant Protection Convention or IPPC in 1952. This international treaty organization works to prevent the international spread of pests and plant diseases in both cultivated and wild plants. Among its functions are the maintenance of lists of plant pests, tracking of pest outbreaks, and coordination of technical assistance between member nations. As of May 2012, 177 governments had adopted the treaty.
Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition[edit]
"AAHM" redirects here. For the American society dedicated to medical history, see American Association for the History of Medicine.
The Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition (AAHM)[21] aims to address how countries and organizations can be more effective in advocating and carrying out actions to address hunger and malnutrition. As a global partnership, AAHM creates global connections between local, regional, national and international institutions that share the goals of fighting hunger and malnutrition. The organization works to address food security by enhancing resources and knowledge sharing and strengthening hunger activities within countries and across state lines at the regional and international levels.
Following the World Food Summit, the Alliance was initially created in 2002 as the 'International Alliance Against Hunger (IAAH)' to strengthen and coordinate national efforts in the fight against hunger and malnutrition. The mission of the Alliance originates from the first and eight UN Millennium Development Goals; reducing the number of people that suffer from hunger in half by 2015 (preceded by the "Rome Declaration" in 1996) and developing a global partnership for development. The Alliance was founded by the Rome-based food agencies – the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),[22] UN World Food Programme (WFP),[23] International Fund for Agriculture Fund for Development (IFAD),[24] – and Bioversity International.[25]
AAHM connects top-down and bottom-up anti-hunger development initiatives, linking governments, UN organizations, and NGOs together in order to increase effectiveness through unity.[26]
Integrated pest management[edit]
During the 1990s, FAO took a leading role in the promotion of integrated pest management for rice production in Asia. Hundreds of thousands of farmers were trained using an approach known as the Farmer Field School (FFS).[27] Like many of the programmes managed by FAO, the funds for Farmer Field Schools came from bilateral Trust Funds, with Australia, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland acting as the leading donors. FAO's efforts in this area have drawn praise from NGOs that have otherwise criticized much of the work of the organization.
Transboundary pests and diseases[edit]
FAO established an Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases in 1994, focusing on the control of diseases like rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease and avian flu by helping governments coordinate their responses. One key element is the Global Rinderpest Eradication Programme, which has advanced to a stage where large tracts of Asia and Africa have now been free of the cattle disease rinderpest for an extended period of time. Meanwhile, Locust Watch monitors the worldwide locust situation and keeps affected countries and donors informed of expected developments.[citation needed]
Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building[edit]




The Food Price Index (FAO) 1990-2012


The Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building (GIPB) is a global partnership dedicated to increasing plant breeding capacity building.[28] The mission of GIPB is to enhance the capacity of developing countries to improve crops for food security and sustainable development through better plant breeding and delivery systems.[29] The ultimate goal is to ensure that a critical mass of plant breeders, leaders, managers and technicians, donors and partners are linked together through an effective global network.
Increasing capacity building for plant breeding in developing countries is critical for the achievement of meaningful results in poverty and hunger reduction and to reverse the current worrisome trends. Plant breeding is a well recognized science capable of widening the genetic and adaptability base of cropping systems, by combining conventional selection techniques and modern technologies. It is essential to face and prevent the recurrence of crises such as that of the soaring food prices and to respond to the increasing demands for crop based sources of energy.
Investment in agriculture[edit]
FAO's technical cooperation department hosts an Investment Centre that promotes greater investment in agriculture and rural development by helping developing countries identify and formulate sustainable agricultural policies, programmes and projects. It mobilizes funding from multilateral institutions such as the World Bank, regional development banks and international funds as well as FAO resources.[30]
Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS)[edit]
The Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) Partnership Initiative was conceptualized and presented by Dr. Parviz Koohafkan the Task Manager of Chapter 10 of Agenda 21 in Food and Agricultural Organization of United Nations, FAO in 2002 during World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, South Africa. This UN Partnership Initiative aims to identify, support and safeguard Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and their livelihoods, agricultural and associated biodiversity, landscapes, knowledge systems and cultures around the world. The GIAHS Partnership recognizes the crucial importance of the well-being of family farming communities in an integrated approach while directing activities towards sustainable agriculture and rural development.
Animal Genetic Resources[edit]
FAO has a unit focused on Animal Genetic Resources, which are defined as “those animal species that are used, or may be used, for the production of food and agriculture, and the populations within each of them. These populations within each species can be classified as wild and feral populations, landraces and primary populations, standardised breeds, selected lines, varieties, strains and any conserved genetic material; all of which are currently categorized as Breeds.".[31] FAO assists countries in implementation of the Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources. FAO supports a variety of ‘ex situ’ and ‘in situ’ conservation strategies including cryoconservation of animal genetic resources.
Forestry[edit]
See also: Forestry Information Centre
One of FAO's strategic goals is the sustainable management of the world's forests. The Forestry Department [32] works to balance social and environmental considerations with the economic needs of rural populations living in forest areas. FAO serves as a neutral forum for policy dialogue, as a reliable source of information on forests and trees and as a provider of expert technical assistance and advice to help countries develop and implement effective national forest programmes.
FAO is both a global clearinghouse for information on forests and forest resources and a facilitator that helps build countries' local capacity to provide their own national forest data. In collaboration with member countries, FAO carries out periodic global assessments of forest resources, which are made available through reports, publications and the FAO's Web site.[33] The Global Forest Resources Assessment [34] provides comprehensive reporting on forests worldwide every five years. FRA 2015 is the most recent global assessment. The results, data and analyses are available online in different formats, including the FAO synthesis report Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How are forests changing?,[35] the Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015 Desk Reference[36] containing summary tables, 234 country reports[37] and the FRA 2015 Infographics.[38] Moreover, in 2015, the journal Forest Ecology and Management published a special issue, Changes in Global Forest Resources from 1990 to 2015[39][40] reporting forest change over the period 1990–2015.
Every two years, FAO publishes the State of the World's Forests,[41][42] a major report covering current and emerging issues facing the forestry sector.
Since 1947, FAO has published the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products,[43] a compilation of statistical data on basic forest products from over 100 countries and territories of the world. It contains data on the volume of production; and the volume, value and direction of trade in forest products.
Unasylva,[44] FAO's peer-reviewed journal on forestry, has been published in English, French and Spanish on a regular basis since 1947, the longest-running multilingual forestry journal in the world.
The FAO is an official sponsor of International Day of Forests, on 21 March each year, as proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly on 28 November 2012.[45]
Every 6 years since 1926, FAO and a host member state hold the World Forestry Congress. It is a forum for the sharing of knowledge and experience regarding the conservation, management and use of the world's forests, and covers such issues as international dialogue, socio-economic and institutional aspects, and forest policies.
The Forestry Department is also organised geographically in several groups covering the whole world's forest ecosystems. One of them is the Silva mediterranea workgroup, covering the pan-mediterranean region.
Fisheries[edit]
The FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department is defined through its vision and mission statements:

Vision: A world in which responsible and sustainable use of fisheries and aquaculture resources makes an appreciable contribution to human well-being, food security and poverty alleviation.
Mission: To strengthen global governance and the managerial and technical capacities of members and to lead consensus-building towards improved conservation and utilization of aquatic resources.[citation needed]

The work of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Department centers on the "Sustainable management and use of fisheries and aquaculture resource," embracing normative as well as operational activities, whether implemented from headquarters or from the field.[citation needed]
Statistics[edit]
The FAO Statistical Division produces FAOSTAT,[46] which offers free and easy access to data for 245 countries and 35 regional areas from 1961 through the most recent year available. Enhanced features include browsing and analysis of data, an advanced interactive data download, and enhanced data exchange through web services. The Land and Water Division maintains a database of global water statistics, Aquastat.[47]
Flagship Publications[edit]
Every year, FAO publishes a number of major ‘State of the World’ reports related to food, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources.

State of Agricultural Commodity Markets
State of Food and Agriculture
State of Food Insecurity in the World
State of the World’s Animal Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
State of the World’s Forest Genetic Resources
State of the World’s Forests
State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture
State of the World’s Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture
State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture
Status of the World’s Soil Resources

Membership[edit]
There are a total of 197 members comprising 194 member nations, 1 member organization (European Union) and 2 associate members (Faroe Islands and Tokelau).



Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of the Congo
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
European Union (member organization)
Faroe Islands, Denmark (associate member)
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Federated States of Micronesia
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tokelau (associate member)
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe



The UN member state that is a non-member of the FAO is Liechtenstein.[48][49]
Some countries may denote specific representatives to the FAO, for instance the United States Ambassador to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, who has ambassador rank and is also part of the United States Mission to the UN Agencies in Rome.




  FAO member states
  FAO associates



Criticism[edit]
1970s, 80s, 90s[edit]
There has been public criticism of FAO for at least 30 years. Dissatisfaction with the organisation's performance was among the reasons for the creation of two new organisations after the World Food Conference in 1974, namely the World Food Council and the International Fund for Agricultural Development; by the early eighties there was intense rivalry among these organisations.[50] At the same time, the World Food Programme, which started as an experimental 3-year programme under FAO, was growing in size and independence, with the Directors of FAO and WFP struggling for power.[51]
Early in 1989, the organisation came under attack from The Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank based in Washington, D.C. The Foundation wrote that "The sad fact is that the FAO has become essentially irrelevant in combating hunger. A bloated bureaucracy known for the mediocrity of its work and the inefficiency of its staff the FAO in recent years has become increasingly politicised".[52] In September of the same year, the journal Society published a series of articles about FAO[53] that included a contribution from the Heritage Foundation and a response by FAO staff member, Richard Lydiker, who was later described by the Danish Minister for Agriculture (who had herself resigned from the organisation) as 'FAO's chief spokesman for non-transparency'.[54]
Edouard Saouma, the Director-General of FAO, was also criticised in Graham Hancock's book Lords of Poverty, published in 1989.[55][56] Mention is made of Saouma's 'fat pay packet', his 'autocratic' management style, and his 'control over the flow of public information'. Hancock concluded that "One gets the sense from all of this of an institution that has lost its way, departed from its purely humanitarian and developmental mandate, become confused about its place in the world – about exactly what it is doing, and why". Despite the criticism, Edouard Saouma served as DG for three consecutive terms from 1976 to 1993.
In 1990, the US State Department expressed the view that "The Food and Agriculture Organization has lagged behind other UN organizations in responding to US desires for improvements in program and budget processes to enhance value for money spent".[57]
A year later, in 1991, The Ecologist magazine produced a special issue under the heading "The UN Food and Agriculture Organization: Promoting World Hunger".[58] The magazine included articles that questioned FAO's policies and practices in forestry, fisheries, aquaculture, and pest control. The articles were written by experts such as Helena Norberg-Hodge, Vandana Shiva, Edward Goldsmith, Miguel A. Altieri and Barbara Dinham.
2000s[edit]
The 2002 Food Summit organised by FAO was considered to be a waste of time by many of the official participants.[59] Social movements, farmers, fisherfolk, pastoralists, indigenous peoples, environmentalists, women's organisations, trade unions and NGOs expressed their "collective disappointment in, and rejection of the official Declaration of the ... Summit".[60]
In 2004, FAO produced a controversial report called 'Agricultural Biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?'. The report claimed that "agricultural biotechnology has real potential as a new tool in the war on hunger".[61] In response to the report, more than 650 organisations from around the world signed an open letter in which they said "FAO has broken its commitment to civil society and peasants' organisations". The letter complained that organisations representing the interests of farmers had not been consulted, that FAO was siding with the biotechnology industry and, consequently, that the report "raises serious questions about the independence and intellectual integrity of an important United Nations agency".[62] The Director General of FAO responded immediately, stating that decisions on biotechnology must "be taken at the international level by competent bodies" (in other words, not by non-governmental organizations). He acknowledged, however, that "biotechnology research is essentially driven by the world's top ten transnational corporations" and "the private sector protects its results with patents in order to earn from its investment and it concentrates on products that have no relevance to food in developing countries".[63]
In May 2006, a British newspaper published the resignation letter of Louise Fresco, one of eight Assistant Directors-General of FAO. In her letter, the widely respected Dr Fresco stated that "the Organization has been unable to adapt to a new era", that "our contribution and reputation have declined steadily" and "its leadership has not proposed bold options to overcome this crisis".[64]
The 32nd Session of FAO's Committee on World Food Security in 2006, attended by 120 countries, was widely criticised by Non-Governmental Organizations, but largely ignored by the mainstream media. Oxfam called for an end to the talk-fests[65] while Via Campesina issued a statement that criticised FAO's policy of Food Security.[66]
On 18 October 2007, the final report of an Independent External Evaluation of FAO was published. More than 400 pages in length, the evaluation was the first of its kind in the history of the Organization. It had been commissioned by decision of the 33rd Session of the FAO Conference in November 2005. The report concluded that "The Organization is today in a financial and programme crisis" but "the problems affecting the Organization today can all be solved".[67]Among the problems noted by the IEE were: "The Organization has been conservative and slow to adapt"; "FAO currently has a heavy and costly bureaucracy", and "The capacity of the Organization is declining and many of its core competencies are now imperilled". Among the solutions offered were: "A new Strategic Framework", "institutional culture change and reform of administrative and management systems". In conclusion the IEE stated that, "If FAO did not exist it would need to be invented".
The official response from FAO came on 29 October 2007. It indicated that Management supported the principal conclusion in the report of the IEE on the need for 'reform with growth' so as to have an FAO 'fit for this century'.[68]Meanwhile, hundreds of FAO staff signed a petition in support of the IEE recommendations, calling for "a radical shift in management culture and spirit, depoliticization of appointments, restoration of trust between staff and management, [and] setting strategic priorities of the organization".[69]
In November 2008, a Special Conference of FAO member countries agreed a US$42.6 million (€38.6 million), three-year Immediate Plan of Action for "reform with growth", as recommended by the IEE. Under the plan US$21.8 million would be spent on overhauling the financial procedures, hierarchies and human resources management.[70]
In 2015 FAO was criticised by The Economist for giving a diploma to Venezuela for being one of 72 countries that had “reached the UN Millennium Development Goal of halving the percentage of their populations suffering from hunger”. It argued that the positive conclusion reached by FAO about the performance of a country experiencing major economic difficulties was based on false statistics and that the percentage of the Venezuelan population suffering from hunger had actually increased. It quoted FAO as saying that it had no reason to doubt the Venezuelan statistics.
In 2016/17 FAO was heavily criticized for recruiting Nadine Heredia Alarcón de Humala, wife of the former president of Peru, Ollanta Humala, to a senior position, at a time when she was being investigated by Peru following corruption allegations. [71][72]Critics included Transparency International.[73]
At the end of April, 2017 FAO staff unions addressed the organization’s Governing Council to complain about the practice of issuing short-term contracts that "exploit employees without providing job security, social security and paid leave". Other complaints included the increasing centralization of management processes, despite claims that FAO was being decentralized, and the failure to follow United Nations recommendations regarding increasing the retirement age. The staff representative also complained about the high percentage of unfilled positions, increasing the workload for others who were under pressure to deliver more with less. She also noted that contacts between Management and the staff bodies were becoming less and less frequent. [74]
World food crisis[edit]
In May 2008, while talking about the ongoing world food crisis, President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal expressed the opinion that FAO was "a waste of money" and "we must scrap it". Mr Wade said that FAO was itself largely to blame for the price rises, and that the organisation's work was duplicated by other bodies that operated more efficiently, like the UN's International Fund for Agricultural Development.[75] However, this criticism may have had more to do with personal animosity between the President and the Director-General, himself a Senegalese, particularly in light of the significant differences in the work carried out by the two organizations.
In 2008, the FAO sponsored the High-Level Conference on World Food Security. The summit was notable for the lack of agreement over the issue of biofuels.[76]
The response to the summit among Non-governmental organizations was mixed, with Oxfam stating that "the summit in Rome was an important first step in tackling the food crisis but greater action is now needed",[77] while Maryam Rahmanian of Iran's Centre for Sustainable Development said "We are dismayed and disgusted to see the food crisis used to further the policies that have led us to the food crisis in the first place".[78]
As with previous food summits, civil society organizations held a parallel meeting and issued their own declaration to "reject the corporate industrial and energy-intensive model of production and consumption that is the basis of continuing crises."[79]
FAO renewal[edit]
The FAO Conference in November 2007 unanimously welcomed the IEE report and established a Conference Committee for the Follow-up to the Independent External Evaluation of FAO (CoC-IEE) to be chaired by the Independent Chairperson of Council, and open to full participation by all Members. The CoC-IEE was charged to review the IEE report and its recommendations and develop an Immediate Plan of Action (IPA) for their implementation.[80]
A comprehensive programme of organizational reform and culture change began in 2008 after the release of an Independent External Evaluation. Headquarters restructuring and delegation of decision making created a flatter more responsive structure and reduced costs. Modernizing and streamlining of administrative and operational processes took place. Improved internal teamwork and closer external partnerships coupled with upgrading of IT infrastructure and greater autonomy of FAO's decentralized offices now allows the Organization to respond quickly where needs are greatest. As FAO is primarily a knowledge based organization, investing in human resources is a top priority. Capacity building including a leadership programme, employee rotation and a new junior professional programme were established. Individual performance management, an ethics and ombudsman officer and an independent office of evaluation were designed to improve performance through learning and strengthened oversight.
In January 2012, the Director-General José Graziano da Silva acted upon the commitment made during his campaign to bring the FAO reform to a successful and anticipated completion. In addition, the new Director-General shifted the focus of the reform process to realization of its benefits and mainstreaming the reform into the work of the Organization.[81]
See also[edit]


Agriculture and agronomy portal
Hunger relief portal
Forestry portal
United Nations portal




FAO Building, Rome
FAO Country Profiles
Regional Animal Health Center for North Africa
World Summit on Food Security


References[edit]


^ "List of FAO members". Fao.org. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Text of the 1905 convention, from the website of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office and supplementary protocol of 1926
^ "its origins, formation and evolution 1945-1981". FAO. Retrieved 14 June 2012. 
^ "Text of the 1946 convention for the dissolution of the International Agricultural Institute". Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "Home > About FAO > Who we are". Fao.org. 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2016. 
^ "What we do". FAO. Retrieved 6 January 2017. 
^ "World Food Summit archive, FAO". Fao.org. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Profit for few or food for all, Final Statement of the NGO Forum, 1996
^ "About FAO's TeleFood campaign". fao.org. Retrieved 2016-10-10. 
^ "Get Involved: Ronan Keating". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 8 May 2013. 
^ "Get Involved: Anggun". Fao.org. Retrieved 8 May 2013. 
^ Olivier de Schutter (2010) "Countries tackling hunger with a right to food approach. Significant progress in implementing the right to food at national scale in Africa, Latin America and South Asia" United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, Briefing Note 01, 14 May 2010. [www.srfood.org/images/stories/pdf/otherdocuments/20100514_briefing-note-01_en.pdf] Downloaded 3 May 2012
^ "Haiti's seed multiplication programme yields fruits", Jeune Afrique, 21 August 2009
^ "FAO and EU Food Facility". Fao.org. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "UN food agency assists farmers in Zimbabwe", Xinhua, 14 September 2009
^ "1billionhungry project petition presented to world leaders". Westerfarmpress.com. 30 November 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2012. 
^ "EndingHunger". Retrieved 9 January 2012. 
^ Chayefsky, Paddy and Lumet, Sidney (Director) (1976). Network (Motion picture). United States: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, United Artists. 
^ "The 1billionhungry project" (DOC). AD HOC Group of INGOs. Retrieved 9 January 2012. 
^ "FAO launches anti-hunger petition, 11 May 2010". Fao.org. 11 May 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2012. 
^ "theaahm.org". theaahm.org. Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "fao.org". Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "wfp.org". Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "ifad.org". Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "bioversityinternational.org". Retrieved 7 November 2012. 
^ "Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition". theaahm.org. 17 March 2011. Retrieved 17 March 2011. 
^ http://www.comunityipm.org
^ "About GIPB". FAO. Retrieved 3 March 2012. 
^ "Objectives". FAO. Retrieved 3 March 2012. 
^ "About FAO". FAO. Retrieved 18 February 2014. 
^ FAO. "Annex 2: Working Definitions for Use in Developing Country Reports and Providing Supporting Data." Animal Genetics Resources Information: Special Issue State of the World 30 (2001): 35-40. Web. 19 May 2016.
^ FAO's Forestry portal page
^ FAO's home page
^ FAO's Global Forest Resources Assessment
^ FAO synthesis report Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How are forests changing?
^ Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015 Desk Reference
^ http://www.fao.org/forest-resources-assessment/current-assessment/country-reports/en/
^ http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4868e.pdf
^ http://www.fao.org/3/be7b339c-dbe9-4d48-ac73-2a8ba1ae7ee2/i4895e.pdf
^ "Changes in Global Forest Resources from 1990 to 2015". Elsevier. Retrieved 5 April 2016. 
^ FAO's State of the World's Forests
^ "FAO. 2014. State of the World's Forests 2014. Rome, Italy". Fao.org. Retrieved 23 July 2014. 
^ "FAO Yearbook of Forest Products". FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. FAO. 
^ FAO's Unasylva
^ "International Day of Forests," United Nations General Assembly, 28 November 2012.
^ http://faostat3.fao.org/home/index.html
^ http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm
^ "FAO members list". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 17 September 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "CIA World Factbook". Cia.gov. Retrieved 14 June 2012. 
^ Critics Say Rivalries Hurt Work of Food Groups, New York Times, 9 November 1981
^ Bread and Stones: Leadership and the Struggle to Reform the United Nations World Food Programme, James Ingram, Booksurge, 2006
^ "The U.N.'s Food and Agriculture Organization: Becoming Part of the Problem", Juliana Geran Pilon, Heritage Foundation Backgrounder #626, 4 January 1988
^ "Society, Volume 25, Number 6, September 1988". Springerlink.com. 5 April 2002. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ A Sixth 100 Questions on Democracy, Council for Parity Democracy, 22 November 2002
^ Lords of Poverty: The Power, Prestige, and Corruption of the International Aid Business, MacMillan, London, 1989
^ Amy Sherman (Winter 1991). "Lords of Poverty and Servants of the Poor" (PDF). Stewardship Journal. 
^ "Statement by John R. Bolton", Assistant Secretary for International Organizations, 19 September 1990
^ The Ecologist. Exacteditions.theecologist.org. 21 (2). March–April 1991 http://exacteditions.theecologist.org/exact/browse/307/308/5643/1/1. Retrieved 15 October 2010.  Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ "Food summit waste of time". BBC News. 13 June 2002. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "NGO/CSO Forum for Food Sovereignty, final statement". Practicalaction.org. 12 June 2002. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Agricultural Biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?, FAO, 17 May 2004
^ "FAO declare war on farmers not hunger, Grain, 16 June 2004". Grain.org. 16 June 2004. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "Statement by FAO Director General". Fao.org. 16 June 2004. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "Resignation letter of Louise Fresco, ADG, FAO", Guardian, 14 May 2006
^ Global hunger: act now or go home, press statement, 30 October 2006
^ 10 Years of Empty Promises, press statement 22 September 2006 Archived 10 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Independent External Evaluation, page at FAO website with links to the IEE report
^ "Official FAO response to evaluation report". Fao.org. 29 October 2007. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ For a Renewal of FAO, on-line petition, November 2007
^ "UN food agency approves US$42.6 million, €38.6 million reform plan". Times of India. 22 November 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Nikolau, Lisa. "U.N. job for former Peru first lady held up by inquiry back home". Humanosphere. Retrieved 8 May 2017. 
^ "Nadine 'still on FAO payroll,' agency quoted saying". The Italian Insider. Retrieved 8 May 2017. 
^ "José Ugaz: "Nadine Heredia debió postergar cargo en la FAO"". La República. Retrieved 10 May 2017. 
^ Filipowicz, Jan. "FAO 'exploiting employees' without job security, unions say". Italian Insider. Retrieved 13 May 2017. 
^ "UN food body should be scrapped". BBC News. 5 May 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ Borger, Julian (6 June 2008). "Food summit fails to agree on biofuels, Guardian 06 June 2008". Guardian. London. Retrieved 15 October 2010. 
^ "Rome summit 'important first step' but much more needed says Oxfam", Oxfam Press Release, 5 June 2008
^ "Farmers 'disgusted' with food summit", Daily Despatch Online, 7 June 2008
^ Civil Society Declaration of the Terra Preta Forum, La Via Campesina, 5 June 2008 Archived 10 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
^ "Conference Committee for the Follow-up to the Independent External Evaluation of FAO". FAO.org. Retrieved 5 October 2013. 
^ "FAO Reform" (PDF). Fao.org. 28 February 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2011. 


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Food and Agriculture Organization.



Official website
Aquastat, FAO database of global water usage







v
t
e


United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)



Membership



List of members of the United Nations Economic and Social Council





Functional commissions



UN Commission for Social Development (CsocD)
Commission on Narcotic Drugs
Commission on Science and Technology for Development (CSTD)
UN Commission on the Status of Women (UN CSW)
Commission on Population and Development
UN Statistical Commission
United Nations Forum on Forests





Regional commissions



Europe (ECE)
Africa (ECA)
Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)
Western Asia (ESCWA)





Specialized agencies



International Labour Organization (ILO)
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
World Health Organization (WHO)
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
International Maritime Organization (IMO)
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Universal Postal Union (UPU)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Office of Project Services (UNOPS)
International Refugee Organisation (IRO – ceased to exist in 1952)
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB)





World Bank Group



International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
International Development Association (IDA)
International Finance Corporation (IFC)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)





Other entities



United Nations Development Group (UNDG)
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII)
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF)





Disbanded entities



Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD - Disbanded 2013 into UNHLPF)
UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR - Disbanded 2006 in to UNHRC)








 Category
 United Nations Portal












v
t
e


 United Nations






António Guterres, Secretary-General
Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
Peter Thomson, General Assembly President





United Nations System




United Nations Charter



Preamble





Principal organs



General Assembly

President


Security Council

Members


Economic and Social Council
Secretariat

Secretary-General
Deputy Secretary-General
Under-Secretary-General


International Court of Justice

statute


Trusteeship Council





Secretariat Offices
and Departments



Headquarters
Envoy on Youth
Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
Geneva
Palace of Nations
Nairobi
Vienna
Economic and Social Affairs
Political Affairs
Public Information

Dag Hammarskjöld Library


Safety and Security
Palestinian Rights
Peacekeeping Operations
Internal Oversight
Legal Affairs
Developing Countries
Sport for Development and Peace
Disarmament Affairs
Outer Space Affairs
Partnerships
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
UN organizations by location
United Nations Office for Developing Countries






Programmes and
specialized agencies




FAO
ICAO
IFAD
ILO
IMO
ITC
IPCC
IAEA
MINURSO
UNIDO
ITU
UNAIDS
SCSL
UNCTAD
UNCITRAL
UNCDF
UNDG
UNDP
UNDPI
UNDPKO

peacekeeping


UNEP

OzonAction
UNEP/GRID-Arendal
UNEP-WCMC


UNESCO
UNFIP
UNFPA
UN-HABITAT
OHCHR
UNHCR
UNHRC
UNICEF
UNICRI
UNIDIR
UNITAR
UN-Oceans
UNODC
UNOPS
UNOSAT
UNRISD
UNRWA
UNSSC
UNU

UNU-OP
UNU-CRIS


UNV
UN Women
UNWTO
UPU
WFP
WHO
WIPO
WMO








Members / observers



Full members
Founding members

UNSC Permanent members


Observers

European Union







History



League of Nations
Four Policemen
Declaration by United Nations
Peacekeeping missions

history
timeline


Enlargement





Resolutions



Security Council vetoes
General Assembly

66th
67th


Security Council

Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Nagorno-Karabakh
North Korea
Palestine
Syria
Western Sahara







Elections



Secretary-General (2006
2016)
International Court of Justice 2011
General Assembly President (2012
2016)
Security Council (2015
2016)





Related



Bretton Woods system
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Criticism
Delivering as One
Flag

Honour Flag


Four Nations Initiative
Genocide Convention
UN Global Compact
ICC
International Years
UN laissez-passer
Military Staff Committee
Official languages
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Peacekeeping
Treaty Series
UN Day
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Millennium Declaration

Summit
Development Goals


Security Council veto power
UN reform

Security Council reform


UN Art Collection
UN Memorial Cemetery Korea





Other



Outline
UN television film series (1964–1966)
In popular culture












v
t
e


Forestry






Outline
Index
Forest areas
Ministries
Research institutes
Colleges
Journals
Arbor Day





Types



Agroforestry

dehesa


Analog forestry
Bamboo forestry
Close to nature forestry
Community forestry
Ecoforestry
Energy forestry
Mycoforestry
Permaforestry
Plantation forestry
Social forestry
Sustainable forestry
Urban forestry





Ecology and
management



Arboriculture
Controlled burn
Dendrology
Ecological thinning
Even-aged management
Fire ecology
Forest

informatics
IPM
inventory
governance
law
old-growth
pathology
protection
restoration
secondary
transition


Forest certification

ATFS
CFS
FSC
PEFC
SFI
SmartWood
Woodland Carbon Code


Forestation

afforestation
reforestation


Growth and yield modelling
Horticulture

GM trees


i-Tree

urban


Silviculture
Sustainable management
Tree

allometry
breeding


Tree measurement

crown
girth
height
volume







Environmental
topics



Acid rain
Carbon sequestration
Clearcutting
Deforestation
Ecological services
Forest dieback
Forest fragmentation
High grading
Illegal logging
Invasive species
REDD
Shifting cultivation

chitemene
slash-and-burn
slash-and-char
svedjebruk


Timber recycling
Wildfire
Wilding





Industries



Coppicing
Forest farming
Forest gardening
Logging
Manufacturing

lumber
plywood
pulp and paper
sawmilling


Products

biochar
biomass
charcoal
non-timber
palm oil
rayon
rubber
tanbark


Rail transport
Tree farm

Christmas trees


Wood

engineered
fuel
mahogany
teak


Woodworking





Occupations



Forester
Arborist
Bucker
Choker setter
Ecologist
Feller
Firefighter

handcrew
hotshot
lookout
smokejumper


River driver
Truck driver
Log scaler
Lumberjack
Ranger
Resin tapper
Rubber tapper
Shingle weaver
Timber cruiser
Tree planter
Wood process engineer








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


Global human population



Major topics



Biocapacity
Optimum population
Overpopulation

Malthusian catastrophe


Population
Population ethics
Population momentum
Sustainable development
Women's reproductive rights
Zero population growth





Biological and
related topics



Family planning

Pledge two or fewer


Human population planning

One-child policy
Two-child policy


Population biology
Population decline
Population density

Physiological density


Population dynamics
Population growth
Population model
Population pyramid
Projections of population growth





Human impact on
the environment



Deforestation
Desalination
Desertification
Environmental impact

of agriculture
of aviation
of biodiesel
of concrete
of electricity generation
of the energy industry
of fishing
of irrigation
of mining
of off-roading
of oil shale industry
of palm oil
of paper
of the petroleum industry
of reservoirs
of shipping
of war


Industrialisation
Land degradation
Land reclamation
Overconsumption
Pollution
Quarrying
Urbanization

Loss of green belts
Urban sprawl


Waste
Water scarcity

Overdrafting








Population
ecology




Carrying capacity
Deep ecology
Earth's energy budget
Food security
Habitat destruction
I = P × A  × T
Malthusian growth model
Overshoot (population)
World energy consumption
World energy resources
World3 model





Literature



A Modest Proposal
Observations Concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.
An Essay on the Principle of Population
"How Much Land Does a Man Need?"
Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth
Population Control: Real Costs, Illusory Benefits
The Limits to Growth
The Population Bomb
The Skeptical Environmentalist
The Ultimate Resource





Publications



Population and Environment
Population and Development Review





Lists



Population and housing censuses by country
Metropolitan areas by population
Population milestone babies






Events and
organizations




7 Billion Actions
International Conference on Population and Development
Population Action International
Population Connection
Population Matters
Population Research Institute
United Nations Population Fund
Voluntary Human Extinction Movement
World Population Day
World Population Foundation





Related topics



Classic Maya collapse
Fertility and intelligence
Green Revolution
Holocene extinction
Migration








 Commons
 Human overpopulation
Human activities with impact on the environment
Human migration









Authority control



WorldCat Identities
VIAF: 163972141
LCCN: n80004214
ISNI: 0000 0000 9621 3895
GND: 2010460-1
SELIBR: 115422
SUDOC: 026357364
BNF: cb118620937 (data)
NLA: 49641413
NDL: 00288567
NKC: kn20010710021
BNE: XX99658











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Food_and_Agriculture_Organization&oldid=818249065"					Categories: Food and Agriculture OrganizationUnited Nations specialized agenciesAgricultural organizationsHunger relief organizationsUnited Nations Development GroupUnited Nations Economic and Social CouncilAgrarian politicsEnvironmental agenciesFisheries agenciesFood politicsForestry agenciesWorld forestryEnvironmental organisations based in ItalyOrganizations established in 1945Organisations based in RomeFood- and drink-related organizationsHidden categories: Pages with citations lacking titlesPages with citations having bare URLsWebarchive template wayback linksUse dmy dates from February 2014Articles containing Latin-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2017All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles needing additional references from October 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2011Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014Articles with unsourced statements from November 2013Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with NLA identifiers