For other uses, see Food (disambiguation).




Various foods






Foods from plant sources


Food is any substance[1] consumed to provide nutritional support for an organism. It is usually of plant or animal origin, and contains essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals. The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells to provide energy, maintain life, or stimulate growth.
Historically, humans secured food through two methods: hunting and gathering and agriculture. Today, the majority of the food energy required by the ever increasing population of the world is supplied by the food industry.
Food safety and food security are monitored by agencies like the International Association for Food Protection, World Resources Institute, World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization, and International Food Information Council. They address issues such as sustainability, biological diversity, climate change, nutritional economics, population growth, water supply, and access to food.
The right to food is a human right derived from the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), recognizing the "right to an adequate standard of living, including adequate food", as well as the "fundamental right to be free from hunger".



Contents


1 Food sources

1.1 Plants
1.2 Animals


2 Production
3 Taste perception

3.1 Sweet
3.2 Sour
3.3 Salty
3.4 Bitter
3.5 Umami


4 Cuisine

4.1 Presentation
4.2 Contrast in texture
4.3 Contrast in taste
4.4 Food preparation

4.4.1 Animal preparation
4.4.2 Cooking

4.4.2.1 Cooking equipment


4.4.3 Raw food preparation


4.5 Restaurants
4.6 Food manufacturing


5 Commercial trade

5.1 International food imports and exports
5.2 Marketing and retailing
5.3 Prices
5.4 As investment


6 Famine and hunger

6.1 Food aid


7 Safety

7.1 Allergies
7.2 Other health issues


8 Diet

8.1 Cultural and religious diets
8.2 Diet deficiencies
8.3 Moral, ethical, and health-conscious diets


9 Nutrition and dietary problems
10 Legal definition
11 Types of food
12 See also
13 Notes
14 References
15 Further reading
16 External links



Food sources
Most food has its origin in plants. Some food is obtained directly from plants; but even animals that are used as food sources are raised by feeding them food derived from plants. Cereal grain is a staple food that provides more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop.[2] Corn (maize), wheat, and rice – in all of their varieties – account for 87% of all grain production worldwide.[3][4][5] Most of the grain that is produced worldwide is fed to livestock.
Some foods not from animal or plant sources include various edible fungi, especially mushrooms. Fungi and ambient bacteria are used in the preparation of fermented and pickled foods like leavened bread, alcoholic drinks, cheese, pickles, kombucha, and yogurt. Another example is blue-green algae such as Spirulina.[6] Inorganic substances such as salt, baking soda and cream of tartar are used to preserve or chemically alter an ingredient.
Plants
See also: Herb and spice
Many plants and plant parts are eaten as food and around 2,000 plant species are cultivated for food. Many of these plant species have several distinct cultivars.[7]
Seeds of plants are a good source of food for animals, including humans, because they contain the nutrients necessary for the plant's initial growth, including many healthful fats, such as omega fats. In fact, the majority of food consumed by human beings are seed-based foods. Edible seeds include cereals (corn, wheat, rice, et cetera), legumes (beans, peas, lentils, et cetera), and nuts. Oilseeds are often pressed to produce rich oils - sunflower, flaxseed, rapeseed (including canola oil), sesame, et cetera.[8]
Seeds are typically high in unsaturated fats and, in moderation, are considered a health food, although not all seeds are edible. Large seeds, such as those from a lemon, pose a choking hazard, while seeds from cherries and apples contain cyanide which could be poisonous only if consumed in large volumes.[9]
Fruits are the ripened ovaries of plants, including the seeds within. Many plants and animals have coevolved such that the fruits of the former are an attractive food source to the latter, because animals that eat the fruits may excrete the seeds some distance away. Fruits, therefore, make up a significant part of the diets of most cultures. Some botanical fruits, such as tomatoes, pumpkins, and eggplants, are eaten as vegetables.[10] (For more information, see list of fruits.)
Vegetables are a second type of plant matter that is commonly eaten as food. These include root vegetables (potatoes and carrots), bulbs (onion family), leaf vegetables (spinach and lettuce), stem vegetables (bamboo shoots and asparagus), and inflorescence vegetables (globe artichokes and broccoli and other vegetables such as cabbage or cauliflower).[11]
Animals
Main articles: Animal source foods and Food chain




Various raw meats


Animals are used as food either directly or indirectly by the products they produce. Meat is an example of a direct product taken from an animal, which comes from muscle systems or from organs.
Food products produced by animals include milk produced by mammary glands, which in many cultures is drunk or processed into dairy products (cheese, butter, etc.). In addition, birds and other animals lay eggs, which are often eaten, and bees produce honey, a reduced nectar from flowers, which is a popular sweetener in many cultures. Some cultures consume blood, sometimes in the form of blood sausage, as a thickener for sauces, or in a cured, salted form for times of food scarcity, and others use blood in stews such as jugged hare.[12]
Some cultures and people do not consume meat or animal food products for cultural, dietary, health, ethical, or ideological reasons. Vegetarians choose to forgo food from animal sources to varying degrees. Vegans do not consume any foods that are or contain ingredients from an animal source.

Production




A tractor pulling a chaser bin


Main articles: Agriculture, Food industry, and Genetically modified food
Most food has always been obtained through agriculture. With increasing concern over both the methods and products of modern industrial agriculture, there has been a growing trend toward sustainable agricultural practices. This approach, partly fueled by consumer demand, encourages biodiversity, local self-reliance and organic farming methods.[13] Major influences on food production include international organizations (e.g. the World Trade Organization and Common Agricultural Policy), national government policy (or law), and war.[14]
In popular culture, the mass production of food, specifically meats such as chicken and beef, has come under fire from various documentaries, most recently Food, Inc, documenting the mass slaughter and poor treatment of animals, often for easier revenues from large corporations. Along with a current trend towards environmentalism, people in Western culture have had an increasing trend towards the use of herbal supplements, foods for a specific group of people (such as dieters, women, or athletes), functional foods (fortified foods, such as omega-3 eggs), and a more ethnically diverse diet.[15]
Several organisations have begun calling for a new kind of agriculture in which agroecosystems provide food but also support vital ecosystem services so that soil fertility and biodiversity are maintained rather than compromised. According to the International Water Management Institute and UNEP, well-managed agroecosystems not only provide food, fiber and animal products, they also provide services such as flood mitigation, groundwater recharge, erosion control and habitats for plants, birds, fish and other animals.[16]

Taste perception
Main article: Taste
Animals, specifically humans, have five different types of tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami. As animals have evolved, the tastes that provide the most energy (sugar and fats) are the most pleasant to eat while others, such as bitter, are not enjoyable.[17] Water, while important for survival, has no taste.[18] Fats, on the other hand, especially saturated fats, are thicker and rich and are thus considered more enjoyable to eat.
Sweet




Structure of sucrose


Generally regarded as the most pleasant taste, sweetness is almost always caused by a type of simple sugar such as glucose or fructose, or disaccharides such as sucrose, a molecule combining glucose and fructose.[19] Complex carbohydrates are long chains and thus do not have the sweet taste. Artificial sweeteners such as sucralose are used to mimic the sugar molecule, creating the sensation of sweet, without the calories. Other types of sugar include raw sugar, which is known for its amber color, as it is unprocessed. As sugar is vital for energy and survival, the taste of sugar is pleasant.
The stevia plant contains a compound known as steviol which, when extracted, has 300 times the sweetness of sugar while having minimal impact on blood sugar.[20]
Sour
Sourness is caused by the taste of acids, such as vinegar in alcoholic beverages. Sour foods include citrus, specifically lemons, limes, and to a lesser degree oranges. Sour is evolutionarily significant as it is a sign for a food that may have gone rancid due to bacteria.[21] Many foods, however, are slightly acidic, and help stimulate the taste buds and enhance flavor.
Salty




Salt mounds in Bolivia


Saltiness is the taste of alkali metal ions such as sodium and potassium. It is found in almost every food in low to moderate proportions to enhance flavor, although to eat pure salt is regarded as highly unpleasant. There are many different types of salt, with each having a different degree of saltiness, including sea salt, fleur de sel, kosher salt, mined salt, and grey salt. Other than enhancing flavor, its significance is that the body needs and maintains a delicate electrolyte balance, which is the kidney's function. Salt may be iodized, meaning iodine has been added to it, a necessary nutrient that promotes thyroid function. Some canned foods, notably soups or packaged broths, tend to be high in salt as a means of preserving the food longer. Historically salt has long been used as a meat preservative as salt promotes water excretion. Similarly, dried foods also promote food safety.[22]
Bitter
Bitterness is a sensation often considered unpleasant characterized by having a sharp, pungent taste. Unsweetened dark chocolate, caffeine, lemon rind, and some types of fruit are known to be bitter.
Umami
Umami, the Japanese word for delicious, is the least known in Western popular culture but has a long tradition in Asian cuisine. Umami is the taste of glutamates, especially monosodium glutamate (MSG).[19] It is characterized as savory, meaty, and rich in flavor.[23] Salmon and mushrooms are foods high in umami.[24]
Cuisine
Main articles: Cuisine, Regional cuisine, and Global cuisines




Typical Balinese cuisine in Indonesia


Many scholars claim that the rhetorical function of food is to represent the culture of a country, and that it can be used as a form of communication. According to Goode, Curtis and Theophano, food "is the last aspect of an ethnic culture to be lost".[25]
Many cultures have a recognizable cuisine, a specific set of cooking traditions using various spices or a combination of flavors unique to that culture, which evolves over time. Other differences include preferences (hot or cold, spicy, etc.) and practices, the study of which is known as gastronomy. Many cultures have diversified their foods by means of preparation, cooking methods, and manufacturing. This also includes a complex food trade which helps the cultures to economically survive by way of food, not just by consumption.
Some popular types of ethnic foods include Italian, French, Japanese, Chinese, American, Cajun, Thai, African, Indian and Nepalese. Various cultures throughout the world study the dietary analysis of food habits. While evolutionarily speaking, as opposed to culturally, humans are omnivores, religion and social constructs such as morality, activism, or environmentalism will often affect which foods they will consume. Food is eaten and typically enjoyed through the sense of taste, the perception of flavor from eating and drinking. Certain tastes are more enjoyable than others, for evolutionary purposes.
Presentation




A French basil salmon terrine, with eye-appealing garnishes


Main article: Food presentation
Aesthetically pleasing and eye-appealing food presentations can encourage people to consume foods. A common saying is that people "eat with their eyes". Food presented in a clean and appetizing way will encourage a good flavor, even if unsatisfactory.[26][27]
Contrast in texture
Texture plays a crucial role in the enjoyment of eating foods. Contrasts in textures, such as something crunchy in an otherwise smooth dish, may increase the appeal of eating it. Common examples include adding granola to yogurt, adding croutons to a salad or soup, and toasting bread to enhance its crunchiness for a smooth topping, such as jam or butter.[28]
Contrast in taste
Another universal phenomenon regarding food is the appeal of contrast in taste and presentation. For example, such opposite flavors as sweetness and saltiness tend to go well together, as in kettle corn and nuts.
Food preparation
Main article: Outline of food preparation
While many foods can be eaten raw, many also undergo some form of preparation for reasons of safety, palatability, texture, or flavor. At the simplest level this may involve washing, cutting, trimming, or adding other foods or ingredients, such as spices. It may also involve mixing, heating or cooling, pressure cooking, fermentation, or combination with other food. In a home, most food preparation takes place in a kitchen. Some preparation is done to enhance the taste or aesthetic appeal; other preparation may help to preserve the food; others may be involved in cultural identity. A meal is made up of food which is prepared to be eaten at a specific time and place.[29]




A refrigerator helps to keep foods fresh.


Animal preparation
The preparation of animal-based food usually involves slaughter, evisceration, hanging, portioning, and rendering. In developed countries, this is usually done outside the home in slaughterhouses, which are used to process animals en masse for meat production. Many countries regulate their slaughterhouses by law. For example, the United States has established the Humane Slaughter Act of 1958, which requires that an animal be stunned before killing. This act, like those in many countries, exempts slaughter in accordance to religious law, such as kosher, shechita, and dhabīḥah halal. Strict interpretations of kashrut require the animal to be fully aware when its carotid artery is cut.[30]
On the local level, a butcher may commonly break down larger animal meat into smaller manageable cuts, and pre-wrap them for commercial sale or wrap them to order in butcher paper. In addition, fish and seafood may be fabricated into smaller cuts by a fish monger. However fish butchery may be done on board a fishing vessel and quick-frozen for preservation of quality.[31]
Cooking




Cooking with a wok in China


Main article: Cooking
The term "cooking" encompasses a vast range of methods, tools, and combinations of ingredients to improve the flavor or digestibility of food. Cooking technique, known as culinary art, generally requires the selection, measurement, and combining of ingredients in an ordered procedure in an effort to achieve the desired result. Constraints on success include the variability of ingredients, ambient conditions, tools, and the skill of the individual cook.[32] The diversity of cooking worldwide is a reflection of the myriad nutritional, aesthetic, agricultural, economic, cultural, and religious considerations that affect it.[33]
Cooking requires applying heat to a food which usually, though not always, chemically changes the molecules, thus changing its flavor, texture, appearance, and nutritional properties.[34] Cooking certain proteins, such as egg whites, meats, and fish, denatures the protein, causing it to firm. There is archaeological evidence of roasted foodstuffs at Homo erectus campsites dating from 420,000 years ago.[35] Boiling as a means of cooking requires a container, and has been practiced at least since the 10th millennium BC with the introduction of pottery.[36]
Cooking equipment




A stainless steel frying pan






A traditional asado (barbecue)


Main article: Cookware and bakeware
There are many different types of equipment used for cooking.
Ovens are mostly hollow devices that get very hot (up to 500 °F (260 °C)) and are used for baking or roasting and offer a dry-heat cooking method. Different cuisines will use different types of ovens. For example, Indian culture uses a tandoor oven, which is a cylindrical clay oven which operates at a single high temperature.[37] Western kitchens use variable temperature convection ovens, conventional ovens, toaster ovens, or non-radiant heat ovens like the microwave oven. Classic Italian cuisine includes the use of a brick oven containing burning wood. Ovens may be wood-fired, coal-fired, gas, electric, or oil-fired.[38]
Various types of cook-tops are used as well. They carry the same variations of fuel types as the ovens mentioned above. Cook-tops are used to heat vessels placed on top of the heat source, such as a sauté pan, sauce pot, frying pan, or pressure cooker. These pieces of equipment can use either a moist or dry cooking method and include methods such as steaming, simmering, boiling, and poaching for moist methods, while the dry methods include sautéing, pan frying, and deep-frying.[39]
In addition, many cultures use grills for cooking. A grill operates with a radiant heat source from below, usually covered with a metal grid and sometimes a cover. An open pit barbecue in the American south is one example along with the American style outdoor grill fueled by wood, liquid propane, or charcoal along with soaked wood chips for smoking.[40] A Mexican style of barbecue is called barbacoa, which involves the cooking of meats such as whole sheep over an open fire. In Argentina, an asado (Spanish for "grilled") is prepared on a grill held over an open pit or fire made upon the ground, on which a whole animal or smaller cuts are grilled.[41]
Raw food preparation




Many types of fish ready to be eaten, including salmon and tuna


Certain cultures highlight animal and vegetable foods in a raw state. Salads consisting of raw vegetables or fruits are common in many cuisines. Sashimi in Japanese cuisine consists of raw sliced fish or other meat, and sushi often incorporates raw fish or seafood. Steak tartare and salmon tartare are dishes made from diced or ground raw beef or salmon, mixed with various ingredients and served with baguettes, brioche, or frites.[42] In Italy, carpaccio is a dish of very thinly sliced raw beef, drizzled with a vinaigrette made with olive oil.[43] The health food movement known as raw foodism promotes a mostly vegan diet of raw fruits, vegetables, and grains prepared in various ways, including juicing, food dehydration, sprouting, and other methods of preparation that do not heat the food above 118 °F (47.8 °C).[44] An example of a raw meat dish is ceviche, a Latin American dish made with raw meat that is "cooked" from the highly acidic citric juice from lemons and limes along with other aromatics such as garlic.

Restaurants




The Allyn House restaurant menu (March 5, 1859)






Tom's Restaurant, a restaurant in New York City


Main article: Restaurant
Restaurants employ trained chefs who prepare food, and trained waitstaff to serve the customers. The term restaurant is credited to the French from the 19th century, as it relates to the restorative nature of the bouillons that were once served in them. However, the concept pre-dates the naming of these establishments, as evidence suggests commercial food preparation may have existed during the age of the city of Pompeii, and urban sales of prepared foods may have existed in China during the Song dynasty. The coffee shops or cafés of 17th century Europe may also be considered an early version of the restaurant.[45] In 2005, the population of the United States spent $496 billion for out-of-home dining. Expenditures by type of out-of-home dining were as follows: 40% in full-service restaurants, 37.2% in limited service restaurants (fast food), 6.6% in schools or colleges, 5.4% in bars and vending machines, 4.7% in hotels and motels, 4.0% in recreational places, and 2.2% in others, which includes military bases.[46]
Food manufacturing




Packaged household food items


Main article: Food manufacture
Packaged foods are manufactured outside the home for purchase. This can be as simple as a butcher preparing meat, or as complex as a modern international food industry. Early food processing techniques were limited by available food preservation, packaging, and transportation. This mainly involved salting, curing, curdling, drying, pickling, fermenting, and smoking.[47] Food manufacturing arose during the industrial revolution in the 19th century.[48] This development took advantage of new mass markets and emerging technology, such as milling, preservation, packaging and labeling, and transportation. It brought the advantages of pre-prepared time-saving food to the bulk of ordinary people who did not employ domestic servants.[49]
At the start of the 21st century, a two-tier structure has arisen, with a few international food processing giants controlling a wide range of well-known food brands. There also exists a wide array of small local or national food processing companies.[50] Advanced technologies have also come to change food manufacture. Computer-based control systems, sophisticated processing and packaging methods, and logistics and distribution advances can enhance product quality, improve food safety, and reduce costs.[49]
Commercial trade




SeaWiFS image for the global biosphere






Global average daily calorie consumption in 1995






Food imports in 2005






Population density of world regions


International food imports and exports
See also: Population density
The World Bank reported that the European Union was the top food importer in 2005, followed at a distance by the USA and Japan. Britain's need for food was especially well illustrated in World War II. Despite the implementation of food rationing, Britain remained dependent on food imports and the result was a long term engagement in the Battle of the Atlantic.
Food is traded and marketed on a global basis. The variety and availability of food is no longer restricted by the diversity of locally grown food or the limitations of the local growing season.[51] Between 1961 and 1999, there was a 400% increase in worldwide food exports.[52] Some countries are now economically dependent on food exports, which in some cases account for over 80% of all exports.[53]
In 1994, over 100 countries became signatories to the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in a dramatic increase in trade liberalization. This included an agreement to reduce subsidies paid to farmers, underpinned by the WTO enforcement of agricultural subsidy, tariffs, import quotas, and settlement of trade disputes that cannot be bilaterally resolved.[54] Where trade barriers are raised on the disputed grounds of public health and safety, the WTO refer the dispute to the Codex Alimentarius Commission, which was founded in 1962 by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization. Trade liberalization has greatly affected world food trade.[55]
Marketing and retailing




Packaged food aisles of supermarket in Portland, Oregon, United States of America


Main article: Food marketing
Food marketing brings together the producer and the consumer. It is the chain of activities that brings food from "farm gate to plate".[56] The marketing of even a single food product can be a complicated process involving many producers and companies. For example, fifty-six companies are involved in making one can of chicken noodle soup. These businesses include not only chicken and vegetable processors but also the companies that transport the ingredients and those who print labels and manufacture cans.[57] The food marketing system is the largest direct and indirect non-government employer in the United States.
In the pre-modern era, the sale of surplus food took place once a week when farmers took their wares on market day into the local village marketplace. Here food was sold to grocers for sale in their local shops for purchase by local consumers.[33][49] With the onset of industrialization and the development of the food processing industry, a wider range of food could be sold and distributed in distant locations. Typically early grocery shops would be counter-based shops, in which purchasers told the shop-keeper what they wanted, so that the shop-keeper could get it for them.[33][58]
In the 20th century, supermarkets were born. Supermarkets brought with them a self service approach to shopping using shopping carts, and were able to offer quality food at lower cost through economies of scale and reduced staffing costs. In the latter part of the 20th century, this has been further revolutionized by the development of vast warehouse-sized, out-of-town supermarkets, selling a wide range of food from around the world.[59]
Unlike food processors, food retailing is a two-tier market in which a small number of very large companies control a large proportion of supermarkets. The supermarket giants wield great purchasing power over farmers and processors, and strong influence over consumers. Nevertheless, less than 10% of consumer spending on food goes to farmers, with larger percentages going to advertising, transportation, and intermediate corporations.[60]
Prices




Some essential food products including bread, rice and pasta


See also: Food vs. fuel




Food, meat, dairy, cereals, vegetable oil, and sugar price indices, deflated using the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value Index (MUV)[61]


It is rare for price spikes to hit all major foods in most countries at once. Food prices rose 4% in the United States in 2007, the highest increase since 1990, and are expected to climb as much again in 2008. As of December 2007, 37 countries faced food crises, and 20 had imposed some sort of food-price controls. In China, the price of pork jumped 58% in 2007. In the 1980s and 1990s, farm subsidies and support programs allowed major grain exporting countries to hold large surpluses, which could be tapped during food shortages to keep prices down. However, new trade policies have made agricultural production much more responsive to market demands, putting global food reserves at their lowest since 1983.[62]
Rising food prices over recent years have been linked with social unrest around the world, including rioting in Bangladesh and Mexico,[63] and the Arab Spring.[64] Food prices worldwide increased in 2008.[65][66] One cause of rising food prices is wealthier Asian consumers are westernizing their diets, and farmers and nations of the third world are struggling to keep up the pace. The past five years have seen rapid growth in the contribution of Asian nations to the global fluid and powdered milk manufacturing industry, which in 2008 accounted for more than 30% of production, while China alone accounts for more than 10% of both production and consumption in the global fruit and vegetable processing and preserving industry.[67]
In 2013 Overseas Development Institute researchers showed that rice has more than doubled in price since 2000, rising by 120% in real terms. This was as a result of shifts in trade policy and restocking by major producers. More fundamental drivers of increased prices are the higher costs of fertiliser, diesel and labour. Parts of Asia see rural wages rise with potential large benefits for the 1.3 billion (2008 estimate) of Asia's poor in reducing the poverty they face. However, this negatively impacts more vulnerable groups who don't share in the economic boom, especially in Asian and African coastal cities. The researchers said the threat means social-protection policies are needed to guard against price shocks. The research proposed that in the longer run, the rises present opportunities to export for Western African farmers with high potential for rice production to replace imports with domestic production.[68]
As investment
Institutions such as hedge funds, pension funds and investment banks like Barclays Capital, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley[63] have been instrumental in pushing up prices in the last five years, with investment in food commodities rising from $65bn to $126bn (£41bn to £79bn) between 2007 and 2012, contributing to 30-year highs. This has caused price fluctuations which are not strongly related to the actual supply of food, according to the United Nations.[63] Financial institutions now make up 61% of all investment in wheat futures. According to Olivier De Schutter, the UN special rapporteur on food, there was a rush by institutions to enter the food market following George W Bush's Commodities Futures Modernization Act of 2000.[63] De Schutter told the Independent in March 2012: "What we are seeing now is that these financial markets have developed massively with the arrival of these new financial investors, who are purely interested in the short-term monetary gain and are not really interested in the physical thing – they never actually buy the ton of wheat or maize; they only buy a promise to buy or to sell. The result of this financialisation of the commodities market is that the prices of the products respond increasingly to a purely speculative logic. This explains why in very short periods of time we see prices spiking or bubbles exploding, because prices are less and less determined by the real match between supply and demand."[63] In 2011, 450 economists from around the world called on the G20 to regulate the commodities market more.[63]
Some experts have said that speculation has merely aggravated other factors, such as climate change, competition with bio-fuels and overall rising demand.[63] However, some such as Jayati Ghosh, professor of economics at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, have pointed out that prices have increased irrespective of supply and demand issues: Ghosh points to world wheat prices, which doubled in the period from June to December 2010, despite there being no fall in global supply.[63]
Famine and hunger
Food deprivation leads to malnutrition and ultimately starvation. This is often connected with famine, which involves the absence of food in entire communities. This can have a devastating and widespread effect on human health and mortality. Rationing is sometimes used to distribute food in times of shortage, most notably during times of war.[14]
Starvation is a significant international problem. Approximately 815 million people are undernourished, and over 16,000 children die per day from hunger-related causes.[69] Food deprivation is regarded as a deficit need in Maslow's hierarchy of needs and is measured using famine scales.[70]
Food aid
Main article: Food aid
Food aid can benefit people suffering from a shortage of food. It can be used to improve peoples' lives in the short term, so that a society can increase its standard of living to the point that food aid is no longer required.[71] Conversely, badly managed food aid can create problems by disrupting local markets, depressing crop prices, and discouraging food production. Sometimes a cycle of food aid dependence can develop.[72] Its provision, or threatened withdrawal, is sometimes used as a political tool to influence the policies of the destination country, a strategy known as food politics. Sometimes, food aid provisions will require certain types of food be purchased from certain sellers, and food aid can be misused to enhance the markets of donor countries.[73] International efforts to distribute food to the neediest countries are often coordinated by the World Food Programme.[74]
Safety
Main article: Food safety




Salmonella bacteria is a common cause of foodborne illness, particularly in undercooked chicken and chicken eggs.


Foodborne illness, commonly called "food poisoning", is caused by bacteria, toxins, viruses, parasites, and prions. Roughly 7 million people die of food poisoning each year, with about 10 times as many suffering from a non-fatal version.[75] The two most common factors leading to cases of bacterial foodborne illness are cross-contamination of ready-to-eat food from other uncooked foods and improper temperature control. Less commonly, acute adverse reactions can also occur if chemical contamination of food occurs, for example from improper storage, or use of non-food grade soaps and disinfectants. Food can also be adulterated by a very wide range of articles (known as "foreign bodies") during farming, manufacture, cooking, packaging, distribution, or sale. These foreign bodies can include pests or their droppings, hairs, cigarette butts, wood chips, and all manner of other contaminants. It is possible for certain types of food to become contaminated if stored or presented in an unsafe container, such as a ceramic pot with lead-based glaze.[75]
Food poisoning has been recognized as a disease since as early as Hippocrates.[76] The sale of rancid, contaminated, or adulterated food was commonplace until the introduction of hygiene, refrigeration, and vermin controls in the 19th century. Discovery of techniques for killing bacteria using heat, and other microbiological studies by scientists such as Louis Pasteur, contributed to the modern sanitation standards that are ubiquitous in developed nations today. This was further underpinned by the work of Justus von Liebig, which led to the development of modern food storage and food preservation methods.[77] In more recent years, a greater understanding of the causes of food-borne illnesses has led to the development of more systematic approaches such as the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP), which can identify and eliminate many risks.[78]
Recommended measures for ensuring food safety include maintaining a clean preparation area with foods of different types kept separate, ensuring an adequate cooking temperature, and refrigerating foods promptly after cooking.[79]
Foods that spoil easily, such as meats, dairy, and seafood, must be prepared a certain way to avoid contaminating the people for whom they are prepared. As such, the rule of thumb is that cold foods (such as dairy products) should be kept cold and hot foods (such as soup) should be kept hot until storage. Cold meats, such as chicken, that are to be cooked should not be placed at room temperature for thawing, at the risk of dangerous bacterial growth, such as Salmonella or E. coli.[80]
Allergies
Main article: Food allergy
Some people have allergies or sensitivities to foods which are not problematic to most people. This occurs when a person's immune system mistakes a certain food protein for a harmful foreign agent and attacks it. About 2% of adults and 8% of children have a food allergy.[81] The amount of the food substance required to provoke a reaction in a particularly susceptible individual can be quite small. In some instances, traces of food in the air, too minute to be perceived through smell, have been known to provoke lethal reactions in extremely sensitive individuals. Common food allergens are gluten, corn, shellfish (mollusks), peanuts, and soy.[81] Allergens frequently produce symptoms such as diarrhea, rashes, bloating, vomiting, and regurgitation. The digestive complaints usually develop within half an hour of ingesting the allergen.[81]
Rarely, food allergies can lead to a medical emergency, such as anaphylactic shock, hypotension (low blood pressure), and loss of consciousness. An allergen associated with this type of reaction is peanut, although latex products can induce similar reactions.[81] Initial treatment is with epinephrine (adrenaline), often carried by known patients in the form of an Epi-pen or Twinject.[82][83]
Other health issues
Human diet was estimated to cause perhaps around 35% of cancers in a human epidemiological analysis by Richard Doll and Richard Peto in 1981.[84] These cancer may be caused by carcinogens that are present in food naturally or as contaminants. Food contaminated with fungal growth may contain mycotoxins such as aflatoxins which may be found in contaminated corn and peanuts. Other carcinogens identified in food include heterocyclic amines generated in meat when cooked at high temperature, polyaromatic hydrocarbons in charred meat and smoked fish, and nitrosamines generated from nitrites used as food preservatives in cured meat such as bacon.[85]
Anticarcinogens that may help prevent cancer can also be found in many food especially fruit and vegetables. Antioxidants are important groups of compounds that may help remove potentially harmful chemicals. It is however often difficult to identify the specific components in diet that serve to increase or decrease cancer risk since many food, such as beef steak and broccoli, contain low concentrations of both carcinogens and anticarcinogens.[85] There are many international certifications in cooking field, such as Monde Selection、A.A.Certification、iTQi. They use the high quality evaluation methods to make the food become more safe.
Diet




Changes of food supply (by energy)[86][87]
Other area (Yr 2010)[88] * Africa, sub-Sahara - 2170 kcal/capita/day * N.E. and N. Africa - 3120 kcal/capita/day * South Asia - 2450 kcal/capita/day * East Asia - 3040 kcal/capita/day * Latin America / Caribbean - 2950 kcal/capita/day * Developed countries - 3470 kcal/capita/day


Main article: Diet (nutrition)
Cultural and religious diets
Dietary habits are the habitual decisions a person or culture makes when choosing what foods to eat.[89] Many cultures hold some food preferences and some food taboos. Dietary choices can also define cultures and play a role in religion. For example, only kosher foods are permitted by Judaism, halal foods by Islam, and in Hinduism beef is restricted.[90] In addition, the dietary choices of different countries or regions have different characteristics. This is highly related to a culture's cuisine.
Diet deficiencies
Main article: Avitaminosis
Dietary habits play a significant role in the health and mortality of all humans. Imbalances between the consumed fuels and expended energy results in either starvation or excessive reserves of adipose tissue, known as body fat.[91] Poor intake of various vitamins and minerals can lead to diseases that can have far-reaching effects on health. For instance, 30% of the world's population either has, or is at risk for developing, iodine deficiency.[92] It is estimated that at least 3 million children are blind due to vitamin A deficiency.[93] Vitamin C deficiency results in scurvy.[94] Calcium, Vitamin D, and phosphorus are inter-related; the consumption of each may affect the absorption of the others. Kwashiorkor and marasmus are childhood disorders caused by lack of dietary protein.[95]
Moral, ethical, and health-conscious diets
Many individuals limit what foods they eat for reasons of morality, or other habit. For instance, vegetarians choose to forgo food from animal sources to varying degrees. Others choose a healthier diet, avoiding sugars or animal fats and increasing consumption of dietary fiber and antioxidants.[96] Obesity, a serious problem in the western world, leads to higher chances of developing heart disease, diabetes, cancer and many other diseases.[97] More recently, dietary habits have been influenced by the concerns that some people have about possible impacts on health or the environment from genetically modified food.[98] Further concerns about the impact of industrial farming (grains) on animal welfare, human health, and the environment are also having an effect on contemporary human dietary habits. This has led to the emergence of a movement with a preference for organic and local food.[99]
Nutrition and dietary problems




MyPlate replaced MyPyramid as the USDA nutrition guide.


Between the extremes of optimal health and death from starvation or malnutrition, there is an array of disease states that can be caused or alleviated by changes in diet. Deficiencies, excesses, and imbalances in diet can produce negative impacts on health, which may lead to various health problems such as scurvy, obesity, or osteoporosis, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases as well as psychological and behavioral problems. The science of nutrition attempts to understand how and why specific dietary aspects influence health.
Nutrients in food are grouped into several categories. Macronutrients are fat, protein, and carbohydrates. Micronutrients are the minerals and vitamins. Additionally, food contains water and dietary fiber.
As previously discussed, the body is designed by natural selection to enjoy sweet and fattening foods for evolutionary diets, ideal for hunters and gatherers. Thus, sweet and fattening foods in nature are typically rare and are very pleasurable to eat. In modern times, with advanced technology, enjoyable foods are easily available to consumers. Unfortunately, this promotes obesity in adults and children alike.
Legal definition
Some countries list a legal definition of food, often referring them with the word foodstuff. These countries list food as any item that is to be processed, partially processed, or unprocessed for consumption. The listing of items included as food include any substance intended to be, or reasonably expected to be, ingested by humans. In addition to these foodstuffs, drink, chewing gum, water, or other items processed into said food items are part of the legal definition of food. Items not included in the legal definition of food include animal feed, live animals (unless being prepared for sale in a market), plants prior to harvesting, medicinal products, cosmetics, tobacco and tobacco products, narcotic or psychotropic substances, and residues and contaminants.[100]
Types of food


Comfort food
Fast food
Junk food
Natural food
Organic food
Slow food
Whole food


See also


Food portal
Drink portal
Agriculture and Agronomy portal




Bulk foods
Beverages
Food and Bioprocess Technology
Category:Lists of foods
Food engineering
Food Inc., a 2009 documentary
Food science
Food security
Future food technology
List of foods
Lists of prepared foods
Non-food crop
Nutrition facts label
Optimal foraging theory
Outline of cooking
Outline of nutrition
Packaging and labeling
Traditional food
Urban farming
Food Justice


Notes


^ "food". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2017-07-27. Retrieved 2017-05-25. 
^ Society, National Geographic (2011-03-01). "food". National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 2017-03-22. Retrieved 2017-05-25. 
^ "ProdSTAT". FAOSTAT. Archived from the original on 2012-02-09. Retrieved 2008.  Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ Favour, Eboh. "DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF A MILL PULVERIZER". Archived from the original on 2017-12-26. 
^ Engineers, NIIR Board of Consultants & (2006-04-01). The Complete Book on Spices & Condiments (with Cultivation, Processing & Uses) 2nd Revised Edition: With Cultivation, Processing & Uses. ASIA PACIFIC BUSINESS PRESS Inc. ISBN 9788178330389. Archived from the original on 2017-12-26. 
^ McGee, 333–334.
^ McGee, 253.
^ McGee, Chapter 9.
^ "Are apple cores poisonous?". The Naked Scientists, University of Cambridge. 26 Sep 2010. Archived from the original on 6 May 2014. Retrieved 12 May 2014. 
^ McGee, Chapter 7.
^ McGee, Chapter 6.
^ Davidson, 81–82.
^ Mason
^ a b Messer, 53–91.
^ "Popular Culture, Food and". Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ Boelee, E. (Ed) Ecosystems for water and food security Archived 2013-05-23 at the Wayback Machine., 2011, IWMI, UNEP
^ "Evolution of taste receptor may have shaped human sensitivity to toxic compounds". Medical News Today. Archived from the original on 27 September 2010. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ "Why does pure water have no taste or colour?". The Times Of India. 2004-04-03. Archived from the original on 2015-12-30. 
^ a b New Oxford American Dictionary
^ The sweetness multiplier "300 times" comes from subjective evaluations by a panel of test subjects Archived January 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. tasting various dilutions compared to a standard dilution of sucrose. Sources referenced in this article say steviosides have up to 250 times the sweetness of sucrose, but others, including stevioside brands such as SweetLeaf, claim 300 times. 1/3 to 1/2 teaspoon (1.6–2.5 ml) of stevioside powder is claimed to have equivalent sweetening power to 1 cup (237 ml) of sugar.
^ States "having an acid taste like lemon or vinegar: she sampled the wine and found it was sour. (of food, esp. milk) spoiled because of fermentation." New Oxford American Dictionary
^ "Food Preservatives". Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ Farr, Sarah (2016). Healing Herbal Teas: Learn to Blend 101 Specially Formulated Teas for Stress Management, Common Ailments, Seasonal Health, and Immune Support. Storey Publishing. ISBN 9781612125749. 
^ Feely, Caro (2015-11-12). Wine: The Essential Guide to Tasting, History, Culture and More. Summersdale Publishers LTD. ISBN 9781783726837. 
^ Shugart, Helene A. (2008). "Sumptuous Texts: Consuming "Otherness" in the Food Film Genre". Critical Studies in Media Communication. 25 (1): 68. doi:10.1080/15295030701849928. 
^ "You first eat with your eyes". Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ Food Texture, Andrew J. Rosenthal
^ Rosenthal, Andrew J (1999-02-28). "Food Texture: Measurement and Perception". ISBN 978-0-8342-1238-1. 
^ Mead, 11–19
^ McGee, 142–143.
^ McGee, 202–206
^ McGee Chapter 14.
^ a b c Mead, 11–19.
^ McGee
^ Campbell, 312.
^ McGee, 784.
^ Davidson, 782–783
^ McGee, 539,784.
^ McGee, 771–791
^ Davidson, 356.
^ Asado Argentina
^ Davidson, 786–787.
^ Robuchon, 224.
^ Davidson, 656
^ Davidson, 660–661.
^ United States Department of Agriculture
^ Aguilera, 1–3.
^ Miguel, 3.
^ a b c Jango-Cohen
^ Hannaford
^ The Economic Research Service of the USDA
^ Regmi
^ CIA World Factbook
^ World Trade Organization, The Uruguay Round
^ Van den Bossche
^ Wansink, Marketing Nutrition, 501–3.
^ Smith, 501–3.
^ Benson
^ Humphery
^ Magdoff, Fred (Ed.) "[T]he farmer's share of the food dollar (after paying for input costs) has steadily declined from about 40 percent in 1910 to less than 10 percent in 1990."
^ "Annual real food price indices". Archived from the original on 1 April 2014. Retrieved 19 March 2014. 
^ "Food prices rising across the world", CNN. 24 March 2008
^ a b c d e f g h "The real hunger games: How banks gamble on food prices – and the poor lose out". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved April 1, 2012. 
^ "Did Food Prices Spur the Arab Spring?". PBS NewsHour. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 25 May 2017. 
^ "World food prices stabilize, no drop in sight: WFP". Reuters. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ "Inflation slows in Feb. as food prices stabilize". GMA News Online. Archived from the original on 25 September 2010. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ May 2008, Global Trends: – Food Production and Consumption: The China Effect Archived 2014-12-31 at the Wayback Machine., IBISWorld
^ Steve Wiggins and Sharada Keats, August 2013, The end of cheap rice: a cause for celebration? ODI Briefings 82 Archived June 19, 2014, at the Wayback Machine.
^ World Health Organization
^ Howe, 353–372
^ World Food Programme
^ Shah
^ Kripke
^ United Nations World Food program
^ a b National Institute of Health, MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
^ Hippocrates, On Acute Diseases.
^ Magner, 243–498
^ USDA
^ "Check Your Steps". Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. 
^ "Fact sheets - Poultry Preparation - Focus on Chicken". Archived from the original on 2004-05-19. 
^ a b c d National Institute of Health
^ About Epipen, Epipen.com Archived January 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine.
^ About Twinject, Twinject.com
^ Doll, R.; Peto, R. (1981). "The causes of cancer: Quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United States today". Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 66 (6): 1191–1308. doi:10.1093/jnci/66.6.1192. PMID 7017215. 
^ a b Carcinogens and Anticarcinogens in the Human Diet. National Academy Press. 1996. ISBN 0-309-05391-9. 
^ FAO FAOSTAT Archived 2013-12-02 at the Wayback Machine.
^ These are supplied energy, intake energy are about 60-80% of supply.
^ FAO Food Security Archived 2013-10-31 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Wansink, Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think
^ Simoons
^ Nicklas
^ Merson, 245
^ Merson, 231.
^ Merson, 464.
^ Merson, 224.
^ Carpenter
^ Merson, 266–268.
^ Parekh, 187–206.
^ Schor
^ United Kingdom Office of Public Sector Information


References


Aguilera, Jose Miguel and David W. Stanley. Microstructural Principles of Food Processing and Engineering. Springer, 1999. ISBN 0-8342-1256-0.
Asado Argentina. About Asado Argentina. Retrieved from http://www.asadoargentina.com/about-asado-argentina/ on 2007-05-28.
Campbell, Bernard Grant. Human Evolution: An Introduction to Man's Adaptations. Aldine Transaction: 1998. ISBN 0-202-02042-8.
Carpenter, Ruth Ann; Finley, Carrie E. Healthy Eating Every Day. Human Kinetics, 2005. ISBN 0-7360-5186-4.
Davidson, Alan. The Oxford Companion to Food. 2nd ed. UK: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2005. . Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/docrep/008/a0200e/a0200e00.htm on 2006-09-29.
Hannaford, Steve. Oligopoly Watch: Top 20 world food companies. Retrieved from http://www.oligopolywatch.com/2005/10/06.html on 2006-09-23.
Howe, P. and S. Devereux. Famine Intensity and Magnitude Scales: A Proposal for an Instrumental Definition of Famine. 2004.
Humphery, Kim. Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing Cultures of Consumption. Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-62630-7.
Jango-Cohen, Judith. The History Of Food. Twenty-First Century Books, 2005. ISBN 0-8225-2484-8.
Jurgens, Marshall H. Animal Feeding and Nutrition. Kendall Hunt, 2001. ISBN 0-7872-7839-4.
Kripke, Gawain. Food aid or hidden dumping?. Oxfam International, March 2005. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20060714133231/http://www.oxfam.org/en/policy/briefingpapers/bp71_food_aid_240305 on 2007-05-26.
Lawrie, Stephen; R A Lawrie. Lawrie's Meat Science. Woodhead Publishing: 1998. ISBN 1-85573-395-1.
Magdoff, Fred; Foster, John Bellamy; and Buttel, Frederick H. Hungry for Profit: The Agribusiness Threat to Farmers, Food, and the Environment. September 2000. ISBN 1-58367-016-5.
Mason, John. Sustainable Agriculture. Landlinks Press: 2003. ISBN 0-643-06876-7.
Merson, Michael H.; Black, Robert E.; Mills, Anne J. International Public Health: Disease, Programs, Systems, and Policies. Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 2005.
McGee, Harold. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004. ISBN 0-684-80001-2.
Mead, Margaret. The Changing Significance of Food. In Carole Counihan and Penny Van Esterik (Ed.), Food and Culture: A Reader. UK: Routledge, 1997. ISBN 0-415-91710-7.
Messer, Ellen; Derose, Laurie Fields and Sara Millman. Who's Hungry? and How Do We Know?: Food Shortage, Poverty, and Deprivation. United Nations University Press, 1998. ISBN 92-808-0985-7.
National Institute of Health. Food poisoning. MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia F. May 11, 2006. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20060928222906/http://www.niaid.nih.gov/publications/pdf/foodallergy.pdf on 2006-09-29.
Nicklas, Barbara J. Endurance Exercise and Adipose Tissue. CRC Press, 2002. ISBN 0-8493-0460-1.
Parekh, Sarad R. The Gmo Handbook: Genetically Modified Animals, Microbes, and Plants in Biotechnology. Humana Press,2004. ISBN 1-58829-307-6.
Regmi, Anita (editor).Changing Structure of Global Food Consumption and Trade. Market and Trade Economics Division, Economic Research Service, USDA, May 30, 2001. stock #ERSWRS01-1.
Schor, Juliet; Taylor, Betsy (editors). Sustainable Planet: Roadmaps for the Twenty-First Century. Beacon Press, 2003. ISBN 0-8070-0455-3.
Shah, Anup. Food Dumping (Aid) Maintains Poverty. Causes of Poverty. Retrieved from http://www.globalissues.org/TradeRelated/Poverty/FoodDumping.asp on 2006-09-29.
Simoons, Frederick J. Eat Not This Flesh: Food Avoidances from Prehistory to the Present. ISBN 0-299-14250-7.
Smith, Andrew (Editor). “Food Marketing,” in Oxford Encyclopedia of American Food and Drink, New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
The Economic Research Service of the USDA. Global Food Markets: Briefing Rooms. Retrieved from http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/international-markets-trade/global-food-markets.aspx on 2006-09-29.
United Kingdom Office of Public Sector Information. Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16). Retrieved from http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1990/Ukpga_19900016_en_2.htm#mdiv1 on 2006-11-08.
United States Department of Agriculture, USDA Economic Research Service: The Economics of Food, Farming, Natural Resources, and Rural America. "Briefing Rooms, Food CPI, Prices and Expenditures: Food Expenditure Tables". Retrieved from http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-price-outlook.aspx on 2007-06-06.
Van den Bossche, Peter. The Law and Policy of the bosanac Trade Organization: Text, Cases and Materials. UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-521-82290-4.
World Food Programme. Breaking out of the Poverty Trap: How We Use Food Aid. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20060928075506/http://www.wfp.org/food_aid/introduction/index.asp?section=12&sub_section=1 on 2006-09-29.
World Health Organization. WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/en/ on 2006-09-29.
World Trade Organization. The Uruguay Round. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20060822200650/http://www.wto.org/trade_resources/history/wto/urug_round.htm on 2006-09-29.


Further reading

Collingham, E. M. (2011). The Taste of War: World War Two and the Battle for Food
Katz, Solomon (2003). The Encyclopedia of Food and Culture, Scribner
Nestle, Marion (2007). Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health, University Presses of California, revised and expanded edition, ISBN 0-520-25403-1
Mobbs, Michael (2012). Sustainable Food Sydney: NewSouth Publishing, ISBN 9781920705541
The Future of Food (2015). A panel discussion at the 2015 Digital Life Design (DLD) Annual Conference. "How can we grow and enjoy food, closer to home, further into the future? MIT Media Lab’s Kevin Slavin hosts a conversation with food artist, educator, and entrepreneur Emilie Baltz, professor Caleb Harper from MIT Media Lab's CityFarm project, the Barbarian Group's Benjamin Palmer, and Andras Forgacs, the co-founder and CEO of Modern Meadow, who is growing 'victimless' meat in a lab. The discussion addresses issues of sustainable urban farming, ecosystems, technology, food supply chains and their broad environmental and humanitarian implications, and how these changes in food production may change what people may find delicious ... and the other way around." Posted on the official YouTube Channel of DLD

External links



Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Cookbook





Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Food.





Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Food




 The dictionary definition of food at Wiktionary
 Media related to food at Wikimedia Commons
Food Timeline
Wikibooks Cookbook





Links to related articles











v
t
e


Cuisines



Regional



African

North
West
list


Americas

North
South
list


Asian

Central
South
list


Caribbean
Caucasian
European

Central
Eastern
list


Global
Latin American
Mediterranean
Middle-Eastern

Levantine


Oceanic





National



Afghan
Albanian
Algerian
Angolan
Argentine
Armenian
Australian
Austrian
Azerbaijani
Bahraini
Bangladeshi
Barbadian
Belarusian
Belgian
Belizean
Beninese
Bhutanese
Bissau-Guinean
Bolivian
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazilian
British

English
Scottish
Welsh
Cornish


Bruneian
Bulgarian
Burkinabé
Burmese
Burundian
Cambodian
Cameroonian
Canadian

Canadian Chinese
Quebec


Central African Republic
Chadian
Chilean
Chinese

Tibetan


Colombian
Congolese
Croatian
Cuban
Cypriot
Czech
Danish
Djiboutian
Dominican
Dominican Republic
Dutch
East Timorese
Ecuadorian
Egyptian
Emirati
Equatorial Guinean
Eritrean
Estonian
Ethiopian
Fijian
Filipino
Finnish
French

Occitania


Gabonese
Gambian
Georgian
German
Ghanaian
Greek
Guatemalan
Guianan
Guinean
Haitian
Honduran
Hong Kong
Hungarian
Icelandic
Indian
Indonesian
Iranian
Iraqi
Irish
Israeli
Italian

Sicilian


Ivorian (Côte d'Ivoire)
Jamaican
Japanese
Jordanian
Kazakh
Kenyan
Korean
Kosovan
Kuwaiti
Kyrgyz
Lao
Latvian
Lebanese
Lesotho
Liberian
Libyan
Liechtensteiner
Lithuanian
Luxembourg
Macau
Macedonian
Malagasy
Malawian
Malaysian

Malay
Chinese
Indian
Eurasian
Sabahan
Sarawakian


Maldivian
Malian
Maltese
Mauritanian
Mauritian
Mexican
Moldovan
Monégasque
Mongolian
Moroccan
Mozambican
Namibian
Nauruan
Nepalese
New Zealand
Nigerian
Nigerien
Norwegian
Niuean
Omani
Pakistani
Palestinian
Panamanian
Peruvian

Chinese


Polish
Portuguese
Qatari
Romanian
Russian
Rwandan
Salvadoran
Saint Helena
Saint Lucian
Sammarinese
São Tomé and Príncipe
Saudi Arabian
Senegalese
Serbian
Seychelles
Sierra Leonean
Singaporean
Slovak
Slovenian
Somali
South African
Spanish

Andalusian
Asturian
Basque
Catalan
Galician
Valencian


Sri Lankan
Sudanese
Swazi
Swedish
Swiss
Syrian
Taiwanese
Tajik
Tanzanian
Thai
Togolese
Tunisian
Turkish
Trinidadian and Tobagonian
Ugandan
Ukrainian
United States

California Cuisine
Hawaiian
New American
Puerto Rican
Soul food


Uruguayan
Uzbek
Venezuelan
Vietnamese
Vatican
Western Saharan
Yemeni
Zambian
Zimbabwean





Ethnic and
religious



Ainu
American Chinese
Anglo-Indian
Arab
Assyrian
Balochi
Balinese
Batak
Bengali
Berber
Betawi
Buddhist
Cajun
Cantonese
Chechen
Chinese Indonesian
Chinese Islamic
Christian
Circassian
Crimean Tatar
Greek American
Hindu
Inuit
Italian American
Jain
Javanese
Jewish

Sephardic
Mizrahi
American
Bukharan
Syrian


Komi
Kurdish
Livonian
Louisiana Creole
Malay
Manado
Maharashtrian
Mordovian
Native American
Okinawan
Ossetian
Padang
Parsi
Pashtun
Pennsylvania Dutch
Peranakan
Punjabi
Sami
Sikh
Sindhi
Soul food
Sundanese
Tatar
Udmurt
Yamal
Yup'ik
Zanzibari





Historical



Ancient Egyptian
Ancient Greek
Ancient Israelite
Ancient Roman
Aztec
Byzantine
Early modern European
Historical Chinese
Historical South Asian
History of seafood
History of vegetarianism
Inca
Mayan
Medieval
Ottoman
Peasant
Soviet
Thirteen Colonies





Styles



Cuisine classique
Fast food
Fusion
Haute
Molecular gastronomy
Note by Note
Nouvelle





Lists



List of cuisines
Lists of prepared foods








 Food portal
 Drink portal
 Category
 Commons
 Cookbook
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Meals



Common meals



Breakfast
Second breakfast
Elevenses
Brunch
Lunch
Merienda
Tea
Coffee break
Dinner
Supper





Components & courses



Apéritif and digestif
Amuse-bouche
Dessert
Entrée
Entremet
Hors d'oeuvre
Main course
Meal replacement
Savoury
Side dish
Snack





Table service



Buffet
Conveyor belt sushi
Dish
Finger food
Full course dinner
Multicourse meal
Platter
Service à la française
Service à la russe
Silver service
Small plates





Presentation



Dining room
Eating utensils
Food presentation
Garnish
Nyotaimori
Pièce montée
Serving size
Tablecloth
Table setting
Tableware





Dining



Table manners / Eating utensil etiquette
Toast





Regional styles



Anju
Antipasto
Cicchetti
Banchan / Korean table d'hôte
Bandeja paisa
Dastarkhān
Dim sum / Yum cha
Fika
Izakaya / Sakana
Kaiseki
Meat and three
Meze
Plate lunch
Pu pu platter
Rijsttafel
Sadhya
Smörgåsbord
Tapas
Tiffin
Thali
Zakuski





Packed



Airline meal
Bento
Convenience food
Dosirak
Instant breakfast
Packed lunch
Take-out
TV dinner





Menus and meal deals



À la carte
Table d'hôte
Blue-plate special
Combination meal
Free lunch
Free refill
Happy hour
Kids' meal
School meal
Suspended meal
Tasting menu / Degustation
Value meal
Value menu





Communal meals



Banquet
Barbecue
Commercium
Communal dining
Dining in
Mangal
Picnic
Potluck
Sittning
State dinner
Supra
Tableround
Tea party





Related topics



Catering
Cook
Cookbook
Cooking
Culinary art
Cuisine

outline


Drink
Eating
Food
Meal preparation
Meal delivery service
Restaurant
Snacking
Waiting staff
Coffee culture
Tea culture












v
t
e


Food science



General



Allergy
Engineering
Microbiology
Nutrition

Diet
clinical


Processing
Processing aids
Quality
Sensory analysis

Discrimination testing


Rheology
Storage
Technology












v
t
e


Food chemistry






Additives
Carbohydrates
Coloring
Enzymes
Essential fatty acids
Flavors
Fortification
Lipids
"Minerals" (Chemical elements)
Proteins
Vitamins
Water


















v
t
e


Food preservation






Biopreservation
Canning
Cold chain
Curing
Drying
Fermentation
Freeze-drying
Freezing
Hurdle technology
Irradiation
Jamming
Jellying
Jugging
Modified atmosphere
Pascalization
Pickling
Potting

Confit
Potjevleesch


Salting
Smoking
Sugaring
Tyndallization
Vacuum packing













Food industry



Manufacturing
Packaging
Marketing
Foodservice
Fortification












v
t
e


Food safety



Adulterants, food contaminants



3-MCPD
Aldicarb
Cyanide
Formaldehyde
Lead poisoning
Melamine
Mercury in fish
Sudan I





Flavorings



Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
Salt
Sugar

High-fructose corn syrup







Microorganisms



Botulism
Campylobacter jejuni
Clostridium perfringens
Escherichia coli O104:H4
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis E
Listeria
Norovirus
Rotavirus
Salmonella





Parasitic infections through food



Amoebiasis
Anisakiasis
Cryptosporidiosis
Cyclosporiasis
Diphyllobothriasis
Enterobiasis
Fasciolopsiasis
Fasciolosis
Giardiasis
Gnathostomiasis
Paragonimiasis
Toxoplasmosis
Trichinosis
Trichuriasis





Pesticides



Chlorpyrifos
DDT
Lindane
Malathion
Methamidophos





Preservatives



Benzoic acid
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
Sodium benzoate





Sugar substitutes



Acesulfame potassium
Aspartame
Saccharin
Sodium cyclamate
Sorbitol
Sucralose





Toxins, poisons, environment pollution



Aflatoxin
Arsenic contamination of groundwater
Benzene in soft drinks
Bisphenol A
Dieldrin
Diethylstilbestrol
Dioxin
Mycotoxins
Nonylphenol
Shellfish poisoning





Food contamination incidents



Devon colic
1858 Bradford sweets poisoning
1989 Chilean grape scare
1993 Jack in the Box E. coli outbreak
1996 Odwalla E. coli outbreak
1999 Sun Orchard salmonellosis outbreak
2005 Indonesia food scare
2006 North American E. coli O157:H7 outbreaks
2007 Vietnam food scare
2008 Canada listeriosis outbreak
2008 Chinese milk scandal
2008 Irish pork crisis
2008 United States salmonellosis outbreak
2011 Germany E. coli O104:H4 outbreak
2011 Taiwan food scandal
2011 United States listeriosis outbreak
2013 European aflatoxin contamination
2013 horse meat scandal
2013 Taiwan food scandal
2014 Taiwan food scandal
2015 United States E. coli outbreak
2017 Brazil weak meat scandal
Food safety incidents in China
Foodborne illness

outbreaks
death toll
United States


ICA meat repackaging controversy
Minamata disease
StarLink corn recall
Toxic oil syndrome





Regulation, standards, watchdogs



Acceptable daily intake
E number
Food labeling regulations
Food libel laws
International Food Safety Network
ISO 22000
Quality Assurance International





Institutions



Centre for Food Safety
European Food Safety Authority
Institute for Food Safety and Health
International Food Safety Network
Ministry of Food and Drug Safety


















v
t
e


Food substitutes



Artificial fat substitutes



Olestra
Trans fat





Artificial protein substitutes



Acid-hydrolyzed vegetable protein





Artificial sugar substitutes



Acesulfame potassium
Alitame
Aspartame
Aspartame-acesulfame salt
Dulcin
Glucin
Hydrogenated starch hydrolysates
Neohesperidin dihydrochalcone
Neotame
NutraSweet
Nutrinova
Saccharin
Sodium cyclamate
Sucralose





Natural food substitutes



Cheese analogues
Coffee substitutes
Egg substitutes
Meat analogues

bacon
list


Milk substitutes
Phyllodulcin
Salt substitutes













Food politics



Food power
Food security
Famine
Malnutrition
Overnutrition





Institutions



International Association for Food Protection
Food and Drug Administration
Food and Agriculture Organization
National Agriculture and Food Research Organization
National Food and Drug Authority












v
t
e


Lists of prepared foods



Dishes
by origin



African

Angolan
Central African Republic
Chadian
Ethiopian
Libyan
Nigerian
Nigerien
Togolese
Tunisian
Western Saharan


American

Italian-American
Jewish-American
New Orleans
Regional
Southern United States


Anguillian
Arab
Argentine
Bangladeshi
Brazilian
Burmese
Caucasus
Chinese

Beijing
Sichuan


Colombian
Crimean Tatar
Cuban
Ecuadorian
English
Filipino
French
Gabonese
German
Greek
Hawaiian
Hungarian
Indian
Indonesian
Irish
Israeli
Italian

Sicilian


Jamaican
Japanese
Jewish
Jordan
Korean

North Korean


Liechtensteiner
Malaysian
Maltese
Mexican
Moroccan
National dishes
Nepalese
Pakistani
Palestinian
Paraguayan
Peranakan
Peruvian
Polish
Portuguese
Romanian
Russian
Sami
São Tomé and Príncipe
Scottish
Seychelles
Singaporean
Spanish
Thai
Tibetan
Turkish
Ukrainian
Uzbek
Venezuelan
Vietnamese





By origin
and type




Breads



American
British
Indian
Pakistani





Cheeses



American
British

Cornish


Dutch
English
French
German
Greek
Irish
Italian
Polish
Spanish
Swiss





Condiments



French fry accompaniments
Indian
Japanese
Pakistani





Desserts and sweets



American
Argentine
Bangladeshi
Brazilian
British
Chinese
French
German
Indian
Italian
Japanese
Korean

Tteok


Pakistani
Philippine
Polish
Romanian
Russian
Spanish
Sri Lankan
Thai
Turkish





Soups and stews



Chinese
French
German
Indonesian
Italian
Japanese
Pakistani
Spanish





Snack foods



Snack foods by country

Indian
Japanese
Pakistani







Misc.



American sandwiches
Foods with religious symbolism
Vietnamese specialities








By type







Ancient
Bacon substitutes
Baozi
Brand name snacks
Breakfast

Beverages
Cereals


Brunch
Christmas
Chutneys
Coconut
Coconut milk
Coffee
Comfort
Delicacies
Hangover foods
Hors d'oeuvre

Tapas


Made from maple
Military
Mushroom
Pastries
Pies, tarts and flans
Porridges
Puddings
Relishes
Sandwiches
Soul
Street
Tortilla-based
Traditional





By cooking style



Baked goods

Twice-baked


Casseroles
Deep fried
Smoked
Steamed





By preparation style



Dips
Dried
Fermented

Soy products


Food pastes
Garnishes
Gravies
Instant
Pickled

Pickled fruits


Rolled
Sauces

Dessert sauces
Fish sauces
Hot sauces


Spreads
Stuffed dishes





Breads, grains and seeds



Almond
Breads

bread dishes
Buns
Flatbreads
Quick breads
Rolls
Sweet breads


Crackers
Dumplings
Fried dough
Legume

Chickpea
Peanut


Maize
Noodles

Noodle dishes
Fried noodle dishes
Ramen


Pancakes
Pasta

Pasta dishes


Rice

Fried rice
Rice pudding


Rice and beans
Sesame seed
Toast





Dairy-based



Butter dishes
Cheese dishes
Cheeses

Brined


Yogurt-based





Fruits and vegetables



Apple
Avocado
Banana
Cabbage
Carrot
Cassava
Eggplant
Garlic
Lemon
Melon
Onion
Plum
Potato

French fry


Salads

Arab
Thai


Soy-based
Strawberry
Tofu
Tomato





Fish and seafood



Clam
Cod
Crab
Fish head
Fish stews
Fried fish
Herring
Raw fish
Salmon
Shrimp
Sushi and sashimi





Meat-based



Barbecue
Beef

Shredded beef
Steak
Veal


Chicken
Duck
Egg

Eggs Benedict
Scrambled eggs


Goat
Hamburgers
Hot dogs
Kebabs
Lamb
Meatball
Mixed grill
Pork

Bacon
Ham dishes
Hams


Sausages

Sausage dishes


Skewered foods





Soups and Stews



Blood
Cheese
Fish and seafood
Vegetable





Sweets



Cakes
Candies
Chocolate bars
Chocolate-covered
Cookies

Cookie sandwiches
Shortbread


Desserts

Custard


Doughnuts
Pastries

Choux pastry
Poppy seed


Pies, tarts and flans











 Food portal
 Category: Lists of foods












v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological
land


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources














Authority control



GND: 4034870-2
NDL: 00572183











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Food&oldid=817585706"					Categories: FoodsCuisineHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesWebarchive template wayback linksWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia articles with GND identifiersFood Watchlist Articles