This article is about the scientific field of forestry. For the American racehorse, see Forestry (horse).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Forestry work in Austria


Forestry is the science and craft of creating, managing, using, conserving, and repairing forests and associated resources to meet desired goals, needs, and values for human and environment benefits.[1] Forestry is practiced in plantations and natural stands. The science of forestry has elements that belong to the biological, physical, social, political and managerial sciences.[2]
Modern forestry generally embraces a broad range of concerns, in what is known as multiple-use management, including the provision of timber, fuel wood, wildlife habitat, natural water quality management, recreation, landscape and community protection, employment, aesthetically appealing landscapes, biodiversity management, watershed management, erosion control, and preserving forests as 'sinks' for atmospheric carbon dioxide. A practitioner of forestry is known as a forester. Other terms are used a verderer and a silviculturalist being common ones. Silviculture is narrower than forestry, being concerned only with forest plants, but is often used synonymously with forestry.
Forest ecosystems have come to be seen as the most important component of the biosphere,[3] and forestry has emerged as a vital applied science, craft, and technology.
Forestry is an important economic segment in various industrial countries. For example, in Germany, forests cover nearly a third of the land area,[4] wood is the most important renewable resource, and forestry supports more than a million jobs and about billion in yearly turnover.[5]




A deciduous beech forest in Slovenia





Contents


1 History

1.1 Background
1.2 Early modern forestry development
1.3 Forest conservation and early globalization
1.4 Mechanization
1.5 Early journals which are still present


2 Forestry today
3 Foresters
4 Forestry plans
5 Forestry as a science
6 Genetic diversity in forestry
7 Education

7.1 History of forestry education
7.2 Forestry education today


8 See also
9 References

9.1 Notes
9.2 Further reading


10 External links



History[edit]
Background[edit]
The preindustrial age has been dubbed by Werner Sombart and others as the 'wooden age', as timber and firewood were the basic resources for energy, construction and housing. The development of modern forestry is closely connected with the rise of capitalism, economy as a science and varying notions of land use and property.[6]
Roman Latifundiae, large agricultural estates, were quite successful in maintaining the large supply of wood that was necessary for the Roman Empire.[7] Large deforestations came with respectively after the decline of the Romans.[7] However already in the 5th century, monks in the then Byzantine Romagna on the Adriatic coast, were able to establish stone pine plantations to provide fuelwood and food.[8] This was the beginning of the massive forest mentioned by Dante Alighieri in his 1308 poem Divine Comedy.[8]
Similar sustainable formal forestry practices were developed by the Visigoths in the 7th century when, faced with the ever-increasing shortage of wood, they instituted a code concerned with the preservation of oak and pine forests.[8] The use and management of many forest resources has a long history in China as well, dating back to the Han Dynasty and taking place under the landowning gentry. A similar approach was used in Japan. It was also later written about by the Ming Dynasty Chinese scholar Xu Guangqi (1562–1633).
In Europe, land usage rights in medieval and early modern times allowed different users to access forests and pastures. Plant litter and resin extraction were important, as pitch (resin) was essential for the caulking of ships, falking and hunting rights, firewood and building, timber gathering in wood pastures, and for grazing animals in forests. The notion of "commons" (German "Allmende") refers to the underlying traditional legal term of common land. The idea of enclosed private property came about during modern times. However, most hunting rights were retained by members of the nobility which preserved the right of the nobility to access and use common land for recreation, like fox hunting.
Early modern forestry development[edit]




Timber harvesting in Finland






Hans Carl von Carlowitz


Systematic management of forests for a sustainable yield of timber began in Portugal in the 13th century when Afonso III of Portugal planted the Pinhal do Rei near Leiria to prevent coastal erosion and soil degradation, and as a sustainable source for timber used in naval construction.[9] His successor Dom Dinis continued the practice and the forest exists still today.[10]
Forest management also flourished in the German states in the 14th century, e.g. in Nuremberg,[11] and in 16th-century Japan.[12] Typically, a forest was divided into specific sections and mapped; the harvest of timber was planned with an eye to regeneration. As timber rafting allowed for connecting large continental forests, as in south western Germany, via Main, Neckar, Danube and Rhine with the coastal cities and states, early modern forestry and remote trading were closely connected. Large firs in the black forest were called „Holländer“, as they were traded to the Dutch ship yards. Large timber rafts on the Rhine were 200 to 400m in length, 40m in width and consisted of several thousand logs. The crew consisted of 400 to 500 men, including shelter, bakeries, ovens and livestock stables.[13] Timber rafting infrastructure allowed for large interconnected networks all over continental Europe and is still of importance in Finland.
Starting with the sixteenth century, enhanced world maritime trade, a boom in housing construction in Europe and the success and further Berggeschrey (rushes) of the mining industry increased timber consumption sharply. The notion of 'Nachhaltigkeit', sustainability in forestry, is closely connected to the work of Hans Carl von Carlowitz (1645–1714), a mining administrator in Saxony. His book Sylvicultura oeconomica, oder haußwirthliche Nachricht und Naturmäßige Anweisung zur wilden Baum-Zucht (1713) was the first comprehensive treatise about sustainable yield forestry. In the UK, and, to an extent, in continental Europe, the enclosure movement and the clearances favored strictly enclosed private property.[14] The Agrarian reformers, early economic writers and scientists tried to get rid of the traditional commons.[15] At the time, an alleged tragedy of the commons together with fears of a Holznot, an imminent wood shortage played a watershed role in the controversies about cooperative land use patterns.[16]
The practice of establishing tree plantations in the British Isles was promoted by John Evelyn, though it had already acquired some popularity. Louis XIV's minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert's oak Forest of Tronçais, planted for the future use of the French Navy, matured as expected in the mid-19th century: "Colbert had thought of everything except the steamship," Fernand Braudel observed.[17] In parallel, schools of forestry were established beginning in the late 18th century in Hesse, Russia, Austria-Hungary, Sweden, France and elsewhere in Europe.
Forest conservation and early globalization[edit]
Further information: forest conservation
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, forest preservation programs were established in British India, the United States, and Europe. Many foresters were either from continental Europe (like Sir Dietrich Brandis), or educated there (like Gifford Pinchot). Sir Dietrich Brandis is considered the father of tropical forestry, European concepts and practices had to be adapted in tropical and semi arid climate zones. The development of plantation forestry was one of the (controversial) answers to the specific challenges in the tropical colonies. The enactment and evolution of forest laws and binding regulations occurred in most Western nations in the 20th century in response to growing conservation concerns and the increasing technological capacity of logging companies. Tropical forestry is a separate branch of forestry which deals mainly with equatorial forests that yield woods such as teak and mahogany.
Mechanization[edit]
Forestry mechanization was always in close connection to metal working and the development of mechanical tools to cut and transport timber to its destination. Rafting belongs to the earliest means of transport. Steel saws came up in the 15th century. The 19th century widely increased the availability of steel for whipsaws and introduced Forest railways and railways in general for transport and as forestry customer. Further human induced changes, however, came since World War II, respectively in line with the '1950s-syndrome'.[18] The first portable chainsaw was invented in 1918 in Canada, but large impact of mechanization in forestry started after World War II. Forestry harvesters are among the most recent developments. Although drones, planes, laser scanning, satellites and robots also play a part in forestry.
Early journals which are still present[edit]

Sylwan first published in 1820[19]
Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Forstwesen first published in 1850.[19][20]
The Indian Forester first published in 1875.[19][21]
Šumarski list (Forestry Review, Croatia) was published in 1877 by Croatian Forestry Society.[19][22]
Montes (Forestry, Spain) first published in 1877.[19][23]
Revista pădurilor (Journal of Forests, Romania, 1881–1882; 1886–present), the oldest extant magazine in Romania[19][24]
Forestry Quarterly, first published in 1902 by the New York State College of Forestry.
Šumarstvo[25] (Forestry, Serbia) first published in 1948 by the Ministry of Forestry of Democratic Federal Yugoslavia, and since 1951 by Organ of Society of Forestry Engineers and Technicians of the Republic of Serbia (succeeding the former Šumarski glasnik published from 1907-1921)[26]

Forestry today[edit]




A modern sawmill


Today a strong body of research exists regarding the management of forest ecosystems and genetic improvement of tree species and varieties. Forestry also includes the development of better methods for the planting, protecting, thinning, controlled burning, felling, extracting, and processing of timber. One of the applications of modern forestry is reforestation, in which trees are planted and tended in a given area.
Trees provide numerous environmental, social and economic benefits for people.[27] In many regions the forest industry is of major ecological, economic, and social importance. Third-party certification systems that provide independent verification of sound forest stewardship and sustainable forestry have become commonplace in many areas since the 1990s. These certification systems were developed as a response to criticism of some forestry practices, particularly deforestation in less developed regions along with concerns over resource management in the developed world. Some certification systems are criticized for primarily acting as marketing tools and lacking in their claimed independence.
In topographically severe forested terrain, proper forestry is important for the prevention or minimization of serious soil erosion or even landslides. In areas with a high potential for landslides, forests can stabilize soils and prevent property damage or loss, human injury, or loss of life.
Public perception of forest management has become controversial, with growing public concern over perceived mismanagement of the forest and increasing demands that forest land be managed for uses other than pure timber production, for example, indigenous rights, recreation, watershed management, and preservation of wilderness, waterways and wildlife habitat. Sharp disagreements over the role of forest fires, logging, motorized recreation and other issues drives debate while the public demand for wood products continues to increase.
Foresters[edit]
Main article: Forester




Foresters of the Austral University of Chile in the Valdivian forests of San Pablo de Tregua, Chile


Foresters work for the timber industry, government agencies, conservation groups, local authorities, urban parks boards, citizens' associations, and private landowners. The forestry profession includes a wide diversity of jobs, with educational requirements ranging from college bachelor's degrees to PhDs for highly specialized work. Industrial foresters plan forest regeneration starting with careful harvesting. Urban foresters manage trees in urban green spaces. Foresters work in tree nurseries growing seedlings for woodland creation or regeneration projects. Foresters improve tree genetics. Forest engineers develop new building systems. Professional foresters measure and model the growth of forests with tools like geographic information systems. Foresters may combat insect infestation, disease, forest and grassland wildfire, but increasingly allow these natural aspects of forest ecosystems to run their course when the likelihood of epidemics or risk of life or property are low. Increasingly, foresters participate in wildlife conservation planning and watershed protection. Foresters have been mainly concerned with timber management, especially reforestation, maintaining forests at prime conditions, and fire control.[28]

Forestry plans[edit]
Foresters develop and implement forest management plans relying on mapped resource inventories showing an area's topographical features as well as its distribution of trees (by species) and other plant cover. Plans also include landowner objectives, roads, culverts, proximity to human habitation, water features and hydrological conditions, and soils information. Forest management plans typically include recommended silvicultural treatments and a timetable for their implementation. Application of digital maps in Geographic Informations systems (GIS) that extracts and integrates different information about forest terrains, soil type and tree covers, etc. using, e.g. laser scanning, enhances forest management plans in modern systems.
Forest management plans include recommendations to achieve the landowner's objectives and desired future condition for the property subject to ecological, financial, logistical (e.g. access to resources), and other constraints. On some properties, plans focus on producing quality wood products for processing or sale. Hence, tree species, quantity, and form, all central to the value of harvested products quality and quantity, tend to be important components of silvicultural plans.
Good management plans include consideration of future conditions of the stand after any recommended harvests treatments, including future treatments (particularly in intermediate stand treatments), and plans for natural or artificial regeneration after final harvests.
The objectives of landowners and leaseholders influence plans for harvest and subsequent site treatment. In Britain, plans featuring "good forestry practice" must always consider the needs of other stakeholders such as nearby communities or rural residents living within or adjacent to woodland areas. Foresters consider tree felling and environmental legislation when developing plans. Plans instruct the sustainable harvesting and replacement of trees. They indicate whether road building or other forest engineering operations are required.
Agriculture and forest leaders are also trying to understand how the climate change legislation will affect what they do. The information gathered will provide the data that will determine the role of agriculture and forestry in a new climate change regulatory system.[28]
Forestry as a science[edit]
Over the past centuries, forestry was regarded as a separate science. With the rise of ecology and environmental science, there has been a reordering in the applied sciences. In line with this view, forestry is a primary land-use science comparable with agriculture.[29] Under these headings, the fundamentals behind the management of natural forests comes by way of natural ecology. Forests or tree plantations, those whose primary purpose is the extraction of forest products, are planned and managed utilizing a mix of ecological and agroecological principles.[30]
Genetic diversity in forestry[edit]
The provenance of forest reproductive material used to plant forests has great influence on how the trees develop, hence why it is important to use forest reproductive material of good quality and of high genetic diversity.[31]
The term, genetic diversity describe differences in DNA sequence between individuals as distinct from variation caused by environmental influences. The unique genetic composition of an individual (its genotype) will determine its performance (its phenotype) at a particular site.[32]
Genetic diversity is needed to maintain the vitality of forests and to provide resilience to pests and diseases. Genetic diversity also ensures that forest trees can survive, adapt and evolve under changing environmental conditions. Furthermore, genetic diversity is the foundation of biological diversity at species and ecosystem levels. Forest genetic resources are therefore important to consider in forest management.[31]
Genetic diversity in forests is threatened by forest fires, pests and diseases, habitat fragmentation, poor silvicultural practices and inappropriate use of forest reproductive material. Furthermore, the marginal populations of many tree species are facing new threats due to climate change.[31]
Most countries in Europe have recommendations or guidelines for selecting species and provenances that can be used in a given site or zone.[32]
Education[edit]
History of forestry education[edit]
See also: List of historic schools of forestry
The first dedicated forestry school was established by Georg Ludwig Hartig at Hungen in the Wetterau, Hesse, in 1787, though forestry had been taught earlier in central Europe, including at the University of Giessen, in Hesse-Darmstadt.
In Spain, the first forestry school was the Forest Engineering School of Madrid (Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros de Montes), founded in 1844.
The first in North America, the Biltmore Forest School was established near Asheville, North Carolina, by Carl A. Schenck on September 1, 1898, on the grounds of George W. Vanderbilt's Biltmore Estate. Another early school was the New York State College of Forestry, established at Cornell University just a few weeks later, in September 1898. Early 19th century North American foresters went to Germany to study forestry. Some early German foresters also emigrated to North America.
In South America the first forestry school was established in Brazil, in Viçosa, Minas Gerais, in 1962, and moved the next year to become a faculty at the Federal University of Paraná, in Curitiba.[33]
Forestry education today[edit]
See also: List of forestry universities and colleges and List of forestry technical schools




Prescribed burning is used by foresters to reduce fuel loads


Today, forestry education typically includes training in general biology, botany, genetics, soil science, climatology, hydrology, economics and forest management. Education in the basics of sociology and political science is often considered an advantage.
In India, forestry education is imparted in the agricultural universities and in Forest Research Institutes (deemed universities). Four year degree programmes are conducted in these universities at the undergraduate level. Masters and Doctorate degrees are also available in these universities.
In the United States, postsecondary forestry education leading to a Bachelor's degree or Master's degree is accredited by the Society of American Foresters.[34]
In Canada the Canadian Institute of Forestry awards silver rings to graduates from accredited university BSc programs, as well as college and technical programs.[35]
In many European countries, training in forestry is made in accordance with requirements of the Bologna Process and the European Higher Education Area.
The International Union of Forest Research Organizations is the only international organization that coordinates forest science efforts worldwide.[36]
See also[edit]


Forestry portal
Trees portal
Plants portal


Main article: Outline of forestry


Afforestation
Agroforestry
Close to nature forestry
Community forestry
Deforestation
Deforestation and climate change
Dendrology
Forest dynamics
Forest farming
Forest informatics
Forestry literature
History of the forest in Central Europe
International Year of Forests
List of forest research institutes
List of forestry journals
Lumberjack
Nonindustrial private forests
Sustainable forest management
Silviculture
Silvology


References[edit]
Notes[edit]



^ "SAFnet Dictionary | Definition For [forestry]". Dictionaryofforestry.org. 2008-10-22. Archived from the original on 2013-10-19. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Young, Raymond A. (1982). Introduction to Forest Science. John Wiley & Sons. p. ix. ISBN 0-471-06438-6. 
^ "ecosystem part of biosphere". Tutorvista.com. Archived from the original on 2013-11-11. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Bundeswaldinventur 2002 Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine., Bundesministerium für Ernährung, Landwirtschaft und Verbraucherschutz (BMELV), retrieved, 17 January 2010
^ Unternehmen Wald, forests as an enterprise, German private forestry association website Archived 2016-09-18 at the Wayback Machine.
^ compare Joachim Radkau Wood: A History, 2011
^ a b The Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History, by Alfred Thomas Grove, Oliver Rackham, Yale University Press, 2003, review at Yale university press Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine. Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History (review) Brian M. Fagan, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Volume 32, Number 3, Winter 2002, pp. 454-455 | Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c T. Mirov, Nicholas; Hasbrouck, Jean (1976). "6". The story of pines. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press. p. 111. ISBN 0-253-35462-5. 
^ H. V. Livermore (2004). Portugal: A Traveller's History. Boydell Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-84383-063-4. Archived from the original on 2017-12-11. 
^ http://www.icnf.pt/portal/florestas/gf/pgf/publicitacoes/drf-centro/2011/pgf-mn-leiria
^ Buttinger, Sabine (2013). "Idee der Nachhaltigkeit" [The Idea of Sustainability]. Damals (in German). 45 (4): 8. 
^ "Forestry in Yashino". City of Nara, Nara. Archived from the original on 2011-06-28. Retrieved 2010-10-12. 
^ Beschreibung eines großen Rheinfloßes Archived 2014-11-29 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Radkau, Joachim. Nature and Power. A Global History of the Environment. Cambridge University Press. 2008.
^ Nature and Power, A Global History of the Environment, by Joachim Radkau, 2008, p. 72
^ The end of the commons as a watershed' The Age of Ecology, Joachim Radkau, John Wiley & Sons, 03.04.2014,[clarification needed] p. 15 ff
^ Braudel, Fernand (1979). The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism: 15th-18th Century (Volume II). University of California Press. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-520-08115-4. 
^ Christian Pfister (Hrsg.), Das 1950er Syndrom: Der Weg in die Konsumgesellschaft, Bern 1995
^ a b c d e f Petru-Ioan Becheru (Aug 2012). "Revista pădurilor online". Rev. pădur. (in Romanian). 127 (4): 46–53. ISSN 1583-7890. 16819. Retrieved 2012-10-21. [permanent dead link](webpage has a translation button)
^ szf-jfs.org
^ "indianforester.org". indianforester.org. Archived from the original on 2013-05-17. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Šumarski list (Forestry Review), with full digital archive since 1877
^ "Revista Montes, with 12.944 free downloadable digital files from 1868". Revistamontes.net. Archived from the original on 2013-11-27. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Victor Giurgiu (Nov 2011). "Revista pădurilor (Journal of forests) 125 years of existence". Rev. pădur. 126 (6): 3–7. ISSN 1583-7890. Retrieved 2012-04-06. [permanent dead link](webpage has a translation button)
^ "Časopis". SCIndeks. Archived from the original on 2013-12-12. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ "Udruženje šumarskih inženjera i tehničara Srbije - Istorijat". Srpskosumarskoudruzenje.org.rs. Archived from the original on 2013-12-12. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ "Department of environmental conservation". New York State Department. Archived from the original on 2015-02-21. Retrieved 2014-11-29. 
^ a b "PowerSearch Logout". Find.galegroup.com. Archived from the original on 2013-05-10. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ Wojtkowski, Paul A. (2002) Agroecological Perspectives in Agronomy, Forestry and Agroforestry. Science Publishers Inc., Enfield, NH, 356p.
^ Wojtkowski, Paul A. (2006) Undoing the Damage: Silviculture for Ecologists and Environmental Scientists. Science Publishers Inc., Enfield, NH, 313p.
^ a b c de Vries, S.M.G., Alan, M., Bozzano, M., Burianek, V., Collin, E., Cottrell, J., Ivankovic, M., Kelleher, C.T., Koskela, J., Rotach, P., Vietto, L. and Yrjänä, L. (2015). "Pan-European strategy for genetic conservation of forest trees and establishment of a core network of dynamic conservation units" (PDF). European Forest Genetic Resources Programme, Bioversity International, Rome, Italy.: xii + 40 p. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-01-31. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ a b Konnert, M., Fady, B., Gömöry, D., A’Hara, S., Wolter, F., Ducci, F., Koskela, J., Bozzano, M., Maaten, T. and Kowalczyk, J. (2015). "Use and transfer of forest reproductive material in Europe in the context of climate change" (PDF). European Forest Genetic Resources Programme, Bioversity International, Rome, Italy.: xvi and 75 p. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-04. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ "News of the world". Unasylva. FAO. 23 (3). 1969. Archived from the original on 2010-04-27. Retrieved 2010-10-12. 
^ "SAF Accredited and Candidate Forestry Degree Programs" (PDF) (Press release). Society of American Foresters. 2008-05-19. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-02-26. The Society of American Foresters grants accreditation only to specific educational curricula that lead to a first professional degree in forestry at the bachelor's or master's level. 
^ "Canadian Institute of Forestry - Silver Ring Program". Cif-ifc.org. Archived from the original on 2014-02-01. Retrieved 2014-03-15. 
^ "Discover IUFRO:The Organization". IUFRO. Archived from the original on 2010-07-08. Retrieved 2010-10-12. 



Further reading[edit]

Eyle, Alexandra. 1992. Charles Lathrop Pack: Timberman, Forest Conservationist, and Pioneer in Forest Education. Syracuse, NY: ESF College Foundation and College of Environmental Science and Forestry. Distributed by Syracuse University Press. Available: Google books.
Hammond, Herbert. 1991. Seeing the Forest Among the Trees. Winlaw/Vancouver: Polestar Press, 1991.
Hart, C. 1994. Practical Forestry for the Agent and Surveyor. Stroud. Sutton Publishing. ISBN 0-86299-962-6
Hibberd, B.G. (Ed). 1991. Forestry Practice. Forestry Commission Handbook 6. London. HMSO. ISBN 0-11-710281-4
Kimmins, Hammish. 1992. Balancing Act: Environmental Issues in Forestry. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
Maser, Chris. 1994. Sustainable Forestry: Philosophy, Science, and Economics. DelRay Beach: St. Lucie Press.
Miller, G. Tyler. 1990. Resource Conservation and Management. Belmont: Wadsworth Publishing.
Nyland, Ralph D. 2007. Silviculture: Concepts and Applications. 2nd ed. Prospect Heights: Waveland Press.
Radkau, Joachim Wood: A History, ISBN 978-0-7456-4688-6, November 2011, Polity
Stoddard, Charles H. 1978. Essentials of Forestry. New York: Ronald Press.
[1]. Vira, B. et al. 2015. Forests and Food: Addressing Hunger and Nutrition Across Sustainable Landscapes. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers.

External links[edit]

 Media related to Forestry at Wikimedia Commons
 Works related to Forestry at Wikisource
Forestry at Curlie (based on DMOZ)







v
t
e


Forestry






Outline
Index
Forest areas
Ministries
Research institutes
Colleges
Journals
Arbor Day





Types



Agroforestry

dehesa


Analog forestry
Bamboo forestry
Close to nature forestry
Community forestry
Ecoforestry
Energy forestry
Mycoforestry
Permaforestry
Plantation forestry
Social forestry
Sustainable forestry
Urban forestry





Ecology and
management



Arboriculture
Controlled burn
Dendrology
Ecological thinning
Even-aged management
Fire ecology
Forest

informatics
IPM
inventory
governance
law
old-growth
pathology
protection
restoration
secondary
transition


Forest certification

ATFS
CFS
FSC
PEFC
SFI
SmartWood
Woodland Carbon Code


Forestation

afforestation
reforestation


Growth and yield modelling
Horticulture

GM trees


i-Tree

urban


Silviculture
Sustainable management
Tree

allometry
breeding


Tree measurement

crown
girth
height
volume







Environmental
topics



Acid rain
Carbon sequestration
Clearcutting
Deforestation
Ecological services
Forest dieback
Forest fragmentation
High grading
Illegal logging
Invasive species
REDD
Shifting cultivation

chitemene
slash-and-burn
slash-and-char
svedjebruk


Timber recycling
Wildfire
Wilding





Industries



Coppicing
Forest farming
Forest gardening
Logging
Manufacturing

lumber
plywood
pulp and paper
sawmilling


Products

biochar
biomass
charcoal
non-timber
palm oil
rayon
rubber
tanbark


Rail transport
Tree farm

Christmas trees


Wood

engineered
fuel
mahogany
teak


Woodworking





Occupations



Forester
Arborist
Bucker
Choker setter
Ecologist
Feller
Firefighter

handcrew
hotshot
lookout
smokejumper


River driver
Truck driver
Log scaler
Lumberjack
Ranger
Resin tapper
Rubber tapper
Shingle weaver
Timber cruiser
Tree planter
Wood process engineer








 Portal
 Category










Related articles











v
t
e


Forestry by country






Forest areas

deforestation


Ministries
Research institutes
Universities and colleges
Technical schools





Africa



Angola
Central African Republic
Chad
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Uganda








Americas



Argentina
Chile





Asia



Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Japan
Pakistan
Syria





Europe



Estonia
Finland
Russia
United Kingdom





Oceania



Australia (Tasmania)
New Zealand





Central agencies



Canada
Chile
Denmark
Kenya
Mexico
Papua New Guinea
Romania
South Korea
Sri Lanka
United States








 Forestry portal
 Category

by continent
agencies


 Commons
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Forestry tools and equipment



Tree planting/
afforestation



Caulk boots
Hoedad (hoedag)
Groasis Waterboxx
Mattock
Pottiputki
Root trainer
Seed trap
Tree planting bar (dibble bar)
Tree shelter (Tuley tube)
Tree spade








Mensuration



3D scanner
Angle gauge
Biltmore stick
Calipers
Chain
Cruising rod
Diameter tape
Hemispherical photography
Inclinometer
Increment borer
Rangefinder

laser


Microtome
Relascope
Wedge prism





Fire suppression



Aerial firefighting

DC-10
UAVs


Driptorch
Fire flapper
Fire rake
Fire retardant
Helitack
McLeod
Pulaski
Rakehoe





Axes



Billhook
Broadaxe
Froe (shake axe)
Hatchet
Labrys
Log splitter
Splitting maul





Saws



Bow saw
Bucksaw
Chainsaw

safety clothing
safety features


Crosscut saw
Dragsaw
Head saw
Lumber edger
Portable sawmill
Resaw
Two-man saw
Whipsaw





Logging



Cant hook
Feller buncher
Forwarder
Go-devil
Harvester
Helicopter
Log truck
Lombard Steam Log Hauler
Michigan logging wheels
Peavey
Pickaroon
Pike pole
Skid cone
Skidder

Washington winch


Steam donkey
Yarder

swing







Other



Denailer
Firewood processor
Forest railway
Forestry mulcher
Hand compass
Hand hook
Hydraulic debarker
Log house moulder
Machete
Stump grinder
Chainsaw mill
Tree tyer
Tsakat
Whoopie sling
Wood-drying kiln
Woodchipper








 Forestry portal
 Categories

tools
equipment


 Commons

tools
equipment


 WikiProject Forestry












v
t
e


Deforestation by country or region



Africa



DR Congo
Ethiopia
Kenya
Madagascar
Nigeria








Americas



Amazon
Brazil
Canada (British Columbia)
Central America
Colombia
Costa Rica
Haiti
Mexico
United States





Asia



Borneo
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia (Kalimantan)
Laos
Malaysia (East Malaysia)
Myanmar
Nepal
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam





Europe



Roman Empire
Russia





Oceania



Australia
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea








 Forestry portal
 Category
 Commons
 WikiProject Forestry












v
t
e


Botany




History of botany



Subdisciplines



Plant systematics
Ethnobotany
Paleobotany
Plant anatomy
Plant ecology
Phytogeography

Geobotany
Flora


Phytochemistry
Plant pathology
Bryology
Phycology
Floristics
Dendrology





Plant groups



Algae
Archaeplastida
Bryophyte
Non-vascular plants
Vascular plants
Spermatophytes
Pteridophyte
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm






Plant morphology
(glossary)





Plant cells



Cell wall
Phragmoplast
Plastid
Plasmodesma
Vacuole





Tissues



Meristem
Vascular tissue

Vascular bundle


Ground tissue

Mesophyll


Cork
Wood
Storage organs





Vegetative



Root
Rhizoid
Bulb
Rhizome
Shoot

Stem
Leaf

Petiole
Cataphyll


Bud
Sessility







Reproductive
(Flower)



Flower development
Inflorescence

Umbel
Raceme
Bract
Pedicellate


Flower

Whorl
Floral symmetry
Floral diagram
Floral formula


Receptacle
Hypanthium (Floral cup)
Perianth

Tepal
Petal
Sepal


Sporophyll
Gynoecium

Ovary

Ovule


Stigma


Archegonium
Androecium

Stamen
Staminode
Pollen
Tapetum


Gynandrium
Gametophyte
Sporophyte
Plant embryo
Fruit

Fruit anatomy
Berry
Capsule
Seed

Seed dispersal
Endosperm









Surface structures



Epicuticular wax
Plant cuticle
Epidermis
Stoma
Nectary
Trichome
Prickle











Plant physiology
Materials






Nutrition
Photosynthesis

Chlorophyll


Plant hormone
Transpiration
Turgor pressure
Bulk flow
Aleurone
Phytomelanin
Sugar
Sap
Starch
Cellulose





Plant growth and habit



Secondary growth
Woody plants
Herbaceous plants
Habit

Vines

Lianas


Shrubs

Subshrubs


Trees
Succulent plants







Reproduction


Evolution
Ecology






Alternation of generations
Sporangium

Spore
Microsporangia

Microspore


Megasporangium

Megaspore




Pollination

Pollinators
Pollen tube


Double fertilization
Germination
Evolutionary development
Evolutionary history

timeline


Hardiness zone





Plant taxonomy



History of plant systematics
Herbarium
Biological classification
Botanical nomenclature

Botanical name
Correct name
Author citation
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN)
- for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP)


Taxonomic rank
International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT)
Plant taxonomy systems
Cultivated plant taxonomy

Citrus taxonomy
cultigen

cultivar
Group
grex









Practice



Agronomy
Floriculture
Forestry
Horticulture








Lists
Related topics






Botanical terms
Botanists

by author abbreviation


Botanical expedition








Category
Commons
Portal
WikiProject














Authority control



GND: 4064356-6
NDL: 00569483











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forestry&oldid=814889235"					Categories: ForestryHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro)All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles needing additional references from February 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with GND identifiers