This article is about the formal taxonomic term in botany. For the use in zoology, see Form (zoology). For the informal botanical grouping, see Forma specialis.




Seedlings of Abies procera sometimes arise that have attractive silvery-blue foliage. The name Abies procera Rehder forma glauca (Ravenscr.) Rehder has been created for these. However, if the plants are selectively propagated for the horticulture trade, a cultivar name is generally used instead.


In botanical nomenclature, a form (forma, plural formae) is one of the "secondary" taxonomic ranks, below that of variety, which in turn is below that of species; it is an infraspecific taxon.[1] If more than three ranks are listed in describing a taxon, the "classification" is being specified, but only three parts make up the "name" of the taxon: a genus name, a specific epithet, and an infraspecific epithet.
The abbreviation "f." or the full "forma" should be put before the infraspecific epithet to indicate the rank. It is not italicised.
For example:

Acanthocalycium spiniflorum f. klimpelianum or

Acanthocalycium spiniflorum forma klimpelianum (Weidlich & Werderm.) Donald


Crataegus aestivalis (Walter) Torr. & A.Gray var. cerasoides Sarg. f. luculenta Sarg. is a classification of a plant whose name is:

Crataegus aestivalis (Walter) Torr. & A.Gray f. luculenta Sarg.



A form usually designates a group with a noticeable morphological deviation. The usual taxonomic practice is that the individuals classified within the form are not necessarily known to be closely related (they may not form a clade).[2] For instance, white-flowered plants of species that usually have coloured flowers can be grouped and named (e.g., as "f. alba"). Formae apomicticae are sometimes named among plants that reproduce asexually, by apomixis. There are theoretically countless numbers of forms based on minor genetic differences, and only a few that have particular significance are likely to be named.
See also[edit]

Form (zoology)
Forma specialis, an informal rank used for a parasitic form adapted to a particular host
Trinomial nomenclature
Variety (botany)
Subvariety
Plant variety (disambiguation)
Cultivar
Hybrid (biology)
Race (biology)

References[edit]



^ McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012). International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011. Regnum Vegetabile 154. A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG. ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6.  Chapter I. Article 4
^ Hamilton, C.W.; Reichard, S.H. (1992), "Current Practice in the Use of Subspecies, Variety, and Forma in the Classification of Wild Plants", Taxon, 41 (3): 485–498, doi:10.2307/1222819, JSTOR 1222819 









v
t
e


Taxonomic ranks









Domain/Superkingdom
Kingdom
Subkingdom
Infrakingdom/Branch




Superphylum/Superdivision
Phylum/Division
Subphylum
Infraphylum
Microphylum




Superclass
Class
Subclass
Infraclass
Parvclass




Legion
Cohort




Magnorder
Superorder
Order
Suborder
Infraorder
Parvorder




Section (zoo.)
Superfamily
Family
Subfamily




Supertribe
Tribe
Subtribe




Genus
Subgenus
Section (bot.)
Series (bot.)




Species
Subspecies
Variety
Form














This botany article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e










						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Form_(botany)&oldid=742642294"					Categories: Botanical nomenclaturePlant taxonomyBotany stubsHidden categories: All stub articles