A formal system or logical calculus is any well-defined system of abstract thought based on the model of mathematics. A formal system need not be mathematical as such; for example, Spinoza's Ethics imitates the form of Euclid's Elements. Spinoza employed Euclidiean elements such as "axioms" or "primitive truths", rules of inferences, etc., so that a calculus can be built using these.
Some theorists[which?] use the term formalism as a rough synonym for formal system, but the term is also used to refer to a particular style[which?] of notation, for example, Paul Dirac's bra–ket notation.



Contents


1 Background

1.1 Recursive
1.2 Inference and entailment

1.2.1 Formal language
1.2.2 Logical system
1.2.3 Deductive inference




2 History

2.1 Formalism

2.1.1 Hilbert's program


2.2 QED manifesto


3 Examples
4 Variants

4.1 Proof system


5 See also
6 References
7 Further reading
8 External links



Background[edit]
Each formal system uses a set of primitive symbols (sometimes known as an alphabet) to finitely construct a formal language from a set of axioms through inferential rules of formation.
The system thus consists of valid formulas built up through finite combinations of the primitive symbols—combinations that are formed from the axioms in accordance with the stated rules.[1]
More formally, this can be expressed as the following:

A finite set of symbols, that can be used for constructing formulas (i.e. finite strings of symbols).
A grammar, which tells how well-formed formulas (abbreviated wff) are constructed out of the symbols in the alphabet. It is usually required that there be a decision procedure for deciding whether a formula is well formed or not.
A set of axioms or axiom schemata: each axiom must be a wff.
A set of inference rules.

Recursive[edit]
A formal system is said to be recursive (i.e. effective) or recursively enumerable if the set of axioms and the set of inference rules are decidable sets or semidecidable sets, respectively.
Inference and entailment[edit]
The entailment of the system by its logical foundation is what distinguishes a formal system from others which may have some basis in an abstract model. Often the formal system will be the basis for or even identified with a larger theory or field (e.g. Euclidean geometry) consistent with the usage in modern mathematics such as model theory.[clarification needed]
Formal language[edit]
Main articles: Formal language and formal grammar
A formal language is a language that is defined by a formal system. Like languages in linguistics, formal languages generally have two aspects:

the syntax of a language is what the language looks like (more formally: the set of possible expressions that are valid utterances in the language) studied in formal language theory
the semantics of a language are what the utterances of the language mean (which is formalized in various ways, depending on the type of language in question)

In computer science and linguistics a formal grammar is a precise description of a formal language: a set of strings. The two main categories of formal grammar are that of generative grammars, which are sets of rules for how strings in a language can be generated, and that of analytic grammars (or reductive grammar,[2][3] which are sets of rules for how a string can be analyzed to determine whether it is a member of the language. In short, an analytic grammar describes how to recognize when strings are members in the set, whereas a generative grammar describes how to write only those strings in the set.
Logical system[edit]
A logical system or, for short, logic, is a formal system together with a form of semantics,[disputed – discuss] usually in the form of model-theoretic interpretation, which assigns truth values to sentences of the formal language, that is, formulae that contain no free variables. A logic is sound if all sentences that can be derived are true in the interpretation, and complete if, conversely, all true sentences can be derived.
Deductive inference[edit]
A deductive system, also called a deductive apparatus, consists of the axioms (or axiom schemata) and rules of inference that can be used to derive theorems of the system.[4]
Such deductive systems preserve deductive qualities in the formulas that are expressed in the system. Usually the quality we are concerned with is truth as opposed to falsehood. However, other modalities, such as justification or belief may be preserved instead.
In order to sustain its deductive integrity, a deductive apparatus must be definable without reference to any intended interpretation of the language. The aim is to ensure that each line of a derivation is merely a syntactic consequence of the lines that precede it. There should be no element of any interpretation of the language that gets involved with the deductive nature of the system.
History[edit]
Panini is credited with the creation of the world's first formal system in or before mid-fourth century BCE, well before the innovations of Gottlob Frege and the subsequent development of mathematical logic in 19th century Europe.
Formalism[edit]
Main article: Mathematical formalism
Hilbert's program[edit]
Main article: Hilbert's program
David Hilbert instigated a formalist movement that was eventually tempered by Gödel's incompleteness theorems.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2017)



QED manifesto[edit]
Main article: QED manifesto
The QED manifesto represented a subsequent unsuccessful effort at formalization of known mathematics.




This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2017)



Examples[edit]
Main article: List of formal systems
Examples of formal systems include:

Axiomatic system
Formal ethics
Lambda calculus
Proof calculus





This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (January 2017)



Variants[edit]
The following systems are variations of formal systems[clarification needed].
Proof system[edit]
Main articles: Proof system and Formal proof
Formal proofs are sequences of well-formed formulas (or wff for short). For a wff to qualify as part of a proof, it might either be an axiom or be the product of applying an inference rule on previous wffs in the proof sequence. The last wff in the sequence is recognized as a theorem.
The point of view that generating formal proofs is all there is to mathematics is often called formalism. David Hilbert founded metamathematics as a discipline for discussing formal systems. Any language that one uses to talk about a formal system is called a metalanguage. The metalanguage may be a natural language, or it may be partially formalized itself, but it is generally less completely formalized than the formal language component of the formal system under examination, which is then called the object language, that is, the object of the discussion in question.
Once a formal system is given, one can define the set of theorems which can be proved inside the formal system. This set consists of all wffs for which there is a proof. Thus all axioms are considered theorems. Unlike the grammar for wffs, there is no guarantee that there will be a decision procedure for deciding whether a given wff is a theorem or not. The notion of theorem just defined should not be confused with theorems about the formal system, which, in order to avoid confusion, are usually called metatheorems.
See also[edit]






This article is in a list format that may be better presented using prose. You can help by converting this article to prose, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (January 2017)








Formal method
Formal science
Rewriting system
Substitution instance
Theory (mathematical logic)





Systems science portal
Logic portal






References[edit]



^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Formal system definition, 2007.
^ Reductive grammar: (computer science) A set of syntactic rules for the analysis of strings to determine whether the strings exist in a language. "Sci-Tech Dictionary McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms" (6th ed.). McGraw-Hill. [unreliable source?] About the Author Compiled by The Editors of the McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science & Technology (New York, NY) an in-house staff who represents the cutting-edge of skill, knowledge, and innovation in science publishing. [1]
^ "There are two classes of formal-language definition compiler-writing schemes. The productive grammar approach is the most common. A productive grammar consists primarrly of a set of rules that describe a method of generating all possible strings of the language. The reductive or analytical grammar technique states a set of rules that describe a method of analyzing any string of characters and deciding whether that string is in the language." "The TREE-META Compiler-Compiler System: A Meta Compiler System for the Univac 1108 and General Electric 645, University of Utah Technical Report RADC-TR-69-83. C. Stephen Carr, David A. Luther, Sherian Erdmann" (PDF). Retrieved 5 January 2015. 
^ Hunter, Geoffrey, Metalogic: An Introduction to the Metatheory of Standard First-Order Logic, University of California Pres, 1971



Further reading[edit]

Raymond M. Smullyan, 1961. Theory of Formal Systems: Annals of Mathematics Studies, Princeton University Press (April 1, 1961) 156 pages ISBN 0-691-08047-X
Stephen Cole Kleene, 1967. Mathematical Logic Reprinted by Dover, 2002. ISBN 0-486-42533-9
Douglas Hofstadter, 1979. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid ISBN 978-0-465-02656-2. 777 pages.

External links[edit]



Look up formalisation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Encyclopædia Britannica, Formal system definition, 2007.
What is a Formal System?: Some quotes from John Haugeland's `Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea' (1985), pp. 48–64.
Peter Suber, Formal Systems and Machines: An Isomorphism, 1997.







v
t
e


Mathematical logic



General



Formal language
Formation rule
Formal proof
Formal semantics
Well-formed formula
Set
Element
Class
Classical logic
Axiom
Rule of inference
Relation
Theorem
Logical consequence
Type theory
Symbol
Syntax
Theory





Systems



Formal system
Deductive system
Axiomatic system
Hilbert style systems
Natural deduction
Sequent calculus





Traditional logic



Proposition
Inference
Argument
Validity
Cogency
Syllogism
Square of opposition
Venn diagram






Propositional
calculus
Boolean logic




Boolean functions
Propositional calculus
Propositional formula
Logical connectives
Truth tables
Many-valued logic





Predicate logic



First-order
Quantifiers
Predicate
Second-order
Monadic predicate calculus





Naive set theory



Set
Empty set
Element
Enumeration
Extensionality
Finite set
Infinite set
Subset
Power set
Countable set
Uncountable set
Recursive set
Domain
Codomain
Image
Map
Function
Relation
Ordered pair





Set theory



Foundations of mathematics
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory
Axiom of choice
General set theory
Kripke–Platek set theory
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory
Morse–Kelley set theory
Tarski–Grothendieck set theory





Model theory



Model
Interpretation
Non-standard model
Finite model theory
Truth value
Validity





Proof theory



Formal proof
Deductive system
Formal system
Theorem
Logical consequence
Rule of inference
Syntax





Computability
theory



Recursion
Recursive set
Recursively enumerable set
Decision problem
Church–Turing thesis
Computable function
Primitive recursive function












v
t
e


Computable knowledge



Topics and
concepts



Alphabet of human thought
Authority control
Automated reasoning
Commonsense knowledge
Commonsense reasoning
Computability
Formal system
Inference engine
Knowledge base
Knowledge-based systems
Knowledge engineering
Knowledge extraction
Knowledge representation
Knowledge retrieval
Library classification
Logic programming
Ontology
Personal knowledge base
Question answering
Semantic reasoner





Proposals and
implementations



Zairja
Ars Magna (1300)
An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language (1688)
Calculus ratiocinator & Characteristica universalis (1700)
Dewey Decimal Classification (1876)
Begriffsschrift (1879)
Mundaneum (1910)
Logical atomism (1918)
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921)
Hilbert's program (1920s)
Incompleteness theorem (1931)
World Brain (1938)
Memex (1945)
General Problem Solver (1959)
Prolog (1972)
Cyc (1984)
Semantic Web (2001)
Evi (2007)
Wolfram Alpha (2009)
Watson (2011)
Siri (2011)
Knowledge Graph (2012)
Wikidata (2012)
Cortana (2014)
Viv (2016)





In fiction



The Engine (Gulliver's Travels, 1726)
Joe ("A Logic Named Joe", 1946)
The Librarian (Snow Crash, 1992)
Dr. Know (A.I. Artificial Intelligence, 2001)
Waterhouse (The Baroque Cycle, 2003)

See also: Logic machines in fiction and List of fictional computers











v
t
e


Systems science



Systems
types



Anatomical
Art
Biological
Complex
Complex adaptive
Conceptual
Coupled human–environment
Database
Dynamical
Ecological
Economic
Energy
Formal
Holarchic
Information
Legal
Measurement
Metric
Multi-agent
Nervous
Nonlinear
Operating
Physical
Planetary
Political
Sensory
Social
Star
Writing





Theoretical
fields







Chaos theory
Complex systems
Control theory
Cybernetics
Earth system science
Living systems
Sociotechnical system
Systemics
Urban metabolism
World-systems theory








analysis
biology
dynamics
ecology
engineering
neuroscience
pharmacology
psychology
theory
thinking








Systems
scientists



Alexander Bogdanov
Russell L. Ackoff
William Ross Ashby
Ruzena Bajcsy
Béla H. Bánáthy
Gregory Bateson
Anthony Stafford Beer
Richard E. Bellman
Ludwig von Bertalanffy
Margaret Boden
Kenneth E. Boulding
Murray Bowen
Kathleen Carley
Mary Cartwright
C. West Churchman
Manfred Clynes
George Dantzig
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Heinz von Foerster
Stephanie Forrest
Jay Wright Forrester
Barbara Grosz
Charles A S Hall
Lydia Kavraki
James J. Kay
Faina M. Kirillova
George Klir
Allenna Leonard
Edward Norton Lorenz
Niklas Luhmann
Humberto Maturana
Margaret Mead
Donella Meadows
Mihajlo D. Mesarovic
James Grier Miller
Radhika Nagpal
Howard T. Odum
Talcott Parsons
Ilya Prigogine
Qian Xuesen
Anatol Rapoport
Peter Senge
Claude Shannon
Katia Sycara
Francisco Varela
Manuela M. Veloso
Kevin Warwick
Norbert Wiener
Jennifer Wilby
Anthony Wilden





Applications



Systems theory in anthropology
Systems theory in archaeology
Systems theory in political science





Organizations



List
Principia Cybernetica








 Systems science portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formal_system&oldid=816677027"					Categories: MetalogicSyntax (logic)Formal systemsFormal languagesHidden categories: All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from February 2015All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2017Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017All accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from June 2015Articles to be expanded from January 2017All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2017Articles needing cleanup from January 2017All pages needing cleanupArticles with sections that need to be turned into prose from January 2017