"Oil and gas" redirects here. For other uses, see Oil and gas (disambiguation).




Coal, one of the fossil fuels


A fossil fuel is a fuel formed by natural processes, such as anaerobic decomposition of buried dead organisms, containing energy originating in ancient photosynthesis.[1] The age of the organisms and their resulting fossil fuels is typically millions of years, and sometimes exceeds 650 million years.[2] Fossil fuels contain high percentages of carbon and include petroleum, coal, and natural gas.[3] Other commonly used derivatives include kerosene and propane. Fossil fuels range from volatile materials with low carbon to hydrogen ratios like methane, to liquids like petroleum, to nonvolatile materials composed of almost pure carbon, like anthracite coal. Methane can be found in hydrocarbon fields either alone, associated with oil, or in the form of methane clathrates.
The theory that fossil fuels formed from the fossilized remains of dead plants[4] by exposure to heat and pressure in the Earth's crust over millions of years[5] was first introduced by Georgius Agricola in 1556 and later by Mikhail Lomonosov in the 18th century.
The United States Energy Information Administration estimates that in 2007 the primary sources of energy consisted of petroleum 36.0%, coal 27.4%, natural gas 23.0%, amounting to an 86.4% share for fossil fuels in primary energy consumption in the world.[6] Non-fossil sources in 2006 included nuclear 8.5%, hydroelectric 6.3%, and others (geothermal, solar, tidal, wind, wood, waste) amounting to 0.9%.[7] World energy consumption was growing about 2.3% per year.
Although fossil fuels are continually being formed via natural processes, they are generally considered to be non-renewable resources because they take millions of years to form and the known viable reserves are being depleted much faster than new ones are being made.[8][9]
The use of fossil fuels raises serious environmental concerns. The burning of fossil fuels produces around 21.3 billion tonnes (21.3 gigatonnes) of carbon dioxide (CO2) per year. It is estimated that natural processes can only absorb about half of that amount, so there is a net increase of 10.65 billion tonnes of atmospheric carbon dioxide per year.[10] Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas that increases radiative forcing and contributes to global warming. A global movement towards the generation of renewable energy is underway to help reduce global greenhouse gas emissions.



Contents


1 Origin
2 Importance

2.1 Reserves


3 Limits and alternatives
4 Environmental effects
5 Industry

5.1 Economic effects


6 See also
7 Footnotes
8 Further reading
9 External links



Origin




Since oil fields are located only at certain places on earth,[11] only some countries are oil-independent; the other countries depend on the oil-production capacities of these countries


Aquatic phytoplankton and zooplankton that died and sedimented in large quantities under anoxic conditions millions of years ago began forming petroleum and natural gas as a result of anaerobic decomposition. Over geological time this organic matter, mixed with mud, became buried under further heavy layers of inorganic sediment. The resulting high levels of heat and pressure caused the organic matter to chemically alter, first into a waxy material known as kerogen which is found in oil shales, and then with more heat into liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons in a process known as catagenesis. Despite these heat driven transformations (which may increase the energy density compared to typical organic matter), the embedded energy is still photosynthetic in origin.[1]
Terrestrial plants, on the other hand, tended to form coal and methane. Many of the coal fields date to the Carboniferous period of Earth's history. Terrestrial plants also form type III kerogen, a source of natural gas.
There is a wide range of organic, or hydrocarbon, compounds in any given fuel mixture. The specific mixture of hydrocarbons gives a fuel its characteristic properties, such as boiling point, melting point, density, viscosity, etc. Some fuels like natural gas, for instance, contain only very low boiling, gaseous components. Others such as gasoline or diesel contain much higher boiling components.
Importance




A petrochemical refinery in Grangemouth, Scotland, UK


See also: Fossil fuel power plant
Fossil fuels are of great importance because they can be burned (oxidized to carbon dioxide and water), producing significant amounts of energy per unit mass. The use of coal as a fuel predates recorded history. Coal was used to run furnaces for the melting of metal ore. Semi-solid hydrocarbons from seeps were also burned in ancient times,[12] but these materials were mostly used for waterproofing and embalming.[13]
Commercial exploitation of petroleum began in the 19th century, largely to replace oils from animal sources (notably whale oil) for use in oil lamps.[14]
Natural gas, once flared-off as an unneeded byproduct of petroleum production, is now considered a very valuable resource.[15] Natural gas deposits are also the main source of the element helium.
Heavy crude oil, which is much more viscous than conventional crude oil, and tar sands, where bitumen is found mixed with sand and clay, began to become more important as sources of fossil fuel as of the early 2000s.[16] Oil shale and similar materials are sedimentary rocks containing kerogen, a complex mixture of high-molecular weight organic compounds, which yield synthetic crude oil when heated (pyrolyzed). These materials had yet to be fully exploited commercially.[17] With additional processing, they can be employed in lieu of other already established fossil fuel deposits. More recently, there has been disinvestment from exploitation of such resources due to their high carbon cost, relative to more easily processed reserves.[18]
Prior to the latter half of the 18th century, windmills and watermills provided the energy needed for industry such as milling flour, sawing wood or pumping water, and burning wood or peat provided domestic heat. The widescale use of fossil fuels, coal at first and petroleum later, to fire steam engines enabled the Industrial Revolution. At the same time, gas lights using natural gas or coal gas were coming into wide use. The invention of the internal combustion engine and its use in automobiles and trucks greatly increased the demand for gasoline and diesel oil, both made from fossil fuels. Other forms of transportation, railways and aircraft, also required fossil fuels. The other major use for fossil fuels is in generating electricity and as feedstock for the petrochemical industry. Tar, a leftover of petroleum extraction, is used in construction of roads.
Reserves




An oil well in the Gulf of Mexico


See also: Oil reserves
Levels of primary energy sources are the reserves in the ground. Flows are production of fossil fuels from these reserves. The most important part of primary energy sources are the carbon based fossil energy sources. Coal, oil, and natural gas provided 79.6% of primary energy production during 2002 (in million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe)) (34.9+23.5+21.2).
Levels (proved reserves) during 2005–2006

Coal: 997,748 million short tonnes (905 billion metric tonnes),[19] 4,416 billion barrels (702.1 km3) of oil equivalent
Oil: 1,119 billion barrels (177.9 km3) to 1,317 billion barrels (209.4 km3)[20]
Natural gas: 6,183–6,381 trillion cubic feet (175–181 trillion cubic metres),[20] 1,161 billion barrels (184.6×10^9 m3) of oil equivalent

Flows (daily production) during 2006

Coal: 18,476,127 short tonnes (16,761,260 metric tonnes),[21] 52,000,000 barrels (8,300,000 m3) of oil equivalent per day
Oil: 84,000,000 barrels per day (13,400,000 m3/d)[22]
Natural gas: 104,435 billion cubic feet (2,963 billion cubic metres),[23] 19,000,000 barrels (3,000,000 m3) of oil equivalent per day

Limits and alternatives
Main articles: Peak oil, Hubbert peak theory, Renewable energy, and Energy development
P. E. Hodgson, a Senior Research Fellow Emeritus in Physics at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, expects the world energy use is doubling every fourteen years and the need is increasing faster still and he insisted in 2008 that the world oil production, a main resource of fossil fuel, is expected to peak in ten years and thereafter fall.[24]
The principle of supply and demand holds that as hydrocarbon supplies diminish, prices will rise. Therefore, higher prices will lead to increased alternative, renewable energy supplies as previously uneconomic sources become sufficiently economical to exploit. Artificial gasolines and other renewable energy sources currently require more expensive production and processing technologies than conventional petroleum reserves, but may become economically viable in the near future. Different alternative sources of energy include nuclear, hydroelectric, solar, wind, and geothermal.
One of the more promising energy alternatives is the use of inedible feed stocks and biomass for carbon dioxide capture as well as biofuel. While these processes are not without problems, they are currently in practice around the world. Biodiesels are being produced by several companies and source of great research at several universities. Some of the most common and promising processes of conversion of renewable lipids into usable fuels is through hydrotreating and decarboxylation.
Environmental effects




Global fossil carbon emission by fuel type, 1800–2007. Note: Carbon only represents 27% of the mass of CO2


Main article: Environmental impact of the energy industry
The United States holds less than 5% of the world's population, but due to large houses and private cars, uses more than 25% of the world's supply of fossil fuels.[25] As the largest source of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions, CO2 from fossil fuel combustion, accounted for 80 percent of [its] weighted emissions in 1998.[26] Combustion of fossil fuels also produces other air pollutants, such as nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, volatile organic compounds and heavy metals.
According to Environment Canada:

"The electricity sector is unique among industrial sectors in its very large contribution to emissions associated with nearly all air issues. Electricity generation produces a large share of Canadian nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide emissions, which contribute to smog and acid rain and the formation of fine particulate matter. It is the largest uncontrolled industrial source of mercury emissions in Canada. Fossil fuel-fired electric power plants also emit carbon dioxide, which may contribute to climate change. In addition, the sector has significant impacts on water and habitat and species. In particular, hydropower dams and transmission lines have significant effects on water and biodiversity."[27]





Carbon dioxide variations over the last 400,000 years, showing a rise since the industrial revolution


According to U.S. Scientist Jerry Mahlman and USA Today: Mahlman, who crafted the IPCC language used to define levels of scientific certainty, says the new report will lay the blame at the feet of fossil fuels with "virtual certainty," meaning 99% sure. That's a significant jump from "likely," or 66% sure, in the group's last report in 2001, Mahlman says. His role in this year's effort involved spending two months reviewing the more than 1,600 pages of research that went into the new assessment.[28]
Combustion of fossil fuels generates sulfuric, carbonic, and nitric acids, which fall to Earth as acid rain, impacting both natural areas and the built environment. Monuments and sculptures made from marble and limestone are particularly vulnerable, as the acids dissolve calcium carbonate.
Fossil fuels also contain radioactive materials, mainly uranium and thorium, which are released into the atmosphere. In 2000, about 12,000 tonnes of thorium and 5,000 tonnes of uranium were released worldwide from burning coal.[29] It is estimated that during 1982, US coal burning released 155 times as much radioactivity into the atmosphere as the Three Mile Island accident.[30]
Burning coal also generates large amounts of bottom ash and fly ash. These materials are used in a wide variety of applications, utilizing, for example, about 40% of the US production.[31]
Harvesting, processing, and distributing fossil fuels can also create environmental concerns. Coal mining methods, particularly mountaintop removal and strip mining, have negative environmental impacts, and offshore oil drilling poses a hazard to aquatic organisms. Oil refineries also have negative environmental impacts, including air and water pollution. Transportation of coal requires the use of diesel-powered locomotives, while crude oil is typically transported by tanker ships, each of which requires the combustion of additional fossil fuels.
Environmental regulation uses a variety of approaches to limit these emissions, such as command-and-control (which mandates the amount of pollution or the technology used), economic incentives, or voluntary programs.
An example of such regulation in the USA is the "EPA is implementing policies to reduce airborne mercury emissions. Under regulations issued in 2005, coal-fired power plants will need to reduce their emissions by 70 percent by 2018.".[32]
In economic terms, pollution from fossil fuels is regarded as a negative externality. Taxation is considered one way to make societal costs explicit, in order to 'internalize' the cost of pollution. This aims to make fossil fuels more expensive, thereby reducing their use and the amount of pollution associated with them, along with raising the funds necessary to counteract these factors.[citation needed]
According to Rodman D. Griffin, "The burning of coal and oil have saved inestimable amounts of time and labor while substantially raising living standards around the world".[33] Although the use of fossil fuels may seem beneficial to our lives, this act is playing a role on global warming and it is said to be dangerous for the future.[33]
Moreover, these environmental pollutions impacts on the human beings because its particles of the fossil fuel on the air cause negative health effects when inhaled by people. These health effects include premature death, acute respiratory illness, aggravated asthma, chronic bronchitis and decreased lung function. So, the poor, undernourished, very young and very old, and people with preexisting respiratory disease and other ill health, are more at risk.[34]
Industry
Main articles: coal industry and petroleum industry
Further information: Fossil fuel exporters and Fossil fuels lobby
Economic effects
Europe spent €406 billion on importing fossil fuels in 2011 and €545 billion in 2012. This is around three times more than the cost of the Greek bailout up to 2013. In 2012 wind energy in Europe avoided €9.6 billion of fossil fuel costs.[35] A 2014 report by the International Energy Agency said that the fossil fuels industry collects $550 billion a year in global government fossil fuel subsidies.[36] This amount was $490 billion in 2014, but would have been $610 billion without agreements made in 2009.[37]
A 2015 report studied 20 fossil fuel companies and found that, while highly profitable, the hidden economic cost to society was also large.[38][39] The report spans the period 2008–2012 and notes that: "For all companies and all years, the economic cost to society of their CO2 emissions was greater than their after‐tax profit, with the single exception of ExxonMobil in 2008."[38]:4 Pure coal companies fare even worse: "the economic cost to society exceeds total revenue in all years, with this cost varying between nearly $2 and nearly $9 per $1 of revenue."[38]:5 In this case, total revenue includes "employment, taxes, supply purchases, and indirect employment."[38]:4
See also


Abiogenic petroleum origin proposes that petroleum is not a fossil fuel
Bioremediation
Carbon bubble
Environmental impact of the energy industry
Fossil Fools Day
Fossil fuel divestment
Fossil fuel drilling
Fossil fuel exporters
Fossil fuel phase-out
Fossil fuels lobby
Hydraulic fracturing
Liquefied petroleum gas
Low-carbon power
Peak coal
Peak gas
Petroleum industry
Shale gas


Footnotes


^ a b "thermochemistry of fossil fuel formation" (PDF). 
^ Paul Mann, Lisa Gahagan, and Mark B. Gordon, "Tectonic setting of the world's giant oil and gas fields," in Michel T. Halbouty (ed.) Giant Oil and Gas Fields of the Decade, 1990–1999, Tulsa, Okla.: American Association of Petroleum Geologists, p. 50, accessed 22 June 2009.
^ "Fossil fuel". ScienceDaily. Archived from the original on 2012-05-10. 
^ Novaczek, Irene (September 2000). "Canada's Fossil Fuel Dependency". Elements. Retrieved 2007-01-18. 
^ "Fossil fuel". EPA. Archived from the original on March 12, 2007. Retrieved 2007-01-18. 
^ "U.S. EIA International Energy Statistics". Retrieved 2010-01-12. 
^ "International Energy Annual 2006". Archived from the original on 2009-02-05. Retrieved 2009-02-08. 
^ https://books.google.ie/books?id=AJ4SnHbb-ZcC&pg=PA11&lpg=PA11&dq=fossil+fuels+depleted+much+faster+than+renewal&source=bl&ots=i44RC-FU6L&sig=jiYif0JITyWRqnl112Rgro2Zfp0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi59d22r_7RAhVLGsAKHV47COQQ6AEIPzAG#v=onepage&q=fossil%20fuels%20depleted%20much%20faster%20than%20renewal&f=false
^ https://books.google.ie/books?id=DHKDBAAAQBAJ&pg=PA278&lpg=PA278&dq=fossil+fuels+depleted+much+faster+than+renewal&source=bl&ots=DCef6lEBXr&sig=HRFYnyQw1COFPBekmu__ZtONtNM&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi59d22r_7RAhVLGsAKHV47COQQ6AEINTAE#v=onepage&q=fossil%20fuels%20depleted%20much%20faster%20than%20renewal&f=false
^ "What Are Greenhouse Gases?". US Department of Energy. Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ Oil fields map Archived 2012-08-06 at the Wayback Machine.. quakeinfo.ucsd.edu
^ "Encyclopædia Britannica, use of oil seeps in ancient times". Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ Bilkadi, Zayn (1992). "BULLS FROM THE SEA : Ancient Oil Industries". Aramco World. Archived from the original on 2007-11-13. 
^ Ball, Max W.; Douglas Ball; Daniel S. Turner (1965). This Fascinating Oil Business. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. ISBN 0-672-50829-X. 
^ Kaldany, Rashad, Director Oil, Gas, Mining and Chemicals Dept, World Bank (December 13, 2006). Global Gas Flaring Reduction: A Time for Action! (PDF). Global Forum on Flaring & Gas Utilization. Paris. Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ "Oil Sands Global Market Potential 2007". Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ "US Department of Energy plans for oil shale development". Archived from the original on August 13, 2007. Retrieved 2007-09-09. 
^ "Insurance giant Axa dumps investments in tar sands pipelines". Retrieved 2017-12-24. 
^ World Estimated Recoverable Coal Archived 2008-09-20 at the Wayback Machine.. eia.doe.gov. Retrieved on 2012-01-27.
^ a b World Proved Reserves of Oil and Natural Gas, Most Recent Estimates Archived 2011-05-23 at the Wayback Machine.. eia.doe.gov. Retrieved on 2012-01-27.
^ Energy Information Administration. International Energy Annual 2006 Archived 2008-09-22 at the Wayback Machine. (XLS file). October 17, 2008. eia.doe.gov
^ Energy Information Administration. World Petroleum Consumption, Annual Estimates, 1980–2008 (XLS file). October 6, 2009. eia.doe.gov
^ Energy Information Administration. International Energy Annual 2006 Archived 2008-09-25 at the Wayback Machine. (XLS file). August 22, 2008. eia.doe.gov
^ Hodgson, P.E (2008). "Nuclear Power and Energy Crisis". Modern Age. 50 (3): 238. 
^ "The State of Consumption Today". Worldwatch Institute. Retrieved March 30, 2012. 
^ Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990–1998, Rep. EPA 236-R-00-01. US EPA, Washington, DC|accessdate=2017-12-24
^ "Electricity Generation". Environment Canada. Retrieved 2007-03-23. 
^ O'Driscoll, Patrick; Vergano, Dan (2007-03-01). "Fossil fuels are to blame, world scientists conclude". USA Today. Retrieved 2010-05-02. 
^ Coal Combustion: Nuclear Resource or Danger Archived February 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. – Alex Gabbard
^ Nuclear proliferation through coal burning Archived 2009-03-27 at the Wayback Machine. – Gordon J. Aubrecht, II, Ohio State University
^ American Coal Ash Association. "CCP Production and Use Survey" (PDF). [permanent dead link]
^ "Frequently Asked Questions, Information on Proper Disposal of Compact Fluorescent Light Bulbs (CFLs)" (PDF). Retrieved 2007-03-19. 
^ a b Griffin, Rodman (10 July 1992). "Alternative Energy". 2 (2): 573–596. 
^ Liodakis, E; Dashdorj, Dugersuren; Mitchell, Gary E. (2011). "The nuclear alternative". Energy Production within Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. AIP Conference Proceedings. 1342 (1): 91. doi:10.1063/1.3583174. 
^ Avoiding fossil fuel costs with wind energy EWEA March 2014
^ Jerry Hirsch (2 June 2015). "Elon Musk: 'If I cared about subsidies, I would have entered the oil and gas industry'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 29 October 2015. 
^ http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2015/WEO2015_Factsheets.pdf
^ a b c d Hope, Chris; Gilding, Paul; Alvarez, Jimena (2015). Quantifying the implicit climate subsidy received by leading fossil fuel companies — Working Paper No. 02/2015 (PDF). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Judge Business School, University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2016-06-27. 
^ "Measuring fossil fuel 'hidden' costs". University of Cambridge Judge Business School. 23 July 2015. Retrieved 2016-06-27. 


Further reading

Ross Barrett and Daniel Worden (eds.), Oil Culture. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2014.
Bob Johnson, Carbon Nation: Fossil Fuels in the Making of American Culture. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 2014.

External links



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Fossil fuel



Listen to this article (info/dl)












This audio file was created from a revision of the article "Fossil fuel" dated 2010-08-24, and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles


"The Coming Energy Crisis?" – essay by James L. Williams of WTRG Economics and A. F. Alhajji of Ohio Northern University
"Powering the Future" – Michael Parfit (National Geographic)
"Federal Fossil Fuel Subsidies and Greenhouse Gas Emissions"
Fossil Fuel Subsidies in Europe
Oil companies hit by 'state' cyber attacks

Debate

The Origin of Methane (and Oil) in the Crust of the Earth – Thomas Gold (Internet Archives)
Abiotic theory debunked "fossil fuel" myth







v
t
e


Global warming and climate change








Temperatures






Brightness temperature
Effective temperature
Geologic record
Hiatus
Historical climatology
Instrumental record
Paleoclimatology
Paleotempestology
Proxy data
Record of the past 1,000 years
Satellite measurements













Causes







Anthropogenic



Attribution of recent climate change
Aviation
Biofuel
Black carbon
Carbon dioxide
Deforestation
Earth's energy budget
Earth's radiation balance
Ecocide
Fossil fuel
Global dimming
Global warming potential
Greenhouse effect
(Infrared window)
Greenhouse gases
(Halocarbons)
Land use, land-use change and forestry
Radiative forcing
Tropospheric ozone
Urban heat island





Natural



Albedo
Bond events
Climate oscillations
Climate sensitivity
Cloud forcing
Cosmic rays
Feedbacks
Glaciation
Global cooling
Milankovitch cycles
Ocean variability

AMO
ENSO
IOD
PDO


Orbital forcing
Solar variation
Volcanism





Models



Global climate model
















History






History of climate change science
Atmospheric thermodynamics
Svante Arrhenius
James Hansen
Charles David Keeling













Opinion and climate change






Environmental ethics
Media coverage of climate change
Public opinion on climate change
(Popular culture)
Scientific opinion on climate change
Scientists opposing the mainstream assessment
Climate change denial
Global warming conspiracy theory
By country & region
(Africa
Arctic
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
China
Europe
European Union
Finland
Grenada
Japan
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Scotland
South Korea
Sweden
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
United States)













Politics










Clean Power Plan
Climate change denial
(Manufactured controversy)
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
March for Science
People's Climate March
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
Global climate regime
















Potential effects and issues







General



Abrupt climate change
Anoxic event
Arctic dipole anomaly
Arctic haze
Arctic methane release
Climate change and agriculture
Climate change and ecosystems
Climate change and gender
Climate change and poverty
Current sea level rise
Drought
Economics of global warming
Effect on plant biodiversity
Effects on health
Effects on humans
Effects on marine mammals
Environmental migrant
Extinction risk from global warming
Fisheries and climate change
Forest dieback
Industry and society
Iris hypothesis
Megadrought
Ocean acidification
Ozone depletion
Physical impacts
Polar stratospheric cloud
Regime shift
Retreat of glaciers since 1850
Runaway climate change
Season creep
Shutdown of thermohaline circulation





By country



Australia
South Asia

India
Nepal


United States
















Mitigation







Kyoto Protocol



Clean Development Mechanism
Joint Implementation
Bali Road Map
2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference





Governmental



European Climate Change Programme
G8 Climate Change Roundtable
United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
Paris Agreement

United States withdrawal


Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
List of climate change initiatives





Emissions reduction



Carbon credit
Carbon-neutral fuel
Carbon offset
Carbon tax
Emissions trading
Fossil-fuel phase-out





Carbon-free energy



Carbon capture and storage
Efficient energy use
Low-carbon economy
Nuclear power
Renewable energy





Personal



Individual action on climate change
Simple living





Other



Carbon dioxide removal
Carbon sink
Climate change mitigation scenarios
Climate engineering
Individual and political action on climate change
Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
Reforestation
Urban reforestation
Climate Action Plan
Climate action
















Proposed adaptations







Strategies



Damming glacial lakes
Desalination
Drought tolerance
Irrigation investment
Rainwater storage
Sustainable development
Weather modification





Programmes



Avoiding dangerous climate change
Land allocation decision support system














Glossary of climate change
Index of climate change articles
Category:Climate change
Category:Global warming
Portal:Global warming












v
t
e


Natural resources



Air




Pollution / quality



Ambient standards (USA)
Index
Indoor

developing nations


Law

Clean Air Act (USA)


Ozone depletion





Emissions



Airshed
Trading
Deforestation (REDD)











Energy



Law
Resources
Fossil fuels (peak oil)
Geothermal
Nuclear
Solar

sunlight
shade


Tidal
Wave
Wind





Land



Arable

peak farmland


Degradation
Law

property


Management

habitat conservation


Minerals

mining

law
sand


peak
rights


Soil

conservation
fertility
health
resilience


Use

planning
reserve







Life



Biodiversity
Bioprospecting
Biosphere
Bushfood
Bushmeat
Fisheries

law
management


Food
Forests

genetic resources
law
management


Game

law


Gene bank
Herbalist plants
Marine conservation
Non-timber forest products
Rangeland
Seed bank
Wildlife

conservation
management


Wood





Water




Types / location



Aquifer

storage and recovery


Drinking
Fresh
Groundwater

pollution
recharge
remediation


Hydrosphere
Ice

bergs
glacial
polar


Irrigation
Rain

harvesting


Stormwater
Surface water
Wastewater

reclaimed







Aspects



Desalination
Floods
Law
Leaching
Sanitation
Conflict
Conservation
Peak water
Pollution
Privatization
Quality
Right
Resources

management
policy










Related







Commons

enclosure
global
land
tragedy of


Economics

ecological
land


Ecosystem services
Exploitation

overexploitation
Earth Overshoot Day


Management

adaptive


Natural capital

accounting


Nature reserve
Systems ecology
Urban ecology
Wilderness





Resource



Common-pool
Conflict (perpetuation)
Curse
Depletion
Extraction
Nationalism
Renewable / Non-renewable








 Portals



Agriculture and agronomy
Energy
Environment
Fishing
Forestry
Mining
Water
Wetlands








 Category

agencies
law
management
ministries
organizations


Colleges
 Natural resources












v
t
e


Energy



Fundamental concepts



Energetics
Energy

Units


Energy system
Energy transformation
Mass

Mass–energy equivalence


Power
Thermodynamics

Laws of thermodynamics


Exergy





Forms



Kinetic
Potential
Mechanical
Electric
Magnetic
Gravitational
Chemical
Ionization
Nuclear
Chromodynamic
Elastic
Mechanical wave
Sound wave
Radiant
Rest
Thermal





Energy carriers



Enthalpy
Fuel

fossil fuel


Heat
Work
Electricity
Battery
Capacitor





Primary energy



Fossil fuel

Coal
Petroleum
Natural gas


Gravitational energy
Nuclear fuel

Natural uranium


Radiant energy
Solar
Wind
Bioenergy
Hydropower
Marine energy
Geothermal





Energy system
components



Energy engineering
Oil refinery
Fossil-fuel power station

Cogeneration
Integrated gasification combined cycle


Nuclear power

Nuclear power plant
Radioisotope thermoelectric generator


Solar power

Photovoltaic system
Concentrated solar power


Solar thermal energy

Solar power tower
Solar furnace


Wind power

Wind farm
High-altitude wind power


Hydropower

Hydroelectricity
Wave farm
Tidal power


Biomass
Geothermal power





Use and
supply



Energy consumption

World energy consumption


Energy security
Energy conservation
Efficient energy use

Transport
Agriculture


Renewable energy
Sustainable energy
Energy policy

Energy development


Worldwide energy supply
South America
USA
Mexico
Canada
Europe
Asia
Africa
Australia





Misc.



Jevons's paradox
Carbon footprint









Authority control



GND: 4211713-6








Energy portal
Renewable energy portal
Global warming portal







						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fossil_fuel&oldid=816915255"					Categories: Fossil fuelsHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from August 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2012Spoken articlesArticles with hAudio microformatsWikipedia articles with GND identifiers