

Criminal law


Elements




Actus reus
Mens rea
Causation
Concurrence




Scope of criminal liability




Complicity
Corporate
Vicarious




Severity of offense




Felony
Infraction (also called violation)
Misdemeanor




Inchoate offenses




Attempt
Conspiracy
Incitement
Solicitation




Offence against the person







Assassination
Assault
Battery
Bigamy
Criminal negligence
False imprisonment
Home invasion
Homicide
Kidnapping
Manslaughter (corporate)
Mayhem
Murder

corporate


Negligent homicide
Public indecency
Rape
Robbery
Sexual assault







Crimes against property




Arson
Blackmail
Bribery
Burglary
Embezzlement
Extortion
False pretenses
Fraud
Larceny
Payola
Pickpocketing
Possessing stolen property
Robbery
Smuggling
Tax evasion
Theft




Crimes against justice




Compounding
Malfeasance in office
Miscarriage of justice
Misprision
Obstruction
Perjury
Perverting the course of justice




Victimless crimes




Adultery
Apostasy
Buggery
Providing contraception information (Comstock law)
Dueling
Fornication
Gambling
Incest
Lewd and lascivious behavior
Exhibitionism
Creation of obscenity
Prostitution
Recreational drug use (including alcohol, when prohibited)
Sodomy
Suicide




Crimes against animals




Cruelty to animals
Wildlife smuggling
Bestiality




Defences to liability




Automatism
Consent
Defence of property
Diminished responsibility
Duress
Entrapment
Ignorantia juris non excusat
Infancy
Insanity
Justification
Mistake (of law)
Necessity
Provocation
Self-defence




Other common-law areas




Contracts
Evidence
Property
Torts
Wills, trusts and estates




Portals




Criminal justice
Law







v
t
e







Part of the common law series


Tort law


Intentional torts




Assault
Battery
False imprisonment
Intentional infliction of emotional distress
Transferred intent




Property torts




Trespass

land
chattels


Conversion
Detinue
Replevin
Trover




Defenses




Assumption of risk
Comparative negligence
Contributory negligence
Consent
Necessity
Statute of limitations
Self-defense
Defense of others
Defense of property
Shopkeeper's privilege




Negligence




Duty of / standard of care
Proximate cause
Res ipsa loquitur
Calculus of negligence
Rescue doctrine
Duty to rescue
Negligent infliction of emotional distress
Employment-related
Entrustment
Malpractice

legal
medical






Liability torts




Product liability
Quasi-tort
Ultrahazardous activity




Nuisance




Public nuisance
Rylands v Fletcher




Dignitary torts




Defamation
Invasion of privacy
False light
Breach of confidence
Abuse of process
Malicious prosecution
Alienation of affections
Criminal conversation
Seduction
Breach of promise




Economic torts




Fraud
Tortious interference
Conspiracy
Restraint of trade




Liability and remedies




Last clear chance
Eggshell skull
Vicarious liability
Volenti non fit injuria
Ex turpi causa non oritur actio
Neutral reportage
Damages
Injunction
Torts and conflict of laws
Joint and several liability
Comparative responsibility
Market share liability




Duty to visitors




Trespassers
Licensees
Invitees
Attractive nuisance




Other common law areas




Contracts
Criminal law
Evidence
Property
Wills, trusts, and estates






 Law portal







v
t
e





In law, fraud is deliberate deception to secure unfair or unlawful gain, or to deprive a victim of a legal right. Fraud itself can be a civil wrong (i.e., a fraud victim may sue the fraud perpetrator to avoid the fraud or recover monetary compensation), a criminal wrong (i.e., a fraud perpetrator may be prosecuted and imprisoned by governmental authorities) or it may cause no loss of money, property or legal right but still be an element of another civil or criminal wrong.[1] The purpose of fraud may be monetary gain or other benefits, such as obtaining a passport or travel document, driver's license or qualifying for a mortgage by way of false statements.[2]
A hoax is a distinct concept that involves deliberate deception without the intention of gain or of materially damaging or depriving a victim.



Contents


1 As a civil wrong
2 As a criminal offence
3 By region

3.1 Canada
3.2 China
3.3 United Kingdom

3.3.1 England, Wales, and Northern Ireland
3.3.2 Fraud Act
3.3.3 Serious Fraud Office
3.3.4 National Fraud Authority
3.3.5 CIFAS - The UK's Fraud Prevention Service


3.4 United States

3.4.1 Criminal fraud
3.4.2 Civil fraud




4 Cost
5 Types of fraudulent acts
6 Anti-fraud movements
7 Detection
8 Related
9 See also
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



As a civil wrong[edit]
In common law jurisdictions, as a civil wrong, fraud is a tort. While the precise definitions and requirements of proof vary among jurisdictions, the requisite elements of fraud as a tort generally are the intentional misrepresentation or concealment of an important fact upon which the victim is meant to rely, and in fact does rely, to the harm of the victim.[3] Proving fraud in a court of law is often said to be difficult.[4] That difficulty is found, for instance, in that each and every one of the elements of fraud must be proven, that the elements include proving the states of mind of the perpetrator and the victim, and that some jurisdictions require the victim to prove fraud by clear and convincing evidence.[5]
The remedies for fraud may include rescission (i.e., reversal) of a fraudulently obtained agreement or transaction, the recovery of a monetary award to compensate for the harm caused, punitive damages to punish or deter the misconduct, and possibly others.[5]
In cases of a fraudulently induced contract, fraud may serve as a defense in a civil action for breach of contract or specific performance of contract.
Fraud may serve as a basis for a court to invoke its equitable jurisdiction.
As a criminal offence[edit]
In common law jurisdictions, as a criminal offence, fraud takes many different forms, some general (e.g., theft by false pretense) and some specific to particular categories of victims or misconduct (e.g., bank fraud, insurance fraud, forgery). The elements of fraud as a crime similarly vary. The requisite elements of perhaps most general form of criminal fraud, theft by false pretense, are the intentional deception of a victim by false representation or pretense with the intent of persuading the victim to part with property and with the victim parting with property in reliance on the representation or pretense and with the perpetrator intending to keep the property from the victim.[6]
By region[edit]
Canada[edit]
Section 380(1) of the Criminal Code provides the general definition for fraud in Canada:

380. (1) Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,

(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or
(b) is guilty

(i) of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or
(ii) of an offence punishable on summary conviction, where the value of the subject-matter of the offence does not exceed five thousand dollars.[7]




In addition to the penalties outlined above, the court can also issue a prohibition order under s. 380.2 (preventing a person from "seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or valuable security of another person"). It can also make a restitution order under s. 380.3.[8]
The Canadian courts have held that the offence consists of two distinct elements:



A prohibited act of deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means. In the absence of deceit or falsehood, the courts will look objectively for a "dishonest act"; and
The deprivation must be caused by the prohibited act, and deprivation must relate to property, money, valuable security, or any service.[9]



The Supreme Court of Canada has held that deprivation is satisfied on proof of detriment, prejudice or risk of prejudice; it is not essential that there be actual loss.[10] Deprivation of confidential information, in the nature of a trade secret or copyrighted material that has commercial value, has also been held to fall within the scope of the offence.[11]
China[edit]
Zhang Yingyu's story collection The Book of Swindles (ca. 1617) testifies to rampant commercial fraud, especially involving itinerant businessmen, in late Ming China.[12] The journal Science reported in 2017 that fraud is rife in Chinese academia, resulting in numerous article retractions and harm to China's international prestige.[13] The Economist, CNN, and other media outlets regularly report on incidents of fraud or bad faith in Chinese business and trade practices.[14][15][16] Forbes cites cybercrime as a persistent and growing threat to Chinese consumers.[17]
United Kingdom[edit]
England, Wales, and Northern Ireland[edit]
BBC News Online reported in 2016 that the estimated value lost through fraud in the UK was £193 billion a year.[18]
As at November 2017 Fraud is the most common criminal offence in the UK according to a study by Crowe Clark Whitehill, Experian and the Centre for Counter Fraud Studies. [19] The study suggests the UK loses over £190 billion per year to fraud. £190 billion is more than 9% of the UK’s projected GDP for 2017 ($2,496 (£2,080) billion according to Statistics Times). The estimate for fraud in the UK figure is more than the entire GDP of countries such as Romania, Qatar and Hungary. [20]
According to another review by the UK anti-fraud charity Fraud Advisory Panel (FAP), business fraud accounted for £144bn, while fraud against individuals was estimated at £9.7bn. The FAP has been particularly critical of the support available from the police to victims of fraud in the UK outside of London. Although victims of fraud are generally referred to the UK's national fraud and cyber crime reporting centre, Action Fraud, the FAP found that there was "little chance" that these crime reports would be followed up with any kind of substantive law enforcement action by UK authorities, according to the report.[21]
In July 2016 it was reported that fraudulent activity levels in the UK increased in the 10 years to 2016 from £52 billion to £193bn. This figure would be a conservative estimate, since as the former commissioner of the City of London Police, Adrian Leppard, has said, only 1 in 12 such crimes are actually reported.[22] Donald Toon, director of the NCA's economic crime command, stated in July 2016: "The annual losses to the UK from fraud are estimated to be more than £190bn". Figures released in October 2015 from the Crime Survey of England and Wales found that there had been 5.1 million incidents of fraud in England and Wales in the previous year, affecting an estimated one in 12 adults and making it the most common form of crime.[23]
Also in July 2016, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) stated "Almost six million fraud and cyber crimes were committed last year in England and Wales and estimated there were two million computer misuse offences and 3.8 million fraud offences in the 12 months to the end of March 2016." Fraud affects one in ten people in the UK. According to the ONS most frauds relate to bank account fraud. These figures are separate from the headline estimate that another 6.3 million crimes (distinct from frauds) were perpetrated in the UK against adults in the year to March 2016.[24]
Fraud is apparently low on the list UK law enforcement priorities. Controversially, the crime does not feature on a new "Crime Harm Index" published by the Office for National Statistics. Michael Levi, professor of criminology at Cardiff University, remarked in August 2016 that it was ‘deeply regrettable’ fraud is being left out of the first index despite being the most common crime reported to police in the UK. Professor Levi said ‘If you’ve got some categories that are excluded, they are automatically left out of the police’s priorities.’[25]. The Chief of the National Audit Office (NAO), Sir Anyas Morse has also said “For too long, as a low-value but high-volume crime, online fraud has been overlooked by government, law enforcement and industry. It is now the most commonly experienced crime in England and Wales and demands an urgent response.”[26]
Fraud Act[edit]
Main article: Fraud Act 2006
The Fraud Act 2006 (c 35) is an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It affects England and Wales and Northern Ireland. It was given Royal Assent on 8 November 2006, and came into effect on 15 January 2007.[27]
The Act gives a statutory definition of the criminal offence of fraud, defining it in three classes—fraud by false representation, fraud by failing to disclose information, and fraud by abuse of position. It provides that a person found guilty of fraud is liable to a fine or imprisonment for up to twelve months on summary conviction (six months in Northern Ireland), or a fine or imprisonment for up to ten years on conviction on indictment. This Act largely replaces the laws relating to obtaining property by deception, obtaining a pecuniary advantage and other offences that were created under the Theft Act 1978.
Serious Fraud Office[edit]
The Serious Fraud Office (United Kingdom) is an arm of the Government of the United Kingdom, accountable to the Attorney-General.
National Fraud Authority[edit]
The National Fraud Authority (NFA) is the government agency co-ordinating the counter-fraud response in the UK.
CIFAS - The UK's Fraud Prevention Service[edit]
CIFAS - The UK's Fraud Prevention Service, is a not-for-profit membership association representing the private and public sectors. CIFAS is dedicated to the prevention of fraud, including staff fraud, and the identification of financial and related crime.
In July 2016 the BBC referred to a recently published CIFAS report which estimated the annual cost of fraud in the UK was £193bn - equal to nearly £3,000 per head of population.[28]
A CIFAS study found that the number of reported cases of identity fraud jumped by 57 per cent between 2014 and 2015. Drawing from its reporting database of 261 organisations, CIFAS found that 148,463 people reported having their identity stolen in 2015, up from 94,492 the previous year. The rise of social media has been blamed. CIFAS has warned that social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn are becoming a “hunting ground” for fraudsters.[29]
United States[edit]
Criminal fraud[edit]
The proof requirements for criminal fraud charges in the United States are essentially the same as the requirements for other crimes: guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Throughout the United States fraud charges can be misdemeanors or felonies depending on the amount of loss involved. High value frauds can also include additional penalties. For example, in California losses of $500,000 or more will result in an extra two, three, or five years in prison in addition to the regular penalty for the fraud.[30]
The U.S. government's 2006 fraud review concluded that fraud is a significantly under-reported crime, and while various agencies and organizations were attempting to tackle the issue, greater co-operation was needed to achieve a real impact in the public sector.[31] The scale of the problem pointed to the need for a small but high-powered body to bring together the numerous counter-fraud initiatives that existed.
According to Bloomberg, auto loan application fraud rates in the United States has been steadily rising over the past few years. This type of fraud expected to double from about $2-3 billion in 2015 to $4-6 billion in 2017.[32]
Civil fraud[edit]
Although elements may vary by jurisdiction and the specific allegations made by a plaintiff who files a lawsuit that alleged fraud, typical elements of a fraud case in the United States are that:[33]

somebody misrepresents a material fact in order to obtain action or forbearance by another person,
the other person relies upon the misrepresentation, and
the other person suffers injury as a result of the act or forbearance taken in reliance upon the misrepresentation.

To establish a civil claim of fraud, most jurisdictions in the United States require that each element of a fraud claim be plead with particularity and be proved by a preponderance of the evidence,[34] meaning that it is more likely than not that the fraud occurred. Some jurisdictions impose a higher evidentiary standard, such as Washington State's requirement that the elements of fraud be proved with clear, cogent, and convincing evidence (very probable evidence),[35] or Pennsylvania's requirement that common law fraud be proved by clear and convincing evidence.[36]
The measure of damages in fraud cases is normally computed using one of two rules:[37]

the "benefit of bargain" rule, which allows for recovery of damages in the amount of the difference between the value of the property had it been as represented and its actual value; or
out-of-pocket loss, which allows for the recovery of damages in the amount of the difference between the value of what was given and the value of what was received.

Special damages may be allowed if shown to have been proximately caused by defendant's fraud and the damage amounts are proved with specificity.
Many jurisdictions permit a plaintiff in a fraud case to seek punitive or exemplary damages.[38]
Cost[edit]
The typical organization loses five percent of its annual revenue to fraud, with a median loss of $160,000. Frauds committed by owners and executives were more than nine times as costly as employee fraud. The industries most commonly affected are banking, manufacturing, and government.[39]
Types of fraudulent acts[edit]




The highly decorated fake uniform worn by a man impersonating a "Marine" caught by two gunnery sergeants at Times Square in New York City, N.Y.






A possibly fraudulent "work from home" advertisement.


See also: Types of fraud
Fraud can be committed through many media, including mail, wire, phone, and the Internet (computer crime and Internet fraud). International dimensions of the web and ease with which users can hide their location, the difficulty of checking identity and legitimacy online, and the simplicity with which hackers can divert browsers to dishonest sites and steal credit card details have all contributed to the very rapid growth of Internet fraud. In some countries, tax fraud is also prosecuted under false billing or tax forgery.[40] There have also been fraudulent "discoveries", e.g., in science, to gain prestige rather than immediate monetary gain.[citation needed]
Anti-fraud movements[edit]
Beyond laws that aim at prevention of fraud, there are also governmental and non-governmental organizations that aim to fight fraud. Between 1911 and 1933, 47 states adopted the so-called Blue Sky Laws status.[41] These laws were enacted and enforced at the state level and regulated the offering and sale of securities to protect the public from fraud. Though the specific provisions of these laws varied among states, they all required the registration of all securities offerings and sales, as well as of every U.S. stockbroker and brokerage firm.[42] However, these Blue Sky laws were generally found to be ineffective. To increase public trust in the capital markets the President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt, established the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).[43] The main reason for the creation of the SEC was to regulate the stock market and prevent corporate abuses relating to the offering and sale of securities and corporate reporting. The SEC was given the power to license and regulate stock exchanges, the companies whose securities traded on them, and the brokers and dealers who conducted the trading.[44]
Detection[edit]




A fraudulent Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price on a speaker.


Further information: Data analysis techniques for fraud detection
For detection of fraudulent activities on the large scale, massive use of (online) data analysis is required, in particular predictive analytics or forensic analytics. Forensic analytics is the use of electronic data to reconstruct or detect financial fraud. The steps in the process are data collection, data preparation, data analysis, and the preparation of a report and possibly a presentation of the results. Using computer-based analytic methods Nigrini's wider goal is the detection of fraud, errors, anomalies, inefficiencies, and biases which refer to people gravitating to certain dollar amounts to get past internal control thresholds.[45]
The analytic tests usually start with high-level data overview tests to spot highly significant irregularities. In a recent purchasing card application these tests identified a purchasing card transaction for 3,000,000 Costa Rica Colons. This was neither a fraud nor an error, but it was a highly unusual amount for a purchasing card transaction. These high-level tests include tests related to Benford's Law and possibly also those statistics known as descriptive statistics. These high-tests are always followed by more focused tests to look for small samples of highly irregular transactions. The familiar methods of correlation and time-series analysis can also be used to detect fraud and other irregularities. Forensic analytics also includes the use of a fraud risk-scoring model to identify high risk forensic units (customers, employees, locations, insurance claims and so on). Forensic analytics also includes suggested tests to identify financial statement irregularities, but the general rule is that analytic methods alone are not too successful at detecting financial statement fraud.[46]

Alfredo Sáenz Abad who lied about bank loans, as a banker so that some customers to the bank went to prison. Later on he was sentenced to prison, but managed to get a pardon and kept his job.
Allen Stanford Self-styled banker who sold fake certificates of deposit to people in many countries, raking in $7 billion to $8 billion over decades.
Alves Reis, who forged documents to print 100,000,000 PTE in official escudo banknotes (adjusted for inflation, it would be worth about US$150 million today).
Barry Minkow and the ZZZZ Best scam.
Bernard Ebbers, founder of WorldCom, which inflated its asset statements by about $11 billion.
Bernard Madoff, creator of a $65 billion Ponzi scheme – the largest investor fraud ever attributed to a single individual.
Cassie Chadwick, who pretended to be Andrew Carnegie's illegitimate daughter to get loans.
Charles Ponzi and the Ponzi scheme.
Christopher Rocancourt, a Rockefeller impersonator who defrauded Hollywood celebrities.
Columbia/HCA Medicare fraud. Columbia/HCA pleaded guilty to 14 felony counts and paid out more than $2 billion to settle lawsuits arising from the fraud.[47] The company's board of directors forced then–Chairman and CEO Rick Scott to resign at the beginning of the federal investigation; Scott was subsequently elected Governor of Florida in 2010.
Eddie Antar, founder of Crazy Eddie, who has criminal convictions on 17 counts and about $1 billion worth of civil judgments against him stemming from fraudulent accounting practices at that company.[48][49]
Edward Davenport self-styled "Lord"[50] nicknamed "Fast Eddie"[51] and "Lord of Fraud"[52] from 2005 to 2009 he was the "ringmaster" of a series of advance-fee fraud schemes that defrauded dozens of individuals out of millions of pounds.[53] He is said to have made £34.5 million through his various frauds.[54]
Enric Durán defrauded Spanish banks and then gave away the loaned money to anti-growth organizations.
F. Bam Morrison, who conned the town of Wetumka, Oklahoma by promoting a circus that never came.
Frank Abagnale Jr., U.S. impostor who wrote bad checks and falsely represented himself as a qualified member of professions such as airline pilot, doctor, attorney, and teacher. The film Catch Me If You Can is based on his life.[55]
Frederick Emerson Peters, American impersonator who wrote bad checks.
Gaston Means, a professional conman during U.S. President Warren G. Harding's administration.
Gert Postel, German mailman who worked as a psychiatrist in different hospitals.
Gregor MacGregor, Scottish conman who tried to attract investment and settlers for the non-existent country of Poyais.
James Paul Lewis, Jr., ran one of the biggest ($311 million) and longest running Ponzi Schemes (20 years) in U.S. history.
John Bodkin Adams, British doctor and suspected serial killer, but only found guilty of forging wills and prescriptions.[56]
John Rigas, cable television entrepreneur, cofounder of Adelphia Communications Corporation and owner of the Buffalo Sabres hockey team, defrauded investors of over $2 billion and was sentenced to a 12-year term in federal prison.
John Spano, a struggling businessman who faked massive success in an attempt to buy out the New York Islanders of the NHL.
John Stonehouse, the last Postmaster-General of the UK and MP who faked his death to marry his mistress.
Jordan Belfort, "The Wolf of Wall Street", who swindled over $200 million via a penny stock boiler room operation. The film "The Wolf of Wall Street" starring Leonardo DiCaprio is based on his life and fraudulent activity.
Kenneth Lay, the American businessman who built energy company Enron. He was one of the highest paid CEOs in the U.S. until he was ousted as Chairman and convicted of fraud and conspiracy, although, as a result of his death, his conviction was vacated.[57]
Kevin Trudeau, U.S. writer and billiards promoter, convicted of fraud and larceny in 1991, known for a series of late-night infomercials and his series of books about "Natural Cures "They" Don't Want You to Know About".
Konrad Kujau, German fraudster and forger responsible for the "Hitler Diaries".
Lou Pearlman, former boy-band manager and operator of a $300 million Ponzi scheme using two shell companies.
Marc Dreier, Managing founder of Attorney firm Dreir LLP, a $700 million Ponzi scheme.[58]
Martin Frankel, former U.S. financier, convicted in 2002 of insurance fraud worth $208 million, racketeering and money laundering.
Matt the Knife, American con artist, card cheat and pickpocket who, from the ages of approximately 14 through 21, bilked dozens of casinos, corporations and at least one Mafia crime family out of untold sums.
Michael Monus, founder of Phar-Mor, which ultimately cost its investors more than $1 billion.
Michael Sabo, best known as a check, stocks and bonds forger. He became notorious in the 1960s throughout the 1990s as a "Great Impostor" with over 100 aliases, and earned millions from such.
Nick Leeson, English trader whose unsupervised speculative trading caused the collapse of Barings Bank.
Ramón Báez Figueroa, banker from the Dominican Republic and former President of Banco Intercontinental. He was sentenced on October 21, 2007 to 10 years in prison for a U.S. $2.2 billion fraud case that drove the Caribbean nation into economic crisis in 2003.
Richard Whitney, who stole from the New York Stock Exchange Gratuity Fund in the 1930s.
Samuel Israel III, former hedge fund manager who ran the former fraudulent Bayou Hedge Fund Group, and faked suicide to avoid jail.
Scott W. Rothstein, a disbarred lawyer from Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, who perpetrated a Ponzi scheme which defrauded investors of over $1 billion.
Thomas Petters is an American masquerading as a business man who turned out to be a con man and was the former CEO and chairman of Petters Group Worldwide.[59] Petters resigned his position as CEO on September 29, 2008, amid mounting criminal investigations.[60] He later was convicted for turning Petters Group Worldwide into a $3.65 billion Ponzi scheme[61] and was sentenced to 50 years in federal prison.

Related[edit]
Apart from fraud, there are several related categories of intentional deceptions that may or may not include the elements of personal gain or damage to another individual:

Obstruction of justice
18 U.S.C. § 704 which criminalizes false representation of having been awarded any decoration or medal authorized by Congress for the Armed Forces of the United States

See also[edit]


Bait-and-switch
Caper stories (such as The Sting)
Contract fraud
Corruption
Cramming (fraud)
Creative accounting
Crimestoppers
Deception
Electoral fraud
False Claims Act
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
Financial crimes
Forgery
Fraud deterrence
Fraud in the factum
Fraud in parapsychology
Fraud Squad (UK)
Friendly fraud
Front running
Geneivat da'at
Great Stock Exchange Fraud of 1814
Guinness share-trading fraud, famous British business scandal of the 1980s
Hoax
Identity management
Impersonator
Internet fraud
Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
Interpol
Journalism fraud
Money laundering
Mail and wire fraud
Organized crime
Placebo
Phishing, attempt to fraudulently acquire sensitive information
Police impersonation
Political corruption
Quackery
Quatloos.com
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO)
SAS 99
Scam
Secret profits
Shell company
Swampland in Florida
The National Council Against Health Fraud
Tobashi scheme, concealing financial losses
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
United States Postal Inspection Service
United States Secret Service
White-collar crime


References[edit]


^ "Legal Dictionary: fraud". Law.com. Retrieved 2016-01-27. 
^ "Basic Legal Concepts". Journal of Accountancy. Retrieved 2013-12-18. 
^ "California Civil Jury Instructions: 1900. Intentional Misrepresentation". Judicial Council of California. Retrieved 2013-12-27. 
^ need citation
^ a b need citations
^ "California Criminal Jury Instructions: 1804. Theft By False Pretense". Judicial Council of California. Retrieved 2013-12-27. 
^ "Criminal Code, Section 380". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved 2013-12-05. 
^ "Criminal Code, Sections 380.2 - 380.3". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Retrieved 2013-12-05. 
^ Tony Wong. "The Law of Fraud and White Collar Crime in Canada" (Pdf). Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP. Retrieved 2012-04-22. 
^ R. v. Olan et al., [1978] 2 S.C.R. 1175. Full text of Supreme Court of Canada decision at LexUM
^ R. v. Stewart, [1988] 1 S.C.R. 963. Full text of Supreme Court of Canada decision at LexUM
^ https://cup.columbia.edu/book/the-book-of-swindles/9780231178631
^ http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/07/china-cracks-down-after-investigation-finds-massive-peer-review-fraud
^ https://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21729430-does-it-play-fair-how-china-battling-ever-more-intensely-world-markets
^ http://www.fraud-magazine.com/article.aspx?id=4294967661
^ https://www.cnbc.com/video/2017/01/23/fraud-in-china-is-on-the-up.html
^ https://www.forbes.com/sites/roncheng/2017/03/28/cybercrime-in-china-online-fraud/
^ "UK fraud costing '£193bn a year', new study suggests". BBC. 25 May 2016. Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ http://www.cityam.com/275550/fraud-costs-uk-economy-gbp190bn-incidents-soar
^ https://www.enterprisetimes.co.uk/2017/11/13/experian-claims-fraud-costs-uk-190-billion-per-year
^ Fraud Advisory Panel (2016). The Fraud Review Ten Years On (PDF). 
^ "Report highlights 'same failings' in fight against fraud 10 years on". www.out-law.com. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "UK fraud police release wanted list". BBC News. 2016-07-18. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "Nearly six million fraud and cyber crimes last year, ONS says". BBC News. 2016-07-21. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ Beckford, Martin (21 August 2016). "Revealed: New 'crime index' used by police says burglary is twice as bad as child abduction - and bike theft is more serious than drug possession". Daily Mail Online. Associated Newspapers Ltd. Retrieved 18 September 2016. 
^ "Online fraud costs public billions but is still not a police priority, says watchdog". The Guardian. Press Association. 30 June 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ The Fraud Act 2006 (Commencement) Order 2006 - SI 2006 No. 3200 (C.112) ISBN 0-11-075407-7
^ "Identity fraud up by 57% as thieves 'hunt' on social media". BBC News. 2016-07-05. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "Social media blamed as identity fraud cases double in a year". www.miltonkeynes.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "California Code, Penal Code - PEN § 186.11". California Legislative Information. California State Legislature. Retrieved 9 August 2017. If the pattern of related felony conduct involves the taking of, or results in the loss by another person or entity of, more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the additional term of punishment shall be two, three, or five years in the state prison. 
^ "Financial Crimes Report 2006". FBI. Federal Bureau of Investigations. Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ Scully, Matt (2017-05-10). "Auto Loan Fraud Soars in a Parallel to the Housing Bubble". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 2017-05-12. 
^ Larson, Aaron (8 July 2016). "Fraud, Silent Fraud, and Innocent Misrepresentation". ExpertLaw. Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ See, e.g., "Halpert v. Rosenthal, 267 A. 2d 730 (R.I. 1970)". Google Scholar. Google. Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ "WPI 160.02 Fraud—Burden of Proof". Washington Pattern Jury Instructions - Civil. West. Retrieved 24 May 2017. 
^ "Boehm v. Riversource Life Insurance Co., 2015 PA Super 120, 117 A.3d 308 (Pa. Super. 2015)". Google Scholar. Google. Retrieved 24 May 2017. 
^ Chang, Stanley Y. (April 1994). "The CPA Journal Online". Retrieved 6 September 2017. 
^ Koerner, Theodore G. (Jan 1958). "Contracts: Damages: Punitive Damages Awarded for Breach Accompanied by Fraudulent Act". Michigan Law Journal. 56 (3): 448. Retrieved 24 May 2017. 
^ "Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse". Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 2010. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. 
^ "Tax Fraud and the Problem of a Constitutionality Acceptable Definition of Religion". BJ Casino. American Criminal Law. Rev., 1987
^ "Speech by SEC Staff: remarks at the F. Hodge O'neal Corporate and securities Law symposium". sec.gov. 21 February 2003. 
^ "Blue Sky Laws". Seclaw.com. 2007-07-07. Retrieved 2013-12-05. 
^ "Franklin Delano Roosevelt (1882-1945)". gwu.edu. 
^ "Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC")". learn.advfn.com. 
^ "Forensic Analytics". analytics-magazine.org. July–August 2013. 
^ Nigrini, Mark (June 2011). Forensic Analytics: Methods and Techniques for Forensic Accounting Investigations. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. ISBN 978-0-470-89046-2. 
^ "Largest Health Care Fraud Case in U.S. History Settled; HCA Investigation Nets Record Total of $1.7 Billion" (Press release), U.S. Department of Justice, June 26, 2003, retrieved April 11, 2011 
^ Pinder, Jeanne B. (1993-07-21). "Crazy Eddie Founder Guilty of Fraud". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "Founder of Crazy Eddie Gets 8 Years in Prison and Big Fine". New York Times. Retrieved 2016-07-15. 
^ "'Lord' Edward Davenport jailed for fraud". BBC News. 2011-10-05. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "Inside the world of fraudster Fast Eddie Davenport". Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ "The 'Lord of Fraud' Edward Davenport is out of prison and back in business". 2015-11-06. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ Bowers, Simon (2011-10-05). "Fast Eddie, friend to celebrities, swaps Portland Place mansion for prison cell". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2016-09-18. 
^ Evans, Martin (29 July 2014). "Fraudster forced to sell off 'unique' London mansion to pay legal bills". The Telegraph. Retrieved 18 September 2016. 
^ Biography.com Editors. "Frank Abagnale Biography". Retrieved 2015-10-08. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "Murder trial doctor's items sold". BBC. Retrieved 2015-10-08. 
^ Lozano, Juan A. (17 October 2006). "Judge vacates conviction of Ken Lay". CBS News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 24, 2009. 
^ Kokenes, Chris (March 19, 2009), "N.Y. lawyer arraigned in alleged $700M fraud", CNNMoney.com, retrieved April 10, 2011
^ Nicole Muehlhausen, BIO: Tom Petters, KSTP.com, September 24, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2008.
^ [1] Archived February 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine.
^ Hughes, Art (December 2, 2009). "UPDATE 2-Tom Petters found guilty of Ponzi scheme fraud". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. Retrieved December 10, 2009. 


Further reading[edit]

Edward J. Balleisen Fraud: An American History from Barnum to Madoff. ISBN 9780691164557 (2017). Princeton University Press.
Fred Cohen Frauds, Spies, and Lies – and How to Defeat Them. ISBN 1-878109-36-7 (2006). ASP Press.
Green, Stuart P. Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory of White Collar Crime. Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0199225804
Review Fraud – Alex Copola Podgor, Ellen S. Criminal Fraud, (1999) Vol, 48, No. 4 American Law Review 1.
The Nature, Extent and Economic Impact of Fraud in the UK. February, 2007.
The Fraudsters – How Con Artists Steal Your Money(ISBN 978-1-903582-82-4) by Eamon Dillon, published September 2008 by Merlin Publishing
Zhang, Yingyu. The Book of Swindles: Selections from a Late Ming Collection. Columbia University Press, 2017. ISBN 9780231178631

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fraud.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Fraud



 The dictionary definition of fraud at Wiktionary
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners
Immigration Marriage Fraud Amendments of 1986
FBI Home page for fraud
U.S. Department of Justice Fraud Section







v
t
e


Types of fraud



Business-related



Billing
Cramming
Disability
Drug / Pharmaceutical
Email
Employment
Fixing
Impersonation
Intellectual property
Internet
Job
Long firm
Odometer
Phone
Quackery / Health care
Racketeering
Return
Tech support
Slamming
Telemarketing





Family-related



Marriage
Paternity





Financial-related



Advance-fee (Lottery scam)
Bank
Bankruptcy
Chargeback
Cheque
Credit card
Forex
Insurance
Mortgage
Securities
Shill bidding
Tax





Government-related



Benefit
Electoral
Medicare
Visa
Welfare





Other types



Affinity fraud
Charity
Confidence trick
Counterfeiting
Faked death
Forgery
Hoax
Impersonation
Mail and wire (honest services)
Scientific
Spyware
White-collar crime












v
t
e


Scams and confidence tricks



Terminology



Confidence trick
Error account
Shill
Shyster
Sucker list





Notable
scams and
confidence tricks



Advance-fee scam
Art student scam
Badger game
Bait-and-switch
Black money scam
Blessing scam
Bogus escrow
Boiler room
Bride scam
Bullet-planting scheme
Charity fraud
Clip joint
Coin-matching game
Coin rolling scams
Drop swindle
Embarrassing cheque
Employment scams
Extraterrestrial real estate
Fiddle game
Fine print
Foreclosure rescue scheme
Foreign exchange fraud
Fortune telling fraud
Gas leak phone call scam
Gem scam
Get-rich-quick scheme
Green goods scam
Hustling
Initial coin offering
Intellectual property scams
Kansas City Shuffle
Long firm
Miracle cars scam
Mock auction
Moving scam
Patent safe
Pig in a poke
Pigeon drop
Priority Development Assistance Fund scam
Pump and dump
Reloading scam
Rent-a-car scam
Salting
Shell game
Sick baby hoax
Slavery reparations scam
Spanish Prisoner
Strip search phone call scam
Swampland in Florida
Technical support scam
Telemarketing fraud
Thai tailor scam
Thai zig zag scam
Three-card Monte
Trojan horse
White van speaker scam
Work-at-home scheme





Internet scams
and
countermeasures



Avalanche
Carding
Click fraud
Clickjacking
Cramming
Cybercrime
CyberThrill
DarkMarket
Domain name scams
Email authentication
Email fraud
Internet vigilantism
Lottery scam
PayPai
Phishing
Referer spoofing
Ripoff Report
Rock Phish
Romance scam
Russian Business Network
SaferNet
Scam baiting
ShadowCrew
Spoofed URL
Spoofing attack
Stock Generation
Voice phishing
Website reputation ratings
Whitemail





Pyramid and
Ponzi schemes



Aman Futures Group
Bernard Cornfeld
Caritas
Dona Branca
Ezubao
Foundation for New Era Philanthropy
Franchise fraud
High-yield investment program (HYIP)
Investors Overseas Service
Earl Jones (investment advisor)
Kubus scheme
Madoff investment scandal
Make Money Fast
Matrix scheme
MMM
Petters Group Worldwide
Pyramid schemes in Albania
Reed Slatkin
Saradha financial scandal
Scott W. Rothstein
Stanford Financial Group
Welsh Thrasher faith scam





Lists



Con artists
Confidence tricks
Criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates
Email scams
Impostors
In the media

Film and television
Literature


Ponzi schemes












v
t
e


Law



Core subjects



Administrative law
Constitutional law
Contract
Criminal law
Deed
Equity
Evidence
International law
Law of obligations
Procedure

Civil
Criminal


Property law
Public law
Restitution
Statutory law
Tort





Other subjects



Agricultural law
Aviation law
Banking law
Bankruptcy
Commercial law
Competition law
Conflict of laws
Construction law
Consumer protection
Corporate law
Cyberlaw
Election law
Energy law
Entertainment law
Environmental law
Family law
Financial regulation
Health law
Immigration law
Intellectual property
International criminal law
International human rights
International slavery laws
Labour
Law of war
Legal archaeology
Legal fiction
Maritime law
Media law
Military law
Probate

Estate
Will and testament


Product liability
Public international law
Space law
Sports law
Tax law
Transport law
Trust law
Women in law





Sources of law



Charter
Constitution
Custom
Divine right
Human rights
Natural and legal rights
Case law

Precedent







Law making



Ballot measure
Codification
Decree

Edict
Executive order
Proclamation


Legislation

Delegated legislation
Regulation
Rulemaking


Promulgation
Repeal
Treaty
Statutory law

Statute
Act of Parliament
Act of Congress (US)







Legal systems



Civil law
Common law
Chinese law
Legal pluralism
Religious law

Canon law
Hindu law
Jain law
Jewish law
Sharia


Roman law
Socialist law
Statutory law
Xeer
Yassa





Legal theory



Critical legal studies
Comparative law
Feminist
Law and economics
Legal formalism
History
Natural law
International legal theory
Principle of legality
Rule of law
Sociology





Jurisprudence



Adjudication
Administration of justice
Criminal justice
Court-martial
Dispute resolution
Fiqh
Lawsuit/Litigation
Legal opinion
Legal remedy
Judge

Justice of the peace
Magistrate


Judgment
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Jury
Justice
Practice of law

Attorney
Barrister
Counsel
Lawyer
Legal representation
Prosecutor
Solicitor


Question of fact
Question of law
Trial
Trial advocacy
Trier of fact
Verdict





Legal institutions



Bureaucracy
The bar
The bench
Civil society
Court
Election commission
Executive
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legal education

Law school


Legislature
Military
Police
Political party
Tribunal








Category
Index
Outline
Portal











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fraud&oldid=816693843"					Categories: CrimesDeceptionFraudTort lawProperty crimesHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from September 2012