Not to be confused with Free market or Fair trade.






An automated process has detected links on this page on the local or global blacklist. If the links are appropriate you may request whitelisting by following these instructions; otherwise consider removing or replacing them with more appropriate links. (To hide this tag, set the "invisible" field to "true")

List of blacklisted links:


http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP.html

Triggered by \beconlib\.org\b on the local blacklist


http://www.econlib.org/library/Ricardo/ricP2a.html#Ch.7,%20On%20Foreign%20Trade

Triggered by \beconlib\.org\b on the local blacklist











Part of a series on


World trade











Policy


Import
Export
Balance of trade
Trade law
Trade pact
Trade bloc
Trade creation
Trade diversion
Export orientation
Import substitution
Trade finance
Trade facilitation
Trade route
Domestic trade
Tax, tariff and trade








Restrictions


Trade barriers
Tariffs
Non-tariff barriers
Import quotas
Tariff-rate quotas
Quota share
Import licenses
Customs duties
Export subsidies
Technical barriers
Bribery
Exchange rate controls
Embargo
Safeguards
Countervailing duties
Anti-dumping duties
Voluntary export restraints








History


Mercantilism
Protectionism
Laissez-faire
Free trade
Economic nationalism
Economic integration








Organizations


International Monetary Fund
International Trade Centre
World Trade Organization
World Customs Organization








Economic integration


Preferential trading area
Free trade area
Customs union
Single market
Economic union
Monetary union
Fiscal union
Customs and monetary union
Economic and monetary union








Issues


Intellectual property rights
Smuggling
Competition policy
Government procurement
Outsourcing
Globalization
Fair trade
Trade justice
Emissions trading
Trade sanctions
War

Currency
Trade costs
Customs
Trade


Trade and development








Lists


Imports
Exports
Tariffs
Largest consumer markets
Leading trade partners








By country


Trade mission
Trading nation
United States
Argentina
Pakistan
Romania
Vietnam
India








Theory


Comparative advantage
Competitive advantage
Heckscher–Ohlin model
New trade theory
Economic geography
Intra-industry trade
Gravity model of trade
Ricardian trade theories
Balassa–Samuelson effect
Linder hypothesis
Leontief paradox
Lerner symmetry theorem
Terms of trade









v
t
e







Part of a series on


Libertarianism




Origins


Age of Enlightenment
Aristotelianism
Classical liberalism








Concepts


Anti-authoritarianism
Antimilitarism
Anti-statism
Anti-war
Argumentation ethics
Class struggle
Communes
Counter-economics
Crypto-anarchism
Decentralization
Direct action
Dispute resolution organization
Economic freedom
Egalitarianism
Expropriative anarchism
Free market
Free-market environmentalism
Free migration
Free society
Free trade
Free will
Freedom of association
Freedom of contract
Gift economy
Homestead principle
Illegalism
Individuality
Individualism
Individual reclamation
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Limited government
Localism
Marriage privatization
Natural and legal rights
Night-watchman state
Non-aggression principle
Non-interventionism
Non-politics
Non-voting
Participatory economics
Polycentric law
Private defense agency
Propaganda of the deed
Property
Really Really Free Market
Refusal of work
Restorative justice
Self-governance
Self-ownership
Single tax
Spontaneous order
Squatting
Stateless society
Tax resistance
Title-transfer theory of contract
Voluntary association
Voluntary society
Wage slavery
Workers' self-management








Schools


Agorism
Anarchism
Anarcho-capitalism
Autarchism

Christian libertarianism
Collectivist anarchism
Consequentialist libertarianism
Free-market anarchism
Fusionism
Geolibertarianism
Georgism
Green anarchism
Green libertarianism
Individualist anarchism
Insurrectionary anarchism
Left-libertarianism
Left-wing market anarchism
Libertarian communism
Libertarian Marxism
Libertarian socialism
Libertarian transhumanism
Minarchism
Mutualism
Natural-rights libertarianism
Paleolibertarianism
Panarchism
Right-libertarianism
Social anarchism
Voluntaryism








People


Émile Armand
Mikhail Bakunin
Frédéric Bastiat
Alexander Berkman
Walter Block
Murray Bookchin
Jason Brennan
Bryan Caplan
Kevin Carson
Voltairine de Cleyre
Joseph Déjacque
Buenaventura Durruti
Francesc Ferrer i Guàrdia
Ricardo Flores Magón
David D. Friedman
Milton Friedman
Luigi Galleani
Henry George
William Godwin
Emma Goldman
Paul Goodman
Friedrich Hayek
Henry Hazlitt
Auberon Herbert
Karl Hess
Thomas Hodgskin
Hans-Hermann Hoppe
Samuel Edward Konkin III
Peter Kropotkin
Étienne de La Boétie
Gustav Landauer
Rose Wilder Lane
Roderick T. Long
Tibor R. Machan
Nestor Makhno
Errico Malatesta
Wendy McElroy
Carl Menger
Louise Michel
John Stuart Mill
Ludwig von Mises
Tim Moen
Gustave de Molinari
Johann Most
Albert Jay Nock
Robert Nozick
Marco Pannella
Isabel Paterson
Ron Paul
Francesc Pi i Margall
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
Ayn Rand
Rudolf Rocker
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Baptiste Say
J. Neil Schulman
Herbert Spencer
Lysander Spooner
Max Stirner
Henry David Thoreau
Leo Tolstoy
Benjamin Tucker
Voline
Josiah Warren
Thomas Woods








Aspects



Anarcho-capitalism and
minarchism

Criticisms
Intellectual property
Internal debates
LGBT rights
Objectivism
Political parties
Theories of law








Organizations


International Alliance of Libertarian Parties
Students For Liberty








Related topics


Austrian School of economics
Civil libertarianism
Constitutionalism
Libertarian conservatism
Libertarian Democrat
Libertarian hip hop
Libertarian Republican
Libertarian science fiction
Libertarian transhumanism
Libertarianism in the United States
Market liberalism
Objectivism
Public choice theory
Small government
Technolibertarianism








Outline of libertarianism
Libertarianism portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


New Democrats







Ideology



Centrism
Clintonism
Cultural liberalism
Economic liberalism
Radical centrism
Social liberalism
Third Way









People



Bruce Babbitt
Evan Bayh
John Carney
Tom Carper
Lawton Chiles
Bill Clinton
Hillary Clinton
Gerry Connolly
Jim Davis
Susan Davis
Cal Dooley
John Edwards
Harold Ford Jr.
Al From
Dick Gephardt
Al Gore
Bob Graham
Jim Himes
John Kerry
Ron Kind
Mary Landrieu
Rick Larsen
Joe Lieberman
Blanche Lincoln
Will Marshall
Jim Moran
Sam Nunn
Barack Obama
Jared Polis
Chuck Robb
Timothy J. Roemer
Paul Tsongas
Allyson Schwartz
Adam Smith









Organizations



Coalition for a Democratic Majority
Democratic Leadership Council
Moderate Dems Working Group
New Democrat Coalition
New Democrat Network
Progressive Policy Institute
Senate Centrist Coalition
Third Way









 Politics portal







v
t
e







Part of a series on


Liberalism







Schools



History of liberalism
Contributions to liberal theory









Ideas



Civil and political rights
Cultural liberalism
Democracy

Liberal democracy


Economic liberalism
Egalitarianism
Free market
Free trade
Freedom of the press
Freedom of religion
Freedom of speech
Gender equality
Harm principle
Internationalism
Laissez-faire
Liberty
Market economy
Natural and legal rights
Negative / positive liberty
Open society
Permissive society
Private property
Rule of law
Secularism
Separation of church and state
Social contract
Welfare state









Variants



Anarcho-capitalism
Civic nationalism
Classical liberalism
Conservative liberalism
Democratic liberalism
Geolibertarianism
Green liberalism
Liberal feminism

Equity feminism


Liberal internationalism
Liberal socialism
Libertarianism
Muscular liberalism
Neoliberalism
Ordoliberalism
Radical centrism
Radicalism
Religious liberalism

Christian
Islamic


Secular liberalism
Social liberalism
Technoliberalism









People



Rifa'a al-Tahtawi
Juan Bautista Alberdi
Chu Anping
Matthew Arnold
Raymond Aron
Frédéric Bastiat
Simone de Beauvoir
Jeremy Bentham
Isaiah Berlin
Eduard Bernstein
William Beveridge
Norberto Bobbio
Ludwig Joseph Brentano
John Bright
Edmund Burke
Thomas Carlyle
Anders Chydenius
Richard Cobden
Marquis de Condorcet
Benjamin Constant
Benedetto Croce
Jean le Rond d'Alembert
Ralf Dahrendorf
John Dewey
Charles Dickens
Denis Diderot
Zhang Dongsun
Ronald Dworkin
Ahmed Lutfi el-Sayed
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Karl-Hermann Flach
Milton Friedman
John Kenneth Galbraith
William Lloyd Garrison
José Ortega y Gasset
David Lloyd George
William Gladstone
Friedrich Hayek
Auberon Herbert
Thomas Hobbes
Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse
John A. Hobson
Qin Hui
Wilhelm von Humboldt
Piero Gobetti
Francisco Luís Gomes
John Gray
Thomas Hill Green
Thomas Jefferson
Zef Jubani
Immanuel Kant
Namık Kemal
John Maynard Keynes
Will Kymlicka
John Locke
Salvador de Madariaga
James Madison
Harriet Martineau
Minoo Masani
James Mill
John Stuart Mill
John Milton
Ludwig von Mises
Donald Barkly Molteno
Leo Chiozza Money
Charles de Montesquieu
José María Luis Mora
Chantal Mouffe
Dadabhai Naoroji
Friedrich Naumann
Robert Nozick
Bertil Ohlin
Thomas Paine
Alan Paton
Karl Raimund Popper
Richard Price
Joseph Priestley
Guillermo Prieto
François Quesnay
Ignacio Ramírez
Ayn Rand
Walther Rathenau
John Rawls
Joseph Raz
David Ricardo
Wilhelm Röpke
Richard Rorty
Carlo Rosselli
Murray Rothbard
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Jean-Baptiste Say
Amartya Sen
Li Shenzhi
Hu Shih
Algernon Sidney
Emmanuel Sieyès
İbrahim Şinasi
Adam Smith
Hernando de Soto
Herbert Spencer
Baruch Spinoza
Anne Louise Germaine de Staël
William Graham Sumner
R. H. Tawney
Johan Rudolf Thorbecke
Henry David Thoreau
Alexis de Tocqueville
Antoine Destutt de Tracy
Anne Robert Jacques Turgot
Voltaire
Lester Frank Ward
Max Weber
Mary Wollstonecraft
Tao Xingzhi
Gu Zhun









Organizations



Liberal parties
Africa Liberal Network (ALN)

Alliance of Liberals and
Democrats for Europe (ALDE)


Alliance of Liberals and Democrats
for Europe Party (ALDEP)


Arab Liberal Federation (ALF)


Council of Asian Liberals
and Democrats (CALD)

European Democratic Party (EDP)
European Liberal Youth (LYMEC)
European Party for Individual Liberty (EPIL)

International Alliance of
Libertarian Parties (IALP)


International Federation of
Liberal Youth (IFLRY)

Liberal International

Liberal Network for
Latin America (RELIAL)


Liberal South East
European Network (LIBSEEN)










Regional variants



Europe
Latin America
Albania
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
China
Chile
Colombia
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech lands
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iran
Israel
Italy
Japan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Mexico
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Senegal
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
South Africa
South Korea
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Zimbabwe









Related topics



Democratic capitalism
Democratic education
Liberal bias in academia
Liberal conservatism
Liberal socialism
National liberalism
Regressive left









 Liberalism portal
 Politics portal







v
t
e





Free trade is a policy followed by some international markets in which countries' governments do not restrict imports from, or exports to, other countries. Free trade is exemplified by the European Economic Area and the Mercosur, which have established open markets. Most nations are today members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) multilateral trade agreements. However, most governments still impose some protectionist policies that are intended to support local employment, such as applying tariffs to imports or subsidies to exports. Governments may also restrict free trade to limit exports of natural resources. Other barriers that may hinder trade include import quotas, taxes, and non-tariff barriers, such as regulatory legislation.
There is a broad consensus among economists that protectionism has a negative effect on economic growth and economic welfare, while free trade and the reduction of trade barriers to trade has a positive effect on economic growth.[1][2][3][4][5][6] However, liberalization of trade can cause significant and unequally distributed losses, and the economic dislocation of workers in import-competing sectors.[2]



Contents


1 Features of free trade
2 Economics of free trade

2.1 Economic models

2.1.1 The economics of tariffs


2.2 Trade diversion
2.3 Opinion of economists


3 History

3.1 Early era
3.2 Post-World War II
3.3 Current status

3.3.1 Degree of free trade policies




4 The politics of free trade

4.1 Colonialism


5 Alternatives
6 In literature
7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 Further reading
11 External links



Features of free trade[edit]
Free trade policies generally promote the following features:[citation needed]

Trade of goods without taxes (including tariffs) or other trade barriers (e.g., quotas on imports or subsidies for producers)
Trade in services without taxes or other trade barriers
The absence of "trade-distorting" policies (such as taxes, subsidies, regulations, or laws) that give some firms, households, or factors of production an advantage over others
Unregulated access to markets
Unregulated access to market information
Inability of firms to distort markets through government-imposed monopoly or oligopoly power
Trade agreements which encourage free trade.

Economics of free trade[edit]
Economic models[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Supply and demand.
Two simple ways to understand the proposed benefits of free trade are through David Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage and by analyzing the impact of a tariff or import quota. An economic analysis using the law of supply and demand and the economic effects of a tax can be used to show the theoretical benefits and disadvantages of free trade.[7][8]
Most economists would recommend that even developing nations should set their tariff rates quite low, but the economist Ha-Joon Chang, a proponent of industrial policy, believes higher levels may be justified in developing nations because the productivity gap between them and developed nations today is much higher than what developed nations faced when they were at a similar level of technological development. Underdeveloped nations today, Chang believes, are weak players in a much more competitive system.[9][10] Counterarguments to Chang's point of view are that the developing countries are able to adopt technologies from abroad, whereas developed nations had to create new technologies themselves, and that developing countries can sell to export markets far richer than any that existed in the 19th century.
If the chief justification for a tariff is to stimulate infant industries, it must be high enough to allow domestic manufactured goods to compete with imported goods in order to be successful. This theory, known as import substitution industrialization, is largely considered ineffective for currently developing nations.[9]
The economics of tariffs[edit]




The pink regions are the net loss to society caused by the existence of the tariff.


The chart at the right analyzes the effect of the imposition of an import tariff on some imaginary good. Prior to the tariff, the price of the good in the world market (and hence in the domestic market) is Pworld. The tariff increases the domestic price to Ptariff. The higher price causes domestic production to increase from QS1 to QS2 and causes domestic consumption to decline from QC1 to QC2.[11][12]
This has three main effects on societal welfare. Consumers are made worse off because the consumer surplus (green region) becomes smaller. Producers are better off because the producer surplus (yellow region) is made larger. The government also has additional tax revenue (blue region). However, the loss to consumers is greater than the gains by producers and the government. The magnitude of this societal loss is shown by the two pink triangles. Removing the tariff and having free trade would be a net gain for society.[11][12]
An almost identical analysis of this tariff from the perspective of a net producing country yields parallel results. From that country's perspective, the tariff leaves producers worse off and consumers better off, but the net loss to producers is larger than the benefit to consumers (there is no tax revenue in this case because the country being analyzed is not collecting the tariff). Under similar analysis, export tariffs, import quotas, and export quotas all yield nearly identical results.[7]
Sometimes consumers are better off and producers worse off, and sometimes consumers are worse off and producers are better off, but the imposition of trade restrictions causes a net loss to society because the losses from trade restrictions are larger than the gains from trade restrictions. Free trade creates winners and losers, but theory and empirical evidence show that the size of the winnings from free trade are larger than the losses.[7]
Trade diversion[edit]
According to mainstream economic theory, the selective application of free trade agreements to some countries and tariffs on others can lead to economic inefficiency through the process of trade diversion. It is economically efficient for a good to be produced by the country which is the lowest cost producer, but this does not always take place if a high cost producer has a free trade agreement while the low cost producer faces a high tariff. Applying free trade to the high cost producer (and not the low cost producer as well) can lead to trade diversion and a net economic loss. This is why many economists place such high importance on negotiations for global tariff reductions, such as the Doha Round.[7]
Opinion of economists[edit]
The literature analysing the economics of free trade is extremely rich with extensive work having been done on the theoretical and empirical effects. Though it creates winners and losers, the broad consensus among economists is that free trade is a large and unambiguous net gain for society.[13][14] In a 2006 survey of American economists (83 responders), "87.5% agree that the U.S. should eliminate remaining tariffs and other barriers to trade" and "90.1% disagree with the suggestion that the U.S. should restrict employers from outsourcing work to foreign countries."[15]
Quoting Harvard economics professor N. Gregory Mankiw, "Few propositions command as much consensus among professional economists as that open world trade increases economic growth and raises living standards."[16] In a survey of leading economists, none disagreed with the notion that "freer trade improves productive efficiency and offers consumers better choices, and in the long run these gains are much larger than any effects on employment."[17]
Most economists would agree that although increasing returns to scale might mean that certain industry could settle in a geographical area without any strong economic reason derived from comparative advantage, this is not a reason to argue against free trade because the absolute level of output enjoyed by both "winner" and "loser" will increase with the "winner" gaining more than the "loser" but both gaining more than before in an absolute level.
History[edit]
See also: Timeline of international trade
Early era[edit]
Further information: Anti-Corn Law League




David Ricardo


The notion of a free trade system encompassing multiple sovereign states originated in a rudimentary form in 16th century Imperial Spain.[18] American jurist Arthur Nussbaum noted that Spanish theologian Francisco de Vitoria was "the first to set forth the notions (though not the terms) of freedom of commerce and freedom of the seas."[19] Vitoria made the case under principles of jus gentium.[19] However, it was two early British economists Adam Smith and David Ricardo who later developed the idea of free trade into its modern and recognizable form.
Economists who advocated free trade believed trade was the reason why certain civilizations prospered economically. Adam Smith, for example, pointed to increased trading as being the reason for the flourishing of not just Mediterranean cultures such as Egypt, Greece, and Rome, but also of Bengal (East India) and China. The great prosperity of the Netherlands after throwing off Spanish Imperial rule and pursuing a policy of free trade[20] made the free trade/mercantilist dispute the most important question in economics for centuries. Free trade policies have battled with mercantilist, protectionist, isolationist, communist, populist, and other policies over the centuries.
The Ottoman Empire had liberal free trade policies by the 18th century, with origins in capitulations of the Ottoman Empire, dating back to the first commercial treaties signed with France in 1536 and taken further with capitulations in 1673, in 1740 which lowered duties to only 3% for imports and exports, and in 1790. Ottoman free trade policies were praised by British economists advocating free trade, such as J. R. McCulloch in his Dictionary of Commerce (1834), but criticized by British politicians opposing free trade, such as prime minister Benjamin Disraeli, who cited the Ottoman Empire as "an instance of the injury done by unrestrained competition" in the 1846 Corn Laws debate, arguing that it destroyed what had been "some of the finest manufactures of the world" in 1812.[21]




Average Tariff Rates (France, UK, US)


Trade in colonial America was regulated by the British mercantile system through the Acts of Trade and Navigation. Until the 1760s, few colonists openly advocated for free trade, in part because regulations were not strictly enforced—New England was famous for smuggling—but also because colonial merchants did not want to compete with foreign goods and shipping. According to historian Oliver Dickerson, a desire for free trade was not one of the causes of the American Revolution. "The idea that the basic mercantile practices of the eighteenth century were wrong," wrote Dickerson, "was not a part of the thinking of the Revolutionary leaders".[22]
Free trade came to what would become the United States as a result of American Revolutionary War. After the British Parliament issued the Prohibitory Act, blockading colonial ports, the Continental Congress responded by effectively declaring economic independence, opening American ports to foreign trade on April 6, 1776. According to historian John W. Tyler, "Free trade had been forced on the Americans, like it or not."[23]
In March 1801 the Pope Pius VII ordered some liberalization of trade to face the economic crisis in the Papal States with the Motu Proprio "Le più colte"; despite of this, the export of national corn was forbidden to ensure the food for the State.




Britain waged two Opium Wars to force China to legalize the opium trade and to open all of China to British merchants.


In Britain, free trade became a central principle practiced by the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. Large-scale agitation was sponsored by the Anti-Corn Law League. Under the Treaty of Nanking, China opened five treaty ports to world trade in 1843. The first free trade agreement, the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty, was put in place in 1860 between Britain and France, which led to successive agreements between other countries in Europe.[24]
Many classical liberals, especially in 19th and early 20th century Britain (e.g. John Stuart Mill) and in the United States for much of the 20th century (e.g., Henry Ford and Secretary of State Cordell Hull), believed that free trade promoted peace. Woodrow Wilson included free-trade rhetoric in his "Fourteen Points" speech of 1918:

The program of the world's peace, therefore, is our program; and that program, the only possible program, all we see it, is this: [...]
3. The removal, so far as possible, of all economic barriers and the establishment of equality of trade conditions among all the nations consenting to the peace and associating themselves for its maintenance.[25]

According to economic historian Douglas Irwin, a common myth about U.S. trade policy is that low tariffs harmed American manufacturers in the early 19th century and then that high tariffs made the United States into a great industrial power in the late 19th century.[26] A review by the Economist of Irwin's 2017 book Clashing over Commerce: A History of US Trade Policy notes[26]:

Political dynamics would lead people to see a link between tariffs and the economic cycle that was not there. A boom would generate enough revenue for tariffs to fall, and when the bust came pressure would build to raise them again. By the time that happened, the economy would be recovering, giving the impression that tariff cuts caused the crash and the reverse generated the recovery. Mr Irwin also methodically debunks the idea that protectionism made America a great industrial power, a notion believed by some to offer lessons for developing countries today. As its share of global manufacturing powered from 23% in 1870 to 36% in 1913, the admittedly high tariffs of the time came with a cost, estimated at around 0.5% of GDP in the mid-1870s. In some industries, they might have sped up development by a few years. But American growth during its protectionist period was more to do with its abundant resources and openness to people and ideas.

According to Paul Bairoch, since the end of the 18th century, the United States has been "the homeland and bastion of modern protectionism". In fact, the United States never adhered to free trade until 1945. For the most part, the "Jeffersonians" strongly opposed it. In the 19th century, statesmen such as Senator Henry Clay continued Hamilton's themes within the Whig Party under the name "American System." The opposition Democratic Party contested several elections throughout the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s in part over the issue of the tariff and protection of industry.[27]
In the U.S., the Democratic Party favored moderate tariffs used for government revenue only, while the Whigs favored higher protective tariffs to protect favored industries. The economist Henry Charles Carey became a leading proponent of the "American System" of economics. This mercantilist "American System" was opposed by the Democratic Party of Andrew Jackson, Martin Van Buren, John Tyler, James K. Polk, Franklin Pierce, and James Buchanan.
The fledgling Republican Party led by Abraham Lincoln, who called himself a "Henry Clay tariff Whig", strongly opposed free trade and implemented a 44-percent tariff during the Civil War—in part to pay for railroad subsidies and for the war effort, and to protect favored industries.[28] William McKinley (later to become President of the United States) stated the stance of the Republican Party (which won every election for President from 1868 until 1912, except the two non-consecutive terms of Grover Cleveland) as thus:

Under free trade the trader is the master and the producer the slave. Protection is but the law of nature, the law of self-preservation, of self-development, of securing the highest and best destiny of the race of man. [It is said] that protection is immoral…. Why, if protection builds up and elevates 63,000,000 [the U.S. population] of people, the influence of those 63,000,000 of people elevates the rest of the world. We cannot take a step in the pathway of progress without benefitting mankind everywhere. Well, they say, 'Buy where you can buy the cheapest'…. Of course, that applies to labor as to everything else. Let me give you a maxim that is a thousand times better than that, and it is the protection maxim: 'Buy where you can pay the easiest.' And that spot of earth is where labor wins its highest rewards.[29]

During the interwar period, economic protectionism took hold in the United States, most famously in the form of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, which is credited by economists with the prolonging and worldwide propagation of the Great Depression.[30]:33[31] From 1934, trade liberalization began to take place through the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act.




George W. Bush and Hu Jintao of China meet while attending an APEC summit in Santiago de Chile, 2004.


In Kicking Away the Ladder, development economist Ha-Joon Chang reviews the history of free trade policies and economic growth, and notes that many of the now-industrialized countries had significant barriers to trade throughout their history. The United States and Britain, sometimes considered the homes of free trade policy, employed protectionism to varying degrees at all times. Britain abolished the Corn Laws, which restricted import of grain, in 1846 in response to domestic pressures, and it reduced protectionism for manufactures in the mid 19th century, when its technological advantage was at its height, but tariffs on manufactured products had returned to 23% by 1950. The United States maintained weighted average tariffs on manufactured products of approximately 40–50% up until the 1950s, augmented by the natural protectionism of high transportation costs in the 19th century.[32] The most consistent practitioners of free trade have been Switzerland, the Netherlands, and to a lesser degree Belgium.[33] Chang describes the export-oriented industrialization policies of the Four Asian Tigers as "far more sophisticated and fine-tuned than their historical equivalents".[34]
Some degree of protectionism is nevertheless the norm throughout the world. Most developed nations maintain controversial[citation needed] agricultural tariffs. From 1820 to 1980, the average tariffs on manufactures in twelve industrial countries ranged from 11 to 32%. In the developing world, average tariffs on manufactured goods are approximately 34%.[35]
Post-World War II[edit]
Since the end of World War II, in part due to industrial size and the onset of the Cold War, the United States has often been a proponent of reduced tariff-barriers and free trade. The U.S. helped establish the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and later the World Trade Organization (WTO); although it had rejected an earlier version in the 1950s (International Trade Organization or ITO).[36][citation needed] Since the 1970s, U.S. governments have negotiated managed-trade agreements, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in the 1990s, the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) in 2006, and a number of bilateral agreements (such as with Jordan).[citation needed]
In Europe, six countries formed the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951 which became the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1958. Two core objectives of the EEC were the development of a common market, subsequently renamed the single market, and establishing a customs union between its member states. After expanding its membership, the EEC became the European Union (EU) in 1993. The European Union, now the world's largest single market,[37] has concluded free trade agreements with many countries around the world.[38]
Current status[edit]




Singapore is the top country in the Enabling Trade Index.


Main articles: World Trade Organization, List of multilateral free trade agreements, and List of bilateral free trade agreements
Most countries in the world are members of the World Trade Organization,[39] which limits in certain ways but does not eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers. Most countries are also members of regional free trade areas that lower trade barriers among participating countries. The EU and the US are negotiating a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. Initially led by the U.S., twelve countries that have borders on the Pacific Ocean are currently in private negotiations[40] around the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is being touted by the negotiating countries as a free trade policy.[41] In January 2017, the United States pulled out of negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Parternship. [42]
Degree of free trade policies[edit]
Main article: Global Enabling Trade Report
The Enabling Trade Index measures the factors, policies and services that facilitate the trade in goods across borders and to destination. It is made up of four sub-indexes: market access; border administration; transport and communications infrastructure; and business environment. The top 30 countries and areas in 2016 are:[43]


 Singapore 6.0
 Netherlands 5.7
 Hong Kong 5.7
 Luxembourg 5.6
 Sweden 5.6
 Finland 5.6
 Austria 5.5
 United Kingdom 5.5
 Germany 5.5
 Belgium 5.5
  Switzerland 5.4
 Denmark 5.4
 France 5.4
 Estonia 5.3
 Spain 5.3
 Japan 5.3
 Norway 5.3
 New Zealand 5.3
 Iceland 5.3
 Ireland 5.3
 Chile 5.3
 United States 5.2
 United Arab Emirates 5.2
 Canada 5.2
 Czech Republic 5.1
 Australia 5.1
 South Korea 5.0
 Portugal 5.0
 Lithuania 5.0
 Israel 5.0


The politics of free trade[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Free trade debate.
The relative costs, benefits and beneficiaries of free trade are debated by academics, governments and interest groups.
Arguments for protectionism fall into the economic category (trade hurts the economy or groups in the economy) or the moral category (the effects of trade might help the economy, but have ill effects in other areas); a general argument against free trade is that it is colonialism or imperialism in disguise. The moral category is wide, including concerns of destroying infant industries and undermining long-run economic development, income inequality, environmental degradation, supporting child labor and sweatshops, race to the bottom, wage slavery, accentuating poverty in poor countries, harming national defense, and forcing cultural change.[44][better source needed]
Economic arguments against free trade criticize the assumptions or conclusions of economic theories. Sociopolitical arguments against free trade cite social and political effects that economic arguments do not capture, such as political stability, national security, human rights and environmental protection.[citation needed]
Free trade is often opposed by domestic industries that would have their profits and market share reduced by lower prices for imported goods.[45][46] For example, if United States tariffs on imported sugar were reduced, U.S. sugar producers would receive lower prices and profits, while U.S. sugar consumers would spend less for the same amount of sugar because of those same lower prices. The economic theory of David Ricardo holds that consumers would necessarily gain more than producers would lose.[47][48] Since each of those few domestic sugar producers would lose a lot while each of a great number of consumers would gain only a little, domestic producers are more likely to mobilize against the lifting of tariffs.[46] More generally, producers often favor domestic subsidies and tariffs on imports in their home countries, while objecting to subsidies and tariffs in their export markets.

Real Wages vs Trade as a Percent of GDP[49][50]
Socialists frequently oppose free trade on the ground that it allows maximum exploitation of workers by capital. For example, Karl Marx wrote in The Communist Manifesto, "The bourgeoisie... has set up that single, unconscionable freedom – free trade. In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation." Nonetheless, Marx did favor free trade—solely because he felt that it would hasten the social revolution.[51]
"Free trade" is opposed by many anti-globalization groups, based on their assertion that free trade agreements generally do not increase the economic freedom of the poor or the working class, and frequently make them poorer. Where the foreign supplier allows de facto exploitation of labor, domestic free-labor is unfairly forced to compete with the foreign exploited labor. To this extent, free trade is seen as an end-run around workers' rights and laws that protect individual liberty.
Some opponents of free trade favor free trade theory but oppose free trade agreements as applied. Some opponents of NAFTA see the agreement as being materially harmful to the common people, but some of the arguments are actually against the particulars of government-managed trade, rather than against free trade per se. For example, it is argued that it would be wrong to let subsidized corn from the U.S. into Mexico freely under NAFTA at prices well below production cost (dumping) because of its ruinous effects to Mexican farmers. Of course, such subsidies violate free trade theory, so this argument is not actually against the principle of free trade, but rather its selective implementation.[citation needed]
Research shows that support for trade restrictions is highest among respondents with the lowest levels of education.[52] The authors find "that the impact of education on how voters' think about trade and globalization has more to do with exposure to economic ideas and information about the aggregate and varied effects of these economic phenomena, than it does with individual calculations about how trade affects personal income or job security. This is not to say that the latter types of calculations are not important in shaping individuals' views of trade—just that they are not being manifest in the simple association between education and support for trade openness."[52] A 2017 study found that individuals whose occupations are routine-task-intensive and who do jobs that are offshorable are more likely to be protectionist.[53]
Research suggests that attitudes towards free trade do not necessarily reflect individuals' self-interests.[54][55]
Colonialism[edit]
For more details on this topic, see Dependency theory.
It has long been argued that free trade is a form of colonialism or imperialism, a position taken by various proponents of economic nationalism and the school of mercantilism. In the 19th century these criticized British calls for free trade as cover for British Empire, notably in the works of American Henry Clay, architect of the American System[56] and by German American economist Friedrich List.[57]
More recently, Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa has denounced the "sophistry of free trade" in an introduction he wrote for a book titled The Hidden Face of Free Trade Accords, written in part by Correa's current Energy Minister Alberto Acosta. Citing as his source the book Kicking Away the Ladder, written by Ha-Joon Chang, Correa identified the difference between an "American system" opposed to a "British System" of free trade. The latter, he says, was explicitly viewed by the Americans as "part of the British imperialist system." According to Correa, Chang showed that it was Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, and not Friedrich List, who was the first to present a systematic argument defending industrial protectionism.
Alternatives[edit]
The following alternatives for free trade have been proposed: balanced trade, fair trade, protectionism, industrial policy.[citation needed]
In literature[edit]
The value of free trade was first observed and documented by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations, in 1776.[58] He wrote,

It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy.... If a foreign country can supply us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves can make it, better buy it of them with some part of the produce of our own industry, employed in a way in which we have some advantage.[59]

This statement uses the concept of absolute advantage to present an argument in opposition to mercantilism, the dominant view surrounding trade at the time, which held that a country should aim to export more than it imports, and thus amass wealth.[60] Instead, Smith argues, countries could gain from each producing exclusively the good(s) in which they are most suited to, trading between each other as required for the purposes of consumption. In this vein, it is not the value of exports relative to that of imports that is important, but the value of the goods produced by a nation. The concept of absolute advantage however does not address a situation where a country has no advantage in the production of a particular good or type of good.[61]
This theoretical shortcoming was addressed by the theory of comparative advantage. Generally attributed to David Ricardo who expanded on it in his 1817 book On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,[62] it makes a case for free trade based not on absolute advantage in production of a good, but on the relative opportunity costs of production. A country should specialize in whatever good it can produce at the lowest cost, trading this good to buy other goods it requires for consumption. This allows for countries to benefit from trade even when they do not have an absolute advantage in any area of production. While their gains from trade might not be equal to those of a country more productive in all goods, they will still be better off economically from trade than they would be under a state of autarky. [63][64]
Exceptionally, Henry George's 1886 book Protection or Free Trade was read out loud in full into the Congressional Record by five Democratic congressmen.[65][66] Tyler Cowen wrote that 'Protection or Free Trade "remains perhaps the best-argued tract on free trade to this day."[67] George discusses the subject in particular with respect to the interests of labor. Although George is very critical towards protectionism:

We all hear with interest and pleasure of improvements in transportation by water or land; we are all disposed to regard the opening of canals, the building of railways, the deepening of harbors, the improvement of steamships as beneficial. But if such things are beneficial, how can tariffs be beneficial? The effect of such things is to lessen the cost of transporting commodities; the effect of tariffs is to increase it. If the protective theory be true, every improvement that cheapens the carriage of goods between country and country is an injury to mankind unless tariffs be commensurately increased.[68]

George considers the general free trade argument 'inadequate'. He argues that the removal of protective tariffs alone is never sufficient to improve the situation of the working class, unless accompanied by a shift towards land value tax.[69]
See also[edit]


Business and economics portal





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Free trade


Concepts/topics:

Free trade area
Free trade zone
Freedom of choice
International free trade agreement
Trade war


Offshore outsourcing
Offshoring
Borderless Selling
Trade bloc
Economic globalization
Trade Adjustment Assistance
Non-tariff barriers to trade

Trade organizations:

Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)
European Union
World Trade Organization (WTO)

References[edit]


^ See P.Krugman, «The Narrow and Broad Arguments for Free Trade», American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 83(3), 1993 ; and P.Krugman, Peddling Prosperity: Economic Sense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished Expectations, New York, W.W. Norton & Company, 1994.
^ a b "Free Trade". IGM Forum. March 13, 2012. 
^ "Import Duties". IGM Forum. October 4, 2016. 
^ N. Gregory Mankiw, Economists Actually Agree on This: The Wisdom of Free Trade, New York Times (April 24, 2015): "Economists are famous for disagreeing with one another.... But economists reach near unanimity on some topics, including international trade."
^ William Poole, Free Trade: Why Are Economists and Noneconomists So Far Apart, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October 2004, 86(5), pp. 1: "most observers agree that '[t]he consensus among mainstream economists on the desirability of free trade remains almost universal.'"
^ "Trade Within Europe | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 2017-06-24. 
^ a b c d Steven E. Landsburg. Price Theory and Applications, Sixth Edition, Chapter 8
^ Thom Hartmann, Unequal Protection, Second Edition, Chapter 20. p. 255
^ a b Pugel (2007), International Economics, pp. 311–312
^ Chang, Ha-Joon, Kicking Away the Ladder: Good Policies and Good Institutions in Historical Perspective 
^ a b Alan C. Stockman, Introduction to Economics, Second Edition, Chapter 9
^ a b N. Gregory Mankiw, Macroeconomics, Fifth Edition, Chapter 7
^ Fuller, Dan; Geide-Stevenson, Doris (Fall 2003). "Consensus Among Economists: Revisited" (PDF). Journal of Economic Review. 34 (4): 369–387. doi:10.1080/00220480309595230.  (registration required)
^ Friedman, Milton. "The Case for Free Trade". Hoover Digest. 1997 (4). Archived from the original on 2007-01-22. 
^ Whaples, Robert (2006). "Do Economists Agree on Anything? Yes!". The Economists' Voice. 3 (9). doi:10.2202/1553-3832.1156. 
^ Mankiw, Gregory (2006-05-07). "Outsourcing Redux". Retrieved 2007-01-22. 
^ "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 2016-07-01. 
^ Giovanni Arrighi (1994). The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times. Verso. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-85984-015-3. 
^ a b Arthur Nussbaum (1947). A concise history of the law of nations. Macmillan Co. p. 62. 
^ Appleby, Joyce (2010). The Relentless Revolution: A History of Capitalism. New York, New York: W.W. Norton & Company. 
^ Paul Bairoch (1995). Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes. University of Chicago Press. pp. 31–32. 
^ Dickerson, The Navigation Acts and the American Revolution, p. 140.
^ Tyler, Smugglers & Patriots, p. 238.
^ International Monetary Fund Research Dept. (1997). World Economic Outlook, May 1997: Globalization: Opportunities and Challenges. International Monetary Fund. p. 113. ISBN 9781455278886. 
^ Fourteen Points
^ a b "A historian on the myths of American trade". The Economist. Retrieved 2017-11-26. 
^ Larry Schweikart, What Would the Founders Say? (New York: Sentinel, 2011), pp. 106–124.
^ Lind, Matthew. "Free Trade Fallacy". Prospect. Archived from the original on 6 January 2006. Retrieved 3 January 2011. 
^ William McKinley speech, October 4, 1892 in Boston, MA William McKinley Papers (Library of Congress)
^ Eun, Cheol S.; Resnick, Bruce G. (2011). International Financial Management, 6th Edition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin. ISBN 978-0-07-803465-7. 
^ Irwin, Douglas A. (2017-09-19). "Steve Bannon's Bad History". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 2017-09-20. 
^ Chang (2003), Kicking Away the Ladder, p. 17
^ Chang (2003), Kicking Away the Ladder, p. 59
^ Chang (2003), Kicking Away the Ladder, p. 50
^ Chang (2003), Kicking Away the Ladder, p. 66
^ http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/reser_e/pera9707.pdf
^ "EU position in world trade". European Commission. Retrieved 24 May 2015. 
^ "Agreements". European Commission. Retrieved 17 March 2016. 
^ "Members and Observers". World Trade Organisation. Retrieved 3 January 2011. 
^ "Everything You Need To Know About The Trans-Pacific Partnership". The Washington Post. Retrieved 28 December 2014. 
^ "Trans-Pacific Partnership". U.S. Trade Representative. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014. 
^ "Trump Abandons Trans-Pacific Parternship, Obama's Signature Trade Deal". New York Times. Retrieved 2 September 2017. 
^ http://reports.weforum.org/global-enabling-trade-report-2016/enabling-trade-rankings/
^ Boudreaux, Don Globalization, 2007
^ William Baumol and Alan Blinder, Economics: Principles and Policy, p. 722.
^ a b Brakman, Steven; Harry Garretsen; Charles Van Marrewijk; Arjen Van Witteloostuijn (2006). Nations and Firms in the Global Economy : An Introduction to International Economics and Business. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83298-4. 
^ Richard L. Stroup, James D. Gwartney, Russell S. Sobel, Economics: Private and Public Choice, p. 46.
^ Pugel, Thomas A. (2003). International economics. Boston: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-119875-X. 
^ "Earnings – National". Databases, Tables & Calculators by Subject. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2012. 
^ "Table 1.1.5. Gross Domestic Product". National Income and Product Accounts Table. U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. Retrieved 16 March 2012. 
^ "It is in this revolutionary sense alone, gentlemen, that I vote in favor of free trade." Marx, Karl On the Question of Free Trade Speech to the Democratic Association of Brussels at its public meeting of January 9, 1848
^ a b Hainmueller, Jens; Hiscox, Michael J. (2006-04-01). "Learning to Love Globalization: Education and Individual Attitudes Toward International Trade". International Organization. 60 (02): 469–498. doi:10.1017/S0020818306060140. ISSN 1531-5088. 
^ Owen, Erica; Johnston, Noel P. (2017). "Occupation and the Political Economy of Trade: Job Routineness, Offshorability, and Protectionist Sentiment". International Organization: 1–35. doi:10.1017/S0020818317000339. ISSN 0020-8183. 
^ Mansfield, Edward D.; Mutz, Diana C. (2009-07-01). "Support for Free Trade: Self-Interest, Sociotropic Politics, and Out-Group Anxiety". International Organization. 63 (03): 425–457. doi:10.1017/S0020818309090158. ISSN 1531-5088. 
^ "Why Don't Trade Preferences Reflect Economic Self-Interest?" (PDF). 
^ "Gentlemen deceive themselves. It is not free trade that they are recommending to our acceptance. It is, in effect, the British colonial system that we are invited to adopt; and, if their policy prevail, it will lead, substantially, to the recolonization of these States, under the commercial dominion of Great Britain.", "In Defense of the American System, Against the British Colonial System." 1832, Feb 2, 3, and 6, Clay, Henry (1843). "The Life and Speeches of Henry Clay". II: 23–24. 
^ "Had the English left everything to itself—'Laissez faire, laissez aller', as the popular economical school recommends—the [German] merchants of the Steelyard would be still carrying on their trade in London, the Belgians would be still manufacturing cloth for the English, England would have still continued to be the sheep-farm of the Hansards, just as Portugal became the vineyard of England, and has remained so till our days, owing to the stratagem of a cunning diplomatist."
^ Bhagwati (2002), Free Trade Today, p. 3
^ Smith, Wealth of Nations, pp. 264–265
^ Pugel (2007), International Economics, p. 33
^ Pugel (2007), International Economics, p. 34
^ Ricardo (1817), On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, Chapter 7 "On Foreign Trade"
^ Bhagwati (2002), Free Trade Today, p 1
^ Pugel (2007), International Economics, pp. 35–38, 40
^ Weir, "A Fragile Alliance," 425–425
^ Henry George, Protection or Free Trade: An Examination of the Tariff Question, with Especial Regard to the Interests of Labor(New York: 1887).
^ Cowen, Tyler (May 1, 2009). "Anti-Capitalist Rerun". The American Interest. 4 (5). Retrieved 15 November 2014. 
^ "True Free Trade", Chapter 3, Protection or Free Trade
^ True Free Trade chapter 16, "Inadequacy of the Free Trade Argument"


59. Galiani, Sebastian, Norman Schofield, and Gustavo Torrens. 2014. Factor Endowments, Democracy and Trade Policy Divergence. Journal of Public Economic Theory 16(1): 119-56.
Bibliography[edit]

Bhagwati, Jagdish. Free Trade Today. Princeton: Princeton University Press (2002). ISBN 0-691-09156-0
Blinder, Alan S. (2008). "Free Trade". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN 978-0865976658. OCLC 237794267. CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list (link)
Chang, Ha-Joon. Kicking Away The Ladder: Development Strategy in Historical Perspective. London: Anthem Press 2003. ISBN 978-1-84331-027-3.
Dickerson, Oliver M. The Navigation Acts and the American Revolution. New York : Barnes (1963). ISBN 978-0374921620 OCLC 490386016
Pugel, Thomas A. International Economics, 13th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin (2007). ISBN 978-0-07-352302-6
Ricardo, David. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, Library of Economics and Liberty (1999)
Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Digireads Publishing (2009), ISBN 1-4209-3206-3
Tyler, John W. Smugglers & Patriots: Boston Merchants and the Advent of the American Revolution. Boston: Northeastern University Press (1986). ISBN 0-930350-76-6

Further reading[edit]

Medley, George Webb (1881). England under free trade. London: Cassell, Petter, Galpin & Co. 

External links[edit]

The Online Library of Liberty

66 contemporary British ilustrations about free trade, 1830s-1910s










v
t
e


Globalization






Journals
Outline
Studies





Aspects



Alter-globalization
Anti-globalization
Counter-hegemonic globalization
Cultural globalization
Deglobalization
Democratic globalization
Economic globalization
Environmental globalization
Financial globalization
Global citizenship

education


Global governance
Global health
History of

archaic
early modern


Military globalization
Political globalization
Trade globalization
Workforce globalization





Issues




Global



Disease
Digital divide
Labor arbitrage
Population
Warming
Water crisis





Other



Brain drain

reverse


Climate change
Climate justice
Development aid
Economic inequality
Endangered languages
Fair trade
Forced migration
Human rights
Illicit financial flows
Invasive species
Investor-state disputes
New international division of labour
North–South divide
Offshoring
Race to the bottom

pollution havens


Transnational crime
McDonaldization
Westernization
American imperialism
British Empire
World war








Theories



Capital accumulation
Dependency
Development
Earth system
Fiscal localism
Modernization

ecological
history of


Primitive accumulation
Social change
World history
World-systems





Notable
scholars



Samir Amin
Arjun Appadurai
K. Anthony Appiah
Daniele Archibugi
Giovanni Arrighi
Ravi Batra
Jean Baudrillard
Zygmunt Bauman
Ulrich Beck
Walden Bello
Jagdish Bhagwati
Robert Brenner
Manuel Castells
Noam Chomsky
Alfred Crosby
Christopher Chase-Dunn
Andre G. Frank
Thomas Friedman
Anthony Giddens
Peter Gowan
Michael Hardt
David Harvey
David Held
Paul Hirst
Michael Hudson
Paul James
Ibn Khaldun
Naomi Klein
Antonio Negri
George Ritzer
Jeffrey Sachs
Saskia Sassen
John R. Saul
Vandana Shiva
Joseph Stiglitz
John Urry
Immanuel Wallerstein








 Portal
 Category












v
t
e


International trade



Terminology



Absolute advantage
Balance of payments
Balance of trade
Capital account
Comparative advantage
Current account
Export-oriented industrialization
Fair trade
Foreign exchange reserves
Globalization
Import substitution industrialization
Net capital outflow
Outsourcing
Tariff
Trade justice
Trade war
Trading nation









Organizations
and policies




International Monetary Fund (IMF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
World Bank Group
World Trade Organization (WTO)

International Trade Centre


Bilateral investment treaty
Economic integration
Free-trade zone
Special economic zone
Trade agreement
Trade barrier
Trade bloc





Political economy



Free trade (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, Repeal of the Corn Laws)
Mercantilism
Protectionism (Economic nationalism, Autarky)





Regional organizations



ACU
ASEAN
CACM
CAN
CARICOM
CEMAC
CUBKR
EAC
EAU
EU
GCC
Mercosur
RCEP
SAARC
SACU
WAEMU





Exports by product



Aircraft & Spacecraft
Aircraft parts
Aluminium
Cars
Car parts
Coal
Coffee
Computers
Copper
Corn
Cotton
Diamonds
Electricity
Engines
Gas turbines
Gold
Integrated circuits
Iron ore
Natural gas
Oil
Petrol
Pharmaceuticals
Ships
Steel
Telecommunications equipment
Telephones
Trucks
Wheat
Wine








 Category
 Commons











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_trade&oldid=817612190"					Categories: International tradeTrade policyFree tradeHidden categories: Pages with login required references or sourcesTagged pages containing blacklisted linksAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2017Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from July 2017Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017CS1 maint: Extra text: editors list