For other uses, see Freedom of the press (disambiguation).


Journalism







News
Writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
News values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school
Index of journalism articles




Areas




Arts
Business
Data
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technology
Trade
Traffic
Weather
World




Genres




Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Comics-based
Community
Data
Database
Gonzo
Immersion
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
"New Journalism"
Non-profit
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Scientific
Sensor
Underground
Visual
Watchdog




Social impact




Fake news
Fourth Estate
Fifth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Press service
Propaganda model
Yellow journalism




News media




Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media




Roles




Journalists (reporters)
Columnist
Blogger
Editor
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Pundit / commentator






 Journalism portal
Category: Journalism







v
t
e





Freedom of the press or freedom of the media is the freedom of communication and expression through various mediums, such as electronic media and published materials. Wherever such freedom exists mostly implies the absence of interference from an overreaching state; its preservation may be sought through constitutional or other legal protections.
With respect to governmental information, any government may distinguish which materials are public or protected from disclosure to the public. State materials are protected due to either of two reasons: the classification of information as sensitive, classified or secret, or the relevance of the information to protecting the national interest. Many governments are also subject to sunshine laws or freedom of information legislation that are used to define the ambit of national interest.
The United Nations' 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: "Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference, and to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas through any media regardless of frontiers".[1]
This philosophy is usually accompanied by legislation ensuring various degrees of freedom of scientific research (known as scientific freedom), publishing, and press. The depth to which these laws are entrenched in a country's legal system can go as far down as its constitution. The concept of freedom of speech is often covered by the same laws as freedom of the press, thereby giving equal treatment to spoken and published expression.



Contents


1 Relationship to self-publishing
2 Status of press freedom worldwide

2.1 Worldwide press freedom index
2.2 Freedom of the Press
2.3 Non-democratic states
2.4 Regions closed to foreign reporters


3 History

3.1 Europe

3.1.1 Great Britain
3.1.2 Denmark–Norway
3.1.3 Italy
3.1.4 Nazi Germany (1933–1945)
3.1.5 Sweden and Finland


3.2 Americas

3.2.1 United States
3.2.2 Canada


3.3 Asia

3.3.1 China
3.3.2 India




4 Implications of new technologies
5 Organizations for press freedom
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links



Relationship to self-publishing[edit]
Freedom of the press is construed as an absence of interference by outside entities, such as a government or religious organization, rather than as a right for authors to have their works published by other people.[2] This idea was famously summarized by the 20th century American journalist, A. J. Liebling, who wrote, "Freedom of the press is guaranteed only to those who own one".[2] Freedom of the press gives the printer or publisher exclusive control over what the publisher chooses to publish, including the right to refuse to print anything for any reason.[2] If the author cannot reach a voluntary agreement with a publisher to produce the author's work, then the author must turn to self-publishing.
Status of press freedom worldwide[edit]
Beyond legal definitions, several non-governmental organizations use other criteria to judge the level of press freedom around the world:

Reporters Without Borders considers the number of journalists murdered, expelled or harassed, and the existence of a state monopoly on TV and radio, as well as the existence of censorship and self-censorship in the media, and the overall independence of media as well as the difficulties that foreign reporters may face.
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) uses the tools of journalism to help journalists by tracking press freedom issues through independent research, fact-finding missions, and firsthand contacts in the field, including local working journalists in countries around the world. CPJ shares information on breaking cases with other press freedom organizations worldwide through the International Freedom of Expression Exchange, a global e-mail network. CPJ also tracks journalist deaths and detentions. CPJ staff applies strict criteria for each case; researchers independently investigate and verify the circumstances behind each death or imprisonment.
Freedom House likewise studies the more general political and economic environments of each nation in order to determine whether relationships of dependence exist that limit in practice the level of press freedom that might exist in theory. So the concept of independence of the press is one closely linked with the concept of press freedom.

Worldwide press freedom index[edit]




2017 Press Freedom Index[3]



  Very serious situation
  Difficult situation
  Noticeable problems


  Satisfactory situation
  Good situation
  Not classified / No data







Every year, Reporters Without Borders establishes a ranking of countries in terms of their freedom of the press. The worldwide Press Freedom Index list is based on responses to surveys sent to journalists that are members of partner organisations of the RWB, as well as related specialists such as researchers, jurists and human rights activists. The survey asks questions about direct attacks on journalists and the media as well as other indirect sources of pressure against the free press, such as non-governmental groups. RWB is careful to note that the index only deals with press freedom, and does not measure the quality of journalism.
In 2016, the countries where press was the most free were Finland, Netherlands, Norway, Denmark and New Zealand, followed by Costa Rica, Switzerland, Sweden, Ireland and Jamaica. The country with the least degree of press freedom was Eritrea, followed by North Korea, Turkmenistan, Syria, China, Vietnam and Sudan.[4]
The problem with media in India, the world's largest democracy, is enormous. India doesn't have a model for a democratic press. The Canadian Journalists for Free Expression (CJFE) has published a report [5] on India stating that Indian journalists are forced—or feel compelled for the sake of job security—to report in ways that reflect the political opinions and corporate interests of shareholders. The report written by Ravi S Jha says "Indian journalism, with its lack of freedom and self-regulation, cannot be trusted now—it is currently known for manipulation and bias."
Freedom of the Press[edit]
Freedom of the Press is a yearly report by US-based non-governmental organization Freedom House, measuring the level of freedom and editorial independence enjoyed by the press in every nation and significant disputed territories around the world. Levels of freedom are scored on a scale from 1 (most free) to 100 (least free). Depending on the basics, the nations are then classified as "Free", "Partly Free", or "Not Free".
In 2009 Iceland, Norway, Finland, Denmark, and Sweden topped the list with North Korea, Turkmenistan, Myanmar (Burma), Libya, Eritrea at the bottom.
Non-democratic states[edit]




Georgiy Gongadze, Ukrainian journalist, founder of a popular Internet newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda, who was kidnapped and murdered in 2000.


According to Reporters Without Borders, more than a third of the world's people live in countries where there is no press freedom.[6] Overwhelmingly, these people live in countries where there is no system of democracy or where there are serious deficiencies in the democratic process.[7] Freedom of the press is an extremely problematic problem/concept for most non-democratic systems of government since, in the modern age, strict control of access to information is critical to the existence of most non-democratic governments and their associated control systems and security apparatus. To this end, most non-democratic societies employ state-run news organizations to promote the propaganda critical to maintaining an existing political power base and suppress (often very brutally, through the use of police, military, or intelligence agencies) any significant attempts by the media or individual journalists to challenge the approved "government line" on contentious issues. In such countries, journalists operating on the fringes of what is deemed to be acceptable will very often find themselves the subject of considerable intimidation by agents of the state. This can range from simple threats to their professional careers (firing, professional blacklisting) to death threats, kidnapping, torture, and assassination.
Reporters Without Borders reports that, in 2003, 42 journalists lost their lives pursuing their profession and that, in the same year, at least 130 journalists were in prison as a result of their occupational activities. In 2005, 63 journalists and 5 media assistants were killed worldwide. Examples include:

The Lira Baysetova case in Kazakhstan.[8]
The Georgiy R. Gongadze case in Ukraine[9]
In Nepal, Eritrea, and mainland China, journalists may spend years in jail simply for using the "wrong" word or photo.[6]

Regions closed to foreign reporters[edit]

Chechnya, Russia[10]
Ogaden, Ethiopia
Jammu & Kashmir, India[11]
Waziristan, Pakistan[12]
Agadez, Niger
North Korea

History[edit]
Europe[edit]
Main article: Media freedom in the European Union
Central, Northern and Western Europe has a long tradition of freedom of speech, including freedom of the press. After World War II, Hugh Baillie, the president of United Press wire service based in the U.S., promoted freedom of news dissemination. In 1966 he called for an open system of news sources and transmission, and minimum of government regulation of the news. His proposals were aired at the Geneva Conference on Freedom of Information in 1948, but were blocked by the Soviets and the French.[13]
Media freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the European Union and its citizens, as defined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights as well as the European Convention on Human Rights.[14]:1 Within the EU enlargement process, guaranteeing media freedom is named a "key indicator of a country's readiness to become part of the EU".[15]
Great Britain[edit]
According to the New York Times, "Britain has a long tradition of a free, inquisitive press", but "[u]nlike the United States, Britain has no constitutional guarantee of press freedom."[16] Freedom of the press was established in Great Britain in 1695, with Alan Rusbridger, former editor of The Guardian, stating: “When people talk about licensing journalists or newspapers the instinct should be to refer them to history. Read about how licensing of the press in Britain was abolished in 1695. Remember how the freedoms won here became a model for much of the rest of the world, and be conscious how the world still watches us to see how we protect those freedoms.”[17]




First page of John Milton's 1644 edition of Areopagitica


Until 1694, England had an elaborate system of licensing; the most recent was seen in the Licensing of the Press Act 1662. No publication was allowed without the accompaniment of a government-granted license. Fifty years earlier, at a time of civil war, John Milton wrote his pamphlet Areopagitica (1644).[18] In this work Milton argued forcefully against this form of government censorship and parodied the idea, writing "when as debtors and delinquents may walk abroad without a keeper, but unoffensive books must not stir forth without a visible jailer in their title." Although at the time it did little to halt the practice of licensing, it would be viewed later a significant milestone as one of the most eloquent defences of press freedom.[18]
Milton's central argument was that the individual is capable of using reason and distinguishing right from wrong, good from bad. In order to be able to exercise this ration right, the individual must have unlimited access to the ideas of his fellow men in “a free and open encounter." From Milton's writings developed the concept of the open marketplace of ideas, the idea that when people argue against each other, the good arguments will prevail. One form of speech that was widely restricted in England was seditious libel, and laws were in place that made criticizing the government a crime. The King was above public criticism and statements critical of the government were forbidden, according to the English Court of the Star Chamber. Truth was not a defense to seditious libel because the goal was to prevent and punish all condemnation of the government.
Locke contributed to the lapse of the Licensing Act in 1695, whereupon the press needed no license. Still, many libels were tried throughout the 18th century, until "the Society of the Bill of Rights" led by John Horne Tooke and John Wilkes organised a campaign to publish Parliamentary Debates. This culminated in three defeats of the Crown in the 1770 cases of Almon, of Miller and of Woodfall, who all had published one of the Letters of Junius, and the unsuccessful arrest of John Wheble in 1771. Thereafter the Crown was much more careful in the application of libel; for example, in the aftermath of the Peterloo Massacre, Burdett was convicted, whereas by contrast the Junius affair was over a satire and sarcasm about the non-lethal conduct and policies of government.
In Britain's American colonies, the first editors discovered their readers enjoyed it when they criticized the local governor; the governors discovered they could shut down the newspapers. The most dramatic confrontation came in New York in 1734, where the governor brought John Peter Zenger to trial for criminal libel after the publication of satirical attacks. The defense lawyers argued that according to English common law, truth was a valid defense against libel. The jury acquitted Zenger, who became the iconic American hero for freedom of the press. The result was an emerging tension between the media and the government. By the mid-1760s, there were 24 weekly newspapers in the 13 colonies, and the satirical attack on government became common features in American newspapers.[19]
John Stuart Mill in 1869 in his book On Liberty approached the problem of authority versus liberty from the viewpoint of a 19th-century utilitarian: The individual has the right of expressing himself so long as he does not harm other individuals. The good society is one in which the greatest number of persons enjoy the greatest possible amount of happiness. Applying these general principles of liberty to freedom of expression, Mill states that if we silence an opinion, we may silence the truth. The individual freedom of expression is therefore essential to the well-being of society. Mill wrote:

If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and one, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind.[20]

Denmark–Norway[edit]
Between September 4, 1770 and October 7, 1771 the kingdom of Denmark–Norway had the most unrestricted freedom of press of any country in Europe. This occurred during the regime of Johann Friedrich Struensee, whose second act was to abolish the old censorship laws. However, due to the great amount of mostly anonymous pamphlets published that was critical and often slanderous towards Struensee's own regime, he reinstated some restrictions regarding the freedom of press a year later, October 7, 1771.[21]
Italy[edit]
See also: Censorship in Italy
After the Italian unification in 1861, the Albertine Statute of 1848 was adopted as the constitution of the Kingdom of Italy. The Statute granted the freedom of the press with some restrictions in case of abuses and in religious matters, as stated in Article 28:[22]

The press shall be free, but the law may suppress abuses of this freedom. However, Bibles, catechisms, liturgical and prayer books shall not be printed without the prior permission of the Bishop.

After the abolition of the monarchy in 1946 and the abrogation of the Statute in 1948, the Constitution of the Republic of Italy guarantees the freedom of the press, as stated in Article 21, Paragraphs 2 and 3:[23]

The press may not be subjected to any authorisation or censorship. Seizure may be permitted only by judicial order stating the reason and only for offences expressly determined by the law on the press or in case of violation of the obligation to identify the persons responsible for such offences.

The Constitution allows the warrantless confiscation of periodicals in cases of absolute urgency, when the Judiciary cannot timely intervene, on the condition that a judicial validation must be obtained within 24 hours. Article 21 also gives restrictions against those publications considered offensive by public morality, as stated in Paragraph 6:

Publications, performances, and other exhibits offensive to public morality shall be prohibited. Measures of preventive and repressive measure against such violations shall be established by law.

Nazi Germany (1933–1945)[edit]
In 1933 freedom of the press was suppressed in Nazi Germany by the Reichstag Fire Decree of President Paul Von Hindenburg, just as Adolf Hitler was coming to power. Hitler largely suppressed freedom of the press through Joseph Goebbels' Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda.[24] The Ministry acted as a central control-point for all media, issuing orders as to what stories could be run and what stories would be suppressed. Anyone involved in the film industry—from directors to the lowliest assistant—had to sign an oath of loyalty to the Nazi Party, due to opinion-changing power Goebbels perceived movies to have. (Goebbels himself maintained some personal control over every single film made in Nazi Europe.) Journalists who crossed the Propaganda Ministry were routinely imprisoned.
Sweden and Finland[edit]
One of the world's first freedom of the press acts was introduced in Sweden in 1766, mainly due to classical liberal member of parliament, Ostrobothnian priest, Anders Chydenius.[25][26][27][28] Excepted and liable to prosecution was only vocal opposition to the King and the Church of Sweden. The Act was largely rolled back after King Gustav's coup d'état in 1772, restored after the overthrowing of his son, Gustav IV of Sweden in 1809, and fully recognized with the abolition of the king's prerogative to cancel licenses in the 1840s.
Americas[edit]
United States[edit]
Main article: Freedom of the press in the United States
The First Amendment of the United States Constitution states:

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

Canada[edit]
Section 2(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms states that everyone has "the freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication." [29]
The open court principle ensures the freedom of the press by requiring that court proceedings presumptively be open and accessible to the public and to the media.
Asia[edit]
China[edit]
Main article: Freedom of the press in China




This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (April 2017)



India[edit]
The Indian Constitution, while not mentioning the word "press", provides for "the right to freedom of speech and expression" (Article 19(1) a). However this right is subject to restrictions under sub clause (2), whereby this freedom can be restricted for reasons of "sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, preserving decency, preserving morality, in relation to contempt, court, defamation, or incitement to an offense". Laws such as the Official Secrets Act and Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act[30] (PoTA) have been used to limit press freedom. Under PoTA, person could be detained for up to six months for being in contact with a terrorist or terrorist group. PoTA was repealed in 2006, but the Official Secrets Act 1923 continues.
For the first half-century of independence, media control by the state was the major constraint on press freedom. Indira Gandhi famously stated in 1975 that All India Radio is "a Government organ, it is going to remain a Government organ..."[31] With the liberalization starting in the 1990s, private control of media has burgeoned, leading to increasing independence and greater scrutiny of government.
It ranks poorly at 136th[32] rank out of 179 listed countries in the Press Freedom Index 2013 released by Reporters Without Borders (RWB).[33] Analytically India's press freedom, as could be deduced by the Press Freedom Index, has constantly reduced since 2002, when it culminated in terms of apparent freedom, achieving a rank of 80 among the reported countries.
Implications of new technologies[edit]
Many of the traditional means of delivering information are being slowly superseded by the increasing pace of modern technological advance. Almost every conventional mode of media and information dissemination has a modern counterpart that offers significant potential advantages to journalists seeking to maintain and enhance their freedom of speech. A few simple examples of such phenomena include:

Satellite television versus terrestrial television: Whilst terrestrial television is relatively easy to manage and manipulate, satellite television is much more difficult to control as journalistic content can easily be broadcast from other jurisdictions beyond the control of individual governments. An example of this in the Middle East is the satellite broadcaster Al Jazeera. This Arabic-language media channel operates out of Qatar, whose government is relatively liberal compared to many of its neighboring states. As such, its views and content are often problematic to a number of governments in the region and beyond. However, because of the increased affordability and miniaturisation of satellite technology (e.g. dishes and receivers) it is simply not practicable for most states to control popular access to the channel.
Internet-based publishing (e.g., blogging, social media) vs. traditional publishing: Traditional magazines and newspapers rely on physical resources (e.g., offices, printing presses) that can easily be targeted and forced to close down. Internet-based publishing systems can be run using ubiquitous and inexpensive equipment and can operate from any global jurisdiction. Nations and organisations are increasingly resorting to legal measures to take control of online publications, using national security, anti-terror measures and copyright laws to issue takedown notices and restrict opposition speech.[34]
Internet, anonymity software and strong cryptography: In addition to Internet-based publishing the Internet in combination with anonymity software such as Tor and cryptography allows for sources to remain anonymous and sustain confidentiality while delivering information to or securely communicating with journalists anywhere in the world in an instant (e.g. SecureDrop, WikiLeaks)
Voice over Internet protocol (VOIP) vs. conventional telephony: Although conventional telephony systems are easily tapped and recorded, modern VOIP technology can employ low-cost strong cryptography to evade surveillance. As VOIP and similar technologies become more widespread they are likely to make the effective monitoring of journalists (and their contacts and activities) a very difficult task for governments.

Naturally, governments are responding to the challenges posed by new media technologies by deploying increasingly sophisticated technology of their own (a notable example being China's attempts to impose control through a state-run internet service provider that controls access to the Internet) but it seems that this will become an increasingly difficult task as journalists continue to find new ways to exploit technology and stay one step ahead of the generally slower-moving government institutions that attempt to censor them.
In May 2010, U.S. President Barack Obama signed legislation intended to promote a free press around the world, a bipartisan measure inspired by the murder in Pakistan of Daniel Pearl, the Wall Street Journal reporter, shortly after the September 11 attacks in 2001. The legislation, called the Daniel Pearl Freedom of the Press Act, requires the United States Department of State to expand its scrutiny of news media restrictions and intimidation as part of its annual review of human rights in each country.[35] In 2012 the Obama Administration collected communication records from 20 separate home and office lines for Associated Press reporters over a two-month period, possibly in an effort to curtail government leaks to the press. The surveillance caused widespread condemnation by First Amendment experts and free press advocates, and led 50 major media organizations to sign and send a letter of protest to American attorney general Eric Holder.[36][37]
Organizations for press freedom[edit]


American Civil Liberties Union
Article 19
Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
The Committee to Protect Journalists
Electronic Frontier Foundation
Freedom House
Index on Censorship
Inter American Press Association
International Freedom of Expression Exchange
International Press Institute
Media Legal Defence Initiative
OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media
Reporters Without Borders
Student Press Law Center
World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers
World Press Freedom Committee
Worldwide Governance Indicators


See also[edit]


Part of a series on


Censorship by country





Countries







Algeria
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Bhutan
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
China
(incl. Hong Kong)
Cuba
Czech Republic
Denmark
Ecuador
Eritrea
Finland
France
Germany (Nazi/East/Federal Republic)
Honduras
India
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea (North/South)
Malaysia
Maldives




Mexico
Myanmar
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Paraguay
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
(Soviet Union / Russian Empire)
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Somalia
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Taiwan
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Vietnam







See also




Freedom of speech by country
Internet censorship by country







v
t
e







Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights
Chilling effect (term)
Declaration of Windhoek (1991)
Free Speech, "The People’s Darling Privilege"
Freedom of the Press Act (1766)
Freedom of the Press (report)
Freedom of the press in the Russian Federation
Freedom of the press in the United States
Freedom of the press in Ukraine
Free speech in the media during the 2011 Libyan civil war
Gag order
Journalism ethics and standards
Journaliste en danger
Journalistic standards
List of indices of freedom
Media blackout
Media transparency
Muckraker
News embargo
Open court principle
Photography is Not a Crime
Prior restraint
Section Two of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
State media
Transparency of media ownership in Europe
Tunisia Monitoring Group
Virginia Declaration of Rights
World Press Freedom Day on May 3
Worldwide Press Freedom Index



Notes[edit]


^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations. Retrieved 7 August 2017. 
^ a b c Powe, L. A. Scot (1992). The Fourth Estate and the Constitution: Freedom of the Press in America. University of California Press. ISBN 9780520913165. 
^ "2017 World Press Freedom Index". Reporters Without Borders. 2017. 
^ "2016 World Press Freedom Index". Reporters Without Borders. 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2016. 
^ http://www.cjfe.org/indias_free_press_problem
^ a b "Description: Reporters Without Borders". The Media Research Hub. Social Science Research Council. 2003. Archived from the original on 9 January 2011. Retrieved 23 September 2012. 
^ Freedom House (2005). "Press Freedom Table (Press Freedom vs. Democracy ranks)". Freedom of the Press 2005. UK: World Audit. Retrieved 23 September 2012. 
^ "Editor's daughter killed in mysterious circumstances", International Freedom of Expression Exchange (IFEX), 2 July 2002
^ "Ukraine remembers slain reporter", BBC News, 16 September 2004
^ "Do journalists have the right to work in Chechnya without accreditation?". Moscow Media Law and Policy Center. March 2000. Archived from the original on 2008-10-09. Retrieved 2008-09-06. 
^ "India praises McCain-Dalai Lama meeting". Washington, D.C.: WTOPews.com. July 27, 2008. Retrieved 2008-09-06. 
^ Landay, Jonathan S. (March 20, 2008). "Radical Islamists no longer welcome in Pakistani tribal areas". McClatchy Washington Bureau. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved 2008-09-06. 
^ Eleonora W. Schoenebaum, ed. (1978), Political Profiles: The Truman Years, pp. 16–17, Facts on File Inc., ISBN 9780871964533.
^ Maria Poptcheva, Press freedom in the EU Legal framework and challenges, EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service, Briefing April 2015
^ "European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations". European Commission. Archived from the original on 2016-01-24. Retrieved 2016-02-08. 
^ "British Press Freedom Under Threat", Editorial, New York Times, 14 November 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013.
^ "Leveson Inquiry: British press freedom is a model for the world, editor tells inquiry". The Telegraph. 14 October 2017. 
^ a b Sanders, Karen (2003). Ethics & Journalism. Sage. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-7619-6967-9. 
^ Alison Olson, "The Zenger Case Revisited: Satire, Sedition and Political Debate in Eighteenth Century America", Early American Literature, vol.35 no.3 (2000), pp. 223–45.
^ John Stuart Mill (1867). On Liberty. p. 10. 
^ Laursen, John Christian (January 1998). "David Hume and the Danish Debate about Freedom of the Press in the 1770s". Journal of the History of Ideas. 59 (1): 167–72. doi:10.1353/jhi.1998.0004. JSTOR 3654060. 
^ "Lo Statuto Albertino" (PDF). The official website of the Presidency of the Italian Republic. 
^ "The Italian Constitution" (PDF). The official website of the Presidency of the Italian Republic. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-11-27. 
^ Jonathon Green; Nicholas J. Karolides, eds. (2009). Encyclopedia of Censorship. Infobase Publishing. pp. 194–96. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ "The Freedom of the Press Act", Sveriges Riksdag Archived 2007-09-30 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Fortress Europe? – Circular Letter. "FECL 15 (May 1993): The Swedish Tradition of Freedom of Press". Retrieved 14 March 2016. 
^ "The World's First Freedom of Information Act (Sweden/Finland 1766)". Scribd. Retrieved 14 March 2016. 
^ freedominfo.org, "Sweden"
^ "Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms". Paragraph 2(b): Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016. 
^ "The Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002". 
^ "Freedom of the Press". PUCL Bulletin. People's Union for Civil Liberties. July 1982. 
^ https://rsf.org/en/india
^ "Press Freedom Index 2013". Reporters Without Borders. 
^ "How U.S. copyright law is being used to take down Correa's critics in Ecuador - Committee to Protect Journalists". cpj.org. Retrieved 2017-01-20. 
^ "U.S. to Promote Press Freedom". New York Times. 17 May 2010. 
^ Hicken, Jackie (15 May 2013). "Journalists push back against Obama administration for seizure of Associated Press records". Deseret News. Retrieved 16 May 2013. 
^ Savage, Charlie; Leslie Kaufman (13 May 2013). "Phone Records of Journalists Seized by U.S". The New York Times. Retrieved 16 May 2013. 


References[edit]

Gant, Scott (2007). We're All Journalists Now: The Transformation of the Press and Reshaping of the Law in the Internet Age. New York: Free Press. ISBN 0-7432-9926-4. 
Gardner, Mary A. The Inter American Press Association: Its Fight for Freedom of the Press, 1926–1960 (University of Texas Press, 2014)
George, Cherian. Freedom from the Press: Journalism and State Power in Singapore (2012)
McDonald, Blair (2015). "Freedom of Expression Revisited: Citizenship and Journalism in the Digital Era". Canadian Journal of Communication. 40 (1). 
Molnár, Peter, ed. Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Information Since the Fall of the Berlin Wall (Central European University Press, 2014)
Nord, Lars W., and Torbjörn Von Krogh. "The Freedom of The Press or The Fear Factor? Analysing Political Decisions and Non-Decisions in British Media Policy 1990–2012." Observatorio (OBS*) (2015) 9#1 pp. 1–16.
Starr, Paul (2004). The Creation of the Media: Political Origins of Modern Communications. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-08193-2. 
Stockmann, Daniela. Media Commercialization and Authoritarian Rule in China (2012)
Thierer, Adam & Brian Anderson (2008). A Manifesto for Media Freedom. New York: Encounter Books. ISBN 1-59403-228-9. 
Wilke, Jürgen (2013). Censorship and Freedom of the Press. Leibniz Institute of European History (IEG). 

External links[edit]



Look up freedom of the press in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.





Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freedom of the press.





Wikiquote has quotations related to: Freedom of the press



Canadian Journalists for Free Expression
Media Freedom Navigator Media Freedom Indices at a Glance
Risorse Etiche Publish and translate articles of independent journalists
the ACTivist Magazine
Paradox of media freedom in Pakistan
South East Europe Media Organisation
Banned Magazine, the journal of censorship and secrecy.
News and Free Speech – Newspaper Index Blog
Press Freedom
OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media
MANA – the Media Alliance for New Activism
International Freedom of Expression Exchange – Monitors press freedom around the world
IPS Inter Press Service Independent news on press freedom around the world
The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
Reporters Without Borders
Doha Center for Media Freedom
World Press Freedom Committee
Student Press Law Center
Union syndicale des journalistes CFDT
Mapping media freedom in Europe







v
t
e


Censorship



Media regulation



Books (books banned)
Films (banned films)
Internet

circumvention


Music
Post
Press
Radio
Speech and expression
Thought
Video games








Methods



Bleeping
Book burning
Broadcast delay
Burying of scholars
Censor bars
Chilling effect
Concision
Conspiracy of silence
Content-control software
Euphemism

Minced oath


Expurgation
Fogging
Gag order
Heckling
Heckler's veto
Internet police
Memory hole
National intranet
Newspaper theft
Pixelization
Prior restraint
Propaganda
Purge
Revisionism
Sanitization
Self-censorship
Speech code
Strategic lawsuit
Surveillance

computer & network
mass


Whitewashing
Word filtering
Damnatio memoriae





Contexts



Criminal
Corporate
Hate speech
Ideological
Media bias
Moralistic fallacy
Naturalistic fallacy
Politics
Propaganda model
Religious (Islamic)
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias





By country



Censorship
Freedom of speech
Internet censorship












v
t
e


Liberty



Concepts



Positive liberty
Negative liberty
Cognitive liberty
Social liberty
Rights
Free will
Moral responsibility
Goddess of Liberty





By type



Academic
Civil
Economic
Intellectual
Morphological
Political





By right



Assembly
Association
Choice
Education
Information
Movement
Press
Religion
Public speech
Thought












v
t
e


Journalism



Roles



Journalist
Reporter
Editor
Columnist
Copy editor
Meteorologist
News presenter
Photographer
Political commentator
Blogger





Profession



News
News writing style
Ethics
Objectivity
Values
Attribution
Defamation
Editorial independence
Journalism school





Areas



Arts
Business
Data-driven
Entertainment
Environment
Fashion
Global
Medicine
Politics
Science
Sports
Technical
Trade
Traffic
Video games
Weather
World





Genres



Advocacy
Analytic
Blogging
Broadcast
Churnalism
Citizen
Civic
Collaborative
Community
Data
Database
Embedded
Gonzo
Investigative
Literary
Muckraking
Narrative
New Journalism
Non-profit journalism
Online
Opinion
Peace
Photojournalism
Presstitute
Scientific
Visual
Watchdog





Social impact



Fake news
Fourth Estate
Freedom of the press
Infotainment
Media bias
Public relations
Yellow journalism





News media



Newspapers
Magazines
TV and radio
Internet
News agencies
Alternative media






List of journalism articles










v
t
e


Sexual revolution



Main topics



Free love
Summer of Love





Milestones



Abortion law
Divorce law by country
Freedom of speech
Freedom of the press
Golden Age of Porn
"Porno chic"
Pornography
Pornography in the United States
Swinging
The Pill (1965)
United States v. One Book Called Ulysses





Slogans



"Make love, not war"
"The personal is political"





Events



Kinsey Reports
Masters and Johnson Institute
Playboy
Protests of 1968
Stonewall riots





People



Gerard Damiano
Hugh Hefner
Virginia Johnson
Alfred Kinsey
William Masters
Wilhelm Reich





Related topics



Counterculture of the 1960s
Feminist views of pornography
Hippie
LGBT
LGBT culture in New York City
Lust
Peace movement








Freedom of speech portal





Authority control



LCCN: sh85051711
GND: 4047160-3
NDL: 00563328











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_the_press&oldid=817612060"					Categories: JournalismFreedom of the pressHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksArticles to be expanded from April 2017All articles to be expandedArticles with empty sections from April 2017All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxesWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers