"Masonic" and "Freemason" redirect here. For the ghost town, see Masonic, California. For other uses, see Freemason (disambiguation).
"Freemasons" redirects here. For the house music producers, see Freemasons (band).




The Masonic Square and Compasses.
(Found with or without the letter G)




Part of a series on


Freemasonry







Overview


Grand Lodge
Masonic lodge
Masonic lodge officers
Grand Master
Prince Hall Freemasonry
Regular Masonic jurisdiction
Continental Freemasonry








History


History of Freemasonry
Liberté chérie
Masonic manuscripts








Masonic bodies


Masonic


Masonic bodies
York Rite
Order of Mark Master Masons
Holy Royal Arch
Royal Arch Masonry
Cryptic Masonry
Knights Templar
Red Cross of Constantine
Scottish Rite
Knight Kadosh
Societas Rosicruciana
Order of Royal and Select Masters
Grand College of Rites
Swedish Rite
Order of Saint Thomas of Acon
Royal Order of Scotland
Order of Knight Masons
Research Lodge
Corks


Side degrees


The Shrine
Royal Order of Jesters
Tall Cedars of Lebanon
The Grotto


Masonic groups for women


Women and Freemasonry
Order of the Amaranth
Order of the Eastern Star
Co-Freemasonry


Masonic youth organizations


DeMolay
A.J.E.F.
Job's Daughters
International Order of the Rainbow for Girls








Views of Masonry


Anti-Masonry
Anti-Masonic Party
Grand Anti-Masonic Exhibition
Masonic conspiracy theories
Opposition to Freemasonry within Christianity
Papal ban of Freemasonry
Suppression of Freemasonry
Taxil hoax








People and places


Masonic Temple
James Anderson
Prince Hall
William Preston
Thomas Smith Webb
Albert Mackey
Albert Pike
John the Evangelist
John the Baptist
William Schaw
Elizabeth Aldworth
List of Freemasons
Lodge Mother Kilwinning
Freemasons' Hall, London
Mark Masons' Hall, London
House of the Temple
Solomon's Temple
Detroit Masonic Temple
List of Masonic buildings








Related


Masonic ritual and symbolism
Great Architect of the Universe
Square and Compasses
Pigpen cipher
Eye of Providence
Hiram Abiff
Sprig of Acacia
Masonic Landmarks
Pike's Morals and Dogma
Propaganda Due
Dermott's Ahiman Rezon
Volume of Sacred Law








By country


Barbados
Belgium
Canada
Croatia
Denmark
France
Finland
Germany
Indonesia
Italy
Lebanon
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Scotland
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Philippines
Turkey
Ukraine
Venezuela









v
t
e





Freemasonry or Masonry consists of fraternal organisations that trace their origins to the local fraternities of stonemasons, which from the end of the fourteenth century regulated the qualifications of stonemasons and their interaction with authorities and clients. The degrees of freemasonry retain the three grades of medieval craft guilds, those of Apprentice, Journeyman or fellow (now called Fellowcraft), and Master Mason. These are the degrees offered by Craft (or Blue Lodge) Freemasonry. Members of these organisations are known as Freemasons or Masons. There are additional degrees, which vary with locality and jurisdiction, and are usually administered by different bodies than the craft degrees.
The basic, local organisational unit of Freemasonry is the Lodge. The Lodges are usually supervised and governed at the regional level (usually coterminous with either a state, province, or national border) by a Grand Lodge or Grand Orient. There is no international, worldwide Grand Lodge that supervises all of Freemasonry; each Grand Lodge is independent, and they do not necessarily recognise each other as being legitimate.
Modern Freemasonry broadly consists of two main recognition groups. Regular Freemasonry insists that a volume of scripture is open in a working lodge, that every member profess belief in a Supreme Being, that no women are admitted, and that the discussion of religion and politics is banned. Continental Freemasonry is now the general term for the "liberal" jurisdictions who have removed some, or all, of these restrictions.



Contents


1 Masonic Lodge

1.1 Joining a lodge


2 Organisation

2.1 Grand Lodges
2.2 Recognition, amity and regularity

2.2.1 Exclusive Jurisdiction
2.2.2 Regularity




3 Other degrees, orders and bodies
4 Ritual and symbolism
5 History

5.1 Origins
5.2 North America

5.2.1 Prince Hall Freemasonry


5.3 Emergence of Continental Freemasonry

5.3.1 Schism


5.4 Freemasonry and women


6 Anti-Masonry

6.1 Religious opposition

6.1.1 Christianity and Freemasonry
6.1.2 Islam and Freemasonry


6.2 Political opposition

6.2.1 The Holocaust




7 See also
8 References
9 External links



Masonic Lodge




Lodge in Palazzo Roffia, Florence, set out for French (Moderns) ritual


Main article: Masonic Lodge
The Masonic Lodge is the basic organisational unit of Freemasonry.[1] The Lodge meets regularly to conduct the usual formal business of any small organisation (pay bills, organise social and charitable events, elect new members, etc.). In addition to business, the meeting may perform a ceremony to confer a Masonic degree[2] or receive a lecture, which is usually on some aspect of Masonic history or ritual.[3] At the conclusion of the meeting, the Lodge might adjourn for a formal dinner, or festive board, sometimes involving toasting and song.[4]
The bulk of Masonic ritual consists of degree ceremonies. Candidates for Freemasonry are progressively initiated into Freemasonry, first in the degree of Entered Apprentice. Some time later, in a separate ceremony, they will be passed to the degree of Fellowcraft, and finally they will be raised to the degree of Master Mason. In all of these ceremonies, the candidate is entrusted with passwords, signs and grips (secret handshakes) peculiar to his new rank.[5] Another ceremony is the annual installation of the Master and officers of the Lodge.[2] In some jurisdictions Installed Master is valued as a separate rank, with its own secrets to distinguish its members.[6] In other jurisdictions, the grade is not recognised, and no inner ceremony conveys new secrets during the installation of a new Master of the Lodge.[7]
Most Lodges have some sort of social calendar, allowing Masons and their partners to meet in a less ritualised environment.[8] Often coupled with these events is the obligation placed on every Mason to contribute to charity. This occurs at both Lodge and Grand Lodge level. Masonic charities contribute to many fields, such as education or disaster relief.[9][10]
These private local Lodges form the backbone of Freemasonry, and a Freemason will necessarily have been initiated into one of these. There also exist specialist Lodges where Masons meet to celebrate events, such as sport or Masonic research. The rank of Master Mason also entitles a Freemason to explore Masonry further through other degrees, administered separately from the Craft, or "Blue Lodge" degrees described here, but having a similar format to their meetings.[11]
There is very little consistency in Freemasonry. Because each Masonic jurisdiction is independent, each sets its own procedures. The wording of the ritual, the number of officers present, the layout of the meeting room, etc. varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.[11][12]
The officers of the Lodge are elected or appointed annually. Every Masonic Lodge has a Master, two Wardens, a secretary and a treasurer. There is also a Tyler, or outer guard, who is always present outside the door of a working Lodge. Other offices vary between jurisdictions.[11]
Each Masonic Lodge exists and operates according to a set of ancient principles known as the Landmarks of Freemasonry. These principles have thus far eluded any universally accepted definition.[13]
Joining a lodge




Print from 1870 portraying George Washington as Master of his Lodge


Candidates for Freemasonry will have met most active members of the Lodge they are joining before they are initiated. The process varies between jurisdictions, but the candidate will typically have been introduced by a friend at a Lodge social function, or at some form of open evening in the Lodge. In modern times, interested people often track down a local Lodge through the Internet. The onus is on candidates to ask to join; while candidates may be encouraged to ask, they are never invited. Once the initial inquiry is made, an interview usually follows to determine the candidate's suitability. If the candidate decides to proceed from here, the Lodge ballots on the application before he (or she, depending on the Masonic Jurisdiction) can be accepted.[14]
The absolute minimum requirement of any body of Freemasons is that the candidate must be free, and considered to be of good character.[15] There is usually an age requirement, varying greatly between Grand Lodges, and (in some jurisdictions) capable of being overridden by a dispensation from the Grand Lodge. The underlying assumption is that the candidate should be a mature adult.[14]
Additionally, most Grand Lodges require the candidate to declare a belief in a Supreme Being. In a few cases, the candidate may be required to be of a specific religion. The form of Freemasonry most common in Scandinavia (known as the Swedish Rite), for example, accepts only Christians.[16] At the other end of the spectrum, "Liberal" or Continental Freemasonry, exemplified by the Grand Orient de France, does not require a declaration of belief in any deity, and accepts atheists (a cause of discord with the rest of Freemasonry).[17][18]
During the ceremony of initiation, the candidate is expected to swear (usually on a volume of sacred text appropriate to his personal religious faith) to fulfil certain obligations as a Mason. In the course of three degrees, new masons will promise to keep the secrets of their degree from lower degrees and outsiders, and to support a fellow Mason in distress (as far as practicality and the law permit).[11] There is instruction as to the duties of a Freemason, but on the whole, Freemasons are left to explore the craft in the manner they find most satisfying. Some will further explore the ritual and symbolism of the craft, others will focus their involvement on the social side of the Lodge, while still others will concentrate on the charitable functions of the lodge.[19][20]
Organisation
Grand Lodges




Freemasons Hall, London, home of the United Grand Lodge of England


Main article: Grand Lodge
Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are independent and sovereign bodies that govern Masonry in a given country, state, or geographical area (termed a jurisdiction). There is no single overarching governing body that presides over worldwide Freemasonry; connections between different jurisdictions depend solely on mutual recognition.[21][22]
Freemasonry, as it exists in various forms all over the world, has a membership estimated by the United Grand Lodge of England at around six million worldwide.[2] The fraternity is administratively organised into independent Grand Lodges (or sometimes Grand Orients), each of which governs its own Masonic jurisdiction, which consists of subordinate (or constituent) Lodges. The largest single jurisdiction, in terms of membership, is the United Grand Lodge of England (with a membership estimated at around a quarter million). The Grand Lodge of Scotland and Grand Lodge of Ireland (taken together) have approximately 150,000 members.[2] In the United States, total membership is just under two million.[23]
Recognition, amity and regularity
Relations between Grand Lodges are determined by the concept of Recognition. Each Grand Lodge maintains a list of other Grand Lodges that it recognises.[24] When two Grand Lodges recognise and are in Masonic communication with each other, they are said to be in amity, and the brethren of each may visit each other's Lodges and interact Masonically. When two Grand Lodges are not in amity, inter-visitation is not allowed. There are many reasons why one Grand Lodge will withhold or withdraw recognition from another, but the two most common are Exclusive Jurisdiction and Regularity.[25]
Exclusive Jurisdiction
Exclusive Jurisdiction is a concept whereby only one Grand Lodge will be recognised in any geographical area. If two Grand Lodges claim jurisdiction over the same area, the other Grand Lodges will have to choose between them, and they may not all decide to recognise the same one. (In 1849, for example, the Grand Lodge of New York split into two rival factions, each claiming to be the legitimate Grand Lodge. Other Grand Lodges had to choose between them until the schism was healed.[26]) Exclusive Jurisdiction can be waived when the two over-lapping Grand Lodges are themselves in Amity and agree to share jurisdiction (for example, since the Grand Lodge of Connecticut is in Amity with the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Connecticut, the principle of Exclusive Jurisdiction does not apply, and other Grand Lodges may recognise both).[27]
Regularity




Freemasons' Hall, London, c. 1809


Main article: Regular Masonic jurisdictions
Regularity is a concept based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, the basic membership requirements, tenets and rituals of the craft. Each Grand Lodge sets its own definition of what these landmarks are, and thus what is Regular and what is Irregular (and the definitions do not necessarily agree between Grand Lodges). Essentially, every Grand Lodge will hold that its landmarks (its requirements, tenets and rituals) are Regular, and judge other Grand Lodges based on those. If the differences are significant, one Grand Lodge may declare the other "Irregular" and withdraw or withhold recognition.[28][29]
The most commonly shared rules for Recognition (based on Regularity) are those given by the United Grand Lodge of England in 1929:

The Grand Lodge should be established by an existing regular Grand Lodge, or by at least three regular Lodges.
A belief in a supreme being and scripture is a condition of membership.
Initiates should take their vows on that scripture.
Only men can be admitted, and no relationship exists with mixed Lodges.
The Grand Lodge has complete control over the first three degrees, and is not subject to another body.
All Lodges shall display a volume of scripture with the square and compasses while in session.
There is no discussion of politics or religion.
"Antient landmarks, customs and usages" observed.[30]

Other degrees, orders and bodies
See also: Masonic bodies and List of Masonic Rites
Blue Lodge Freemasonry offers only three traditional degrees, and in most jurisdictions, the rank of past or installed master. Master Masons are also able to extend their Masonic experience by taking further degrees, in appendant bodies approved by their own Grand Lodge.[31]
The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a system of 33 degrees (including the three Blue Lodge degrees) administered by a local or national Supreme Council. This system is popular in North America and in Continental Europe. The York Rite, with a similar range, administers three orders of Masonry, namely the Royal Arch, Cryptic Masonry and Knights Templar.[32]
In Britain, separate bodies administer each order. Freemasons are encouraged to join the Holy Royal Arch, which is linked to Mark Masonry in Scotland and Ireland, but separate in England. Templar and Cryptic Masonry also exist.[33]
In the Nordic countries, the Swedish Rite is dominant; a variation of it is also used in parts of Germany.
Ritual and symbolism
Main article: Masonic ritual and symbolism
Freemasonry describes itself as a "'beautiful system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols".[34] The symbolism is mainly, but not exclusively, drawn from the manual tools of stonemasons – the square and compasses, the level and plumb rule, the trowel, among others. A moral lesson is attached to each of these tools, although the assignment is by no means consistent. The meaning of the symbolism is taught and explored through ritual.[11]
All Freemasons begin their journey in the "craft" by being progressively initiated, passed and raised into the three degrees of Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry. During these three rituals, the candidate is progressively taught the meanings of the Lodge symbols, and entrusted with grips, signs and words to signify to other Masons that he has been so initiated. The initiations are part allegory and part lecture, and revolve around the construction of the Temple of Solomon, and the artistry and death of his chief architect, Hiram Abiff. The degrees are those of Entered apprentice, Fellowcraft and Master Mason. While many different versions of these rituals exist, with at least two different lodge layouts and versions of the Hiram myth, each version is recognisable to any Freemason from any jurisdiction.[11]
In some jurisdictions, the main themes of each degree are illustrated by tracing boards. These painted depictions of Masonic themes are exhibited in the lodge according to which degree is being worked, and are explained to the candidate to illustrate the legend and symbolism of each degree.[35]
The idea of Masonic brotherhood probably descends from a 16th-century legal definition of a brother as one who has taken an oath of mutual support to another. Accordingly, Masons swear at each degree to keep the contents of that degree secret, and to support and protect their brethren unless they have broken the law.[36] In most Lodges the oath or obligation is taken on a Volume of Sacred Law, whichever book of divine revelation is appropriate to the religious beliefs of the individual brother (usually the Bible in the Anglo-American tradition). In Progressive continental Freemasonry, books other than scripture are permissible, a cause of rupture between Grand Lodges.[37]
History
Main article: History of Freemasonry
Origins




Goose and Gridiron, where the Grand Lodge of England was founded


Since the middle of the 19th century, Masonic historians have sought the origins of the movement in a series of similar documents known as the Old Charges, dating from the Regius Poem in about 1425[38] to the beginning of the 18th century. Alluding to the membership of a lodge of operative masons, they relate a mythologised history of the craft, the duties of its grades, and the manner in which oaths of fidelity are to be taken on joining.[39] The fifteenth century also sees the first evidence of ceremonial regalia.[40]
There is no clear mechanism by which these local trade organisations became today's Masonic Lodges, but the earliest rituals and passwords known, from operative lodges around the turn of the 17th–18th centuries, show continuity with the rituals developed in the later 18th century by accepted or speculative Masons, as those members who did not practice the physical craft came to be known.[41] The minutes of the Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary's Chapel) No. 1 in Scotland show a continuity from an operative lodge in 1598 to a modern speculative Lodge.[42] It is reputed to be the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world.[43]
Alternatively, Thomas De Quincey in his work titled; Rosicrucians and Freemasonry, put forward the theory which suggested that Freemasonry was possibly an outgrowth of Rosicrucianism. The theory had also been postulated in 1803 by German professor; J. G. Buhle.[44][45]




View of room at the Masonic Hall, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, England, early 20th century, set up for a Holy Royal Arch convocation


The first Grand Lodge, the Grand Lodge of London and Westminster (later called the Grand Lodge of England (GLE)), was founded on 24 June 1717, when four existing London Lodges met for a joint dinner. Many English Lodges joined the new regulatory body, which itself entered a period of self-publicity and expansion. However, many Lodges could not endorse changes which some Lodges of the GLE made to the ritual (they came to be known as the Moderns), and a few of these formed a rival Grand Lodge on 17 July 1751, which they called the "Antient Grand Lodge of England." These two Grand Lodges vied for supremacy until the Moderns promised to return to the ancient ritual. They united on 27 December 1813 to form the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE).[46][47]
The Grand Lodge of Ireland and the Grand Lodge of Scotland were formed in 1725 and 1736 respectively, although neither persuaded all of the existing lodges in their countries to join for many years.[48][49]
North America
The earliest known American lodges were in Pennsylvania. The Collector for the port of Pennsylvania, John Moore, wrote of attending lodges there in 1715, two years before the formation of the first Grand Lodge in London. The Premier Grand Lodge of England appointed a Provincial Grand Master for North America in 1731, based in Pennsylvania.[50] Other lodges in the colony obtained authorisations from the later Antient Grand Lodge of England, the Grand Lodge of Scotland, and the Grand Lodge of Ireland, which was particularly well represented in the travelling lodges of the British Army.[51][52] Many lodges came into existence with no warrant from any Grand Lodge, applying and paying for their authorisation only after they were confident of their own survival.[53]
After the American Revolution, independent U.S. Grand Lodges formed themselves within each state. Some thought was briefly given to organising an overarching "Grand Lodge of the United States," with George Washington (who was a member of a Virginian lodge) as the first Grand Master, but the idea was short-lived. The various state Grand Lodges did not wish to diminish their own authority by agreeing to such a body.[54]
Prince Hall Freemasonry
Main article: Prince Hall Freemasonry
Prince Hall Freemasonry exists because of the refusal of early American lodges to admit African-Americans. In 1775, an African-American named Prince Hall,[55] along with fourteen other African-Americans, was initiated into a British military lodge with a warrant from the Grand Lodge of Ireland, having failed to obtain admission from the other lodges in Boston. When the military Lodge left North America, those fifteen men were given the authority to meet as a Lodge, but not to initiate Masons. In 1784, these individuals obtained a Warrant from the Premier Grand Lodge of England (GLE) and formed African Lodge, Number 459. When the UGLE was formed in 1813, all U.S.-based Lodges were stricken from their rolls – due largely to the War of 1812. Thus, separated from both UGLE and any concordantly recognised U.S. Grand Lodge, African Lodge re-titled itself as the African Lodge, Number 1 – and became a de facto "Grand Lodge" (this Lodge is not to be confused with the various Grand Lodges on the Continent of Africa). As with the rest of U.S. Freemasonry, Prince Hall Freemasonry soon grew and organised on a Grand Lodge system for each state.[56]
Widespread segregation in 19th- and early 20th-century North America made it difficult for African-Americans to join Lodges outside of Prince Hall jurisdictions – and impossible for inter-jurisdiction recognition between the parallel U.S. Masonic authorities. By the 1980s, such discrimination was a thing of the past, and today most U.S. Grand Lodges recognise their Prince Hall counterparts, and the authorities of both traditions are working towards full recognition.[57] The United Grand Lodge of England has no problem with recognising Prince Hall Grand Lodges.[58] While celebrating their heritage as lodges of black Americans, Prince Hall is open to all men regardless of race or religion.[59]
Emergence of Continental Freemasonry




Masonic initiation, Paris, 1745


English Freemasonry spread to France in the 1720s, first as lodges of expatriates and exiled Jacobites, and then as distinctively French lodges which still follow the ritual of the Moderns. From France and England, Freemasonry spread to most of Continental Europe during the course of the 18th century. The Grande Loge de France formed under the Grand Mastership of the Duke of Clermont, who exercised only nominal authority. His successor, the Duke of Orléans, reconstituted the central body as the Grand Orient de France in 1773. Briefly eclipsed during the French Revolution, French Freemasonry continued to grow in the next century.[60]
Schism
The ritual form on which the Grand Orient of France was based was abolished in England in the events leading to the formation of the United Grand Lodge of England in 1813. However the two jurisdictions continued in amity (mutual recognition) until events of the 1860s and 1870s drove a seemingly permanent wedge between them. In 1868 the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of the State of Louisiana appeared in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana, recognised by the Grand Orient de France, but regarded by the older body as an invasion of their jurisdiction. The new Scottish rite body admitted blacks, and the resolution of the Grand Orient the following year that neither colour, race, nor religion could disqualify a man from Masonry prompted the Grand Lodge to withdraw recognition, and it persuaded other American Grand Lodges to do the same.[61]
A dispute during the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875 prompted the Grand Orient de France to commission a report by a Protestant pastor which concluded that, as Freemasonry was not a religion, it should not require a religious belief. The new constitutions read, "Its principles are absolute liberty of conscience and human solidarity", the existence of God and the immortality of the soul being struck out. It is possible that the immediate objections of the United Grand Lodge of England were at least partly motivated by the political tension between France and Britain at the time. The result was the withdrawal of recognition of the Grand Orient of France by the United Grand Lodge of England, a situation that continues today.[18]
Not all French lodges agreed with the new wording. In 1894, lodges favouring the compulsory recognition of the Great Architect of the Universe formed the Grande Loge de France.[62] In 1913, the United Grand Lodge of England recognised a new Grand Lodge of Regular Freemasons, a Grand Lodge that follows a similar rite to Anglo-American Freemasonry with a mandatory belief in a deity.[63]
There are now three strands of Freemasonry in France, which extend into the rest of Continental Europe:-

Liberal (also adogmatic or progressive) – Principles of liberty of conscience, and laicity, particularly the separation of the Church and State.[64]
Traditional – Old French ritual with a requirement for a belief in a supreme being.[65] (This strand is typified by the Grande Loge de France).
Regular – Standard Anglo-American ritual, mandatory belief in Supreme being.[66]

The term Continental Freemasonry was used in Mackey's 1873 Encyclopedia of Freemasonry to "designate the Lodges on the Continent of Europe which retain many usages which have either been abandoned by, or never were observed in, the Lodges of England, Ireland, and Scotland, as well as the United States of America".[67] Today, it is frequently used to refer to only the Liberal jurisdictions typified by the Grand Orient de France.[68]
The majority of Freemasonry considers the Liberal (Continental) strand to be Irregular, and thus withhold recognition. For the Continental lodges, however, having a different approach to Freemasonry was not a reason for severing masonic ties. In 1961, an umbrella organisation, Centre de Liaison et d'Information des Puissances maçonniques Signataires de l'Appel de Strasbourg (CLIPSAS) was set up, which today provides a forum for most of these Grand Lodges and Grand Orients worldwide. Included in the list of over 70 Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are representatives of all three of the above categories, including mixed and women's organisations. The United Grand Lodge of England does not communicate with any of these jurisdictions, and expects its allies to follow suit. This creates the distinction between Anglo-American and Continental Freemasonry.[69][70]
Freemasonry and women
Main articles: Freemasonry and women and Co-Freemasonry
The status of women in the old guilds and corporations of mediaeval masons remains uncertain. The principle of "femme sole" allowed a widow to continue the trade of her husband, but its application had wide local variations, such as full membership of a trade body or limited trade by deputation or approved members of that body.[71] In masonry, the small available evidence points to the less empowered end of the scale.[72]
At the dawn of the Grand Lodge era, during the 1720s, James Anderson composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons, the basis for most subsequent constitutions, which specifically excluded women from Freemasonry.[73] As Freemasonry spread, continental masons began to include their ladies in Lodges of Adoption, which worked three degrees with the same names as the men's but different content. The French officially abandoned the experiment in the early 19th century.[74][75] Later organisations with a similar aim emerged in the United States, but distinguished the names of the degrees from those of male masonry.[76]
Maria Deraismes was initiated into Freemasonry in 1882, then resigned to allow her lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge. Having failed to achieve acceptance from any masonic governing body, she and Georges Martin started a mixed masonic lodge that actually worked masonic ritual.[77] Annie Besant spread the phenomenon to the English speaking world.[78] Disagreements over ritual led to the formation of exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England, which spread to other countries. Meanwhile, the French had re-invented Adoption as an all-female lodge in 1901, only to cast it aside again in 1935. The lodges, however, continued to meet, which gave rise, in 1959, to a body of women practising continental Freemasonry.[75]
In general, Continental Freemasonry is sympathetic to Freemasonry amongst women, dating from the 1890s when French lodges assisted the emergent co-masonic movement by promoting enough of their members to the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite to allow them, in 1899, to form their own grand council, recognised by the other Continental Grand Councils of that Rite.[79] The United Grand Lodge of England issued a statement in 1999 recognising the two women's grand lodges there to be regular in all but the participants. While they were not, therefore, recognised as regular, they were part of Freemasonry "in general".[2][80] The attitude of most regular Anglo-American grand lodges remains that women Freemasons are not legitimate Masons.[81]
Anti-Masonry
Main article: Anti-Masonry




Masonic Temple of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, one of the few Masonic temples that survived the Franco dictatorship in Spain.


Anti-Masonry (alternatively called Anti-Freemasonry) has been defined as "opposition to Freemasonry",[82][83] but there is no homogeneous anti-Masonic movement. Anti-Masonry consists of widely differing criticisms from diverse (and often incompatible) groups who are hostile to Freemasonry in some form. Critics have included religious groups, political groups, and conspiracy theorists.
There have been many disclosures and exposés dating as far back as the 18th century. These often lack context,[84] may be outdated for various reasons,[85] or could be outright hoaxes on the part of the author, as in the case of the Taxil hoax.[86]
These hoaxes and exposés have often become the basis for criticism of Masonry, often religious or political in nature or are based on suspicion of corrupt conspiracy of some form. The political opposition that arose after the "Morgan Affair" in 1826 gave rise to the term Anti-Masonry, which is still in use today, both by Masons in referring to their critics and as a self-descriptor by the critics themselves.[87]
Religious opposition
Freemasonry has attracted criticism from theocratic states and organised religions for supposed competition with religion, or supposed heterodoxy within the fraternity itself, and has long been the target of conspiracy theories, which assert Freemasonry to be an occult and evil power.[88]
Christianity and Freemasonry
Main article: Opposition to Freemasonry within Christianity
Although members of various faiths cite objections, certain Christian denominations have had high-profile negative attitudes to Masonry, banning or discouraging their members from being Freemasons.
The denomination with the longest history of objection to Freemasonry is the Catholic Church. The objections raised by the Catholic Church are based on the allegation that Masonry teaches a naturalistic deistic religion which is in conflict with Church doctrine.[89] A number of Papal pronouncements have been issued against Freemasonry. The first was Pope Clement XII's In eminenti apostolatus, 28 April 1738; the most recent was Pope Leo XIII's Ab apostolici, 15 October 1890. The 1917 Code of Canon Law explicitly declared that joining Freemasonry entailed automatic excommunication, and banned books favouring Freemasonry.[90]
In 1983, the Church issued a new code of canon law. Unlike its predecessor, the 1983 Code of Canon Law did not explicitly name Masonic orders among the secret societies it condemns. It states: "A person who joins an association which plots against the Church is to be punished with a just penalty; one who promotes or takes office in such an association is to be punished with an interdict." This named omission of Masonic orders caused both Catholics and Freemasons to believe that the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons may have been lifted, especially after the perceived liberalisation of Vatican II.[91] However, the matter was clarified when Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI), as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, issued a Declaration on Masonic Associations, which states: "... the Church's negative judgment in regard to Masonic association remains unchanged since their principles have always been considered irreconcilable with the doctrine of the Church and therefore membership in them remains forbidden. The faithful who enrol in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion."[92] For its part, Freemasonry has never objected to Catholics joining their fraternity. Those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE deny the Church's claims. The UGLE now states that "Freemasonry does not seek to replace a Mason's religion or provide a substitute for it."[2]
In contrast to Catholic allegations of rationalism and naturalism, Protestant objections are more likely to be based on allegations of mysticism, occultism, and even Satanism.[93] Masonic scholar Albert Pike is often quoted (in some cases misquoted) by Protestant anti-Masons as an authority for the position of Masonry on these issues.[94] However, Pike, although undoubtedly learned, was not a spokesman for Freemasonry and was also controversial among Freemasons in general. His writings represented his personal opinion only, and furthermore an opinion grounded in the attitudes and understandings of late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the USA. Notably, his book carries in the preface a form of disclaimer from his own Grand Lodge. No one voice has ever spoken for the whole of Freemasonry.[95]
Free Methodist Church founder B.T. Roberts was a vocal opponent of Freemasonry in the mid 19th century. Roberts opposed the society on moral grounds and stated, "The god of the lodge is not the God of the Bible." Roberts believed Freemasonry was a "mystery" or "alternate" religion and encouraged his church not to support ministers who were Freemasons. Freedom from secret societies is one of the "frees" upon which the Free Methodist Church was founded.[96]
Since the founding of Freemasonry, many Bishops of the Church of England have been Freemasons, such as Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher.[97] In the past, few members of the Church of England would have seen any incongruity in concurrently adhering to Anglican Christianity and practising Freemasonry. In recent decades, however, reservations about Freemasonry have increased within Anglicanism, perhaps due to the increasing prominence of the evangelical wing of the church. The former Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams, appeared to harbour some reservations about Masonic ritual, whilst being anxious to avoid causing offence to Freemasons inside and outside the Church of England. In 2003 he felt it necessary to apologise to British Freemasons after he said that their beliefs were incompatible with Christianity and that he had barred the appointment of Freemasons to senior posts in his diocese when he was Bishop of Monmouth.[98]
In 1933, the Orthodox Church of Greece officially declared that being a Freemason constitutes an act of apostasy and thus, until he repents, the person involved with Freemasonry cannot partake of the Eucharist. This has been generally affirmed throughout the whole Eastern Orthodox Church. The Orthodox critique of Freemasonry agrees with both the Catholic and Protestant versions: "Freemasonry cannot be at all compatible with Christianity as far as it is a secret organisation, acting and teaching in mystery and secret and deifying rationalism."[99]
Regular Freemasonry has traditionally not responded to these claims, beyond the often repeated statement that those Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE explicitly adhere to the principle that "Freemasonry is not a religion, nor a substitute for religion. There is no separate 'Masonic deity,' and there is no separate proper name for a deity in Freemasonry."[100]
Christian men, who were discouraged from joining the Freemasons by their Churches or who wanted a more religiocentric society, joined similar fraternal organisations, such as the Knights of Columbus for Catholic Christians, and the Loyal Orange Institution for Protestant Christians,[101][102] although these fraternal organisations have been "organized in part on the style of and use many symbols of Freemasonry".[101][102]
Islam and Freemasonry
Many Islamic anti-Masonic arguments are closely tied to both antisemitism and Anti-Zionism, though other criticisms are made such as linking Freemasonry to Al-Masih ad-Dajjal (the false Messiah).[103][104] Some Muslim anti-Masons argue that Freemasonry promotes the interests of the Jews around the world and that one of its aims is to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque in order to rebuild the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem.[105] In article 28 of its Covenant, Hamas states that Freemasonry, Rotary, and other similar groups "work in the interest of Zionism and according to its instructions ..."[106]
Many countries with a majority Muslim population do not allow Masonic establishments within their borders. However, countries such as Turkey and Morocco have established Grand Lodges,[107] while in countries such as Malaysia[108][109] and Lebanon[110] there are District Grand Lodges operating under a warrant from an established Grand Lodge.
In Pakistan in 1972, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, placed a ban on Freemasonry. Lodge buildings were confiscated by the government.[111]
Masonic lodges existed in Iraq as early as 1917, when the first lodge under the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE) was opened. Nine lodges under UGLE existed by the 1950s, and a Scottish lodge was formed in 1923. However, the position changed following the revolution, and all lodges were forced to close in 1965.[112] This position was later reinforced under Saddam Hussein; the death penalty was "prescribed" for those who "promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations."[103]
Political opposition
See also: Anti-Masonry and Suppression of Freemasonry
In 1799, English Freemasonry almost came to a halt due to Parliamentary proclamation. In the wake of the French Revolution, the Unlawful Societies Act banned any meetings of groups that required their members to take an oath or obligation.[113]
The Grand Masters of both the Moderns and the Antients Grand Lodges called on Prime Minister William Pitt (who was not a Freemason) and explained to him that Freemasonry was a supporter of the law and lawfully constituted authority and was much involved in charitable work. As a result, Freemasonry was specifically exempted from the terms of the Act, provided that each private lodge's Secretary placed with the local "Clerk of the Peace" a list of the members of his lodge once a year. This continued until 1967 when the obligation of the provision was rescinded by Parliament.[113]
Freemasonry in the United States faced political pressure following the 1826 kidnapping of William Morgan by Freemasons and subsequent disappearance. Reports of the "Morgan Affair", together with opposition to Jacksonian democracy (Andrew Jackson was a prominent Mason) helped fuel an Anti-Masonic movement, culminating in the formation of a short lived Anti-Masonic Party which fielded candidates for the Presidential elections of 1828 and 1832.[114]




Lodge in Erlangen, Germany. First meeting after World War II with guests from USA, France and Czechoslovakia, 1948.


In Italy, Freemasonry has become linked to a scandal concerning the Propaganda Due lodge (a.k.a. P2). This lodge was chartered by the Grande Oriente d'Italia in 1877, as a lodge for visiting Masons unable to attend their own lodges. Under Licio Gelli's leadership, in the late 1970s, P2 became involved in the financial scandals that nearly bankrupted the Vatican Bank. However, by this time the lodge was operating independently and irregularly, as the Grand Orient had revoked its charter and expelled Gelli in 1976.[115]
Conspiracy theorists have long associated Freemasonry with the New World Order and the Illuminati, and state that Freemasonry as an organisation is either bent on world domination or already secretly in control of world politics. Historically, Freemasonry has attracted criticism—and suppression—from both the politically far right (e.g., Nazi Germany)[116][117] and the far left (e.g. the former Communist states in Eastern Europe).[118]
Even in modern democracies, Freemasonry is sometimes viewed with distrust.[119] In the UK, Masons working in the justice system, such as judges and police officers, were from 1999 to 2009 required to disclose their membership.[120] While a parliamentary inquiry found that there has been no evidence of wrongdoing, it was felt that any potential loyalties Masons might have, based on their vows to support fellow Masons, should be transparent to the public.[119][120][121] The policy of requiring a declaration of masonic membership of applicants for judicial office (judges and magistrates) was ended in 2009 by Justice Secretary Jack Straw (who had initiated the requirement in the 1990s). Straw stated that the rule was considered disproportionate, since no impropriety or malpractice had been shown as a result of judges being Freemasons.[122]
Freemasonry is both successful and controversial in France; membership is rising, but reporting in the popular media is often negative.[119]
In some countries anti-Masonry is often related to antisemitism and anti-Zionism. For example, in 1980 the Iraqi legal and penal code was changed by Saddam Hussein's ruling Ba'ath Party, making it a felony to "promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including Freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations".[103] Professor Andrew Prescott of the University of Sheffield writes: "Since at least the time of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, antisemitism has gone hand in hand with anti-masonry, so it is not surprising that allegations that 11 September was a Zionist plot have been accompanied by suggestions that the attacks were inspired by a masonic world order".[123]
The Holocaust
Main article: Holocaust victims § Freemasons
See also: Liberté chérie (Freemasonry) and Suppression of Freemasonry




Forget-me-not


The preserved records of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt (the Reich Security Main Office) show the persecution of Freemasons during the Holocaust.[124] RSHA Amt VII (Written Records) was overseen by Professor Franz Six and was responsible for "ideological" tasks, by which was meant the creation of antisemitic and anti-Masonic propaganda. While the number is not accurately known, it is estimated that between 80,000 and 200,000 Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime.[125] Masonic concentration camp inmates were graded as political prisoners and wore an inverted red triangle.[126] Hitler believed Freemasons had succumbed to the Jews conspiring against Germany.[127][128]
The small blue forget-me-not flower was first used by the Grand Lodge Zur Sonne, in 1926, as a Masonic emblem at the annual convention in Bremen, Germany. In 1938 a forget-me-not badge—made by the same factory as the Masonic badge—was chosen for the annual Nazi Party Winterhilfswerk, the annual charity drive of the National Socialist People's Welfare, the welfare branch of the Nazi party. This coincidence enabled Freemasons to wear the forget-me-not badge as a secret sign of membership.[129][130][131]
After World War II, the forget-me-not flower was again used as a Masonic emblem at the first Annual Convention of the United Grand Lodges of Germany in 1948.[132] The badge is now worn in the coat lapel by Freemasons around the world to remember all who suffered in the name of Freemasonry, especially those during the Nazi era.[132]
See also


Freemasonry portal



List of Freemasons


References


^ "What is Freemasonry". www.chevalierramsay.be. Retrieved 2017-06-14. 
^ a b c d e f "Frequently Asked Questions" United Grand Lodge of England retrieved 30 October 2013
^ "Materials: Papers and Speakers" Provincial Grand Lodge of East Lancashire, retrieved 30 October 2013
^ "Gentlemen, please be upstanding" Toasts for the festive board, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon retrieved 30 October 2013
^ "Words, Grips and Signs" H. L. Haywood, Symbolical Masonry, 1923, Chapter XVIII, Sacred Texts website, retrieved 9 January 2014
^ "Past Master" Masonic Dictionary, retrieved 31 October 2013
^ "Maçon célèbre : le Maître Installé" GADLU blog Maçonnique, 3 March 2013, retrieved 2 November 2013
^ For instance "Introduction into Freemasonry", Provincial Grand Lodge of Hertfordshire, retrieved 8 November 2013
^ "Charitable work", UGLE, retrieved 8 November 2013
^ (editors) John Hamill and Robert Gilbert, Freemasonry, Angus, 2004, pp 214–220
^ a b c d e f Michael Johnstone, The Freemasons, Arcturus, 2005, pp 101–120
^ "Les Officiers de Loge" Maconnieke Encyclopedie, retrieved 31 October 2013
^ Alain Bernheim, "My Approach to Masonic History", Pietre Stones, from address of 2011, retrieved 8 November 2013
^ a b "How to become a Freemason", Masonic Lodge of Education, retrieved 20 November 2013
^ "Comment devenir franc-maçon?", Grande Loge de Luxembourg, retrieved 23 November 2013
^ "Swedish Rite FAQ", Grand Lodge of British Columbia & Yukon, Accessed 19 November 2013
^ "Faut-il croire en Dieu?", Foire aux Questions, Grand Orient de France, Retrieved 23 November 2013
^ a b Jack Buta, "The God Conspiracy, The Politics of Grand Lodge Foreign Relations", Pietre-Stones, retrieved 23 November 2013
^ "Social events and activities", Hampshire Province, retrieved 20 November 2013
^ "Who are Masons, and what do they do?", MasonicLodges.com, retrieved 20 November 2013
^ (editors) John Hamill and Robert Gilbert, Freemasonry, Angus, 2004, Glossary, p247
^ "Difficult Questions; Is Freemasonry a Global Conspiracy?" MasterMason.com, retrieved 18 November 2013
^ Hodapp, Christopher. Freemasons for Dummies. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2005. p. 52.
^ Campbell, Donald G.; Committee on Ritual. "The Master Mason; Irregular and Clandestine Lodges". Handbook for Candidate's Coaches (excerpt). Grand Lodge F.&A.M. of California. Retrieved 8 May 2007. 
^ Jim Bantolo, "On Recognition" Archived 14 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine., Masonic Short Talk, Pilar lodge, 2007, retrieved 25 November 2013
^ Ossian Lang, "History of Freemasonry in the State of New York" (pdf), 1922, pp135-140, Masonic Trowel eBooks
^ "Exclusive Jurisdiction", Paul M. Bessel, 1998, retrieved 25 November 2013
^ "Regularity in Freemasonry and its Meaning", Grand Lodge of Latvia, retrieved 25 November 2013
^ Tony Pope, "Regularity and Recognition", from Freemasonry Universal, by Kent Henderson & Tony Pope, 1998, Pietre Stones website, retrieved 25 November 2013
^ UGLE Book of Constitutions, "Basic Principles for Grand Lodge Recognition", any year since 1930, page numbers may vary.
^ Robert L.D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider 2006, p229
^ Michael Johnstone, The Freemasons, Arcturus, 2005, pp 95–98
^ J S M Ward, "The Higher Degrees Handbook", Pietre Stones, retrieved 11 November 2013
^ "What is Freemasonry?" Grand Lodge of Alberta retrieved 7 November 2013
^ Mark S. Dwor, "Some thoughts on the history of the Tracing Boards", Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon, 1999, retrieved 7 November 2013
^ Robert L.D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider 2006, p79
^ "Masonic U.S. Recognition of French Grand Lodges in the 20th century" Archived 10 April 2006 at the Wayback Machine., Paul M. Bessel. retrieved 8 November 2013
^ Andrew Prescott, "The Old Charges Revisited", from Transactions of the Lodge of Research No. 2429 (Leicester), 2006, Pietre-Stones Masonic Papers, retrieved 12 October 2013
^ A. F. A. Woodford, preface to William James Hughan, The Old Charges of British Freemasons, London, 1872
^ John Yarker (1909). The Arcane Schools. Manchester. pp. 341–342. 
^ Robert L.D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider 2006, Chapter 4, p 53
^ David Murray Lyon, History of the Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary's Chapel) No 1, Blackwood 1873, Preface
^ Stevenson, David (1988). The Origins of Freemasonry. Cambridge University Press. pp. 38–44. ISBN 0521396549. 
^ Dafoe, Stephen. "Rosicrucians and Freemasonry | Masonic Dictionary | www.masonicdictionary.com". www.masonicdictionary.com. Retrieved 2017-06-14. 
^ Hall, Manly P. (2010). The Secret Teachings of All Ages: An Encyclopedic Outline of Masonic, Hermetic, Qabbalistic and Rosicrucian Symbolical Philosophy. Courier Corporation. ISBN 9780486471433. 
^ S. Brent Morris (2006). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry. Alpha/Penguin Books. p. 27. ISBN 1-59257-490-4. 
^ I. R. Clarke, "The Formation of the Grand Lodge of the Antients" , Ars Quatuor Coronatorum, vol 79 (1966), p. 270-73, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon, retrieved 28 June 2012
^ H. L. Haywood, "Various Grand Lodges", The Builder, vol X no 5, May 1924, Pietre Stones website, retrieved 9 January 2014
^ Robert L.D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider 2006, Chapter 1, p 17
^ Francis Vicente, An Overview of Early Freemasonry in Pennsylvania, Pietre-Stones, retrieved 15 November 2013
^ Werner Hartmann, "History of St. John's Lodge No. 1", St. John's Lodge No. 1, A.Y.M., 2012, retrieved 16 November 2013
^ M. Baigent and R. Leigh, The Temple and the Lodge, Arrow 1998, Appendix 2, pp360-362, "Masonic Field Lodges in Regiments in America", 1775–77
^ Robert L.D. Cooper, Cracking the Freemason's Code, Rider 2006, p190
^ Bullock, Steven C.; Institute of Early American History and Culture (Williamsburg, Va.) (1996). Revolutionary brotherhood: Freemasonry and the transformation of the American social order, 1730–1840. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4750-3. OCLC 33334015. 
^ Johnson, Lawrence (1996). "Who is Prince Hall? And other well known Prince Hall Masons". Retrieved 14 November 2005. 
^ "Prince Hall History Education Class" by Raymond T. Coleman(pdf) Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. retrieved 13 October 2013
^ Bessel, Paul M. "Prince Hall Masonry Recognition details: Historical Maps". Retrieved 14 November 2005. 
^ "Foreign Grand Lodges", UGLE Website, retrieved 25 October 2013
^ "History of Prince Hall Masonry: What is Freemasonry" Archived 19 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Most Worshipful Prince Hall Grand Lodge Free and Accepted Masons Jurisdiction of Pennsylvania, retrieved 25 October 2013
^ Histoire de la Franc-maçonnerie, Grand Orient de France, retrieved 12 November 2013
^ Paul Bessel, "U.S. Recognition of French Grand Lodges in the 1900s" Archived 10 April 2006 at the Wayback Machine., from Heredom: The Transactions of the Scottish Rite Research Society, vol 5, 1996, pp 221–244, Paul Bessel website, retrieved 12 November 2013
^ Historique de la GLDF, Grande Loge de France, retrieved 14 November 2013
^ Alain Bernheim, "My approach to Masonic History", Manchester 2011, Pietre-Stones, retrieved 14 November 2013
^ "Liberal Grand Lodges", French Freemasonry, retrieved 14 November 2013
^ "Traditional Grand Lodges", French Freemasonry, retrieved 14 November 2013
^ "Regular Grand Lodges", French Freemasonry, retrieved 14 November 2013
^ "Continental Lodges",Mackey's Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, retrieved 30 November 2013
^ For instance "Women in Freemasonry, and Continental Freemasonry", Corn Wine and Oil, June 2009, retrieved 30 November 2013
^ Tony Pope, "At a Perpertual Distance: Liberal and Adogmatic Grand Lodges", Presented to Waikato Lodge of Research No 445 at Rotorua, New Zealand, on 9 November 2004, as the annual Verrall Lecture, and subsequently published in the Transactions of the lodge, vol 14 #1, March 2005, Pietre-Stones, retrieved 13 November 2013
^ "Current members" CLIPSAS, retrieved 14 November 2014
^ Antonia Frazer, The Weaker Vessel, Mandarin paperbacks, 1989, pp108-109
^ for example, see David Murray Lyon, History of the lodge of Edinburgh, Blackwood, Edinburgh, 1873, pp 121–123
^ Anderson, James (1734) [1723]. Paul Royster, ed. The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (Philadelphia ed.). Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Benjamin Franklin. p. 49. Retrieved 12 August 2013. The Persons admitted Members of a Lodge must be good and true Men, free-born, and of mature and discreet Age, no Bondmen, no Women, no immoral or scandalous Men, but of good Report. 
^ "Adoptive Freemasonry" Entry from Mackey's Lexicon of Freemasonry
^ a b Barbara L. Thames, "A History of Women's Masonry", Phoenix Masonry, retrieved 5 March 2013
^ "Order of the Eastern Star" Masonic Dictionary, retrieved 9 January 2013
^ "Maria Deraismes (1828–1894)", Droit Humain, retrieved 5 March 2013. (French Language)
^ Jeanne Heaslewood, "A Brief History of the Founding of Co-Freemasonry", 1999, Phoenix Masonry, retrieved 12 August 2013
^ "Histoire du Droit Humain", Droit Humain, retrieved 12 August 2013
^ "Text of UGLE statement", Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons, retrieved 12 August 2012
^ Karen Kidd, Haunted Chambers: the Lives of Early Women Freemasons, Cornerstone, 2009, pp204-205
^ "Anti-Masonry" – Oxford English Dictionary (Compact Edition), Oxford University Press, 1979, p.369
^ "Antimasonry – Definition of Antimasonry by Webster Dictionary". Webster-dictionary.net. Retrieved 8 September 2011. 
^ Morris, S. Brent (2006). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry. New York: Alpha Books. pp. 85 (also discussed in chapters 13 and 16). ISBN 978-1-59257-490-2. OCLC 68042376. 
^ Robinson, John J. (1993). A Pilgrim's Path. New York: M. Evans. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-87131-732-2. OCLC 27381296. 
^ de Hoyos, Arturo; S. Brent Morris (18 August 2002). "Leo Taxil Hoax — Bibliography". Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon. Retrieved 7 July 2007.  Lists many books which perpetuate Masonic ritual hoaxes.
^ "Anti-mason" infoplease.com retrieved 9 January 2014
^ Morris, S. Brent; The Complete Idiot's Guide to Freemasonry, Alpha books, 2006, p,204.
^ Cardinal Law, Bernard (19 April 1985). "Letter of 19 April 1985 to U.S. Bishops Concerning Masonry". CatholicCulture.org. Retrieved 9 July 2007. 
^ Canon 2335, 1917 Code of Canon Law from "Canon Law regarding Freemasonry, 1917–1983". Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon. 
^ McInvale, Reid (1991). "Roman Catholic Church Law Regarding Freemasonry". Transactions of Texas Lodge of Research. 27: 86–97. OCLC 47204246. 
^ Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith, DECLARATION ON MASONIC ASSOCIATIONS Archived 14 March 2001 at the Wayback Machine., 26 November 1983, retrieved 26 November 2015
^ Jack Chick. "The Curse of Baphomet". Retrieved 29 September 2007. 
^ Arturo de Hoyos and S. Brent Morris (2004). Is it True What They Say About Freemasonry, 2nd edition (revised), chapter 1. M. Evans & Company. 
^ Pike, Albert; T. W. Hugo; Scottish Rite (Masonic order). Supreme Council of the Thirty-Third Degree for the Southern Jurisdiction (1950) [1871]. Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry. Washington, DC: House of the Temple. OCLC 12870276. In preparing this work [Pike] has been about equally Author and Compiler. (p. iii.) ... The teachings of these Readings are not sacramental, so far as they go beyond the realm of Morality into those of other domains of Thought and Truth. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite uses the word "Dogma" in its true sense of doctrine, or teaching; and is not dogmatic in the odious sense of that term. Everyone is entirely free to reject and dissent from whatsoever herein may seem to him to be untrue or unsound (p. iv) 
^ Snyder, Howard (2006). Populist Saints. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. p. 727. 
^ Beresiner, Yasha (July 2006). "Archbishop Fisher – A Godly man and a Brother". Masonic Quarterly Magazine (18). Retrieved 7 May 2007. 
^ Hastings, Chris; Elizabeth Day (20 April 2003). "Rowan Williams apologises to Freemasons". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 November 2007. Retrieved 9 July 2007. 
^ "Freemasonry: Official Statement of the Church of Greece (1933)". Orthodoxinfo.com. 12 October 1933. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ "Freemasonry and Religion" (PDF). United Grand Lodge of England. Retrieved 2 November 2013. 
^ a b Jeffers, H. Paul (2005). Freemasons: A History and Exploration of the World's Oldest Secret Society. Citadel Press. p. 110. ISBN 9780806526621. Founded by Michael J. McGivney, a New Haven, Connecticut, parish priest, the Knights of Columbus paralleled the structure of Freemasonry with ritual, degrees, passwords, and the motto "Charity, Unity, Fraternity, and Patriotism." 
^ a b Fields, Rona M. (1 January 1980). Northern Ireland: Society Under Siege. Transaction Publishers. p. 113. ISBN 9781412845090. 
^ a b c Sands, David R (1 July 2004). "Saddam to be formally charged". The Washington Times. Retrieved 18 June 2006. 
^ Prescott, Andrew. The Study of Freemasonry as a New Academic Discipline. pp. 13–14. Retrieved 18 December 2008. 
^ "Can a Muslim be a Freemason" Wake up from your slumber, 2007, retrieved 8 January 2014
^ "Hamas Covenant 1988". Avalon.law.yale.edu. 18 August 1988. Retrieved 15 January 2011. 
^ Leyiktez, Celil. "Freemasonry in the Islamic World", Pietre-Stones Retrieved 2 October 2007.
^ "Home Page", District Grand Lodge of the Eastern Archipelago, retrieved 9 January 2014
^ "Mystery unveiled". The Star Online. 17 April 2005. Retrieved 13 February 2014. 
^ Freemasonry in Lebanon Lodges linked to the Grand Lodge of Scotland, retrieved 22 August 2013
^ Peerzada Salman, "Masonic Mystique", December 2009, Dawn.com (News site), retrieved 3 January 2012
^ Kent Henderson, "Freemasonry in Islamic Countries", 2007 paper, Pietre Stones, retrieved 4 January 2014
^ a b Andrew Prescott, "The Unlawful Societies Act", First published in M. D. J. Scanlan, ed., The Social Impact of Freemasonry on the Modern Western World, The Canonbury Papers I (London: Canonbury Masonic Research Centre, 2002), pp. 116–134, Pietre-Stones website, retrieved 9 January 2014
^ "The Morgan Affair", Reprinted from The Short Talk Bulletin – Vol. XI, March 1933 No. 3, Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon, retrieved 4 January 2014
^ King, Edward L. (2007). "P2 Lodge". Retrieved 31 October 2006. 
^ Wilkenson, James; H. Stuart Hughes (1995). Contemporary Europe: A History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. p. 237. ISBN 978-0-13-291840-4. OCLC 31009810. 
^ Zierer, Otto (1976). Concise History of Great Nations: History of Germany. New York: Leon Amiel Publisher. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-8148-0673-9. OCLC 3250405. 
^ Michael Johnstone, The Freemasons, Arcturus, 2005, pp 73–75
^ a b c Hodapp, Christopher. Freemasons for Dummies. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2005. p. 86.
^ a b Bright, Martin (12 June 2005). "MPs told to declare links to Masons", The Guardian
^ Cusick, James (27 December 1996). Police want judges and MPs to reveal Masonic links too, The Independent
^ Sparrow, Andrew (5 November 2009). "Jack Straw scraps rule saying judges must declare if they are masons". guardian.co.uk. Retrieved 7 November 2009. 
^ Prescott, pp. 13–14, 30, 33.
^ "World War II Documents showing the persecution of Freemasonry". Mill Valley Lodge #356. Archived from the original on 10 December 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2006. 
^ Freemasons for Dummies, by Christopher Hodapp, Wiley Publishing Inc., Indianapolis, 2005, p. 85, sec. Hitler and the Nazi
^ Katz. "Jews and Freemasons in Europe". In Israel Gutman. The Encyclopedia of the Holocaust. p. vol. 2, p. 531. ISBN 978-0-02-897166-7. OCLC 20594356. 
^ "Freemasonry". 
^ McKeown, Trevor W. "Hitler and Freemasonry". 
^ "Das Vergißmeinnicht-Abzeichen und die Freimaurerei, Die wahre Geschichte" (in German). Internetloge.de. Retrieved 8 July 2006. 
^ Bernheim, Alain (10 September 2004). "The Blue Forget-Me-Not: Another Side Of The Story". Pietre-Stones Review of Freemasonry. Retrieved 8 July 2006. 
^ Francke, Karl Heinz; Ernst-Günther Geppert (1974). Die Freimaurer-Logen Deutschlands und deren Grosslogen 1737–1972 (in German) (Second rev. ed.). Bayreuth: Quatuor Coronati. Also in: Francke, Karl Heinz; Ernst-Günther Geppert (1988). Die Freimaurer-Logen Deutschlands und deren Grosslogen 1737 – 1985 : Matrikel und Stammbuch; Nachschlagewerk über 248 Jahre Geschichte der Freimaurerei in Deutschland (in German). Bayreuth: Quatuor Coronati. ISBN 978-3-925749-05-6. OCLC 75446479. 
^ a b "The Story Behind Forget Me Not Emblem!". Masonic Network. 11 December 2009. 


External links

Find more aboutFreemasonryat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Learning resources from Wikiversity



 "Freemasonry". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. 
Web of Hiram at the University of Bradford. A database of donated Masonic material.
Masonic Books Online of the Pietre-Stones Review of Freemasonry
The Constitutions of the Free-Masons (1734), James Anderson, Benjamin Franklin, Paul Royster. Hosted by the Libraries at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
The Mysteries of Free Masonry, by William Morgan, from Project Gutenberg
A Legislative Investigation into Masonry (1832) on the Internet Archive, OCLC 1560509
The United Grand Lodge of England's Library and Museum of Freemasonry, London
A page about Freemasonry – claiming to be the world's oldest Masonic website.
Articles on Judaism and Freemasonry
Anti-Masonry: Points of View – Edward L. King's Masonic website







v
t
e


Freemasonry in Europe




List of Masonic Grand Lodges



Regular
Freemasonry,
including
Anglo-American



United Grand Lodge of England
Grand Lodge of Scotland
Grand Lodge of Ireland
United Grand Lodges of Germany
Grand Lodge of Austria
Regular Grand Lodge of Belgium
Grand Lodge of Cyprus
Danish Order of Freemasons
Grand Lodge of Spain
Grande Loge Nationale Française
Grand Lodge of Greece
Sovereign Grand Lodge of Malta
Symbolic Grand Lodge of Hungary
Regular Grand Lodge of Italy
Grand Lodge of Latvia
Grand Lodge of Luxembourg
Regular Grand Lodge of Macedonia
Norwegian Order of Freemasons
Grand Orient of the Netherlands
National Grand Lodge of Poland
Regular Grand Lodge of Portugal
National Grand Lodge in Romania
Grand Lodge of Russia
Swedish Order of Freemasons
Grande Loge Suisse Alpina
Grand Lodge of Turkey








Liberal
Freemasonry,
including
CLIPSAS



Le Droit Humain (several countries)
Grand Orient of Austria
Grand Orient of Belgium
Female Grand Lodge of Belgium
Grand Lodge of Belgium
Grand Lodge of Denmark of Ancient Free & Accepted Masons
Symbolic Grand Lodge of Spain
Grand Orient of Catalonia
Grand Orient de France
Mixed Grand Lodge of France
Serene Grand Orient of Greece
Mixed Grand Orient of Greece
International Masonic Order of Delphi
Grande Oriente Ibérico
Grand Lodge of Italy
Female Grand Lodge of Italy
Grand Orient of Luxembourg
Grand Lodge of Malta
Grand Lodge of Macedonia
Grand Orient of Poland
Grand Orient of Portugal
Female Grand Lodge of Romania
Grand Orient of Romania
Grand Orient of Switzerland
Liberal Grand Lodge of Turkey





Scottish Rite



Grand Lodge of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Austria
Confederate Grand Lodge of Spain
Grand Lodge of the Canarias
Grande Loge traditionnelle et symbolique Opéra
Grande Loge de France
Grand Lodge of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Greece
Grand Lodge of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Hungary
Grand Lodge of Hungary
Italian Grand Lodge of the Order of the Ancient Observance
United Grand Lodge of Russia
National Grand Lodge of Romania
National Grand Lodge of Serbia





Others

Grand Orient of Italy



Defunct

Grand Orient of Russia’s Peoples






 Freemasonry portal
 Book
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject












v
t
e


Freemasonry in the Americas




List of Masonic Grand Lodges



Regular
Freemasonry,
including
Anglo-American




CGMNA



Alberta
British Columbia & the Yukon
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Newfoundland and Labrador
Nova Scotia
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Québec
Saskatchewan
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Mexico
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming





CMI



Grand Lodge of Argentina
Grand Lodge of Bolivia
Grande Oriente do Brasil
Grand Lodge of Chile
Grand Lodge of Costa Rica
Grand Lodge of Ecuador
Gran Logia Cuscatlán
Grand Lodge of Guatemala
Grand Lodge of Honduras
Grand Symbolic Lodge of Nicaragua
Grand Lodge of Panama
Symbolic Grand Lodge of Paraguay
Grand Lodge of the Republic of Peru
Grand Lodge of Uruguay
Grand Lodge of Venezuela
Grand Lodge of Cuba
Grand Lodge of the Dominican Republic
Grand Orient of Haiti
Grand Lodge of the Valley of Mexico





CGLREU



Aguascalientes
Baja California
Southern Baja California
Campeche
Chiapas
Chihuahua
Coahuila
Colima
Durango
Mexico City
Guanajuato
Guerrero
Hidalgo
Jalisco
Michoacán
Morelos
Nayarit
Nuevo León
Oaxaca
Puebla
Querétaro
Quintana Roo
San Luis Potosí
Sinaloa
Sonora
Tabasco
Tamaulipas
Veracruz
Yucatán
Zacatecas





CMSB



Acre
Alagoas
Ampá
Amazonas
Bahia
Ceará
Distrito Federal
Espirito Santo
Goiás
Maranhão
Mato Grosso
Mato Grosso do Sul
Minas Gerais
Pará
Paraíba
Paraná
Pernambuco
Piauí
Rio de Janeiro
Rio Grande do Norte
Rio Grande do Sul
Rondônia
Roraima
Santa Catarina
São Paulo
Sergipe
Tocantins





CMC



Santander
Barranquilla
Bogotá
Occidental
Cartagena
Oriental





Others



Prince Hall Freemasonry











Liberal
Freemasonry,
including
CLIPSAS



Mixed Grand Lodge of Puerto Rico
George Washington Union
Grand Lodge of the Republic of Venezuela
Omega Grand Lodge of the State of New York
Grande Loge haïtienne de St. Jean des Orients d'Outre-Mer
Grande Loge d'Haïti de 1961
Gran Oriente Latino Americano
Mixed Grand Lodge of Chile
Female Grand Lodge of Chile
Grande Loge des Caraïbes
National Grand Lodge of Canada
Grand Orient of Mexico
Grande Oriente Nacional Gloria do Occidente do Brasil
Gran Logia del Norte de Colombia
Grande Loja Maçonica Mixta do Brasil
Grande Loja Unida de Pernambuco
Central Grand Lodge of Colombia
Grande Oriente Masónico Chileno
Gran Logia Femenina de Argentina
Grande Loja Feminina da Maçonaria Brasileira
Grande Loja Arquitetos de Aquário
Grand Lodge Bet-El
Benjamin Herrera
Gran Oriente de la Francmasonaria Mixta Universal
Constitutional Grand Lodge of Peru
Federal Grand Orient of the Republic of Argentina
Grand Orient of El Salvador
Federación Colombiana de Logias Masónicas
Grande Loja Feminina do Brasil
Gran Logia Oriental del Perú
Sovereign Grand Lodge of Venezuela
Grand Lodge ANI of Canada





Scottish Rite



Southern Jurisdiction of the United States
Northern Jurisdiction of the United States








 Freemasonry portal
 Book
 Media
 Category
 Templates
 WikiProject









Authority control



LCCN: sh85051718
GND: 4018348-8











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freemasonry&oldid=812960890"					Categories: FreemasonryHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksCS1 German-language sources (de)Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesGood articlesUse British English from March 2016Use dmy dates from November 2016Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource referenceArticles with Internet Archive linksWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers