

French colonial empire


Empire colonial français


Colonial empire






1534–1980[1][2]











Top: Royal Standard of France (before French Revolution)
Bottom: Flag of the French Empire







All territories that were ever part of the French colonial empire
  France
  First colonial empire (after 1534)
  Second colonial empire (after 1830)



Capital
Paris


Political structure
Colonial empire


History



 • 
Cartier claimed Gaspé Bay
1534


 • 
Sale of Louisiana
1803


 • 
Conquest of Algeria
1830–1852


 • 
French Union
1946


 • 
French Community
1958


 • 
Independence of Vanuatu
1980[1][2]


Area


 • 
1670 (first colonial empire peak)[3]
3,400,000 km2 (1,300,000 sq mi)


 • 
1920 (second colonial empire peak)[4]
11,500,000 km2 (4,400,000 sq mi)


Currency
Franc and various other currencies








Succeeded by






Overseas France









Warning: Value not specified for "continent"


The French colonial empire constituted the overseas colonies, protectorates and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward. A distinction is generally made between the "first colonial empire", that existed until 1814, by which time most of it had been lost, and the "second colonial empire", which began with the conquest of Algiers in 1830. The second empire came to an end after the loss of bitter wars in Vietnam (1954) and Algeria (1962), and relatively peaceful decolonizations elsewhere after 1960.
Competing with Spain, Portugal, the Dutch United Provinces and later England, France began to establish colonies in North America, the Caribbean and India in the 17th century. A series of wars with Great Britain and other European major powers during the 18th century and early 19th century resulted in France losing nearly all of its conquests. France rebuilt a new empire mostly after 1850, concentrating chiefly in Africa as well as Indochina and the South Pacific. Republicans, at first hostile to empire, only became supportive when Germany started to build her own colonial empire. As it developed, the new empire took on roles of trade with France, especially supplying raw materials and purchasing manufactured items as well as lending prestige to the motherland and spreading French civilization and language and the Catholic religion. It also provided manpower in the World Wars.[5]
It became a moral mission to lift the world up to French standards by bringing Christianity and French culture.[citation needed] In 1884, the leading proponent of colonialism, Jules Ferry, declared; "The higher races have a right over the lower races, they have a duty to civilize the inferior races." Full citizenship rights – assimilation – were offered, although in reality "assimilation was always receding [and] the colonial populations treated like subjects not citizens."[6] France sent small numbers of settlers to its empire, contrary to Great Britain and previously Spain and Portugal, with the only notable exception of Algeria, where the French settlers nonetheless always remained a small minority.
At its apex, it was one of the largest empires in history. Including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached 11,500,000 km2 (4,400,000 sq mi) in 1920, with a population of 110 million people in 1939. In World War II, Charles de Gaulle and the Free French used the overseas colonies as bases from which they fought to liberate France. Historian Tony Chafer argues: "In an effort to restore its world-power status after the humiliation of defeat and occupation, France was eager to maintain its overseas empire at the end of the Second World War."[7] However, after 1945 anti-colonial movements began to challenge European authority. The French constitution of October 27, 1946 (Fourth Republic), established the French Union which endured until 1958. Newer remnants of the colonial empire were integrated into France as overseas departments and territories within the French Republic. These now total altogether 119,394 km² (46,098 sq. miles), which amounts to only 1% of the pre-1939 French colonial empire's area, with 2.7 million people living in them in 2013. By the 1970s, says Robert Aldrich, the last "vestiges of empire held little interest for the French." He argues, "Except for the traumatic decolonization of Algeria, however, what is remarkable is how few long-lasting effects on France the giving up of empire entailed."[8]



Contents


1 First French colonial empire

1.1 The Americas
1.2 Africa and Asia
1.3 Colonial conflict with Britain


2 Second French colonial empire (after 1830)

2.1 Napoleon III: 1852–70
2.2 New Caledonia becomes a French possession (1853–54)
2.3 Colonization of Senegal (1854–65)
2.4 Intervention in China (1858–60)
2.5 France in Korea and Japan (1866–68)
2.6 France in Indochina and the Pacific (1858–70)
2.7 Intervention in Syria and Lebanon (1860–61)
2.8 Algeria
2.9 French Intervention in Mexico (1862–67)
2.10 French–British relations
2.11 French–U.S. relations


3 After 1870

3.1 Asia
3.2 Africa
3.3 Pacific islands
3.4 Civilising mission
3.5 World War II


4 Decolonization

4.1 Repression


5 Demographics

5.1 French settlers


6 See also
7 Notes and references
8 Further reading

8.1 Policies and colonies
8.2 Decolonization
8.3 Images and impact on France
8.4 Historiography and memoir


9 External links



First French colonial empire[edit]
The Americas[edit]




Map of the first (green) and second (blue) French colonial empires


See also: New France




The French colonial empire in the Americas comprised New France (including Canada and Louisiana), French West Indies (including Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Dominica, St. Lucia, Grenada, Tobago and other islands) and French Guyana.






French Northern America was known as 'Nouvelle France' or New France


During the 16th century, the French colonization of the Americas began. Excursions of Giovanni da Verrazzano and Jacques Cartier in the early 16th century, as well as the frequent voyages of French boats and fishermen to the Grand Banks off Newfoundland throughout that century, were the precursors to the story of France's colonial expansion.[9] But Spain's jealous protection of its foreign monopoly, and the further distractions caused in France itself in the later 16th century by the French Wars of Religion, prevented any constant efforts by France to settle colonies. Early French attempts to found colonies in Brazil, in 1555 at Rio de Janeiro ("France Antarctique") and in Florida (including Fort Caroline in 1562), and in 1612 at São Luís ("France Équinoxiale"), were not successful, due to a lack of official interest and to Portuguese and Spanish vigilance.[10]
The story of France's colonial empire truly began on 27 July 1605, with the foundation of Port Royal in the colony of Acadia in North America, in what is now Nova Scotia, Canada. A few years later, in 1608, Samuel De Champlain founded Quebec, which was to become the capital of the enormous, but sparsely settled, fur-trading colony of New France (also called Canada).[11]
New France had a rather small population, which resulted from more emphasis being placed on the fur trade rather than agricultural settlements. Due to this emphasis, the French relied heavily on creating friendly contacts with the local First Nations community. Without the appetite of New England for land, and by relying solely on Aboriginals to supply them with fur at the trading posts, the French composed a complex series of military, commercial, and diplomatic connections. These became the most enduring alliances between the French and the First Nation community. The French were, however, under pressure from religious orders to convert them to Catholicism.[12]
Through alliances with various Native American tribes, the French were able to exert a loose control over much of the North American continent. Areas of French settlement were generally limited to the St. Lawrence River Valley. Prior to the establishment of the 1663 Sovereign Council, the territories of New France were developed as mercantile colonies. It is only after the arrival of intendant Jean Talon in 1665 that France gave its American colonies the proper means to develop population colonies comparable to that of the British. Acadia itself was lost to the British in the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. Back in France there was relatively little interest in colonialism, which concentrated rather on dominance within Europe, and for most of its history, New France was far behind the British North American colonies in both population and economic development.[13][14]
In 1699, French territorial claims in North America expanded still further, with the foundation of Louisiana in the basin of the Mississippi River. The extensive trading network throughout the region connected to Canada through the Great Lakes, was maintained through a vast system of fortifications, many of them centred in the Illinois Country and in present-day Arkansas.[15]




1767 Louis XV Colonies Françoises (West Indies) 12 Diniers copper Sous (w/1793 "RF" counterstamp)


As the French empire in North America grew, the French also began to build a smaller but more profitable empire in the West Indies. Settlement along the South American coast in what is today French Guiana began in 1624, and a colony was founded on Saint Kitts in 1625 (the island had to be shared with the English until the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, when it was ceded outright). The Compagnie des Îles de l'Amérique founded colonies in Guadeloupe and Martinique in 1635, and a colony was later founded on Saint Lucia by (1650). The food-producing plantations of these colonies were built and sustained through slavery, with the supply of slaves dependent on the African slave trade. Local resistance by the indigenous peoples resulted in the Carib Expulsion of 1660.[16] France's most important Caribbean colonial possession was established in 1664, when the colony of Saint-Domingue (today's Haiti) was founded on the western half of the Spanish island of Hispaniola. In the 18th century, Saint-Domingue grew to be the richest sugar colony in the Caribbean. The eastern half of Hispaniola (today's Dominican Republic) also came under French rule for a short period, after being given to France by Spain in 1695.[17]
Africa and Asia[edit]
See also: Category:French colonisation in Africa.
See also: Françafrique




Arrival of Marshal Randon in Algiers in 1857


French colonial expansion was not limited to the New World. In Senegal in West Africa, the French began to establish trading posts along the coast in 1624. In 1664, the French East India Company was established to compete for trade in the east. With the decay of the Ottoman Empire, in 1830 the French seized Algiers, thus beginning the colonization of French North Africa.
During the First World War, after France had suffered heavy casualties on the Western Front, they began to recruit soldiers from their African empire. By 1917, France had recruited 270,000 African soldiers.[18] Their most decorated regiments came from Morocco, but due to the ongoing Zaian War they were only able to recruit 23,000 Moroccans. African soldiers had success in the Battle of Verdun and failure in the Nivelle Offensive, but in general regardless of their usefulness, French generals did not think highly of their African troops.[18]
After the First World War, France's African war aims were not being decided by her cabinet or the official mind of the colonial ministry, but rather the leaders of the colonial movement in French Africa. The first occasion of this was in 1915–1916, when Francois Georges-Picot (both a diplomat and part of a colonial dynasty) met with the British to discuss the division of Cameroon.[18] Picot proceeded with negotiations with neither the oversight of the French president nor the cabinet. What resulted was Britain giving nine tenths of Cameroon to the French. Picot emphasized the demands of the French colonists over the French cabinet. This policy of French colonial leaders determining France's African war aims can be seen throughout much of France's empire.[19]
Colonies were established in India in Chandernagore (1673) and Pondichéry in the south east (1674), and later at Yanam (1723), Mahe (1725), and Karikal (1739) (see French India). Colonies were also founded in the Indian Ocean, on the Île de Bourbon (Réunion, 1664), Isle de France (Mauritius, 1718), and the Seychelles (1756).
Colonial conflict with Britain[edit]
Further information: France in the Seven Years' War and France in the American Revolutionary War




Carte de L'Indoustan. Bellin, 1770


In the middle of the 18th century, a series of colonial conflicts began between France and Britain, which ultimately resulted in the destruction of most of the first French colonial empire and the near complete expulsion of France from the Americas. These wars were the War of the Austrian Succession (1744–1748), the Seven Years' War (1756–1763), the American Revolution (1765–1783), the French Revolutionary Wars (1793–1802) and the Napoleonic Wars (1803–1815). It may even be seen further back in time to the first of the French and Indian Wars. This cyclic conflict is known as the Second Hundred Years' War.
Although the War of the Austrian Succession was indecisive – despite French successes in India under the French Governor-General Joseph François Dupleix and Europe under Marshal Saxe – the Seven Years' War, after early French successes in Menorca and North America, saw a French defeat, with the numerically superior British (over one million to about 50 thousand French settlers) conquering not only New France (excluding the small islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon), but also most of France's West Indian (Caribbean) colonies, and all of the French Indian outposts.
While the peace treaty saw France's Indian outposts, and the Caribbean islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe restored to France, the competition for influence in India had been won by the British, and North America was entirely lost – most of New France was taken by Britain (also referred to as British North America), except Louisiana, which France ceded to Spain as payment for Spain's late entrance into the war (and as compensation for Britain's annexation of Spanish Florida). Also ceded to the British were Grenada and Saint Lucia in the West Indies. Although the loss of Canada would cause much regret in future generations, it excited little unhappiness at the time; colonialism was widely regarded as both unimportant to France, and immoral.[20]
Some recovery of the French colonial empire was made during the French intervention in the American Revolution, with Saint Lucia being returned to France by the Treaty of Paris in 1783, but not nearly as much as had been hoped for at the time of French intervention. True disaster came to what remained of France's colonial empire in 1791 when Saint Domingue (the Western third of the Caribbean island of Hispaniola), France's richest and most important colony, was riven by a massive slave revolt, caused partly by the divisions among the island's elite, which had resulted from the French Revolution of 1789.
The slaves, led eventually by Toussaint L'Ouverture and then, following his capture by the French in 1801, by Jean-Jacques Dessalines, held their own against French, Spanish, and British opponents, and ultimately achieved independence as Empire of Haiti in 1804 (Haiti became the first black republic in the world, followed by Liberia in 1847).[21]
In the meanwhile, the newly resumed war with Britain by the French, resulted in the British capture of practically all remaining French colonies. These were restored at the Treaty of Amiens in 1802, but when war resumed in 1803, the British soon recaptured them. France's repurchase of Louisiana in 1800 came to nothing, as the success of the Haitian Revolution convinced Napoleon that holding Louisiana would not be worth the cost, leading to its sale to the United States in 1803. The French attempt to establish a colony in Egypt in 1798–1801 was not successful.

Second French colonial empire (after 1830)[edit]




Animated map showing the growth and decline of the first and second French colonial empires


At the close of the Napoleonic Wars, most of France's colonies were restored to it by Britain, notably Guadeloupe and Martinique in the West Indies, French Guiana on the coast of South America, various trading posts in Senegal, the Île Bourbon (Réunion) in the Indian Ocean, and France's tiny Indian possessions; however, Britain finally annexed Saint Lucia, Tobago, the Seychelles, and the Isle de France (now Mauritius).
In 1825 Charles X sent an expedition to Haïti, resulting in the Haiti indemnity controversy.[22]
The beginnings of the second French colonial empire were laid in 1830 with the French invasion of Algeria, which was conquered over the next 17 years.
Napoleon III: 1852–70[edit]




The last photograph of Napoleon III (1872)


Napoleon III doubled the area of the French overseas Empire; he established French rule in New Caledonia, and Cochinchina, established a protectorate in Cambodia (1863); and colonized parts of Africa. He joined Britain sending an army to China during Second Opium War and the Taiping Rebellion (1860), but French ventures to establish influence in Japan (1867) and Korea (1866) were less successful. His attempt to impose a European monarch, Maximilian I of Mexico on the Mexicans ended in a spectacular failure in 1867.
To carry out his new overseas projects, Napoleon III created a new Ministry of the Navy and the Colonies, and appointed an energetic minister, Prosper, Marquis of Chasseloup-Laubat, to head it. A key part of the enterprise was the modernization of the French Navy; he began the construction of fifteen powerful new battle cruisers powered by steam and driven by propellers; and a fleet of steam powered troop transports. The French Navy became the second most powerful in the world, after Britain's. He also created a new force of colonial troops, including elite units of naval infantry, Zouaves, the Chasseurs d'Afrique, and Algerian sharpshooters, and he expanded the Foreign Legion, which had been founded in 1831 and won fame in the Crimea, Italy and Mexico. By the end of Napoleon III's reign the French overseas territories had tripled in area; in 1870 they covered a million square kilometers, with more than five million inhabitants.[23]
New Caledonia becomes a French possession (1853–54)[edit]
On 24 September 1853, Admiral Febvrier Despointes took formal possession of New Caledonia and Port-de-France (Nouméa) was founded 25 June 1854. A few dozen free settlers settled on the west coast in the following years, but New Caledonia became a penal colony and, from the 1860s until the end of the transportations in 1897, about 22,000 criminals and political prisoners were sent to New Caledonia to be killed.[24]
Colonization of Senegal (1854–65)[edit]
Main article: French Senegal
At the beginning of Napoleon III's reign, the presence of France in Senegal was limited to a trading post on the island of Goree, a narrow strip on the coast, the town of Saint-Louis, and a handful of trading posts in the interior. The economy had largely been based on the slave trade, carried out by the rulers of the small kingdoms of the interior, until France abolished slavery in its colonies in 1848. In 1854, Napoleon III named an enterprising French officer, Louis Faidherbe, to govern and expand the colony, and to give it the beginning of a modern economy. Faidherbe built a series of forts along the Senegal River, formed alliances with leaders in the interior, and sent expeditions against those who resisted French rule. He built a new port at Dakar, established and protected telegraph lines and roads, followed these with a rail line between Dakar and Saint-Louis and another into the interior. He built schools, bridges, and systems to supply fresh water to the towns. He also introduced the large-scale cultivation of Bambara groundnuts and peanuts as a commercial crop. Reaching into the Niger valley, Senegal became the primary French base in West Africa and a model colony. Dakar became one of the most important cities of the French Empire and of Africa.[25]
Intervention in China (1858–60)[edit]
In 1857, after the murder of a French priest and the arrest by the Chinese police of the crew of a British merchant ship, Napoleon III joined together with Great Britain to form a military expedition to punish the Chinese government. The object of his policy was not to take territory, but to assure that the vast and lucrative Chinese market was open to French commerce, and not the exclusive trading partner of Britain. In January 1858 a combined British and French fleet bombarded and occupied Canton, and landed troops at the mouth of the Hai River in northern China. In June 1858 the Chinese government in Peking was forced to sign the Treaty of Tientsin with Britain, France, Russia and the United States. This treaty opened six additional Chinese ports to European merchant ships, allowed Christian missionary activity, and legalized the import of opium into China.




The Anglo-French forces pillage China's Summer Palace, October 1860.


The Chinese government was reluctant to observe the treaty, so Napoleon III and the British Prime Minister Lord Palmerston decided to take more forceful action, in what became known in history as the second phase of the Second Opium War. A joint French-British expeditionary force of 8,000 men was created under a French general, Charles Cousin-Montauban, who had commanded French forces in Algeria. At the beginning of 1860 the French-British fleet sailed from Europe, and in the spring of 1860 landed the army in China. The Anglo-French army force, led by Cousin-Montauban, captured Tientsin, and then marched on the capital. On 21 September 1860 it defeated the army of the Chinese emperor at the Battle of Palikao and seized the capital Beijing. At the orders of the British commander Lord Elgin, the British and French forces burned and pillaged the Old Summer Palace of the Chinese Emperor. On 25 October 1860, the Chinese Emperor was obliged to accept a second treaty of Tientsin, opening an additional eleven new ports to European trade, making westerners immune to prosecution by Chinese courts, and establishing western diplomatic missions in Beijing. Some of the art objects taken from the looted Summer Palace were carried to France, where the Empress used them to decorate a Chinese-themed salon at the Palace of Fontainebleau, where they can be seen today.[26]
France in Korea and Japan (1866–68)[edit]
Main article: French campaign against Korea (1866)
In 1866, French diplomats in China learned that French priests had been arrested and executed in Korea, a country which had had no diplomatic or commercial contact with Europe or America. Twelve Catholic priests at the time were living in Korea, with an estimated 23,000 Korean converts, belonging to churches founded by French missionaries in the 18th century. In January 1866, King Gojong and his father, the regent, ordered the execution of most of the French priests, and ten thousand converts. A squadron of French ships, carrying eight hundred naval infantry, attempted retaliation but made little headway.[27]
In Japan the Meiji Emperor, and his enemies, the Tokugawa Shogunate, both sought French military training and technology in their battle for power, known as the Boshin War. In 1867, a military mission to Japan played a key role in modernizing the troops of the Shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu, and even participated on his side against Imperial troops during the Boshin war. The European representative of the Shogunate, Shibata Takenaka, approached both Britain and France, asking assistance to build a modern shipyard and to train the Shogunate army in modern western warfare. The shipyard, which became the naval base of Yokosuka, was designed by the French engineer Leonce Verny. The British, who supported the imperial faction, declined to provide trainers, but Napoleon III agreed, and in 1867 dispatched a delegation of nineteen French military experts in the fields of infantry, cavalry and artillery to Japan. They trained an elite corps, called the Denshutai, to fight on the side of the Shogun.
On the other side, the Emperor purchased from the United States a French-built ironclad warship, renamed the Kotetsu (literally "ironclad"). It played an important role in the first modern naval battle fought in Japan. By 1868, the Imperial forces had won a decisive victory. French influence in the Japanese navy remained strong.[28]
France in Indochina and the Pacific (1858–70)[edit]
Napoleon III also acted to increase the French presence in Indochina. An important factor in his decision was the belief that France risked becoming a second-rate power by not expanding its influence in East Asia. Deeper down was the sense that France owed the world a civilizing mission.[29]
French missionaries had been active in Vietnam since the 17th century, when the Jesuit priest Alexandre de Rhodes opened a mission there. In 1858 the Vietnamese emperor of the Nguyen Dynasty felt threatened by the French influence and tried to expel the missionaries. Napoleon III sent a naval force of fourteen gunships, carrying three thousand French and three thousand Filipino troops provided by Spain, under Charles Rigault de Genouilly, to compel the government to accept the missionaries and to stop the persecution of Catholics. In September 1858 the expeditionary force captured and occupied the port of Da Nang, and then in February 1859 moved south and captured Saigon. The Vietnamese ruler was compelled to cede three provinces to France, and to offer protection to the Catholics. The French troops departed for a time to take part in the expedition to China, but in 1862, when the agreements were not fully followed by the Vietnamese emperor, they returned. The Emperor was forced to open treaty ports in Annam and Tonkin, and all of Cochinchina became a French territory in 1864.
In 1863, the ruler of Cambodia, King Norodom, who had been placed in power by the government of Thailand, rebelled against his sponsors and sought the protection of France. The Thai Emperor granted authority over Cambodia to France, in exchange for two provinces of Laos, which were ceded by Cambodia to Thailand. In 1867, Cambodia formally became a protectorate of France.







Capture of Saigon by Charles Rigault de Genouilly on 18 February 1859, painted by Antoine Morel-Fatio









Napoleon III receiving the Siamese embassy at the palace of Fontainebleau in 1864




Intervention in Syria and Lebanon (1860–61)[edit]




French expedition in Syria led by General Beaufort d'Hautpoul, landing in Beyrouth on 16 August 1860


In the spring of 1860, a war broke out in Lebanon, then part of the Ottoman Empire, between the quasi-Muslim Druze population and the Maronite Christians. The Ottoman authorities in Lebanon could not stop the violence, and it spread into neighboring Syria, with the massacre of many Christians. In Damascus, the Emir Abd-el-Kadr protected the Christians there against the Muslim rioters. Napoleon III felt obliged to intervene on behalf of the Christians, despite the opposition of London, which feared it would lead to a wider French presence in the Middle East. After long and difficult negotiations to obtain the approval of the British government, Napoleon III sent a French contingent of seven thousand men for a period of six months. The troops arrived in Beirut in August 1860, and took positions in the mountains between the Christian and Muslim communities. Napoleon III organized an international conference in Paris, where the country was placed under the rule of a Christian governor named by the Ottoman Sultan, which restored a fragile peace. The French troops departed in June 1861, after just under one year. The French intervention alarmed the British, but was highly popular with the powerful Catholic political faction in France, which had been alarmed by Napoleon's dispute with the Pope over his territories in Italy.[30]
Algeria[edit]




French conquest of Algeria


Algeria had been formally under French rule since 1830, but only in 1852 was the country entirely conquered. There were about a hundred thousand European settlers in the country, at that time, about half of them French. Under the Second Republic the country was ruled by a civilian government, but Louis Napoleon re-established a military government, much to the annoyance of the colonists. By 1857 the army had conquered Kabyle Province, and pacified the country. By 1860 the European population had grown to two hundred thousand, and the land of the Algerians was being rapidly bought and farmed by the new arrivals.[31]
In the first eight years of his rule Napoleon III paid little attention to Algeria. In September 1860, however, he and the Empress Eugénie visited Algeria, and the trip made a deep impression upon them. Eugénie was invited to attend a traditional Arab wedding, and the Emperor met many of the local leaders. The Emperor gradually conceived the idea that Algeria should be governed differently from other colonies. in February 1863, he wrote a public letter to Pelissier, the Military Governor, saying: "Algeria is not a colony in the traditional sense, but an Arab kingdom; the local people have, like the colonists, a legal right to my protection. I am just as much the Emperor of the Arabs of Algeria as I am of the French." He intended to rule Algeria through a government of Arab aristocrats. Toward this end he invited the chiefs of main Algerian tribal groups to his chateau at Compiegne for hunting and festivities.[32]
Compared to previous administrations, Napoleon III was far more sympathetic to the native Algerians.[33] He halted European migration inland, restricting them to the coastal zone. He also freed the Algerian rebel leader Abd al Qadir (who had been promised freedom on surrender but was imprisoned by the previous administration) and gave him a stipend of 150,000 francs. He allowed Muslims to serve in the military and civil service on theoretically equal terms and allowed them to migrate to France. In addition, he gave the option of citizenship; however, for Muslims to take this option they had to accept all of the French civil code, including parts governing inheritance and marriage which might conflict with the Muslim tradition, and they had to reject the competence of religious Sharia courts. This was interpreted by some Muslims as requiring them to give up parts of their religion to obtain citizenship and was resented.
More importantly, Napoleon III changed the system of land tenure. While ostensibly well-intentioned, in effect this move destroyed the traditional system of land management and deprived many Algerians of land. While Napoleon did renounce state claims to tribal lands, he also began a process of dismantling tribal land ownership in favour of individual land ownership. This process was corrupted by French officials sympathetic to the French in Algeria who took much of the land they surveyed into public domain. In addition, many tribal leaders, chosen for loyalty to the French rather than influence in their tribe, immediately sold communal land for cash.[34]
His attempted reforms were interrupted in 1864 by an Arab insurrection, which required more than a year and an army of 85,000 soldiers to suppress. Nonetheless, he did not give up his idea of making Algeria a model where French colonists and Arabs could live and work together as equals. He traveled to Algiers for a second time on 3 May 1865, and this time he remained for a month, meeting with tribal leaders and local officials. He offered a wide amnesty to participants of the insurrection, and promised to name Arabs to high positions in his government. He also promised a large public works program of new ports, railroads, and roads. However, once again his plans met a major natural obstacle' in 1866 and 1867, Algeria was struck by an epidemic of cholera, clouds of locusts, draught and famine, and his reforms were hindered by the French colonists, who voted massively against him in the plebiscites of his late reign.[35]
French Intervention in Mexico (1862–67)[edit]
Main articles: French intervention in Mexico and Second Mexican Empire




Napoleon III tried unsuccessfully to place Maximilian I, brother of the Austrian Emperor, on the throne of Mexico.


In December 1862, the conservative Mexican government was overthrown by Benito Juarez, who established a secular state and refused to pay the internal and external debts of the old government. France was the largest owner of the debt, owed 135 million gold francs of the 260 million francs total. The rest of the debt was owed to Britain (85 million francs) and Spain (40 million). Under an 1861 agreement, France, Britain and Spain organized a joint military force to compel the Mexican government to pay. A British-French flotilla of ships arrived at VeraCruz in December 1861 and landed 7500 French soldiers and 700 British soldiers, joined later by 6000 Spanish soldiers from Cuba.
Juarez opened negotiations with the international force, but it soon became evident that the French expedition had a more ambitious objective than debt repayment. Napoleon III and the Empress had been intensively lobbied by Mexican émigrés in Europe, who proposed that France establish a new conservative and Catholic government in Mexico, under a European monarch. Napoleon III was told that the new monarch would be welcomed by the entire Mexican population. He consented to launch the operation if the new monarch would be approved by a national plebiscite, as he had been. The monarch selected for this task was the Archduke Maximilian, the brother of the Austrian Emperor Franz-Joseph II, and husband of Charlotte, daughter of the King of Belgium.
When the British and Spanish realized the French goals, they withdrew from the expedition, but the French marched on Mexico City. The first attempt by General Lorencez was repulsed by the forces of General Ignacio Zaragoza at Puebla on 5 May 1862, the first defeat of a French Army since Waterloo. Napoleon III appointed a new commander, General Forey, one of the victors of Solferino, and sent 23,000 fresh soldiers. Napoleon III believed that the Mexican people would embrace the new government. He also knew that the government of the United States would be unable to prevent it, even though it was in contravention of the Monroe Doctrine, because of the American Civil War then underway, and the implicit support provided by the neighboring Confederate States of America.[36]
The reinforced French army under Forey launched a new offensive from March to June 1863. After bitter resistance, the defenders of Mexico City surrendered on 7 June 1863. Forey, disregarding Napoleon III's instructions not to install a monarch without a popular plebiscite, organized an assembly of Mexican notables who proclaimed the Mexican Empire and invited Maximilian I of Mexico to rule. Ruling President Benito Juárez and his Republican forces retreated to the countryside and fought against the French troops and the Mexican monarchists.




French chasseurs d'Afrique taking the standard of the Durango lancers at the Battle of San Pablo del Monte


Maximilian was a reluctant Emperor, not arriving in Mexico until June 1864. One of his first acts was to sign an agreement that Mexico would repay France the entire cost of the war. The combined Mexican monarchist and French forces won victories up until 1865, but then the tide began to turn against them, in part because the American Civil War had ended. The U.S. government demanded that France withdraw its soldiers from Mexico. Facing a guerilla war and a financial catastrophe, the Emperor Maximilian became more and more depressed, leaving the capital for long periods and allowing the Empress Carlotta to reign. Not willing to have a war with the United States, Napoleon III decided at the beginning of 1866 to withdraw French troops from Mexico. In 1863 Maximilian had sent Carlotta to Europe to appeal for funds and support. She appealed to Napoleon III, but he refused to provide more troops or money. During her tour of European courts, she lost and never regained her sanity. Maximilian refused pleas that he depart, and fought against the growing partisan army of Juarez. He was captured, judged, and shot on 19 June 1867.
The misadventure in Mexico cost the lives of six thousand French soldiers and 336 million francs, in a campaign originally designed to collect 60 million francs. It also aroused the hostility of both the United States and Austria, which had lost a member of its royal family. It was also a distraction to Napoleon III, on the eve of his coming confrontation with Prussia.[37]







Siege of Puebla, Mexico by the French Army









The execution of Maximilian I on 19 June 1867, as painted by Edouard Manet. The intervention in Mexico was a disaster for French foreign policy.




French–British relations[edit]
Despite the signing of the 1860 Cobden–Chevalier Treaty, a historic free trade agreement between Britain and France, and the joint operations conducted by France and Britain in the Crimea, China and Mexico, diplomatic relations between Britain and France never became close. Lord Palmerston, the British foreign minister from 1846 to 1851 and prime minister from 1855 to 1865, sought to maintain the balance of power in Europe; this rarely involved an alignment with France. In 1859 there were even briefly fears that France might try to invade Britain.[38] Palmerston was suspicious of France's interventions in Lebanon, Southeast Asia and Mexico. Palmerston was also concerned that France might intervene in the American Civil War (1861–65) on the side of the South.[39] The British also felt threatened by the construction of the Suez Canal (1859–1869) by Ferdinand de Lesseps in Egypt. They tried to oppose its completion by diplomatic pressures and by promoting revolts among workers.[40]
The Suez Canal was successfully built by the French, but became a joint British-French project in 1875. Both nations saw it as vital to maintaining their influence and empires in Asia. In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France. France's leading expansionist Jules Ferry was out of office, and Paris allowed London to take effective control of Egypt.[41]
French–U.S. relations[edit]
Main article: France in the American Civil War
During 1861 to 1862, at the beginning of the American Civil War, Napoleon III considered recognizing the Confederacy in order to protect his operations in Mexico. Washington repeatedly warned that this meant war but the emperor kept this option open, hoping to get Britain as an ally. The Union blockade of southern ports stopped the supply of cotton to textile mills in France, and caused unemployment. The Confederacy had put their faith in "King Cotton" diplomacy, expecting that the cutoff of cotton supplies would cause Britain and France to declare war to reopen the trade. Through 1862, Napoleon III met unofficially with Confederate diplomats, raising their hopes that he would unilaterally recognize the Confederacy. France was too weak to act without collaboration with the British, who after much wavering finally rejected intervention as not worth the heavy risk of losing American food exports. Napoleon realized that a war with the U.S. without allies "would spell disaster" for France.[42] In 1863 the Confederacy realized there was no longer any chance of intervention, and expelled the French and British consuls, who were advising their citizens not to enlist in the Confederate Army. In 1865, the United States stationed a large combat Army near the Mexican border as a warning sign. Napoleon III pulled the French troops out, and the "emperor" he had imposed on Mexico was captured and shot.[43][44][45]
After 1870[edit]
Most Frenchmen ignored foreign affairs and colonial issues. In 1914 the chief pressure group was the Parti colonial, a coalition of 50 organizations with a combined total of 5000 members.[46]
Asia[edit]
It was only after its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871 and the founding of the Third Republic (1871–1940) that most of France's later colonial possessions were acquired. From their base in Cochinchina, the French took over Tonkin (in modern northern Vietnam) and Annam (in modern central Vietnam) in 1884–1885. These, together with Cambodia and Cochinchina, formed French Indochina in 1887 (to which Laos was added in 1893 and Guangzhouwan[47] in 1900). In 1849, the French concession in Shanghai was established, lasting until 1946.[48] The French also had concessions in Guangzhou and Hankou (now part of Wuhan).[49]




French colonies in 1891 (from Le Monde illustré).
1. Panorama of Lac-Kaï, French outpost in China.
2. Yun-nan, in the quay of Hanoi.
3. Flooded street of Hanoi.
4. Landing stage of Hanoi


Africa[edit]
France also extended its influence in North Africa after 1870, establishing a protectorate in Tunisia in 1881 with the Bardo Treaty. Gradually, French control crystallised over much of North, West, and Central Africa by around the start of the 20th century (including the modern states of Mauritania, Senegal, Guinea, Mali, Ivory Coast, Benin, Niger, Chad, Central African Republic, Republic of the Congo, Gabon, the east African coastal enclave of Djibouti (French Somaliland) and the island of Madagascar.
Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza helped to formalise French control in Gabon and on the northern banks of the Congo River from the early 1880s. The explorer Colonel Parfait-Louis Monteil traveled from Senegal to Lake Chad in 1890–1892, signing treaties of friendship and protection with the rulers of several of the countries he passed through, and gaining much knowledge of the geography and politics of the region.[50]
The Voulet–Chanoine Mission, a military expedition, set out from Senegal in 1898 to conquer the Chad Basin and to unify all French territories in West Africa. This expedition operated jointly with two other expeditions, the Foureau-Lamy and Gentil Missions, which advanced from Algeria and Middle Congo respectively. With the death (April 1900) of the Muslim warlord Rabih az-Zubayr, the greatest ruler in the region, and the creation of the Military Territory of Chad (September 1900), the Voulet-Chanoine Mission had accomplished all its goals. The ruthlessness of the mission provoked a scandal in Paris.[51]




Central and east Africa, 1898, during the Fashoda Incident


As a part of the Scramble for Africa, France aimed to establish a continuous west-east axis across the continent, in contrast with the proposed British north-south axis. Tensions between Britain and France heightened in Africa. At several points war seemed possible, but no outbreak occurred.[52] The most serious episode was the Fashoda Incident of 1898. French troops tried to claim an area in the Southern Sudan, and a British force purporting to act in the interests of the Khedive of Egypt arrived to confront them. Under heavy pressure the French withdrew, implicitly acknowledging Anglo-Egyptian control over the area. An agreement between the two states recognised the status quo: acknowledging British control over Egypt while France became the dominant power in Morocco, but France suffered a humiliating defeat overall.[53][54]
During the Agadir Crisis in 1911 Britain supported France against Germany, and Morocco became a French protectorate.
Pacific islands[edit]
At this time, the French also established colonies in the South Pacific, including New Caledonia, the various island groups which make up French Polynesia (including the Society Islands, the Marquesas, and the Tuamotus), and established joint control of the New Hebrides with Britain.[citation needed]
The French made their last major colonial gains after World War I, when they gained mandates over the former territories of the Ottoman Empire that make up what is now Syria and Lebanon, as well as most of the former German colonies of Togo and Cameroon.
Civilising mission[edit]
A hallmark of the French colonial project in the late 19th century and early 20th century was the civilising mission (mission civilisatrice), the principle that it was Europe's duty to bring civilisation to benighted peoples.[55] As such, colonial officials undertook a policy of Franco-Europeanisation in French colonies, most notably French West Africa and Madagascar. During the 19th century, French citizenship along with the right to elect a deputy to the French Chamber of Deputies was granted to the four old colonies of Guadeloupe, Martinique, Guyanne and Réunion as well as to the residents of the "Four Communes" in Senegal. In most cases, the elected deputies were white Frenchmen, although there were some blacks, such as the Senegalese Blaise Diagne, who was elected in 1914.[56] Elsewhere, in the largest and most populous colonies, a strict separation between "sujets français" (all the natives) and "citoyens français" (all males of European extraction) with different rights and duties was maintained until 1946. As was pointed out in a 1927 treatise on French colonial law, the granting of French citizenship to natives "was not a right, but rather a privilege".[57] Two 1912 decrees dealing with French West Africa and French Equatorial Africa enumerated the conditions that a native had to meet in order to be granted French citizenship (they included speaking and writing French, earning a decent living and displaying good moral standards). From 1830 to 1946, only between 3,000 and 6,000 native Algerians were granted French citizenship. In French West Africa, outside of the Four Communes, there were 2,500 "citoyens indigènes" out of a total population of 15 million.[58]




French colonial troops, led by Colonel Alfred-Amédée Dodds, a Senegalese mulatto, conquered and annexed Dahomey in 1894


French conservatives had been denouncing the assimilationist policies as products of a dangerous liberal fantasy. In the Protectorate of Morocco, the French administration attempted to use urban planning and colonial education to prevent cultural mixing and to uphold the traditional society upon which the French depended for collaboration, with mixed results. After World War II, the segregationist approach modeled in Morocco had been discredited by its connections to Vichyism, and assimilationism enjoyed a brief renaissance.[56]
In 1905, the French abolished slavery in most of French West Africa.[59] David P. Forsythe wrote: "From Senegal and Mauritania in the west to Niger in the east (what became French Africa), there was a parallel series of ruinous wars, resulting in tremendous numbers of people being violently enslaved. At the beginning of the twentieth century there may have been between 3 and 3.5 million slaves, representing over 30 percent of the total population, within this sparsely populated region."[60]
Critics of French colonialism gained an international audience in the 1920s, and often used documentary reportage and access to agencies such as the League of Nations and the International Labour Organization to make their protests heard. The main criticism was the high level of violence and suffering among the natives. Major critics included Albert Londres, Félicien Challaye, and Paul Monet, whose books and articles were widely read.[61]
While the first stages of a takeover often involved the destruction of historic buildings in order to use the site for French headquarters, archaeologists and art historians soon engaged in systematic effort to identify, map and preserve historic sites, especially temples such as Angkor Wat, Champa ruins and the temples of Luang Prabang.[62] Many French museums have collections of colonial materials. Since the 1980s the French government has opened new museums of colonial artifacts including the Musée du Quai Branly and the Cité Nationale de l’Histoire de l’Immigration, in Paris; the Centre Culturel Tjibaou in New Caledonia; and the Maison des Civilisations et de l’Unité Réunionnaise in Réunion.[63]
World War II[edit]






v
t
e


Free French military campaigns of World War II






Dakar
Gabon
Keren
Exporter
Kufra
Bir Hakeim
Run for Tunis
Torch
Réunion
Tunisia
Husky
Corsica
Monte Cassino
Glières
Ist
Mont Mouchet
Overlord
Elba
Saint-Marcel
Vercors
Dragoon
Marseilles
Paris
Strasbourg
Nordwind
Colmar Pocket
Authion
Indochina (1945)
Crimson



French Liberation Army
I Armée
Army of Africa
I Corps
XIX Corps
1re DFL
1reDB
2e DB
5e DB
3e DIA
13e DBLE
FFF
FFI
FEC
FEFEO
CLI
SAS
Résistance
Free French Navy
Free French Air Force
Normandie-Niemen










This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (July 2014)







The gradual loss of all Vichy territory to Free France and the Axis by 1943. Legend.








v
t
e


Military actions of Vichy France during World War II






Mers-el-Kébir
Gibraltar
Dakar
Gabon
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Indochina (1940)
Franco-Thai War (Ko Chang)
Syria–Lebanon
Madagascar
Réunion
Torch
Anton
Toulon






During World War II, allied Free France, often with British support, and Axis-aligned Vichy France struggled for control of the colonies, sometimes with outright military combat. By 1943, all of the colonies, except for Indochina under Japanese control, had joined the Free French cause.[64]
The overseas empire helped liberate France as 300,000 North African Arabs fought in the ranks of the Free French.[65] However Charles de Gaulle had no intention of liberating the colonies. He assembled the conference of colonial governors (excluding the nationalist leaders) Brazzaville in January 1944 to announce plans for postwar Union that would replace the Empire.[66] The Brazzaville manifesto proclaimed:

the goals of the work of civilization undertaken by France in the colonies exclude all idea of autonomy, all possibility of development outside the French block of the Empire; the possible constitutional self-government in the colonies is to be dismissed.[67]

The manifesto angered nationalists across the Empire and set the stage for long-term wars in Indochina and Algeria that France would lose in humiliating fashion.
Decolonization[edit]




French soldiers with suspected Algerian rebels


The French colonial empire began to fall during the Second World War, when various parts were occupied by foreign powers (Japan in Indochina, Britain in Syria, Lebanon, and Madagascar, the USA and Britain in Morocco and Algeria, and Germany and Italy in Tunisia). However, control was gradually reestablished by Charles de Gaulle. The French Union, included in the Constitution of 1946, nominally replaced the former colonial empire, but officials in Paris remained in full control. The colonies were given local assemblies with only limited local power and budgets. There emerged a group of elites, known as evolués, who were natives of the overseas territories but lived in metropolitan France.[68]
Repression[edit]
France was immediately confronted with the beginnings of the decolonisation movement. In Algeria demonstrations in May 1945 were repressed with an estimated 6,000 Algerians killed.[69] In late May, a general strike in Syria was met by a French warship shelling Damascus for three days.[dubious – discuss] Unrest in Haiphong, Indochina, in November 1945 was met by another warship bombarding the city.[70] Paul Ramadier's (SFIO) cabinet repressed the Malagasy Uprising in Madagascar in 1947. French officials estimated the number of Malagasy killed from a low of 11,000 to a French Army estimate of 89,000.[71]
In Asia, Ho Chi Minh's Vietminh declared Vietnam's independence, starting the First Indochina War. In Cameroun, the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon's insurrection, started in 1955 and headed by Ruben Um Nyobé, was violently repressed over a two-year period, with perhaps as many as 100 people killed.
When the Indochina War ended with defeat and withdrawal in 1954, France became almost immediately involved in a new, and even harsher conflict in Algeria, the oldest major colony, and later département. Ferhat Abbas and Messali Hadj's movements had marked the period between the two wars, but both sides radicalised after the Second World War. In 1945, the Sétif massacre was carried out by the French army.
The Algerian War started in 1954. Algeria was particularly problematic, due to the large number of Europeans who had settled there in the 125 years of French rule. Charles de Gaulle's accession to power in 1958 in the middle of the crisis ultimately led to the independence of Algeria with the 1962 Evian Accords.
The French Union was replaced in the new 1958 Constitution of 1958 by the French Community. Only Guinea refused by referendum to take part in the new colonial organisation. However, the French Community dissolved itself in the midst of the Algerian War; almost all of the other African colonies were granted independence in 1960, following local referendums. Some few colonies chose instead to remain part of France, under the status of overseas départements (territories). Critics of neocolonialism claimed that the Françafrique had replaced formal direct rule. They argued that while de Gaulle was granting independence on one hand, he was creating new ties with the help of Jacques Foccart, his counsellor for African matters. Foccart supported in particular the Nigerian Civil War during the late 1960s.
Robert Aldrich argues that with Algerian independence in 1962, it appeared that the Empire practically had come to an end, as the remaining colonies were quite small and lacked active nationalist movements. However, there was trouble in French Somaliland (Djibouti), which became independent in 1977. There also were complications and delays in the New Hebrides Vanuatu, which was the last to gain independence in 1980. New Caledonia remains a special case under French control.[72] The Indian Ocean island of Mayotte voted in referendum in 1974 to retain its link with France and forgo independence.[73]
Demographics[edit]
French census statistics from 1931 show an imperial population, outside of France itself, of 64.3 million people living on 11.9 million square kilometers. Of the total population, 39.1 million lived in Africa and 24.5 million lived in Asia; 700,000 lived in the Caribbean area or islands in the South Pacific. The largest colonies were Indochina with 21.5 million (in five separate colonies), Algeria with 6.6 million, Morocco, with 5.4 million, and West Africa with 14.6 million in nine colonies. The total includes 1.9 million Europeans, and 350,000 "assimilated" natives.[74]


Population of the French Empire between 1919 and 1939


 1921 
 1926 
 1931 
 1936 


Metropolitan France
39,140,000
40,710,000
41,550,000
41,500,000


Colonies, protectorates, and mandates
55,556,000
59,474,000
64,293,000
69,131,000


Total
94,696,000
100,184,000
105,843,000
110,631,000


Percentage of the world population
5.02%
5.01%
5.11%
5.15%


Sources: INSEE,[75] SGF[76]


French settlers[edit]




The deportation order is read to a group of Acadians in 1755.


Unlike elsewhere in Europe, France experienced relatively low levels of emigration to the Americas, with the exception of the Huguenots in British or Dutch colonies. France generally had close to the slowest natural population growth in Europe, and emigration pressures were therefore quite small. A small but significant emigration, numbering only in the tens of thousands, of mainly Roman Catholic French populations led to the settlement of the provinces of Acadia, Canada and Louisiana, both (at the time) French possessions, as well as colonies in the West Indies, Mascarene islands and Africa. In New France, Huguenots were banned from settling in the territory, and Quebec was one of the most staunchly Catholic areas in the world until the Quiet Revolution. The current French Canadian population, which numbers in the millions, is descended almost entirely from New France's small settler population.
On 31 December 1687 a community of French Huguenots settled in South Africa. Most of these originally settled in the Cape Colony, but have since been quickly absorbed into the Afrikaner population. After Champlain's founding of Quebec City in 1608, it became the capital of New France. Encouraging settlement was difficult, and while some immigration did occur, by 1763 New France only had a population of some 65,000.[77]
In 1787, there were 30,000 white colonists on France's colony of Saint-Domingue. In 1804 Dessalines, the first ruler of an independent Haiti (St. Domingue), ordered the massacre of whites remaining on the island.[78] Out of the 40,000 inhabitants on Guadeloupe, at the end of the 17th century, there were more than 26,000 blacks and 9,000 whites.[79] Bill Marshall wrote, "The first French effort to colonize Guiana, in 1763, failed utterly when tropical diseases and climate killed all but 2,000 of the initial 12,000 settlers."[80]
French law made it easy for thousands of colons, ethnic or national French from former colonies of North and West Africa, India and Indochina to live in mainland France. It is estimated that 20,000 colons were living in Saigon in 1945. 1.6 million European pieds noirs migrated from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.[81] In just a few months in 1962, 900,000 French Algerians left Algeria in the largest relocation of population in Europe since World War II.[citation needed] In the 1970s, over 30,000 French colons left Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge regime as the Pol Pot government confiscated their farms and land properties. In November 2004, several thousand of the estimated 14,000 French nationals in Ivory Coast left the country after days of anti-white violence.[82]
Apart from French-Canadians (Québécois and Acadians), Cajuns, and Métis other populations of French ancestry outside metropolitan France include the Caldoches of New Caledonia, the so-called Zoreilles, Petits-blancs with the Franco-Mauritian of various Indian Ocean islands and the Beke people of the French West Indies.
See also[edit]


History portal
France portal
French language and French-speaking world portal



Army of the Levant
Colonialism
Decolonization
Evolution of the French Empire
Francization
French Army units with a tradition of service overseas

1900–1958: Troupes de marine
1900–1958: Troupes coloniales
Tirailleurs
Spahis
Zouaves


French colonial flags
French colonisation of the Americas
French law on colonialism (for teachers, 2005)
History of France
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)
List of French possessions and colonies
New France
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
Postage stamps of the French colonies
Scramble for Africa
Timeline of imperialism

Notes and references[edit]


^ Robert Aldrich, Greater France: A History of French Overseas Expansion (1996) p 304
^ Melvin E. Page, ed. (2003). Colonialism: An International Social, Cultural, and Political Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 218. CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
^ Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 501. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ Rein Taagepera (September 1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 502. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053. Retrieved 16 September 2016. 
^ Tony Chafer (2002). The End of Empire in French West Africa: France's Successful Decolonization?. Berg. pp. 84–85. 
^ Julian Jackson, The Other Empire, Radio 3
^ Tony Chafer, The end of empire in French West Africa: France's successful decolonisation? (2002)see Chafer abstract
^ Robert Aldrich, Greater France: A History of French Overseas Expansion (1996) p 305. His section on "Ending the Empire" closes in 1980 with the independence of New Hebrides, p. 304.
^ Singer, Barnett & Langdon, John (2008). Cultured Force: Makers and Defenders of the French Colonial Empire. University of Wisconsin Press. p. 24. ISBN 9780299199043. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
^ Steven R. Pendery, "A Survey Of French Fortifications In The New World, 1530–1650." in First Forts: Essays on the Archaeology of Proto-colonial Fortifications ed by Eric Klingelhofer (Brill 2010) pp. 41-64.
^ Marcel Trudel, The Beginnings of New France, 1524-1663 (McClelland & Stewart, 1973).
^ James R. Miller, Skyscrapers hide the heavens: A history of Indian-white relations in Canada (University of Toronto Press, 2000).
^ Edward Robert Adair, "France and the Beginnings of New France." Canadian Historical Review 25.3 (1944): 246-278.
^ Helen Dewar, "Canada or Guadeloupe?: French and British Perceptions of Empire, 1760-1763." Canadian Historical Review 91.4 (2010): 637-660.
^ Carl J. Ekberg, French roots in the Illinois country: The Mississippi frontier in colonial times (U of Illinois Press, 2000).
^ Paul Cheney, Revolutionary Commerce: Globalization and the French Monarchy (2010)
^ H.P.Davis, Black Democracy The Story of Haiti (1928) pp 16-86 online free
^ a b c Andrew, C. M.
^ Andrew, C. M., and A. S. . KANYA-FORSTNER. "FRANCE, AFRICA, AND THE FIRST WORLD WAR." The Journal of African History 19.1 (1978): 11–23. Print.
^ Colin Gordon Calloway, The scratch of a pen: 1763 and the transformation of North America (2006). pp 165-69
^ Mimi Sheller, "The 'Haytian Fear': Racial Projects and Competing Reactions to the First Black Republic." Research in Politics and Society 6 (1999): 285-304.
^ David Patrick Geggus (2002). Haitian Revolutionary Studies. Indiana University Press. p. 28. ISBN 9780253109262. 
^ Pierre Milza, Napoléon III (in French, Paris: 2006), pp. 626–636
^ Robert Aldrich; John Connell (2006). France's Overseas Frontier: Départements et territoires d'outre-mer. Cambridge University Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-521-03036-6. 
^ G. Wesley Johnson, Double Impact: France and Africa in the age of imperialism (Greenwood 1985).
^ H. M. Cole, "Origins of the French Protectorate Over Catholic Missions in China." American Journal of International Law (1940): 473–491.
^ Daniel C. Kane, "Bellonet and Roze: Overzealous Servants of Empire and the 1866 French Attack on Korea," Korean Studies (1999) Vol. 23, pp 1–23.
^ Ryōtarō Shiba, The last shogun: the life of Tokugawa Yoshinobu (1998) pp. 169–72
^ Arthur J. Dommen, The Indochinese experience of the French and the Americans (2001) p. 4
^ Girard, 1986, p. 313
^ Girard, 1986, p. 320
^ Girard, 1986, p. 321-322
^ Abun-Nasr, Jamil M. (1987). A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic period. Cambridge University Press. p. 264. ISBN 0-521-33767-4. Retrieved 10 November 2010. 
^ Jamil M. Abun-Nasr (1987). A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period. Cambridge U.P. p. 264. 
^ Girard, 1986, p. 322-23
^ Charles M. Hubbard (2000). The Burden of Confederate Diplomacy. Univ. of Tennessee Press. p. 163. 
^ Jasper Ridley, Maximilian and Juárez (1992).
^ Desmond Gregory (1999). No Ordinary General: Lt. General Sir Henry Bunbury (1778–1860) : the Best Soldier Historian. Fairleigh Dickinson U.P. p. 103. 
^ David Brown, "Palmerston and Anglo–French Relations, 1846–1865", Diplomacy & Statecraft (2006) 17#4 pp. 675–692
^ K. Bell, "British Policy towards the Construction of the Suez Canal, 1859–65," Transactions of the Royal Historical Society (1965) Vol. 15, pp 121–143.
^ A.J.P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848–1918 (1954) pp 286–92
^ Howard Jones (1999). Abraham Lincoln and a New Birth of Freedom: The Union and Slavery in the Diplomacy of the Civil War. U of Nebraska Press. p. 183. 
^ Lynn M. Case and Warren F. Spencer, The United States and France: Civil War Diplomacy (1970) pp 424–6
^ Frank L. Owsley Sr., King Cotton Diplomacy: Foreign Relations of the Confederate States of America (3rd ed. 2008) ch 10
^ Kristine Ibsen, Maximilian, Mexico, and the Invention of Empire (2010)
^ Anthony Adamthwaite, Grandeur And Misery: France's Bid for Power in Europe, 1914-1940 (1995) p 6
^ Foreign Concessions and Colonies
^ Paul French (2011). The Old Shanghai A-Z. Hong Kong University Press. p. 215. ISBN 9789888028894. 
^ Greater France: A History of French Overseas Expansion, Google Print, p. 83, Robert Aldrich, Palgrave Macmillan, 1996, ISBN 0-312-16000-3
^ Claire Hirshfield (1979). The diplomacy of partition: Britain, France, and the creation of Nigeria, 1890–1898. Springer. p. 37ff. ISBN 90-247-2099-0. Retrieved 10 October 2010. 
^ Bertrand Taithe, The Killer Trail: A Colonial Scandal in the Heart of Africa (2009)
^ T. G. Otte, "From 'War-in-Sight' to Nearly War: Anglo–French Relations in the Age of High Imperialism, 1875–1898," Diplomacy & Statecraft (2006) 17#4 pp 693–714.
^ D. W. Brogan, France under the Republic: The Development of Modern France (1870–1930) (1940) pp 321–26
^ William L. Langer, The diplomacy of imperialism: 1890–1902 (1951) pp 537–80
^ Betts, Raymond F. (2005). Assimilation and Association in French Colonial Theory, 1890–1914. University of Nebraska Press. p. 10. ISBN 9780803262478. 
^ a b Segalla, Spencer. 2009, The Moroccan Soul: French Education, Colonial Ethnology, and Muslim Resistance, 1912–1956. Nebraska University Press
^ Olivier Le Cour Grandmaison, De l'Indigénat. Anatomie d'un monstre juridique: Le Droit colonial en Algérie et dans l'Empire français, Éditions La Découverte, Paris, 2010, p. 59.
^ Le Cour Grandmaison, p. 60, note 9.
^ "Slave Emancipation and the Expansion of Islam, 1905–1914 Archived 2 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine.". p.11.
^ David P. Forsythe (2009). "Encyclopedia of Human Rights, Volume 1". Oxford University Press. p. 464. ISBN 0195334027
^ J.P. Daughton, "Behind the Imperial Curtain: International Humanitarian Efforts and the Critique of French Colonialism in the Interwar Years," French Historical Studies, (2011) 34#3 pp 503–528
^ Robert Aldrich, "France and the Patrimoine of the Empire: Heritage Policy under Colonial Rule," French History and Civilisation (2011), Vol. 4, pp 200–209
^ Caroline Ford, "Museums after Empire in Metropolitan and Overseas France," Journal of Modern History, (Sept 2010), 82#3 pp 625–661,
^ Martin Thomas, The French Empire at War, 1940–1945 (Manchester University Press, 2007)
^ Robert Gildea, France since 1945 (1996) p 17
^ Joseph R. De Benoist, "The Brazzaville Conference, or Involuntary Decolonization." Africana Journal 15 (1990) pp: 39-58.
^ Gildea, France since 1945 (1996) p 16
^ Simpson, Alfred William Brian (2004). Human Rights and the End of Empire: Britain and the Genesis of the European Convention. Oxford University Press. pp. 285–86. ISBN 0199267898. 
^ Horne, Alistair (1977). A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954–1962. New York: The Viking Press. p. 27. 
^ J.F.V. Keiger, France and the World since 1870 (Arnold, 2001) p 207.
^ Anthony Clayton, The Wars of French Decolonization (1994) p 85
^ Robert Aldrich, Greater France: A history of French overseas expansion (1996) pp 303-6
^ "Mayotte votes to become France's 101st département". The Daily Telegraph. March 29, 2009.
^ Herbert Ingram Priestley, France overseas: a study of modern imperialism (1938) pp 440-41.
^ INSEE. "TABLEAU 1 – ÉVOLUTION GÉNÉRALE DE LA SITUATION DÉMOGRAPHIQUE" (in French). Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ Statistique générale de la France. "Code Officiel Géographique – La IIIe République (1919–1940)" (in French). Retrieved 3 November 2010. 
^ "British North America: 1763–1841". Archived from the original on 1 November 2009. 
^ Girard, Philippe R. (2011), The Slaves Who Defeated Napoleon: Toussaint Louverture and the Haitian War of Independence 1801–1804, Tuscaloosa, Alabama: The University of Alabama Press, pp. 319–322., ISBN 978-0-8173-1732-4 
^ Guadeloupe : the mosaic island
^ Bill Marshall (2005). France and the Americas: culture, politics, and history : a multidisciplinary encyclopedia. N – Z, index. ABC-CLIO. Pp. 372–373. ISBN 1851094113.
^ "For Pieds-Noirs, the Anger Endures". nytimes.com. 6 April 1988. Retrieved 2 April 2016. 
^ France, U.N. Start Ivory Coast Evacuation, FOXNews.com


Further reading[edit]

Hutton, Patrick H. ed. Historical Dictionary of the Third French Republic, 1870–1940 (2 vol 1986)
Northcutt, Wayne, ed. Historical Dictionary of the French Fourth and Fifth Republics, 1946- 1991 (1992)

Policies and colonies[edit]

Aldrich, Robert. Greater France: A History of French Overseas Expansion (1996)
Anderson, Fred. Crucible of War: The Seven Years' War and the Fate of Empire in British North America, 1754–1766 (2001)
Baumgart, Winfried. Imperialism: The Idea and Reality of British and French Colonial Expansion, 1880–1914 (1982)
Betts, Raymond. Tricouleur: The French Overseas Empire (1978), 174pp
Betts, Raymond. Assimilation and Association in French Colonial Theory, 1890–1914 (2005) excerpt and text search
Burrows, Mathew (1986). "'Mission civilisatrice': French Cultural Policy in the Middle East, 1860–1914". The Historical Journal. 29 (1): 109–135. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00018641. .
Chafer, Tony (2002). The End of Empire in French West Africa: France's Successful Decolonization?. Berg. 
Clayton, Anthony. The Wars of French Decolonization (1995)
Conklin, Alice L. A Mission to Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in France and West Africa, 1895-1930 (1997) online
Evans, Martin. "From colonialism to post-colonialism: the French empire since Napoleon." in Martin S. Alexander, ed., French History since Napoleon (1999) pp: 391-415.
Jennings, Eric T. Imperial Heights: Dalat and the Making and Undoing of French Indochina (2010).
Lawrence, Adria. Imperial rule and the politics of nationalism: anti-colonial protest in the French empire (Cambridge UP, 2013).
Newbury, C. W.; Kanya-Forstner, A. S. (1969). "French Policy and the Origins of the Scramble for West Africa". The Journal of African History. 10 (2): 253–276. doi:10.2307/179514. .
Klein, Martin A. Slavery and colonial rule in French West Africa (Cambridge University Press, 1998)
Manning, Patrick. Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa 1880-1995 (Cambridge UP, 1998). online
Neres, Philip. French-speaking West Africa: From Colonial Status to Independence (1962) online
Priestley, Herbert Ingram. France overseas: a study of modern imperialism (1938) 464pp.
Quinn, Frederick. The French Overseas Empire (2000) online
Pakenham, Thomas (1991). The Scramble for Africa, 1876–1912. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-51576-5. .
Petringa, Maria (2006). Brazza, A Life for Africa. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse. ISBN 1-4259-1198-6. .
Priestley, Herbert Ingram. (1938) France overseas;: A study of modern imperialism 463pp; encyclopedic coverage as of late 1930s
Segalla, Spencer (2009). The Moroccan Soul: French Education, Colonial Ethnology, and Muslim Resistance, 1912–1956. Lincoln: Nebraska University Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-1778-2. .
Strother, Christian. "Waging War on Mosquitoes: Scientific Research and the Formation of Mosquito Brigades in French West Africa, 1899–1920." Journal of the history of medicine and allied sciences (2016): jrw005.
Thomas, Martin. The French Empire Between the Wars: Imperialism, Politics and Society (2007) 1919–1939
Thompson, Virginia, and Richard Adloff. French West Africa (Stanford UP, 1958).
Wellington, Donald C. French East India companies: A historical account and record of trade (Hamilton Books, 2006)
Wesseling, H.L. and Arnold J. Pomerans. Divide and rule: The partition of Africa, 1880–1914 (Praeger, 1996.) online
Wesseling, H.L. The European Colonial Empires: 1815-1919 (Routledge, 2015).

Decolonization[edit]

Betts, Raymond F. Decolonization (2nd ed. 2004)
Betts, Raymond F. France and Decolonisation, 1900-1960 (1991)
Chafer, Tony. The end of empire in French West Africa: France's successful decolonization (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2002).
Chamberlain, Muriel E. ed. Longman Companion to European Decolonisation in the Twentieth Century (Routledge, 2014)
Clayton, Anthony. The wars of French decolonization (Routledge, 2014).
Cooper, Frederick. "French Africa, 1947–48: Reform, Violence, and Uncertainty in a Colonial Situation." Critical Inquiry (2014) 40#4 pp: 466-478. in JSTOR
Ikeda, Ryo. The Imperialism of French Decolonisation: French Policy and the Anglo-American Response in Tunisia and Morocco (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015)
Jansen, Jan C. & Jürgen Osterhammel. Decolonization: A Short History (princeton UP, 2017). online
Jones, Max, et al. "Decolonising imperial heroes: Britain and France." Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History 42#5 (2014): 787-825.
Lawrence, Adria K. Imperial Rule and the Politics of Nationalism: Anti-Colonial Protest in the French Empire (Cambridge UP, 2013) online reviews
McDougall, James. "The Impossible Republic: The Reconquest of Algeria and the Decolonization of France, 1945–1962," The Journal of Modern History 89#4 (December 2017) pp 772-811 excerpt
Rothermund, Dietmar. Memories of Post-Imperial Nations: The Aftermath of Decolonization, 1945-2013 (2015) excerpt; Compares the impact on Great Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Portugal, Italy and Japan
Rothermund, Dietmar. The Routledge companion to decolonization (Routledge, 2006), comprehensive global coverage; 365pp
Shepard, Todd. The Invention of Decolonization: The Algerian War and the Remaking of France (2006)
Simpson, Alfred William Brian. Human Rights and the End of Empire: Britain and the Genesis of the European Convention (Oxford University Press, 2004).
Smith, Tony. "A comparative study of French and British decolonization." Comparative Studies in Society and History (1978) 20#1 pp: 70-102. online
Smith, Tony. "The French Colonial Consensus and People's War, 1946-58." Journal of Contemporary History (1974): 217-247. in JSTOR
Thomas, Martin, Bob Moore, and Lawrence J. Butler. Crises of Empire: Decolonization and Europe's imperial states (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2015)

Images and impact on France[edit]

Andrew, C. M.; Kanya-Forstner, A. S. (1976). "French Business and the French Colonialists". The Historical Journal. 19 (4): 981–1000. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00010803. .
August, Thomas G. The Selling of the Empire: British and French Imperialist Propaganda, 1890–1940 (1985)
Chafer, Tony, and Amanda Sackur. Promoting the Colonial Idea: Propaganda and Visions of Empire in France (2002) online
Confer, Vincent (1964). "French Colonial Ideas before 1789". French Historical Studies. 3 (3): 338–359. doi:10.2307/285947. .
Conkin, Alice L. A Mission to Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in France and West Africa, 1895-1930 (1997) online
Dobie, Madeleine. Trading Places: Colonization & Slavery in 18th-Century French Culture (2010)
Freundschuh, Aaron. The Courtesan and the Gigolo: The Murders in the Rue Montaigne and the Dark Side of Empire in Nineteenth-Century Paris, Stanford University Press (2017). ISBN 1-50360-082-3
Martin, Guy (1985). "The Historical, Economic, and Political Bases of France's African Policy". The Journal of Modern African Studies. 23 (2): 189–208. doi:10.1017/S0022278X00000148. .
Rosenblum, Mort. Mission to Civilize: The French Way (1986) online review
Rothermund, Dietmar. Memories of Post-Imperial Nations: The Aftermath of Decolonization, 1945-2013 (2015) excerpt; Compares the impact on Great Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Portugal, Italy and Japan
Singer, Barnett, and John Langdon. Cultured Force: Makers and Defenders of the French Colonial Empire (2008)
Thomas, Martin, ed. The French Colonial Mind, Volume 1: Mental Maps of Empire and Colonial Encounters (France Overseas: Studies in Empire and D) (2012); The French Colonial Mind, Volume 2: Violence, Military Encounters, and Colonialism (2012)

Historiography and memoir[edit]

Bennington, Alice. "Writing Empire? The Reception of Post-Colonial Studies in France." Historical Journal (2016) 59#4: 1157-1186. abstract
Dubois, Laurent. "The French Atlantic," in Atlantic History: A Critical Appraisal, ed. by Jack P. Greene and Philip D. Morgan, (Oxford UP, 2009) pp 137–61
Dwyer, Philip. "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars," French Politics, Culture & Society (2008) 26#3 pp 110–122.
Emerson, Rupert (1969). "Colonialism". Journal of Contemporary History. 4 (1): 3–16. doi:10.1177/002200946900400101. .
Greer, Allan. "National, Transnational, and Hypernational Historiographies: New France Meets Early American History," Canadian Historical Review, (2010) 91#4 pp 695–724, in Project MUSE
Hodson, Christopher, and Brett Rushforth, "Absolutely Atlantic: Colonialism and the Early Modern French State in Recent Historiography," History Compass, (January 2010) 8#1 pp 101–117
Lawrence, Adria K. Imperial Rule and the Politics of Nationalism: Anti-Colonial Protest in the French Empire (Cambridge UP, 2013) online reviews

External links[edit]

French Colonial Historical Society
H-FRANCE, daily discussions and book reviews
French Colonial Historical Society
French Colonial History an annual volume of refereed, scholarly articles
French Colonialism, lecture on the colonial period 1871 to 1914, via Open Yale Courses (45-min audio/video/text)
Area Of French Empire in 1940







v
t
e


French overseas empire



Former











v
t
e


Former French colonies in Africa and the Indian Ocean



French North Africa



Algeria
Morocco
Tunisia





French West Africa



Côte d'Ivoire
Dahomey
French Sudan
Guinea
Mauritania

Arguin Island


Niger
Senegal
Upper Volta





 



French Togoland
James Island
Albreda





French Equatorial Africa



Chad
Gabon
Middle Congo
Ubangi-Shari
French Cameroons





French Comoros



Anjouan
Grande Comore
Mohéli





 



French Somaliland (Djibouti)
Madagascar
Isle de France















v
t
e


Former French colonies in the Americas



New France



Acadia
Louisiana
Canada
Terre Neuve





French Caribbean



Dominica
Grenada
The Grenadines
Saint-Domingue

Haïti, Dominican Republic


Saint Kitts & Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent
Tobago
Virgin Islands





Equinoctial France



Berbice
France Antarctique
Inini








French colonization of the Americas
French West India Company















v
t
e


Former French colonies in Asia and Oceania



French India



Chandernagor
Coromandel Coast
Madras
Mahé
Pondichéry
Karaikal
Yanaon





Indochinese Union



Cambodia
Laos
Vietnam

Cochinchina
Annam
Tonkin


Kouang-Tchéou-Wan, China





French Mandate for Syria
and the Lebanon



State of Syria

Aleppo
Damascus


Alawite State
Greater Lebanon
Jabal al-Druze
Sanjak of Alexandretta





Oceania



New Hebrides

Vanuatu


Port Louis-Philippe (Akaroa)








France–Asia relations
French East India Company











Present







v
t
e


Overseas France








Inhabited areas







Overseas departments1



French Guiana
Guadeloupe
Martinique
Mayotte2
Réunion








Overseas collectivities



French Polynesia
St. Barthélemy
St. Martin
St. Pierre and Miquelon
Wallis and Futuna





Sui generis collectivity



New Caledonia
















Uninhabited areas







Pacific Ocean



Clipperton Island






Overseas territory (French
Southern and Antarctic Lands)








Île Amsterdam
Île Saint-Paul
Crozet Islands
Kerguelen Islands
Adélie Land






Scattered islands in
the Indian Ocean




Bassas da India3
Europa Island3
Glorioso Islands2, 3
Juan de Nova Island3
Tromelin Island4

















1 Also known as overseas regions
2 Claimed by Comoros
3 Claimed by Madagascar
4 Claimed by Mauritius















v
t
e


Colonial empires




 American ·  Austro-Hungarian ·  Belgian ·  British ·  Couronian ·  Danish ·  Dutch ·  English ·  French ·  German ·  Italian




 Japanese ·  Sovereign Military Order of Malta ·  Ottoman ·  Portuguese ·  Russian ·  Soviet ·  Spanish ·  Swedish




Colonies in antiquity










v
t
e


Empires



Ancient



Akkadian
Egyptian
Assyrian
Babylonian
Carthaginian
Chinese

Qin
Han
Jin
Northern Wei


Hellenistic

Macedonian
Seleucid


Hittite
Indian

Nanda
Maurya
Satavahana
Shunga
Gupta
Harsha


Iranian

Median
Achaemenid
Parthian
Sasanian


Kushan
Mongol

Xianbei
Xiongnu


Roman

Western
Eastern


Teotihuacan





Post-classical



Arab

Rashidun
Umayyad
Abbasid
Fatimid
Córdoba


Aragonese
Angevin
Aztec
Benin
Bornu
Bruneian
Bulgarian

First
Second


Byzantine

Nicaea
Trebizond


Carolingian
Chinese

Sui
Tang
Song
Yuan


Ethiopian

Zagwe
Solomonic


Georgian
Hunnic
Inca
Indian

Chola
Gurjara-Pratihara
Pala
Eastern Ganga dynasty
Delhi
Vijayanagara


Iranian

Tahirid
Samanid
Buyid
Sallarid
Ziyarid


Kanem
Khmer
Latin
Majapahit
Malaccan
Mali
Mongol

Yuan
Golden Horde
Chagatai Khanate
Ilkhanate


Moroccan

Idrisid
Almoravid
Almohad
Marinid


North Sea
Oyo
Roman
Serbian
Somali

Ajuran
Ifatite
Adalite
Mogadishan
Warsangali


Songhai
Srivijaya
Tibetan
Turko-Persian

Ghaznavid
Great Seljuk
Khwarezmian
Timurid


Vietnamese

Ly
Tran
Le


Wagadou





Modern



Ashanti
Austrian
Austro-Hungarian
Brazilian
Central African
Chinese

Ming
Qing
China
Manchukuo


Ethiopian
French

First
Second


German

First/Old Reich
Second Reich
Third Reich


Haitian

First
Second


Indian

Maratha
Sikh
Mughal
British Raj


Iranian

Safavid
Afsharid
Zand
Qajar
Pahlavi


Japanese
Johor
Korean
Mexican

First
Second


Moroccan

Saadi
Alaouite


Russian
USSR
Somali

Gobroon
Majeerteen
Hobyo
Dervish


Swedish
Tongan
Turkish

Ottoman
Karaman
Ramazan


Vietnamese

Tay Son
Nguyen
Vietnam







Colonial



American
Belgian
British

English


Danish
Dutch
French
German
Italian
Japanese
Omani
Norwegian
Portuguese
Spanish
Swedish





Lists



Empires

largest


ancient great powers
medieval great powers
modern great powers












v
t
e


 New France (1534–1763)



Subdivisions



Acadia (1604–1713)
Canada (1608–1763) Pays d'en Haut
Domaine du roy
Louisiana (1682–1762, 1802–1803) Illinois Country Ohio Country
Newfoundland (1662–1713)
Île Royale (1713–1763)





Towns



Acadia (Port Royal)
Canada

Quebec
Trois-Rivières
Montreal
Détroit


Île Royale

Louisbourg


Louisiana

Mobile
New Orleans


Newfoundland

Plaisance


List of towns





Forts



Fort Rouillé
Fort Michilimackinac
Fort de Buade
Fort de Chartres
Fort Detroit
Fort Carillon
Fort Condé
Fort Duquesne
Fortress of Louisbourg
Castle Hill
Fort St. Louis (Illinois)
Fort St. Louis (Texas)
List of Forts





Government



Canada

Governor General
Intendant
Sovereign Council
Bishop of Quebec
Governor of Trois-Rivières
Governor of Montreal


Acadia

Governor
Lieutenant-General


Newfoundland

Governor
Lieutenant-General


Louisiana

Governor
Intendant
Superior Council


Île Royale

Governor
Intendant
Superior Council







Law



Intendancy
Superior Council
Admiralty court
Provostship
Officiality
Seigneurial court
Bailiff
Maréchaussée
Code Noir





Economy



Seigneurial system
Fur trade
Company of 100 Associates
Crozat's Company
Mississippi Company
Compagnie de l'Occident
Chemin du Roy
Coureur des bois
Voyageurs





Society



Population

1666 census


Habitants
King's Daughters
Casquette girls
Métis
Amerindians
Slavery
Plaçage
Gens de couleur libres





Religion



Jesuit missions
Récollets
Grey Nuns
Ursulines
Sulpicians





War and peace



Military of New France
Intercolonial Wars
French and Iroquois Wars
Great Upheaval
Great Peace of Montreal
Schenectady massacre
Deerfield massacre





Related



French colonization of the Americas
French colonial empire
History of Quebec
History of the Acadians
History of the French-Americans
French West Indies
Carib Expulsion
Atlantic slave trade








 Category
 Portal
 Commons









Authority control



BNF: cb11934457h (data)











						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_colonial_empire&oldid=817368243"					Categories: States and territories established in 1534Former French coloniesFrench colonial empireHistory of European colonialismOverseas empires1534 establishments in the French colonial empire1946 disestablishments in the French colonial empireHidden categories: CS1 maint: Extra text: authors listCS1 maint: Uses authors parameterWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 French-language sources (fr)Use dmy dates from May 2011Former country articles requiring maintenancePages using infobox country or infobox former country with the flag caption or type parametersAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2017Articles with unsourced statements from July 2011Articles to be expanded from July 2014All articles to be expandedArticles using small message boxesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from July 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers